THE LETANY OF JOHN BASTVVICK, Doctor of Physic, Being now full of Devotion,
as well in respect of the common calamities of plague and pestilence; as also
of his own particular misery: lying at this instant in Limbo Patrum. Set
down in two Letters to Mr. Aquila Wykes, keeper of the Gatehouse, his good
Angel.

IN WHICH There is an universal challenge to the whole World, to prove the
parity of Ministers, to be jure divino.

ALSO A full demonstration, that the Bishops are neither Christ's, nor the
Apostles Successors, but enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and of the Kings
most excellent Majesty's prerogative Royal.

All which he undertaketh to make good before King and Counsel, with the
hazard of otherwise being made a prey to their insatiable indignation.

A Book very useful, and profitable for all good Christians to read, for the
stirring up of devotion in them likewise.

PROVERB. Chap. 25. verse. 2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but
the honor of the King is to search out a matter.

PRINTED By the special procurement, and for the especial use of our English
Prelat^ in the year of Remembrance, Anno 1637.

THE SECOND PART OF THE LATENY, OF JOHN BASTWICK, Doctor of Physic.
WORTHY SIR
I Was sometime in a demurre, whether I should answer any thing or no, unto the
exceptions you made against my LETANY: and had I not indeed heard from many,
that others also, from your speeches conceived something in it, might well have
been omited, who by that means, began to have a preiudicat opinion of my
honest endeauours, I should never have vouchsafed to have given a reason of my
proceedings in that behalf, till I had been called in question. But in regard
of that: I thought fit in the mean time, in a few words to signify unto you,
that whatsoever you seem to blame, as either favoring of rashness, or not so
grave, was of purpose put in by me, and proceeded from no disguised distemper
or vnadvisednes but from mature deliberation and very good reason.

And whatsoever you may think of it, I hope among equal Judges, it can no
ways, hurt the cause of any honest men, nor procure trouble to me: my only
aim and end being the honor of God and the King and the general good of this
Kingdom, Which I shall ever prefer before my own life and well being. Nay
had I never so many lives, I would willingly loose them all in the cause of
either. Neither do I suppose any wise men, to be so shallow, that if I should
handle a good cause never so weakly, or unadvisedly, that the truth it self
should suffer for my deficiency, or others fare the worse for my temerity. God
forbid, that one man's failing should any ways prove fatal to all those that
are innocent.

More charity I do conceive yet dwells in the world, then that the innocuous
should suffer with the delinquent.

But now briefly to sum up what you object against MY LETANY, OBLIGATION and
EPISTLE to the LADY. You seemd to blame some three passages, as not so grave
but comicall, others to hyperbolicall, and sauouring of some virulency: and in
fine think, that some others will be questionable, as scandalous, and somewhat
dishonorable to the divine Sacrament of Baptism, and the holy ordinance of
Matrimony. To all which, I suppose among all rational men, I shall find no
great difficulty to answer, when I am called thereunto.

But in the mean time, by way of preface, I have sent you the ensuing lines,
in the which I shall tell you, and that upon good grounds, there is no just
cause why any should blame me for mingling ioc^^ serijs et seria iocis; all
scurrility and profaneness being avoided. For there wants not presidents of
this kind in sacred writ: that in the most grave and waightiest matters it
pleased the Prophets of old to use ironicall speeches, yea the holy Scriptures
are full of them; But not now to enumerat many, let one at this time suffice to
be specified. Where the Prophet deridingly bids. Bals Priests cry alowd, for
that their God might either be in a journey, or a sleep, or talking with his
friends, I pray was not this as deep an Irony as any ever was, and that in a
serious business?

But to speak no more of that, let us look into all the famous writers of all
ages, and you shall find that many of them have used this method, for the
discovering and confuting of error, and have more confounded the adversaries of
the truth in a pleasant and merry way, then with all the gravity they could
ever use. I dare say the Papists themselves will tell you that ALAGVNDE, that
noble Gentleman did them more hurt with his Beehiue. And two or three other
such books, mixing and contempering mirth with seriousnes, the^ the profoundest
Doctor of that age with all the pouderosity of Arguments and solidest tractats.

Such delight change of writing brings, that even as the same meat dressed
after a common manner, is not so pleasing, nor so delightful to many, that know
the diversity of tastes; but cooked with some variety, as some time with tart,
sometime with pleasant sauce, does conciliat an excellent appetit: so the same
truth, diversely set out, and coming forth in a new fashion, and something
merrily, makes more gazing after it, then if it were in an ordinary grave
matronly habit, which usually is not looked after. Neither was it ever more
seasonable, then in this age, where there is such plurality of mutations in all
things. Besides, a Writer must look at the condition of the people, whose
benefit he aims at, the variety of humors, sexes and conditions, and must so
order things, that they may please the most. If gravity please not, they may
have that which may make them merry. If seriousnes on the other side and
sobriety be prized, they may find no want of that neither, there being both the
one and the other so mingled together, as they may take away nauciousnes and
recreat the readers. And this indeed is the best way of writing, though nothing
now a days can please all men's fantasies.

It was the counsel of the Fathers, to write with diversity of style in the
same faith, that the enemies of the Gospel, and errors might the better be
opposed, and that the way of truth might the more easily be found out and
falsity discovered; an excellent means of which, they conceived to be the
variety of styles and writing. And so daily experience teaches us. It is with
many men in our days as it is with those that are stung with the Tarantula in
Apulia, who are cured by music, and that not with every sort of music, but
such only, as at that instant pleases their humor, which the Musician plays
long many times before he can find out, or light upon, and sometime can never
hit it; so that many perish being suddenly stupisied and benumbed with the
poison. But if the fiddler strike upon that string that pleases their Phantasy,
then immediately they dance and so continne till they fall down out of
weariness, then keeping them very warm and sweating them, when they have got
new strength that they, begin to stir again, they likewise fall a playing the
same lesson, and they dance afresh, and so by fits continue this exercise, till
they have sweat-out all the malignancy and the venom: and by this means and
this only they are cured.

Even so I say, in this age where there are so many stung with Popish
Tarantulas, all sorts of music cannot please them to make them sweat out their
Poison of errors; for I playing formerly* somewhat gravely, it delighted not
their phansies, I have endeavored now therefore with a more merry lesson, to
try if there be any way to purge that venom and to restore them to sanity of
mind and body. Our Savior Christ compared the men of his time, to a company of
little children sitting in a market place, that allthough their fellows had
mourned unto them, they never had condoled with them: and all though they had
piped yet they never had danced, so attent they were to their fopperyes and
vain inventions, that neither mercy nor indgments nor any thing could prevail
with them: And yet our Savior cease not still to use all means to the
bringing them to the knowledge of God and of themselves. And now to speak
something to the matter in hand, and for my own particular. You cannot be
ignorant, that for these three score years and upward there have been
thousands, that have writ with all manner of gravity and humble lowlines calling
for reformation, and yet nothing has been listened unto, but for their pains
they have been Severely punished, and miserably undone by the PRELATES.

As for my self, I neither meddled nor made with them, nor their dignities, and
notwithstanding out of their mere suspicion, to the dishonor of God and the
King, and our holy profession, they have ruined me and all mine, and I have
now layn in prison mourning these two years, and few have lamented with me I
must confess I had at this instant a humor of piping, to see if I can put any
of my brethren into a mind to dance out of error, and sweat out the contagion
and poison of heresies that are now drunk in; and if I shall seem to have been
over pleasant, they will I hope dispense with it, when they know the occasion.
You think that in my Letany I am too comicall, I conceive that to be a
misprision in you, for what I have set forth is most true, and not fained, most
of which I have been an eve witness of, and can produce thousands to witness the
same with me. And were I a little comicall, I hope the PRELATES will not blame
that in me: For not long since they themselves, in an open Court of judicature
in censuring one that writ against comedyes, testified their liking unto them,
affirming they allowed of Comedies, so the abuse were taken away (which is
absent in mine) and withal said, that some of the ancient Fathers made a
Comedy, which was renowned amongst the grave and learned.

Now if it be a thing commendable in the Fathers, I hope they will not blame it
in their children, in the number of which I am filius Ecclesie et patrum: and
especially when they allow them in both their Universities, and before the
Kings and Qneenes Majesty; and them also made in the scorn of those they
brand with the name of Puritans, to the dishonor of their own Christian
profession, and to the exposing of it, in as much as in them lies, to the
scorn of the adversaries, in so much, (if I have not heard amiss) that the
Kings highness and the Queen, to their everlasting honors be it spoke, were
displeased with it: and that the Queen should say, that if such affronts
should be put upon their Religion in her Country, they would not be thought
worthy to live. This I must confess showed a divine goodness in that most
illustrious Princess, and does withal sufficienly demonstrate., that her
Grace knows what belongs, a little better to the honor of Religion then
our greater Masters.

But be it as you suppose, as comicall as can be imagined, though in truth
there be no such thing, with them and mature esteemers of things, I hope it
will deserve no blame, If I should play a little upon them, when they make it
their daily sport to fill not only their stages, Courts of Judicature, but
their very pulpits with plays, against the most holiest Christians, yea the
chiefest of all their pastimes are employed in scorning, mocking, and telling
one filthy tale or other, which of purpose they themselves have invented
against them, and all to make them odious amongst all men: and this is their
iournall practice, yea I say they make their very pulpits stages to disgrace
honest men, and their most holy profession, to the infinite dishonor of God,
and the ruin of their brethren. I pray go to the Court sermons, and you shall
see those SYCOPHANTS sometime bringing into their deskes Christ and the King on
the one side, and the Jews and the Puritans on the other. The King they
compare to Christ in all things. The Puritans (as they term them) they compare
to the rebellious, disobedient and persecuting Jews: putting a reed into the
Kings hand, in stead of a Scepter, a crown of thorns on his head and the
other accoutriments of scorn, using all manner of contumelies to his Royal
Majesty, and crying hail Master, when in the mean time they make but a
scorn of his highness, neither regarding him, nor his laws; and yiedling no
obedience to either. I beseech you Sir, what is this, but an interlude? If this
be preaching, then Haman was a good Preacher: for he preached as good doctrine
as these do against the poor Jews, and sought not only the ruin of one or
some sew of them, but the destruction of them all, as the Prelates and Priests
of our age now do against their innocent brethren.

For my part I must confess, I have often gone out of the kings chapel with
admiration at the Kings most excellent goodness, and that all the honest men in
the kingdom had not long ago been made a prey to their enemies desire: for if
one private man shall but conceive a displeasure against an other, or hear but
a sinister report of him, that he is not so well affected to him as he imagins,
or that he is his enemy, there is forthwith, a violation of freindship between
them, and ueuer a true reconciliation more to be expected: now if Kings had not
more heroical virtues in them of wisdom, patience, clemency, and forbearing,
and if our gracious King were not a Prince of surpassing debonerity, we should
be as so many sheep unto the slaughter, slain all the day long.

Nay we have all cause to bless God for our Royal King, and to pray for the
continuation of his life and happy reign long among us, and withal, that the
Lord would put it into his royal breast, duly to look into the intentions of
those enemies of all goodness., who aim not at the flourishing of his crown
and dignity but the ruin of it and the true Religion, and to bring in a
confusion both in Church and State for the better effecting of those devilish
purposes, that no gunpowder plot could bring yet to pass.

But that we may a little look back to this preachment of the Court Priests,
and the comedy in it. Whereas they compared their brethren to the rebellious
Jews, I could earnestly desire, that his Highness and the Nobility would but
seriously a little consider these men's proceedings and their Christian candor
in it, and that they would examine them* by the rule of truth and Judgment,
and then they should well perceive, that malice and envy, and not ripe and
mature brotherly reason had dictated this calumniating ventosity to the^, by
which they make themselves preuaricators against God and men. Let them not
therefore say, that those they brand with the name of Puritans, are like the
Jews, but prove it. Wherein I pray have they ever shown their least disloyalty
to his Majesty, or plotted any thing against his life or dignity or impeached
his royalty in any thing? has he not their lives, liberty and purses to the
uttermost, yea above their abilities at his command? do they, or ever did they
resist his royal authority in the least thing nay in any thing? do not his
servants hale them to prison, take away their goods, drive away their cattle at
any time, upon any pretense, without the least reluctation* Let daily
experience then and the prisons convince this notorious calumniation! wherefore
then, are these abominable things acted against them in their pulpits, before
King and Council, the whole Nobility, and flower of the Kingdom? I know there
is not one of these poor men, but would spend their best blood, abandon their
wives and children, and hazard their estates, yea all they have, for the honor
of his crown and dignity, and that most willingly, and although they should be
trampled upon to death, would never harbor a disloyal thought against his
Sovereignty; but as Job said concerning God, if the Lord kill me I will trust
in him, so I dare promise in the person of them all, if the King should
conceive never so meanly of them, and of their allegia^ce were it to death it
self, yet they would a thousand times rather die, before they would be found
disloyal in any duty, that the King by the right of a King, or the laws of his
Kingdom can either expect or challenge at their hands, or by any authority or
Prerogative royal vindicat. How is it the^; I say, that these unworthy Priests
dare thus abuse the Kings royal ears, and so honorable an audience with such
daily false accusations?

What a damnable hight of impiety are our profane Priests and Prelates come to,
to make the pulpit a stage and place to vent most seditious lies in* and those
for the incensing of the king against his most loyal Subjects? and that to
make a division between the head and the members? the unity of which, is not
only the glory, but the safety of a kingdom, which never florisheth so well,
as when there is a sweet harmony between the king and his people.

This is not to be Ministers of Christ, who is the king of peace, but of the
devil and Antichrist, so to preach. Look upon the first Sermon that ever was
preached, after the nativity of Christ, by the Angel to the shephards, it was a
sermon of joy and Peace, and of good tidings. Listen also the heavenly host,
what a sermon they made in the theater of glory, in their praising of God, and
you shall hear them saying, glory to God in the highest and on earth Peace,
and good will toward men. And when the disciples, like the Priests and Prelates
of our age before better information would have had fire come down from heaven
to destroy those that would not entertain Christ, he said unto them, you know
not of what Spirit you are, teaching all his disciples ever after by that
Sermon to preach peace and good will, and not to incite to destruction, their
auditors.

And indeed the Gospel is a message of peace, and the Ministers of it should
teach peace and good will, and not war, incensing and inflaming kings against
their poor Subjects, and alienating the Subjects from their Sovereign Lords
and Masters. Saint Tiberne is a fitter Place and pulpet for such Preachers,
then the kings chapel. Neither can there be any thing, writ, spoke, or done
too severely against such sowers of sedition, and especially those that make
the pulpit a place of it. The peacemakers have ever been blessed by Christ's
own testimony; but for such as are cause of sedition oppression and war in a
common wealth, they are accursed. Christ the blessed peace maker made peace
between God and men. Moses his servant, he stood up in the gap between God and
the people, and made an atonement for the people. The Apostles likewise were
all preachers of peace, and so are all their true Successors. But our Priests
and Prelates, they preach war, and make the Pulpet a place to act their lying
comedies in, to the estranging of the king from his Subjects, and breeding in
his royal heart sinister surmises against them, to the wounding of the poor
Subjects hearts with grief: when they see their King and ruler, the breath of
their nostrils, whom they honor and love better then their lives, to be
alienated from them. And that the Pecres and Nobles of the king dome, should by
their diabolical preachments harbor any evil thoughts of them. This I say
wounds the poor Subjects hearts, and of all this lamentable misery are the
Prelates and Priests the only cause, by their daily acts in their pulpits.

They have diverse parts in their scene. Sometime they bring them in, as most
dangerous and pernicious enimyes of his Highness, making them worse then the
powder plotters. And because forsooth there was a man killed his mother and his
brother not long since, there must be a book printed, that he was a Puritan,
and that he did that facinorous exploit, because they would not kneel at the
Sacrament and howsoever there be sufficient witnesses to the contrary; yet that
must go for current, there must I say be a railing pamphlet set forth against
the whole company of those that fear the Lord, as if they were all of the same
mold.

But had it been so, that a distempered man had perpetrated so foul a crime,
through some deuillish temptation, that had made profession of religion; must
it follow they are all such? Because Judas was a Traitor, must all the Apostles
be therefore condemned? Because one Courtier may be found disloyal to his
Prince, therefore must all the rest be accused of the same wickedness? and
because one merchant may break and play the knave, shall we say that all are
such? good reason will make no such illation. And yet this must be acted and
preached before his Majesty and that by a Prelat, that all Puritans are such:
and a thousand such impieties are daily laid to their charge. Yea what
wickedness is there, that they are not daily accused of to King and Nobles, both
privately and publicly?

I have heard many Sermons at the Court, yet never did I hear any, wherein I
saw not the Puritan brought up, with one scorn or other, and some notorious
lies told of them. So that I wonder not that those poor men are thought so
euilly of, though a most innocent and harmles people, as any lives upon the
earth. For when the place of God it self, from whence truth should only sound,
is made a theater of lying and false accusations, no wonder that the Kings
Majesty and nobles of the Kingdom, have a prejudicat opinion of them they call
Puritans, when they expect nothing but truth and veritable narrations from that
place.

In my younger days (that I may in some thing relate my own condition) I was
bred in as great a hatred of Puritans, as any tender years was capable of, as
it is well known, and thought those men not worthy to live, yet knew not any
of them, (our Country having then scarce two in it) neither was there a sermon
perhaps in half a year thereabouts, and that read out of a paper book, and
half of it commonly was railing against the Puritans. But when it pleased God
that some of those, that spoke euillest of them (through surfeiting and excess
had brought themselves to languishing sickness, and after to death it self) I
say, when those men, in their greatest extremities, chose rather to trust them,
yea and to prefer them, before there own brethren and niest kins-folks, and
bequeath their children and estats into their hands, and then being also
demanded the reason of such trust, and confidence in them, whom they had
reputed the worst of men before, and most of all traduced and hated, they then
openly declared themselves, and their opinion of them, saying that they were
now dying men, and that it was now time to speak the truth, and that they in
their hearts believed, they were the true servants of the Lord, howsoever
despised and contemned in the world, and withal they desired that their souls
might go the way that theirs went.

I say when I saw such a wonderful change in these men, who were men many of
them, of knowledge and understanding in all religions, and some of them
trauellars and courtiers, and that now on their death beds, they should give
such an approbation and so honorable testimony of those men, of whom they had
in their prosperity spoken so maliciously, I being then of years of
descretion, and better able to discern and judge of things that differ, began
more seriously to consider of that matter, and so much the more studious I
was, because I had in some sort, seen the vanity of all pleasures, having
indeed been bred in nothing else. The right way then to find blessedness, was my
only aim: which through Gods special favor and benediction upon my earnest
endeauours, daily reading of the word and holy scriptures, private duties. godly
society and frequent hearing of the word, which is only able to save our
souls, I found out, to the praise and honor of his name be it spoken. And I
then well perceived, looking into the lives and manners of men, that those that
were commonly branded with the name of Puritans, were the happiest, and that if
any were eternally blessed, they were such of them as squared there lives in
sincerity according to their profession.

And least that I might through an ouerweening conceit of some seeming
blessedness in them, be mistaken; I contented not my self with home comparing of
men and domestical experience, but I resolved to seek out still a more
excellent way if there were any; whereupon I went into foreign nations and
lived among all sorts of men, and in the greatest Princes Courts, conuersing
among all ranks and orders of them, and that many years, and amongst all
professions, Courtiers, Soldiers, Scholars, citizens, merchants, and among all
sects, of factions and religions, and examining all those in the balance of
Judgment, I found none in life and death happy and truly comfortable, but
those that are branded with the name of Puritans or at least those that live
and die in their faith. And for my own particular, to speak now my
conscience, I had rather go the way of the meanest Puritans that live and die
according to their profession, then of the greatest Prelates that ever lived
upon the earth; and this I speak in the presence of God: for of the ones
happiness I am as sure as the word of God is sure, and of the others I can
promise nothing, he living in rebellion to God all the days of his life, and
his repentance not known unto me.

And notwith standing I say all rhis, that these are such an holy people: yet
are they made but the offscouring of the world, and of all things, and brought
upon every stage, and into the pulpit, as fittest for ludibry by the Players
Priests, and Prelates, yea and in their Courts it is enough to ruin a man's
cause, if his adversary can but taint him with the name of a Puritan; but most
especially are they vilely abused by the Priests and Prelates in their Pulpits.

Now I say, if it be lawful in them, to make plays of honest men, and to
feign what they please against them: I pray let it be lawful in me, in
merriment to speak the truth of them, which as near as I can, I will not
transgress. If some shall say, they have not so great traynes nor so much ado
in their marching; I affirm, that at all times, they go more like Princes,
then humble Ministers of Christ, and the Apostles Successors, of whom we never
read, they came ever in coach or on horseback, but when Paul was mounted by
authority; or that they had ever a servant to attend them, much less such pomp
and state: and yet one of them converted more souls in one day, then all the
Prelates ever did that ever I read of: neither to speak truly, have I heard of
any they ever converted, but of many thousands they have confounded. But now to
the matter in hand because one of their abetters said not long since, that they
had not such attendance as I accuse them of. I say, if they have less company
one day, they have more an other, and whether they be their own or others
Servants, when they are in their Company, be they the Nobles themselves, they
are all their attendants, and the best of them most heartily glad if by their
service they can please them, and we know it usual, that the denomination of
the retinue is always from the greatest, and they are said to be his
followers. And I have heard the pursuiuants themselves often brag of the
greatness of their Masters attendance, and in such ample manner, as I think the
Kings Majesty has not commonly greater: and therefore that cannot be denied,
which is daily practiced. And for their Servants insolency I have frequently
both seen it and felt it. Now whereas you think, that it will not be will
taken, that I call Bishops, Priests and Deacons Antichrists little toes; and in
my LETANY desire deliuerahce from them, and withal seem to accuse them of
incontinency, all which you think will be censured of vnad uisednes at least,
if not thought scandalous and punishable.

To this I answer, first, that by Bishops, I understand the Prelates and by
Priests their own creatures, a generation unknown in the Church of Christ:
and by Deacons, the under Priests in this Kingdom, Officers of which the
Scripture knows nothing likewise. For the Deacons such as the Churches chose,
and were allowed by the Apostels, they were men of gravity, full of Faith and
the Holy Ghost, men of wisdom and good government and honesty, and were the
treasures of the faithful and the Church of God, and distributed the
liberalityes of the Saints amongst the poor indigent and necessitated
brethren. Now, I know never a Deacon in England either guilty of any of those
Virtues before specified, or that was ever employed in that Office, or was
thought fit to be trusted, with the treasury of the poor, or took the least
care of them, who ordinarily they trample upon and most reprochfully abuse with
the name of rascality. So that such Deacons as I pray against, are limbs of
the Beast, and the inferior order of shauelings, and such as ought to be spewed
out of the Church, as profitable for nothing but the increase of wickedness.

And for Bishops such as God appointed I honor them, and will maintain their
dignity to the last drop of my blood, so far I am from praying against such.
Neither did I ever speak irreverently against the Kings Bishops, and those
that were appointed as an Order in the State, till they had in their open court
renounced his authority, and run themselves by that, and many other notorious
proceedings into a Praemunire; and so had made themselves enemies of his
Prerogative royal, and delinquents against his Majesty, and under his
Highnesses displeasure, as by the Statutes of the Kingdom they are proclaimed
to be, and by the defenders of their proceedings in their Ecclesiastical
Courts: who in a book set forth by their common consent, do conclude all
those in a Praemunire, that challenge their authority Iure diuino, as the Pope
and clergy of Rome, which at this time they do. And for your better
satisfaction look in the Apology for proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical (a
book made by the Prelates own creatures) and in the first chapter, you shall
see all the Prelates by their own witness in a Praemunire and delinquents against
his Majesty in a high degree of contumacy.

And truly I think there was never such an affront put upon regal dignity,
as on that day I was censured; never such dishonor put upon the Scriptures, by
such as would be thought Ministers of the word and the Bishops and Pastors of
Christ: neither were the scriptures ever more blasphemously abused, the^ they
were at that time in their open assembly. I shall briefly therefore tell you
that days work, of which there is a thousand witnesses, as also of their
impious words against the most sacred word of God and divine oracles of holy
writ, by all which, you will see, I have good reason to call them ANTICHRISTS
LITTLE TOES, and to pray against them: for they are as Disperatly impious, and
equally to be detested of all such as truly fear the Lord and the King: for
if we compare them together, there will no disparity appear between them,
they being every way as malicious against the word of God and his dear
servants, and as diametrally opposing regality as Antichrist himself. But that
all things may the more clearly be euidenced unto you, let me tell you that
days proceedings.

You must take notice, that howsoever, they had fained some triuiall articles
against me; they were all by the general consent of the Court thought so
poor, as they openly auerred they would not condemn me for them; and so much
the rather, because those that had sworn to them, were proved to be my capital
enimyes, and also, in their depositions to have sworn point blanck one against
an other, and like evil witnesses could not agree in swearing: therefore, they
only condemned me for my book, which I writ in defense of the honor of
Christ and his Kingdom, and of the Kings most excellent Majesty's prerogative
Royal and Supremacy, against the Pope and Popish Bishops, provoked there unto
by a Papist; to which duty I was bound both by the law of God and the law of
the land, and my special oath, all which I alleged at the bar: and
farthermore added that in writing against the Bishop of Rome, I intented no
such Bishops as acknowledge their authority from Kings and Emperors, but only
those Bishops that vsurp authority over Kings and Emperors and their fellow
brethren and the Church of God iure diuino, and so I had prefaced in my book,
which also I openly read there.

And to speak the truth, I looked for favor and assistance in this combat,
from the Prelates; never suspecting that they would have been my enimyes, for
this endeavor, especially I having also, in that place alleged the Acts and
Statutes establyshed by the public consent of the whole Kingdom, in which it
was ratified, that the Prelates have all their authority and jurisdiction which
they now exercise, from the King, as immediately derived from him, and to
affirm the contrary, is to be ipso facto an enemy of his crown and dignity.
And as the Prelates, were an order established by the King and state, I was so
far from opposing them, that I never impeached their dignity in the least
thing in all the book; neither would I ever have meddled with them, if they had
kept that standing; but they like the evil Angels out of pride, not keeping
their first station, BUT OPENLY RENOVNCING THE KINGS AVTORITY, and affirming
that Jesus Christ made them Bishops, and that the holy Ghost consecrated them,
and that they were Princes and had their thrones and that before Kings, and all
this iure diuino, by all which they made me their enemy, they being
delinquents against the King. And because I had retified, whatsoever I said in
my book by the word of God; they as they had before renounced the Kings
authority and barbarously reviled me for my pains, most impiously, likewise
vilified the holy scripture, Saying in their Sessions, that they looked for
some great matter in my book, finding me so confident, but more diligently
reading of it, they found nothing but scripture in it, which was the refuge of
all Schismatics and Heriticks: and that the Scripture could not be known to
be Scripture, but by the Fathers: nor distinguished from the Apocriphd, but by
the Fathers: nor the meaning of the scripture could not be known but by the
Fathers, and because the Fathers as they said, were in their interpretation
diverse from me (which notwithstanding is not so) therefore they condemned me.

But I pray are not all these blasphemous, popish, and damnable assertions?
could worse have been forged in the very conclaue of hell? Is not this I pray
you to tell the Spirit of God to his face he lies? and to teach an other way to
heaven then by the Scripture? which Christ the Son of God sends us to, and
all the Prophets and Apostles, as to the instructers of the simple, and able to
make the man of God wise to salvation, and perfectly furnished to every good
work, and the which the Holy Ghost compares to a guide and a Lantern for
direction, and a light to conduct us in this our pilgrimage and peregrination
through the errors of the world, and to keep our feet in the paths of truth?
and with the Prelates this great and glorious light, this Scripture must be so
obscure, as it must be inferior to all things, that have a power in themselves
to declare and demonstrate their own nature, as fire to be fire, gold to be
gold, light to be light. But the Scripture only that can not be known but by
the help of others, to be the word of God, it cannot be the word of God
without the Fathers, and their interpretation of them: for the Scriptures
themselves they are the only refuge of Schismatics, the cause of all errors,
and that that comes confirmed and proved only from Scripture, is ever to be
suspected with the Prelates. O BLASPHEMY, yea the book that has nothing, but
Scripture, must be adjudged to the fire, and the author of it given over to the
Devil, sined a thousand pounds, and censured to pay the costs of suit, and be
debarred of his practice, the only support left for the releife of his
distressed family, to the utter undoing of him his poor wise and children, and
all this forsooth because there was nothing but Scripture in it. O HORRIBLE
impiety! The truth is, howsoever they seemed to condemn it; because it had
nothing but scripture that was not the occasion, but the very cause was,
because I writ against the Pope Father Antichrist such correspondency there is
now between the Pope and the Prelates, that one cannot write against him, but
the Prelates say by and by that they are meant by it. The Grols!

You know that among the Papists, if any of them, hold but any one tenent of
the Protestents, as that there is no Purgatory, beside the blood of Jesus
Christ: or that there are no sins in their own nature venial: or that the
Scripture is sufficient of it self, with out traditions: and ought to be the
sole rule of life and doctrine and the only Judge of controversies: or that
the Pope is not Christ's Vicar, nor Peter's successor: or that Christ is not
corporally present in the Sacrament of the altar as they call it, for any of
these assertions, or any other of our tenants he is forthwith condemned for an
heritick, and burnt at a Stake, as daily experience teaches us. Nay it is a
common thing amongst us here in England, let any man hold but any one tenent,
of any sect whatsoever, be it as they term them, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, though in all other things he agree with the Church as they call
it: yet he is forthwith adjudged and condemned for such an one. Yea let a man
refuse but to eat blood, or Swins flesh, though in all other things a good
Christian: by and by they condemn him for a Jew:

I say then, if for any one tenent among the Papists a man may be condemned for
an heretic, and suffer for it: and if by the Prelates likewise, for any one
opinion differing from them, that same sect holds, one may be judged and
condemned to extremest misery as a Brownest, Anabaptist etc. I say then, by
far more excellent reason, one may conclude, that those that hold so many
damnable Popish opinions, and tenants as the Prelates do, and defend them in
their open Courts, that they are Papists; and so they are indeed and to be
detested. For they maintain and set up Popery, and Papal Jurisdiction,
challenging their own authority to be iure deuino; and the Pope does no more.
They likewise trample upon the scriptures, as a thing of nothing, accusing them
of obscurity and imperfection, and will not admit the Scripture to be Judge of
Controversies. The Pope does no more. And withal hold the Synagogue of Rome to
be a true Church: and not so much, as to have had the suspicion of error in any
fundamental points of religion; and all this I say in their open Court, and
the Pope does no more, to the making of the King and his Subjects all
Schismatics and heretics, to the infinite dishonor of God and the King; and
to the eternal disgrace of King James of famous memory, a Prince for knowledge
and wisdom the gratest that ever was, save Solomon: and for learning, renowned
through the extremest parts of the whole universe, of whom I dare say thus much
as a Scholar, becanse I know something in that art: for which I should
excessiuely have honored him, had he been but a private man, much more a King,
and withal, my Soueraygne, whose dignyty I will never see trampled ypon,
though I suffer for my loyalty the whole fury of the Prelates and their
Confederats. I say therefore I dare say thus much of that renowned King, that
for learning and Scholarship, all the Prelates in England shouelled into one
heap, or plastered together into one lump, are not worthy to be named the same
year that his excrements are mentioned: and yet notwithstanding, these
unworthy fellows, do not cease in their open Courts, and in every stinking
pamphlet set forth by their authority to abuse this famous King: WHO IN HIS
APOLOGY, TO ALL CHRISTIAN PRINCES (which is well known to the learned) as
defender of the faith, maintaynes the doctrine of the reformed Churches in his
Kingdoms, and dominions, to be the only true doctrine: and the Popish to be
erroneous and abominable: and with inuencible arguments, and that many, he
proves the Pope to be Antichrist; and exhorts all Christian Kings and Princes
his brethren to cast off his yoke: demonstrateth likewise yea evidently
euinceth, that Rome is the whore of Babylon: and in many of his learned
writings, he continually, like himself a defender of the faith, opposes all
the Romish impious tenants. And all that I now say is well known to all men of
understanding.

Now I pray take notice of the PRELAT OF CANTFRBVRYS ARROGANCE, and of all his
fellows. The King as defender of the farth, teaching us both by his life, and
doctrine maintains and proves, THE POPE TO BE ANTICHRIST, AND THF CHVRCH OF
ROMF TO BE THE WHORE OF BABYLON, and earnestly exhorts all Christian Princes to
come out of her. And the Prelates in their Court, affirm that the Church of
Rome is a true Church, and never had so much as a suspicion of error in
fundamental points of religion; and in putrid pamphlets set forth by their
authority they confirm the same, and that the Pope is not Antichrist. Is not
this damnable impiety against God and the King, and prejudicial to the
salvation of thousands, and the maintenance of the Papists in their diabolycall
doctrins, and the making of many poor people at their wits end, not knowing
which way now to take, for the saving of their souls? and withal yields and
ministers (to my knowledge) many arguments unto the Priests and Jesuits of
seducing the Kings Subjects and to pervert and mislead the people; and keeping
of the seduced in error and disloyalty to their King: when they shall hear our
Fathers the Prelates to proclayme the synagogne of Satan Rome it self to be the
true Chuth and that she never had so much in her, as the appearance of error
and that salvation may be found and had in it. And yet royal and learned KING
JAMES ABSOLVTELY ASSEVERS, NAY UNANSWERABLY PROVES, THAT THE POPE is
ANTICHRIST, AND ROME THE WHORF OF BABYLON, AND that SALVATION CANNOT BE HAD IN
THAT CHVRCH: and in the same faith he lived and dyed: and in the same our
gracious King Charles was bred and educated, and has in two several
declarations after the 39. Articles: and of the dissolution of the Parliament
page 21, 24, Protested before God and all his Subjects, that he would never
give any way, to the licencing or autorising of any thing, whereby any
innovation in the least degree may creep into our Church: nor ever conniue at
any back sliding to Popery. And that it is his hearts desire to be found worthy
of that title, which he esteems to be most glorious in all his crown,
Defender of the faith.

Here the King protests he is of the same faith his father was, and defender of
the same, and that he will never license, nor autorize any thing that tends to
innovation, nor never conniue at any backsliding to Popery. And who is he,
worthy the name of a Subject, that will not take his royal word? by which he
has declared himself to be of his royal fathers faith, and a defender of the
same: and that was that the Pope was Antichrist and the Church of Rome the
whore of Babylon. And yet the Prelates and their accomplices, that vermin, to the
deshonour of both these famous Kings their Lords and Masters teach the
contrary, and punish those severely that defend and mayntaine the same faith,
they profess themselves protectors and defenders of, trampling upon regal
dignity in their Courts, and abusing Princely clemency.

It is worth the looking on, to see, the pride of the Prelates, in setting the
Kings picture over their dresser, in the high Commission Court; for, they have
placed his Highness standing, with his hat of before their worships, like a
delinquent; his Crown and scepter laid low, as the poor Emperors and Kings
were wont to stand before his impiety, the Pope, when they were cited to his
Courts, of which stories, you may read many in KING JAMES HIS APOLOGY, to go
no farther; and in this very manner, have they set up the portrait of our
renowned King. And the very intrinsecall marry bone of the matter is, they
trample upon his imperial dignity, while they seem to honor him, with whom
they make themselves in the mean time checkmates: for they say, they were
before Christian Kings, and had their thrones, and that they were not beholding
to him for their honor and dignity of Episcopality, for they were iure diuino,
that they were.

Now, what is it to trample upon the Kings Crown and Royalty, and stamp his
laws under their feet, and to backslide to Popery, and to bring in innovation,
if this be not? But concerning innovation afterward.

In the mean time, by these damnable proceedings, they manifest sufficiently,
that they are Antichrists little toes: for they are very Popes themselves; and
whatsoever can be said of the Pope, may be spoke of them. I will therefore, for
the more clear elucidation of this matter, in a few things briefly here
compare them together. For howsoever one may be a greater Pope then an other:
as one King may be greater then an other: yet they are all Popes, and
pernicious enimyes, to God, the King, and the whole Church of God. But now to
the matter.

The Pope writes himself Father, so do they write themselves reverend Fathers.
The Pope sells sin for money, so do they, as the whole kingdom, and their
Officers can well tell; and does nothing without money, so do they. The Pope
forbids marriage and meats, and which Paul calls the doctrine of devils,
so do they in the same manner, whatsoever they pretend. The Pope commands
superstitious idol days to be kept and observed, contrary to the
commandments of God, and punishes the neglect of his Commands more severely
then the breach of the waightiest laws of God: so do the Prelates; as their
Courts can witness: yea and command men and compel them as the Pope himself, to
break the commandments of God to observe vain and impious traditions. The
Pope sells Licenses for meats and marriage, the Prelates do the same. The Pope
sells nonresidences, pluralityes, trialityes, totquots, the Prelates do the
same, to the staruing and ruining of the souls of men. The Pope, rules and
governs the Church, by the cursed Canon law, and Popish excommunications, the
scalding house of conscience, the Prelates do the very same; and the breach of
their stinkingest Canons, is more deeply punished in their Courts, then the
violation of all the laws of God and the King. The Pope prefers his
Ceremonies, and traditions above the word of God. The Prelates do the same, as
daily experience teaches us. The Pope makes his Servants or Priests by his
own power, without the consent of the people, and intrudeth them upon the
congregations without either their knowledge or liking, the Prelates do the
same. The Pope percecuteth all godly Preachers and people, that preach the
Gospel in the purity of it, and desire in sincerity to serve the Lord, and
would bring their brethren to the knowledge of the same, and to the purity and
truth of the Apostolical Churches: the Prelates do the like; as the whole
Kingdom knows well, and the gaoles and prisons daily witness and the
silencing of so many learned and painful Ministers. The Pope appoynts his
Priests to stand at the altar with the Deacon apperrelled with his foppish and
player-like accutriments, those Babylonish garments, and to cry out Dominus
vobiscum, the Deacon and Subdeacon with all the rest of Baals Priests answering
him as loud as they can; the Bishops do the same, saving only that it is in
English. The Pope commands adoration at the Sacrament, crossing of children
in baptism, demanding of the newborn babes, if they will forsake the Devil
and all his works etc and esteems the Font more holy then other places;
inioyneth likewise purifying of women, and a thousand such like costly and
chargable vanities which were tedious to relate: and all these and more then
these do the Prelates in like manner, in all which, their Antichristian authority
with their Popish practices are sufficiently manifest: so that there is little
or no difference between Pope and Prelates. And all authority of doing this,
they arrogat unto themselves iure deuino. Limbs therefore they are of
Antichrist, from whom doctor Pocklington gloryes, that they are lineally
descended, in his impious pamphlet Sunday no Sabbath, page: 2, and 44.

And if it be so, that they be lineally descended from that good race, we may
never promise unto our selves, any comfort from them: or to the King or
Kingdom true peace and security: but may justly look for miseryes one after
an other, and extreme calamityes. For King James says of that generation, that
they are the frogs that came out of the bottemles pit, and are of the nature of
amphibia, that live in the water and upon the earth, seeming to be Church men,
and yet are intermedling with States affairs, and indeed troubling the whole
world, and all commonwealths where they dwell, or have any place and
authority, as all the Christian world can witness, which is now drowned in
blood, that they have been the only original of: and such a gender of filth
that great frog left behind him here when he was drove away, that there has
such a brood ofstinking polwigs rose from that, as ever since, the very earth
and air has been so putrified with them, and the very fountains of living
water so corrupted, as Egypt it self was not more stinched with the noysomenes
of them then we have been with the continual bane of these in our nostrils,
insomuch that they are now loathsome to God and men and dangerous to us all. So
that the duty I bear to my Sovereign Lord the King, and the love I have to
the happy flourishing of this Kingdom and the good of the Church, has made
me cast away all fear, and speak the truth, which when I do, I cannot but
say, the Prelates are the most wicked, profane and unconscionable men that live
upon the earth, and inferior to the Pope in no impiety, but rather transcending
him, in regard of their knowledge, which the Pope wants, and also in that he
never yet forced any man to profane the Lords day which they do: But more of
this afterward in our farther paragonating of them together.

And truly in regard of what King James has taught his subjects in his
diverse books and writings and of our gracious King his Declarations, that he
will never autorize any thing that tends to innovation in the least degree, I
cannot but from my soul detest the Prelates, as the greatest innovaters that
ever were in the world, of which practices all men know the danger, as that
they have many times been fatal to Kingdoms and Republics, and ever
perilous, if they were not from worse to better, which then all reason does
allow of. And therefore it has ever been so stricktly looked to in all
Countries, and provided so against by as many Statutes and decrees and ways of
punishment as by the wit of man could be devised, and especially in this
Kingdom singular care was had by the Gouerners, and whole State, that all
occasions of revolting back again to Popery might be prevented, and even as
the Lord himself once took order, by many caueats to the people of Israel,
and by special prohibitions charged them not to return into Egypt, for he
knew well, they had still a lingering after the fleshpots and Onions, so I
say, our rulers and the whole common wealth assenting unto them (as if the
Statutes and records be searched you shall find) had such a provident care
never to return back again to that Romish Egypt, that there was special
order taken, not only about greater matters, but even about thy very standing
of the Communion table, and it was by public consent appointed to be placed in
the midst of the Church, that every one might see the whole administration of
the Sacrament and the actions about it: And order likewise was taken, that
alters should be beat down and removed out of all Churches.

But in this Age, tables are turned again into Altars in many places, and set
alterwise every where, a new way of vshering in Popery being now found out. And
howsoever by the same wisdom, and common consent, and special statutes and
laws it was ordered, that no authority Ecclesiastical should be exercised in
the Kings dominions in their own names, nor no Courts held but by the Kings
sole authority, and all this for prevention of backsliding to Popery: yet the
Prelates against these special decrees and statutes, keep Courts make sommons,
and alter all things by their own authority, as if they were absolute Princes,
and without any dependency, to the infinite dishonor of his Majesty, the
molestation of his subjects* and troubling of the Church of God. And howsoever,
it was decreed that all those, that should iure diuino challenge a
superintendency in the Church above their brethren, were ipso facto in a
Praemunire and under the Kings indignation and high displeasure: yet the
Prelates in their open Courts do challenge their jurisdiction and authority iure
diuino, and punish those with severe censures that deny it. And howsoever I say
again there are many more statutes, yet in force, that provide against
innouations, with the Kings declarations, yet our Prelates violating them all,
daily bring in innovation, not only to the troubling of the Kings best
subjects, but to the putting of them to infinite expenses in the execution of
them, and for the bringing-in again of Popery and superstition and all
abomination, and in as much as in them lies to the ruining of this flourishing
monarchy and kingdom.

All which wicked proceedings, with the bringers of them in, we ought to
detest, as we fear God and the King, if we will listen unto Solomon, who in
the 24. of the Prove: ver. 21. 22. thus says. My Son fear thou the Lord and
the King, and meddle not with them, that are given to change for their calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both. So that we see,
both divine and human wisdom, have always provided against changes and
innouations: as being most dangerous and perilous to a state and that made our
gracious King in his declarations set forth his mind so clearly as that he
would no way allow of it. Notwithstanding all this, the Prelates are mightily
taken up with noueltyes and innouations, so as they have troubled the whole
realm by them, ruined and trust out all the most painful and diligent
Ministers, to the utter undoing of them, their poor wives and children, and
the staruing of the souls of the people, and the perishing of multitudes of
families of those good subjects, that durst not meddle with them in their
dangerous and deuillish proceedings, and made many thousands fly the country,
and more ready to depart, not knowing where to live free and quietly for them
in the whole kingdom.

And it is now come to pass according to that of Solomon Prove. 30 ver. 21. For
three things the earth is disquieted, and for four, it cannot bear, for a
servant when he reigns, and a fool when he is filled with meat etc. So that
the domineering of servants has ever been the disquieting of the whole land
where they are: for when they are filled with meat, like the evil servant in
the Gospel, because his Master delayed his coming, fell a eating and a
drinking and then a beating his fellow servants: even so the Prelates they live
of the fat of the earth, pamper and cram themselves, faring deliciously every
day, and then they fall a beating of us their fellow servants, and use us most
vnhumanly, more like beasts then men; and this is and has been the very
practice of Antichrist, which they now take up: and therefore in all these
respects I may safely conclude they are limbs of the beast and none of Christ's
Ministers nor the Apostles successors, but the very offspring of Antichrist, and
according to Poclington lineally descended from him: which if you would please
with a more serious deliberation to weigh, and parallel the Popes and their
proceedings a little more narrowly together, it would yet more evidently
appear: such a sweet harmony you shall find between them in all things.

Let us look therefore upon the charge, that Christ in the last of Matthew gave
unto his disclipes, and in them to all succeeding Ministers of the Gospel Ver.
19. 20. Go therefore (says he) and teach all nation baptising them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I am with you
always: even unto the end of the world. Here then we see the whole office of
the Ministers of Christ, is to teach and administer the Sacraments, not to
domineir over their brethren. Secondly the restriction and limitation of his
Ministers teaching. They must not teach the people what they list: but they
must teach to observe all things whatsoever Christ commands, and nothing else,
not their own phantisies and foppist superstitions, and vain and idle
ceremonies. And thirdly for their comfort in so doing and teaching, he
promises unto them his perpetual assistance and blessing, and that even to
the end of the world.

I pray let us now se, whether the Pope or Prelates have learned this lesson
well or no, and whether they have imitated the Apostles in so teaching- All
Christ's true Ministers are teachers, no Lords nor beaters, ever careful to
dispense unto the people committed to their charge, the food of their souls,
the word and Sacraments, they go and teach all Nations. The Pope and Prelates
they go beat and silence all Nations: they will neither teach themselves, nor
will let others teach. And this is their daily practice, as the whole world
knows well. Neither can the Pope or Prelates deny it. Are not these therefore
Antichrist little toes; and to be prayed against think you? but not to speak
now more of that.

Now come to the limitation or restriction. All the true Ministers of Christ,
teach the people to observe that only which he has commanded, neither ought
they to teach otherwise: or the people to hear or observe otherwise, though an
angel from heaven should bring it: for they have all a special command not to
be wise above that which is written, and not to preach a diverse doctrine to
that they have been taught. And in the 2. of the Colossians the apostle is very
large in instructing them to beware of all will worship, and to take heed of
all such as under the pretense of devotion, intrude upon the people their own
superstitious inventions in the worship and service of God. And the same
Apostle warnes the Corinthians, that in Gods worship they should not become the
servants of men, who ought not to prescribe how to serve God: in regard, that
he himself by Moses, the Prophets, and in these last days, by his son Jesus
Christ, has fully taught us how to worship him. And Christ himself, rebuked
the Scribes and Pharisees for bringing their own devices into his Service,
openly teaching all his auditors, that those serve him in vain that worship
him after the precepts of men: and for our derection sends them unto the word,
saying, search the Scriptures for they testify of me, and in them you think
to have eternal life. And this word Paul commands, should dwell plentifully in
us, and says that if we walk according to the rule of that, the peace of God
shall be with us: and Saint Peter for our comfort, bids all Christians have
recourse to it, for it is a light to guide us through the darkest errors of
this world. And saint Paul, Ephesians 4, ver: 11. 12, 13. 14. setting down the
reason and end why Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets some Evangelists,
some Pastors and teachers, says, that we henceforth be no more children tossed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of
men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. By which
place, it is sufficiently manifest, that they have given and left unto the
Church a sufficient rule of direction to be guided by, and that to swerve from
it, is to be like little children tossed to and fro. Now then, if Moses, the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles commands be to be obeyed, Ministers and
people are the one to teach, and the other to hear and observe nothing, but
what Christ commands; and either to teach or to obey contrary, is open
rebellion against God, and pernicious to them both. This you see is the
restriction. The word and command of Christ must be the rule, and nothing else.
Yea an angel from heaven is not to be heard, teaching otherwise: nor one
rising from the dead. Abraham sends them to Moses and the Prophets: the word of
God: and that only is able to save our souls: and that only must be the rule
of teaching and obeying.

Now I pray to leave the Pope a little to come nigher home. Hear the Prelates
teach and their shauelings, when they preach even in the Court it self? S^imme
of first the froth of human wit, I mean their vain and unprofitable
florishes* take away their superstition and will worship taught there, to say
nothing of Popery, Arminianisme, and Libertinisme. Pare away their raylings
against the power and life of religion, and the generation of the just. Remove
also, the flattery of them, not far many times from blasphemy, and able to
bring a curse rather then a blessing upon our gracious King. I say remove all
these things away: and you shall see that very little of the word, will be
found and the commands of Christ, in their teaching or any thing that tends to
souls conversion, the reproving of vice, and beating down of sin, or
building up of men in their most holy Faith, or for the more enabling them to
the true worship of God, or for the leading of a pious life.

And to say no more of them, look through the whole Kingdom, and in most
places you shall find no sermons at all, but devised service set up in place of
preaching, an absolute neglect, yea contempt of Christ's command who says Go
preach or teach: they say go say Service and read prayers. Insomuch, that
Cholmny a Patron of Rome writing in defense of that Synagouge, against learned
and reverend Master Henry Burton: who in his answer to him again, Babell no
Bethel, gave her such a blow, and so coniured down that Cacodemon, that Cobbler
and tinker of Babell, that she will never be able to outgrow it, nor he to rise
again or put pen to paper, I say Cholmny, in the magnification of the goodness
of the Church of Rome, and setting down her privileges, affirms that she was
better provided for of teachers and for preaching then the people of Wales here
among us. A fine commendations I promise you of England. But let this by the by
be spoke to the immortal honor of our Prelates, that have silenced all the
preaching Ministers in those parts and diverse other: and he that said this may
be believed, for he was one of the Prelates Sychophants. Lamentable it is I say,
to see through the whole Kingdom how little teaching there is.

But I pray when they teach, what teach they? they teach for the most part,
profanation of the Lords day, Arminianisme, obedience to the Church falsely so
called, human traditions, observation of idle days and times, setting up of
Organs and piping, abstinence from meats and marriage, whisten ales and May
games, Festiual times, the observation of ceremonies and the canons af the
Prelates, to bow and cap and make a curtsy at the name letters and Syllables of
Jesus, to crouch to the altar, and cringe to the Communion table, to turn
their faces to the East, to stand at the Creed and Gospel, to kneel at the
reading of the ten commandments, to take notice of all those that piss
against Churches, and that carry any burdens through them, and to present them,
to beat down the pews and stools to make way to se the altars, to come up
with reverence to the cage and to worship the bread and wine, to set the table
altarwise to see their children be signed with the sign of the Cross, and
that women come in decent carchets when they are Churched, that the Surplice be
cleanly and neatly whashed, and that it be daily put on, as also the whood,
that they marry with the ring, and that they be all reverently uncovered in the
Church that holy place, and that they lean not on the Comunion table, nor
write on it, nor lay their hats nor books on it, and a thousand such like
fopperies and vain inventions are there urged upon the people, all which
things notwithstanding Christ never commanded, and yet they are more strictly
preached and vehemently insisted upon, and urged, then the observation of any
of Gods commandments, or of any wholesome or saving doctrine, and to speak the
truth, most of their preachments are about these fooleries, which Christ sent
them not about: and it is well known, that the neglect of the meanest of these
idle ceremonies, is more severely punished in Minister and people, in their
Courts, then the preuarication of the whole law, as by woeful and daily
experience we are taught. Neither can any man deny what I say to be true. So
that religion now consists in nothing, but in ceremonies, outward observations,
munchy tricks, and the preaching of the Priests and Prelates is nothing, but
down with the Gospel and up with Popery as fast as may be: deplorable indeed
are our times, and great contempt there is now of the Gospel, and vshering in
of novelties and innouations. I beseech you what could be done more at Rome?
But if I should run through all, whereas I thought to have writ but a few lines
only, I should make a volume, and too much weary you.

Yet I must now crave pardon, in one thing more, that you would give me a
little liberty, and so much the rather, because it is a matter of great
concequence, and the cause of all superstition all most and idolatry, and the
occasion of the greatest breach of union amongst Christians, which was given
and appointed by Christ him self, for one of the greatest ties and bands of
concord love Charity and peace among them: and that is the Supper of the Lord,
which was the devils craft and subtlety so to bring things about. Let us now
see in that, what Christ and the apostles did and taught concerning this
mystery (whose example we have precept to imitate) and what the Pope Priests
and Prelates in our Age do in it: and what mischeife has come upon the Church
of God, by the leaving of Christ's and the Apostles example and following
Antichrist and his disciples.

First therefore to speak of the gesture. It is said that Christ and all his
apostles in the celebration of the supper sat; So it is in the original, and
so in all translations that ever I yet read: and most cartaine it is they used
a table gesture, but whatsoever it was, that was then in use, whether leaning,
lying, standing, sitting, kneeling it was not: and that all men that ever I
conferred with about this, or ever read, accord to. Now the Pope and the
Prelates have altered this gesture, and bring-in kneeling, a posture of
adoration, a strange innovation, and a gesture that never was used at the
celibration of any Sacrament. And truly in my opinion, it is a great temerity
among Christians, to leave the ordinary examples of Christ and his apostles,
and follow extraordinary of Antichrist and his disciples: especially when we
are commanded by Paul himself 1. Cor: chap. 11. to be followers of him even as
he is of Christ. And this in the very chapter where he speaks of the
institution of the supper of the Lord. And in the fourth to the Philip: the
apostle says in these express terms, those things which ye have both
learned, and received and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace
shall be with you. Here the example of the Apostle is set before us, and peace
promised unto us, if we imitate him in it. Shall we therefore leave the
example of Christ, and the Apostles in the gesture of receiving and
administration of the supper of the Lord, and take up the example of
Antichrist, from whom we ought to be unlike in all things? And to speak the
truth, kneeling of all other postures least agrees to the action of a supper or
a feast: neither was such a gesture ever used in ordinary or extraordinary
feastings. Let us look back to all the Sacraments likewise of the old Testament
the Passover it self, which where the same with ours, for the apostle in 1.
Corinthians 10. tells us that they in them eat the same spiritual meat and
drank the same spiritual drink, that we do in ours, there was in them all, a
heavenly holy banquet and refreshing, and Christ was as really there present as
in ours, and as great a preparation was to be made there and as great reverence
to be used as in ours, and there was but this difference in them, that the one
set forth Christ to come and to be crucified, and the other set forth Christ
now dead and rose again and in heaven: but I say for the substance, they were
all one, and the believing Israelits were as really made partakers of Christ
and all his merits in their Sacraments as we in ours: and he as really present
there as in ours; and yet I say they used no posture of adooration in it,
neither was that gesture ever used in the administration of Baptism, where
Christ is also as much present as in the Lords supper, and that Sacrament also
was honored with the visible presence of the holy Ghost, and the voice of God
the Father the greatest miracle that ever was, and the most certain real
presence that ever we read of in scripture was in that; and this also is such
a Sacrament, and of such necessity, as without which the adversaries say there
is no salvation, neither can they deny but Christ is as really present there as
in the supper: yet this sacrament is administered by all the adversaries
themselves standing, without the posture of veneration, and yet they dare not
say they baptize irreverently: why then I beseech you do we use a gesture of
more reverence at the one Sacrament then at an other? when they are equally to
be reverenced? or why should we leave the example of Christ and his apostles in
the one and follow Antichrists? this I must confess I see no ground of neither
in reason nor in Scripture.

I have read that when Gods own Ordinances came to be abused to Idolatry they
were then abolished, and it was well pleasing unto God. And I am fully
persuaded if that kneeling had been the gesture in Christ's time, in their
ordinary repasts and meals and that Christ himself with his Apostles had
kneeled in the receiving of that last Supper, yet if afterward, it should have
been abused to idolatry and have given an occasion of much dishonor to God,
and scandal to the brethren, I say I am confident, it would have been well
pleasing unto the Lord to have left it and used an other. But when neither
Christ nor his Apostles used this gesture of veneration in receiving of the
Lords Supper, and it has been an occasion of great Idolatry, yea the greatest
that ever was, and is also a cause still of infinite dishonor to God, and
scandal to the weak and strengthening to the wicked idolaters in their
courses, I affirm and that upon most excellent reason that this gesture ought
now to be left, and declined in the celebrating of that holy Ordinance. But it
has indeed ever been the policy of the devil to corrupt the best things. He
labored first to bring the people to a profanation of this ordinance, and
whereas they met together, to rejoice in remembrance that Christ dyed for them
and was risen again to free and deliver them from death, they in their
rejoicing began to exceed moderation, and to dishonor God in the abuse of his
creatures. Saint Paull therefore to prevent this, writes unto them, reproues
them for this so great abuse, and tells them that such disorder brought a
Judgment upon them rather then ablessing, and wished them to examine
themselves* and to take notice that it was an ordinance of God himself:
setting forth the death and passion of Christ and the great deliverance they
had by it from the captivity and slavery of sin and Satan: and that as they
were redeemed by his death and sufferings from that servitude, to be the
servants of Christ, and not to be any longer at the slavery of the Devil and
to do his works, by disordering themselves, so they should prepare themselves
and remove wickedness out of their hearts and actions, and should come with true
thankefulnes unfeigned faith and true love toward God, charity toward their
neibour, and with all sanctified affections unto his holy ordinance, that so
they might procure a blessing upon themselves by it and not bring down
judgments upon their heads by their inordinat carriage there* and this was all
the Apostle aims at in that chapter, must we therefore by and by think,
because the apostle reproues them of irreuerence and disorder, therefore he
does license Idolatry and the worship of the bread and wine? as we say in our
common discourse there is a difference between staring and stark mad: so there
is a great deal of difference between reverence and Idolatry, the one is by
the Apostle indeed in this chapter commanded, the other in the tenth chapter as
highly displeasing unto God, is abominated.

But I would very feign know of our great Masters, what they think of Christ's
and the apostles gesture of sitting, where they reverent or no, I demand? I
hope they will not say, vnreuerent will they then presume to be more reverent
then Christ and his disciples? away with such hypocrisy and abominable
blasphemy! then we well perceive that there may be reverence in the Sacrament
where there is no kneeling. And yet these hypocrites call it vnreuerent setting
upon their tails, and make it an article in their Courts for the undoing of
many thousands, a damnable wickedness against God and their brethren. And
without all doubt, Paul that revealed the whole will of God unto the faithful,
and in setting forth unto the Corinthians the institution of the Supper of the
Lord as he had received it from Christ himself, and now reproving the^ also for
their vnreuerent coming unto it, and profanation of that holy ordinance, if
kneeling and bodily veneration had been a gesture fit for that action and would
have made more for the reverent receiving or the honoring of God in it, he
having now so good an opportunity, would have put them in mind of it; nay he
would have enjoined them to have used kneeling always in receiving, unless we
will think, Paul was not so careful to provide for the reverent receiving of
the Sacrament, as Antichrist and his disciples which were rashenesse to imagine.
But of kneeling there is altum silentium, not a word, the apostle leaves them
still to their table gesture forewarning them only of profaneness and
inconsideration of those mysteries.

But behold in this thing also the deceit and craft of that old Serpent the
devil, seeing the Apostle had prevented his purpose, in bringing in the
profanation of the supper of the Lord, this most excellent help for the
edification of them in their most holy faith, and well perceiving that all his
possibelity of working that stratagem, was taken away and he was now
disappoynted of his purpose: he goes then an other way to work: and seeing he
could not have his will that way, he resolved to have it an other, and
therefore brings-in a contrary extreme, worshipping of the bread and wine for
Christ himself, the greatest and fearfullest idolatry that ever was in the
world. But for the vsheringin of this piece of Service he had no better
instrument then Antichrist that opposes Christ in all things, and his
shauelings the Prelates: who have left Christ's example, and forced their own
idolatricall one, upon all Christians under their government, a horrible
contempt and neglect of Christ. We were wont to say Reges ad exemplum Kings
examples were to be their Subjects paterns, and so Christ and his Ministers
teach all his children and Subjects to do, what he their King, by life doctrine
and example has taught his Church which equally bind: but Antichrist and his
servants constrain the people to leave Christ's example, and teach them to
follow his which is the enemy of Christ. Which I think is the duty of all such
as fear the Lord to detest.

But now to go forwards, in this weighty businesle Seeing it is most certain,
that the Pope and the Prelates are against Christ in the gesture of receiving,
and do not that Christ and his apostles did. Let us now take notice in the
second place, what the Apostle speaks of the institution. I have says he
received of the Lord that also which I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus
the same night in which he was betrayed took bread etc. Here the Apostle
begins from the time of the institution, saying the same night and in the 20
verse he calls it the Lords Supper, and calls it also bread and wine, all
which things deserve their consideration, and are matters of greater
consequence then at first are thought of, and teach all men in the reformation
of any abuses, to have recourse unto the first original fountain and
institution as the Apostle does here: and tells us what he has received from
the Lord. And conserning the time of the institution of the sacrament, which is
also to be taken notice of; he says the same night etc. and it is therefore by
the holy Ghost called the Lords Supper. Now for the time of institution the
apostle here taught it to the Church as received from Christ, and which Paul
then and the whole Church of God observed in the primitive times, and so it was
lift by the apostle to be continued, for as far as I can perceive or judge,
unto the worlds end: neither can I see any reason why the time should be
changed: without we will plainly confess, that Christ has done all things out
of season and order, and was neither reverent, nor seasonable nor orderly in
his proceedings, and especially in the institution and celebration of the
sacrament of the Lords Supper (for his gesture pleased not before) which were
more then a little arrogance so to speak. Yet I say except men will so vilify
the actions of the Lord Jesus, I know no cause why the time should be changed:
for as the Passover was instituted in the evening, so the children of Israel
and the Church of the Jews precisely observed the time, never being so impudent
and temerarious as to alter it; but it was continued so unto the last use of
it, as by Christ's own example is sufficently manifest. And yet I presume there
might as good reasons have been given for the change of the time in the
celebrating of that ordinance amongst the Jews, as can now by any man be given,
and yet the Israelits were not so fool hardy as to think any time better or
more seasonable then that which God himself had appointed, and contented them
selves well with it. But Antichrist that changes times and seasons and all
things, and his disciples, that oppose Christ in all his ordinances, they have
changed the time, and converted the Supper of the Lord into a breakfast, a
great innovation, and make it no small offense to celebrate it in the evening.
So that now to speak properly, it cannot be called the Lords Supper, but the
Lords break fast: and so it is to them indeed; for they eat up the Lord at a
breakfast, and swallow him down whole, and make no bones of him; he is with
them but their mornings nuntions: and yet they eat him flesh blood and bones
as they say and really, and then after that they drink up his blood, most sweet
CANABALS: and after all this they can eat a sufficeint dinner too. These
fellows must needs have good stomachs. But by all this it is manifest, that
Antichrist and his Apostles have ever opposed Christ in his proceeding be they
what they will be.

But here now comes a sucking objection to be answered to, which is this, if
Christ's example say some, be to be followed, so closely, and so precisely
adhered to, in the administration of the Sacrament, as in his gesture, and the
time of celebration, then also, it must be in an upper room and but with
twelve etc. This I affirm is so poor a foppery as I wonder learned men should
make use of such wretched cauils, and yet I had it from one of great name for
Scholarship. But for answer I say that the Sacrament of the Passover, was to
be celebrated in every private family: by themselves, if they had company enough
within themselves to eat the Lamb, and if they had not, then indeed they were
to call in as many other families to join together, as would suffice for that
purpose: so that howsoever there was a community among them, one with an other
in that action, as at this day the communicants of one church may participate
with an other in the Supper of the Lord, from this very example: yet this was
to be done in a private house, so that for their meeting place, it was not
public. Now very order and nature required, that it should be a place large
enough to entertayne the company and guests that were met together, the number
being for the most part uncertain. But whether they would eat it in an upper
room or a lower room, that was left arbitrary, no commandment given for
either: neither can it enter into any understanding man's heart, to think, that
all the Israelits houses had variety of rooms in them, though some had both
upper and lower rooms, So that for their company it was only required, that
they should have as many as could eat the Lamb as Christ in his family and
company had, and that the room should also be spacious enough and decent,
which is of all Christians now for order and decency sake to be observed, that
for either private: or public meetings for performance of duties of religion if
they have, not a low room fit for those pious purposes, then they may take an
upper room that is more convenient, all places now in Gods service being
alike, as after I shall prove: So that for any man from the certain company of
Christ and his apostles, and from the upper room, to conclude a necessity of
this for ever in the world, and from a private action, to conclude the likeness
in a public, this is no good consequence: nor follows not, as in the two
former, and that every one that has the eye of reason may easily conclude. And
we have many presidents in sacred writ, both for the change of the room in the
celebration of the Supper of the Lord. And also for multitudes of communicants:
as in the whole Church here of Corinth for one: and the Apostle commands them
that they should come together in public: but for the changing of the time and
gecture, it is no where in sacred writ to be found: but amongst the Apostles
and primitive Christians they were both observed and kept. And so much
concerning that.

Now let us look into the oppositions of Antichrist and his disciples, and see
there other diverse mutations in this divine ordinance: They have not only
changed Christ's Supper into a breakfast but into a sacrifice, an other
abominable imimpiety and nefarious innovation, turning the Sacrament of the
Lords own appointing, wherein Christ Does graciously give and offer himself
with all his merits, to the faithful and believing communicants, into a
sacrifice of the mass as they call it, Propitiatory for the living and dead,
where they say that the body and blood of Christ is offered up by a Priest
after the order of Melchisedeck, for the sins of the quick and dead, and by
virtue of this Sacrifice, they affirm that Christ is there corporally and
really present, and with all adoration as the second person of the blessed
Trinity to be worshipped. In the which action to say nothing for the present
but this (for the blasphemies and abomination* of it are innumerable* there is
greater idolatry committed then ever was, in the worshipping of Dagon, Rimon,
or the God of Echaron: and of all them that love the Lord Jesus, and look for
redemprion by him, and hope for his blessed coming, ought to be detested and
abhorred as the devil, and hell it self, with all the damnable crew of
Priests that are agents in it, and favorers of it.

Thus I say Antichrist and his accomplices that oppose Christ in all things, have
changed this blessed supper, a type of our heavenly and spiritual communion
with Christ and the faithful, and the bread and wine in that, into a most
detestable idol and breaden God. And in this fearful idolatry do our Prelates
harmonise with them: and are making as great speed to their old Mistress as they
can: for they have brought in Priests and altars already, and they have all
the wedding garments prepared and every thing for the purpose, they want but an
opportunity to accomplish all things. And howsoever they seem to vary, it is
but in show, for they agree well enough among themselves. A real presence of
Christ they both acknowledge, and a corporal adoratoon and reverence, in regard
of that, they both inioyne. But before we come to the abuses, that follow,
upon the supposition of the real presence, let us see what Christ and his
apostles teach concerning that: and what the Pope and his disciples teach. You
shall see that the Pope and Prelates will ever oppose Christ and his Apostles in
whatsoever they do or teach.

Christ Jesus the Lord commands his Apostles, and in them all Christians in
eating the bread, and drinking the wine, saying, do this in remembrance of me.
Luke 22. 19 And Saint Paul relating the institution as he had it from the Lord,
commands them in receiving the bread and wine* saying, cafe and drink this in
remembrance of me: farther adding, for as often as ye eatt this bread, and
drink this cupp. ye do show the Lords death till he come. By all which it is
manifest, that the Lord is not there present. The same doctrine he commends
unto the Colossians in the 3 chapter, having elevated their minds from all
terrene observations and will worship and trifling inventions of men in Gods
service, he bids them seek those things which are above where Christ sits at
the right hand of God. And Saint Peter in the Acts tells us that the heavens
must contain him till the last day. Infinite places to this purpose might be
produced, to prove that Christ is now in heaven, and there to remain till the
consummation of all things, as in our Creed also we believe. Yea the Scripture
in many places calls the elements by the proper names of bread and wine. So
that by all these manner of expressions, and by the apparent words of the text,
the Lord Jesus himself and his Apostles teach us, that there is in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper a real absence of Christ. But Antichrist* and his
Apostles teach us a real presence. Now here is the doubt, whether we shall
believe Christ and his Apostles, or Antichrist and his shauelings. Christ and
his Apostles teach us a real absence, and they a real presence. Certainly one
of those most teach false. But Christ and his Apostles they teach not false*
ergo the Pope and Prelates teach false doctrine and are not to be listened unto.
Now from this supposition and opinion, they have brought in damnable idolatry,
worshipping of a piece of bread for the blessed Son of God Christ Jesus
himself, the worshipping of the cup and pixe, communion tables, Altars,
temples, the name and Syllables of Jesus, and infinite other trumperies, making
of one place more holy then an other.

But as the worst Nutmegs are commonly gilded over: so the worst things are
varnished over with finest names and compellations. to say nothing of moral
vices that carry the name of virtues. But to the matter in hand: all these
abominable impietyes of will worship, superstion, human inventions, idolatry,
profaneness of the Lords day, must be vshered-in under the name of lawful
recreatious, reverence, decency, obedionce to the Church, order etc when indeed
they bring in confusition and disorder both to the Laws of God and the King,
and a profanation of his ordinances, and execrable wickednesses, all arising
from the vain conceit of a real presence and the incitements of the devil
that desires to destroy the image and workmanship of God in all his works and
ordinances: and therefore suggests into his sworn servants, those rebels to
the will of God, which they can not obey thousand* inuentious, for the
perverting and corrupting of them; because they can not altogether abolish
them. And if they should come which opon opposition, and say let us fall down
and worship the bread and wine, or the cross or table, or alter or the Church,
for this is God; they know that all men would then explode them: and therefore
being all for the most part not only the Popes knights, I mean fir John's
bachellors of wicked arts; but Masters of the black and deuillish art of
deceiving; I say they pretend that Christ is there really present: and
therefore in honor to him they do all this reverence.

I know what they have always pretended for their wickedness, but that must not
suffice in things of this consequence, and in matters that concern the worship
of God, where we look for his express word, for our rule, oboue and beyond
which to be wise, is contrary to the will of God. Therefore if any man will
propound unto us a way to worship God, let them produce his word to convince us
of his pleasure, otherwise it is but will worship, which he abhorres, as we see
in the 2 of the Colossians. And to serve him according to men's precepts is to
worship him in vain. Matthew. 15 If they could once again bring-in the twilight
of ignorance, then perhaps they may make the simple believe that bladders are
Lanthornes: but so long as the light of Gods word shines yet so clearly (for
which we heartily bless and praise his holy name,) they cannot so easily
delude us, and make us take apples for oysters. We ca^ yet distinguish between
truth and error and see all they do, is but mere iug, lings and the tricks of
Munntibanks.

For we know that Christ is in heaven really and no where else in his human
nature, neither are we to believe them that say Christ is here or there. We
know also that Christ is no more in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper then he
has been in other Sacraments in the old testament, and in the Sacrament of
Baptism, nor more in either of all, then in the preaching of the word, or in
any other of his holy ordinances; as in private meetings of the Saints gathered
together in his name, and with all private Christians, walking in faith and
obedience to his commandments, To all which he has given many gracious
promises, that wheresoever two or three be gathered together, there he will be
with them. Calling them (2. Cor. 6.) the Temple of the living God, and saying I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and will be their God and they shall, be
my people, and that he will be a father unto them, and they shall be his sons
and danghters. So that with greater right they may challenge veneration then
stocks and blocks and wooden things. For they that are indeed the temple of
the holy Ghost* and in whom Christ dwells except they be reprobates, in them
there is as much real presence as is in the sacraments, which are but seals
of the promises and follow them: insomuch; that a man may be saved with out the
sacraments, but not without the word mingled with faith, of which they are but
signs and seals.

Again, for the word it self of real presence, it is the language of the beast
so to speak: and howsoever they have forced us sometime to use it, yet I hope
we shall in time, abdicate it, and all other solecismes of that animal:
nevertheless, by that term when we do use it, we understand no more but that
God by his Spirit, which is the Comforter, and which Christ sent in his absence
to illuminat the blind and direct the faithful, and bring them into the way of
truth, does assist his in all that is good, and in all godly undertakings and
holy meetings in his name, and that the blessed Trinity does approve of their
endeauours seconding them in it, go along with them to the end, and sends them
away with a benediction and comfort here, and preserues them in all their ways
and assisteth them and after crowns them which eternal glory, for he is with
them to the end, and in the end. And so the blessed promises of God are to be
understood, when he says he will be with his, and that he is at hand, and in
them, which is all one as to say, that in their will doings he approves of
them and will protect them and ever assist them with his particular
preservation and blessing, and does allow of them so doing in a singular manner.
According to that of Paul writing to the Corinthians about the incestuous
person, being gathered together though absent. says he, I present in spirit 1.
Cor. 5. as much, as if he had said, you have my warrant for what you do, I
allow of it as if I were there present, You have my approbation, I am of the
same mind with you. So that Paul saying, though absent I present in spirit does
not establish a real presence of Paul among the Corinthians, but his
approbation only and liking of their godly prooceedings. And in the very same
manner are the blessed promises now specified to be understood conserning
Christ's real presence.

But to feign any other real presence* that Christ should be more on the
Communion table or alter, then in the Font or belfore, or other part of the
Church, then in any other place where the faithful are in his name gathered
together and therefore that more veneration is to be given to those places, or
reverence used, is mere superstion; yea palpable idolatry, and to worship the
creature for the creator, an abominable and crying sin: and therefore these
impostors do egregiously abuse the poor people, in putting such things into
their heads, as to think one place more holy then an other, whether it be
table, alter, font, Church or Churchyard. and very reason might convince these
men of idleness yea madness if they were* not infatuated. For if the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper were not to be worshipped, not lift by Christ
unto the Church for that end; then much less the place where the Sacraments
are or lie, ought not to be worshipped: But we know that the Sacraments were
only appointed for seals and remembrances of absence and not of presence as
the scripture it self teaches; therefore they most impiously delude the people
in making them yield divine veneration to senseless things, because the
Sacraments are celebrated in or upon them. Besides, that which is a mere
invention of man's own brain, and has been an horrible idol in Gods service,
and is yet an idol, ought not to be tolerated in the Church of God, but to be
abominated of all men, that truly fear the Lord: but all well informed
Christians know, that altars have been and are idols: and therefore they ought
ever to be abhorred and cast out as idols out of the house of God* and all
table worship, alter worship or any creature worship is contrary to the second
commandment: and is detestable idolatry.

Again, to put any holiness more in one place then in an other, and to think
nothing holy, but that which has been confecrated with bell, book, and
candle, is great impiety against Christ, and not far from blasphemy. For we
read in the fourth of John in the one and twentyeth verse, Christ himself
taking away all discrimination of places in the worship of God, makes one place
as holy and* fit as an other for his service and worship saying you shall
neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem worship the father. As much as
if he had said, my worship shall be ^yed now to no place nor country any more,
but all places and countries I have now consecrated to my service, and every
place shall hereafter, be as holy as Jerusalem: according to the prophecy of
Malachi the 1. ver: 11 for from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going
down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every
place incense shall be offered unto my name etc here we see now this prophecy
accomplished by Christ, and all places consecrated to his service Ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the father. and Paul
exhorts Christians in all places to lift up pure hands and hearts: sufficiently
instructing those to whom he writ, that all places were made holy for such
purposes. Now I desire, that any of the Popes at home or abroad would tell me
ingenuously, what he thinks of Christ's concecration here, was it good or bad:
did he consecrate well or not let him answer me in the word of a Priest, with
out tergiuersation, heartily -- If he shall say it was not well consectated, I
will tell him to his face he is a blasphemer and prove him so. If he shall
freely confess, Christ's consecration to be good and authentic, and that all
places indeed were consecrated by Christ himself, to the worship of God. then
how impious and arrogant a thing is it in the Prelates, to vnconsecrate and to
make profane that, which Christ has consecrated and made holy. For so they do
in their consecrations as by and by we shall see. I will assure you, there is a
greater piaculum in this thing, then men at first, can well discern and look
into.

Me thinks that of Saint Peter in the tenth of the Acts should deter them
from such abominations, where, when the vessels descended to him like a four
cornered sheet, full of all manner of four footed beasts of the earth and
creeping things and fowls of the air, and the voice also came unto him
bidding him kill and eat* And Peter answered not so Lord, for I have never
eaten any thing that was common and vnsleane. And the voice spoke unto him
again the second time, saying what God has cleansed, that call not thou
common. By which Peter as you may in the same place see learned by that, that
Christ had taken away the wall of difference, and had consecrated and made all
things clean. And fore-warning him, that he should not make that unclean,
that he had purified and cleansed. Me thinks I say this might something have
deterred our great Masters from their daily impietyes. Nothing with them is
holy, and clean, but, that that has been washed, with the Popes holy water,
or has had their filthy greasy Fingers of consecration upon it: of which
procedings of theirs, there is not a word of warrent in all the book of God,
without which, there can be nothing made holy: neither is there any need of
such wretched fooleryes: for as I said before, Christ the Lord both of heaven
and earth has consecrated it and made all places clean: and so they were all
clean, before they had polluted them with their greasy consecrations, with
their idols and idolworships. Insomuch that there is no place more unholy, then
their cathedralls and altarchurches, and their cloicters, which are so many
dens of thieves and cages of filthiness and Idolatry, which I shall ever be able
to maintain.

And from this impious polluting of that, that Christ has made clean, I had
thought that of Paul might some thing have diuerted those ungodly men: for so
they are; yea notoriously wicked against God, and uncharitable all ways
toward the living temples of the holy Ghost, I say I had thought that of Paul
in the 17 of the Acts 24. 25 might have restrained such palpable impiety: for
there he says God that made the world and all things therein seeing that be is
Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands, neither is
worshipped with men's hands, as though he had need of any thing, seeing he
gives to all life and breath and all things. What could be said more
manifestly for the ouertrowing not only their real presence, but also of that
fiction of theirs, that one place is more holy then an other: when he is the
Lord of all things, and one place and creature is as much his as an other, and
the service offered unto him in one place according to his will, as well
pleasing as in an other. It is a prodigious wickedness in deed and a thing not
supportable to compare the Creator of all things to the creature, or to
circumscribe the incomprehensible, or to think with magnificence and
statelinesle of buildings, or any presents to procure his favor or make him
more propitious unto us. All which base conceits have ever been the fountaynes
of all superstition and idolatry in all nations, and come from the devil. And
so much the more we should be desmayed from such vain imaginatious of real
presence, which is the source of all other will worship, if we considered what
Paul says in the 5. of the 2. of the Corinthians 16. wherefore henceforth know
we no man after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh
yet now henceforth know we him noe more. as much as if he had said, we must
not think of Christ after a carnal manner who has now left the world, and is
to be thought of and considered of us spiritually. All those fictions therefore
of the real presence of Christ, rather in one place then an other as at
CRVCIFIXES, CROSSES, PICTVRES, ALTARS, TABLES, are the dreams of idolatrous
brains, suggested by the diuill, for the keeping of the minds of men fixed
upon earthly things, and attent to his service, making them belecue that
Religion consists only in outward performances and by such delusions as these,
he hinders them from seeking those things which are ahoue where Christ sits at
the right hand of God, which is expressly contrary to the command of Paul.

How outragiously superstitious then yea diabolically impious are those men
think you that spend such mighty sums of money in adorning and making such
sumptuous buildings, as serve for no use, but superstition and idolatry and the
mayntenance of LAZY BELLIGODS, AND PROFANE SCORNERS OF ALL TRVE RELIGION
GODLINESS AND PIETY: and neglect the very living temples of the holy Ghost,
that famish for want of food? Truly it cannot but be a great occasion to
provoke the Lord to jealousy, and hot displeasure against this land, when
contrary to the light of reason and apparent scripture his revealed will, they
set up superstition and idolatry and will worship; and think better of their
own inventions, and prefer their traditions before his most holiest laws
and precepts, and by them transgress the laws of God, scandal and offend
their brethren: yea punish the meanest neglect of them, or the speaking against
them, more severely then the breach of all Gods comandements. I say these
things must needs exceedingly provoke the Lord, when men's devices shall be so
advanced and promoted; and when the Gospel and the poor members of Christ,
are stamped under foot, and drove by unkind usage both out of the Kingdom.

What may we think you, now promise unto our selves IN THESE SAD TIMES, BUT
SPEEDY PERDITION: for as our savior said, those that despise his true
messengers, despise him; and those that despise him, despise him that sent him,
that is God himself? As the Gospel has ever brought peace, plenty, happy
days and good government, where ever it has become: as all the places in
England can tell, where it has been faithfully preached: and as all England in
general can witness what good we have received by it: so the contempt of it,
and the Ministers of the same will bring desolation and ruin upon the whole
land. And if we shall now be contemnes of the Gospel, and the Ministers
thereof and aduancers of Superstition and make a mock of it; what I say may we
then look for, but speedy confusion and deplorable misery?

Truly, it would greiue the heart of any that either love God, the King or
their Country, or their religion, to see the strange metamorphosis of all
things in this Kingdom, to see how idolatry creepes up EVEN IN THE
VNIVERSITYES TO POISON the WHOLE REAL ME; and how in all places superstition is
every where preached up, both in Court and Country: and what way there is made
for subuerting of preaching and the bringing-in of human inventions and apish
ceremonies, in STEAD of the Gospel and the promulgation of the same which
should save men's souls.

What holiness I pray, is now a days placed in Churches and Chapels? what
adorning of them, to the ruining of the parishes almost where they are? what
adoration, to tables, altars, Syllables, all contrary to the express command
of God? who has said thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, or the
likeness of any thing, in heaven above or in the earth beneath, thou shall not
bow down to it, or worship it. Yet all this cannot restrain them: for they
auerre notwithstanding all this, the place is holy, and ought to be venerated.
What I beseech you is contempt of God if this be not? It would pity, and
perplex the hearts of all those that truly fear the Lord to see what infinite
costs have within these few years been bestowed upon chapels and Churches
only for the advancing of superstition: and to say now something of Paul's:
how has the whole country for above these fifty years been made fools about
that? there having been so many gatherings made for it, and Stones brought up
to it? and preparations made for the repayring of it? and after they have
pursed the money, what have they done else but convert it to their own use?

And now of late, what immense sums of money have been gathered for the same
purpose? I have heard from IESVITS themselves, that are well acquaynted with
those businesses, if not principal sticklers in them, who I know at least, are
very joyful at such preparations, that it AMOVNTETH to ABOVE TWO HUNDRED
THOUSAND POVNDS, that which has already been gathered, and remaynes yet to be
paid, which had been almost sufficient, to have built a royal house for the
honor of the King and Kingdom, and all this mighty mass of money, must be
spent in making a seat for a A PRIESTS ARSE to sit in: for it is cathedra
Episcopi a Bishops chair, and for the Deane and subdeane, and for the Prebends
Canons Pety canons VERGERS QVIRISTERS etc all to keep the POPES SADDEL WARM
as the Popelins themselves bragging prate. The truth is, the whole fraternity
of that crew is, but a generation of vipers, whose employment is nothing else,
but to maintain the superstition already retained, to usher in more, and
Popery it self upon the first occasion, and to sing Credos and anthems, and
exercise prophanenes. Such droues of those unprofitable Epicures there are
through the Kingdom, as devour more revenues, then all the Nobility of the
kingdom, or many mighty Prince enioyes. And all this they possess for the
plauge of the Kingdom, for the bringing-in of luxury, idleness, superstition,
Popery and Idolatory: the least of which sins, are enough to move the Lord to
displeasure: and all that I now speak you know to be true: nay the whole
Kingdom knows it well: neither can there any good reason be given for the
maintenance or upholding of them: without a pestilence and plauge be necessary
for the honor of a State and Kingdom, which all that rabble rout are to ours,
and all Conntryes where they dwell. and the very truth is, the Papists and they
are all one, the one as profound idolaters as the other: and so say the Papists
themselves: that if it were not for the Puritans, they should quickly accord:
and so the Papists have told me twenty times at home, and abroad, and
therefore they so hate them they stigmatize with the name of Puritans.

What a lamentable thing is this then, that this Kingdom should harbor then
within it self, its own destruction? AND BESTOW UPON THAT VERMIN SVCH MIGHTY
REVENVE, and all for the eating out of the bowels of their mother? Time
doubtless it is, that the King and State should look speedily to them: yea it
is high time, and so much the more, it concerns his Majesty, in that they
pretend his authority for all their wickedness, and getting his hand, abuse his
whole kingdom, in pillaging and poling of it, and in inslauing his subjects,
upon every slight occasion, and make them unable to yield unto the Kings most
urgent necessityes, which when through mere indigency they are found failing
in, then they having the Kings royal ear, cry these are the Puritans, that
deny yon highness their assistance in time of your occasions, when they have
been impouerished by their exactions and by their wicked Courts, and thus they
abuse both the King and his people, as all the world knows well, and
therefore I say due time it is, that his Majesty should look a little into
these things: And so much the rather because all these their deuillish plots,
are for the ADVANCING OF POPERY* which will be the bane of him, his, and the
whole realm, and the ruin of all things at last.

What impudency already, the Prelates are come to, the cry of the whole
Kingdom can witness. Their late proceedings in the Fast business can tell: for
howsoever, it pleased his royal majesty, out of his pious zeal, to proclaim
a Fast through the kingdom, for the humbling of the people for their sins:
and commanded that the same book of prayers should be reprinted, which had
been set forth, by public authority in former calamityes of plague and
pestilence; the prelates contrary unto his royal proclamation; see out an
other: or at least left out many things of purpose, that rended to the beating
down of Popery and superstition* and other things, to the dishonor of him and
his nighest Allies: a horrible affront against regal command: and would have
cost any other Subject as much as he had been worth, and deservedly: that
should thus despise his Imperial Maiestics Proclamation and often
declarations: but the PRELATES may commit any insolency against the King and his
people, and no body dare say why do you so: it is enough that they seem to
favor the prerogative royal, though by their actions they conculcate it:
which makes us think now, that it was their invention likewise, to silence all
the lectures in London and in all infected places, that in as much as in them
lies, they might advance their damnable superstitions and idolatryes.

And to what end else, should such preaching up of ALTARS in all places mean?
such urging of beautifying of temples? such bowing to altars, tables, at the
letters and syllables of Jesus? if they had not some great design of
innovation? For, these things used not to be within these few years; and
cannot churches be comely mayntained, as they have formerly been, but the whole
kingdom must be troubled about them for their sumptuosity, and the furnishing
of them with fopperies, fit for nothing but to provoke God to anger, and who
has expressly said, he is not pleased with such things?

There was a wise Deane, not long since, who it seems had been a little before
in heaven: for he brought news fram thence that Saint Paul was very merry and
glad to see their love toward him, and that the King and Nobles were so ready
to yield their helping hands toward his releife, in bestowing new cloths upon
him, or rather mending his old ones. and that Paul's it self, and the very
stones did rejoice, that the reparations went on so prosperously and many a
fine thing he had to this purpose, concerning that holy place for so he termed
it. But I dare presume, in saying that Paul was very glad, to see their love to
him, in repayring that raw bond building, he preached then without his book,
which Deanes seldom do, before the King. I believe if Paul were upon the
earth to see what they now do about that business, he would give them as
little thanks for that endeavor and for all their pains, as he did at Lystra
to the Priests of Jupiter, that would have sacrificed to him and Barnabas. No
without doubt, it would exceedingly trouble and perplex Paul, who hated all
superstition, and such like trumperies, as may easily be seen in the
seuententh of the Acts, where be reprehends the Athenians for their
superstition, and care about temples, and told them that God dwelt not in
temples made with hands: nor had no need of such devices, and earnestly
dehorted them from all such doings: and shall we now think, though a Deane
says it, that Paul would preach an other doctrine contrary to that? No no Paul
was no temporiser, he stood always to his principles, and abhorres all such
fooleries and impietyes.

His whole study was how to build up the true temples and Churches of God, in
their most holy faith, and how to preach and promulgate the Gospel, and how to
promote the honor of it by his Sufferings, and by teaching and instructing the
people night and day from house to house. His care was not taken up, in making
of houses and edifices magnificent or repayring them, fit for nothing but
superstition and idolatry and the MAYNTENANCE OF IDLE ALBEY LVBBERS, concerning
which, he gives strict command, that except they wrought and labored with
their hands, they should not eat. Paul indeed had the solicitude of all the
Churches continually lying upon him, and his whole study was to build and
reedify them, but they were the living temples, and those indeed he built up
daily in the knowledge of God and of themselves, and with all took special
care for the releife of the poor saints, and how to procure aid and comfort
unto them, in the times of their necessityes. Yea so far was Paul from putting
men to unnecessary expenses and burthening of them, or any way charging of them
about building of Churches, that he would not be beholding to them for the
repayring of his own body, the Temple of the holy Ghost, but labored with his
own hands for his proper maintenance, and preached the Gospel to them gratis,
and that night and day, and thought no time enough for that holy duty. And
shall we then think, when Paul was such an aduancer of preaching, and such a
publisher of the Gospel, and so great a hater of superstition and idolatry,
that he now is well pleased with the supperfluous repayring of THAT IDOL
TEMPLE, and the providing of a place for such droanes as he thought not worthy
to eat? Nay I dare maintain out of Paul's own doctrine, that those infinite
sums of money, to have been bestowed upon the poor indigent brethren, would
have been, far more pleasing unto God: for, the poor are in the world for
the exercise of men's charity, and for the common good of kingdoms, but of such
reparations and buildings there comes neither honor to God nor the King,
pretend Popelins what they will. And all this I say I am ready to make good.
But to such a pass are times now come, that the Pulpits, which should be the
place of God and his truth, are now become stages to make plays on, and to
vent lies, impiety, superstition and idolatry.

But one of the greatest hypocritical mockeries of all the rest, is their
capping and crouching at the name of Jesus and the urging of all men to do the
same. Nay some say, they make the PRINCE of WALES to do it. I say in that,
their damnable hypocrisy is seen, for howsoever they urge the observation of
that ceremony and custom, more then they do the keeping of any command of
God, and punish the neglect of it with more severity then the transgression of
the whole law: yet there is not one word of warrant for it in all the book of
God: the very place they pretend, no way favoring them, nor their procedings,
being the 2. to the Philippians 10, To say nothing of the opinion of all
antiquiry, that is against them: nor how that text, by all the torrent of
modern learned men is interpreted contrary to their opinion; and by both
ancient and neoterick Expositers applied to the confuting of damnable
heretics, and not for the bringing-in of apish tricks in the service and
worship of God.

But to come now to the words, let us see whether the Prelates do that the text
inioynts, which is the thing they so earnestly urge. The words are these: That
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess, that
Jesus is the Lord to the glory of God the father. If these words conteyne in
them a command, not only of an inward but an outward bodily reverence, as the
Prelates and their Priests affirm. Then I say this command binds not only
semper but ad semper, as all the other Commandments of God do: for it is of
the same nature with them, and the neglect at any time or in any place of that
service, is a sin at all times. As the command that says, thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, binds semper and ad semper, and the neglect of our love and duty at
any time is a sin, The second command binds likewise, that we should not make
to our selves any graven image, or the likeness of any thing in heaven above or
in the earth beneath, and that we should not bow down to it nor worship it.
This command also binds semper and ad semper, and the violating of it at any
time is a great sin against allmighty God and without repentance brings
eternal misery. The same may be said of the 3 and 4 commandments of taking
the name of God in vain and keeping holy the Sabbath day, and of all the rest
of the commandments. Now I say if these words to the Philippians be a command,
as the Prelates would have it: then it is of the same nature with the rest. So
that the worship there prescribed and set down and that worship only is to be
performed, and not such worship and service as the Prelates would frame: For God
that requires worship from us, will have it after his own way likewise, and
will not be served after men's phansies, which he abominates. So that if an
external and corporal worship be to be given at the name of Jesus as they
say, it must then be bowing of the knees, and the confession with the mouth,
for the words are thus Set down at the name of Jesus euesy knee shall bow, and
every tongue shall confess etc. so that the very instruments by which this
worship should be performed are set down viz: the knees and the tongue.

How is it then, when the Lord has so precisely set down the instruments of
this worship, and the manner of it, that the Prelates are yet so blind, that they
see them not in the Text? or so wilful that they will not follow it? at the
name of Jesus says the text, every knee shall bow: and the Prelates in
obedience to this command put up their fingers to their FOVRE-SQVARE COWTVRDS,
and give him a nod with the head; and all this I auerre is their own worship,
not Gods: God does not bid them bow their fingers to their form alityes: but
the text says expressly that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: this is
the service outward and corporal, and this only that is by that text
required, if any. And the truth is, it is a mockery of God in the Prelates so to
do. If a King should command a subject, to yield him his hand to help him: and
if he should give his foot would not such a fellow be keckt out of the Court
and most worthily? Paul in an other Epistle bids men lift up pure hands and
hearts in all places praying unto God. Now if one going to pray should lift up
his heels, and kecke up his legs, because Paul commands men praying to lift up
pure hands and hearts, would not this fellow be condemned of profaneness among
all me^ and be thought. a scorner of religion, and worthy of severe punishmeut,
so to abuse the Scripture? and in this very manor do the Prelates mock God for
the reverence that they perform is redeculous, and such as the text commands
not: For that says not, put of your hats or caps, or nodd your head and make a
leg: no such business I promise you does that require: but explicitly says at
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow. So that if the Prelates will either do
that themselves, or enjoin others to do it, that is commanded in that place,
they must fall down upon their knees, or at least make a curtsy as often as
the word and sound Jesus comes to their ears, making of a leg and putting of
their caps, or nodding with the head, is no obeying of that command, neither is
it required of them but that their knes should bow, not one in making of a
leg, for that is not to obey the commandment neither, but both, for the text
says at the name of Jesus every knees shall bow: and thus to obey Paul's
command, I never saw any Priest or Prelat to this day: so that as yet, they
live and continue in disobedience to it, and bring-in a command of their own,
which they put upon the people, and the neglect or transgression of the which
they punish with the ruin and undoing of many: a great wickedness, in them to
neglect the commands of God and urge their own traditions above them.

Besides, if this be a command, it is not sufficient only in the Church to do
this, but it must be done in all places, at all times, without limitation,
wheresoever and whenever the name of Jesus sounds, whether in Church or
house, court or country, street or field, whether in preaching or reading,
whether in cursing or railing, banning or swearing, every body must fall upon
their knees, or make a curtsy: for the text says at the name of Jesus every
knee shall bow, and so the commandment runs with out restriction, AND THIS
ALSO HAVE NEITHER PRIESTS NOR PRELATES YET EVER DONE; but live and dye in the
breach of this command; which they so unmercifully punish others for. And were
it so, that at the name of JESUS, the Prelates did fall down upon their knees,
or make an humble curtsy, according to the command: they had yet done but
half service, which is as bad as none: God calls for whole service, he will
not be served to the halues.

Now the text that says at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, the same
text also says* that at the name of Jesus every tongue shall confess that
Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the father* So that there is, an
outward, orall and audible confession to be made with the mouth, as well as an
outward bowing with the knees: and the one is as necessary and as much to be
urged as the other: for in the text they are both joined together, and that
which God has joined together, I desire that the Prelates would not be so bold
as to separate, least they be found guilty of the same crime of which they
sometimes insimulat the Papists, for they accuse them of Sacrilege for taking
away the cup from the people which the Lord notwithstanding has joined with
the bread: Now if it be sacrilege in the Papists to keep the cup from the
people, as damnable sacrilege it is indeed, and to be abhorred of all men, It
is greater impiety and sacrilege in the Prelates to rob God himself of a part
of his worship, and which in express words he challenges: and therefore in
them to seperat the confession of the mouth, part of the worship that is there
required, from the other of the knees, especially when it is said, with the
mouth man confesses to Salvation, is without doubt a crying sacrilege and
impudent temerity: for what God has joined together let no man separat. Now
most clear and evident, it is that the confession of the mouth and that of the
whole congregation, is as much required at the name of Jesus as corporal and
external bowing of the knee; and if the neglect of the one be a sin, and
deserve punishment, the neglect of the other is a sin, and deserves
punishment also: and for the confession with the mouth, to be joined with the
bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus it was never yet practiced in the
world, nor can possibly be without such confusion, as never was brought into
the Church and such a perpetual bondage to all Christians, as that of the Jews
was nothing to it.

For first what an interruption of all duties would there be, if at the name of
Jesus as often as it sounds, the whole congregation should cry out a loud in
the assembly Jesus Christ is the Lord. I say it would perturbat and interrupt
all holy duties, and fill the world with confusion: Now God is a God of order
and not of confusion: and therefore the holy Ghost, by those words, never
intended any outward bodily bowing, or orall confession at all: which as I said
would not bring-in confusion only, but unsupportable bondage, yea a
continuation and an inevitable circulation of worship, which may be called the
cyclopedia of the Prelates: for at the name of Jesus we must bow, and at the
name of Jesus likewise we are commanded to confess aloud that Jesus is the
Lord, and this orall confession calls for a new bowing, and that bowing for a
new confession; so that the one, cannot be without the other, and having once
made a beginning, they must go on without cessation: and this does necessarily
follow from the text, if it be a command, and if the words be to understood and
taken as they sound: for if bodyly bowing be required, then outward confession
also at the name of Jesus is required* and if the one, then the other; if not
both then neither. So that if it be a command as the Prelates will have it, they
have ever lived in the open breach of it: for I never heard them yet at the
name of Jesus with their mouths confess alowd in the congregation, that Jesus
was the Lord; and therefore for them to live in the apparent breach of this so
graat a commandment, it is a great impiety; and to serve God only with
quarter service, and horrible hypocrisy and disobedience.

Wherefore I would persuade them, for time to come, to leave off, to pervert
the holy Scripture, by putting salse glosses upon it, and laying burdens upon
men's shoulders which they will not touch with one of their little fingers, or
else they may surely look that the Lord will severely punish their damnable
hypocrisy wickedness and cruel tyranny they exersice over their brethren.

For can there be a greater impiety then this? for what God commands them by
example and precept, as they themselves confess, that they will not do. What
he forbids them that they will do. He says at the name of Jesus every tongue
shall confess alowd that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God the father,
and that they should bow both their knees. But this command they have never yet
obeyed. He bids them feed his sheep as they love him, and sent them for that
purpose, they neither feed his sheep, nor will let others feed then. He bids
them learn of him to be humble and meek, and that they should not seek the
first places and highest rooms in assemblyes. They affect nothing but state,
POMP, GREATNESS, PREEMINENCE AND PRECEDENCE BEFORE OTHERS. Christ also forbids
them to be Lords of his inheritance, and to exercise authority over their
brethren, and tells then plainly, that they must imitate him, who came to serve
and not to be served: as formerly also he by his own example had instructed
them, flying from those that would have put worldly dignity and honor upon
him: refusing, to be a Judge and diuider of the inheritance, and openly before
Pilat renounced secular power and authority. Notwithstanding the Pope and
Prelates rebelling against Christ's commands and prohibition exercise as great
yea greater authority and domination over their poor brethren, then any secular
Princes and Lords do, captiuating them at their pleasure, not only judging of
them daily, and dividing their inheritances, but giving away all they have and
their very souls to the devil, to the undoing of them their wives and
children, and that for doing their duty, which is the greatest tyranny that
ever was exercised in the world.

And as, they exercise more then a Lordly power and authority over their poor
brethren, so they are attended like the Lords and Princes of the earth, with
mighty retinues, and are carried in coaches with four or six horses a piece in
them, when a wheel barrow such as they trundle white wine vinegar about the
town were a great deal fitter for them I wosse* so little honor they deserve
for their service toward God or the King, and for the good to the Church and
State, of all which they are the cursed enemies who think nothing that Christ
did, or spoke, reverent, timely or orderly, but it must be either* altered, or
neglected, or absolutely rejected by them and abiured, and howsoever he inioines
them to teach or preach nothing to the people, to be observed but what he gave
them in commission yet nevertheless they preach and urge little other, but their
own conceits superstitions and vainest and idlest ceremonies, and howsoever
Christ strickly forbad them to be Lords over his flook as I said before, yet
they boldly tell him to his face, if he should be obeyed in that, there could
be no government, and those that would urge the necessity of his commands upon
the Ministers of the Gospel, they labor to overthrow Monarchies and all
regality, and therefore they being a little wiser, and knowing better what
belongs unto the managing of the Church and States, they think it very fit to
take authority and domination into their hands, and to obtrude their own laws
upon their brethren and with greater severity and rigor exact the observation
of them: and with more bitter seuerityes punish the meanest neglect of them,
then the breach of all Gods commandments, and this you cannot deny: by all
which proceedings of theirs, it is more then apparent, that the Prelates and
their confederats are enimyes of Christ and of his Kingdom, and therefore by
all such as love him and his glorious appearing, ought to be prayed against.
And so far am I from thinking my self in an error in desiring deliverance
from them, that I desire that all would join with me in the same LETANY
fervently and incessantly praying From plague pestilence and famine, from
BISHOPS PRIESTS AND DEACONS GOOD LORD DELIVER US: by the agony and bloody
sweat, by the cross and passion, FROM BISHOPS PRIESTS AND DEACONS GOOD LORD
deliver us. By the precious death and buryall, by the glorious resurrection and
ascension, and by the coming of the holy ghost: FROM BISHOPS PRIESTS AND
DEACONS good Lord deliver us. We Sinners do beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

And so after my Letany I come to your other exceptions, wherein you think,
they will argue me of scandalizing them in saying they go to their Venery in
forma pauperis, by which words I seem to accuse the holy tribe of
iucontinency: and this you think they will make penal* bnt for that, to say
nothing of my own experience, as I AM A PHYSICIAN, nor of what I have heard
from the most famous of that profession of the incontinency of those follows,
who they have had under their cure after their venery, because I will not in
any thing temerate our function; nor be like those beastly Priests that in
their displeasure against a man; will reveal whatsoever was most secretly
commetted unto their trust in deepest familiarity, and swear to it also and
make records of it, to the undoing of many a poor man and the violating of all
the laws and iura Jove's hospitalis to speak nothing now I say of my own
knowledge; look but a little into their bawdy Courts in all the diocesses
through the Kingdom, and there will scarce pass a Court day wherethere are
not two or three Pre^^ts or more presented for incontinency and either for
getting their own mayds with child or their neighbors, or it may be more
profound uncleanness, and then they bring along with them their compurgators,
which do that office upon condition, that they shall be compurgators, for them
an other time, and so they are pronounced rectos in curia and freed from all
crime: and thus they harmonise together for the cloaking of one an others
knavery. Nor to say nothing of Chaplins in general what base filthiness they
perpetrate even in the familyes of illustrious men where they are entertained
and too much honored, sometime with their daughters or allies, sometime which
their servants, or friends, of which the Kingdom cries shame, they professedly
carrying kissing comfits in their pockets, and blush not to publish their
lesciuiousnes being at any time demanded what they smack; I my self have been
an ear witness of that good confession. But not to speak of this, neither; nor
of their codpisse Simony, to use their own language and dialect, nor of the
suits that for their beastliness have been cast ont of the HONORABLE COURT OF
STARCHAMBER: But to come to the High Commission Court, in the which if you
please to be present, you shall hear sometime four or five in a term of such
base filthynesse OF THEIR PRIESTS, as no chaste ears can hear them, such
things indeed as the apostle says expressly, they are not to be named amongst
Christians: and such as the very prophaue cry shame of: and yet it is
wonderful to see, with what grace and how distinctly and orderly the Registers
will read that good stuff: sometimes three or four hours together and more;
and how diligently and attentively those reverend fathers a whole after noone
together will hear those BAWDY BVSINESSES, when to be one hour in the pulpit
to teach the people their duty toward God and their neighbor in half a year,
is a thing very tedious unto them.

So that they cannot take it in ill part, when their own Courts do
sufficiently prove their lewd behavior: which indeed now is well known
through the Kingdom, insomuch that though their incontinency with their
debaushednes be proved never so manifestly, they shall find compurgators and
come well enough of except they be branded with Puritanisme also and that he
preaches diligently, then perhaps he may lose his place for it. But I say let
his incontinency be never so evidently proved* and that he is a breaker of all
the laws of God, suspention is all that I ever heard was inflicted upon such
persons if they be conformable, and if there be any other punishment against
INCONTINENT PRIESTS, it is more then I know. But this I have often observed,
that others that have been proved men of an incontaminat life, of holy
conversation, diligent Preachers, yet found failing perhaps in some trifle of
conformity, they have been deprived ipso facto of their ministry and of their
liuely-hood and committed to prison without either mercy and compassion: So
much conscience is punished now a days and incontinency favored amongst our
reverend Fathers. And therefore if they take pepper in the nose for saying they
go to their venery in forma pauperis, let them do their worst, for I will
never fear to speak the truth.

Now whereas you suppose they will make it an heinous crime, THAT I INVITE THE
WHORE OF BABYLON to my christning with the Prelates. I do conceive no such
offense in that business: For I hope all learned men and good Christians are
well assured, that Godfathers and Godmothers are not essential to baptism,
and that many thousands were well christened in primitive times, and every day
are in many reformed Churches in our age without either. Besides, he that shall
look into the first original cause of them, will at this day see no need of
them among us, at least very little. For Baptism succeding circumcision, and
as under the old law children were not to be circumcised whose Fathers and
mothers were not within the Pale of the Church and within the Covenant: So I
say, in the time of the new testament, baptism coming in place of
circumcision, none were thought fit in the first Christian churches being
children to be received to that holy Sacrament of initiation, but such as were
the children of Christian parents: for the promises were made and renewed to
them and to their children. Hereupon when children were to be baptized, and to
receive the seal of the covenant, Christians being but few in comparison of
Jews and Gentiles, and withal, a persecuted generation of men, and all forced
to live in obscurity and straggling one from an other and to have their meetings
very private: especially in the great persecutions of the Church, for the
satisfaction of the whole congregation: when they assembled together, and when
any INFANTS were there presented unto them to be baptized, there came in some
two or three Christian neighbors to testify unto the congregation, that those
children that were brought into the assembly, were Christians children, so that
they might without any scruple admit them to the sacrament of Baptism: and
this was all the end of witnesses in those times, and all, they did at the
Font: which any two either Jews or Pagan^ might have done as well as Christians
for ought I know: for the congregation desired but to know, whether they were
Christians children: otherwise they admitted them not to baptism: Now a Jew or
a Gentile* that was their enemy, would not have their own children
incorporated among Christians: but would make Christians go among their own
fraternity: therefore as I suppose their witness would easily have been admitted
among the best Christians in this cause. So that in the ORIGINAL CHVRCHES,
this and this only, was the use of witnesses, which I say in our times, where
we are known all ^o be Christians, there is very little need of: for it is a
mere complement in baptism: and to speak truly and properly* none can
better answer for the faith and education of the child to be baptized, then the
father: neither has any better right to give the name, then the father and
mother: who if we look* into the word of God, ever gave their own children
their names; Abraham gave I saack his name, I saac gave his children their
names; and so we shall find, that both the Patriarks and Kings of old gave
their children their names and answered for them: neither can there be any good
reason given, why Christians should be inferior in this matter to the Jews.

Withal, Baptism now is become a thing so chargable to Godfathers, and of so
much expense, that a poor man can scarce get any to christen his children: and
especially a man as I am, not only poor but of whom all men are no^ afraid:
so as it was an impossible thing for me to get or procure any GODFATHERS: and
therefore I was constrained to sue at this time, in my wifes name, TO THE
PRELATES who had been the cause of all my misery; to see, of they would now at
last, show any humanity to the oppressed: and true it is. I joined the WHORE
OF BABYLON with them: because they had a very honorable opinion of her: and so
highly, magnifyed her, as they said i^ open Court, that howsoever other
Church^s had played the harlot, yet she ever had remained a chaste matron: so
that they could not now except against her their old mistress: and for witness in
things of this kind; I think the testimony of any, good or bad will serve:
neither do I know, what reason there should be to the contrary: for the thing
is apparent whether the sun shines or no at noone day, so that if one should
say it did not, thousands would witness the contrary: and that I am a Christian,
who can doubt? For I was signed with the sign of the cross, as all men know;
and the Prelates have crossed me ever since: so that I have I thank them
crosses enough to witness that. And that cities also use to give names unto
children, this daily experience will witness; and therefore that may not be
taken ill by any Catholic, when I am, as I said, a true ancient CATHOLIC AND
APOSTOLIC ROMAN, and am resolved to live and die in that faith in despite of
the devil nay in contemptum diaboli et Praelatorum ^mnium.

For the exception you make against that passage where I say writing to my good
Angel, I will conclude hereafter, that we shall be married together, and
therefore for better for worse I remain his poor wife, etc. I must confess,
I suppose there will not be any so unwise, as to think, that to use a word,
that is metaphorically taken in all Countries and languages upon the like
occasion, and merrily to express it, should be blameworthy in me, for what is
more commonly in use, then to say, one, being cast in prison by his adversaries
that are implacable, that he is married to the place and jaylour. If any do not
like of the manner of expression, 'let him go learn his granam to suck, and
not me to speak, for that matter, for sure I am, such a fellow never came
where good literature and the liberal arts dwelt, that will take away from any
scolar the liberty of a metaphor, or make it an offense in one, when it is a
virtue in an other: but for that, I think it was not yours, but an others
exception, and therefore I will say no more of it.

For the capital and one of the grand ones and your last, to speak a little
of that, and so I will conclude. You tell me I give the Prelates vnreuerent
titles and names, which you think they will make scandalum magnatum and
censure me for it. The truth is; the laws of the Kingdom proclaim them
enemies of the King, and all such as they are, and therefore when I have
authority from them for my language, I conceive it may be tolerated among all
such, as honor the King or love the laws, which they make a scorn of to my
knowledge. But you are mistaken in the business, I was censured and lost my
ears, the one at London the other at Colchester, long before I thought of my
Letany, as the whole Country can tell, and therefore I made my Letany for
deliverance from them and their cruelty: and in that I call a Spade a Spade and
every thing as it deserves, and so much the rather because as soon as my
apology was arrived NEWCOMIN the PRIEST reported in the country, that it should
cost me my ears: and the one I should lose in Colchester, and the other at
London, and something more was added of other punishments, when
notwithstanding, I had made only a relation of the Prelates proceedings against
me in the high commission court, of which there were a thousand witnesses. And
what that Priest reports that ordinarily hapens: for he commonly speaks
nothing which comes not from the Prelates mouths: and that they say, they
know well, they have power enough to bring it to pass. When I was first
hoisted up into the high Commission Court, by that learned Rector and that the
purs^iuant was gone down to ransack my Study, and take away my papers, of all
which proceedings I being absent, was ignorant: he then reported that I should
be fined a thousand pounds, which came to pass: and whatsoever besides he had
foretold, all that was executed upon me, as if he himself had given the
verdict, and this that I now relate, is notoriously known to the whole country.

And as he then did give sentence upon me before judgment in their own Court,
so has he now done in the starchamber; it seems that all Courts are theirs
and that all the NOBILITY AND PEERS OF THE KINGDOM are bound to put in
execution what every profane Priest out of insolency will have, and others out
of cruelty enjoin them to do, upon otherwise incurring their displeasure: and
of this cruelty I have heard not once; So that, so many informations out of the
Country of this censure against me, makes me daily expect the extremity:
all which proceeds from the tyranny of the Prelates who indeed thirst after
the ruin of all them they love not and those that truly fear the Lord, and
this daily experience teaches us. Now I say, when they fight not against men
only, but God himself, as I have showed sufficiently; and when they trample
upon the Prerogative royal, (pretend what they will) and the laws of the
Kingdom, which they are bound to obey and defend as well as my self being
subjects: it is the duty of all good subjects to lay open the wickedness and
ingratitude of such men, by the most fittest terms, they know how to express
it. We see the scripture is full of expressions of this kind, (malice and
hatred to their persons being laid aside, which I harbor not in my heart
against them:) I think it me duty 18 set forth their malicious plots, the best
way I can: for to such a hight is their malice come, that speak them fair or
speak then foul: nay let them but think you speak to them, though you meddle
not with them, it shall ruin you. Neither are they content with their own
power in destroying of poor men, which no Court has in a greater measure, or
ever had, that I remember: but they call for all aid still of the Nobility and
of the Kings majesty himself, to help them in their daily oppressings of poor
men; as if any of them resisted at any time their authority: or as if they of
themselves without any other help could not ruin all the honest men they brand
with the name of Puritans in the Kingdom, and trample upon them at pleasure:
when the whole, realm sees and feels daily their tyranny over their
brethren, which they groan most greiuously under: and under the which thy have
no way to releive themselves but by appealing to Caesar the Kings most
excellent Majesty, which was all the refuge of poor Christians and all
distressed subjects in all nations and ages, yea under heathen Emperors, and
that now is all the hope, of releife they at this day do enjoy, which if it
fail them, they cannot expect from the Prelates, any other but a life far worse
then death: for I have credibly been informed, that they daily labor to
incense his gracious Majesty against such as complain of their exorbitant
domineering over them, and would make the whole State believe that they are
weary of their lives, and the only persecuted men that now live though they
live in all honor and pomp, and only forsooth, because there are some under
others names, and others, without names, set down the greivances of Ministers
and people, which manner of complaining, I could wish were subscribed ever unto,
with the hand of the authors, for that I think more beseems men, whatsoever
the issue be: for they must dye one day, and to dye for the honor of God, the
King, their Religion and country, or to suffer any thing for either of them it
was ever thought honorable, and I call God to witness, the only love and
honor of these has made me abandon all love to my self and mine, in
comparison, and made me lie down in dust and ashes, whereas, if I could have
temporised, I might have enjoyed no small portion in things of this life. But I
say, I would earnestly wish, that the oppressed would show his Majesty indeed
by name and by the effects, that they groan under a mighty and unsupportable
bondage under the Prelates not knowing which way ever to have releise, but by
his gracious assistance. And truly, if men would go plainly and simply to
work, to justify unto the Prelates faces, the things they accuse them of, (as I
ever will) if it did themselves no good, it would witness to all posterity, that
there were some willing, to abdicate all for the honor of God and the good of
the Country and Religion. And who knows but as Benedad said of the Kings of
Israel and Judah, that they were merciful, and therefore they might by humble
entreaty find favor, so our Christian Kings succeeding them and the best of
them in faith and goodness, and being more merciful: who knows I say but
humble suitors may happily find favor at their princely hands at last, and
that, they truly being informed of the calamities their poor subjects sink
under, would send them speedy relief especially when they consider their own
place, and the end of their being, that King and Princes are appointed by God
himself to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers of his people: and therefore
they have their titles of gracious Princes, and Saviors of their people: for,
Kings are Gods vicegerents, to do that which otherwise he might do himself,
which is to releive the oppressed and deliver them from the mighty and help
them against their enemies, and were wont to sit in the gates to receive their
complaynts, and this is the doctrine that God teachers Princes, the practice of
which in common wealths, is far better then Machiauells: and brings more
security ever to their crowns and dignities. And those that teach Kings and
Princes contrary unto that, that God himself has taught them, are but sucking
Politicians, (whatsoever the world esteems of them) and have been ever fatal
to all Empires, as if you look into histories you shall find. If God himself
has said that for oppressions and cruelties a land shall be made desolate, and
gives in charge to Kings and Princes for their own preservation and the common
good to remove those that oppress the people and cause them to sin: if
Machiauell and his disciples shall say the contrary, that Kings must favor
such as seem to advance Princely dignity, by what means soever it be, and by
so much the more that the commons complains against them, and that Kings are
not tied to any Laws but by their absolute authority and prerogative may do
what they will, I will affirm it unto the death, it is damnable doctrine, and
the teachers of it, ought to be put out of office at least, be they Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons.

But concerning such men, hear what the learned King that ever was, (King
JAMES I mean) said in his speech to the Lords and commons at whitehall March
21. 1609. who had more policy in the paring of his nails, then all the
Grollish Politicians that are now extant in the whole body of them, yet he
said, that those that persuade Kings to do contrary unto their laws, are
vipers and pests, both against them and the commonwealth. And these are the
words of a mighty, learned and prudent King, and this doctrine I have received
from him. And if it would please his Highness our renowned King whom God long
preserve, well to consider what his father says: his Majesty would better
Perceive the truth of (...) his speech for in that he spoke not only like a
King of wise dome: but like an oracle from heaven. And indeed Monarchies have
ever been preferred before all populer governments, because there is one ever
ready to whom the subjects in all their pressures by the mighty, may have
recourse and from whom releife, and whom to appeal to. So that they shall not
need then always to wait for public meetings, for the redressing of
greuances: For this is a part of Kingly art, to cure these diseases of state in
time and obstare principiis miseriarum populi, and the violation of their
laws, for if the people be deprived of the benefit of the law and the appeal
to the King that great comfort and releife, they will in time be made a prey to
the cruelty of every oppressor, and their lives become untolerable to them:
especially when it shall be thought a State policy, that he that has the best
faculty of tyrannising and oppressing the King subjects, shall be esteemed the
most serviceable member in a commonwealth and the greatest Statist. And this
is policy from hell, the authors of which the Lord himself will confound, if
they repent not. But in the mean time, in seeking for releif and ease under
oppression; though it be in the diseases of the commonwealth, as it is in the
bodies of men, the speedier remedy to them is ever the best: for the longer
they continue the more dangerous they are: yet as the patient submits himself
to the Physician for the time of the Cure: So much more ought the subject to
leave the Cure to Kings best opportunityes, as the only Physicians of
Kingdoms, and who as they are called Gods, so many times imitate him in long
suffering conniuing at and patient enduring the insolent and domineering
oppressors, and such as trample not only upon the people, but their own
laws, yea upon their crowns and dignity, and yet seem in the mean time, to
be their faithfullest servants, and those that stand most of all for the
advancement of their honor and glory, as those cursed enemies of God did in
the 66 of Isaiah 5. Let the Lord be glorified say they, when they persecuted
and oppressed his servants, hated them and cast them out: So say these
sycophants, Let the Kings honor be mainteyned, when they mean nothing less.
All which things Kings many times know very well and them to be mere
hypocrites, and to do all they do for their own base ends: and therefore in
their fittest opportunities purge the Church and State of them. And as Kings
are Gods in respect of health safety, government and wisdom: So they are
likewise in respect of invocation only to be sought to and called upon of
their subjects in all times of the calamities of oppression next after God
himself: we are not to go in our troubles and oppressions, to wizards of State
the Kings enemies that bewitch men with presents, or rebels, or take indirect
courses of insurrections and tumultuation; this is a remedy worse then the
disease, and more displeasing to God, and dishonorable to the subject: and
deserves a greater yoke of servitude: but we must continue our humble
petitions to the King and tell his Majesty how the matter stands. We must be
like the importunat widow, and allthough we meet with many discouragements, as
those that came unto Christ did, yet we may not surcease and be weary or drove
back; for Kings are Gods and are exorable full of pity and compassion, and
never send away their subjects without comfort that with lowly importunity
solicit them* and this is the duty of all good subjects and such as will
approve their ways before God and men, in the number of which I shall desire
ever to live and die, being though but poor, as rich in loyalty, as any
subject in the Kings three dominions.

But now to shut up all. Whereas you think many will blame me for that I use
such coorse expressions toward them: and it will favor of some inward spleen
and study of revenge, and may also scandal religion, for they will say, they
are all of this Spirit. In answer to that, I protest in the presence of
allmighty God, that I am so far from either rancour and hatred toward them,
for all the wrong they have done me, as I never think of any evil toward
them, because I refer my cause to God and vengeance to him and cast my self
upon his providence in a more special manner, chiefly at this time when I have
none other to depend upon: I being made odious amongst all men and hateful to
them that never saw me. But this I confidently confess unto you* that I know
more of the wicked plots of the Prelates then any Subject that is a Protestant
with in the Kings dominions, and you would say there were reason for it, if you
knew all. And before I have done with them, I will make the wickedness not only
of our Prelates, but of all the Prelates in the whole world known unto all
Christians Princes and to al their Subjects, who to speak the truth are all
infinitely abused by them; not only for the trampling under their feet all the
sucular Peers under them and the Nobility and flower of all Kingdoms where
they dwell; and the subiugating of their Commons, but in fine, in regard of the
danger of having their necks brought under a greater yoke of bondage then ever
it formerly was* all which I will make appear unto all Christian Princes and
unto all men as clearly as the Sun shines at Noone day. The mystery indeed that
they are a working is carried closely, so that Kings and Nobles do not see it:
for they all buzze Nobles and Princes in the ear, that those that are enimyes
to the Hierarchy, they indeed would disthrone Kings and have no government and
they would slight the nobility and dignityes and overthrow order and states:
and then they tell a thousand stories to them all to incense the King and
Nobles against that poor company of men that more honor dignityes, and powers
in a Kingdom then ever any prelat did as shall be evidently proved in my
ANATOMY of the Prelates which I dedicat unto all Christian Princes and
Commonwealths, for it concerns them all, but especially all such as make
profession of the reformed religion. I dare say by that time you and all men
shall have read that book, you will see into the mystery of their iniquity so
clearly, that you will affirm there are no names bad enough for them or
sufficient to express the wickedness and treachery of those empostors. Our
Prelates writ books sometime against the Pope and call him the grand Imposter:
but the truth is, the Papists say that all such Bishops are knaves: and that if
the Pope be an Impostor they are greater: for they are all Pops, and thus much
I have often heard them speak: and that were it not, for the hindering of the
Catholic cause and the universal Monarchy, they could make them fly without
gunpowder, but they hoped in time they would leave to write against the Church
of Rome. They know one an others kneueries, all which I have made known in the
Anatomy of the Prelates which is in the hands of some special friends. The
printing of which I have reserved till my censure in the star chamber,
because I desire to do things methodically and upon mature deliberation, and
in such sort that all Christendom may have the greater cause to look into
businesses that so highly concern their well being. You know I have been a
traveler, and lived many years abroad and in the most flourishing universities
of Europe and in many Courts of great Princes, and have been employed in
matters of state and that often: and in all these places where I ever lived, I
carried my self as a Christian, and had the repute of them all, for an honest
man, and have the public testimonies of all places where I dwelt, both for my
honesty and learning: and my bonds are famous now at Rome it self, to my
knowledge, and in all the Christian world.

And all men that know any thing know also that I suffer not as an evil doer:
and they stand all in wonderful expectation what will be the issue of this
business: for it astonisheth the^, to see that I should be put in prison for
writing a book against the Pope, in defense of Regality, and because it had
nothing but scripture in it. Now in this expectation of theirs, I hear the
Prelates are plotting new mischief against me, and have desired power and
greater assistance from the King for the prosecuting of me more severely yet,
as if they had not enough before, and withal that the Nobility join with them
for the censuring of me in the starchamber for the cutting of my ears and
worse: but I hoope his Majesty and the honorable Lords will more seriously
look into the business, which if they do, I am confident they shall never
find me a delinquent, but to have deserved better from King and state then any
Prelat in England ever did or can do. But by the way. Let me tell you thus
much that whatsoever the Prelates pretend of service and love to the King and
Nobles, they will in the conclusion deal with them as Polyphemus dealt with
Ulysses and his soldiers when he had got them in Antro: first says Ulysses, I
will devour these (meaning the common soldiers) and after I will come to thee.

And even so the Prelates, when they have devoured the commons, and them they
style by the name of Puritans, they will also devour those graet ulysses and
Heroes, and this is as true as the Sunshines at none day. They have made pretty
beginnings of that good work already if men could see it, and they and their
creatures have the breeding of all their children, and the tutoring of them at
home and abroad; and all their whole endeavor is, that the Lords and Peers of
the kingdom may be acquaynted with no solid learning and that which concerns
either Religion or Government: but that they may have some complementall way of
Courtship for entertayment, and be fit for pleasure only; and this say the
Prelates is enough for Lords: so that if any of the Lords creep into the
knowledge either of religion or of states matters, it is through their own
ingenuity and industry, and sore against the Prelates liking. And hence it is,
that such misery at this day is in this kingdom, that there is not one of
forty of the Lords that understands to the purpose an ordinary Latin author,
which is but the bark of learning, so that by this means they are deprived of
an excellent way of instruction, and all this not through their own default,
who otherwise are as witty and ingenious as any men, but through their tutors,
and that indeed is their only study to keep Princes and Nobles ignorant, and
take them up with pleasure, that they may get the government into their own
hands and be thought only fit to manage state affairs, to the infinite
dishonor of the Nobility, yea Kings themselves, who if they would but set
themselves a little to their studyes, and look into matters of Religion and
state, they would find little need of such cattle as Prelates are either in
Church or state, or if their were they would send them home to preach as
Ministers should, nay they would command them to follow that calling of
preaching and leave state-affayres to them. King James in his Apology to
Christian Princes says that Churchmen meddling with state-affayres, are the
frogs that came out of the bottomless pit, that corrupt and spoil all things.
And truly till the Kings and Princes of the earth shall dismiss that crew
from their Courts or send them about their own callings, they can never
promise unto themselves their Crowns and dignities any enduring security, all
which-things I will make so evidently appear in my Anatomy of the Prelates, as
there is never Boy of eight years old but shall see it: and I hope by that
good work to do such service and so good an office to all Christian Kings and
to all Common wealths, to the whole Church of God, and to the generations of
men, that love peace and syncerity, as the very memory of me the miserablest
now of creatures shall be grateful to all posterity to the worlds end. But
this shall be reserved till the sentence of the starchamber is passed. For I
desire to print the whole passage of that Court against me, as I have done of
the high Commission, that all the world may see how little I have deserved such
censures as I have and shall undergo, and how well I have merited both from
Church and state: and when the Censure of the star chamber against me shall
come out, with the Anatomy of the Prelates, you and all men will then see
whether the Prelates are not brave statesmen or no. But that I may notwrong any
man, I must entreat your favor in one thing, I know you are an eminent man,
and have many friends in the Court, I shall therefore desire of You this
kindness, that whatsoever speeches either the kings Attorney or Solicitor or
any other shall make in my absence against me, that it may be taken in short
hand and sent me forth with, that I may translate it into Latin as it comes,
with my answer to it and replication, so that I may have Bill and answer and
all things ready for the press, at the day of my Censure: and that at that
day, there may likewise be as many, as possible can gather speeches that may
take their declamations from their mouths severally, for I resolve to
translate them all into Latin, and to coment upon them, what Lords soever they
be. And I doubt not, but to make it the famousest story that ever was agitated
in any Court of judicature, since Paul appeared before Nero. But it is time now
to draw to an end. I hear that the Attorney universal with the Kings
Solicitor are now a coming to examine me, and intend speedily to have my
ears. I am only sorry I have no more ears, nor lives to lose for the houour
of God, my King and Religion: but what should I greiue that I have no more
lives and ears to lose: I know God accepts of the least things so they be
insyncerity offered unto him: to whose gracious perseruation I commend you, and
think this for the present sufficient to have answered to your exceptions
against my Letany and for the avoiding of others misinterpretings of my honest
intentions. Fare you well.

Your for ever in Limbo Patrum, JOHN BASTVVICK

Hear ends the second part of my Letany the other SIX are to Follow.

