A BRIEF Catechism, containing the Sum of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
his life, declared more at large by the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John.

Written by Edmund Littleton, of Sittingborne in KENT, Preacher.

Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old, he shall not
depart from it,

Pro. 22.6. This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ,

John 17.3. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOVVE for Simon Stafford. 1616.

A brief Catechism, containing the Sum of the Gospel of our blessed LORD
and Savior Jesus Christ, set down more at large by the four Evangelists.
Question. WHat is the Gospel?

Ans. It is the glad tidings of salvation, brought unto us by Jesus Christ.

Q. What does the Gospel principally contain?

A. The Gospel does principally contain these four parts, to wit:

1 The birth of Christ. 2 The life of Christ. 3 The death of Christ, and 4 His
resurrection.
Q. What do you comprehend under the title of his birth?

A. Under the title of his birth, I comprehend his pedigree, as he is man; and
also his generation, as he is God, begotten of his Father before al worlds,
John. 1.1.

And lastly, his Conception of the virgin Mary, Luke. 1.31.

Q. Where was Christ borne?

A. At Beth-lehem in the land of Judah, as it was before prophesied, Mica. 5.2.

Q. When was Christ borne?

A. When the Kingdom was taken from the royal tribe of Judah, as Jacob the
Patriark on his deathbed foretold, Genesis 49.10.

Q. What circumstances were incident to the birth of Christ?

A. Three most excellent and notable above the rest.

Q. Which were they?

A. 1 The most joyful song of the Angels, that gave witness to his birth,
Luke 2.13.

2 The visitation of the sheepe-heards, Verse 15.

3 The coming of the Wise men, and their homage don unto him, Mat. 2.1. etc.

Q. Who do make mention of these things?

A. Three of the holy Evangelists, that is, Matthew, Luke, and John.

Q. Now for the life of Christ, I pray you tell me what he did, before he took
his public function upon him?

A. Before he took upon him the administration of his public function, First,
he fled into Egypt, Mat. 2.13, 14

Secondly, he was obedient to his supposed father, and to the virgin Mary his
mother, Luke 2.51.

And thirdly, he frequented the holy exercises of religion in the Temple, and
there disputed with the Doctors of the law, Verse 43.

Q. Who do report this?

A. Matthew makes mention of the first, and Luke of the rest.

Q. I would gladly know of you, after what manner he was established in his
office, and how he lived after he was called thereunto?

A. His calling was confirmed unto him by three notable testimonies: as,

First, by his baptism, wherein the Father and the holy Ghost approved him,
Mat. 3.16, 17.

Secondly, by his conquest over the devil, tempting him in the desert.

And thirdly, by the faithful witness of John the Baptist.

Q. Who do make mention of this?

A. All the four Evangelists, Mat. 3.14. Mar. 1.9. Luke 3.21. Ioh. 1.6, 7. etc.

Q. What did he in the time of his calling, to wit, for those three years and
6. months, in which he was conversant in diverse places, amongst the Jews, as
in Galile, Samaria, and Judea?

A. He did teach the doctrine of salvation, and confirmed the same by working
of miracles.

Q. What do you learn by the doctrine that he taught?

A. I do especially learn two things.

Q. What are they?

A. First, who is the true Christ.

Secondly, the benefits that are to be obtained by him.

Q. What does the doctrine of Christ contain?

A. The Doctrine of Jesus Christ contains and truly teaches us the matter
of our faith, or Christ himself: that is to say, both who he is, and what a
one he is to us, to wit, a Savior, Mat. 1.21.

Q. And what else?

A. That he is perfect God, and perfect man, and also the means how he is to be
apprehended of us.

Q. How may we apprehend Jesus Christ?

A. Only by Faith.

Q. What benefits get we by Christ thus apprehended?

A. By Jesus Christ thus apprehended by a true and lively faith, we obtain
these benefits following: viz.

First, our Justification, which is, to be accounted perfitly righteous in the
sight of God. Secondly, our Sanctification, which is, the restoration of the
integrity of our nature lost by Adam. Thirdly, our Glorification, which is, to
be made heirs and citizens of the kingdom of heaven.
And to conclude, that comfortable Charity wherewith we love both God and our
neighbor; and all the good fruits that come thereof.

Q. But I pray you tell me, how is this doctrine confirmed unto us?

A. By the right use of the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. In the miracles of Christ, what have we chiefly to consider?

A. In the miracles of Jesus Christ, we have especially to consider his divine
power in the working of them.

Q. Why, how did Christ work his miracles?

A. Sometime by outward application of means, as by touching those whom he
healed, John 9.6.

Sometime by his word only, John 5.8, 9.

And sometime by his divine power without either, Mat. 9.20, 21, 22.

Q. What things do you contain under the title of his death?

A. First, a preparation to the story of his death, wherein these things are
chiefly to be considered, viz.

The apprehending of Christ by the Soldiers, Mat. 26.47.

The treason of Judas Iscariot, Verse. 48.49.

The outrageous violence of the Soldiers, Verse 50.

Secondly, the process, or declaration of the cause, for the which he was
condemned:

First, of the Jews, Mat. 26.65, 66. Secondly, of Pilate, at their
importunacy, in the presence of Annas and Caiaphas, Luke 23.22, 23. And
thirdly, the strife between Pilate and the Jews in the judgment hall.
Fourthly, and lastly, the bringing of him before Herod, and the auouching of
his innocence by the testimony of the Judge himself, Luke 23.14, 15.
Q. What did they to Christ before his condemnation?

A. 1 They did buffet him, Mat. 26.67.

2 They beat him with staves, Mat. 27.30.

3 They scorned him, Mat. 26.68.

4 They spat in his face, Mat. 26.67.

5 They crowned him with thorns, and clothed him with purple, in derision.

6 And to conclude, most unworthily they did whip him, Mar. 15.15.

Q. What follows next?

A. The sentence of condemnation, and the execution thereof.

Q. What have we to consider therein?

A. 1 The most lamentable kind of punishment that he was put to.

In body, the most painful and shameful death of the Cross, Mark. 15.24.

In soul, the most extreme torments of hell, Verse. 34.

2 The most vile reproach done unto him, in forcing him to bear his own Cross
toward the place of execution: and there, in matching him between two arrant
thieves; where the Jews taunt him, and scorn him, and in bitter despite,
entitle him King of the Jews, Mat. 27.37.

Q. Where was Christ put to death?

A. In a noisome and and filthy place without the town gates, called Golgotha,
Mat. 27.33.

Q. What miracles were showed at his death.

A. Diverse, and those very strange and wonderful.

Q. What were they?

A. The sun was darkened for the space of three whole hours over all the
land, Mat. 27.45.

2 The veil of the Temple rent asunder from the top to the bottom.

3 The earth did quake, Verse 51.

4 The rocks cleft asunder, and

5 The graves did open, Verse 52.

Q. What became of the body of Christ after his death?

A. It was buried in a garden, by two honorable Counselors, Joseph, and
Nicodemus, Ioh. 19.38, 39, 41.

Q. What does the fourth and last part of the Gospel contain?

A. His resurrection the third day, according to his promise, Mat. 28.6. and
20.19.

Wherein we are to consider:

1 The guard of Soldiers that watched the sepulcher. 2 The wonderful rising of
his body out of the sepulcher, Mat. 27.66. and 28.2. etc.
Q. Whereby are those things proved and confirmed unto us?

A. First, by the testimony of the Angels, Mat. 28.6. Ioh. 20.12.

Secondly, by the confession of the soldiers to the high Priests. Mat. 28.11.

And lastly, by the sight and feeling of the Apostles and many others, Ioh.
20.27, 28. 1. Cor. 15.6.

Q. How long was Christ on the earth after his Resurrection?

A. The space of 40. days, and then he ascended up into heaven, Acts. 1.9.

Q. What does he there?

A. He is there resident on the right hand of God his Father, making
intercession for us, and from thence shall come at the last day, to judge both
the quick and the dead.

And this is briefly the Sum of the whole Gospel, described more at large by
the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.
FINIS.

