A True and Experimental Discourse, upon the beginning, proceeding, and
Victorious event of this last siege Of BREDA. With the Antiquity and Annexing
of it, to the House of Nassaw, and the many alterations it has suffered by
Arms, and Armies, within these threescore years. Together with the prudent
Plots, Projects, and Policies of War: The Assailants and Defendants
matchless manhood, in managing Martial Affairs: The misery and manner of
soldiers living, their pinching want, and fatal accidents: Strange weapons
and Instruments used by both parties in several Conflicts. Lastly, their
concluded Articles, with the circumstances and ordering of the siege and
Victory. Being pleasant to peruse, and profitable to observe. Written by him
who was an Eye witness of the siege. WILLIAM LITHGOW.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks for I. Rothwel, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Sun. 1637.

The Prologue to the Ingenious READER.
Judicious Lector:
THou may admire to see my flying Quill come unto such a low flight, as the
Belgian Provinces: His book of nineteen years travailes, performed by 3.
several voyages.
which formerly slighted (in the late and large Discourse of my long and
fastidious Travailes) this Western World: but made a step from Paris to Rome:
Nay, scarce of Rome it self, would my pen peruse any pains, till my face
sighted Greece, and Eastern Europe. Whence there my feet footing pedestrially
many Regions in Asia, and thence consequently Voyaging in Africa, by two
several turns and Returns. It is a wonder (I say) to behold my Remote
Labors, fall now upon Breda in Brabant, our neighbor soil, divided from us
only (as it were) by a Channel of the Sea. And yet reason fortifieth my
intention, since now inability of body, restrains me from any further
lanching abroad, and my preteriat days of long worn time, being stricken in
age, retroverteth the ancient Proverb backwards upon my self: To wit, That
young men have wide eyes abroad, and old men narrow eyes at home: Which now I
begin reciprocally to countercambiat, being of both sayings participant. But
understand me better, A comparison between Giants and Dwarfes, re^orded by
Pliny and Virgil.
were not Conopas and Molon two little Dwarfes, as much Renowned in Pliny for
their smalnesse, as those two huge and monsterous Giants Cyclops and Enceladus
rest famous in Virgil for their bigness. And why may not a Mountain produce a
Molehill: for although, perhaps, this present matter seem to thee as a Fly
sitting upon an Elephants back, in comparison of those my rarer Relations
formerly exhibited to the wide desirous World: yet now the time, the sight, the
place, the subject, and the accidents about Breda, ^he sight of ^reda incited
^he Author to ^erforme this ^orke.
command me, and have commanded me to leave a stamp of their Protractures to
this present Age, and succeeding times. Which thou shall not peruse like to
flashing Currants, lying surmises, blind-folded Gazetoes, feined by Domesticke
imaginations, or frivolous reports of flying doubts. No, no, but receive and
read this Work from my own occular experience, whereof I was a daily
Testator. And it also besides, being grounded upon the soundest judgments of
the best Officers there, but indeed more narrowly searched by me from the
common soldiers, E^perience excels far all flying reports.
who daily and nightly were incident unto the Tragical accidents of the
subject it self, from whom as from a fountain, I have drawn the Crystal
truth of this Relation, so much as concerned their passive proof and
Knowledge, the rest and best relyeth upon my self.

Nevertheless (Gentle Reader) if this familiar style seem not to thee so
accurate and Elegant, as I have done heretofore in other Works, impute the
fault thereof to a disordered Leaguer, my miserable lying on cold straw, in
straw huts, and unshifted apparel, to the clangor of Armor, the rattling of
Pikes, the hurling of shouldring Muskets, The disturbant impediments of an
Army, to a penman*
the clamor of tongues, the sounding of Trumpets, and the noise of Drums:
where, when, and whilst I was in writing this experimental Discourse,
distempered my quietness. Yet howsoever that turbulent time, crossed my
Pilgrimagious pains, I have made it plain to the ignorant, and intelligible
to the Prudent, and withal to satisfy the apprehension of any curious
conception. And so I rest, leaving thee, as I leave my self,

To be thine, as thou art mine, William Lithgow.

To his singular friend and Renowned Travailer Mr. Lithgow.
CAn not this I Will, thy wandering mind contain,
When age has crowned thy Foreign toiles and sight,
But now that Belgia must thy stepps sustain,
To pry where Mars involues his awful might:
Thy former Travailes lend the World great light,
And after times thy memory shall praise:
But now Breda claims in thy pains a right
To rouse her worth, her strength, her change, her strays:
Thou bring'st remotest toiles, to homebred ways,
And turns thy Tune, to sing a Tragic song.
It Is done and well, each work thy merits raise,
Patron of Pilgrims, Poet, Penman long.
A Soldiers phrase, thy curious style affords,
To fit the subject, with their deeds and Words.
Soar then (brave Spark) on flying wings of Fame,
That in this task, revives thy living name.
Alexander Grahame.

To his peculiar associate, and pilgrimagious Brother, William Lithgow.
FRom Paris once to Rome with Thee I went,
But further off thy brave Design was bent,
Which thou achieved, in twofold Asia twice,
And compassed Europe, courted Affricke thrice.
O curious toil! exposed in soiles remote,
But rarer far that rare Discourse thou wrote
To light the World: and now thy Quil the while,
Shuts up Breda, within this Tragic style.
James Arthur.

A true Experimental Discourse, upon the Famous Siege, and Happy Recovery of
Breda, the Mistress of Brabant, and Mother of Mars. Done, By the Thrice
Illustrious, and most Victorious Prince, Henry, Prince of Orange, Marquess of
Camphiere and Flushen, Earl of Nassow, etc. Lord of Isseilmond, Brafort, and
Mewreis, etc. Baron of Breda, and Leck, etc. and Lord chief General of all
the Armies under the united States, as well by Sea, as by Land, at home, and
abroad.
AFter long and tedious Travells, over the spacious bounds and Tertiat face of
the ancient World, and now fallen in the rotten bosom of declining Age, the
Sun being set on the winter-day of mine elabourate time: yet it was my fortune,
in this year, 1637. May 16. at Clary, (being bound for Russia) to take my
leave of the truly Noble and Magnanimous Lord, Alexander, Earl of Galloway;
whence being mounted upon a Gallowedian Nagge, I sighted Rose in Cumberland,
where courting Doctor Potter, that painful Preacher, and religious Prelate the
Lord Bishop of Carleile, I set face through Stanmore to Haulkland in
Bishopric, where having saluted there, that excellent Scholar, and pious
Penman, Doctor Morton, Lord Bishop of Durham, I fell down in Yorkshire, to
Bishops-Ouff, and my humble homage made there, unto Doctor Niell, my singular
good Lord and friend, the Archbishop of York, where leaving his Grace, in the
fullness of his deserved Dignity, I arrived at London, and so to Court.

Diverse weeks being spent there, in beholding the changes and vicissitude of
Time and Fortune, The mutabilities of time.
whereof I was both a Testator, and Probator; I left the new-begun Progress,
and stepped down to Gravesend; where staying for my Russian voyage, and
Shipping failing, the Summer being also gone, I resolved to go see Breda.

Well, I, and threescore other passengers boorded a Londoner, whence falling
down to Leye, and lying there 3. days and nights, having fair weather, and
room winds, I found the Master of the Bark, An ignorant Skipper.
R. Ia. an In-dweller near the Tower wharfe, so fearful and ignorant, that
he neither could go out of Thames; nor when he coasted the Holland shore, he
knew not where he was. Sailing thus blindlings, with a blind guide along the
Marine, and North-East, and having out-stripped our Port 60. Miles; a Pilot
boorded us, and brought us to Tassill, in North-Holland: But by your leave, ere
we could return and recover Rotterdam, which should have been our
Landing-place, it cost us passengers above 200. English Crowns.

This I only particularize, that Merchants may see how too too often they put
their goods in hazard, with the like ignorant fellows, whereupon oftentimes
they find deservingly the fatal issue thereof. Being dismissed hence, and
surveying the goodly Cities of Altmore, A Holland Progress.
Harlem, and Amsterdam, in North-Holland, I came to Leyden, a dimensions Town,
wherein there is a learned Academy, and the year before, (as I was informed of
one Mr. Christian, a Printer there) there were 28000. which dyed of the Plague
in a small time, and notwithstanding I found the Town exceeding populous:
Thence carrocheering to Dunhag, that wide-winged Village, and Courtly Residence
of the united States, I embarked for the Cities, Delfe, Rotterdam, and Dort,
whence being mounted upon a Belgian flat-bottom'd Boat, I landed at
Guttenberg, and so I pedestrially advanced three Leagues to the Scots quarter
by the way of Terheyden, to see the cruel and despightfull defendants of
Breda, environed with the merciless fury of the States invincible Assailants.
And now I think it not amiss to discourse a little of the Town, and the
Antiquity thereof, before I come to the sequel Siege, and thus.

This Town of Breda, The Description of Breda.
is situate upon the fairest planure, and dryest ground that generally Brabant
includes, and environed with a sweet salubrious air, not usual in these
places; yea, and whose Champion-face over-topping the Champaine lands about,
with an admired regard, over-looketh, with a singular Metropolitan Majesty, all
the neighboring and circumjacent bounds; that me thought, when I first saw it,
it had an awful and predominant aspect, both for its admirable strength, and
pleasant situation.

Two Rivers, Mark and A.
There are two little Rivers, which run from the South, and through it, where
being within its body conjoined in one, they cast forth their divulgements a
Dutch Mile thence, in the insulting Sea of Terheyden: The chiefest of which two
Rivers, which then run by the Prince of Orange quarters, is called Marck: The
other that keept his course through Grave Williams Brigade and Scots quarter,
is called A. But when they kiss other, A, loses it self in Marck, and
resigneth its name to the Town, whence is derived Bred-A.

It has only three Ports, toward the South Ginicken Gate, toward the West,
Antwerp gate, and toward the East, North-East, the Busse-port: yet toward the
North, it has from the Castle, a private passage unto the house of pleasure,
which is a quarter of a Mile without the Town: But that Port and Bridge were
only ordained for serving the entery and issuing of his Highness of Orange,
and his followers.

As for the construction of the Town, it stands chiefly (not mainely)
Triangular, whence these three Ports are the three Angles of its stationat
seat, and its body Northward, lying half Ovall, disbendeth East and West,
two incorporate points.

And now to come to the Fortifications, The fortification of Breda.
it is strongly fortified, with high earthen Walls, and from them are builded
fifteen Bastions or Bulwarks, round about, each counter-banding one another,
side to side, and flank to flank, having a quadrangled distance between each
of them, which lays open for every several space the entire body of the
Towne-walls: whence each Bulwark running out with a sharp Promontoriate face,
out-braveth the adjoining Fields, with a defencible defiance.

The Walls and Bulwarks themselves are environed with a large Graffe, or Moate,
being of breadth in most parts, one hundredth threescore and seven foot, and in
depth eighteen; and they also hemb'd in upon the brink of the water-stank with
a strong double hedge of Thorns, that secure the Walls from any sudden
swimming or assault.

Now without this broad Ditch, at the forehead of every Bulwark, lies a large
and spacious Hornewarke, with two, and some with three heads, which are the
chiefest strength of the strong Town, and they also environed with deep
waters, the largeness of each of them cannot repugnably be defended without
five hundred men: And between them, and before each of them, lies a
Demi-lune, or half Moone-worke, and sometimes here and there in the full
bosom of the maine Moate, The works without the Town, and Moate.
there stand certain Redoubts, some Triangled, and others Quadrangled, besides
other circulary Monts, which are all compassed with unpassable Graffes: So
before the head of each Hornewarke, and without all these other strengths,
there are sharpe-pointed Counter-scarfes, figured like the Aquilean wings, and
fixed upon the maine dry ground, which is the utmost defense of all the other
works; and between each and all of them, there are little narrow and low
Timber-bridges to pass from one another, as necessity shall require; insomuch
that the works without, are the only strength of the Fortifications within.

For albeit the Bulwarks round about enjoy the Cannon, yet they, the inferior
works, are more strictly breasted with the pouldering Musket, Pike, and hand
Garnads: that certainly, according to the best judgments of all Invaders
there present, and Military Soldiers, it seemed a thing impossible to
over-master that impregnable place; if otherwise, the right owner thereof (as I
may say) had not been the chief Commander and Masterpiece of such desperate
and inexpugnable assaults, whose auspicuous fortunes hitherto, have rather
followed him, than fled him: for so fortunate have been all his attempts, that
he never lay down before a Town, and entrenched, that he took not in, and
so much the more absolutely victorious, howsoever fatal to disastruous
Soldiers.

And now to speak of the Towns inside; it has a most magnificke and curious
Cathedral Church, The high and magnificke Steeple of Breda.
high and spacious within, and far more glorious without; having a Steeple
arising from its maine body, to such an incredible hight, that scarcely I never
saw the higher. It mounteth squared, with four Coins, and some where
garnished with Galleries, and double Columns, till it come a great way above
the body of the Church; and then it gathers in smaller and smaller, till a
circular and spacious Globe over-shaddow all the inferior dependancies: so
from this Rotundo, arises the Steeple higher and higher again, till another
lesser Globe decore the intermingled distances between both; and so to the
highest top it grows more and more beautiful, till an exceeding high
Iron-crosse, and a gilded Cock mounted thereon cover all.

The Town is a Scots Mile in length, in the middle part whereof a stately and
spacious Marketplace, having extracted thence three principal Streets, The
Streets and Castle of Breda.
answerable to the three Ports, with four maine over-thwarting Streets,
crossing from Wall to Wall the breadth thereof; besides other narrow Contrades
and backe-lanes, two whereof are in good Request. There are two other Churches
in it, with two Hospitalls: But above all, (the great Church excepted) the
Castle is most formidable and defencible, being the ancient Mansion, and native
Birthplace of that Princely Progeny of Orange and Nassow. It is both a
Fortress and a glorious Palace, the inner Court whereof is curiously decored,
with a gorgeous and Royal Fabric, and it also containing a Princely Hall,
with diverse Rooms, and magnificke Chambers: having thereunto annexed without
the inmost Drawbridge and utmost Court, a pleasant, spacious, and conspicuous
Garden, full of sweet, savory, and fructiferous Trees, where on some are Summer
houses and banquetring rooms erected.

As for the lower plots, they are fully beautified with all kinds of Flowers
and Herbs, and looking like the old Chelfanian Paradise, brought me in
remembrance of these two incomparable Gardens of Pretolino, near to Florence,
and of Pau in Bierne, where Henry the fourth of France was borne. Lo, there is
briefly the Topographicall Description of Breda, and so I will proceed to its
Antiquity, present Siege, and fortunate Recovery.

Breda a Baronry, contains 17. Villages.
Breda, the noble and tryumphing Lady of all the circumjacent places about,
comprehends under it a Baronry or Jurisdiction of Land, wherein are contained
seventeene Villages, and as many Parish-Churches: Confining with these Towns,
of Steenberg, Roosendale, and Oosterhout; and stands distant from Bruxilles
eight leagues from Antwerp seven, from Bergenopzom five, from Turnehout four,
from Hoogstraten three, and from Gutrenberg two Leagues.

This Town and Baronry of Breda, with the lands of Leck, etc. were annexed to
the house of Nassow, Anno 1404. even then when Count Engelbright married Lady
Ieane, the Heretrix of the aforesaid Lands: And thereafter for many ages, it
was the Residence of the House of Nassow, till in the year 1567. Prince
William of Nassow, was enforced to abandon it, at that ominous and disastruous
coming of the Duke of Alba, The Vicissitude and victories of Breda.
into the Netherlands: And so it remained under the Spaniard, till in the year
1577, that the aforesaid Prince William did magnanimously recover the same, and
kept it Viriliously in possession, till in the year 1581. that one
Haultepenne, General of some Spanish forces, surprised it in the Night, June
25. who ransacked and burned the most part of the Town.

And so it again continued under the Dominion of Spain, till in the year
159. the fourth of March, that one Captain Heraugier, under the government and
command of his late excellence Count Maurice, by the means of a serviceable
Ship to the Castle, laden with Earth-fewell, under the which he, and some
fifty chosen Soldiers were nasconded, and so by which Stratagem it was in the
Night courageously recovered again from the Spaniard.

Then a few years thereafter, Anno 1599. February 17. one Antony Shets, the
Lord of Grobendonk, came accompanied with four Thousand Footmen, and eleven
Horse-troupes, and intended to have surprised it again, out of the hands of
Nassow, but he was merely frustrated of his design, and expulsed by the
Defendants, with the loss of two Hundred men.

Then lastly, and a long time thereafter, Anno 1624. August 27. came Ambrose,
Marquess of Spineola, General of the Spanish Army, and laid a Siege to the
said Town: Meanewhile that his Excellence Mauritius had another higher
Design, and thought to have surprised the Town and Castle of Antwerp, but his
intention came to no perfection, and all by the base and cowardly proceedings
of three Thousand Duchess, which had undertaken the execution of his Princely
purpose: Insomuch that Spineola in this lost time lying before Breda, was so
strongly entrenched, that it was impossible for Prince Maurice to brangle him,
or to enforce him to lift the Siege, till such time that the Defendants within,
were constrained, The famishing of Breda by Spineola.
after a long and extreme famine, of eleven Months time, to surrender it upon
good conditions to the aforesaid Spineola, Anno 1625. July the fifth; where ever
since, till this time, it has been a place of Brigandage, Breda turned a
place of Brigandage.
and miserable incursions, daily executed upon all the Country about belonging
to the States, by reason of their continual sallying out of the Town, some
parties on Horseback, some on foot, as well by Water as by Land, which shut up
all adjoining passages, and domineering alwhere at their pleasure, returned
ever laden with booties and spoils.

But now, to come to this present and last Adventure, his Highness the
auspicuous Prince of Orange, having ever a special regard to reacquist his
own Heritage, and so eminent a place of singular importance as this Town is;
and hearing that Marishall Chattilieon was fallen down in Artois with a great
Army, thought it a fit time to bestirre his best wits and endeavors for such a
serious attempt, to hold the Cardinal awake on both sides: An Army levied by
the Prince of Orange, and his politic proceeding.
And therefore caused Drums to be beaten through all his Garrisons and with
advice of the States, having levied an Army of twenty five thousands, Horse and
Foot, gave order for an infinite number of small ships, to be in readiness for
their transportation.

Well, they are embarked, and with them Artillery, Munition, Victuals, together
with a great number of Pipes and Barrells filled full of water, as if he had
been mindful for a Flandrian Journey, or where fresh water was to be wanted;
and all this was done, but to inveigle and deceive the Enemy.

Meanewhile, the ninth of July, being our Penult of June, they hoysed sail,
and advanced from the Keill, lying a League West from Dort, and so set forward
to Rammekin Castle in Zeland, where he was to make his Rendevouze, and to
gather more forces from Bergenopzom, and other adjacent Garrisons. Nevertheless
he was mightily crossed with a South-west wind for certain days, which seemed
to oppose and counter-check his designs.

In this time the Cardinal Infanta hearing and fearing that the Prince of
Orange would fall upon some part of West Flanders, caused with all possible
diligence, to levy and convocate al^ the forces of Horse and foot, A
preparation in Flanders to resist the Prince of Orange.
that conveniently he might spare, from affronting the French Army, that
encroached so near him.

And for this end there was a passage-bridge made at Antwerp, over the which
there marched that same day into Flanders fourteen Horse-companies, and the
following day Grave John of Nassow marched along with forty Horse companies
more, whereof he was General. Moreover, the Cavallery of Breda were called
hither, and with them five hundred Firelocks on foot, and certain ammunition,
which weakened the Town so much the more, besides many foote-forces from other
parts: Whereupon they, with all the rest, were distributed here and there, to
defend the places and Ports of greatest importance, along the Flandrian coast.

A speedy ad^^^tisment to ^^unt Casmir.
This being done, the Prince of Orange meanewhile sent a speedy intendment unto
Count Henry Casmir, General of the Freizes, (who then was gone up the Rhyne,
waiting for Advertisment) that he should fall down upon Breda, and environe
the Town with his forces, till he came to him: That thereby these who had
sorted sorth, to assist the Cardinal, should not return to strengthen the
Town any more.

Whereupon the said Casmir, who had under his Conduct fifty foote-companies,
and thirty eight troops of Cavallery, left the Rhyne, July, 17. and marching
with great celerity to the Town of Grave, the day following at Drunen, he was
seconded with the Duke of Bullion, who also had brought with him certain
forces of Horse and Foot.

Upon the one and twentieth of July, they set face for Breda, Breda beset about
with Casmirs forces.
marching with sound of Trumpet, and touking of Drums, the Cavallery with
great courage environed the Town that same day. Upon this their sudden
coming, they of the Town rang their Bells, to give an Alarm to the Burgers,
to save their Cattle that were feeding without; but they were prevented by the
Cavallery of Count Casmir, who seized upon the greater part. Meanewhile the
Prince of Orange, with his Army, departing from Rammekin Castle, July 20,
landed that day, and the next morning following his whole forces at Bergenopzom.

And it is to be observed for a notable Policy in the Prince, that whilst his
Army was on marching toward Breda, he caused two hundred of small ships, and
in them certain Companies of Firelocks, to sail along the Coast of Flanders,
with sound of Trumpets and Drums, that so affrighted all the Coast, that they
were continually in Arms for the space of twelve days. Meanewhile, July 23.
1637. the Prince arrived before Breda, and thanking his Cousin Count Casmir for
the good service he had done him in his absence, and dismissing the Duke of
Bullion his Nephew for Mastrick, they refreshed themselves, and the whole Army
that Night with necessary Recreation, and heart-swelling hopefulnesse.

The next morning, July 24. Stilo Gregorio, his Highness, The Arrival of the
Prince of Ora^ge before Breda.
with the State, or Council of War, began to divide their Horse-troupes in
certain Bands and Numbers, here and there, to keep Watch in the Country
round about, and without them: and the same day with an incredible promptitude
they set down their quarters, and begun their Entrenchments.

The four Quarters set down and out Trenches.
The special and chiefest quarter, which was for the Prince, was ordained to
lie down upon the South Side of the Town, at the Village of Ginnekin, close
by the River of Marck, and a short English mile from Breda* Upon the West part
whereof lay five French Regiments, and near them four English Regiments,
under the command of these four Colonells, Morgan, Gowreine, Herbert, and
Colpepper, besides two Regiments of Duchess.

And to the East, beyond the River, these Regiments of Count Maurice, the Count
of Solmes, and the Lord Bredrode; and lastly his Highness Guard, consisting of
three hundred chosen men, lay in the Village it self, near to the Prince.

The second quarter lay down at the Village of Hage, (before the West Port,
named Antwerp-gate, and a mile distant from it) under command of the Marishall
of the Field, Count William of Nassow, consisting of three Scots Regiments,
and they also under these three Colonells, the Lord Amon, Sir James Sandilands,
and Sir David Balfoure, to whose courtesies I was greatly obliged, and in a
singular respect to mine old acquaintance, Colonel Sandilands; besides the
kindnesses of most part of all these Captains and other Officers there, who
now and then did feast me with good cheer, and kindly draughts of French,
Rhenish, and Spanish liquors.

The rest of this Brigade, were five Dutch Regiments, scarce worthy to be set
down here, as hereafter shall appear in the own place.

The third quarter or Brigade, was placed at the Village of Teteringen, on the
North-East end of the Town, before the Busse-port, and an Irish mile distant,
under the Conduct of Count Henry Casmir of Nassow, with fifty foot Companies of
diverse Nations, Freizes, Switzers, Vallones, and Duchess.

The fourth and last quarter was appointed at Terheyden, North-west, under
command of Colonel Farick, consisting only of two thousand Footmen, and three
English miles from the Town; which made no approach, but only lay there
strongly entrenched, to guard the ships, for here stayed all the whole
provision of Victuals for the Army, that came from Holland.

Now their quarters being placed, I proceed to the Line, or works without,
that environed all these divided Brigades or quarters. The day following, July
25. there accoasted here from South Holland, about four Thousand Bowres, who
instantly with great toil, alacrity, and expedition, fell to work, with all
k^nds of pi^narding Instruments, and in nine days time accomplished the first
Line or Trench: (...) ^orkes and ^^doubt^.
And within five days thereafter, being ad^u^ed with Soldiers and
neighboring bowres, they finally perfected the second or double Trench,
invested here and there with Quadrat Redoubts, for the ^nstalment of Ordnance,
and their better assu^^nce. Truly, I may say, a work of great Admiration,
that the power of thrice as many men ^s they were, could have performed such a
task in so small a time, each one of these two Trenches being in compass full
Eighteen English Miles, and more.

By which means Breda stood in the midst of the Center, (...)
in regard of the Circuit; like a Maypole in a Market place, or like to a
Thief in a Common Hall condemned to dye; for indeed it had an awful Jurie
summoned to its confusion, whose proud contempt was every day feareful^^
examined. And yet notwithstanding, howso^ver busy they were for their own
safeguard, the Enemy made as great haste from Flanders, to intercept their
entrenchments; but their expedi^ion fell short of prevention.

Nevertheless Grave John backed with eight Thousand Horsemen, made a Bravado
upon the Princes Quarter, but at their first presentation, being saluted with
the Cannon, they suddenly retired into the Woods again. The sequel day, August
4. they fell down Westward, and invaded the Scots Quarter; but they found no
better success there, than the preceding day before; for besides the Musket,
the Cannon swept away diverse ranks of them, flying in the air like Phrygian
Eagles in a Randon; that they were enforced to seek shelterage under Hedges,
Thickets, and cloudy Groves. And that same night they retired, the Spaniards
within the Town, made three times fire upon the Church-Steeple, denoting to
the Cardinal without, their desired relief; so the fourth night thereafter
they did the like, but to no purpose.

Well, the Cardinal and Grave John stayed fifteen days without, The Cardinal
and Grave John attempted to relieve Breda.
and about the Trenches, peeping here and there, and showing themselves after
this manner. In all which time the Prince of Orange might make no approaches to
the Town; for having the half of his Army ever in Arms along the Trenches,
he had not only the Enemy without to resist, but also the Enemy within to
gaine-stand; which continually vexed the quarters about, with Cannon from the
walls, but to no great damage, save only some accidental blows, and they
very few. And yet the Spaniards within, with these long roaving shots spent a
great deal of Powder and Bullets, which in the end, the self same excess
became the chiefest cause of their overthrow and subjection.

At last the Cardinal being dismissed, and marching up the Country with his
Army of fifteen Thousand, Horse and Foot, he fell upon Fenlo, near to
Mastrick, where being no sooner arrived, but as soon one Brederode, a Bastard
borne Hollander, Governor thereof, sold and gave up the Town, for the value
of twenty Thousand pounds Starling, being suborned and enticed by the Jesuits
remaining there: So was it a well deserved Recompense for the Prince, that
should have admitted any Popish Priests to have stayed there, after he was
Master of the place.

This base treacherous Villain fled away thence to Culloine, with four other
inward Captains, his Consorts, where he and they run their heads, in the
midst of a Cloister to stay, which otherwise should have been detrenched for
unnatural Treason, being Flemings.

The rest of the Captains of fifteen Companies, came to clear themselves
before the Prince, but three of them fell short, and were left Delinquents, for
the Council of War to order their deservings.

The Cardinal took in Fenlo and Ruramont by treacherous ends.
Within two days thereafter, the Cardinal took in Rurarmont, but that was a
place of smaller importance than the other, which is newly again recovered.
and so will also shortly the other; for his Highness of Orange took them
both, in six days time. After this the Cardinal marching to Mastricke, The
Duke of Bulloine Governor of Mastrick.
(whereof the Duke of Bulloine was, and is Governor) and intending to lie
down before it, he was not able to beleaguer it, in regard of its strength,
and strong Garrison within, and of his small Army without. Whereupon he made
great haste for Artois, to incorporate his forces, with another Army of his
there, that were daily at Pell mell with the French, where now leaving them to
their doubtful events, I return to Breda.

The Prince this while being soundly settled, and strongly fortified with double
Trenches, besides many other Works and Redoubts, both within and without the
Line, then begun he to stop the current of the River Mark, Two Rivers drawn
from their courses.
that it should not run to the Town; and withdrew its natural course, along
the backe-side of his own Trenches, with maine force and power, of marvailous
pains and workmanship, which run along East and North-Eastward, to Casmirs
quarters, and so to the Sea of Gutrenberg: So likewise was the River of A,
which run by the Scots quarter at Hage, withdrawn from the Town, and
carried along in both the Ditches of the double Trenches, North, and
North-westward to the Sea of Terheyden; so that thereby it was impossible for
the power of man to raise him, or to disquiet his Army.

And yet more, on the North side of the Town, at the house of pleasure, (being
a place of Recreation for the House of Nassow) by which the Sea flowed up in
Mark, to Bredaes Port, he caused to damme it up, The flowing Tide re-enforced
back to the Sea.
and stop the flowing thereof, with huge toil and charges, and dashed back
again, in despite of the Sea, its own disgorgements; and secured so the
North parts of the Town, that there was neither issuing from it, nor entering
to it.

Being thus wonderfully fortified, he sent away the fourth part of his Army,
Horse and Foot, to strengthen the Garrisons of other frontier Towns, because
the Enemy was roaving abroad. And likewise he caused to make Bridges over Mark
at Terheyden, and Ginnekin, with three Bridges over A, and its branches,
whereby the whole circuit of the Trenches within was made passable. Now
between every quarter about the Line, The ordinary posts about the Trenches.
there were eight posts, or divisions of Companies, set upon guard in Quadrons,
and between these intermingled spaces, there were Centinells fixed, each one
within speech of another; where their continuance of all, was ordinarily twenty
four hours, before their renewing relief came; I mean from their quarters.

All these things exactly done, and provided, then his Highness begun to make
his Approaches; where near to a Water-mill, erecting a Half Moon for
preservation of Centinells, and workmen, that were to advance other works
daily nearer and nearer the Town; and three Troops of Horses placed there for
a safeguard. There sallyed out of the Enemy, a little after Midnight, Diverse
Conflicts.
above twelve hundred men, where making an assault upon the Half Moon, being
six for one, yet by a fresh supply which came forthwith from the quarter, they
were courageously repulsed, and chased to the Town, leaving 28. killed behind
them, and thrice as many wounded they took with them.

But now understand me better; there were diverse other sallies made every day
out of Town, as well in the other quarters as here for 3. weeks space, till
their Batteries were erected, and as many repulses given them back again with
some killed, some wounded, and some taken prisoners on both sides.

But to shun prolixity, I think it best to disclaim their Diurnall and
Noctuall proceedings, The Approaches begun.
which as they were but fatal and disastruous Accidents, so shall the relation
of such crooked fortunes be as unsavory, and unpleasant to the Judicious
Reader, whose Curiosity would rather rest on the maine and most selected
points, than in perusing the misery of miserable effects. The next strenuous
and more forcible advancement, was a Battery reared half way to the Town, and
planted with six half Cannons; and to the Eastward of it, diverse Redoubts
shadowed with Pikes and Muskets, then began they to make sport to the Enemy.
And shortly thereafter, there were two other Batteries nearer and nearer
erected, enstalled with Cannon and Cannoniers, then played they thick day and
night, bellowing Martial Music, against that great and high earthen Bulwark
at Ginnekin Port. Upon which the Spaniard had 9. piece of Ordnance, and a whole
Cannon enstalled, besides other Pieces planted on neighboring Bulwarks.

Grievous and hot was the service on both sides, and sometimes their aims so
just, that they burst one another Cannon, Thundering Cannons and roaring
Muskets.
for almost they never rested; insomuch that the Crystal Air, and azure
skies were rent asunder, and darkened with the excrementall smoke of their
combustible pains; yea, and the people and Country Villages abroad and about,
were deafned and over-thundred with their reverberating Echoes; and lastly,
their tremenduous noise, and re-enforced rebounding sounds made the Tents,
Howts, and Sutlars shops to quake, and the ground to shake and tremble, that me
thought the ordinary Earthquake of Puteoli had been transported hither to the
Princes quarter, and yet it was near an English mile from the inmost Mont and
most dreadful Battery.

At last, within 17. days, the Spaniards Cannons were dismounted, and they
quite beaten off the Bulwark, and constrained to settle their Ordnance on the
lower Flanks of counterbanding Bastions, and could shoot no more at Randon;
then every man went safe and freely about the Fields and quarter.

But now leaving these Batteries, to batter down the Towne-houses, Ports, and
mouldring Walls, The Infantry begin their works.
I come to the Military proceedings of the Infantery, and their Approaches:
forthwith and at this instant, began they their encroaching works and
Trenches, making two Divisions: the French on the right hand, and the English
on the left; and thus in short time they accoasted the Enemies Countersearfe,
and with much ado beat them from it, to the Hornewarke within: where, and at
which time there were cruel Conflicts for certain days and nights, and
valor exposed to the uttermost of worth.

Well, at last the French and English, breasting the Hornewarke, and striving
who should first invelope it, their contention fell equal to either, for both
their Busse-bridges were alike soon over the circulating Moate. Here was
great mortality betwixt either Factions, within and without; for the Muskets
played continually as thick on others faces, as the Winter-hayle, which whiten
the ground. Both Nations attempted the Hornewarke in the evening, but were
beaten back again to their great disadvantage; notwithstanding, about three a
Clock in the Morning, The English courageously took in the Enemies Hornewarke.
the magnanimous English, made another brave and fortunate assault, cutting off
circumspectly the Sentinels, broke in upon the Enemy, putting sundry to the
Sword, some to summersing swimming, and took prisoners a Spanish Captain,
with his Alfiero, and twenty five Soldiers alive, which were not redeemed till
the Town was surrendered, being vanquished pledges, for blazing abroad the
meritorious fame of the English attempt.

There, and at this time was Captain Crofis killed, and that Honorable
Gentleman Colonel Gowreine, shot in the leg with a most dangerous and
pitiful hurt, to the great lamentation of many noble hearts: Besides the
death and deadly wounds of many commanded Gallants, and uncommanded Volunteers;
amongst whom was one Peter Ape-slee, shot through his cheek and mouth, taking
away two of his fore-teeth, which indeed was a sharp caveat to temper a jeering
mouth.

The Hornewarke being thus regained by the singular valor of the English; then
with much difficulty the two distinctive Nations fell to, and turned over the
inner-side of it defencible for themselves, with a number of turnings and
windings deeply sought in the ground: Intricated Trenches and wonderful works.
that notwithstanding they were at the Moate-side, and under the walls (as it
were) of the Town, yet these Trenches secured them sightlesse from their foes,
with a safe shelterage; that when I went through them afterward, they in a
manner resembled to me, that intricate Laborynth of Dedalus, cut out on the
face of that Cretan Ida, or the Ciento Camarelle of Baia: Then upon the
Graffe-side, and point for point against the Enemy, in the two co-operative
Divisions, there were four other Batteries erected, to defend the advancement
of the Galleries, that were to surprise and undermine the Bulwark; which did
so danton the desperate Defendants, that they were enforced in the day time to
draw in their Cannons, and to labor th^^ only in the night; for upon the
Princes seven Batteries, first and last, there were mounted Twenty eight half
Cannons, and with them twice as many Cannoniers.

Great mortality amongst the French.
Neither was the French at this time, and other times too, without great loss
of Captains, and other Commanders, besides abundance of common Soldiers, both
slain and wounded, of whom in Armies there is none, or very small reckoning
made, save only of Officers, of whom the Sergeant is meanest.

The chiefest of the French that was killed at this Hornewarke, was one
Monsieur du Charnacie, Colonel, and Leaguer Ambassador for the French King,
who had his head shot off from the shoulders, with the thundering messenger of a
Cannon Bullet, and thereafter the rest of his dead body was sent to be interred
in France.

Now between the English and French works there was a Traverse made, and
topped with a blind of bushes, that if, and when need required, they might the
more facily relieve one another: And then next of all, they took in certain
Half Moons and Monts, whereby the Enemy on this quarter was absolutely
immured within the Town. The English and French Galleries begun.
Whereupon the two Nations begun to found their Galleries, which were a
pret-way distantone from another about twice twelve score paces, either
contending who first should pass the Towne-Moate, which was both large 167.
and deep 18. foot: where now I leave them for a while, jealous of other
fastidious Actions, and will fall down a League Westward to Grave Williams
Brigade, or Scots quarter, which was the place of my chiefest abode.

Here, (as in the Princes quarter) at the beginning of their Approaches, with
three Redoubts and two Batteries, the Enemy did diverse times sally forth upon
them, but they were ever viriliously repulsed back to their own repugnable
limits, with Martial Affronts, and loosing of lives.

But when the utmost of the Scots Trenches and works, The Scots quarter, and
their great services.
encroached within push of Pike to the Enemies Hornewarke; at which time
Colonel Sandilands was shot through the left Arm, from the wreist almost to
his elbow, whereof (praised be God) he is now happily convalesced: then (I say)
grim Fatality overspred these journall and Nocturnall Combattants, of both
Factions, with the black Cymmerian wings of preposterous Death: for as
Empidocles threw himself in the Aetnean fires to be reputed for a god: so
these rash and temerarious Soldiers (of whom my Countrymen were only
chiefest) did desperately cast themselves before the merciless mouths of the
Cannon and Musket, thinking thereby to gain a Bellonean Reputation. Where
otherwise they, or he, being fallen, and dead, (I mean the Doltish Duchess)
his best Commerad would scarcely bring him off, and bury him, unless his back
had been covered with rough clothes.

Then was his Corpse laid on a Wagon, and brought to the Quarter, The death and
burial of Soldiers done without sorrow.
where straight on the back side of the Trenches, his naked body was cast in a
sandy hole, without Chest or Winding-sheete, nay, without any sorrow for the
loss of his friend, which I daily beheld, and much more than I here engrosse,
to my great loathing and humane grief: for as doubling waves devour one
another, till they break upon the bellowing shore: so the sequel days
Mortality amongst them, swallowed up the memory of the preceding days
misfortune, in the ungrateful darkness of Oblivion. Nay, Death grew so
obvious to everv eye, as if Men had been Mice, and Accidents, had been Cats
to devour them; so that Man's Catastrophe, or Epilogue came to this Epitaphium,
Nunc absit, and mortuus est. Yea, and also the like Destinies, as well as here,
were incident to the other Quarters about, for their quotidian Services and
Attempts were ever as dangerous, as their Approaches insulted upon the
Resisters liberty and credit; neither were these disasters more influent to the
Assailants, as fatal, and acerbiously occurrent to the Defendants.

But now to be punctual; upon the second of September, The Scots assail the
Enemies Hornewarke.
there came Direction from his Highness to Crave William, that the Scots the
day following should storm the Hornewarke, and that the Duchess should second
them. To behold this Assault, came hither the Prince Elector Palatine,
accompanied with two young German Dukes, Lantsberg and Swavsbridge etc. the
Lord Viscount Grandeson, the Lord Craven, and certain other English Gallants,
of singular Note. Now with much difficulty had the Scots made a Busse-bridge
over the Moate of the Hornewarke, where fastening a Mine within the bosom of an
earthen Rampire for passage sake, which being blown, it rebounded back on
themselves, (being the Enginiers fault) yet without any damage, save only a
part of the Bridge broken down.

Then was Lieutenant Gladstanes commanded by the General to fall on, and with
him diverse Officers, and some choice Companies of selected Soldiers, which
indeed they both bravely and manfully accomplished: And with them fell on a
certain number of uncommanded Volunteers, all Scotsmen. The Conflict for an
hours space, was exceeding doubtful and dangerous, for the Muskets and
Firelocks never ceased, neither was the Sword and Pike short of the manliest
usage, courageous valor could afford magnanimous Gallants.

The Enemy repulsed by the Scots.
At last the Enemy was beaten out of the body of the Hornewarke, with above
threescore of them left there killed, and retired to a cross Demilune, erected
within the inmost corner of this work: from which place they damnably threw
over Hand-garnads, Bullets of three pounds weight, and being empty within, they
are filled with Powder, Pitch, and Sulphur; where falling on the ground, and
breaking, spoiled a number of our men.

Then came certain Companies of Dutch Firelocks to second them, and gave once
fire; but by your leave, like cowardly beasts, and greedy slaves as they are,
they left their service, and fell a spoiling of the dead bodies which the Scots
had slain.

A great death of Scotsmen, and shameful flight of the Duchess.
In the end the buttery Duchess perceiving fresh supply coming out of the
Town, to aid their almost vanquished consorts, the Burgondions, they
shamefully fled, leaving with the incensed and exasperate Enemies the Scots at
pell mell: in which place there were Thirty seven of them left dead, and Forty
four wounded, who with the rest were enforced to retire again to their own
Trenches, with the general Applause of dear bought praise and commendation.
In which Retreat Sergeant Lindsey was drowned in the Moate, whose body could
never be found; notwithstanding we supposed he had been taken prisoner, but
the Enemy the next day, avouched the contrary, to the great grief of all his
fellow soldiers, and to me much more; for I lay in his straw-built Cabine, and
was familiar with him, as with a sociall friend.

The special of which fatal Volunteers, Scots gallants and Volunteers killed.
was Lieutenant Colonel Henderson, whose Father, Sir Robert Henderson
Colonel, and lately killed at Bergen^pzom, was a son of that Venerable and
Martial Race of Fordell: And this young Accadent, as he was bred of a
valorous Father, so he fought as valiantly as ever could a noble heart
perform a manly part, and dyed in the bed of Honor.

Secondly, that Gallant and ever lamented Gentleman Captain Williamson, who
killed three men with his own hands, and the fourth killed him: The third was
Ancient Hammilton, Perdevans son beside Lithgow, who lately eight days
before in another Conflict, had so courageously behaved himself, that he slew
two Vallounes, and took captive the Neapolitan Cantelmo, carrying him away
perforce, and with strong hand from amongst the midst of his enemies, to his
eternal fame; and now, and at this time, he killed four Burgondions before
he fell; whom then the Enemy knew well, because of his red clothes, where in a
base and inhumane revenge, they mangled, cut, and carved his head, face, and
dead body, that scarcely the next day, when his Corpse was sent over the Moate,
could he well be known. The rest were these Sergeants, Lindsay, Inglis, and
Corbet, with diverse more young Gentlemen, of whom one Moncreeffe, a delicate
Stripling, was much lamented.

Commanded Soldiers and their cruel conflict.
Of the hurt Volunteers, was Sir Philip Balfoure one, who with Sword and Pike
manfully behaved his weilding hands, and being shot in the left arm, came
fairly off with deserved reputation: Where, and there also, Ancient Drummond
had his leg shot from him, which although it be the badge of a Soldier, yet
it has spoiled the comely feature of a gallant Personage.

Now of the commanded Soldiers, there was principally slain Lieutenant
Gladstanes, an aged man, whose death his own hands revenged, upon the lives of
five Burgondions before he fell dead, whose valor the very Enemy the next day
mightily applauded. So with him was killed Ancient Fargeson, with certain
others, whose names I suspend to relate. The next morning there was a parley
beaten on either side, A parley beaten for burying the dead.
that both foes might take away the dead, and bury them. All the dead Scots
were spoiled by the Enemy, save only Captain Williamson, whose body one David
Anderson manfully brought off, to his great credit, and thereupon present
preferment, and saved thereby his clothes, and forty pieces of Gold that were
in his pockets. The rest were sent over the Graffe in Boats stark naked, and
loathsome to behold.

The Corpse of Lieutenant Colonel Henderson was sent to Dunhag, and there
buried in the great Church beside his Father, and the bodies of Williamson,
Gladestanes, and valiant Hammilton, were sent three Leagues off, to Gutrenberg,
and there interred in a Church. The rest were buried at the Hage, and near the
Scots Quarter, with hollow Drums, and volley shots, and Soldiers trayling
Pikes before them, the miserable mourning of Mars.

The next morning after this, the Scots made another Sally upon the Hornwarke,
The Scots took in the Enemies Hornewarke.
and then the Burgondions fled, leaving behind them some Barrels of Beer, a
number of Firelocks, and diverse Bedsteads. Well, this dear bought Hornwarke
was instantly turned over, and made defencive for the Victors use; and then
close by the Moate side there were two new Batteries made up, which forthwith
dismounting the Enemies Cannon, constrained the Spaniard to sink them lower in
the Walls, and so they taught them (as the Proverb is) to eat their meat in
order; for upon these four Batteries here, there were mounted 14. half
Cannons, with twenty three Cannoniers. Then that same night they begun their
Gallery, whereof one James Lecky was chief Workmaster, who was to have for
perfecting the same, Thirty six thousand Gilders.

The advancement of the Scots Gallery.
Now to speak a little of a Gallery, and how it is advanced, is thus: They
first begin, and set some eight couple of Posts in the dry land fast founded,
and then they go on, and advance others in the watery Moate, by turns and
times, more and more, every post or couple being set two foot from another: As
they are thus fast above and under, so also are they flanked with boords,
bundels of boughs and branches, and earth on both sides, and above, to save
the workmen from Muskets; for altogether these flankings are not Cannon proof:
And so as they proceed in the Graffe, What a Gallery is.
they cast in bundels of branches, and arms of Trees, and bushes, and upon
them they heap on sand and earth, to fill their watery and plunging way, and
so thereby to make a dry foundation, whereon to fix their Posts. Within it is
the height of a man, and so wide, that four may march side to side into it. In
the further end, next the Towne-wall, as they wrought forward, the adventerous
laborers had a blind before them, composed of boughs and earth, and that
safeguard is sometimes Cannon proof.

And notwithstanding there were every other day and night some killed, some
wanting legs and arms, and some wounded; yea, and the Cannon would break
down at diverse times sundry of their posts, which were aye speedily renewed
again: But what offended the Workmen here most, Morters or Pot-pieces.
as also in the other Galleries, were these Morters, or Pot-pieces, three
quarters of a Yard long, but exceeding large and wide; which will shoot
Granadaes of a hundred pound weight, and more; for it is empty within, which
being filled with cut iron, poulder, Pitch, and Sulphur, and so put in the
Mortar; the Cannonier takes his height and aim, (for it is shot off with the
mouth half upward) by Art, Compass, and Geometry, that he will lay the
Granada far and near as he pleases: for where it falls, it breaks in
pieces, spoiling houses, men, timber-workes, and whatsover it rancounters
withal.

And here by the way, I cannot forget a sorrowful sport: one Night four
fellows working on the French Gallerie, Damnable Granadaes.
and two of them killed with the Musket; there fell a Granada in midst of the
Gallery, to the which the other two ran to catch it, taking it for a
Cannon-bullet* but as they begun to gripe it, it burst in pieces, and blew them
both in the Air, rent and torn asunder to nothing. Neither are these
Pot-pieces frequently shot off, but now and then, and at certain serious
times, and that because of the great expenses they make; for every charge of
any of them, will cost above fourscore and ten Gilders, so large are their
bellies, and divelish wide their mouths.

And now I remember, when the Scots Gallery was half over the Moate, and
Lieutenant Colonel Couts standing there, giving directions to Soldiers, there
was a Burgondion from a wooden Windmill, on the Towne-wall, shot him through
the thigh, and burst the bone in pieces, by the which this aged and brave
Commander was left there for death; yet at my departure there was great hope of
his recovery.

Whereupon the next day, Colonel Balfoure caused four half Cannons to be
stalled against the Winde-mill, A winde-mill broke in pieces.
where down it came with a rattle, and bruised the bones of some Burgondions,
till their guts groaned again. So likewise about this time one Captain Wachub
sickned in the quarter, Captain Wachubs death*
and dyed the third day thereafter, which was thought to have been the Plague;
for the Pestilence was in all the quarters, and almost in every Regiment; yet
with no force, nor infectious mortality, by reason of the Soldiers going
abroad day and night to the Trenches, where lying in their clothes, and on the
cold ground, infringed the contagion.

Now as concerning their profession, being in a Leaguer, every Regiment has a
Preacher, and on the Sabbath day under the Colonells Tent a Sermon, The
profession of Soldiers Religion.
where few Auditors frequent, unless it be a poor handful of some well
disposed persons. And every day in the Afternoon, according to their turns,
when these Companies came up under their colors, that were to go for the
Trenches and Galleries, then the Predicators of each Regiment* made an earnest
prayer, exhorting their Soldiers to go on courageously, and assuredly
confident of the pardon of their sins in Christ's blood; and that they should
carry themselves manfully in fighting Gods Battle, for the Gospells liberty;
which indeed some of them too insolently and desperately performed: for
Religion now, in most parts of the whole Universe, is turned to policy,
wherewith this Belgican State is only and absolutely invested. And I had
almost forgot a divellish weapon which both parties made use of, at their
breasting of Trenches, which Soldiers cognominate, an iron Flaile, and is
composed of two pieces, the shortest whereof, having a round head, (not much
unlike to a Turkish Balucco) is set full of deep steeled pikes, and they so
sharp and deadly, that there is no resistance nor fence for their blows, each
Soldier threshing death on others fatal bodies. Iron Flailes threshing death.
Nay, I was astonished to behold such hellish Instruments, and my heart wished
that the Inventers of them had the same reward, that Phalaris gave to Perillus,
who tortured him in the brazen Bull, which he invented for the destruction of
others.

And alas, what a poor thing is it, to see so many Gentlemen, and gallant
youths of all kinds, to hazard their lives for so small a recompense, as five
pence half penny a day, five Stivers, having their food and apparel to take
out of it, besides their hard lying, and turmoyling services: which common
calamities and profound extreme miseries, I would to God most of our
younglings at home knew, then would they be careful to prevent these
languishing adversities, The misery of a Soldiers life.
before they find the succourlesse smart thereof: for by your leave, if a
Soldiers industry be not quickened and animated with bountiful rewards, he
has less will to perform any part of Martial service, than a dead coarse
has power to arise out of the grave: for what can be more precious to man than
his blood? being the fountain and Nurse of his vital spirits, and the ground
of his bodily substance; which no free nor ingenious nature will loose for
nothing.

And whosoever shall argument or discourse upon found reason, and infallible
experience, may easily prove and perceive, that those Commanders have ever best
prospered, which have most liberally maintained, and had in singular regard
Military Arts and Soldiers: Otherwise the honorable mind would account it a
great deal better, to have Death without Life, than Life without Reward; yea,
and the noble Commander desiring rather to want, than to suffer true Worth
unrecompensed. I could instance here many Examples of Ingratitude in great
persons, that by their wretchedness to Soldiers, have first lost themselves,
and then their Kingdoms and Principalities; but I desist, only lamenting what
I saw here, that even the chiefest Commanders, (Fatality is so ordinary to
Military proceedings) so they obtain their ambitious ends, regarded no more
the losing of men's lives, than the death of dogs.

But now I come to the third Quarter, settled on the Towns North side, the
Freizes, under command of Count Casmir their General: Truly they had the
most difficult passage to make their Approaches, The Freizes quarter and their
adventures.
than any of the other two besides; for they had a long and fastidious way of
marish water, to march along a Dike blinded with bushes, to their works before
the Castle: Yet they were still advancing their encroachments to affront the
Enemies Hornewarke, which they thrice invaded, and were still repulsed, with a
great loss of many of their best Officers and Soldiers. And howsoever they
came short of the policies and expedition of the other two Quarters, yet in the
end, being ashamed of their postponed purposes, they desperately, on Satturday
at midday, September 29. Stilo Gregorio set upon the Enemies Hornewarke, and
made exceeding good fire for an hours space, and beat their Opposers into the
Town, with great mortality on both sides, and so turned over the work
defencible for themselves: Whereupon they began their Gallery, but to no
purpose, the other three being closing with the Wales and theirs in twenty
days time could not have been perfected; where now I leave them,
(nevertheless) well worthy of a good remembrance: their Batteries were only
four, and planted with twelve half Cannons.

But now to return unto his Highness quarter, where I had my last and
journall Residence, till the bowels of Breda, gave my long expecta^ion a
desired Albergamento; English and French Galleries done.
I found shortly thereafter, the English and French galleries fully done, and
fastened to the Root of the promontoriat Bastion, where there and then each
Nation begun to work their Mines. In this performance, the French out-stripped
the English, and had advanced their insinuating projects two pikes length in
the Walls, besides diverse dividuat chambers in the Work before the other; but
yet the English gallerie was thicker of posts, and stronger builded than the
French: For indeed the English had bin mightily hindered in advancing their
gallery, by the Enemies Cannon, which often ramversed diverse of their posts;
and as they were as speedily renewed again, with the loss of many poor
lives; so these workmen adventured to advance the gallery here, and in the
other two galleries also, for extraordinary wages, some ten, some twenty
dollors in a night: And notwithstanding, most of these desperate laborers,
made a dolorous end, and never enjoyed them, for the Muskets without and
firelocks within, day nor night, were never at rest; besides skirmishes and
ambushes still from either party exploited at all advantages. Truly, I speak
it credibly, the French nation did never so good service, with such promptitude
and dexterity, and so happy a success, as here before Breda; neither did they
ever gain the like commendation since their first coming here, to serve under
the States, as the whole Army, not themselves did testify.

Well, upon the first of October, the Prince rode down, with two followers, to
the galleries, (as he most adventrously did every day) to pry into the Mines,
The mines begun in the Towne-walls.
for he himself is an excellent Engenier: during his abode there, the Cannon
and the Musket played most grievously upon the Towne-houses and Walls, in so
much that the Enemy could hardly soot himself for any shot at all. But when
night came, and the Spaniards re-setling their Cannons in the hollow flanks of
their Bulwarks, then fell both sides to work, and all the Quarters about the
Town, with thundering and roaring sounds, as if Heaven and Earth had met
together, yea, and with a greater clamor then the Vlyssen wooden Horse made to
fatal Troy. For the Princes Cannon went ever all the night till the morning as
thick off, as the nimble fingers of a youngling, Great thundering of Cannon and
Musket.
play upon the Virginals; but their Musical Notes were different, the one
delicious, and the other dreadful. Whereupon, and because the strength of the
Enemy grew defective, their forces impaired by slaughter, and their Ammunition
altogether deficient, (which was well known to the Prince, and the whole Army
a Fort-night before this their re-enforced submission) then beat they their
Drums about the walls, The Enemy beats a parley to render the Town.
for a general parley to all the Quarters, about seven a Clock on Tuesday
morning, October 6. Stilo Italico, and so the Cannon ceased on both sides, and
there was no more shooting, invasion, nor resistance.

Upon which there sorted an Officer from the Governor at Ginnekin Port, and
well mounted on Horseback, who rode Post up to his Highness, rancountering me
as I ran down to the Trenches. The Commission of the Governor being delivered
to the Prince, and his flexibility considered, there were Hostages sent from
both sides, for the assurance of fidelity to other; three aged Colonells from
the Prince, and six Burgers from the Town.

Well, in the Afternoon there came from the Town five sufficient men of
quality, and a Cathedral Priest, clothed in a white Robe, and a white Hat,
signifying Peace; (for he was no Monk, unless he had been Lucifer in a
Monks habit, nor none of the like order in the Town) These six came (I say)
to capitulate with the Prince, and Council of War, upon pretended Articles.
They moved the Prince for the Freedom of a Church to celebrate the Mass into,
for the staying of some of their Clergy there, and some other libertinous
demands; but they were all refused with this solid and general Answer: To wit,
that these Conditions which Spineola 13. years before, Anno 1625. July 5. gave
to Colonel Morgan, who was constrained by famine, after 11. Months siege to
surrender it; the self same conditions should they receive, and no more, and
so it was concluded under the shadow of Eighteen Articles, the chiefest
whereof were these: The Articles and Conditions made to the Spaniards.
First, that they should have three days time to stay in the Town, to prepare
and accommodate themselves, and what they had for Transportation. Secondly,
that the Prince should furnish them with four hundred Wagons, to carry away
their loggage, baggage, Women, Children, Priests, and lame men for the Town of
Machlein. Thirdly, that they should march out of Town with flying Colors,
kindled Matches, shouldred Muskets, and Bullets in their mouths. Fourthly,
that they should take with them four half Cannons, and two Pot-pieces; but
the courteous Prince gave them two more, which made six Cartouses, and two
Morters. Fifthly, that none should search nor enquire for what they carried, nor
no recapitulation to be made of booties and blood past, and that there should
go a Convoy of Horsemen with them half way to Machlein. Sixthly, that all the
Town Burgers, which were Papists, should have two years time to reside there,
for disposing of their houses, lands, or goods, during the which space, they
were to enjoy the profits of whatsoever they had, and then to depart, under the
pain of severe punishment, and confiscation of their estate. Seventhly, that
the two Nunneries there, should have liberty to keep within doors enduring
life; but no Priest to be allowed them for Masses, nor to stay within the
Town, under the pain of Death. Eighthly, that those Soldiers which were
fallen sick, lame, or wounded, lying in the Hospital for health, should
remain there in safety till their convalescment, and then to have a safe
convoy, The Wagons sent to transport the enemy.
sent with them half way to Machlein. Ninthly, that there should two
sufficient Pledges stay in Breda, until such time, that the Spaniards sent
back the aforesaid Wagons and Bowres without any damage or offense.

Leaving as unnecessary the lesser Articles to be rehearsed: Upon Saturday,
October 10. the Wagons being all in readiness, and sent in unto them, and
well provided with good Horses, they begun to take their journey, about 11. a
clock in the forenoone, but very slowly, which wearied our expectation: First
then, there marched forth 3. several and distant divisions of Muskets,
Firelocks, and Pikes, and the fourth division came last of all with the
Governor, and he also in a Coach, carrying with them fifty one Colors, the
half of which wanted Companies, being cut off at the siege, so that one
Ancient sometimes carried three Colors,

Between the first three, and last division, came all the Wagons along, one
drayning after another, with their Household stuff, (o miserable furniture)
Women, Children, and wounded people, with six half Cannon, and two pot pieces.

Next unto the Bussport, at their forth coming, and without two draw Bridges
and an empty Court du guard, stood the Prince his own Guard, 300. Foot, and a
troop of Horses, all armed, with Corslets, and head-peices as clear as
silver, The Enemies marching out of Breda.
or shining like to Eurileus Murreon in the Cinthian night; by and along whose
faces they marched through Count Casmirs Brigade, for they were in arms,
because they passed through their quarter, and in one part their Trenches were
cast down for their departure.

But what shall I say of the great concurrence, and innumerable numbers of
people which flocked hither, of all sorts under the States, Merchants, Burgers,
and Bowres, maids, and wives. that came, to see this Hispanicall farewell;
nay, certainly there were above three hundred thousands, young and old: for
such a sight at once, and on the fair Fields, was never seen assembled
together, (as I may say) since Tamberlanes days; that in my conceit it was a
rarer thing to behold the infinite multitude here convocated, than either to
stand gazing upon the vanquished Viadants, or to admire the alacrious faces of
the triumphing Victors.

Then before the last division of the Spaniards, and behind the Wagons, Romish
Priests mounted on Carro^hes.
marched forth some Romish Religious Orders, namely, 16. Dominican Friars, and
eight Augustines, all in black and white habits. Next to them came some
straggling Cordeleirs, amounting to ten, whom the Italians denominate
Chiogolanti, because they wear wooden shoes: Then after them issued out five
or six staggering Seminary Priests, Some drunken Priests.
who partly for sorrow to leave the Town and friends, and partly to expel
their visible causes of grief, and invisible melancholy, they were so
overwhelmed in the plunging profundity of Bachaniall streams, that one tumbled
down here, and another fell there, whereby they became a laughter to all the
Army, and a miserable mockery to scornful Spectators: Now amongst the
Wagon there were here and there certain straggling Firelocks marching
along, and behind their heels, that predominant and imperious sect of the
Tiatinean Jesuits, being fourteen in number, and as well mounted on Carroshes
of four wheels, as if they had been African Apes, riding on Elephants of
four legs.

The last division of the four was the strongest of all, Capushin Friars
marching forth before the Governor.
and best accommaded; where behind them and before the Governor, marched seven
couple of Capushin Friars, the first of which paires carried a high wooden
Cross, with a Ladder, a Reed, a hanging Sponge, and a Lance fastened to it,
with other dependancies. The aged Governor being postremest, was mounted in a
Coach, and overloaden with all the signs of a dejected countenance, marched
away after the rest, (and I after him) to the utmost Trench or Line. Where the
Prince of Orange stayed for his coming, accompanied with these three Princely
brothers, his grand Nephews, Prince Charles, Prince Robert, and Prince Maurice
of the Palatine, with all the other Dukes, Counts there present, and Generals
of the Army.

The Governor approaching his Highness, dismissed the Coach, and mounting on
Horseback, saluted his Conqueror, with an exceeding low courtesy, and
wringing complements: The Prince of Orange conferres with the Governor in his
journey.
The benign Prince did fully the like to him; where after half an hours
conference, and blandements blown on others mouths, the weeping Governor
took a final farewell of his victorious Adversary.

The number of these four Divisions, which marched away in Arms, were thought
to be (besides four hundred straggling Firelocks^) about fifteen hundred
Soldiers, all lusty men, and in good Equipage, whose Martial countenances
seemed rather to have overcome these who overcame them, than to have been
vanquished by their valor, and inexpugnable fortunes; whose brave service and
desperate defense, for approved worth and deserved fame, may justly claim the
Constantinopolitan Hippodrome, to engrave thereon their courageous
Atchievments, which in ten weeks and five days time they worthily performed.
And truly I may say, although I have small reason for it, (when I remember
these miseries I sustained in Malaga) that never Soldiers did more, nor could
do better. Well, and thrice well, and howsoever they fought well, they are now
well gone; and straight at the last of their backs, when they left the Town,
entered in the Princes Guard, and twelve other Companies, to keep the Burgers
unwronged from insidiary Soldiers, till a constant Garrison was settled.

At their entering the Gate, and I with them, his Highness Trumpetters, from
above in a Bulwark, founded three times, the most joyful Victoria, and the
sweetest melodious Triumph, that ever I heard in all my life, wheresoever I
have been. Now for contentment I stayed five nights in Breda, The Authors
abode in Breda.
as glad to have obtained the freedom, which I had so dearly bought before,
in lying seven weeks and four nights in wet straw Howtes, on cold straw-beds,
and continually in my clothes, which was a Noctuall Limbus to try my patience,
as the Leaguer was a diurnall Purgatory for the purging of money out of my
purse.

But now, not to be oblivious, I recall, that at the beginning and about the
middle time of the siege, there remained here in the Princes quarter for
certain days, these two noble Lords, the Earl of Warwick, and the Earl of
Northampton; and with him was the Queens Majesty's Dwarf, strenuous Ieffrey,
that Cyclopian creature, whose Gygantisme body made the Bulwarks of Breda to
tremble: But rather I would say, this Son of Conopas made the whole Army to
admire his monstrous smalnesse; who for this Bellonean practice our Champion
saw, he may justly, as General, lead an Army of Pigmaes to the Catopian
Fields; where Molon, Commander of the contrary Camp, will run at tilt
against him, with the Lance of a Rush, as long as a straw: and so leaving this
memorable Monument of a living Statue, I return to my purpose. Truly it was a
pleasant thing to behold the cheerful countenance of common Soldiers, when
they marched to the Court du Guard in the Market place, and to other remoter
staunces about the walls; for they looked all as Lords of this vanquished Lady.

And now the next morning after my first entery in the Town, being Sunday,
there were two Sermons made in the great Church by Dutch Predicants to Gods
glory, where the day preceding, there had been fifteen Masses, celebrate to
the Veneration of imaginary Saints. For Wine and victuals we found plenty in
the Town, and no scarcity of any thing save of favorable faces; and for
excellent good Beer of all Belgia, Breda is the Daughter of Bacchus.
Melancho^^ Burgers.
As for most of the Burgers, all this time they kept their doors fast,
lamenting within what they could not help without, being shrewdly invenomed
with the perturbulent Jesuits before their departure.

The Town it self I found mightily deformed, and the houses beaten down most
lamentably with the Cannon; in all these three corned streets, that were
opposite, to the three quarters without, whereof Ginnekin street, from the
Princes batteries was worst defaced; that it grieved me to hear of the great
fatality, these downe-falling houses brought to the inhabitants, as also the
sorrow to behold between two extremes, the miserable effects of war; which
I leave my mourning Muse to deplore.

O woeful war, which lessens wealth, and strength
And brings the ruynes of ruin at length:
It does dishonor Honor, and degrad
The mighty Man, from what his greatness had:
Which weight let Tyrus, sometimes stately plumed
With Troy and Thebes, both alike consumed:
Swelled Ninivie, whose fragments naught imparts,
And Learned Athens, once the source of Arts;
With sightlesse Carthage, Lacedemon rent,
Iebus and Bagdat, in a manner shent;
Sardis, Syracuse, Adrianople lost,
Nay, now stress'd Almaine with such sorrows crossed,
Denote and show, what time and wars have wrought,
That crushed their might (from flatring pride) to naught
Nay, Monarchies, great Kingdoms, th'Vniverse
Are pressed to change, erect'd, thrown down by Mars.
Like to the rage of the impetuous flood
Debording from his banks, leaves slime and mood
To choke the fertile plains* supplants the roots
Of Herbs and Trees; defaceth quite the fruits
Of Grapes and grain; and often breaks the walls
Of strongest Towns, whereon destruction falls.
Even so the furye of the bloody war,
In breaking down the bonds of peace; debar
The links of Love and alliance, quite defaceth
The liberty of nature, and disgraceth
The ornaments of Time; and cuts the throat
Of martial darlings; then casts up the lot
Of desolation; which destroys all
Which can to mean or mighty men befall:
So, so Breda, was fought, and sought, and wounded,
By him, whose stock, her first foundation founded.
Now the next morning after the Town was surrendered, there came forty eight
Trumpeters before the Princes lodging, and sounded the victory over Breda, and
after them came four hundred threescore and twelve drums, doing the like, to
whom and every one of them, there was rewards given as a thing due to their
Calling after any victory.

The third day of this vicissitude, being monday morning, then the whole
quarters began to slight and cast down their works, equalizing them with the
ground; but understand me better, no man wrought but for extraordinary pay, for
they can not compel a Soldier, by the law of Arms, to do any more than
march, watch, and fight, without a secondary acknowledgement: but the most
difficult toil of all, was to empty the moate, of infinite bundles of Boughs
and arms of Trees, and to pull down the Galleries, whose erections had been
so fatal to many misfortunate lives.

Then, and at that time, all the Country Bowres about, All the works and
Approaches without are cast down.
were commanded every man in his own ground, to level and throw down, the
out trenches, Redoubts, and other works, which in 16. days time was
cheerfully performed.

Now upon the fourth day after the Towns surrendering, being wednesday,
October 14. there were solemn feastings, and bonfires made through all the
Towns of the jurisdictions and Provinces under the united States, for this
unestimable victory: And upon the sixth day thereafter, the Prince, Princess,
and young Prince of Orange with all the chief Commanders of the Army, The
joyful Victoria kept in Holland and Breda.
had their Jubilee, and Triumphs observed, within the Castle of Breda at supper,
with bonefires, and thundering Cannons within the walls, to which the Army
without, for 2. hours space, made an equivox of Volley-roaring shots from
innumerable Muskets; as if the mountains of Cuma, and Sybillaes chambers, with
their neighbor Apolloes Temple, had been thrown down, with a counterbanding
clangor, in the Avernian Lake.

And then the sequel day, all things for preservation of the Town being
appointed and settled, as well for victuals as military provision; the Lord
Baverward a brave young Gentleman, Baverward left Governor of Breda.
and natural Son to Count Maurice of famous memory, was enstaled governor:
With threescore Companies of foot and horse, eight whereof were Scots, and
English, the rest Duchess, French, and Friezes: Where now I leave them, as they
were left, to erect three Sconses or Forts, without the works of the 3. Ports;
and another Fort at Terheyden, to keep the River of Mark passable, and so
thereby the safety of Traffickers procured. And now leaving this conspicuous
Conquest, Good News from other parts which came to the Leaguer.
I fall upon the good news, that with this Victory, came all at one time to
the Leaguer, to wit, that Marishall Chatilion, General of the French Army in
Artois, had defeated there the Cardinals Army, with the slaughter of two
Regiments, besides some taken prisoners, and with them twelve Pieces of
Ordnance.

And from the Eastern Germany, the like good news came by one Mr. Grahame,
son to the Heritour of Killearne, that the Scots and Swedes had given to the
Saxon and Austrian forces, a ponderous overthrow: And with these Buonos
Novellos, came the Victory of Bernard Saxe Wymer, fought beside Strausberg,
against the Imperial Army, where with many thousands the Emperors General was
killed. Neither may I thrust in Oblivion the auspicuous attempts and approved
valor of mine ever renowned Countryman, General Lesslie, who in a most
singular manner, Anno 1636. August 9. at the battle of Whitesock, (besides
other famous and fortunate Conflicts) had both the Vanguard and the Victory. O
memorable Victory! and put to flight the Duke of Saxon, and the Imperialists
with great slaughter; seazing on four thousand Wagons, five whereof were
laden with Ricks Dollours, and with them twenty eight pieces of Ordnance.

Where, and at which Rancounter, that hardy and redoubted Gentleman Colonel
Robert Cunyngham was slain, Certain valiant Scots Worthies.
a son of the house of Boniton upon the River of Clyde, and once my
Condisciple in Lanerk. Nor dare I seclude from this commemoration, that ever
honored Commander, General Ruthwen, whose fidele service and manly prowesses
are Orientally known, as well to the foes, as to the friends of Swethlands
Crown. And what shall I speak of late Colonel Hepburne? but let Germany,
France, and fatal Loraine, where he was killed, affirm and approve of him,
that he was absolutely one of the best Soldiers in Christendom, and so
consequently of the World. After whose death, succeeded to his place the
younger Colonel Hepburne, his Cousin, son and apparent Heir of that ancient
House of Wachton, who now lately, on the Frontiers of France, and about the
former disastruous place, has suffered the like fatal blow of preposterous
death.

But now to return to the Lesslies, of whom there are so many valorous
Colonells and Captains, besides the aforesaid General, that I may justly
aver it, that there are not so many of one Surname within Europe, and in this
Age, have acquisted more credit, honor, and indubitable reputation, than that
Heroic and Bellonean Name has done. Twenty eight Scots Colonells at one time
under the King of Swethland.
Whereof Gustavus ghost may testify not only of them, but also of diverse
other worthy and noble Commanders, as these honorable Colonells, Mackay, now
Lord of Raye; two of the Surnames of Lindsey, Earls of Crawfurd, the noble
Forbes, two of Hamilton, three of Cuningham; the rest of the Colonels were
Minroe, Lumsdale, Stewart, Keith, Baillie, Gunne, and that once highly
respected Commander under the Marquess of Hannay, Sir James Ramsey lately
deceased: with sundry like Colonells, and many Captains of notable memory; and
so from them generally of the whole Scots, their followers, that they have
been the nerves and sinews of his Army, yea, and the Sword of his right hand:
for as the Myrmedons were the Bulwarks of Alexanders fortunes, so were they
the Pike and Buckler of all Adolphus most glorious Atchievments, as well in
Prucia, Germany, as on the borders of Russia, or else where; whose proper and
peculiar Acts of most of them I could seriously divulge, but time, it traitors
me: neither may this present Volumne permit to engrosse any prolixious subject,
(howsoever necessary) unless I had a proposed drift to perfect punctually in a
larger Relation than this, their generous and general proceedings, their
Heroic Exploits, and fastidious following of their adventurous labors in
Martial Discipline; and so I hasten to Finis.

But what shall I say? Scotland now a days has no Historian, bravest Wits
turn dull, Poets sing dumb, Penmen grow deaf, and best spirits slumber. And
why? because there is no Mecenas, as little regard, Ungrateful Times.
far less reward to laborious Recorders. So that now by numbers of
ungrateful Patrones, the praises of past Worthies lie interred in the dust,
and future times robbed of the necessary knowledge of things past and present;
and thus in the darkness of Ingratitude, the living men murder the memory of
the dead. Nay, and worse, Penmen now may not labor in their pains, because
of clownish Carpers, Critticks, Calumniators, and distracted Censurers, that
tare the life of Virtue in pieces with their spightfull tongues; for it is a
more facile thing for a Miscreant to judge, than to suffer judgment himself:
And especially some raw-mouthd younglings, (nay, rather fondlings) who being
newly Laureate, after short four half years time spent in the College, they
come forth from this small Commencement, (wanting wit, judgment, and
understanding) like to Bulls broken out from Dungeons, to bear the faces of
the world: Wise men are ignorant to them, the Laiety but Lubbards; old men but
fools, and they will have men of honor, to honor them with the first good
morrow, the top of the Table, the Right hand, The arrogance of young beardlesse
Scholars.
and the entery of the Door. And why? because they are over-master'd with Art,
not Masters of it; having their shallow brains laden with the empty
apprehension of bottomless Syllogismes, rotten rags of Heathnish Philosophy,
and clouted phrases of Paganism Authors, who but they? and if they rail upon
Divine Authority, Vulgars say, they are brave Scholars, hopeful youths, and
well set; away, run here and there, go beyond Sea, to teach and concionate.
Some of which presumptuous crew I found here in the Leaguer before Breda, (I
mean of mine own Contrymen, and none other) whose beardlesse mouths have
greater need of more Learning, Knowledge, and Instruction, than to dare to do
the thing they cannot do; whose Names I reserve to discover in my verbal and
ordinary discourses.

And now to close up all, the two aforesaid Rivers of Marck and A, Marck and A,
returned to their own courses.
were returned again to their own Channells, yet not without great damage,
and impetuous violence done to their next bordering bounds. After this the Army
dissolved, and every Company sent to their own Garrison: where from thence
also, the Prince with his ordinary Guard went up the Rhine, to surveigh and
strengthen the Towns and places there of greatest importance, with all
necessary provision.

Whence I falling down from Breda to Dunhag, presented the Majesty of Bohemia,
with some of my former works: And having viewed and reviewed her princely
Children here, and at Leyden, six sons and four Daughters, whom God may long
bless, prosper, and preserve; I returned to Rotterdam, and thence I embarked
for Camphiere in Zeland.

And now I think it not amiss, to lay open briefly some general Observations
that I gathered of Holland, their condition of living, their politic
government, and of their forces by Sea and Land. First then, The conditions and
manners of the Dutcher.
as for their carriage and manner of conversation, they are a selfe-loving
people, just and strict in their bargains, nothing to spare, nothing to lend;
cheap buyers, and dear sellers; civil in show, and churlish of nature* their
Birth and breeding semblable to the Mechanic vulgarity of their actions;
painful and industrious for profit, but nowayes courteous, nor charitable:
Their Gentry is mesculat, and the true Quintessence thereof remaining only in
the house of Bredrod; they keep their houses cleanly, and go honestly
apparrelled; they will do any thing for advantage, and nothing without gain:
They are great misregarders of Strangers, notwithstanding they live safely
under the shelter of their bloody Swords; and in a word, they are Pharisees
without, and hollow Hebrews within.

For government, The provident States.
the States, they are sublimely politic, wonderful provident, and great
Intelligencers abroad; and for preventing inconveniences and foreseeing of
safety, their Republic excels Venice, and all the Commonwealths of the
world; they are mighty in means, laying grievous Taxes and Assizes upon the
people, which still double the value of any thing the Commonalty buy or sell.

H^l^and maintains yearly 100000. soldiers by Sea and Land.
As for their Army by Land, generally in Garrisons, and on the Field, consists
(as I was credibly informed) of threescore and ten Thousand men; and by Sea,
and in the East and West Indies thirty thousands more, which this handful of
Holland does daily sustain, the rest of this Discourse I omit, till such time
that I enlarge my former Book of Travells.

And now to observe my methodicall order, I found in the aforesaid Camphiere a
Scots Staple, and over it a venerable Gentleman, Master Patrick Drummond, Lord
Conservator there for the Buroughs, (Merchants, and Traffickers here) of
Scotland, to whose love I celebrate this grateful memory.

This Isle of VVaker, a part of Zeland, is eight English miles in length, and
thrice as much in circuit, containing these three Towns, Camphiere to the
East, Middlebrough in the midst, and Flushen to the South-west: between which
Towns there is a delicate smooth Calsey of thin Brick, hedged and ditched on
both hands; that in walking of it, me thought I had been in the Valley of
Suda, else in the Tempian Plains, watered with pleasant Permessis. Arrived at
Flushen, and attending for Transportation to England, Five Flusherer Ships
seaz'd on three Dunkirkers.
there came in one morning five Zelander ships, men of War, who brought in
three prizes, Dunkirker ships, furnished with threescore and twelve pieces of
Ordnance, some whereof were Brazen half Cannon and Culverin; and on these
ships three hundred and sixteen Captives, who now lie there incarcerate till
their Redemption.

Indeed these Dunkirkers brought with them a great deal of joy to the
Inhabitants: but what shall I say? the second night following, a drunken Pilot
cast away one of these great ships (brought in these prizes) upon the Isle of
Cassand, just before the Town; of whom, and of them, I may say as Maharrabell
said to his Master, Vincere scis Annibal, victoria uti nescis. But now to
conclude, if there be any Britannian or Hybernian desirous to see and try the
effects of Purgatory, let him go over to Flushen, where it will soon purge his
purse of Money, and his Heart of patience; and so farewell, for I am landed at
Gravesend.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Sa. Baker,
December. 13. 1637.

