A crystal glass of christian reformation, wherein the godly may behold
the colored abuses used in this our present time.

Collected by Stephen Bateman Minister.

IMPRINTED at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

CVM GRATIA ET PRIuilegio Regia Maiestatis per decennium. 1569.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Giving thee to understand (Christian Reader) the manifest power of God in
considering the inestimable mercy and long sufferance of us most miserable
creatures, who from time to time proves whether we will fly from our
wickedness and froward usage of life or no, and seeing no amendme^t cease not,
but forthwith plageth us: yea, and at the length gives us over unto our own
wretched will, and being so deuoyd and frustrate from all hope joy and
triumphant glory, we are assured as then of nothing but everlasting death and
endelesse sorrow. Therefore I wish all faithful christians to foresee and so
to provide in time, that neither popish Antichrist, nor any rabble of false
usurped powers shall once be able to spurn or kick against the verity and
true professors of the same. The holy apostle S. James speaks very lovingly
unto all such as gives their minds to godly exercise and study, saying these
words. My brethren count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, forasmuch as you know how that the trying of your faith brings
patience, and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
sound lacking nothing. Herein the apostle shows unto all men, that by
patience we must moderate our selves, as if the enemy show rigorousnes
ortiranny, win him by patience, but use no superbitie or reuengeme^t, but
yield the cause unto god, yt which judges rightly, and he will in time be a
defense unto all such oppressed. Vir duplex animo inconstans est in omnibus
vijs suis, a waueryng minded man is unstable in all his ways. But most happy
is that man that endures in temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive
the crown of life which the lord has promised to those which love him, and
err not my dear brethren. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of light, with whom is no
variablenes, neither is he changed into darkness. Of his own will begat he
us with the word of life, that we should be the first fruits of his
creatures, so that as long as we obey his precepts and be zealous furtherers
of his gospel, and always continuing, then shall all such doers be assured of
most happy salvation. Herein is plainly showed unto all, the estate of every
degree by order of picture and signification, to the intent, that thereby every
christian Reader may the better see the disordred abuses which daily raueth
amongst us, and also the state of obedience by every picture in like sort
signified, that thereby every Christian may the better beware the deceiuable
suggestions of Satan, that neither pardon nor mumming, massinges or any other
popish ceremonies, can any thing avail as touching salvation: for if it were
so, then Christ's death was in vain, and of none effect. Take heed therefore
and cleave betyme to Christ and his doctrine, and leave of from such
superstition and faynings of men, and use the counsel of the holy apostle S.
Jude, which says: Similiter and hi carne^ quide^ maculant dominatorem aut
spernu^t maiestates aut blasphemant. Likewise these dreamers defile the flesh,
despise rulers, and speak evil of them that are in authority. But these
speak evil of those they know not, and what things they know naturally, as
beasts which are without reason, in those things they corrupt themselves. Woe
be unto them, for they have followed the way of Balaam for lukers sake, and
perish in the treason of Chore. These are murmurers, complainers, walking
after their own lusts, whose mouths speak proud things. They have men in
great reverence because of advantage. But ye beloved, remember the words
which were spoken before, of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that
they told you that there should be beguilers in the last time, which should
walk in their ungodly lusts, these are makers of sects fleshly, having no
spirit, pray therefore dearly beloved, that God so root out al such enemies
which kick against the truth of his gospel, and so arm your selves with the
armor of God, considering that Satan is most busiest and full of rage in
this our time, as Saint John in his revelation does manifestly express:
That we all being armed with godliness may be able to resist in the day of our
trial, and to be found vigilant watchemen aspectyng the great and second
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. In the mean season applying our minds to
the study of virtue, may be rich and plentiful in righteousness and hope of
salvation. And for that your minds among many and earnest pensive and sorrowful
studies might be revived also in virtue. I have put forth unto your gentle
considerations this my simple trauayls, which in perusing you shall well espy to
be in effect as I have named it.

This crystal glass wherein we may learn godly reformation, whose brightness
shines not to the beholders thereof in this world, a light to every christian
man, but in the world to come a most precious and everlasting brightness in
endless felicity.

As I said, a manifest show of all colored abuses that reign in every state,
and set in the frame of most plentiful and Christian examples. The substance
whereof is the perfect glass of godly reformation, beautified with ye crystal
sight of all celestial virtues, right fruitful for every man to carry, and
most needful for this our present time. Thus gentle reader I bid thee most
heartily farewell in him that lives for ever.

By me Stephen Bateman Minister.

Faults escaped.
In the description of Pride, the second page, the 16. line, read for Dedalus
Icarus, and for Icarus Dedalus.

In the epistle of the 2. part of this book, and xx. line, for so, read for

In the 30. line of the description of faith, and is God, read and maker is God.

In the description of Ueritie, is left out the sword that is signified in the
figure.

The description of Covetousness.
Aristotle. Seneca. To delight in treasure, is a dangerous pleasure,
In a liar doubtless, there never was goodness.

The signification of the picture.
THe devil is Envy, the swords in his hand betokens mischief, the purse
covetousness, the globe the world, the man in fools weed signifies careless
covetousness, a man being overcome with Envy and covetousness, may be likened to
a fool that is not able to rule himself, and so the end is death.



WHo so is envious may be likened unto Satan: who are more foolisher the^
those persons the which are never satisfied with money. Money causes
mischief, mischief destroys ye soul. For as it is good to ye godly by using
it by measure: so is it euel to the wicked, and brings displeasure. Money in
ye hands of the envious does cause much bloodshed. Covetous envy is to no man
commodious, and without return by spedy repentance brings to hell most
odious. The envious man that coueteth does ever grudge at his neighbors
prosperity or welfare: he is friend to no m^, he loves no man, neither is his
miserable appetite at any time satisfied.

Eccl. 14
He that is wicked unto himself, how should he be good unto other men? How can
such a one have any pleasure of his goods. Say not thou I will hide my self
from God, Eccl. 16
for who will think upon me from above, I shall not be known in so great an
heap of people, for what is my soul among so many creatures. Behold, the
heaven, yea, the heaven of heavens, the deep, the earth, and all that therein
is, shall be moved at his presence: The mountains, the hills, and the
foundations of the earth shall shake for fear, when God visits them, etc.
Take this for ensample beware in time, from Satan's driftes do thou declyne.

Antisthenes. It is far better to chance among crows then flatterers:
For crows eat the dead, the flatterers consume the^ which are alive.

The signification of the picture.
HE which sits with iiij. arms, two to deliver and two to receive: The
iiij. hands signifies, without reward there is little gotten, that is to say,
those ij. hands that does deliver the writings, does declare preferme^t for
small gain, the other as deceit, and they receive privily.



THere can be no greater mischief in a commonwealth then insatiable or
dissembling justice. For where coueteousnes is in ye heart once planted: there
true laws are eftsoons euel-fauouredlye racked. The covetous dissembler, will
not be openly seen to receive any reward: but with ypocriticall gloses, he
will be sure, either by countenance, or by some feigned friendship to bring his
deceauable purpose to pass, unto such and of such there is no travail for him
which means truth, or for the poor, No penny, no Pater noster. The poor for
lack of substance often loses that, the which might do him good, ye rich
speedeth, or him that has ought yea and sometime the flatterer, also under
color of such like friendship as may pleasure the like: and in the end their
own deceiuable covetousness deceives them. In thend there follows ruin of
their riches for open oppression, and without amendment in time, hell is their
portion.

Eccle. 10.
Despise not thou the just poor man, and magnify not the rich and ungodly,
great is the judge and mighty in honor, yet is there none greater then he that
fears God. Oseas, 5.
O ye priests, hear this, take heed O thou house of Israel. etc.

In time to beware I think it best,
For that shall bring thy soul to rest.
Diogenes. The servant serves his master.
The wicked serve covetousness.

The signification.
THe two on horsback signifies both estates striving for spiritual
promotions, with sufficiency not contented, the bag in their hands is
insatiable desire, the devil flying out is temptacion, and the ground opening
under the^ is destruction. For when covetousness is most desired, then is death
soonest stirred.



THere is nothing more pestiferous then pride. For by pride, manne is brought
to most miserable state. To be both proud and covetous, is two mischiefs
incurable, in what estate soever they be, and thend thereof is, without spedy
return, hell, death, and utter dedestruction. And thus the auaricious man is
most miserable.

John. 18.
By avarice Judas betraryed our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and finally,
dispayred and so hanged him self. Luke. 23. By avarice Dalila betrayed Sampson,
as it appears in the. 16. of the Judges. By the which historyes, it also
appears, yt avarice brings men often to perdition. The like avarice betwixt
the popish spiritualty and temporaltye, yea and in some professors of the
verity, which has brought the common wealth into great miserye. God grant the
like be not also found among the greater part of such as profess, or at the
lest takes on them ye names of Christians. Wherefore was Semei condemned to
death, but for his covetousness. Because he departed from Jerusalem, against the
commandment of his Lord. Look more of this in the. 3. book of kings the 2.
chapter.

Themistocles. It is better to have men, having lack of money,
Then money having lack of men.

The signification.
THe Eliphant signifies, force or strength: the man on his back usury: the
Flag or banner in his hand, signifies illusion, or vain hoped time: the Wolf
devouring the lamb, signifies all such gredy oppressors as do oppress the
poor and indigent: the cofer under his arm Mammon: the purse destruction: and
he which leads the Eliphant, is Nigardship: and the rope the which he is
drawn withal, is deceate. When gredy death does force assail, and Nigardship
begin to fly: the^ pity shall his place possess, and laud the name of God
most hie.



A Nigarde, is among the covetous, and is most to be abhorred. For neither envy
deceit nor pride in coveting is or may be compared unto the churl. The Usurer
with the churl may well be compared. The usurer with out interest will lend to
no man. The churl or nigard, is no longer quiet, then he may be loking or
telling his money, yea he will starve himself rather the^ once diminish any
part or portion thereof, ever coveting and never satisfied: usury with
nigardship are always together, and the one is never without the other. For
they are both of one propertye. First, it is breeder of mischief, nurse to
all errors, and stepdame to wicked envy, and always bondslaue to mamon, when
he sees it, he thinks never to have enough of the sight thereof, and when he
does lend it, he is then never quiet till he sees it again, it is too
innumerable to hear, the wickedness which follows the insatiable desire of
money.

He that has not given his money upon usury, nor taken reward against the
innocents. Psalm. 15.
The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and their childrens teeth are set on
edge.

Ezech. 12.
Let these few ensamples convert the greedy appetite of insatiable desire to
have money, for goods and money were ordained to serve man, and not to rule man,

Aristippus. Get such riches that when the net is broken.
They may escape with thee.

The signification.
THese three on horseback signifies the states of me^ worldly minded: as
Makeshift, Flattery, and Desire to have. The foremost shows those persons of
gentilitie that are not contented with sufficiency, and those are Makeshiftes:
the second shows the Popish spirituality, those are Flattery: the third the
yeomandry or francklin, who seeks by the recovery of spiritual promotion
from the dunghill to a gentleman, those are Desire to have: the devil is
destruction: the net insatiable desire: and all these ride to the devil their
sovereign for spiritual promotion.



LIke as coueteousnes is enemy to the body, by means of cares, in desiring
still abundance, and thereby never satisfied: So is it most deadly to the
soul and hateful before God. For in what nation or country so ever it be
either suffered or maintained, needs must grow out of the same such
encombra^ces amongs the common wealth, that without foresight in time it cannot
otherwise choose but grow not only to the bodies of those instruments vexation
of mind: but also to the soul endless destruction. Flattery, Makeshifte, and
Desire to have, these as servants, first, to parciality, and then by obtaining
that which by such is required, insatiable desire so much inflameth their
hearts, that no respect of person is favored, but those whose pursse bottomes
are never uncovered. God grant to those which in these days remain, that
they may see the state of each degree so amended, that unto whom preferment
appertains, to prefer, without ye voluptuous desire of vile avarice. And that
those pastors which are daily laborers in Gods vineyarde may be so provided
for and looked unto, that no greedy viper by money or Fee, may be suffered to
displace the true shephearde of his right. The common practice (among many)
is, no sooner any spiritual living to fall, (so diligently they watch) that
either by hook or crook, by gifts and large proffers, they never cease suit
or suing for, till it be by such obtained, and that being obtained: they are
not ashamed to say without spiritual prefermente it were not possible for them
to keep house. Saint Paul in the fifth of the Thessalonians says. 1 Thessalonians.
5
I beseech ye brethren know them which labor among you and have the oversight
of you, that ye have them in reverence for their work sake and be at peace
with them. Surely those which for lukers sake will rather prefer the temporal
man before the spiritual, has no small account to render when he shall come
before the judge of quick and dead, The property of the viper is, the femall
biteth of the males head and the young gnaweth themselves out of their dammes
belly.
when for his wicked doing he shall reap not only death of body, but in body
and soul (without speedy repentance) endless destruction. God for his mercies
sake so open the hearts of all magistrates that such greedy vipers may be
subverted. Deride not that which is for thy health, least happily in thend thou
decrease thy wealth. Where wealth does decrease there sorrows does grow,
therefore do in time the truth learn to know.

Solomon. A wrathful person provoke contention:
But he that is patient appeaseth debate.

The signification.
THe Bore signifies Wrath, and the man on his back mischief: the Pope in the
Flag destruction, and the Flag uncertain religion, turning and changing with
every blast of wind: the man killing him self desperation: the woman madness.



AS Seneca says: Ire troubles the understanding of the creatures, and
therefore it is needful to be taken heed of. Ire accustomed makes a man to
come out of his wit. Also ire does most hurt unto himself, Chitofell.
and ge^dreth discord and all envy, Ajax.
and causes reason to perish. Ire has so much done, yt it has brought men
to desperation, and in the end have hanged themselves. Also among the godly
there has been anger or irefulnes found, as when occasion has been given. As
for example: Moses was angry against the children of Israel because they kept
Manna against the commandment of God, as it appears in the.xvj. of Exodus:
and also for that they did worship the calfe: in so much that he brake the
tables of the commandments, as it is written in the.xxij. of Exodus. Also
Neemias was wroth against them that committed usury. Look in the.xiij. of
Neemie. 2. Esd. 13.


This kind of anger or irefulnes, far differs from wrathful ire, because
that the one may rule him self, and the other not. In wise men the countenance
irefull makes the offenders afraid: but wilful wrath cannot once rule
himself. A wise man in his anger remembers counsel: but the wrathful person
tells out all, and eftsoon to his own destruction.

Antisthenes. Envy eats a man,
As rust consumes iron.

The signification.
THe Ass signifies wrathful justice. The man that is drawn away Truth-Those
that draws Truth by the arms Flatterers. The Friar, lies, and the associate
with the Friar, Perjury.



BEtter is the poor that lives godly then the blasphemer that is but a Fool.
A fool has no delight in understanding, but only in those things, wherein
his heart reioyseth. Riches makes many friends, but the pore is forsaken of his
neighbor. A false witness shall not escape. One witness shall not rise
against a man for any manner sin or for any manner fault that he offends
in. Prou. 19 Deuteronomy. 19. Prou. 17.
A wicked judge gives audience to false lips, and a froward person gives
ear to a disceitfull tongue. There can be no greater plague then to have an
Ass to bear authority. By the Ass is me^t the cruel Antechristians.
For by such comes much dissension. Among all Asses, the religious Ass of
late being in authority has done most harm.

While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of
light. Whosoever shall endure to the end shall be safe. John. 12 Mark. 13 Luke 12
Romans 8
Be ye ready, for the son of man will come at an hour, when ye think not.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of gods chosen, it is God that
justifies, who is he that can condemn.

Pythagoras. They which to slander or to kill,
The dead have their delight:

The signification.
THe man which stands like a Prophet signifies godliness: the Friar treason:
the cup with the Serpent poison: the other which strikes with the sword
murder: and he which is wounded is peace.



Nothing may be more grievous then wrathful treason: because the imaginations
thereof be endless, it may therefore be likened unto the venim of ye Serpent
Aspis whose poison is incurable. Yet notwithstanding as wrath is deadly, so is
it traiterous: and unto him that uses it double death, not only to the body
but also to the soul. Example of Ioab, who traitorously slew Amason, as it
appears in the xx. chapt. of the second book of the Kings, who showing a
countenance of frendlines, suddenly struck him into ye body yt he died.
Faithful are the wounds of a lover: Prou. 27.
but the kisses of an enemy are cruel. He that provides for an others
destruction, let him be sure that a like pestilence is provided for him.
Tullius.
Therefore in time beware and consider, and remember each estate, that Satan
the author of all evil do not entise thee: but in all temptations call to God
and he will help thee.

Are like such dogs in fury,
That at stones do bark and bite.

The signification.
THe Pope is oppression: the man which kills is cruelty: those which are a
killing constant religion: the three kneeling love furtherance and truth to the
Gospel. etc.



Amongst men of authority there can be no greater terror, then to the
subject to show cruelty. The vain glory of this world is a deceatfull
sweetenes, and may be likened to the Popes suberbius cruelty, an unfruitful
labor, a continual fear, Augustinus.
a dangerous advancement, a beginning without providence, an end without
repentance. Ambrosius.
Therefore there is not so much joy in climing upward, as there is sorrow in
falling hard downward: nor so much room after victory, as after ruin reproach
of folly. Therefore be sure with what measure is met to others, the same to
be measured again. If these sentences had been, and were, of the enemies of
Gods Gospel well considered, truly they would not have showed so much cruelty
in shedding so much innocent blood as they have done, and continually seek to
do. What should he that is strong auaunt of his strength, who^ bodily sickness
brings to feebleness. Ambrosius.
Therefore in time foresee and amend: if not, the fall will be the greater.
Concerning a further setting forth of the Romish Church and cruelty, I refer
it to other authors which speak thereof sufficiently.

Great grief assailes the Lecherous mind: of such as does the youth alure:
More worse then beasts I do the^ find: such youth to lechery to procure.

The signification.
THe Goat signifies Lechery: the woman Whoredome^ she which leads the Goat
by the beard is meretrix, the baude: and the devil Nicticorax, a blind guide
or deceauer.



LEchery in all estates is utter enemy to virtue, and an offense to the body.
It causes all mischief and discord, not only betwixt man and wife, but also
it engenders dreadful hate and endless destruction, both to the body living,
and also to the soul everlasting.

Ualerius in his 4. book, declares of one Sophonides, who in his old age, said
to one which demanded of him, if he were any thing lecherous: His answer was,
willing him to have other matters to speak or talk of: for (says he) I have
had great victory, for that from my time to this present, I have vanquished
that, which otherwise would have vanquished me. Look in the 34. chapter of
Genesis, Genesis 34.
and there is manifestly showed the punishment for adulterers. When Dina the
daughter of Lea, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of
the land: whom when Sichem the son of Hemor the Heuite Lord of that country
saw, he took her, and lay with her, and forced her. And when Jacob heard that
his daughter Dina was defiled, he with his sons ceased not to avenge the
crime committed: so that Simeon and Leui her brethren took either of them his
sword, and went into the city, and slew all that was male, and also Hemor,
and Sichem his son. etc.

Look also in the second book of the Kings the 13. chapter: of Ammon, who
for defiling of his sister Thamar, was destroyed by his brother Absolon.
Consider also the horrible plage that fell unto those which had committed
horrible adultery with the Levites wife: look in the 20. chapter of the
Judges. Moreover, what was the cause of the Lords threatening against the
Ninevites? It was for the wicked sin of whoredom. Who caused Joseph to be
imprisoned? Even the lecherous desire of his mistress: as it appears in the
39. chapter of Genesis. Therefore lechery does not only cause offense by
actual deed, but also in inward thought to such as do desire the same. Look
in Math. 5: Who so looks on a woman and lusts after her, has committed
adultery already in his heart. Fly from sin as thou would fly from a
Serpent: if not, be thou sure, what soever thou be, not to have fellowship
with the faithful.

Worse then a Pharesite I may them call: which lawful marriage does disdain:
And seeks the truth to bring in thrall: all such does Satan quit their pain.

The signification.
THe Friar is Fallax: the Nun Dedecus: the devil in the tree superstition:
and the other devil Dicax, a reprocher of wickedness, and a rayler against the
verity.



FOrnication ought to be eschewed. Look in the 1. Corinthians. 10. chapter. The
people satte down to eat and drink, 1. Cor. 10.
and rose up to play. Neither let us be defiled with fornication, as some of
the^ were defiled with fornication, and fell in one day xxiij. thousand.
Therefore to avoid whoredom, 1. Cor. 7.
let every man have his own wife: and let every woman have her husband. Every
sin that a man does, 1. Cor. 6.
is without the body: But he that is a fornicator, sins against his own
body. Heb. 13.
Wedlock is to be had in honor among all me^, and the bed undefiled. As for
whorekepers and adulterers God will judge. There goes a common saying, that
there is fornication among you, and such fornication, 1. Cor. 5.
as is not named among the Gentiles: that one should have his fathers wife. And
ye swell, and have not rather sorrowed, that he which had done this deed,
might be put from among you. Therefore fly this horrible sin: and as for
such as will condemn the lawful estate of Matrimony, and honest marriage of
godly Ministers: such chaste and maidenly prelates of their doings, shall be
showed as follows in the fourth part of this treatise of Lechery.
Fornication is enemy to God, and enuieth virtues. It consumes all substance,
and deliteth in the appetite present: Augusti^us.
it lets that a man can not think on poverty, which is not long absent.

If we will consider the excellency of man's nature, and the dignity thereof,
Tullius.
we shall well perceive how foul and dishonest a thing it is to be resolved
in fornication, and to live wantonly. Contrarywyse, how honest and fair a
thing it is to live temperately, continently, sadly, and soberly.

When David the King, by sight had desired: the wife of Vrias to fulfill his
lust:
He was by the Prophet therefore reproved: Vrias in the forward being slain
first.

The signification.
THese two armies signifies the striving of the flesh against the spirit:
all worldlynes is confounded: and happy is he that fights by faith divine
unto the end.



AS in the two chapters of Lechery and fornication, is described the
wretchedness of ye horrible sin: so in adultery and rape, shall be rehearsed
ye wonderful calamities and loss of countries, with the overthrowing of
kingdoms, to the clean secludyng or cutting of, of all such as have been
maintainers of the same. Adultery is the violation of the faith promised in
marriage, the which thing is forbidden us: Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Luke 18. Dan. 13.
Thou shall not break wedlock. Adulterers are stoned to death. Susanna had
leauer die then to commit adultery with the two false Judges. Adultery is
cause of procuring of other men's death, as it appears in the xj. chapt. of
the second book of Kings. David the King committed adultery with Bethsabe the
wife of Urias the Hethite, and also caused Urias to be put to death, being
slain in ye forefrunt of Ioabs host. The Prophet Nathan being sent of the
Lord, reproved the king because of his wickedness. Also S. John the Baptist
reproved Herod for lying with his brother Phillips wife, saying: It is not
lawful for thee to have her. Math. 14 Prouer. 6. Eccle. 23.
An harlot will make a man to beg his bread, and a woman will hunt for the
precious life. All bread is sweet to a whoremonger: he will not leave of till
he have his purpose. So likewise the wily crafts of Satan does so stir
the minds of the disobedient sort, that they are careless, minding neither to
amend their folly, nor suffer others to avoid the same, but headlong goes
forth in the demonaicall laws as brute beasts, and at no time satisfied.

Proverbs. 23. A whore is a deep grave: and an harlot is a narrow pi^.
She lurketh like a thief: and brings unto her such me^ as be full of vice.

The signification.
THese four sitting banqueting, signifies fleshly delight: and the fifth which
is apparelled like a woman with a cup in her hand, and whose legs are like
unto a Serpent, is called Philogines, a lover of Lechery: the cup horror: the
legs destruction: the men fighting murder: and hell the place for such
offenders, whose continuannce is endless.



WHen man is given to the Sodomicall lust, then comes misery to the body,
sorrow to the life, and death to the soul. S. Paul in his Epistle to ye
Romans says: Romans 1.
that to delight in other men's sins, is greater offense then to sin thy
self. Therefore as ye sin is horrible to him that offends: so is it more
grievous to those that are maintainers of the same. That which thou art ashamed
to speak, Hieronimus.
be also ashamed to think. Evil thoughts brings evil factes, whereof
ensues grievous offense. What was the cause that the Prodigal son came to
such misery? Luke. 15.
Because he delighted to company with harlottes and inordinate livers. Sodom
and Gomorra were destroyed because of adultery, lechery, fornication, rape, and
inuiolate rauishing, which is most horrible. What mischief fell among the
Romans after that Tarquinus Sextus had violated Lucrecia by his Sodomicall
will? He was utterly exiled, and never after was there any king: and she after
for sorrow slew her self. What monstrous slaughter fell among the Troyans
and Grecians? First the Grecians ravished Hesiona, the daughter of Laomedon
king of Ilion. And Priamus stale away Helane the wife of Menelaus king of
Lacedemonia, Abessa of Bethele^ was judge in Israel about this time.
whereof came the utter ruin and destruction of Troy. Let these few examples
guide thee from all such mischiefs.

Where murder is suffered not seen to in time,
There mischief increases and brings to woe:
All such as to Backus does honor divine,
Shall soon be bereft their goods to forgo.

The signification.
THese which are fightyng, signifies incontinence: he which is slain hazard:
and death: and the one which goes out with his sword in his hand audax, one
past grace, or a murderer.



IN the xxvj. year of Asa King of Judah, Regu^. 16.
began Ela the son of Baasa to reign over Israel in Thirza ij. year. And
his servant Zimri (which was captain of half his Chariots) conspired against
him, as he was in Thirza drinking: and was dronken in the house of Arza
steward of his house in Thirza. And Zimri came and smote him, and killed him in
the xxvij. year of Asa King of Judah, and reigned in his stead.

^. Reg. 13.
Amon being dronken was slain of his brother Absalon. Also Holofernes was
slain by Judith in his dronkennes, Iudit. 13.
as it appears in ye xiij. of Judith. Noe being dronken was mocked of his
son Cham. Genesis 9.
Also Polyphemus a monstrous Giant, Ovid. lib. 14.
was in his dronkennes destroyed by Ulissis. Therefore dronkennes does not only
surfeit the body for a time, but also breeds extreme malady, and makes a man
to forget reason, and causes bloodshed and wilful murder: so yt it is not
only a grief to the body in this world, but also an endless sorrow in the
world to come. When ye Philistines had gotten Sampson, Judges. 17
and also had determined to have been merry, and to see Sampson to play before
the^ he being blind: they rejoiced in their God Dagon, believing yt he had
delivered Sampson into their hands: they being in their iollitie, were by
Sa^pson suddenly destroyed, in shaking their house all to pieces upon the^. Cor.
6.
Drunkardes shall not possess the kingdom of heaven. etc

When gredy glotony seeks his ease, forsaking true labor which is most fit:
Then follows Podagra with her disease, to utter ruin she does them knitte.

The signification.
THe woman is Podagra: the naked man with the barrel on his leg is Prodigus:
the other with the grapes in his hand is rauin: the cords are force to
destruction: and are led by Podagra, the gowte.



WHat thing in a man is best? Reason: For by that he goes before beasts, and
follows the Gods: wherefore a perfect reason is that good which properly
belongs to man, all other things is to him common with beasts: if he be
strong, so is the Lion: if he be fair, so is the Pecocke: if he be swift, so
is the horse. I do not say yt in every of these things the other surmounteth
him, Tullius.
for I seek not that thing which is most excellent in him, but that which is
his own, and belongs properly to him: for as he has substance, so has the
trees: and as he has voluntary moving, in like wise has not only the
beasts, but also the worms: if he have a voice, so has dogs and much louder:
the Egles more sharp and perching: the Bull much greater: the Nightingale
sweter. The^ what thing properly is a man's own? surely reason: for that being
in the right course and perfect, makes a man full of felicity. A drunken
workman shall never be rich: Ecclesia.
and he that sets naught by a little, shall by a little and a little come
unto nothing. Wine inordinately taken, troubles man's reason, makes dull
understanding, and corrupts the body, and engenders noisome diseases, as the
gout, empostum, plurisies, caterns, palsies, and dropsies, with such like:
Boctius.
and also infebleth remembrance, sends in forgetfulness, pours in errors,
and brings forth sluggishnes.

When prelates to wine does give their delight,
To vanquishe truth which shines so clear:
Then follows death with all this might,
Them to prouent, and pays their hyre.

The signification.
THe Priest signifies Newter, neither hoate nor cold: the man in the barrel
insatiable desire: the books torn vnwritte^ verities: the Nun light
credence in believing the same.



Eccle. 31.
HOw sufficient unto a learned man is a small quantity of wine? so that in
sleep he shall not be sick thereof, nor feel any pain, Lechery, wine, Osea.
and sacietie, consumes all wisdom. Take heed to your selves, Luke 21.
least your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunckennes, and cares of
this life, and so the day come upon you unawares. Be not greedy in every
eating, and be not to hasty upon all meats. Eccle. 37.
For excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony comes at the last to
an unmeasurable heat. Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly: Ephe.
5.
not as unwise, but as wise men, redeeming the time, because the days are
evil. Wherefore, be ye not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord
is, and be not drunken with wine, wherein is excess. It is not (I say) for
kings to drink wine excessiuely, Prou. 31.
nor princes strong drink (for there is no secret where drunkenness reigns)
least they being drunken, forget the law, and peruerte the judgment of all
poor men's children. Who has woe? Prou. 23.
who has sorrow? who has strife? who has brawling? and who has wounds
without cause? or who has red eyes? even they that be ever at the wine and
seek excess. Be not thou a wine bibber, Eccle. 31.
for that has destroyed many a man. The fire proves the hard iron: even so
does wine prove the hearts of the proud.

All such therefore as pervert be: and seeks to maintain their estate:
Without repentance straight shall see: the endless woe and dreadful gate.

The signification.
THe two foremost excess, the king mainteinaunce, the Friar sufferance: and
Backus the god of wine: the Bear force: the serving man riot: and the Popish
priest careless diet.



Romans 12.
Gluttony is the work of darkness: let us not therefore be given unto it, but
let us set against it the prayer that is written in the 23. chapter of
Ecclesiasticus. Eccle. 23.
As Esau, Esau.
, Heb. 12 Genesis 25.
which for one mess of meat sold his byrthright. For ye know how that
afterward, when he would by enheritance have received blessing, he was put by,
for he found no place of repentance, though he sought for it with tears.
Thus by example it is manifest, that gluttony loses the memory, and causes
many a man to promise that which after he repents. Gluttony is never
satisfied: and when the belly is full, then does ye body crave rest. Gluttony
loses first memory: secondly consumes substance: and thirdly, Gods vengeance
and wrath falls upon such disobedient livers. Example of the children of
Israel, who being not satisfied with the Lords provision, Exodus 16.
grudged, and shortly after so much provoked the wrath of God, that they were
destroyed, the meat being in their mouths. Thus therefore as the Lord is a
revenger of the gluttonous: even so is he also of the superbious, and all other
offenders: Luke 16.
as Dives was punished and had his reward, so also shall be all those that in
time have no regard.

As sluggishe sleep the time does spend: and loytering luskes no pain will
take:
So fire consumes them in the end: as filthy varmin the idle forsake.

The signification.
HE which lies a sleep in his bed, signifies sloth in hearing of the word:
the fire burning about him, signifies Gods wrath, which consumes him through
his slothful negligence: and he which lies dead, with the varmin creeping
from him, is filthy behavior and idle life, whose end is also miserable.



THe omnipotent God, and plasmator of all creatures, never cease, but still
labors by his holy spirit, in ye hearts of the faithful, to draw and
procure the^ to al virtuous studies and exercises, as most best seems him,
among all estates, as well ye temporal as spiritual: not yt he has any need
of man, but yt he seeing man so subject to all deformed vices and vanities, often
stirs him by his holy spirit to repentance: For as his Godhead is
inco^prehensible, so his mercies are also innumerable. Therefore fly sin, and
give not thy self to sloth and idleness, least thou by long sleeping ouerpasse
the hour, Percius in his Satires.
and so be shut out. A man negligent, is as a land that is barren. Also Cato
reproves sluggishnes as a vice most deadly: Cato.
Plus vigila semper nec somno deditus esto: Nam diuturna quies vicijs alimenta
ministrat. Delight not in sloth, but from sleep sone arise: for rest and
idleness is mother of all vice. Also, a man negligent and slothful, is as a
dead man, and always apt to great mischiefs. There is also an inward sloth or
sluggishnes, and that is when a man by desire of worldly goods and promotions,
clean forgets his creator, and reme^breth more ye goods of this world, then
ye life to come. S. Paul to Timothe says: ^. Tim. 4.
Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning, and continue therein: For if thou
shall so do, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. Miserable are
the days of the sluggishe and sleepie vagabondes as will not work, nor once
give them selves to labor, whose days are doleful, and ends most odious and
hateful.

The sleepie mind does time forget: and youth to toys do most desire:
So time once paste is hard to fet: to late in age learning to require:

The signification.
HE which sits sleeping signifies slothfulnes amongst teachers, whose
desire being satisfied, cares not for the charge: the children idleness, whose
minds without a careful tutor, are bent to nothing but ease and vanities.



OUr Savior Christ rebuked his Disciples, when he came and found them a
sleep, and said unto Peter: What? Math. 26
could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray, that ye fall not into
temptation: the spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. Also, the kingdom of
heaven is like unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. Math. 13
But while men slept, there came his enemy, and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way. Which signifies ye negligence yt me^ have in ye things
belonging to God, which is by ye carefulnes of riches and pleasures of this
world. Quintilian says, Quintilian.
yt natural sin foreseeth sloth and idleness. Ishbosheth was slain by Rechab
and Baanah in his sleep. 2. King. 4.
Sampson by sleeping lost ye locks of his head, Judge. 16.
whereby his great strength was diminished, and so taken of ye Philistians.
Ovid declares in his first book, Ouidius Metham.
of one Argus, who had an hundredth eyes, and always when he slept, certain of
his eyes were open and saw, so yt at no time he might be found with all on
sleep: But Mercury by his subtle music, brought Argus in so sound a sleep,
yt he struck of his head, and so delivered Io, yt before was transformed into a
Cow. There be many yt have an hundred eyes, for they see very clear, and have
also quick wits, and perfect vndersta^dinges: but nevertheless Mercury, that
is to say, the world, often brings them a sleep: and then the Cow, that is to
say, the flesh, is lost and perishes. An idle hand makes poor, Prou. 10.
but a quick laboring hand makes rich. Time is the most precious thing that
is. Theophrastes.


All such as will not labor in time: but spend their days in idleness:
Full soon are caught up with the line: of sorrow, pain, and wretchedness.

The signification.
HE which stands by his tools, signifies the disse^bling labourer, who
minds to work no longer then his co^maunder stands by, and when there is
none to control him, then he loytereth as before. Of such idle laborers
there are to many.



AS smoke is unto ye eyes: even so is a sluggishe person to them that send him
forth. A slothful person shuts his hands into his bosom as into a pot:
Prou. 19.
and will not take pain to put it to his mouth. A slothful body will not go
to plough for cold in the winter: Prou. 20.
therefore shall he go a begging in the Summer, and have nothing. Delight not
thou in sleep, least thou come unto poverty: but open thine eyes that thou
may have bread. Thus gentle reader, may thou see the mischief and
unhappiness that ensues sloth. When Eneas came from the siege of Troy, he
arrived in Carthage, there for a time to solace him self: and as he walked, ye
Queen of Carthage, whose name was Dido, espying ye comely personage of Eneas,
was therewith inflamed. And when they had talked togethers, and sociated them a
certain space, the said Eneas departed into Italy, and there was long time
absent from the presence of Dido, who waxed displeasant at his sloth and
forgetfulness, saying, that the cause of his absence without spedie return,
would be cause of her death. Eneas not regarding the letter that Dido sent, but
being loath to journey, remained still in Italy. In the mean time, Dido slew
her self: and when Eneas knew of her death, then he lamented yt he had not come
before her death. Some writers say that Dido builded Carthage, and Eneas was
dead iij. C. years before the buildyng of Carthage: therefore it was not that
Eneas, but some other. S. Augustine writes of ye same, Confessionum in fine.

Great grief it is the learned to see: in slothful rest to spend their days:
Such may be likened to dronebees: that suck the sweet and go their ways.

The signification.
HE which rydeth on the Ass signifies sloth, as well among the chiefest as
among the lowest: the Friars weed and Beads signifies hypocrisy and
lothsomnes of the truth.



SLoth among the spiritual, is much to be reproved, and spoken of in all such
as do not thankfully apply the gifts that God gives the^, to their brothers
profit. From such God will take his gifts, and will make the^ void of al
ghostly understanding. The kingdom of heaven is like unto x. virgins, Math. 25
which took their lamps, and went to meet the bridegroom. Five of them were
folishe, and v. were wise. The folishe took their lamps, but took no oil
with them. But the wise took oil with them in their vessels, with their
lamps also. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept. And even
at midnight, there was a cry made: behold the bridegroom comes, go out to
meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and prepared their lamps. And the
folish said unto the wise: give us of your oil, for our lamps go out. But
the wise answered, saying, not so, least there be not enough for us and you:
but go ye rather to them that sell, and bye for your selves. And while they
went to bye, the bridegroom came: and they that were ready, went in with him
to the wedding, and the gate was shut up. Afterward came also the other
virgins, saying: Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said: verily I say
unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore: for ye know neither the day, nor the
hour, when the son of man shall come. The lamps signify such dead faith as
S. James declares to be in devils and rotten trees which bring forth no
fruit. Watch.
We ought always so to live, even as though we should depart presently.

Envy seeks where to find: to hurt his neighbor if he can:
And never cease but to purloyne: which has been the undoing of many man.

The signification.
THese two me^ signifies, the one a true labourer, the other an envious
deceauer: he which sows the ground is diligence of mind in sowing the seeds
of verity: but he which sta^des pouring the corn into the water, signifies a
deceatfull person, seeking by all means to waste and spoil the seeds of
verity: the birds signify the faithful followers of the verity.



Envy ought to be put out from all men: for by envy many men conspire their
own death, and come to utter destruction. Example of Caine that slew his
brother Abell, Genesis 4.
and therefore the Lord said to Caine: Now art thou cursed from the earth.
etc. By envy Joseph was sold of his brethren into Egypt. Genesis 38.
Through envy Saul would have slain David with a Iauelinne, 1. Reg. 18
but David escaped and fled from him. Who made Daniell to be cruelly
entreated, Dan. 6.
but only envy? For when Darius had ordained a C. and xx. Lords which should
be in all his kingdom, amongst who^ was Daniell, which exceeded all the reast
of the Lords, for the spirit of God was with him: so that ye king was minded
to set him over the whole realm. Wherefore the princes and Lords sought to
pick out in Daniell some quarrel, yet could they find none occasion nor
fault upon him. Then they seeing that they could not prevail, they imagined a
sure statute, namely: that who soever desired any petition, either of any God
or man within xxx. days, except it were to the king, the same person to be
cast in the Lions de^ne. So Darius made the writing, and confyrmed it: whereby
ensued, that those which sought the death of Daniell, whom God had delivered
from the den of the Lions, the same were of the Lions destroyed.

Where Gods word preached is in place: unto the people willingly:
Woe be to them that would deface: for if such cease, the stones will cry.

The signification.
HE which preaches in the pulpit, signifies godly zeal, and a furtherer of
the gospel: and the two which are plucking him out of his place, are the
enemies of Gods word, threatening by fire to consume the professors of the same:
and that company which sits still, are Nullifidians, such as are of no
religion, not regarding any doctrine, so they may be quiet to live after their
own wills and minds.



WHo caused our Savior Christ to be condemned to death, Luke. 22.
but envy of ye Jews? Also, because the counsel of Ahitofell was refused, 2.
Reg. 17.
he presently sadled his Ass and rode home, and so hanged himself. Act. 7.
The Jews also through envy stoned to death ye Martyr S. Steven. So likewise
Senacherib, 2. Esd. 4.
or Sanabalat, when he heard say that the walls of Jerusalem were redified, he
was wroth and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews. Whereby it
appears that envy is a right grievous malady, and contrary to nature: for
nature desires good, and every creature naturally takes pleasure in good
things: But envy tormenteth him self when he sees any good thing happen
unto an other, and the most harm falls upon him self. It holds the heart
and the mind in great melancholy, and makes ye color to wax pale: It
dries the body, and makes all such as use it, often to sigh, and to speak
always evil of other, and can not say well. Envy seeks always to destroy
the wealth and welfare of his neighbor. Envy makes a man to be like a feend
of hell, which may not suffer the creature in no wise to do well. God grant
for his mercy, to shorten the days of such envious minds as seeks to
displace the verity. Amor.


While envy seeks to destroy: and will not cease to leave his will:
Then mischief most does him annoy: and so of death he has his fill.

The signification.
HE which strikes, with death behind him, signifies enuiousnes against the
quiet state of the faithful, and in hoping by envy to destroy, death is his
reward: the other by constant faith in Christ is preserved, by the sword which
is the word of God, and so overcomes envy: the Angel behind him, is Gods
provident love, which never fails all those that trust in him.



THe ungodly is cast down for his iniquity: Prou. 14.
but the righteous has a good hope, even in death. A pacient man is better
then one strong: Prou. 16.
and he that can rule him self, is more worth then he that wins a city.
Through envy Acis was slain by the monster Poliphemus, Ovid. lib. 13.
because he would have ravished Galathe the wife of Acis. Also, the two sons
of king Phillip of Macedon, Percius and Demetrius, through envy sought each
others death, and were both slain. Also, Nessus deceived Hercules of Dianira,
at a river, and being on the other side, Ovid.
would have violated her, whereby Hercules shot an arrowe through his body.
Nessus perceauing him self to have his deaths wound, gave a venomed shirte to
Dianira, saying: that to whom soever she gave that shirte, his love should
never depart from her: so that by the said shirte, Hercules was destroyed. Thus
envy has undone many a man and woman, and brought the^ to utter destruction.
O wretched envy, and daughter to pride, which never sees the end of thy
miseries: thou desire to see the people in misery, and then thou reioycest,
and art glad when that thy neighbor decays: by thee, neither from thee, may
come any profit, neither in this world nor in the world to come.

To Serpent like I may compare: those greedy wolves that lambs devour:
Awayting still to catch in snare: all such as get they may by power.

The signification.
THe Dragon signifies the enemy to all that profess the word of God: the
Cardinal persecution, or a persecutor of the same: the Friar murder: the
sheep which are a killing, signifies the professors of Christ, from the
beginning of the world to these present days.



Envy is blind, and can do nothing but dispraise virtue: Liuius.
it is a scabbe of this world, to have envy at virtue. O ye miserable
conditions of people that are to be governed, Tullius.
among whom, diligence is hated, negligence is reproved, where sharpnes is
perilous, liberality tha^keles, co^municatio^ deceatfull, pernicious
flattery, every man's countenance familiar, many men's minds offended, wait to
hurt privily, fair words openly, when officers be coming, they tarry for
the^, while they be present, they do await on the^, being out of authority, al
do forsake the^. All other sins are not so pestiferous as envy: for ye
lecherous by his sin gets sometime a friend or lover: but it may be
accounted a miserable and deadly kind of friendship. Tullius.
The covetous by his usury gets goods and possessions. The negligent by his
sloth, oftentimes has peace, because he medleth with nothing. The proud of
such as he is him self, is often praised. If he be rich, of the poor for
fear: or if he has ought, for that which he has. The irious or wrathful man
is often feared. The glutton by filling his panch, of sweet and delicate
meats. Thus among all sins, envy is most pernicious, and to be accounted
most miserable.

When dainty dames has whole delight: with proud attire them selves to ray:
Pirasmos shines in the sight: of glittering glass such fools to fray.

The signification.
THe woman signifies pride: the glass in her hand flattery or deceate: the
devil behind her temptation: the death head which she sets her foot on,
signifies forgetfulness of the life to come, whereby comes destruction.



TAke heed yt thou fall not into pride, least thou perish with such as before
have offended. Cleobolius. Lindius.
Example of Lucifer, which for his pride was cast down into ye infernal hell.
Also, Adam by tra^sgression fell through ye subtle intisinges of the Serpent.
Gene. 3. Gene. 16.
Agar the servant of Sara, through pride disdained her mistres, because of a
child that she had by Abraham, therefore she was driven to fly into the
wilderness, by the way that lies to Sur. Also, Membroth or Nimrod, through pride
caused the Tower of Babell to be builded. Genesis 10.11.
And the Lord said: Behold the people is one, and they have all one language:
Come, let us go down, and confound their language, that every one understand
not his neighbors speech. And so the Lord scattered them from that place,
into the upper face of all the earth. It is therefore to be understood, ye
pride surmou^ting folly and all sin, is shame and seruitud^. Pharao king of
Egypt, Exodus 14. Psalm. 106
through his obstinate pride, was drowned in the red sea, and all his host, so
yt there remained not one of the^. Haman for his pride, was hanged on ye
gallows that he had ordained for Mardocheus. Hestor. 7.
Abimilech, because a woman smote him on ye head with a piece of a millstone,
Judge. 9.
and therewith brake his brain pan, as he approached the Tower of Thebez, he
therefore caused his harness bearer, to run him through ye body, for that it
should not be said, yt a woman had slain him. Also, Nabuchadonozor was
transformed into a dumb beast, Dan. 4.
for the space of vij. years, because he so proudly exalted him self, saying:
This is the great City of Babylon, which J my self, with my power and
strength, have made.

The rich to praise in some respect: as from all vice will soon refrain:
But such as Pauper do detecte: those gestes with Dives must take pain.

The signification.
THe rich man signifies a proud man covetous, such a one as cares for no
poor man, but for such as him lyketh (to many such are not good in a common
wealth): the poor man signifies the poverty general, whose petitions of
such are not heard, nor once relieved.



ANtiochus also for his pride, 2. Mac. 9
was greatly punished of God, and smitten with such a disease, of yt which he
might not be healed. ^. Mac. 8
Nicanor through pride, was disco^fited and overcome of ye Jews. Phaeton
because he took upon him to govern ye chariot of his father Ph^bus, he
therefore had a great fall. Dedalus was also drowned, Ouidius Metham.
because he took upon him to fly so hie in the air, that the force of the
sun beams melted his magical wings, in refusing his father Icarus
counsel. David the king after that he had numbered the people, his heart smote
him, saying: I have sinned exceedingly in that which I have done. ^. Reg. 24
Iezabell proudly sought the death of the Prophets: and therefore the Lord sent
Iehu to Iezraell. And when Iehu was come to Iezraell, ^. Reg. 9.
Iezabell heard of it, and starched her face, and tired her head, and looked
out at a window. And as Iehu entered at the gate, she said: had Zimri peace
which slew his master? And he lift up his eyes to the window, and said: Who is
of my side, who? And there looked out to him two or three chamberlaines. And he
said, throw her down: so they threw her down, and her blood dashed toward
the wall, and toward the horses, and he troade her under foot. And so she was
devoured of dogs. Why boastest thou thy self, thou tyrant, Psalm. 52.
that thou can do mischief? where as the goodness of God endures yet daily.

put me now in remembrance, for we will reason together, and show what thou
have for thee, to make thee The signification.
THe woman signifies Gods love: The heart continuance of the same: Hell under
her signifies death and destruction: unto the careless livers of this world:
the lamb signifies the quiet conscience of the faithful: And death under him
signieth the change of life, unto all the good to immortality, the bad to
destruction.

righteous, thy first father offended sore, and thy rulers have sinned against
me. Genneces. Psalm. 24.
The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compass of the world,
and they that dwell therein, who shall assend into the hill of the Lord, or who
shall rise up in his holy place. Even he that has clean hands and a pure
heart, and that has not lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to
deceive his neighbor. What man living can say that he is clean and has not
offended, now therefore consider what wonderful love our creator has to man,
Ierem. 33.
when he by his holy spirit calls us to repentance, to the end that all
should come to his eternal and heavenly kingdom. From all misdedes wherein
they have offended against me, I says the lord, will cleanse them, and all their
blaspeemies which they have done against me, when they regarded me not, I will
forgive them, and this shall get me a name, and praise, and honor, among all
the people of the earth, which shall here of the good that I will show unto
them, yea they shall be afraid and astonned at all the good deeds, and
benefits that I will do for them. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten son, John. 3.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life,
for God sent not his son into the world, to condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be saved, he that believes on him is not
condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not
believed on the name of the only begotten son of God, and this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the word, and men love darckenes more
then light, because their deeds were evil, for every one that does evil,
hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be
reproved, but he that does truth, comes to ye light, that his deeds may be
known, how ^t they are wrought in God. Ephe. 5.
Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and walk ye in love, even
as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an offringe and a sacrifice of a
sweet savor to God as for fornication, and all uncleanness let it not be once
named among you, nor coueteousnes, as it becomes saints, or filthiness or
foolish talking, or jesting, which are not comely: but rather giving of
thanks, for this ye know that no whoremo^ger, either unclean person, or
covetous person, which is a worshipper of Images, has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ, and of God, let no man therefore deceive you with vain
words, for because of such things comes the wrath of God, upon the children
of disobedience, be not ye therefore companions of them, ye were sometime in
darcknes, but now are ye light in the Lord, for ungodly communication
strengthens the body against the spirit, and withdraws the mind from al
good exercise and labor, and thereby deserves the just wrath of God, and such
as are worshippers of Images and fornicatours, such like has no part with
Christ in his kingdom, to whom be all glory for ever. Be not wise in thine
own consent: but fear the Lord, and depart from evil, Prou. 3.
so shall thine navel be hole, and thy bones strong, honor the lord with thy
substance, and with ye firstlings of al thine increase, give unto the poor,
so shall thy ^arnes be filled with plenteousnes, Tobia^.
and thy press shall flow over with sweet wine. My son depise not the
chastening of the lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom
the Lord loves, him he chasteneth, and yet delights in him, Heb. 12.
ever as the father in his own son, if ye endure chasteninge, God offers
himself unto you as unto sons, what son is he whom the father chasteneth
not. Rejoice ye heavens, and singe praises thou earth, talk of joy ye hills,
for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his that be in
trouble, but Sion said: God has forsaken me, Esaias. 49.
and my Lord has forgotten me. Will a mother forgette the child of her womb,
and not pity the son whom she has borne? And though she do forgett, yet
will I not forgette thee: says the Lor^e. These are the words that the Lord
shows unto Jeremy saying: Ierem. 30.
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, write up diligently all the words that I
have spoken unto thee in a book, for lo the time comes says ye Lord, that
I will bring again the prisoners of my people Israel and Judah (says the
Lord (for I will restore them unto the land, that I gave to their fathers, and
they shall have it in possession. By this may it evidently appear, that God is
always myndefull of his people, Christ in Math. 22.
and will not forget them, although for a time he suffer them, yet at the
length he will visit and help them. For when the Phariseyes had heard that he
had put the Saduces to silence, they came together, and one of them which was a
Doctor of the law, asked him a question, and tempting him and saying: Master
which is greatest commandment in the law: Jesus said unto him. Thou shall
love thy Lord thy God, with all heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind, Exodus ^0.
this is the first and greatest commandment: And the second is like to it.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, in these two commandments hang
all the law and Prophets. In this commandment the which our Savior Christ
spoke to a Doctor of the sent of the Phariseyes and Saduces, in willinge them
first to love God, and next his neighbor or neighbors, is plainly to be
understood, the love of our Savior Christ toward man, in declaring that he
which loved God faithfully, and also his neighbor, should receive for his
reward the everlasting joys and felici^ie, that soro^ is ^endent and plain,
that for the great lou^ our ^auiour Christ has towar^^s man, did not only
teach all those the which were mindful of his evangelical doctrine, but also
shed his most precious blood to (...) come man from the bondage of sin unto
the life of righteousness, and so (...) co^mite with God the father, to whom be
all have i^ and glory world without end.

Our love toward God.
LEt us love God, for he has loved us first, and redeemed us from all evil, if
we diligently follow his precepts and commandments, John. ^.
he was before all things he created all things, by his only power and might,
and none but he, without him was made nothing yt was made. In him is life light
and verity: a God without beginning and without ending, he came among his own,
and his own received him not, but as many as received him, to them gave he
power to be the sons of God. Prou. 8.
Therefore harken unto me, O ye children, blessed are they that keep my ways,
O give ear unto nurture, be wise and refuse it not, blessed is the man that
hears me, waiting daily at my gate, and giving attendaunce at at the posts
of my doors, for who so finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of
the Lord, but who so offends against me says God, hurts his own soul,
all they that hate me, is the workers of death, and deadly lovers. Harken also
and be steadfast in belief, and seek for none other helper and mediato^r, but
only Jesus Christ's, which is the mediator for all mankind, to God his
father, and he it is the which is the preserver and none but he. In the fourth
of Saint John, John. 4.
it is evidently showed, in the ^^uing communication, the which our Savior
Christ had with the woman of Samari^, by the well side, declaring plainly that
he himelfe was the son of God, and savior of the world, who so therefore
thatseeketh to any other mediator, redemer, or preserver then the only god
and Christ, is utterly deceived, and except speedy return, void from all joy
and felicity, I am the Lord God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
Exodus 20. Os^. 13.
that thou should not know no God but me only, and yt thou should have
no savior but only me. I have loved you says the lord, and yet ye say, where
in have thou loved us: was not Esau Jacobs brother says the lord, yet have I
loved Jacob, and hated Esau. Malach. 1. Romans 9.
Thou will say unto me, why then blames he us yet, for who has benne able to
resist his will. But O ^an, what art thou, which disputes with God, shall the
work say to the workman why have thou made me on this fashion: has not the
potter power over the claye, even of the same lump to make one vessel unto
honor, and an other to dishonor. Even so God wil^inge to show his wrath, and
to make his power known, suffers with long patience, the vessels of wrath,
ordained to damnation, and to declare the riches of his glory on ye vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. They that fear the Lord will not
mistrust his word, Eccl. 2.
and they that love him, will ^eepe his commandments: they that fear the
Lord, will seek out the things that are pleasant unto him, and they that
love him, shall fulfill his law. They that fear the Lord will prepare their
hearts, and humble their souls in his sight, they that fear the Lord, keep
his commandments, and will be pacient til they se himself, saying, better it
is for us, to fall into the hands of the Lord, then into the hands of men,
for his mercy is as great as himself. Malach. 1.
Should not a son honor his father, and a seruitant his master, if I be
now a father, where is now mine honor, if I be ye Lord where then am I feared,
says the Lord of hosts. Now to you priests that depise my name, and if ye
say, where in have we despised thy name. In this, that ye offer unclean bread,
upon mine alter And when thy son asks thee intime to come, saying: what
means these witnesses, ordinances, and laws, which the Lord our God has
commanded you: the^ thou shall say unto thy son* we were Pharaos bondmen in
Egypt; Deuteronomy. 6.
and the Lord brought us out of Egypt, with a mighty hand, and the Lord showed
signs and wonners, great and evil upon Egypt, unto Pharao and all his
household, before our eyes, and brought us out from thence, to bring us in, and
to give us the land, which he swear unto our forefathers. Psalm. 98.
Maruailous things did he in the sight of our forefathers in the land of
Egypt, even in the field of Zoan, he divided the sea and let them go through,
he made the waters to stand on an heap, he rayned down Manna also upon them
for to eat, and gave them food from heaven. But for all this they sinned more
and more, and believed not his wondrous works, therefore did he consume their
days in vanity: and their years in trouble, but he remembered his mercy
toward us, that he forgave their misdeedes, and destroyed not them vtterlly.
Yet for all that they grieved him with their hill alters, and provoked him to
displeasure with their Images. When God heard this, he was wrouth, and took
sore displeasure at Israel. While ye phariseyes were gathered together, Jesus
asked them saying: What think ye of Christ? Math. 22.
whose son is he? They said unto him, the son of David: He said unto them: How
then does David in spirit, call him Lord, saying, the Lord said to my Lord,
sit on my right hand, till I make thine ennemies thy foot stool. If David
call him Lord, how is he then his son, and none could answer him again
one word, neither durst any from that day forth ask him any more questions,
notwythstanding, that Christ, in yt he was man, was the son of David, Note.
that is desended of the stock of David, yet David seeing in spirit that he was
God, called him Lord, but the Phariseyes who were all flesly, could not
perseiue so much of ye spirit. Luke. 1^.
Behold a certain lawyer stood up and tempted him saying, master what shall
I do to enherit eternal life: He said unto him, what is written in ye law,
how read thou. And he answered and said: love thy lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind, and thy neighbor as thy self: And he said unto him, thou have
answered right, this do and thou shall live, he willing to justify himself,
said unto Jesus. Who is then my neighbor: Jesus answered and said. A
certain man desended from Jerusalem to Ierico, and fell into the hands of
thieves, which robbed him by the way, and wounded him, and left him half dead,
and by chance there came a certain priest that same way, which saw him and
passed by, and likewise a Leuit, which also looked upon him, and passed by.
Then a certain Samaritan, as he iornied by, came nigh unto him, and when he
saw him he had compassion on him, and went to and bound up his wounds, and set
him on his own beast and brought him to a common Inn, and made provision for
him, and on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave to
the host, and said unto him, take cure of him, and whatsoever thou spe^dest
more, when I come again I will recompense thee. Which now of these three
think thou, was neighbor unto him that was wounded, and he said he yt
showed mercy on him. The Lawyer perceived not yt it was himself the which was
wounded with extreme wounds of fained hope, Note.
ignorance, and sin, and the same which proffered to heal those wounds,
was the Samaritan Christ, which proffered not health unto him only, but also
unto all such as had confidence and trust in him. But he iustifiyng himself,
therein condemned himself, because there is none righteous but Christ alone.
Deuteronomy. 10.
And now Israel what does thy Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear ye
Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, to love him, and to serve thy Lord
thy God, with all thy heart and with all thy soul. Namely that thou keep the
commandments of the Lord and his ordinances which I command thee this
day, for thy wealth. God gives to man that which is good before him, Eccl. 2.
wisdom, understanding, and gladness, but unto the sinner werines, Deuteronomy. 6.
Math. 22. Iosu. 22.
and superfluous care, that he may gather and heap together, the thing that
afterward shall be given unto him, whom it pleases God, this is now a vain
thing: yea a very disquietnes and vexation of mind. Mark also the words of
our Savior Christ to Philip. Philip says unto him, show us the father and it
suffiseth us: John. 14.
Jesus said unto him, have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not
known me, Philip. He that has seen me has ^eene the father, and how say
thou then show us the father, beleuest thou not that I am in the father, and
the father in me. At the least believe me, for the very works sake. If ye love
me, keep my commandments, and I will pray the father, and he shall give
you another comforter, that he may abide with you ever, which is the spirit of
truth, whom ye world cannot receive, because the world sees him not, neither
knows him, but ye know him, but he dwells with you and shall be in you. I
will not leave you co^fortles, but will come unto you. Eccle. 14.
All transitory things shall fail at the last, and the workers thereof shall go
withal. Every chosen work shall be justified, and he that medleth withal,
shall have honor therein: blessed is the man that keeps himself in wisdom,
and exercises himself in understanding, and with discretion, shall he think
upon the foreknowledge of God, which considers the ways of wisdom in his
heart, has understanding in his secrets, goes after her, as one that seeks
her out and continues in her ways, he looks in at her windows, and
harkeneth at her doors, he takes his rest besides her house, and fasteneth
her stake into her walls, he shall pitch his tente nigh unto her hand, and in
his tent shall good things rest for evermore, he shall set his children under
her covering, and shall dwell under her branches, under her covering shall he
be defended from the heat, and in her glory shall he rest. For I suppose that
the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed
upon us. Romans 8.
Also the fervent desire of the creatures abides looking when the sons of
God shall appear, because ye creatures are subdued to vanity against their
will: but for his will which subdued them in hope, for the very creatures
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God.

How we ought to love our neighbors.
Every beast loves his like, eue^ so let every man love his neighbor, all
flesh will resort to their like. And every man will keep company with such as
he is himsele. But as the Wolf agrees with ye lamb, Eccl. 3.
so does the ungodly with ye righteous. What fellowship should an holy man have
with a dog, how can the rich and the poor agree together. The wild ass, is
the Lions pray in the wilderness, even so are poor men the meat of the rich.
Like as the proud may not away with lowlines, even so does the rich abhor the
poor. If a rich man fall, his friends set him up again: But when the poor
falls, his aquaintance forsake him. If a rich man fall into error he has
many helpers, he speaks proud words, and yet men justify him: But if a
poor man go wrong, he is punished, yea though he speak wisely, yet can it
have no place. When the rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue, and
look what he says, they praise it, unto the clouds. But if the poor man
speak, they say what fellow is this, and he do amiss, they shall destroy him
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, what company has
light with darckenes, what concord has Christ with beliall, either what part
has he that believes with an infidel, and how agrees the temple of God with
Images. Beware of unrighteous things, 2. Cor. 6. Eccle. 17.
he gave every man also a commandment concerning his neighbor, their ways
are ever before him, and are not hid from his eyes. The mercy that a man
shows, is as it were a purse with him, and the grace that is given to a man,
preserves him as the aple of an eye. These. 1.4.
But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you, for ye are
taught of god to love one an other, who so discovers secrets leseth his
credence, Eccle. 27.
and finds no friend after his mind, love thy friend, and bind thy self in
faithfulness with him, but if thou bewraiest his secrets thou shall not get him
again, for like as the man is that destroys his enemy, so is he also that
deals foolishly in the frendshippe of his neighbor. Like as one that lets
a bird go out of his hands, cannot take her again: Romans 13.
also he that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law. I say walk in the
spirit, Gala. ^.
and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, for the flesh lusts contrary to the
spirit, and ye spirit contrary to the flesh these are contrary one to the
other, so that ye cannot do that which you would, but and if ye be led of the
spirit, then are ye not under the law. The deeds of the flesh are manifest,
which are these, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, varience, zeal, wrath, strife, sedition, sects, enuiyng, murder,
dro^kennes, glotony, and such like, of ye which, I tell you before as I have
told you in time past, yt they which such things commite shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. But ye fruit of ye spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
ge^tlenes, goodness, faithfulness, mekenes, te^pera^ce, against such there is no
law, they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the appetites and
lusts. He that loves his father and mother, Math. 10.
son or daughter more then Christ, is not worthy of him. He that finds his
life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake, Seneca. Tullius.
shall find it. Men can better suffer to be denied, then to be deceived: Where
wrong is committed by two manner of ways, either by force, or by fraud, fraud
belongs to a fox, force to a Lion, both the one and the other is to the
nature of man, wonderful contrary, for that I think very necessary some
history to be spoken of concerning brotherly love, the which ought to be, and
also the misery the which eftsons happens to malicious minds, and seekers of
others harms. Horasius. libr^. primo.
I find that in the days of Darius the son of Ahasuerues king of Caldey,
there rayned also one Phalaris a tyrant over Scicilia, Sicilia is a province
of Spain and now under the government of the Emperor.
the which used to punish evil offenders very cruelly, and it fortuned that on
a time there came unto him one Palarius, a crafts man of brass, or as it may
be more plainlier spoken a brasier, such a workman as was very politic in his
occupacion. The said Palarius desiring to please Phalaris not only to get
unto himself some great praise, but also hoping to have had some large reward,
made a Bull of brass, Policro^ison.
being hollow with a door to open in the one side, whereas all those men that
were condemned should go in to be tormented, and when they were within, the
door to be closed, and fire to be made under the Bull, so that the cry, the
which the offenders made, sounded through the said Bull in such hidious sort,
as if there had been a great number of Bulls, because of certain ingens that
were within enclosed. When Phalaris saw the cruelty of the crafts man against
those me^ condemned, among the which there were some of his native country, as
also strangers, forthwith he caused Palarius to be tormented in that sort the
which he had ordained for others, it is therefore necessary that among
Christians there should be christian government, the one to love the other, and
not the one to hate the other. For by such means, the worst end of the staff
happens to the beginner. If thy neighbor be an offender, and such a one as
will not be reformed, then let the laws provided serve for his punishment, but
be thou no imaginer of evil, also let not there be too whot love the one with
the other, least there happen as sudden a cold, but live and love by measure.
Trogus. li. pri.
I read of one Candalus king of Lidus, the which loved his wife so much
because of her beutie and fayrenes, that on a time he showed her unto one Gigy
the which to fore had been his companion and fellow all naked, to the end that
he should thereby praise her beutie and fairenes, reporting her to be one of
the personablest women that then were living in so much that shortly after his
fellow Gigy committed adultery with the wife of Candalus, and so the said
Candalus thereby lost both his wife and kingdom. In this Candalus time, was
living the prophet Daniell. Tobi. 4.
Let us love therefore effecteously supporting one an other, and look that
thou never do unto an other man, the thing that thou would not an other man
should do unto thee, eat thy bread with the hungry and poor, and cover the
naked with thy clothes, set thy bread and wine upon the burial of the
righteous, and do not thou eat and drink thereof with the sinners, ask ever
counsel of the wise, be always thankful unto God, and beseech him yt he
will order thy ways, and that whatsoever thou deuisest or tahest in hand, it
may remain in him. Have we not all one father, Malach. 2. Romans 13.
has not one God made us: why does every one of us then despise his own
brother, and so break the covenant of our fathers. Thou shalt not bear
false witness against thy neighbor. Exodus 20.
We which are strong, ought to bear the frailenes of them which are weak, and
not to stand in our own conceit, Romans 1^.
but every man please his neighbor unto his wealth, and edifiyng, for Christ
pleased not himself, but as it is written, the rebukes of them which rebuke
thee, fell on me. Brethren if any man be fallen by chance into any fault, ye
which are spiritual help to amend him, in the spirit of meekenes, considering
thy self, least, thou also be tempted. Bear ye one an others burden and so
fulfill the law of Christ. Eple. ^.
I therefore which am in bands for the Lords sake, exhort you, that ye walk
worthy of the vocacion wherewith ye are called, in all humblenes of mind, and
meekenes, and long suffering, forbearing one an other through love, and that ye
be diligent to keep the unity of the spirit in the bonds of peace, being one
body and one spirit, even as ye are called, in one hope of your calling, let
there be but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and father of all,
which is above all, through al, and in you all. Phil. ^.
If there be among you any consolation in Christ, if there be any comfortable
love, if there be any fellowship in spirit, if there be any compassion or mercy,
fulfill my joy that ye draw one way, having one love, being of one accord, and
of one mind, that nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but that in
meekenes of mind, every man esteem other, better then himself, and that no
man consider his own, but what is meet for others. Math. 7.
Ask and it shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you, for whosoever axeth receives, and he that seeks finds, and
to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Be ye therefore discrete and sober,
that ye may be apt to prayers, Peter 4.
but above all things have fervent love among you, for love covers the
multitude of sins, be ye harborus one toward an other, and that without
grudging, as every man has received the gift, minister the same one toward
an other, as good ministers of the manifold grace of God, whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God neither he that loves not his brother. John. 13.
A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love together as I have loved
you, that eue^ so ye love one an other, by this shall all men know, that ye are
my desciples. This is my commandment, that ye love together, as I have loved
you, John. 15.
greater love then this has no man, then that a man bestow his life for his
friends. Thou shall not favor the pore nor honor the mighty, Leuit. 19.
but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. Thou shall not go up and
down as a privy accuser among the people, neither shall thou stand against the
blood of thy neighbor. I am the Lord, thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart, but shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, that thou bear not
sin for his sake, thou shall not avenge thy self, nor be mindful of wrong,
against the children of my people, but shall love thy neighbor as thy self. I
am the Lord, Romans 13. Amos. 5.
ye shall keep my commandments. Let love be without dissimulation, hate
that which is evil, and cleave unto that which is good. Be kind one to an
other with brotherly love. We should not love one an other, 1. Peter. 4.
as Cayne, which was of the wicked and slew his brother, and wherefore slew he
him, because his own works were evil, and his brothers good. He that loves
not his brother abides in death, John. 3.
who so ever hates his brother is a man slayer, and ye know that no man
slayer, has eternal life abiding in him.

Our love toward our enemies.
WE ought to love our enemies, ye have heard how it is said, thou shall love
thine neighbor and hate thine enemy. Math. 5.
But I say unto you love your enemies, bless them which curse you, do good to
them that hate you, pray for them which do you wrong and persecute you, that ye
may be the children of your father that is in heaven, for he makes his sun
to arise on the evil, and on the good, sends his rain on the just and
unjust, for if ye love them which love you, what reward shall ye have, do not
the publicans likewise, and if ye be friendly to your brethren only what
singular things do ye, do not the Publicans also, ye shall be therefore perfect,
even as your father which is in heaven is perfect. Prou. 2^.
Let not the wrath and gelosye move thee to follow the wicked and ungodly, why?
the wicked shall have no posterity, and the candle of the ungodly shall be put
out. My son fear the Lord and the king, and keep no company with them that
slide back from his fear, for their destruction shall come suddenly, and who
knows the adversity that may come of them both. Eccle. ^.
Go not from the doctrine of the elders, for they have learned it of their
fathers, for of them thou shall learn understanding, so that thou may make
answer in ye time of need, kindle not the coals of sinners, when thou
rebukest them, least thou be burnt in the fiery flames of their sins, resist
not the face of the blasphemer, that he lay not wait for thy mouth. Esaias. 54
Thy children shall be taught of God, and I will give them plenteousnes of peace,
in righteousness shall thou be grounded, and be far from oppression, for the
which thou need not to be afraid, neither for hinderaunce, for it shall not
come nigh thee, behold the aliant that was far from me shall dwell with me,
and he that joins battle against thee shall pearish, and as for all tongues
that shall resist thee in judgment, thou shalt overcome them, and condemn
them, this is the heritage of the Lords servants, and their righteousness
comes of me says the Lord. A wise judge will order his people with
discretion: Eccle. 10.
and where a man of understanding bears rule, there goes it well, as the
judge of the people is himself, eue^ so are his officers, and look what manner
of man the ruler of the City is, such are they that dwell therein also. An
unwise king destroys his people, but where they that be in authority be men
of understanding, there the city prospers. I say unto you whosoever
confesses me before men, even him shall the son of man confess also before
the Angels of God, Luke. 12.
and he yt denies me before me^ shall be denied before ye Angels of God, and
whosoever speaks a word against ye son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but
unto him yt blasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be forgeuen. Acts. 4.
Also when the Apostles of Christ were forbidden to preach, they would not, but
showed themselves more obedient unto God, then men, such was the envy of the
Jews to ye professors of God and his word. And it came to pass as he sat
at meat with them, he took bread blessed it, brake and gave to the^, and their
eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight. Luke.
24.
Our Savior Christ showed himself after his passion, unto two disciples as
they went toward Emas, and after that standing in the midst of the eleue^th,
as they were together, saying that he was the light of the world, and the
savior of all those which believed in him, such love had our Savior toward
the envious Jews, and yet they would not believe. Also when the martyr S.
Steven rebuked the stifnecked Jews, Acts. 7.
for their cruel oppression and putting to death of all the prophets, before
the coming of that just, whom ye have now betrayed and murdered, and ye also
have received a law, by the ordinance of Angels, and have not kept it, and
when they heard his words they gnashed their teeth upon him, and ran all at
once and stoned him. In like sort has the enemies of Gods Gospel, sought to
kill and to destroy the professors of his truth, God grant for his mercy, if
it be his will, to open their eyes, that they may perceive the truth, and sorry
their for offenses. Math. 10.
Who so ever shall not receive you, nor will hear your preaching, when ye
depart be out of that house, or that city, shake of the dust of your feet.
Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for the land of Zodom and Gomorra in
the day of judgment then for that City. Prou. 25.
There is nothing so close that shall not be opened, and nothing so hide that
shall not be known, a word spoken in due season is like apples of gold, in a
graven work of silver. Be not wise in your own opinions, recompense to no man
evil for evil, Romans 12.
provide before hand things honest in the sight of all men, if it be possible,
howbeit of your part, have peace with all men, dearly beloved avenge not your
selves, but give room to ye wrath of God, for it is written vengeance is
mine, I will reward says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him, if
he thirst give him drink, for in so doing, thou shall heap cooles of fire
upon his head, be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

2. Kings 1.
When the profit David heard that an Amelikite had slain his enemy King Saul,
he was very sorry, and mourned for him, and caused ye Amelikite for his reward
also to be slain, because he had killed the Lords anointed. ^e^e. 18.
When the Lord purposed to destroy Zodom and Gomorra. Abraham said unto him,
Lord what if there be 50. righteous, will thou spare the rest for their
sakes, so that it came to the number of ten, and there could none be found,
but only Lotte and his householde the which were preserved, thus ought every
man to forgive and to pray for his ennemy, and so shall we be the servants
of God.

Of faith and the wonderful working of the same: and steadfast belief of the
fathers in old time.
The signification.
THe man in armor signifies all steadfast beleuers of the verity, being armed
with constant zeal of Christianity, and weaponed with the shield of lively
faith, the spear of continuance, and the sword of the word of God: The Diuil
under him is temptation, being overcome by faith in Christ Jesus.



FAith is a sure co^fide^ce of things which are hoped for, Hebr. 11.
and a certainty of things which are not seen. By it the Elders were well
reported of. Gene. ^.
Through faith we understand that the world was ordained by ye word of God:
Acts. 13.
And things which are seen, were made of things which are not seen. Romans 1.
By faith Abell offered unto God a more plenteous sacrifice then Cayne, Genesis 4.
by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifiyng of his
gifts: by which also he being dead yet speaks. By faith was Enoch translated
that he should not see death, Genesis 5. Sapi. 4. Eccle. 44. and. 49.
neither was he found, for God had taken him away. Before he was taken away, he
was reported of that he had pleased God: but without faith it is impossible to
please him, for he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of the^ that seek him.

Genesis 5. Eccle. 44.
By faith Noe being warned of God, eschued the things which were as yet not
seen, and prepared the Arc to the saving of his household, through the which
Arc, he condemned the world, and became heir of ye righteousness which is
according to faith. Math. 12. Genesis 11. Acts. 7.
By faith Abraham when he was called, obeyed to go out into a place, which he
should afterward receive to inheritance: and he went out, not knowing whether
he should go. By faith he removed into the land of promise, as into a strange
country, when he had dwelt in tabernacles, and so did Isaac and Jacob heirs
with him of the same promise, for he looked for a City, having a foundation
whose builder and is God. Through faith Sara also received strength to conceive
and be with child, Genesis 21.
and was delivered of a child, when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful which had promised: and therefore sprang there of one, even of one,
which was as good as dead so many in multitude as are the stars of the sky,
and as the sand the which is by the sea shore, innumerable. These all dyed
according to faith, Genesis 15
when they had not received the promises, but saw them afar of, and believed
them, and saluted them, Job. 8. Genesis 47. 1. par. 29. psalm. 39.
and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, for they
that saw such things, declare that they seek a Country, and if they had been
mindful of the country, from whence they came out, they had leisure to have
returned again: but now they desire a better, that is to say an heavenly,
wherefore God himself is not ashamed, to be called their God, for he has
prepared for them a City. Exodus 13.
By faith Abraham offered up Isaac, when he was proved, and he offered him being
his only son, in whom he had received the promises, and to him it was
said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, for he considered that God was able
to raise up again from death, therefore received he him also for an example of
ye resurrection. By faith did Isaac bless Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27. Gene. 49.
concerning things to come. By faith Iacobe when he was a dying, blessed both
the sons of Joseph, and bowed himself toward the top of his scepter. Genesis
50.
By faith Joseph when he dyed, remembered the departing of the children of
Israel, and gave commandment of his bones

Exo. 2. Act. 7. Exo. 2.
By faith Moses when he was borne, was hid three months of his father and
mother, because they saw he was a proper child, neither feared they the kings
commandment. By faith Moses when he was great, refused to be called the
son of Pharaoes daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed
the rebuke of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, for he had
respect unto the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not the
fiercenes of the king, for he endured, even as though he had seen him which is
invisible. Exo. 12. Exo. 14. Joshua. 6.
Through faith he ordained the passover, and the effusio^ of blood, least he
that destroys ye first borne, should touch them. By faith they passed through
the red sea as by dry land: which when the Egiptians had assayed to do, Joshua.
2.
they were drowned. By faith ye walls of Jericho fell down, after they were
compassed about seven days. Iudi. 7. Iudi. 4. Iudi. 14. Iudi. 11. 1. Reg. 17.
1. Reg. 12. 1. Reg, 17. Dan. 6. Dan. 3. Dan. 2. 3. Reg. 19.
By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that were disobedient, when
she had received the spies to lodging peaceably, and what shall I more say,
for the time will be to short for me to tell of Gedeon, of Barach, and of
Sampson, and of Iephtaph of David also, and Samuel and of the Prophets, which
through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises,
and stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
turned to flight the arms of the aliantes, the women received their dead
raised to life again. Other were racked (...) would not be delivered, that
they might inherit a better resurrection. 3. Reg. 21. Esa. 38. 3. Reg. 17. 3.
Reg. 14.
Again other were tried with mockkinges and scorninges, moreover with bonds
and prisonment, and were stoned, were hewn a sunder, were tempted, were slain
with the sword, walked up and down in sheep skins and goats skins
being destitute, troubled, and vexed, which men the world was not worthy of.
They wandered in wilderness and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the
earth, and these all through faith obtained good report, and received not the
promise because God had promised a better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect.

By faith we resist the Devil, 1. John. 2.
and overcome him in the world. Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, put on the armor of God, Ephe. 6.
that ye may stand steadfast against the crafty assaults of the Devil, for we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power, and
against worldely rulers of the darckenes of this world, against spiritual
wickedness, for heavenly things, for this cause take unto you the armoure of
God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and stand perfect in all
things. They that have received the faith and the holy Ghost, and also tasted
the gospel of God, if they do forsake it, Hebr. 6.
and blaspheme it, willing to be saved by other sacrifice then that by Christ,
do abide the judgment of God without mercy, we yt believe Christ let us follow
Christ's living. Hieroni. August.
The faith of a Christian is joined with charity, and without charity is the
faith of the Devil. Like as the body is dead wherein is no spirit, Iacobus
August.
so faith is dead where there lacks works. Faith not exercised, soon waxes
sick, and being unoccupied is assaulted with sundry displeasures. Well may he
be counted right valiant in deed, which in joy nor in sorrow does not exceed,
the faithful man possesses his treasure, Seneca.
whose modesty moves still to mind measure. He that teaches the lively
faith in Christ, builds the building and doctrine of God. 1. Tim. 1. James.
1. 2. Cor. 13.
For faith in tribulation causes patience. Let every man see therefore whether
he continue in the same. Faith also makes us to obtain that which we desire
in prayer, and by the which we are by the number of saints, Math. 21. Acts.
26. 1. John. 5.
in receiving remission of our sins. Thus faith is our v^^tory, for all that
is borne of God, overcomes the world, and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is it that overcomes the world?
even he which believes that Jesus is the son of God. Christ is risen from the
dead, and is become the first fruits of them that sleep: for as by man came
death, 1. Cor. 15.
even so by man also came life everlasting, to all that faithfully believe.

Of Hope.
The signification.
THe troubled seas signify the temptations of mankind, the ship being rent,
signifies the dispersed church of God, who being tossed to and fro by the
force of temptations, and thrown out, yet they not fearyng the boisterous
winds of adversity, but thorough assured hope in Christ they fly to the
rock of endless felicity, which is Christ.



BEcause therefore that we are justified by faith, we are at peace with God,
thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have a way in through faith unto
his grace, where in we stand and rejoice in hope of the praise that shall be
given of God, neither do we see only, but also rejoice in tribulation: for we
know that tribulation brings patience, Romans 5.
patience brings experience, experience brings hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, for the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost
which is given unto us. All such as be right Christians, are not ashamed of
this hope, for they are well assured that by the death of Christ, God loves
us, and will bring the hope of all Christians to pass. Hope here is not alone,
but is joined with faith and charity, so that the one cannot be without the
other, neither the one to have the lack of the other: For as Faith cannot be
justified without works, no more can hope without charity: for as faith
without works is dead, so is hope without charity dead also. Therefore it is
necessary for all christians to join themselves to these four, and although
they be named in four several names, yet but two in effect, as may be very
plainly understood, Faith, works, hope and charity, works in the name of a
plural number, signifies all, as well the evil, as good. But I mean those
works in the which all faithful Christians ought to arm themselves withal,
and all those that with willing minds do further any of these, unto such the
reward is most happy and fortunate, with faithful hope there is always
constant charity, the which works so diligently that she never seaseth, but
is still laboring by all means to help and relieve all such as of her has
need. Example herein, may be compared unto all diligent preachers and
furtherers of Gods word, the which neither for persecution nor preferment of
living, will once leave of from teaching the poor of whom they have cure and
charge, (of such there is very few) which signifies most evident and plain,
that charity is nere blind and can not very well see. Therefore I wish or
desire all estates so to bridle their affections, that with sufficiency each
man may so live in this world, that in ye world to come he may have everlasting
felicity. Hope thou in the Lord and keep his way, psalm. 37.
and he shall promote thee, that thou shall possess the land. When the ungodly
perish thou shall see it. psalm. 17.
But my hope has been in thee O Lord. I have said thou art my God. psalm. 46.
God is our hope and strength, a very present help in time of trouble. For
thou lord art my hope, psalm. 91.
thou have set thine house of defense very hye. My soul has longed for thy
salvation, psalm. 119.
and I have a good hope because of thy word. Thou O God art the thing that I
long for, psalm. 71. psalm. 141.
thou art my hope eue^ from my youth. I also cried unto the Lord, and said,
thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the living. Blessed be the Lord
my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight, my
hope, and my fortress, my castle and deliverer, my defender in whom I trust,
which subdueth my people that is under me: for I suppose that the afflictions
of this life, Romans 8.
are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed upon us, also the fervent
desire of the creatures abides, loking when ye sons of God shall appear,
because the creatures are subdued to vanity against their will, but for his
will which subdued them in hope, for the very creatures shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: for
we know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauaileth in pain, even
unto this time not they only, but even we also which have the first fruits of
the spiritie, mourn in our selves, and wait for the adoption, and look for
the deliverance of our bodies, for we are saved by hope: but hope that is
seen, is no hope, for how can a man hope for that which he sees, but and if
we hope for yt which we see not, then do we with patience abide for it: for
where faith is, there is hope, and where as there is no sure hope, there is no
christian faith, wherefore it may be right well said, we are saved by hope.
That is by the most certain and sure faith in Christ's promise, Romans 12.
which causes us to hope certainly that at the time appointed, we shall be
delivered from this great burden of the flesh. Prou. 11. Pro. 14.
The desire of ye righteous is acceptable, but the hope of the ungodly is
judgment. The ungodly is cast a way for his iniquity, but the righteous has
a good hope even in death. Pro. 25.
The hope that is put in a false man in time of need, is like a rotten tooth,
but let not thy soul be moved to slay him. Also as there is a good hope, unto
the godly which before is expressed so is there a feigned hope among the wicked
and very seldom can be redressed, which is when a man in worldly causes
hops to bring to pass that thing which by no means may be entertained or
gotten. Example of one Iphis the son of Theucer, king of Mesia, a country
joining to Hungary, the which for the love of a damsel called Anaxareten,
hanged him self. Wherefore the Poets have feigned the said Anaxareten to be
turned into a stone because that she loved not him the which for her love had
hanged him self. Ouidius lib. 4.
Moreover what ensued of the Princes which sought the death of the Prophet
Daniell, their folishe and vain hope was utterly frustrated, for they thought
that Daniell being once among the lions, could never have escaped undestroyed,
but God so preserved him that he escaped yt death, and those princes which
hoped that after his death to have ruled and borne their own sway, were of the
lions utterly destroyed, this is the end of all vain hope. Therefore as there
is an infallible and true god, so is there also but one firm and true faith,
and in like, one hope, and one charity. Let all christians therefore pray unto
God to send his holy spirit amonge^t us, and that we may be thankful for his
inestimable benefits daily bestowed upon us, lest the like mischief happen
unto us now present, as by example has happened unto those the which ^aue
been refusers of the same.

The description of Charity.
1. John. 4.
GOd is charity, and he that dwells in charity dwells in God, and God in
him. Here in is also love perfect in us that we should have trust in the day of
judgment. The charity of God is declared unto us, John. 3.
for he has sent his son already into the world to redeem the world, from
sin, death, and hell, and has paid for our ransom, even his most precious
blood upon the cross for us miserable creatures, else had we been utterly
destroyed for ever. No man ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from
heaven. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
son of man be lifted up, that none that believe in him perish, but have
eternal life. Little children ye are of God, and have overcome the world, for
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, he the which is
prince of the world is the devil. But the charitable loving and merciful
savior, he is the king of heaven, and of all charitable people, but such as
say that works only justifies from sin, do not only and utterly deny
Christ to be come in the flesh, but also they deny and deprive them selves from
the everlasting joy and heavenly felicity, and although works are needful
and necessary, yet being without faith, hope, and charity, nothing at all
avails. In beleuyng that all such works as are done truly, and not
fainedly, with faith joined, are most wholesome and profitable. Hope, in
tarying the good will and pleasure of God, never thinkyng the Of Charity.
The signification.
AS many as intend to be pertakers with Christ and his Apostels must use this
work of charity, which is to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to harbor
the harbourles, and lodge the stranger, to visit the sick, and to relieve the
prisoners and poor afflicted members of Christ, this is the duties of all
faithful people.

time long of this our abode and pilgrimage. Charity in all things
nourishing, Romans 5.
and ready to cherish all such as lack and are in necessity, and so
continuyng till it shall please the Lord, to change us into a better life,
which is most glorious: for if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of his son, much more, seeing we are reconciled, we shall be
preserved by his life, not only so, but we also joy in God by the means of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. Nothing ought
to separate us from the charity of God: Romans 8.
for whatsoever he be yt sees what Christ has done for him, cannot but believe
that God loves him, and with all his soul, mind, and will, ought to love god
again: for thorough his love that loves us, we overcome strongly the
infirmity of our corrupt and filthy flesh, yea I am sure that neither death,
neither life neither angels, neither rule, neither power, neither things
present, neither things to come, neither hie, neither low, neither any other
creature, shall be able to depart any faithful beleuer from the love of God
showed in Christ Jesus our Lord. For the eternal wisdom of God was, and is
such, that before the world began, appointed certain that should profess and
set forth the gospel of his son, even to the worlds end, that is, they are
not only called, but also elected and chosen. All the commandments do lead
us to charity, for the end of the commandments is love, the which comes
of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, for the which
things some have erred, and have turned unto vain iangelyng, because they
would be doctors in the Scriptures, and yet understand not what they speak,
neither whereof they affirm. If this part of Scripture were well considered of
all such frantike heads, the which takes upon them to interpret the
scriptures according to their own wilful minds, I do not doubt, but such
would be better advised, in considering their duties, not only to their
princes and governors, but also to the omnipotent God who is able in a moment
clearly to seclude, and cut of such unprofitable impes. For as Corach,
Dathan, and Abiram, were destroyed for their rebellion against Moses Gods
servant, in resisting the ordinances and laws before commanded, they as men
the which would seem wiser in their doing then Moses, which had the firm and
true law in deed, were by the Lord so grievously plaged, that the earth opened,
and they all went down into hell, 1. Cor. 16.
such is the reward of all disobedient children. Watch ye, stand fast in
faith, quit you like men and be strong, and let your business be done in love.
1. John. 2.
My little children these things write I unto you, that ye sin not, if any
man sin, yet we have an advocate with ye father Jesus Christ which is
righteous, and he it is that obtayneth grace for our sins, not for our sins
only, but for the sins of the whole world. And hereby we are sure that we
know him, if we keep his commandments. Romans 1.3
He that says I know him and keep his commandments, is a liar, and the
verity is not in him. Ephe. 4.
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one an other, with charitable love. I
therefore which am in bonds for the lords sake, exhort you, that we walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, in all humblenes of mind, and
meekenes, and long suffering, forbearing one an other, and forgeuyng one an
other through love, and that you be diligent to keep the unity of the spirit,
in the bond of peace, being one body and one spirit, even as you are called
in one hope of your calling. Let there be one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and father of all, which is above all, and in you all. Let us be rooted
in charity, that is let us consider one an other, to provoke unto love, and to
do good works: and let us forsake the fellowship that we have among our
selves, as the manner of some is: but let us exhort one another, and that so
much the more, because ye see that the day draws nigh, in this part is showed
our duty, if we will be pertakers of the mercy before rehearsed. Hebr. 10. Heb.
6. Math. 12.
But if we sin willinglingly after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful loking for
judgment and violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries. This place is
also spoken of in the 6. of this epistle, and also in the 12. of the Evangelist
S. Matthew, that in sinnyng willingly, is blasphemy against the holy ghost,
which S. John calls ye sin unto death, let all such therefore, as spare not
to blaspheme the spirit of God in resisting and railing upon his word know
that their mass is no sacrifice for sin, but yt the terrible judgment of
God remains for them and their wicked idolatry. Charity overcomes all
sin. If I had the spirit of prophecy and knew all mysteries, and all manner
of cunning. Also if I had all faith, in so much as I could translate and carry
away mountains out of their places, yet were I nothing if I lacked charity.
Moreover, if I did distribute all my goods in feding the poor, and although I
gave my body that I burned, having no charity, it nothing avails me.
Charity is pacient and gentle. Charity has envy at no man, it does nothing
amiss, it is not puffed out with pride, it is not ambicious, she seeks not her
profit, she is not moved, she thinks no evil, she rejoices in no mischief,
she goes with truth, all things she suffers, all things she believes,
according to godly charity, all things she hops which is to salvation, all
things she bears, charity never fails. Thus says the Lord: the people of
Israel, Iere. 13.
which escaped in the wilderness, from the sword, found grace to come into
their rest. Even so shall the Lord now also appear unto me from far, and
say, I love thee with an everlasting love, therefore by my charitable mercy, I
have drawn thee to me. I will repair thee again, O thou daughter of Israel,
that thou may be fast and sure. Therefore whatsoever thou be that this shall
read, judge not rashly, but use the Scriptures to the furtheraunce of thy
health and solace, and although in many points they may dislike thee, yet know
thou that it is the truth and thou the liar: therefore I say again, whatsoever
point or title thou happen to read, and do not well understand it, as if thy
capacity be not able to comprehend ye meaning thereof, omit it to the divine
wisdom of god, and pray yt it may be opened and reveled unto thee, and thus
with charity use thy self, that thereby it be not only a profit to thee
whilst thou art living, but also an everlasting joy in the world to come. The
hipocrites for to follow their inuencions, do leave judgment, and charity
undone, as appears more evident in the xi. chapter of the Evangelist S. Luke.
Luke. 11.
God grant for his mercy, such charity to reign amongst us, that there may
not only be an outward show thereof, but also in deed, whereby we may be found
at the general day such servant, as were occupied and not stepyng, when we
shall be called.

Of humayne justice and judgment.
NO man may be just, that fears either death, pain, exile, or poverty, or
that prefers their contraries, before very equity. Tulli.
The foundation of perpetual praise and renoume is justice, without the which
nothing is commendable. King Agesilaus being demanded which was the better,
either justice or fortitude. He answered, if all men were just, we neded no
fortitude. The glory of a good man is to do justice. Justice exalts the
people, but sin makes the people wretched and miserable. The Emperor
Alexander hearing that a poor old woman was ill entreated with one of his
soldiers, Aristides.
he discharged him, and gave him in bondage unto the woman to get her her
living with his craft, forasmuch as he was a carpenter. Aristides, being
called the righteous, being demanded of one if he was righteous of his own
nature. Nature said he, has much helped me thereto, but yet by mine industry,
I have helped her also. In the pathe of justice is life, the way that turns
there from, leads unto death. Justice exalts the people in honor. Sin
makes the people wretched and miserable. Use not justice for favor of
frendshippe, or malice, but so deal with all men, that they may report well of
thee. My son, desiring wisdom, keep thou true justice, and God almighty will
give it unto thee. Caius fabricus, was consul of Rome in his days there was
discention among the Samnites, and for that they determined an end, came
before Of Justice.
The signification.
SHe which sits having in one hand a sword, and in the other a pair of
balance, is justice, also having but one eye in the midst of her forehed,
signifies upright judgment, not exteming the person, the balance equity, to
use no parcialitie, nether for love nor favor, the sword to cut of all
rebellious persons and offenders, the other are signified in the chapter.

yt said Fabricus, and profering a great su^me of gold desired his counsel
for that they had been so long time in controversy. Fabricus seeing their gold,
laughed, saying: let me first see whether it has either taste or smell, and so
gave to them their gold again, here in he showed himself to be such a judge
as regarded more true justice, then corrupt bribery or gain. For says he, it
is better to be master over gold, then that gold should have the government,
the which increases most miserable torments, it may be supposed that in
these our days there are very few such Judges and doers of Justice, for the
corrupt desire of gold has blinded the eyes of many, not altogether among
judges, but also among all degrees, as well spiritual as temporal, and
forasmuch as all comme^dable histories ought no to be forgotten in causes
needful, therefore are they placed in such sort, as most best may sollicitate
the minds of all loving and diligent readers, and also to that end and purpose
that when Gods justice and judgment shall be showed among the wicked for the
inordinate living) as a fore warnyng, let this be taken head of, for that the
justice and judgment by Gods words, threatens for grievous offense grievous
punishment.

Cambices being king over the Persians and Medes about the year of the world
four thousand and seventy, elected and chose one named Sisamnes to be judge
over his people, the which for his parcialitie was complained upon unto the
king, that he had against law and right condemned a man to death, the matter
being examined and found true, forthwith the king caused the said Judge to be
put to death, and his skin to be striped of, and laid before the judgment
seat, where tofore he had done the offense, and also caused Ottanus, Sisames
son to succeed in judgment, admonishing him to beware of perverse justice by
example of his fathers skin, lest being found with the like fact, to have
the like reward, and also caused these verses to be written of him as
follows.

Policro.
1. Sede sedens ista, iudex inflexibilis sta
2. A manibus reuoces munus, ab aure preces
3. Sit tibi lucerna, lex lux, pellisque paterna,
4. Qua recedes natus, pro patre sponte datus.
Thou that sit in this iudicall place,
Set up right, and hold thy hands from meede,
Thine ears from prayer, and favor from thee chase,
Let love be thy guide, keep justice I thee read,
Thy fathers skin, which does thy chair spread,
Have in thy mind, fall not to like offense,
Lest for thy fault, thou make like recompense.
The judges ought to do righteous judgment according to the commandment of
God given by Moses unto the children of Israel, saying: I charged your judges
at the same time, saying, hear the cause of your brethren, and judge
righteously between every man and his brother, Deu. 1.16.
and the stranger that is with him. See that you know no faces in judgment
but hear the small as well as the great, and be afraid of no man, for the
judgment is Gods, and the cause that is to hard for you bring unto me, and I
will hear it. Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy cities,
which the Lord thy God gives thee thorough out thy tribes, and they shall
judge the people righteously. Wrest not thou the law, nor know any person,
neither take any reward, for gifts blind the wise, and peruerte the words of
the righteous. That which is just and right shall thou follow, that thou may
live, and enjoy the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Sirach. 20 Pro.
^4.
Rewards and gifts blyndeth the eyes of the wise, and makes him domme, that
he cannot tell men their faults. It is not good to have respect of any person
in judgment, neither to regard the outward appearaunce of men. He that says
to the ungodly, thou art righteous, him shall ye people curse, yea, the
comminaltie shall abhor him, but they that rebuke the ungodly, in them does
God delight, and a rich blessing shall come upon them. Sirach. 11.
Condemn no man before you have tried out the matter, and when thou have made
inquisition, then reform righteously, give not sentence before thou have heard
ye cause, but first let men tell out their tales. Strive not for a matter, that
touches not thy self, and stand not in the judgment of sinners.

If there be strife between men, Deu. 29. Deu. 27.
they shall come unto the law, and let the judges give sentence between them,
and justify the righteous, and condemn ye ungodly. Cursed be he that takes
reward to slay the soul of innocent blood, for in judgment a man should not
agree to the voice of many, for to come by the truth. Thou shall not accept a
vain tale, nether shall put thine hand with ye wicked, Exo. 23.
to be an unrighteous witness. John. 7.
The law does forbid to judge of a man, except he be known to be such a one,
as has been before either an extorcioner, or a perjured person, or such a one
as has been before an utter enemy to all good laws and orders, he that
judges his brother, judges the law. James. 4
What art thou that iudgest an other: Go to now, ye that say, to day and to
morrow let us go into such a city and continue there a year, and buy and sell,
and win, and yet cannot ye tell, what shall happen on the morrow, for what
thing is your life, it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away: for that ye ought to say, if the Lord will, and if we
live, let us do this or that, but now ye rejoice in your bostinges, all such
reioysings is evil: therefore to him that knows how to do good, and does it
not, to him it is sin, he that backbiteth or judges his brother, does judge
the law to be evil, for the law forbids so to do. He that knows and yet
does not, is without excuse, for God has promised no mercy, but to the^ that
will do their good will. Herein is not only an excellent admonition unto
worldly judges, but also among all estates, so that whatsoever he be, that by
any means goes about to dislike or misuse, unto that person is promised the
just judgment of God, the which has power to destroy both body and soul.
Thou shall not favor ye poor, nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness thou
shalt judge thy neighbor, thou shall not go up and down, as a privy accuser
among ye people, Leui. 19.
neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor that thou bear no
sin for his sake. Pro. 3.


My son forget not thou my law, but see that thine heart keep my
commandments, let mercy and faithfulness never go from thee, bynd them about
thy neck, and write them in the tables of thine heart, so shall thou find
favor and good understanding in the sight of God and man. Eccle. 4.
Deliver him that suffers wrong from the hand of ye oppressor, and be not
faint hearted when thou sit in judgment. Be merciful unto the fatherles as
a father, and be instead of an husband unto their mother, so shall thou be an
obedient son of the highest, and he shall love thee more then thy mother
does. At the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death
dye, Deu, 17.
and at the mouth of one witness let no man die. Eccle. 20.
Beware of bribery and gifts, for rewards and gifts blind the eyes of the
wise and make him domme, that he cannot tell men their faults. The Kite in the
air knows her time, the turtle, the Storke, and the swalow do come at their
seasons, my people know not their lords judgment. Tulli.
A good man will not in his friends cause do against a weal public, against
his oath, nor against the trust which is put in him, for he lays aside the
personage of a friend, when he takes on him a judges office. Alexander Augustus.
The emperor Alexander would never suffer to be sold the office of a judge, or
great authority in ye execution of laws saying, needs must he sell that does
buy. And I will not let that there shall be merchants of governance, which if I
do suffer, I may not condemn, for I am ashamed to punish a man that buyeth and
sells. Themistocles being the chief judge in Athence, when there came to him
a great musician which desired of him a thing somewhat against justice.
Themistocles answered, if in singing thou do not regard number and time,
thou art not worthy to be called a good musician, nor I a good Judge if I would
prefer before the laws, the private favor of any one person. 1. Reg. 8.
The children of Israel cried out unto Samuel against his two sons, the
which he had made to be rulers of his people, because they did pervert ye law
and were corrupt with rewards, whose names were Ioell and Abia, and required a
king (consider the misery the which has always happened among cruel and
tyrannous judges, and also the happy success of good and godly maiestrates,
Judges and other officers, and then may it plainly be perceived to whom Gods
mercy is showed, for as he is a god of truth, so is he also in using his
justice to the wicked damnation, and to the other most happy salvation.

The description of Verity.
CHrist is the truth, and he is also called the spirit of truth, John. 14.
not only because he is true, but because he makes ye name into whom he
enters true, where as all they do, without the spirit is none other thing but
lies. 2. Peter. 1.
Also S. Peter says, that all diligence ought to be showed among christians.
And hereunto give all diligence in your faith, ministryng virtue in virtue,
knowledge in knowledge, temperaunce in temperance, patience in patience,
godliness in godliness, brotherly kindness in brotherly kindness, love, for if
these things be among you and are plenteous, they will make you that ye
neither shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. But he yt lacks these things is blind and gropeth for the way with
his hand, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sin, as many as
lacks these and such like works are blind and understands not, what the
faith of Christ means, and also without the mercy of Jesus Christ, are
utterly secluded from all heavenly felicity, which felicity cannot be gotten
(of such) with out hearty prayers, in the time of this transitory abode upon
earth, and as many as have in them the motions of these godly and fruitful
virtues, may be most assured, to be the very elect, and that they have the true
faith, so long as they continue therein, no state, no time, no flourishing power,
no monarchy, nothing within the circuit of the whole earth, may once be
compared to the prosperous estate and endeles felicity of those and such as
have and do obey the living God.

Joshua for that he obeyed God enherited certain possessions in the land of
Canaan, and likewise the lord strengthened Caleb ye son of Iephune, which
said, behold the Lord has kept me alive as he said. This 45. years even
since the Lord spoke this word unto Moses while the children of Israel
wandered in the wilderness, Joshua. 14.
and now, lo, I am this day 85. years old, and yet am as strong at this
time, as I was when Moses sent me, look how strong I was then, so strong am I
now, whether I go to war or to come again. Herein is plainly showed what
happy reward happens unto those that use truth, for that both Joshua and
Caleb obeyed the lords behestes, truly they therefore received the reward of
truth which is eternal felicity. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth, let thy tongue be ignorant of lying, Ieronomi.
and swearing, and love so well truth, that what soever thou speak, think
that thou swerest. Truth most commonly with many words is scattred to nothing.
Lactanti.
The eternal God is so merciful unto his people that he gives them space to
amend of their former offenses, and calls them by his prophets and
preachers, to the end that they at all times should be ready in all truth and
godly exercises, to sollicitate the^ selves withal, Exo. 18.
as for example. The Lord commanded Moses, saying: Thou shall seek out among
all the people, men of actiuitie, and such as fear God, true men hatyng
covetousness, and make them heads over the people. Deu. 13.
If thou shall hear say in one of thy cities, which thy Lord thy God has
given thee to dwell in, that certain men being the children of Beliall, are
gone out from among you, and have moved the Inhabiters of their city, saying,
Let us go and serve strange Gods which ye have not known, then thou must seek
and make search, and inquire diligently, and behold, if it be true and the
thing of a surety, that such abomination is wrought among you, then thou
shall smite the dwellers of that city, in the edge of the sword, and destroy
it utterly, and all that is therein, and even the very cattle thereof, with
the edge of the sword, and gather all the spoil of it, into the midst of the
street thereof, and burn it with fire, both the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, for the Lord thy God. For as much therefore as the
almighties charge was so great unto Moses and Aaron, with the rest Ministers in
those days concerning Idolatry and supersticious ordinances, and that they
were commanded by the mouth of the mighty and eternal God, fully to seclude
themselves, not only from the personages or companies, but also from all such
goods as all those children of Beliall had in their government, and in no
wise to entermeddle with one jot of it, and that both their feigned Gods and
goods should be burned, not privily, but openly, to the intent, that those
Levites and people which believed in the true God should not at no time
therewith be infected, and also because Satan should not have any quarrel,
at no time, amongst the peculier people of God, since therefore that the
commandments of God, Of Verity.
The signification.
HE which sits on the raynebowe signifies Christ, and the sword in his
hand signifies his wrath against the wicked, the round compass, the world,
and those two climing, the one a Pope, and the other a Cardinal, striuyng who
shall be higheir, and the Devil which falls headlong down is Lucifer,
which through pride fell, he which holds the world, is death, standing in the
entrance of hell to receive all such superbious livers.

were so earnestly looked unto in those days, and so justly and truly
observed, how much more ought it, in these our days, to be both looked and
seen unto, for those people believed in the promises to come, hoping in deed,
that that god the which had promised, was able to perform that which was
promised, and through there belief were received up in glory, now that which
was promised, and of them looked and hoped for, is come to pass, which is
Christ, the savior of the whole world, and unto us as mighty a savior, which
believe, as unto them the which before his coming through the promise believed.
Then if we will be the true children of God, as they were, we must do as they
did, which is to follow yt which God commanded, not only them, but all us
also, which is to cleave to all truth, to deny all supersticious enormites and
imaginations of man, and to use the word of God rightfully and truly, taking
nothing from it, neither adding or putting any thing to it, but sincerely and
truly to reverence and obey it, and to show our selves willing members of the
church of God, and then God will guide us, and so inflame our hearts with the
ardent desire of his promises, that at no time the boisterous winds of error
shall not once have power to overthrow us, neither the tiranus threatening of
princes and magistrates once able to euert or turn us from the divine
precepts of our only Lord and savior Jesus. Deu. 18.
When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, se that
thou learn not to do after the abominations of those nations, let there not
be found among you any one, that makes his son or daughter to go through
the fire, or that uses witchcraft, or a choser out of days, or that regards
the flying of foul or a sorcerer, or a charmer or that counsels with
spirits, or a southsayer or that asks the truth of them that be dead, for all
that do such things, are abominable unto the lord, and because of these
abominations, the lord thy God does cast them out before thee, when thou art
come unto any land whether it be in part of thy native country or others,
learn not the mischeuous imaginations of men, but use thy self with the sweet
counsels of Gods word, let not the subtle craftines of satan, inflame
thine heart with sorcery or witchcraft, or any vain worshipping of
supersticious and diabolical laws, for lukers sake, but chiefly in all
storms of temptations pray to the mighty God to aid thee, and arm thy self
with gods truth, never seacing of thy labor, till the lord thy God does call
thee, and whatsoever he be that in this sort spe^deth his days, let him be
sure to have a most happy reward. Example.

Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah did reign, 4. Reg. 18
five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign and reigned nine
and twenty years in Jerusalem, and he did that which was right in the syghte
of the Lord, and therefore the Lord prospered him. Teach me, and I will
hold my tongue, Job. 6.
and when I do err, show me where in. How steadfast are thy words of
truth, and which of you can rebuke or reprove them. Be thou my Judge O Lord
etc. Psalm. 26.
For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes, and I will walk in thy
truth. etc? O shut not up my soul, with the sinners, nor my life with the
blood thirsty, in whose hands is wickedness: and their right hands are full of
gifts. Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, ^sal. 45.
because of the word of truth, of mekenes, and righteousness, and thy right
hand shall teach the terrible things. But lo thou requiredst truth, in the
inward parts, Psalm. 5^.
and shall make me to understand wisdom secretly. Mercy and truth are met
together, Psalm. 85.
righteousness and peace have kissed each other, truth shall flourish out of the
earth, and righteousness has looked down from heaven. But thou o lord art full
of compassion and mercy, long suffering plenteous in goodness and truth. Psalm.
86. psalm. 89.
My song shall be always of the loving kindness of the lord, with my mouth will
I ever be showing thy truth from generation to generation, thy truth shall thou
stablish in the heavens, O Lord ye very heavens, shall praise thy wondrous
works, and thy truth in the congregation of saints, O Lord who is like unto
thee, thy truth most mighty lord is on every side, righteousness and equity is
the habitation of thy seat, mercy and truth shall go before thy face, my truth
and my mercy also shall be with him, and in my name shall his horn be exalted,
nevertheless my loving kindness will not I utterly take from him nor suffer my
truth to fail. Lord where are thine old loving kindness which thou swarest
unto David in thy truth, psalm. 91.
his faythfullnes and truth, shall be thy shilde and buckler. It is a good
thing to give thanks unto the Lord, psalm 111
and to sing praises unto thy name O most hiest, to tell of thy loving kindness
early in the morning, and of thy truth in the night season, the works of his
hands are verity and judgment, all his commandments are true, they stand
fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and equity. O praise the Lord
all ye heathen, Psalm. 1.17.
praise him all ye nations, for his merciful kindness is ever more and more
toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever. Psalm. 1.19.
O take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy
judgments all thy commandments are true. Thy truth also remains from one
generation to an other, thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and
thy law is the truth. Be thou nigh at hand O Lord, for all thy
commandments are true. Thy word is true, and is from everlasting, all thy
judgments of thy righteousness endures for ever. Pro. 8.
Does not wisdom cry, does not understanding put forth her voice and say, my
throat shall be talking of thy truth, and my lips abhor ungodliness. A Just
man will tell the truth, and show the thing that is right, but a false witness
deseueth. A true mouth is ever constant, but a dissembling tongue is ever
chaungeable, Pro. 6.
the lord abhors lying lips, but they that labor for truth please him. A
false witness shall perish, Pro. 21.
but he that is a true man, boldly speaks that he has hard. Have I not
warned thee very often, Pro. 22.
with counsel and learning, that I might show thee the truth, and that thou
with the verity might answer them that send unto thee. Woe be unto them
that make unrighteous laws, Esaias. ^.
and devise things which be to hard for to keep, where through my people are
oppressed, and the Innocents of my people robbed of judgment, that wisdom
may be their pray, and that they may rob the fatherless. What will you do in
time of visitation, and when destruction shall come from far? To whom will ye
run for help, and to whom will you give your honor, that he may keep it,
that when I with draw my hand, ye come not among the prisoners, or lie among
the dead. etc? But faythfulnesse and truth shall they trust unto, yea unto the
lord the holy one of Israel. Esaias. 16
And in mercy shall thy seat be prepared, and he shall sit upon it in the truth
in the tabernacle of David, judging and seking judgment, and making have unto
righteousness. In that day shall this song be soung, Esaias. 16.
In the land of Judah, we have a strong city, salvation shall God appoint in
stead of walls, and bulwarks, open ye the gates that the righteous people
which keeps the truth may enter in, there mind is set upon thee, because
thou preseruest them in peace, yea in peace, because they put their trust in
thee, put ye your trust always in the Lord, for in the Lord God there is
strength for evermore, let all christians joy in this heavenly comfort, the
which the holy prophet of God speaks, for although it be long agone since he
spoke it, yet is it as fruitful to al faithful christians now in these our
days as ever it was before. God grant that the hearts of al faithful
christians may be thankful, for these his inestimable benefits and mercyes
showed unto us in these our days, and therefore let us rejoice with the
Israelites, and say God is our righteousness and truth, and God has delivered
us from the fiery, and cruel malice of satan, and al papistical doctrine,
whereby now having no let, nor foes to disturb us, may so diligently show
ourselves, in each vocation, that thereby Gods name may be glorified, and our
souls refreshed, with ye heavenly food of immortal joys, to the which
eternal and living God be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

He that fears God will do good, and who so keeps the law, Sirach. 15.
shall obtain wisdom, men that go about with lies, will not remember her, but
men of truth shall be found in her, and shall prosper even unto the beholding of
God. And above all things pray the highest that he will lead thy way in
faithfulness and truth. The arrogant and stifnecked Phariseyes, although they
believed not ye preaching of our Savior Christ, yet they confessed him, to be
the truth, saying: master we know that thou art true and teach the way of
God truly neither carest thou for any man, Math. 22. Mark. 12.
for thou regardest not the outward appearaunce of men, tell us therefore how
think thou, is it lawful that tribute be given unto Caesar or not: But Jesus
perceived their wickedness, said, why tempte ye me ye hipocrites, show me the
tribute money, and they took him a penny, and he said unto them, whose is
this Image and superscription, they said unto him, Cesars. Then said he unto
them, give therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Cesars, and unto God
those things that are Gods. By this Caesar, is meant all temporal rulers, to
whom we ought to give all things that the law of the country we be in,
binds us to give, whether it be our goods, our life, our children, or
servants, to do the^ service, as in resisting the forrayne enemy, and showing
our selves obedient subjects unto our prince and gouerners, not after a
sodomicall order, but after those orders yt are as well to be allowed of God, as
of ye Prince or magistrates. Every one yt evil does, hates ye light, John. 3.
neither comes to ye light, least his deeds should be reproved, but he yt
does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be known, how yt they
are wrought in God. He that comes from heaven is above all, and what he has
seen and heard, that he testifies, and no man receaueth his testimony, he
that has received his testimony, has set to his seal that God is true. Which
seal signifies our Christian belief, the which when we have heard, do forth
with follow, to the uttermost on our parts, and do steadfastly stand to the
same, refusing no plagues that may be laid on the body, for that sweet fruit
of happy joy, but even to the end, therein so to continue, and then have we
believed, and also sealed. John. 7. John. 8. Romans 3. 2. Cor. 6.
But he that seeks his praise that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him, yea, and he that sent me is true. Let God be true,
and every man a liar, as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy
sayings, and overcome when thou art judged. Let us give none occasion of
evil, that in our office, be found no fault, but in all things let us
behave our selves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessityes, in anguishes, in stripes, in imprisonmentes, in strives, in
labors, in watchynges, in fastings, in puernes, in knowledge, in long
sufferyng, in kindenes, in the holy ghost, in love unfeigned, in the word of
truth, in the power of God, by the armor of righteousness, of the right hand
and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report,
as deceyuers and yet true. And I saw heaven open, and behold a white horse, and
he that sat upon him, was called faithful and true, and in righteousness, he
does judge and make battle. Revel. 19.
And I saw an angel stand in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying, to all the fowls that fly by the midst of heaven, come and gather
your selves to the supper of the great God, that all flesh may be devoured. The
multitude that cried, are the universal church or congregation of the
faithful, which is also to be understood the wife of the lamb. The lambs
supper, is the life everlasting for all true beleuers to rest in perpetual joy,
and endeles felicity. The fowls that are called to the slaughter, are the
true preachers of christ's doctrine, who are commanded to kill and devour all
flesh with the sharpenes of their preaching, in rebuking the fleshly, Iere. 4.
living in all degrees. O Israel if thou will turn thee, (O England if thou will turn thee) and leave thine abominations, then turn unto me says the
Lord: for even as the Prophet spoke unto Israel, even the very same speaks
he unto thee O England. And if thou will put away thine offenses out of my
sight, thou shall not be moved, and shall swear, the Lord lives in truth, in
equity and righteousness, and all people shall be fortunate and joyful in him.
Oseas. 4.
Hear the words of the Lord, O ye children of Israel, for the Lord must
punish them that dwell in the land. And why, there is no truth, there is no
mercy, there is no knowledge of God in the land, but swearing, lying,
manslaughter, theft, and adultry have gotten the upper hand, therefore shall
the land be in a miserable case, and all those wicked offenders that are
therein, shall be rooted out. The Lord keeps not his wrath for ever, and why,
his delight is to have compassion, Mich. 7.
thou shall keep thy truth with Jacob, and thy mercy for Abraham, like as thou
have sworn unto our fathers long ago. And it shall come to pass, that like as
ye were a curse among the heathen, O ye house of Judah, and ye house of Israel,
even so will I deliver you that you shall be a blessyng. Fear not but let your
hands be strong, for thus says the Lord of hosts. Like as I devised to
punish you, what time as your fathers provoked me unto wrath says the Lord of
hosts, and spared not, even so am I determined now in these days for to do
well unto the house of Judah and Jerusalem. Therefore fear ye not. Now the
things that you shall do are these, speak every man the truth unto his
neighbor, execute judgment truly, and patiently within your ports. None of
you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor, and love no false oaths,
for all these are ye things that I hate says the Lord. The law of truth was
in his mouth, Mal. 2
and there was no wickedness found in his lyps, he walked with me in peace and
equity, and did turn many one away from their sins.

King Darius made a great feast unto his servants 3. Esd. 3
unto all his Court, and to all the officers of Media, and Percia, yea to all
the Deputies, and rulers that were under him, from Judea, unto Ethiopia a 127.
countries, so when they had eaten and dronken, being satisfied, and were gone
home again, Darius the king went into his Chaumber, and there laid him down
to sleep, and after a while a waked.

In the mean season the three young men that kept the kings person, and
watched his body, communed among themselves, and spoke one to an other, let
every one of us say something, and look whose sentence is wisest and most
excellent above the other, unto him shall King Darius give great gifts, and
clothe him with Purple, and set him nere the Kings presence, and so every one
wrote his meaning, sealed it, and laid it under the kings Pillowe and said,
when the king arises we will give him our writings, and look whose word the
king and his chief Lords judge to be most wisely spoken, the same shall have
the victory, one wrote, Wine is a strong thing: the second wrote, the King is
stronger: the third wrote, Women have yet more strength, but above all things
the truth hears away the victory, and this last problem was written by
Zorababel, and was by the king and his counsel esteemed most best in that he
preferred truth above al things. True friendship, and frindes, ye surely shall
find, where many pure hearts, are made in one mind.

Pitagoras. Tobi. 1.
Tobias, of the tribe and City of Nepthalem which lies in the hye countries
of Galile about Naason the way toward the West, having the City Sephet upon
the left side, though he was taken prisoner in the days of Salmanazer king
of the Assirians, nevertheless being in captivity, Tobi. 12.
he forsook not the way of truth. They that do sin in unrighteousness,
Tobi. 14.
are the ennemies of their own souls, wherefore I tell you the truth, and
will hyde nothing from you, serve the Lord in the truth, seek after his will,
and do the thing that pleases him. For God is gracious and merciful, Eccle.
2.
he forgeueth sins in the time of trouble, and is a defendour for all them
that seek him in the truth. And we saw the glory of it, John 1
as the glory of the only begotten son, full of grace and truth. If ye
believe not that I am he, John 8
ye shall dye in your sins. Then said they unto him, what art thou, and
Jesus says unto them, even the very same thing that I spoke unto you, I have
many things to say and to judge of you, yea, and he that sent me is true,
then said he to those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my
word, then are ye my very disciples, and ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free, but now ye go about to kill me, a man that has
told you the truth, which I have heard of God, why do ye not know my
speech, even because ye can not abide the hearing of my word, ye are of your
Father the Devil, and the lusts of your father will ye serve, he was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, therefore ye believe
me not, which of you rebukes me of sin, if I say the truth why do ye not
believe me. John. 18.
For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness of the truth, and all that are of the truth hear my voice.
I say the truth in Christ, and I lie not, if the truth of Christ be in me, Romans
9.
this rejoicing shall not be taken away from me, 2. Cor. 11.
in the region of Achaia. Wherefore because I love you not God knows,
nevertheless what I do, that will I do, to cut away occasion that they might
be found like unto us, in that wherein they rejoice, we can do nothing against
the truth, but for the truth. But let us follow the truth, in love, and in all
things grow in him which is the head, Ephe. 4.
even Christ. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of such
things comes the wrath of God, upon the children of disobedience, be not ye
therefore companions of them. Ye were sometime darkness, but now are ye light
in the lord, walk as children of light, for the fruit of the spirit
consists in all goodness, righteousness, and truth. Study to show thy self
laudable unto God, Ephe. 5.
a workman that neadeth not to be ashamed distributing the word of God, truly
and justly, as for ungodly vanities of vices, pass thou over them, for they
will increase unto greater ungodliness, and their words shall freate even as
does the disease of a canker, of whose number is Himeneus, and Pliletus, which
as concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is passed al
ready, and do destroy the faith of some, but the sure ground of God stands
still and has this seal, the lord knows them that are his, and let every
man that calls on Christ depart from his iniquity. Titus. 1.
This witness is true, wherefore rebuke thou them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith, not taking heed to Iewishe fables, and commandments of
men, that turn away the truth. 1. John 1.
If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and
do not the truth. I have not written unto you, 1. John. 2.
as though ye knew not the truth, but as though ye knew it, and know also
that no lie comes of truth, God grant al christian hearers and readers of
his word, to be as well followers, as hearers, that after this life, we may
all raygne in the eternal and everlasting kingdom, with God the father, and
his son Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory and dominion both now and ever.

The description of wisdom.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, behold I have called by name,
Besalael, the sone of Ury, the son of Ha^^e, of the tribe of Judah, Exo. 31.
and I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom and understanding, in
knowledge, and in all manner of work, to find out subtle feats, and to work
in gold, silver, and brass. And now harken O Israel unto the ordinances and
laws, Deu. 4.
which I teach you etc. Keep it therefore and do them, for that is your
wisdom. The valiant and kingly Prophet David, in that he feared the Lord, 1.
King. 18
the Lord prospered him, and he behaved him self wisely in all his ways, and
the Lord was with him, wherefore, when Same saw that he was so exceeding wife,
he was afraid of David. The days of David drew nigh that he should dye, and
he charged Solomon his son saying: 3. King. 2.
I go the way of all the world, be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a
man. Keep thou the watch of ye Lord thy God, that thou walk in his ways, and
keep his statutes, and his precepts, his judgments, and his testimonies,
even as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all yt
thou dooste, and in every thing that thou medlest wi^h all, (concerning Ioab)
the son of Zarine in that he slew the two capitaines, Abner, and Amasa.
Deal with him, therefore according unto wisdom, and bring not his hoar head
down to the grave in peace. Tulli.
Prudence consists in knowledge of things good and evil. Of wisdom.
The signification.
THe house which stands on the rock, signifies the steadfast belief of the
faithful: The other which stands in the valy and on sandy ground, is the
church of Antichrist and all popish preaching, which house by violence of the
water which falls from the height, over turns it, and so lies void and
empty.

Separate them that do craftily flatter thee, from those that do faithfully
love thee, Socrates.
least the ill men have most profit by thee. By these examples, it is manifest
that God has ^lwayes, and at all times preserved, not only those rulers and
maiestrates, Ex misericordia.
the which have used and kept his precepts, with prudent wisdom and just
dealing, but also as well the poor and simple, and has not only been unto
those realms a most prosperous savior in sending abundance of all
fertility, but in the end an everlasting redemer unto enlesse joys, and most
happy felicity. Consider the excellent wisdom of Solomon, 3. King. 3.
in doing justice between the two women that strove for the quick child, when
as the one of them through her necligence smothered her child, and by craft
meant to lay her fact on the other, to avoid the blame was reproved, and the
true mother of the living child was known. Also God gave Salomo^ wisdom and
understanding exceeding much, 3. King. 4
and a large heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore, and Salomons
wisdom exceded the wisdom of all the children of the East country, and all
the wisdom of Egypt, for he was wiser then all men, yea the^ Ethan the
Ezrahite, and Hemam, Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahole, and his name was
spoken of throughout all nations on every side, and Solomon spoke 3000.
problemes, 3. King. 10
and his so^ges were a thousand and five. And the Queen of Saba, hearing the
fame of Salomo^, concerning the name of the Lord, came to prove him with hard
questions, and she came to Jerusalem, with a very great train, but when she
saw ye goodly building, and costly apparel, of ye ministers, and his drink,
and burnt sacrifices, she said unto ye king, it was a true word that I heard in
mine own land of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom, howbeit I believed it not
till I came and saw it with mine eyes: And behold the one half was not told
me, for thy wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame which I heard of thee,
happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants which stand ever before
thee, and hear thy wisdom. And thou Esdras, after thy wisdom of thy God,
that is in thine hand, 1. Esd. 9.
set Judges and arbitrers, by my authority, to judge all the people that is
beyond the water, even all such as know the law of thy God, and them that
know it not, those see that ye teach. And whosoever will not fulfill the law
of thy God, and the kings law, let him have his judgment without delay,
whether it be unto death, or to be rooted out, or to be condemned in goods, or
to be put in prison. This notable example seems good, yea, and to be well
considered of, among the true professors of Christian religion, first to
c^nsider what a horrible thing it is, to go about to pervert the scriptures,
and sacred word of God, with manes laws and inventions. Secondarily, what a
heinous offense it is before God, in that the subject shall either wilfully, or
co^temptuously go about to make ordinances and laws contrary to the precept
and commandment of that the which the Prince has determined by general
counsel, and consent of ye whole realm, so long as it is to the advancement
of Gods glory, and true religion. Now when I asked my counselers how these
things might be brought to a good end, Hesther 13
there was one by us excelent in wisdom, whose good will, truth, and
faithfulness, has often been showed and proved, which was also the principal,
and next unto the king: Aman by name, which certified us, how that in all
hands there was scatered abroad a rebellious folk, that made statutes and
laws against all other people, and have always despised the proclaimed
commandments of kings, and how yt for this cause, it were not to be suffered
that such rulers should continue by you and not to be pin down, seeing now we
perceive the same, that this people alone are contrary to every man, using
strange and other manner of laws and withstand our statutes and doings, and go
about to to stablish shrewd matters, that our kingdom should never come to
good estate, and stedfastnes. Therefore have we commanded by such as is next
under us, appoynting Aman, which is ordained to root out with the sword, all
such adversaries, and that there shall be no mercy showed, and none such
spared. By these means kings reigned in honor, and God to blessed them, that
all that ever they went about prospered so long as they rebelled not against
his testimonies and laws the which he commanded them to keep. And also the
su^^dcees for that they obeyed there prince with godly (...) and (...), so long
God did also as well defend them from oppression, as he did the prince or Kin^
from (...) heuennes and sub^^^sion. Job. 4.
Shall a man be more just then God, or shall a man be (...) then his maker?
Behold he found no truth in his servants, and in his angels there was
folly, how much more in them that dwell in houses of clay, and whose fundation
is but dust, which shall be consumed as it were with a mothe, They shall be
smitten from the Morning to the Evening, yea, they shall perish for ever, when
no man thinks thereon. Is not their royalty gone away with them? they shall
dye truly and not in wisdom. Sold he that bableth much be commended therein?
Job. 11
Should men give ear unto thee only? Thou will laugh other men to scorn, and
shall nobody mock thee again? Will thou say unto God, the thing that thou
take in hand is perfect, and that thou art clean in his sight? Oh that God
would speak and open his lips against thee, that he might show thee out of
his secret wisdom, why he rew^rdeth thee double as he appointed to do, then
should thou know that God had forgotten thee because of thy sin. Would God
ye kept your tongue, Job 13
for then might ye be taken for wise men. And be no leaders of the simple into
strange errors and folish imaginations of men, (what plague can be greater
unto that realm where so many sects of religion is used, then the sufferance
of such to continue, truly no plague more greater, and no offense more
haynouse^, Job 15
not only against the prince, but most chiefest against the almighty. Wast you
made before the hills? Job 39
o^ Have thou heard the secret counsel of God, that all wisdom is to little
for thee? Pro. 1
Who gives sure wisdom, or steadfast understanding? Comes it through thy
wisdom? Obey thou the Lord, for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom: Pro. 2.
^f good understanding have all these that do thereafter. My son, if thou will receive my words, and keep my commandments b^ thee, tha^ thou will
incline thine heart unto wisdom, apply thine heart so understanding. For if
thou criest after wisdom, and calle^ for knowledge: if thou sekest after her,
as after money, and diggest for her as for creature, then shall thou
understand the fear of the lord, and find the knowledge of God. For it is
the Lord that gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding, and he hides up health for the righteous. Pro. 3.
Well is him that finds wisdom, and obtayneth understanding. Wisdom is
more worth then precious stones, Pro. 4.
and all things that thou can desire are not to be compared unto her, hear
O ye children the fatherly exhortation and take good heed that ye may learn
wisdom, for I have given you a good doctrine: forsake not my law. Wisdom
rests in the heart of him that has understanding, Pro. 14.
and it shall be known among them that are unlearned. pro. 29
Whosoever loves wisdom m^keth his father a glad man. Moreover thus says the
Lord of hosts, Jeremy 9
beware of the vengeance that hangs over you, and call for mourning wines and
send for wise women, that they come shortly and singe a mourning song of you,
that the tears may fall out of your eyes. Thus says the Lord also, let not
the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength,
neither the rich man in his riches, but who (...) will rejoice, let him rejoice
in this, that he understands and knows me, for I am the Lord which does
mercy righteousness and equity on the earth. Also thus says the Lord God,
Ezechi. 28
behold I will bring enemies upon thee, even the tyrants of the heathen,
these shall draw out thy swords upon thy bewty and wisdom and shall
defoyle thy glory. Wisdom shall not enter into a froward soul, Sapi. 1.
nor dwell in thy body that is subdued unto sin. Sapi. 2.
Who so despises wisdom and nourture is unhappy, and as for the hope of
such, it is but vain, their labors unfruitful, and their works
unprofitable. For as much as all men be conceived and borne in sin, and that
with out the free mercy of God, there were no hope of salvation, let us
therefore arm our selves with constant prayers unto almighty God, to strengthen
us with the wisdom of his holy spirit, that in all our affairs; we may
thereby be able to withstand our adversary the Devil. 1. Pet. 5.
Who like a roaring Lion seaseth not, but goes continually about, seking whom
he may devour, yet forasmuch as our savior Christ has prom^sed, that to all that with hearty repentance and true faith turn unto him, that on those he will
have mercy, let us therefore yield unto God all honor, and count our selves
most ignorant, and pray the Lord so to inflame our hearts with spiritual
wisdom, that we may thereby come to the knowledge of his grace, and heavenly
benediction. Steven full of faith and power, Act. 6.
did great wonders and miracles, among the people, then there arose certain
of the sinagoge, which is called the sinagog of the Libertines and Sirenites,
and of Alexandria and of Cilicia, and of Asia, disputing with Steven, and they
could not resist the wisdom, and the spirit which spoke. Where constant faith
is, there is always the spirit of Gods wisdom, and to those that do
continue therein, is everlasting life. 1. Cor. 1.
Has not God made the wisdom of the world foolishnes, for after that the
world through wisdom, knew not God, in ye wisdom of God, it pleased God
through foolishnes of preaching, to save them that believe. For the Jews
require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, but we preach Christ
crucified, unto the Jews an occasion of falling, and unto the Greeks
foolishnes, but unto them which are called, both of the Jews and Greeks, we
preach Christ, the power of God, and ye wisdom of God. If any of you lack
wisdom, James. 1
let him ask of him that gives it, even God which gives to all men
indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth, and it shall be given him: But
let him ask in faith, and waver not.

The description of Peace.
PEace being used, according to ye commandments of our savior Christ, among
all faithful christians, is not only profitable to the body, but also to the
soul, for peace signifies the joy of conscience, and surenes against the
devil our aduersarye. And generally the abundance of all spiritual goodness,
because our sins are forgeuen us by Christ. Genesis 5.
Abraham for that he so peaceably and quietly obayed the commandments of the
eternal and most mighty God, received the reward of everlasting joys, and
also in that he believed the promises of God, without any manner doubt or fear,
offering up his only son Isaak, and believing steadfastly that ye God which
had created him of earth and dust, was able to restore him his son again,
peaceably went to fulfill the Lords commandment. Therefore ye lord blessed
his whole posterity saying: thou shall go with thy fathers in peace, and
shall be buried in a good age. Gene. 42. Gene. 43.
Also when the great dearth and lack of corn fell in the land of Canaan,
Jacob sent his sons into Egypt to buy corn, and there they were known, of
their brother Joseph, and as they returned homeward, they found their money in
the sackes mouths, at their return back again into Egypt, they came unto
the man that was the ruler over Iosephes housholdes, and said unto him: Oh
sir, we came down hither at the first time to buy food, and as we came to an
Inn it happened that we opened our sack, and behold every man's money was in
his sack, with full weight, and we have brought it again in our hands, and
other money have we brought also in our hands to buy food, but we cannot tell
who put our money in our sackes. And he sa^d peace be unto you and fear not,
your God and the God of our fathers has given you that treasure in your
sackes, I had your money. Herein is showed that there was in them a quiet and
peaceable conscience, not desiring more then that which was dew ^ate them, and
fearing also that the money being found in their sackes might be an occasion
unto them of a continual servitude and bondage, with sorrowful minds brought
it again unto the man, the which they had thought had formally received it.
Herein they also showed themselves not only peaceable and quiet men, but also
constant, and true dealers, desiring no more, then that which of right
appertayned unto the^, this example may seem very necessary and profitable
among all the professors of Christianity, whereby they may the better know
how to use their craft and occupiyng with truth and equity. Which being kept,
brings all such to the peaceable haven of quiet immortality.

And if thou thus abide in my laws and observe my commandments, Leui. 26.
I will send peace in the land, and ye shall fleene without any man to make
you afraid, and I will rydde evil beasts out of your land, and there shall
no sword go through out your land, and ye shall chase your enemies and they
shall fall before you upon the sword, and five of you shall chase a hundred,
and a hundred of you shall put a thousand to flight, and your enemies shall
fall before you upon the sword, for I will have respect unto you and make
increase and multiply you, and set up my covenant with you, and ye shall eat
old store, and carry out old for the new. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying: Numb. 25
Phinehes the son of Eleazer, the son of Aaron the priest turned mine anger
away from the children of Israel, in my gelosie, wherefore say, behold I give
unto him my covenant of peace, and he shall have it, and his seed after him,
even the covenant of the Priests office for ever, because he was gelious for
his Gods sake, and made atonement for the children of Israel. When thou
come nygh unto a City to fight against it, offer them peace, and if they
answer thee again peaceably and open unto thee, then let all the people that
is found therein, be tributaryes unto thee, and serve thee. By these pleasant
examples is manifestly showed the mighty power of God to al those that put
their trust in him, as for example, Phinies then which showed him self a true
follower of the commandments of God, and would in no wise, suffer any thing
to be done contrary to Gods precept, and therefore God made a covenant with
him, and with his posterity for ever. So likewise this said example, moves
all true Christians to be steadfast in the promyses of God, and not for vain
and transitory preferment, to color or use them, but with singlenes of heart
do them, not regarding the person, but the cause, and in so doing the reward
Of Peace.
The Signification.
HE which stands with a book in his hand, signifies quietness and peace to
the church of God: And the Woman signifies the spouse and congregation of
Christ, being married to the Lamb (Christ Jesus).

reward is as much in effect unto all such, as ever it was unto Phinies, or at
any other that at any time have given their minds unto the obedience of gods
laws. God grant to all, such zeal unto his word, that thereby we may have
the like reward that are now living in these present days. Moreover, Judges.
6.
when the children of Israel, had committed wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, and they being delivered into the hand of Madian, yet the Lords
compassion was such, that he chose Gedeon, and made him captain over the
children of Israel, and by his mighty power delivered them, and the Lord said
unto Gedeon, peace be unto thee, fear not, thou shall not dye, for Gedeon
after that he had seen the angel of the Lord, was in a great fear, and
thought that he should have dyed, saying, have I therefore seen the angel of
the Lord face, to face, that I should dye, then Gedeon made an alter unto the
Lord, and called it: The Lord of peace. Judges. 11.
Also the spirit of the Lord came upon Iepthath, and he passed over to Gilead,
and from thence unto the children of Ammon, and Iepthath vowed a vow unto the
Lord, and said, if thou shall deliver the children of Ammon into my hands,
then that thing that comes out of my doors of my house against me when I come
home in peace from the children of Ammon shall be the Lords, and I will offer
it for a burnt offering, and the first that met him at his return home, was
his own daughter. 1. Reg. 7.
All the cities the which the Philistines had gotten from the Israelites, the
Lord restored them again, even from Acarom, to Gathe, with the costs of the
same, and Israel plucked them out of the hands of the Philistines and there
was peace between Israel and the Amorites. 2. Reg. 25.
Also consider the great kindness of Abigaell, the wife of Naball that churl,
when David sent x. of his young men unto him, for that he had preserved his
shepehardes and sheep in the wilderness, saying, greet him in my name, and thus
shall ye say: peace be to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto
all that thou have: Behold, I have heard say thou have shearers, now thy
sheep were with us in the wilderness and we did them no spite, neither was
there ought of thy flock minished, unto them, all the while they were in
Carmell, ask thy laddes, and they will show thee: wherefore let these young
men find favor in thine eyes (for we come in a good season) and give I pray
thee whatsoever comes to thine hand unto us, and unto thy son David, Naball
hearing these words, said, what is David, and what is ye son of Isay, there
is plenty of servants now adays, that break away every man from his master,
shall I then take my bread, my water and my flesh that I have killed for my
shearers and give it unto men, whom I wot not whence they be, when the young
men perceived the churlishnes of Naball, and that for the good done unto him,
to have no recompense, returned and told David, then David commanded every
man to girde his sword to his side, and prepare themselves to destroy Naball,
but Abigaell, Nabals wife seeing the misery that was like to ensue on her
husband, for his churlishnes, pro^^ded certain loaves, and partched corn,
and wine and a 100. frayles of reasons, and 200. topnets of figs to pacify
the wrath of David and rode to mete him in the way, unknowing unto her husband,
and as she came in the way, David met her, (and said unto her) in vain have I
kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness, and he has quit me evil
for good. So and so do God to the enemies of David, if I leave any thing, that
partaineth unto him, Abigael seeing the fearcenesse of David against her
husband, fell down at his feet, and desired him to leave of his enterprise and
not to shed blood, and so David withdrew his hand, and received of Abigaell,
that which she brought unto him, and said unto her, go up in peace to thine
house, behold I have heard thy voice, and have accepted thy parson. Augusti.
He that has not peace of the heart, the mouth, and the act, ought not to be
called a christian man, woe be unto them that had rather have the sig^^e of
abundaunce, then to have peaceable quietness, for where the heart is fixed with
the inordinate desire of the world, there can never grow any prosperity in the
common wealth, for if the subject be in penury, and have the lack of
suffisance, then is it not only a misery to the commons, but most of all to
the prince or magistrates, the kings power ought always to rest in his
subjects. For if they he weak and feable then cannot that prince or governor
be strong, although he had never so much abundance of gold or treasure, for
such treasure being hid and unoccupied, bredeth most miserable reproach, and
endless torments. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present
with you, John. 14.
but the comforter which is the holy ghost, whom my father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, what so ever I have said unto you, peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, let not your hearts be grieved, neither fear, ye have
heard how I said unto you, I go and come again unto you. Phil. 4.
The Lord is even at hand, be not careful, but in all things show your
peticion unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving of thanks. And the
peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in
Christ Jesus. Apoc. 1.
Grace be with you and peace from him which is, and which was, and is to come,
and from the 7. spirits which are present before his throne, and from Jesus
Christ which is a faithful witness, and first begotten of the dead, and
washed us from sin, in his own blood, and made us kings and princes unto
God his father be glory, and dominion for ever more, Amen.

The fetching of souls out of purgatory.
FOrasmuch as the Antichristians have a place among themselves imagined, a
place the which the call purgatory, and so affirming it, and that through their
power they are able to bring souls departed out of hell into their purgatory,
and also to send souls thither at their pleasure and will, I have thought
good to search the scriptures, to the intent to see if there had been any such
word or place, as by their writings is alleged, and there is neither word nor
place in such sort to be found. But since they affirm such a place to be, I
think in deed, as many as go thither, when they are dead, do leave their
winding shetes behind, for at oke^, which seems yt such Prelates may put yt
more cloth in their Ephod and Tunicle, and Rochet, else it is to be thought
tohse relickes should not be made so holy. And for the avoiding of such
superstitious imaginations, I have thought good to nominate so many places of
ye scriptures as do allow this third place, which they call purgatory, but naught
there is to be found as hereafter following in this said chapter more at
large shall be showed. In ye first of ye holy Evangelist S. Matthew is written
these words, she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins, all this was done to
fulfill that which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet Esaias in his viij.
chapter, saying: Behold a maid shall be with child and shall bringforth a
son, and they shall call his name Emanuell, which is by interpretation God
with us, which name was given unto Christ, because he being God was as Paul
witnesses found like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. Also in the
2. chapter of S. Mark the Evangelist is written these words, when Jesus saw
their faith, he said to the sick of the paulsey, son thy sins are
forgeuen thee, and there were certain of ye Scribes sitting there and reasoned
in their hearts saying, how does this fellow blaspheme, who can forgive sins,
but God only. Herein they showed themselves altogether ignorant, not
crediting him, for all the miracles that he had done and showed among them, in
like does the Pope and his fraternity, behold the scriptures but nothing at
all use them as they ought to do, but altogether to their own imaginations, in
as much as they have done and do maintain a purgatory, a place to punish
souls in, after they be departed this life at their pleasures, which is
nothing but mere falshod and deceit, ye and also are not ashamed to say that by
virtue of trentall Masses, pardons, and dirgies, they are able to redeem those
that are passed this life from all pains and torments. O wretched
congregation, o generation of vipers, that are not ashamed so superbiously to
brage and so arrogantly seek to deface the truth of the living God, for as
there is but one true and living God, no more is there any other savior and
redemer then God in Christ Jesus, which suffered for all men universally, and he
it is that works our salvation, and none but he. Si quis peccauerit aduocatum
habemus Non habemus hic mane^te^ ciuitatem sed futuram inquirimus.

Heb. 13. Beatiqui ad coenam nuptiarum Angni vocati sunt.

Apoc. 19. Verbum Dei comburens gladius.
Omnia parata venite ad nuptias.
Math. 22. apud deum Iesum Christum iustum, ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis
nostris. If any man sin, yet have we an advocate with ye father Jesus Christ,
the righteous, and he it is that obtains grace for our sins, for he was
wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness. Math. 11.
Venite ad (...) omnes, qui laboratis, and onerati estis, and ego reficiam vos.
Come unto me all ye that lavour and are laden, and I will refresh you. He says
not go to John, Peter, or Paul, much les to either Pope or Cardinal, that any
man should pray unto, but only and soly unto him which died on the Cross for
our sins, and rose again for our justification, now must it plainly appear
(as it is most evident) that the Pope is an hipocrite, a liar, and deceauer,
going about to rob God of his honor, in yt he takes upon him to forgive
sins, being a miserable and wretched offender himself, which none can do but
God only. Christus semel pro peccatis passus fuit, iustus pro iniustis, vt nos
adduceret deo. 1. Pet. 3.
Christ has suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, for to bring us to
God, and was killed as pertaining to the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit.
Sanguis Jesus Christi emundat nos ab omni iniquitate. The blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ has purged us from us from all our sins. Psalm. 115.
Non mortui laudabunt te domine, neque omnes qui discendunt in infernum. The
dead praise not thee O Lord neither all they yt go down into silence. How
then can Pope or Prelate raise them up, and forgive sins, when the Lord has
said, that none praise him that are gone down into the silence. O blind
guides, here the blind lead ye blind, and so both falls into the dich.
Quomodo facti sunt indesolationem subito defecerunt, Psalm. 72.
perierunt propter iniquitatem fuam. O how suddenly do they consume, perish and
come to a fearful end, that seek to maintain their hipocriticall devises,
before ye true words and documents of our savior Christ Jesus, as shall be
showed by ye life of holy S. Dunston, a saint of ye Popes own making. Anno.
958. John ye xij. held ye Papacy at Rome ye space of 4. years 10. months,
some authors write yt he reigned 9. years 3. months, Polichronicon.
and 5. days, and was strike^ of a devil, as he was liyng on bed with a ma^s
wife, and so dyed within 8. days following. This is he of whom the bie word
rise. Bale.
Be as merry as Pope John: Unto this holy vicar of Satan and successor of
Simon magus went Dunstone out of England to be confirmed Archbishop of
Canterbury: As soon as he was returned again to England, by authority of this
most execrable monster and wicked Antichrist, he gave a strait commandment,
that Priests out of hand should put away their lawful wives, whom that brute
con^inced hipocrite called the vessayles of fornication, as more plainly
appears in the acts of the English votaries. Now to return to the former
place of purgatory. M. Bale.
King Edwine, upon the day of his Coronation, lay with Alfiga or Alfgina his
Concubyne, having then no wife. Dunstone being at that time but a munke and
Abot at Glassenbury, and being very nere the place, come and plucked them both
violently from the bed, and brought them before the Archbishop Odo,
threatening ye woman suspencion, for the which the king after that exiled the
said Dunstone into Flaunders, and wrought the munkes many other displeasures.
When King Edwine was dead the Archbishop of Florance, for the good will that
he bare unto Dunstone, wrote this lie of him as follows. When king Edwine was
departed this life, ye devils came and carried his soul to hell, Dunstone
knowing thereof caused his soul to be taken from ye devils and to be put into
their fained purgatory, with lie and al. Polichronico^ says yt when Dunston
commanded ye devils to leave ye soul of Edwine, that one devil spoke and
said, had not Dunston ben, they still might have tormented him. But ye strength
of their requiem Masses were of such abominable operation yt they could keep
him no longer. Thus these shameless rebels, the ofspringes of Satan, are not
ashamed to confirm and say this to be true, which is most pernisious and
filthy, God for his mercies sake open the eyes of all obstinate papists and
hinderers of his word that while the light of his glorious gospel shines
among us both they and we all may embrace the light, and not to run hedlong
into the vale of darkness where is weping wayling and gnashing of teath and
endless woes for ever continuing, remember the words of our savior Christ
which he spoke over Jerusalem saying, I^rusalem Jerusalem, qua occidis
prophetas and lapidas eos qui mittuntur ad te, Luke. 13.
quoties volui congregare filios tuos, quemadmodum auis nidum suum sub pennas
et noluisti. O Jerusalem Jerusalem, which killest ye prophets and stonest them
that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
as the Hen gathers her nest under her wings, but ye would not let these few
ensamples be sufficient. Consider well of them and praise them as they are
worthy, fly fables and cleave to the verity and then no doubt God will extend
to us his mercy Amen.

Problemes.
Satan flourishing, Virtue decreseth,
Virtue flourishing, Satan consumes:
If will have desire to froward intent,
Both froward and will in the end will be shent.
As Fides, and Fallax, be not of one mind, Light and darkness.

So vice with virtue can never agree:
Uice will to vice, as evil by kind,
When virtue shines bright, strange sightes you shall see.
A servant I had, both trusty and true, Satan, the wor^^.

Full of obedience, and very diligent:
Yet evil in manners* full well did ensue,
In darkness condemned no time to repent.
When earth by his vapor shall fume so the head, Worldly cares.

That nothing may cause such apacient to see:
Beware in the end it turn not to Lead,
And so of thy head never cured to be.
When Phaeton whipped, his horses began run, The overthrow of the enemy.

The world to compass, as he then thought:
But Soll, sone displased so wilful a son,
And all his intent consumed to naught.
Where malt long lies not looked unto, Some call Popes we wels.

The Popes they devour, and wast sone the corn:
Yet all not consumed for all they can do,
When fire aproch, there better unborn.
When Crocadill weepeth, and lies full low, Beware of flatt^^.

Then danger nere crepeth, of have none take:
And the ass for pastor does neigh with show,
Then Fallax from falshoode see thou forsake.
The Uiper his kind, does use and keep, Trust not (...)

By resemblance of love, with an outward show:
So ire once kindled, causes some so weep,
And like will to like as all (...) well knew.
The Oak that is grene, and fresh in his kind,
While he is untwined so keep him.
The Iuy once spread, and on the tope take hold:
By little and little, his force is vntwinde,
And the Oak once fallen, then needs must unfold.
Such as can or may see see, lest when ye would ye shall not.
As spring of summer, the gates do delight,
And Aquaries would be in Leos place:
The force of Philomisos may sone lose his fight,
And causeless to forget, each known face.
The Snayle once void, his house cannot get,
Do not wilfully lose thy time.
Where substance of body is utterly spent:
Nor life to see light that once might have set,
And house in the end by tempest is rent.
When Leo by force his pray does seek,
Fear not of persecu^ion.
By Uenus assent and think not to miss:
Philogines with heat may cause him to greet,
So great is his power, deuoyde of all bliss.
The greater mischief allageth the lesser.
When Vulcan with force has done what he can,
With hammers and sledges to hollow the ground:
Yet Philamertia the enmye of man.
Surpasses his force, and gives the wound.
Keep light while ye have it, the night is at hand.
Where the hog is filled with unwonted swill,
And the Ape is used to things not meet:
There deadly drink full soon does kill,
To late to morn, less cause to weep.
This may come to pass.
When gold into copper are changed in one,
And Acteons dogs are suffised with pray:
Then every poor pastor shall dwell alone,
And of their whole living shall have no nay.
When. Bon. in. to. ner. yae. be. to. some,
God grant us his mercy.
His banner displaied in place where he would:
Then L, as Ioylese, may say undone,
Since Pietas delaieth once that he could.
While Soll with his beams, so fresh gives light, Pray to God hardely.

And Ely wishes Zabeth long to reign:
Then pray to Jehovah we lose not that sight,
In whom consists our profit and gain.
All such as are wise use judgment by measure,
Be not to rash, a solusion to give:
And so it may chance sone to persevere,
Much better to understand, the matter to atchiue.
FINIS.
Of the day of doom, And coming of the Lord, wherein is contained the reward
of the faithful, the reprobate go into everlasting fire.
Behold, heau^n and the heaven of heavens is the Lords, and the earth with all
that is therein, notwithstanding, Deuteronomy. 10.
the Lord had a lust unto thy fathers to love them, and chose their seed after
them, even you, above all nations, as thou see this day. Circumcise therefore
the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stifnecked: for the Lord your God, is
God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible God,
which regards no man's person, nor takes gifts: he does right unto the
fatherless and widow, and loves the stranger, to give him food and raiment,
love ye therefore the stranger also, for ye were strangers your selves in ye
land of Egypt. Thou shall fear ye lord thy god, and him only shall you serve,
to him shall thou cleave and swear by his name, he is thy praise and thy God,
that has done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have
seen. Thy fathers went down into Egypt, with 70. souls, and now the Lord thy
God has made thee and multiplied thee as the stars of heaven, consider most
gentle reader, the mercifullnes of so puissa^t a creator, that would not the
death of a sinner, but that he should be converted and turn from his wicked
ways, if not, that then where he promised life, he will reward with horrible
death, takeheede therefore, and be constant in all truth unto the end, and God
will preserve thee, and on all those that have no love unto his word, among
such does God let slip false prophets to deceive them. And therefore God shall
send them strong delusion, 2. Tessa. 2.
that they should believe lies, that al they might be damned which believe not
the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, and those which withdraw the
faithful from the truth of the gospel. Whosoever dwells under the defense of the
most highest, Psalm. 1^.
shall abide under the shadow of the almighty, a thousand shall fall beside
thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee, yea
with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and see the reward of the ungodly. God
begins judgment at his own house: for he sends tribulations, and
afflictions unto his church. If ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ, 1
Pet. 4.
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory, and the spirit of God rests upon
you, one their part he is evil spoken of: but one your parts he is glorified,
see that none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a theife, or an evil doer, or
as a busy body in other men's matters, if any suffer as a christian man, let
him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on his behalf, for the time is
come ye judgment must begin at the house of God, if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of the^ which believe not the gospel of God, and if the
righteous scasely be saved: where shall the ungodly and sinner appear, wherefore
let them that suffer according to ye will of God, commit their souls to him
with well doing, as unto a faithful creator. Riches helps not in ye day of
ve^geaunce, but righteousness delivers from death, Prou. 11.
the righteousness of the just shall deliver them, but the wicked shall be taken
in their own ungodliness. If we had truly judged our selves, we should not
have been judged, but when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened, because
we should not be damned with the world Uerely, verily, I say unto you, John. 5.
the time shall come, and now is, when the dead shall hear ye voice of the
son of God, and they that hear shall live, for as the father has life
himself, so likewise has he given to the son to have life in himself, and
has given him power also to judge, in that he is the son of man. Marvel
not at this, the hour shall come, in the which, all that are in the graves,
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good into the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation. John. 3.
For God so loved ye world yt he has given his only son, ye none yt believe in
him should perish but should have everlasting life, for God sent not his son
into ye world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved, he that believes on him shall not be condemned, but he that believes not
is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only son of
God. John. 12.
He that refuses me and receaueth not my words, has one that judges him,
the words that I have spoken, they shall judge him in ye last day. There shall
go a fire before him and burn his enemies on every side, Psalm. 87.
his lightness gave shine unto the world, the earth saw it and was afraid. The
Lords coming shall be heard like a great noise from the City, and shall reward
his enemies on a sudden, even as the trauayling of a wife when she brings
forth a man child, Esaias. 66. Romans 13.
or ever she suffer the pain of the birth, and anguish of the travail. The
night is passed, and the day is come nigh, let us therefore cast away the deeds
of darkness and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly, as it
were in the day light, not in eating and drinking, neither in foolishnes, as
strife and enuiyng, but put ye on ye Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. Of ye times
and seasons brethren ye have no need, that I write unto you, for ye your
selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall come even as a theife in ye
night, when they shall say peace and no danger, then comes on them sudden
destruction, as the trauayling of a woman with child, and they shall not
escape, therefore let us not sleep, but watch diligently for the coming of the
Lord, that at our calling we may be found occupied in all God exercises, least
being found idell, we perish in our own iniquity, and so come to destruction
both of body and soul. Examine therefore every man among your selves, and so
spend ye days of this troublesome pilgrimage, that in ye end we may come and
appear at ye general day before ye eternal judge, who shall judge all flesh
according to their desartes, and let us most chiefly pray unto God, so to aid
us with his holy spirit against the temptacions of Satan, Math. 25. Ex
misericordia.
that at our appearance we may be found lawdable and glorious in the sight of
that most pure and imaculate lamb Jesus Christ, and to receive ye blessed
benediction, when he shall say, come ye blessed children into my everlasting
kingdom prepared for you from ye beginning of the world. Ex merito.
(And to ye reprobate and wicked ones, go ye wicked into the infernal hell
prepared for you, the devil and his angels.) Let all faithful hearts pray
unto God and always glorify his most blessed name, unto the which God be all
glory, power, and dominion, for ever, and ever. Ame^.

A Small reward, I look to have,
Of such as do the truth despise:
No whit at all, I mind to crave,
But further truth in any wise,
All flesh is frail and soon does rotte,
As does the flower in the field:
When man is gonne, full soon forgot,
Therefore in time to truth do yield.
Lament all flesh that living be,
With brinish tears and blubbrid eyes:
Then after death you soon shall see,
The crystal glass of light to shine.
Which glass is Christ our Savior,
That for us all his blood has shed:
Yield unto him all might and power,
Our only joy and supreme head.
Let fickle fancy not you move,
From him which can both kill and save:
For like as gold, so will he prove.
If light you way to late to crave.
FINIS.

