LITTLETON TENV^S in English^

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

(...)

TEnant en fee simple ^he which has lands or tenementes to hold to him and
to his heirs for ever. And it is called in latin feodum simplex, for feodum is
called inheritance and simplex is as much to say as lawful or pure, and so
feodum simplex is as much to say as lawful or pure inheritance. For if a man
will purchase lands or tenementes in fee si^ple, it behooves him to have these
words in his purchase, to have and to hold unto him and to his heirs, for
these words his heirs make the estate of inheritance. Anno. 20. H. 6 Folio. 38.

For if any man purchase lands by these words, to have and to hold to him for
ever, or by such words to have and to hold to him and to his ass^ignes for
ever. In these two cases he has none estate but for term of life for that,
that he lacks these words his heirs, which words only make the estate of
inheritance, in all feoffementes and grau^tes.

And if a man purchase lands in fee simple and dye without issue, every one
that is his next cosyn collateral of the whole blood, how far soever that he
be from him of degree, may inherit and have the same land as heir to him. But
if there be father and son, and the father has a brother, which is uncle unto
the son, and the son purchases land in fee simple and dies without issue
living the father, the uncle shall have the land, as heir unto the son, and
not the father (yet the father is more nigh of blood unto the son) for that
that there is a ground in law, that inherytance may linially descend, but not
linially ascend, yet if the son in such case die without issue and his uncle
enters into the land as heir unto the son so as he ought by the law, and
after if the uncle decease without issue living the father than shall the father
have the land as heir unto the uncle, and not heir unto ye so^, for that,
that he comes unto the land by collateral descent, and not by linial
ascencion.

And in such case where the son purchases land in fee simple, and dies
without issue, they of his blood on the fathers side shall inheryte as heir
unto him, before any of the blood of the mothers side. But if he have none
heir on the fathers side, than shall the land disce^d unto his heir on the
mothers side. And this is the oppinion of all the Justices. M. 12. E. 4. fol.
14. But there it was holden if any land descend unto a man by the fathers side
which dies without issue, that his next heir on the fathers side shall
inherit unto him, that is to say the next of blood of the father of ye grau^d
fathers side. And for defaut of such an heir they that be of the fathers blood
of the part of the mothers, of the father (that is to say) the grau^dmother
ought to inherit. And if there be no such heir on the fathers side, than the
lord shall have the land by eschete. And so it is if a man take a wife
inherit in fee si^ple, which has issue a son and dies, and the son e^treth
into the teneme^tes as son and heir unto his mother, and after dies without
issue, the heirs on the mothers side ought to inherit the teneme^tes, and not
the heirs on the fathers side.

And if there be none heirs on the mother side than the lord of who^ the same
land is holden, shall have the same sa^d by eschete. In the same manner it is if
lands descend unto the son on the fatherside, and e^treth and after dies
without issue, the land shall descend unto the heirs on the fathers side, and
not unto the heirs on the mother side. And if there be none heirs on the
father side, than the lord of who^ the land is holde^ shall have the same land
by eschete. And so ye may se the diversity, where the son purchases lands in
fee simple, and where he comes into those lands or tenementes by descent on
the father side or on the mother side.

Also if there be three brethren, and the myddle brother purchases land in fee
simple and dies without issue the elder brother shall have the la^d by descent
and not the younger. Also if there be. 3. brethren, and the yo^gest brother
purchases la^d in fee simple and dies without issue the elder brother shall
have the la^d by disce^t, and not the middle brother, for that that the elder
brother is more worthy of blood.

And it is to be understand that no man shall have land in fee simple by
descent as heir unto any manne, but that he be his heir of the hole blood.
For if a man have issue 2. su^nes, by. 2. ventres and the elder purchases land
in fee simple and dies without issue, the younger brother shall not have the
land but the uncle of the elder brother or some other his nigh cosyn shall have
it, for that, that the younger is but of the half blood to the elder brother.
And if a man have a son and a daughter by one ventre, and a son by a another
ventre, and the son by the first ventre purchases land in fee simple and
dies without issue, the lister shall have the land by discente as heir unto
her brother and not the younger brother, for that that the sister is of the
whole blood to her elder brother.

And also where a man is seized of land in fee simple, and he has issue a so^
and a daughter by one ventre and a son by a another ventre and dies, and the
elder son enters and dies without issue, the daughter shall have the land
and not the younger son, and yet is the younger son heir unto his father and
not-his brother. But if the elder son enter not into the land after the death
of his father, but dies before enter made by him, then the yo^ger brother may
enter and have the land as heir unto his father. But where the elder son in
the case aforesaid enters after the death of his father and thereof has
possession, than the sister shall have the land. Quia possessio fratris de
feodo simplici facit sororem esse heredem. For the possession of the brother in
fee simple makes the sister to be heir.

But if there be two brethren by diverse ventres, and the elder is seized in
fee simple and dies without issue and his uncle enters as heir unto him,
which also dies without issue, than the younger brother may have the land as
heir unto his uncle, because he is of the whole blood to him though he be but
of half blood unto his elder brother.

And it is to understand that this word inheritance, is not only understand
where a man has lands or tenementes by descent of heritage. But also every
fee simple or fee tayls that a man has by his purchase, may be said
inheritance, for that, that his heirs may inherit him. For in a writ of
right that a man brings of land, that was of his own purchase, the writ shall
say: Quam clamat esse ius and here ditatem suam. That is to say, which he
claymeth to be his right and his inheritance. And so it shall be said in
diverse other writes which a man or a woman brings of their own purchase, as
it appears by the register.

And of such things as a man may have a manuell occupacion, possession, or
rescent as of lands, tenementes, rentes, and such other, a man shall say in
his pledyng and in way of bar, that one such was seized in his demesn^ as of
fee. But of such things that lie not in manuell occupacion. etc. as of
auowson of a church, and such manner thing, there he shall say that he was
seized as of fee. and not in his demesne as of fee. And in latin it is in the
same case said. Quod talis fuit seis^us in dominico suo vt in feodo, that is to
say, that such one was seized in his demean as of fee, and in that other, Quod
talis fuit seisitus etc. ^t de feodo that is to say that one such was seized as
of fee.

And note well that a man may not have a more large ne greater estate of
inheritance than fee simple.

Also purchase is called the possession of lands or tenementes that a man has
by his deed or by his agreement, unto which possession he comes not by descent
of any of his auncesters or of his cosyns, but by his own deed.

Fee tail.
Tenant in fee tail is by force of the statute of Westminster the second.
Capi. primo for at the common law before the said statute, al inheritance were
fee simple for all the gyfies which been specified within the same statute, were
fee simple condicionally, as it appears by the rehearsal of the statute. And
now by the same statute tenant in the tail is said in two manners, that is
to say, tenant in tail general, and tenant en tail special.

Tenant in tail general, is where lands or tenementes be given to a man and
to his heirs of his body begotten. In this case it is said general tail,
for that that whatsoever woman that the tenant takes unto wife, if he have
many wives, and by each of the^ has issue, yet each one of these issues by
possibilitye may inherit the tenementes by force of the said gift, because
that every such issue is of his body engendered.

In the same manner is where lands and tenementes be given to a woman and to
the heirs coming out of her body how be it that she have many housbandes, yet
the issue that she may have by each husband may inheryte as issue in the tail
by force of such gifts. And therefore such gifts been called general tail.

Tenant in tail special, is where landed and tenementes he given unto a man
and his wife and the heirs of their two bodies begotten. In such case none may
inherit by force of such gift, but those that be engendered between them two and
it is called especial tail for that if the wife dye, and he takes another wife
and has issue the issue of the second wife shall never inherit by force of
such gift. Nor also the issue of the second housbande if the first husband dye.

In the same manner it is where lands and tenementes be given by a man unto
another with a wife, which is the daughter or cosyn to the geuer in frank
marriage. which gift has inheritance by these words frank marriage unto it
annexed, howbeit that they be not expressy said or rehearsed in the gift, that
is for to say that these donees shall have these lands or teneme^tes to them
and to their heirs between them two engendered, and this is said especial
tail for that the issue of the second wife may not inherit.

And note well that this word tallyare is to say to set unto some certainty or
else limit unto some certain inheritance. And for that, that it is limit and set
in certain, what issue shall inherit by force of such gifts, and how long that
the inheritance shall endure: Therefore it is called in latin feodum talliatum.i.
hereditas in quadam certitudine limitata. For if tenant in general tail die
without issue the donour or his heirs shall inherit as in their reuercion. In
the same wise is of the tenant in the tail special. etc. For in every gift of
the tail without more saying, the reuercion of fee simple is in the donour.

And the donees and their heirs shall do to the donour and to his heirs,
such services as the donour does unto his lord next above. Except the
donees in frank Marriage, which shall hold quietely from every manner service
(but if it be for fealty) until the fourth degree be pass. And after that
the fourth degree is past, the issue in the fifth degree and so forth the
other issues after him, shall hold of the donour and of his heirs, as they
hold over as is aforesaid.

And the degrees in frank marriage shall be accounted in such manner, that is to
say, from the donour to the donees in frank marriage the first degree, for that,
yt the wife that is one of the donees ought to be daughter sister or other
cosyn to the donour. And from the donees unto their issue shall be accounted the
second degree. And from their issue unto their issue, the third degree and so
forth. etc.

And the cause is, for that after every such gift, the issues that come of the
donour, and the issues that come of the donees after the fourth degree paste,
of both parties in such form to be accounted, may betwixt them by the law
of holy church intermarye. And that the donee in frank marriage shall be the
first degree of the four degrees a man may se in a plee upon a write of right
of ward. Anno 31. E. 3. where the playntyf pleded, that his aile or
graundfather was seized of certain lands etc. And that he held of another by
knight service. etc. which gave the land unto one Rafe Holande with his sister
in frank marriage. etc. And all these tails before said be specified in the
said estatute of westminster the second.

Also there be diverse other estates in the tail, howbeit that they be not
specifyed by express words in the said estatute, but they betaken by the
equity of the statute, as if lands be given unto a man and to his heirs
males of his body engendered. In such case his heir male shall inherit, and
the issue female shall never inherit, yet in these other tails aforesaid it
is otherwise. In the same manner it is if lands be given to a man and to heirs
females of his body engendered. In this case his issue females shall inherit by
force and form of the said gift and not the issue male, for that in such cases
where the gift is, who ought to inherit and who not, the will of the donour
shall be observed. And in the case where lands be given to a man and to his
heir males issuyng of his body, and he has issue two sons and deceaseth the
elder son enters as heir male and has issue a daughter and deceaseth, his
brother shall have the land and not the daughter, for that the brother is
heir male. But it shall be other wise in these other ta^ies aforesaid, which
ben especifyed in the said estatute, the daughter shall inherit before the
brother.

Also if land be given unto a man, and to his heirs males of his body
engendered and he has issue a daughter, which has issue a son and deceaseth
and after that the donor deceaseth: in this case the son of the daughter
shall not inherit by force of the tail, for that whosoever shall inherit by
force of a gift in the tail made unto his heirs males behooves to convey his
descent always by the males. M. 18. E. 3. folio. 45. But in such case the
donour shall enter for that the donee is dead without issue male in the law.
In so much that the issue of the daughter may not convey to him the descent of
heir male. And in the same manner is it where lands be given to a man and to
his wife and to his heirs males of their two bodies engendered etc.

Also if tenementes be given to a man and his wife* and to the heirs of the
body of the manne engendered, in this case the husband has estate in the
general tail and the wife but estate for term of life.

Also if lands be given to the housbande and to the wife, and to the heirs
of the husband which he ingendreth of the body of the wife. In this case the
husband has estate in the special tail, and the wife but for term of life.

And if the gift be made to the housbande and to the wife, and to the heirs of
the wife of her body by the husband engendered, than the wise has estate in the
special tail, and the husband but for term of life. But if lands be given
to the husband and the wife, and to the heirs that the husband iuge^dreth on
the body of the wife. In this case both have estate in the tail for that
this word (heirs) is not limited no more to the one the^ to the other.

Also if lands be given to a man and his heirs that he engenders on the body
of his wife in this case the husband has estate in the tail special, and the
wife nothing.

Also if a man have issue a son, and deceaseth, and the land is given to the
son, and to the heir of the body of his father engendered, this is a good
tail, and yet the father was dead at the time of the gift.

Also there be many other estates in the tail by the equetie of the said
estatute that be not specified here. But if a man give lands or teneme^tes to
another to have and to hold to him and to his heirs males, or to his heirs
femalez, he to who^ such gift is made has fee simple, for that that it is not
limited by the gift of what body the issue male or female shall be, and so it
may not in any thing be taken by the equity of the said estatute, and therefore
he has fee simple.

Tenant en tail after possibility of issue extinct.
TEnant in the tail after possibility of the issue extinct, is where as lands
or tenementes be given unto a man and his wife in special tail, if one of
them decease without issue, he that suruiueth is tenant in the tail after
possibility of issue extinct. And if they have issue during the life of the
issue, he that suruiueth shall not be said tenant in the tail after
possibility of issue extincte. Yet if the issue decease without issue, so that
there be none alive that may inherit by force of the tail, then he that
suruiueth of the donees is tenant in the tail after possibility of issue
extinct.

Also if lands be given to a man and to his heirs that be engendered on the
body of his wife. In this case the wife has naught in the tenementes, and the
house band is seized as donee in special tail. And in this case if the wife
decease without issue of her body engendered by her housbande, then the
housebande is tenant in the tail after possibility of issue extinct.

And note well that none may be tenant in the tail after possibility of
issue extincte, but one of the donees or the donee in special tail, for the
donee in general tail may never be said tenant in the tail after
possibility of issue extinct, for that always dutyng his life, he may by
possibility have issue that may inherit by force of the same tail. And so in
the same man^ the issue that is heir unto the donees in a special tail may
not be said tenant in tail after possibility. etc. causa qua supra.

Also tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct, shall never be
punished of wast, for the inheritance that once was in him. Anno. 10 H. 6. fol.
1. But he in the reuercion may enter, if he does alien in fee. An. 45. E. 3.
fo. 22.

Tenant by the curtesy of England.
Tenant by the curtesye of England, is where a man takes a wife seized in
fee simple, or of fee tail general, or as heir in the tail special, and
has issue by the same wife male or female. The issue after being dead or alive
if the wife decease, the husband shall hold the land during his life by the law
of England, and this is called tenant by the curtesye for that it is not used
in none other realm but only in England. And some say that it shall not be
said tenant by the curtesye, but if that child that he has by his wife be
hard cry, for by the cry is the proof that the child that he had by his wife
was horn.

Tenant in dower.
TEnant in dower is where a man is seized of certain lands or teneme^tes in
fee simple, or in tail general or as heir in the ^a^ special and takes a
wife and deceaseth the wife after the decease of her husband shall be endowed of
the third part of such lands or tenementes that were her housbandes in any
time during the couerture, to have and to hold to the same wife in seueraltie
by mete^ and bounds for term of her life, whether she have by her housbande
issue or none, and of what age that the wife be, so that she pass the age of
nine year at the time of her housbandes death or else she shall not be
endowed. And note well that by the common law the wife shall not have for her
dower but third part of the tenementes, which were her housbandes during the
espousels. By custom of some country she shall have the half, and by custom
of some town or boroughe she shall have the whole, and i^ all these cases she
shall be said tenant in dower.

Also there is two other manner of dowers, that is to say, dower called dowement
in the church door and dower called dowment by the fathers assent. Dowement at
the church door is, where a man of full age is seized in fee simple which
shall be wedded unto a wife, when he comes unto the church door, and there
after affyaunce, and truth plight made beetwene them, endoweth his wife of his
whole land, or of the half or less parcel, and there openly declare the
quantity and the certain of his land that she shall have for her dower. In
this case the wife after the death of her housbande shall enter into the said
quantity of land, of which her housband endowed her without the assignement
of any manne. Downement by the fathers assent, is where the father is seized of
tenementes in fee, and his son and heir apparente when he is wedded,
indoweth his wife at the church door of parcel of the lands or tenementes
of his fathers of thassent of his father, and assygneth the quantity of the
parcelles. In this case after the death of the son, the wife shall enter in
the same parcel without the assignement of any other. But it has been said in
this case that it behooves the wife to have a deed of the father, prouyng his
assent and consent of such indowement. And if after the deaths of the
housbande she enter and agree to any such dower of the said two dowers at
the church door, than she is concluded to claim any other Dower by the
common law of any lands or tenementes, which were of her said housebande.
But if she will she may refuse such Dower at the Church door, and than she
may be endowed after the course of the common law. And note well that no wife
shall be endowed of the fathers assent in the form aforefayde, save where
the husband is son and heir apparaunte to his father.

Inquere in these two cases of Endowement at the Church door if the wife at
the time of the death of her houseband, pass not the age of.9. years, if she
shall have such Dower or no.

And note well, that in all cases where the certaynetie appears what lands
or tenementes the wife shall have for her Dower, the wife may enter after the
death of her housebande without assygnement of any other. But where the
certain appears not, as to be endowed of the third part to have in
several, or to be endowed of the half after the custom to hold in
seueraltie. In such cases it behooves that her Dower be unto her assygned
after the death of her housebande, because it is not limitte before the
assygnemente what part of land or tenementes she shall have for her Dower. But
if there be two ioyntenantes of certain lands in fee, and the one alyeneth
that, that to him pertayneth and belongs, to another in fee, which takes a
wife and after dies. In this case the wife for her Dower shall have the third
part of the half that her husband purchased, to hold in common and occupye
in common as her part amounts with the heir of her houseband, and with the
other ioyntenant which aliened not, for that in such case her dower may be
assigned by metes and bounds.

And it is to understand, that the wife shall not be endowed of lands or
tenementes that her husband jointly held with another at the time of his
death. But where he holds in common otherwise it is, as in the case
aforesaid. And it is to wit that if the tenant in tail endowe his wife at the
church door as it is aforesaid that shall serve for little or naught to the
wife for that ye after the death of her husband the issue in the tail may
enter upon the possession of the wife, and so may he in ye reuere^ if there be
none issue in ye tail alive.

Also if a man seysed in fee simple being within age endowe his wife at the
church door, and dies, and the wife enters. In this case the heir of the
husband may put her out. But otherwise it is as it seems where the father is
seysed in fee, and the son within age endowe his wife of his fathers assente,
the father than being of full age.

Also there is another Dower which is called Dowement de la pius beale. And
that is as in such case that a man is seized of.xl. acres of land, and he
holds.xx. of the said.xl. acres of one man by knights service, and the
other.xx. acres of an other in socage, and takes a wife, and has issue a
son, and dies his son being within the age of.14. years and the lord of
whom the land is holden by knights service enters into the.xx. acres of
land holden of him, and them has and occupyeth as warden in chinalrye during
the childs nonage, and the childs mother enters in the remnaunt, and it
occupyeth as garden or warden in Socage. If in this case the wife bring a
writ of Dower against the warden in chiualtye to be endowed of the tenementes
holden by knights service in the kings court or in any other court, the
warden in chiualrye may plede in such case all the matter, and show how the
wife is warden in socage as it is aforesaid, and prayed that it may be adjudged
by the court that the wife endow her self of the most fair called plus beale
of the tenementes that she has as wardeyn in socage after the value of the
third part that she claymeth to have of the tenementes in chiualrye by her
writ of Dower, and if the wife may not gainsay it, then the judgment shall be
made that the wardein in chiualrye shall hold the lands holden of him during
the nonage of the child quyte from the woman etc. And that the woman may
endowe her self of the most fair part of the lands that she has, as wardeyn
in socage to the valor of the third part that the wardeyn in chiualrye has*
etc. And after such judgment given, the wife may take her neighbors, and in
their presence endowe her self by metes and bounds of the fairest part of the
tenementes that she has as wardeyne in socage to the valor of the third
part of the lands that the warden in chiualrye has, and that to have and
hold for term of her life. And such dower is called dower of the fairest part
or de plus beale.

with this agrees. P. xlv. E. iii. fol. 4. But there it was said, that after
the time that the heir come to his full age, the wife shall have a new accion
of dower against the heir to be endowed of the third part of all that the man
dyed seized And note well that such doweme^t may not be, but where the
judgment is given in the kings court, or in so^e other court. And the wife
may do this for salvation of the state of the warden in chiualry during the
nonage of the child. And so ye may see five manner of dowers, that is to say
dowement by the common law, dower by custom, dower at the church door, dower
of the fathers assent and dower of the most fair. And remember that in every
case where a man takes a wife seized of such estate of tenementes etc. so that
the issue that he has by his wife may by possibility inherit the same
teneme^tes of such estate that the wife has, as heir to the wife: In such
case after the wife is dead, he shall have the same tenementes by the courtesy
of England, and otherwise not.

And also in every case where the wife takes an husband seized of such estate
of tenementes. etc. so that by possibility it may hap the wife to have some
issue by her husband, and that the same issue may by possibility inherit
the same teneme^tes of such estate that the husband had, as heir to his father,
of such tenementes she shall have her dower, and otherwise not. For if the
tenementes be given unto a man and to the heirs that he geatteth on his wifes
bodi, in such case the wife has naught in the tenem^tes. And the husband has
estate but as done in special tail. Yet if the husband die without issue,
the same wife shall be endowed of the same ten^tes, for that the issue that she by
possibility might have had by the same husband, may inherit the same tenem^tes.
But if the wife decease living the husband, and after takes another wife, the
second wife shall not be endowed in this case, Causa qua supra.

A man was seized of certain lands, and took a wife, and after aliened
the same lands with warrantye, and after the feoffour and feoffre died, and the
wife of the feoffour brings an accion of dower against the issue of the
feoffee, and he vouched the heir of the feoffour, and during the voucher and
not termined, the wife of the feoffe brings an action of dower against the
heir of the feoffe, and demands the third part of all that her housebande
was seized, and would not demand che third part of those two parties that
her houseband was seized it was judged that she should have no judgment until
the time that the other plee were determined. And also note that Vauasour
says, that if a man be seized of lands and commits felonye, and
alieneth, and after is attaynted, the wife shall have good accion of dower
against the feoffee. But if it be escheted unto the king, or unto the Lord,
she shall have no writ of dower. And so see the diversity, and inquere the
cause.

Tenant for term of life.
TEnant for term of life, is where a man lets lands or tenementes to a
man for term of life of the lessee, or for term of life for an other man. In
such case the lessee is tenant for term of life. But by common language he
that holds for term of his own life, is called tenant for term of life, and
he that holds for term^ of another man's life, is called tenant for term of
another man's life. And it is to be understand, that there is feoffour and
feoffe, donour and donee, lessour and less. The feoffour is properly where a
man enfeoffeth another in any lands or teneme^tes in fee simple, he that
makes the f^ffme^t is called feffour, and he unto who^ the fe^femente is made,
is called feoffee, and the donoure is properlye where a man gives certain
lands or tenementes to another in the tail, he that makes the gift is called
donour, and he to whom the gift is made is called donee. And lessour is
properlye where a man lets to an other certain lands or tenementes for
term of life, for term of years, or to hold at will, he that makes the leas
is called lessour, and he to whom the leas is made is called lessee, and every
one that has estate in lands or teneme^tes for term of his own life, or for
term of an other man's life, is called tenant of free hold. And none of less
estate may have free hold but they of greter estate may have free hold, for
tenant in fee simple has free hold: and tenant in the tail has also free
hold.

Tenant for term of years. Cap. 7.
TEnant for term of years is, where a man lets lands or teneme^tes to an
other for term of certain years after the noumber of years that is accorded
between the lessour and the less, and when the lessee enters by force of the
leas, tha^ is he tenant for term of years and if the lessour in such case
reserve to him a yearly rent upon such lees. he may choose for to distreyne for
the rent in the teneme^tes letten, or else he may take an accion of det for
the arrerages against the lessee. But in such case it behooves that the
lessour be seysed in the same teneme^tes at the time of his lees for it is a
good plee for the lessee to say that the lessour had nothing in the tenementes
at the time of the leas except the lease be made by deed endented in which case
than such ple lies not for the lessee to plede.

And it is to understand that in a lease for term of years by deed or without
deed, it needs no liuere of seisin to be made to the less, but he may enter
whansoeuer he will by force of the same lease. But of feoffementes made in the
country or gifts in the tail, or leases for tme of life. In such cases where
free hold shall pass if it be by deed or without deed, it behooves to have
livery of seisyn etc. But if a man let lands or teneme^tes by deed or without
deed for term of years, the remaynder over to an other for term of life, or
in the tail or in fee than in such case it behooves that the lessour make
liuere of seisi^ to the less for tme of years or else there shall nothing
pass to them in the remayndre, though the less enter in the tenementes. And
if the fermour in such case e^tre before any such liuere of seisi^ made unto
him than is the free hold and the reuercion in the lessour. But if he make any
liuere of seisin unto the lessee, than it is free hold with the fee of the^ in
the remayndre after the form of the grant and will of the lessour.

And if a man will make a feoffement by deed or without deed of lands or
teneme^tes that he has in more towns than in one in one shire, if the liuere
of seisin be made in one parcel of the tn^tes in one town in the name of al it
suffices for all the other lands or teneme^tes comprehended in the same
feoffme^t in all other towns in the same shyre. But if a man make a deed of
feffement of lands or ten^tes in diverse shyres, there it behooves him to have
in every shyre a liuere of seisin. And in such case a man shall have by the
grant of another fee simple, fee tail, or free hold without liuere of seisin.
And if.ii. me^ be and each of the^ is seized of a quantity of land withn one
shire, and the one gra^teth his land to the other in excha^ge for the land that
the other has, and in the same manner the other grants his land unto the first
grant our in exchange for the land that the first grant our has. In this case
each may enter in the other lands so taken in exchange wihoute any liuere of
seisin. And such exchange made by words of tenementes within the same shire
without any writing is good enough. And if the lands or tenementes be in
diverse shyres that is to say, if that the one have in one shyre, and the
other has in an other shyre, it behooves to have a deed indented made between
them of such exchange.

And note that in exchange it behooves that the estates that both parties have
in the lands so exchanged be egall. For if the one wills and grants that
the other shall have his land in the tail, for the land that he has of the
grant of the other in fee simple, though the other is agreed to that, yet
this exchange is but void, for that the estates be not even.

In the same manner it is where it is granted and agreed between the^ that the
one shall have in the one land fee tail, and the other shall have in the other
land but term of life. Or if one shall have in the one land fee tail general,
and the other in the other land fee tail especial. So always it behooves that
in excha^ge the estate of both parties be eue^, that is to say if that one have
fee si^ple in that one la^d, that the other shall have such estate in the other
la^d and if the one has fee tail in the one land, than the other shall have
likewise in the other la^d. Et sic de alus statibus. But it is nothing to
charge of the even value of the lands, for though that the land of that one is
so much more in value, than the land of the other, this is nothing to
purpose, so that the estates made by the exchange be even, and so in exchange
by two grauntes, for ever part grant each his land to the other in exchange,
and in each of their grauntes mention shall be made of the exchange.

And if a man let la^d to another for term of years, though the lessour dye
before the lessee enter into the teneme^tes, yet may he enter into the
teneme^tes after the death of the lessor, for that. yt the lessee by force of
the lease, has right incontinent to have the tenementes after the form of
the lease. But if a man make a deed of feoffeme^t unto another, and a letter
of attorney to a man to deliver to him seisin by force of the same deed, yet
if the liuere of seisin be not made in the life of him that made the deed, it
avails not, for that the other has no manner of right to have the tenementes
after the purporte of the deed before the liuere of seisi^ etc. And if no
liuere be made than after the death of him that made the deed the right of such
tenem^tes is continent in his heir or in some other. Also if tenementes be
let to a man for term of half a year, or for term of a quarter of a year
etc. In such case if the lessee make waste, the lessour shall have against him
a writ of waste, and the writ shall say: Qui tenet ad terminum annorum.
But he shall have a special declaracion upon the troth of this matter, and
the plee shall not abate the wryt for that, that he may have no otherwrit upon
the matc^. Anno. 7. H. 7. fol. 1.

Tenant at will. Ca. 8.
Tenant at will is, where lands or tenementes be letten by a man unto an
other, to have and to hold to him at the will of the lessour, by force of
which lease the lessee is in possession. In such case the less is called
tenant at will, for that he has no certain sure estate for the lessor, may put
him out at what time it pleases him, yet if the less sow the land and the
lessour after the sowing and before that his greynes be ripe puts him out
yet shall the less have his greynes, and shall have free egresse and regresse to
reap and to carry his greines, for that he wist not at what time his lessour
would enter upon him. Otherwise it is if tenant for term of years before ye
end of his term sows the land, and the term is ended before that his
greynes be ripe. In this case the lessour, or he in the reuercyon shall have
the greynes, for that the farmour knew well the certain of his term and when
his term should be ended.

Also if an house be let to a man to hold at will, by force of which the
less enters into the house, within which house he brings his household
sluffe, and after the lessour puts him out, yet shall he have free entree,
egresse and regresse in the same house by reasonable time to carry his goods and
household stuff. And if a man be seized of a house in fee simple, fee tail,
or for term of life, the which has certain goods within the same house, and
makes his executours and disceiseth, whosoever after his death has the house
yet shall his executours have free enter, egresse and regresse to carye out of
the house the goods of their testatours by a reasonable time.

Also if a man make a deed of feoffemente unto an other of certain land, and
delivers to him the deed but no livery of sesin. In this case he to whom the
deed is made may enter into the land, and hold and occupy it at the will of him
that made the deed for that, that is proved by the words of the deed, that it
is his will that the other shall have the land. But he that made the deed, may
put him out when he will.

Also if an house be let to hold at will, the lessee is not holden to sustain
or repair the house, as tenant for term of years is holden to do. But if the
lessee at will make volu^tary wast, as in pulli^g down of houses, or in cutting
or felling of trees: It is said that the tessour shall have for that against
him an accio^ of trespass. As if I deliver to a man my sheep to donge or marle
his land, or mine oxen t^ air his land, and he slays my beasts, I man well
have an accion of trespass against him notwithstanding the deliuere.

Also if the lessour upon such lease at will reserve unto him a yearly rent,
he may dystreyn for the rent behynd, or to have for tha^ an accion of Debt at
his own choice. H. v^ R. ii. in Repleuin.

Tenant by copye of court roll. Cap. 9.
TEnaunte by copye of court roll, is as (...) manne be seized of a Manner
within which Manner there is a custom, and has been used time out of mind,
that certain tenante^ within the same manner have used to have lands or
tenementes to hold to the^ and to they^ heirs in see simple or in fee tail,
or for ^m^ of life. etc. at the will of the lord, after the custom of the same
manner. And such a tenante^ may not aliene the land by deed, for tha^ the
Lord may enter as in a thing forfayte to him. But if he will aliene his
land to an other, him behooves after some custom to surrender the tenementes
in some court. etc. unto the lords hands to the use of him that shall have
the estate in such form or to such effect. Ad hanc curiam venit. A. de. B.
and sursum reddidit in eadem curia vnum meswageum etc. in manus domini ad vsum.
E. de. A. et heredum suorum vel heredum de corpore suo exeunt vel pro termino
vite sue etc. Et super hoc venit predictus E. de A. and cepit de domino in
eadem curia meswagium predictum. etc. habendum and tenendum sibi and heredibus
suis, vel sibi and heredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, vel sibi, ad terminum
vite sue, ad voluntatem domini secundum consuetudinem manerii, faciend, and
reddendum inde reddit, debit, seruicia, consuetudines inde prius debitas, and
de iure consuetas, and dat domino de fine etc. Et fecit domino fidelitatem etc.
That is to say A. of B. cummeth unto this court, and surre^dreth in the same
court a mese. etc. into the hands of the Lord, to the use of E. of. A. and
his heirs, or to the heirs, issuynge of his body, or for term of life etc.
And upon that, cummeth the foresaid E. of. A. and takes of the Lord of
the same court the foresaid mese. etc. to have and to hold to him and to his
heirs, or to him and to his heirs issuing of his body, or to hi^ for tme of
life at ye lords will after custom of the manner, to do and yield therefore
re^tes, dettes, services, and customs thereof before dew and accustomed. etc.
and gives the Lord for a fine. etc. and makes unto the lord his fealty.
etc. And such tenauntes been called tenantes by Copy of court roll for that
they have none other evidence concerning their tenementes, but the copies of
the court rolls, and such tenauntes shall no^ implede nor be impleded of their
tenementes by the kings writ but if they will implede other for their
tenem^tes they shall have a play^ made in the court of the lord in such form
or to such effect. A. de. B. queritur versus C. d^ D. de placito terre,
videlicet de vno meswagio quadr^ ginta acris terre quatuor acris pr^ti. etc.
cum pertinenci^s. Et facit protestacionem se qui querelam istam in natura
breui^ domini Regis assise mortis antecessoris a^ communem legem, vel breuis
domini regi^ assise none dysseisine ad communem legem That is to say. A. of B.
complayneth against C. of D. of a plee of land, that is for to say^ of a mese.
and.xl. acres of land, four acres medowe. etc. with the appurtenances and
m^keth protestacion to sue his playnt in nature of the kings writ of assise of
the death of his antecessour at the common law, or by writ t^ of our souerayn
lord the king of assise of noue^ disseisin at the common law, or in nature o^
some other writ etc. pledges and process. F^ G. And though that some such
tenantes have inheritance after the custom and manner, ye^ they have none
estate but at the lords will, and after the course of the common law, for it is
said if the lord put them out, they have none other remedy but to sue unto the
lord by peticion. For if they had any other remedy, they should not be said
tenaunts at the Lords will, after the custom of the manner, but the lord will
not break the custom that is reasonable in such cases. But Brian chyef
Justice says, that his oppinion always has been and always shall be, if such
a tenant by custom (paying his services) be cast out by the lord he shall
have an accion of Trespass against hi^. H. 21. E. 4. And likewise was ye oppinon
of Danby chief Justice. M. 7. E. 4. for he says that the tenant by the custom
is as well inherit to have his land after the custom as well as he that has
franktenement by the common law.

TEnauntes by the yard, be in such nature as tenauntes by copy of court
roll. But the cause for which they be called tenauntes by the rod or yard,
is for that when they will surrender their tenementes into the lords hand to
the use of another, they shall have a little yard or rod, by the custom and
use of their hands which they shall deliver unto the Steward or baylife,
after the custom and use of the manner. And he that shall have the land shall
take the same land in the court, and his taking shall be entered in ye roll And
the steward or the baylife according to to the custom shall deliver unto him
that takes the land the same yard or another yard in the name of seisin. And
for this cause they be called tenauntes by the yard. But they have none other
evidence but copy of ye counrolle.

And also in diverse lordshippes and manners there is such custom, if such a
tenant that holds by the custom will alyen his lands or tenementes, he may
surrendre his lands unto the bailiffe or to the reave, or to two sad men of
the same Lordship, to the use of him that shall have the land, to have in (...)
simple, fee tail, or for term of life. etc. and all that shall they present
at the next court. And than he ye shall have the land by copye of court roll,
shall have the same land after the intent of the surrendre. And so it is to
wete that in diverse lordshippes and diverse manners there be made diverse customs
in such case, as to take tenauntes and as to plede and as touching other
things and customs to be done and all that that is not against reason may well
be admitted and allowed. And such tenauntes that hold after the custom of a
seignorye or after the custom of a manner though they have estate of
inheritance after the custom of the lordship or of the manner, yet because they
have not any freholde by the court of the common law, they be called tenantes
by base tenure.

And diverse diversities there be between a tenant at will which is in by the
lessee of his lessour by the course of the common law, and tenant after the
custom and manner in the form aforesaid. For tenant at will after the custom
may have estate of inheritance as it is aforesaid at the lords will after the
custom and usage of the manner. But if a man have lands or tenementes which be
not within such manner or lordship where such custom has been used in the
form aforesaid, and will let such lands or tenementes to another, to have and
to hold to him and to his heirs at the will of his lessour these words to the
heirs of the less, be void for this is the cause if the lessee dye, and his
heir e^treth the lessour shall have a good accion of trespass against him, but
not so against the heir of the tenant by the custom etc. in any case for that
the custom of the manner in some case may help him to bar his lord in any
accion of trespass.

Also tenant by the custom in some places ought to repair and sustayn the
houses and the other tenant at will ought not. Also one by the custom shall
do fealty and the other not. And diverse other dyuersities there be between
them.

Thus ends the first Book.
Homage.
HOmage is the most honorable service and most humble service of reverence,
that a franktenaunt may do to his lord. For when the tenant shall make
homage to his lord he shall descend and his head uncovered, and his lord
shall sit, and the tenant shall knele before him on both his knees, and hold
his hands jointly together between the hands of his lord, and shall say thus.
I be come your man from this day forward of life and lymme and of earthly
worship and unto you shall be true and faithful, and bear you faith of the
tenementes that I claim to hold of you saving the faith that I owe unto our
soueraygne lord the king. And when the Lord so syttyng shall kiss him.

But if an Abbot or a priour or any other man of religion shall make homage
unto his lord he shall not say. I become your manne^ for that he has
professed himself only to be gods man. But he shall say thus, I do you
homage and unto you shall be true and faithful, and bear you faith for the
teneme^tes that I claim to hold of you. Saving the faith that I owe unto our
soueraygne Lord the king.

Also if a woman sole shall make homage unto her Lord. She shall not say I
become your woman. For that is not convenient for a woman to say that she
shall become the woman to any but only to her husband when she is wedded. But
she shall say I make unto you homage, and to you shall be true and faithful and
shall bear you faith of the tenementes that I hold of you, saving the faith
that I owe unto our sovereign Lord the king.

But if a man have several tena^cies which he holds of several lords, that
is to say every tenancy by homage. Than when he makes homage unto one of his
Lords he shall say in the end of his homage. Saving the faith that I owe unto
the king and unto my other lords.

And note well that none make homage but such as has estate in fee simple or in
fee tail in his own right or in another man's right. For it is a ground in
the law, that he that has estate but for term of life, shall make none
homage nor take none homage.

For if a woman have lands or tenementes in fee simple or in fee tail which
she holds of her Lord by homage and takes an housbande and has issue, than
the husband in the life of the wife shall make homage, for that he has title
to have the land by the curtesy if he suruyue his wife. And also he holds in
ye right of his wife. But before issue between them, the homage shall be made in
both their names. But if the wife decease before homage made by the husband in
the wives life, and the husband holds himself in as tenant by the curtesy he
shall make no homage unto his lord, for that he has than none estate but for
term of life. More shall be said of homage in the tenure of homage auncestrel.

Fealty. Cap. 2.
Fealty is as much to say as fidelitas in latin, and when a franktenaunt shall
make fealty unto the Lord he shall hold his right hand upon a book and shall
say thus.

Hear you this my lord, that I unto you shall be faithful and true, and bear
you faith of the lands or tenementes that I claim to hold of you, and truly
to you shall do the customs and services that I ought to do unto you at
terms assigned, as god me help and al his saints, and than he kisseth the
book* But he shall not knele when he makes his fealty, nor shall make such
humble reverence as is aforesaid in homage. And great diversity there is had
between making of fealty (...) of homage. For homage may not be made but to
the lord himself. But the Steward of the lords court or the bailife may
take fealty of the lord.

Also tenant for term of life shall make fealty, and yet he shall make none
homage (...) diverse other diversities there be between homage, and fealty.

Also a man may see a good note Anno. 15. E. 3. where and how a man and
his wife made homage and fealty in the common bank, which is written in such
form. Note that John Lewkenor and Elizabeth his wife made homage unto william
Thorpe in this manner. The one and the other hylde ioyntlye their hands between
the hands of willyam Thorpe, and the husband said in this wife. we unto you
make homage and bear you faith for the lands that we hold of A. your
Conusour which has granted you our services in B. and in C. and the other
towns. etc. against all men, saving the faith that we owe unto our sovereign
lord the King and to his heirs and to our other lords, and the one and the
other kissed him. And after they made fealty, and the one and the other hylde
their hands together, upon a book, and the husband said the words and both
kyssed the book. More shall be said of fealty in the tenure of Socage and in
the tenure of frank almoyne, and in the tenure of homage Auncestrell.

Escuage.
EScuage is called in latin Scutagium, that is to say service of shield. And
such a tenant that holds his land by escuage, holds by knights service.
And also it is comenly said that some hold by a fe of knights service and some
by the half fee of knights service. etc. And it is said that wha^ ye king
makes a voyage rotal into Scotland for to subdue ye Scots he that holds by a
fee of knights service, behooves to be with the king by.xl. days well and
couenably arrayed for the war. And likewise he that holds his land by the
half of a fee by knights service, ought to be with the king by.xx. days. And
he that holds his la^d by the fourth part of a fe by knights service, him
behooves to be with the king by x. days. And so after the quantity, he that
has more to do more and he that has less to do less. But it appears by
the plees and arguments made in a good plee upon a write of Detenue of an
obligacion brought by one Harry Gray. Anno. 7. E. 3. That it needs not to hem
that holds by escuage to go himself if he will find an able parson for the
war couenably arrayed for the war to go with the king, and that seems good
reason. For it may be that he that holds by such service is sick in such
wise, that may not go nor ride.

And also an Abbot or any other man of religion or a woman sole that holds by
such service, ought not in such case to go in proper parson. And sir william
Herle that time chief Justice of the common place said in the said plee that
escuage shall not be granted but where the king himself goes in proper
parson. And so it abode in judgment in the same plee if these.xl. days shall be
accounted from the day of the muster of the kings host made by the commons and
by the kings commandment. Or else from the day that the king first enters
into Scotland. etc. therefore inquere of this matter.

And after such voyage into Scotland it is commonly said, that by the
auctoritye of parliament the escuage shall be set and put in certain, that is
for to say a certain sum of money, how much every that holds by a whole
fee of knights service which was not in his own proper parso^, nor none other
with him with the king shall pay unto the Lord of whom he holds his land
by escuage. As put case that it was ordained by authority of parliament that
every that holds by a whole fee by knight service which was not with the
king, shall pay to his lord.xl. s. Than he that holds by the half of a fee
by knights service shall pay unto his lord but xx. s. and so who more more,
and who less less. And some tenauntes hold that if escuage run by authority
of parliament to any sum of money that they shall pay but the half of that
so^me and su^me but the fourth part of that so^me. But because the escuage that
they shall pay is not certain for that it is at no certain what the parliament
will assese the escuage they hold by knights service. But otherwise it is of
escuage certain of which shall be spoken of in the tenure of socage.

And if a man speak generally of escuage it shall be understand by the common
speech of escuage not certain which is knights service. And such escuage
draws unto him homage, and homage draws unto him fealty, for fealty is
incident to every manner of service, but to the tenure of frank almoygne as it
shall be said hereafter in tenure of frank almoygne. So as he that holds by
escuage holds by homage, fealty, and escuage.

And it is to be understand that when escuage is so sessed by authority of
parliament every lord of whom the land is, holden by escuage shall have the
escuage so sessed by the parliament because it is understand by the law that
at the beginning such tenementes were given by the lords to hold by such
services to defend their lords as well as the king and to set in quiet and
rest their lords and the king of the Scotts aforesaid. And for that such
tenementes came first of the Lords, it is reason that they have the escuage of
their tenementes.

And the lords in such case may distrei^ for the escuage so assesed or they
may have the kings writtes direct unto the Sherifes of the Shyres to leuy
such escuage for them a^ it appears by the register. Fol. 88.

But of such tenauntes that hold of the king by escuage which were not with the
ki^ in Scotland, the king himself shall have the escuage.

Item in such case aforesaid, where the king makes a voyage royal into
Scotland, and the escuage is assessed by the parliament, if the lord distrayne
his tenant that holds of him by service of a whole knights fee for ye
escuage so assessed. etc. And the tenant pledeth and will auerre that he was
with the king in Scotland. etc. by.xi. days, and the lord will auerre the
contrary, it is said that it shall be tried by the certificacion of the
constable of the kings host, in writing under his seal which shall be sent to
the justices.

Homage fealty, and escuage.
TEnure by homage, fealty and escuage, is to hold by knights service and it
draws unto him ward, marriage, and relief. For wha^ such a tenant dies his
heir male being with in age of.xxi. year, the lord shall have the land holden
of him until the age of the heir of xxi. year, which is called plain or full
age for that such an heir by the understanding of the law, is not able to do
knights service before the age of xxi. year.

And also if such an heir be not married at the time of the death of his
auncester than the Lord shall have the ward and marriage of him. But if such a
tenant dye, his heir female being of the age of.xiiii. year or more than the
Lord shall not have the ward another of the land nor of the body, for that a
woman of such age may have an husband able to deoe knights service. But if
such an heir female be within the age of xiiii. year and not married at the
time of the death of her ancester, tha^ the lord shall have the ward of the
land holden of him till the age of such an heir female, of.xvi. year. For that
it is given by the statute of westmynster the first. cap. 22. that by two year
next following the said.xiii. year, the Lord may tender a conuenyent marriage
without dyperagyng of such an heir female. And if the lord do not tender her
such marriage within the said two year, than she at the end of the said two
year may enter and put out the lord. But if such an heir female be married
within the age of xiiii. year in the life of the auncester, and the auncester
dye she being within the age of xiiii. year the lord shall have but the ward
of the land till a end of.xiiii. year of age of such an heir female. And
than her husband and she may enter into the land and put out the lord, for
this is out of the case of the statute. Insomuch that the lord can not tender
marriage to her that is married. etc. For before ye said estatute of westmister
the first such issue female that was within age of.xiiii. year at the time of
the death of her auncester, and after that she had accomplished the age
of.xiiii. year without any tender of marriage to her by the Lord such an heir
female than might enter into the land and put out the lord as it appears by
the rehearsal and by the words of the same estatute. So that the said statute
was made in such case all for the advantage of the lord as it seems. But yet
that at all times is understand by the words of the same estatute, that the
Lord shall not have the two year after the.xiiii. year as it is aforesaid.

And note well that the full age of heir male and female after the common
speech, is said the age of.xxi. And the age of discrecion is said the age
of.xiiii. year for a child at such age which is wedded within such age to a
woman may agree to the marriage or dysagree.

And if the wardeyne in chiualrye mary once his ward within the age of.xiiii.
year, and after the age of.xiiii. year he disagreeth to the marriage. It is
said by some folk that the child is not holden by the law to be married
another time by his wardeyne, for that the wardeyne had once the marriage of
him, and therefore he was out of his ward as concerning the ward of his body.
And when he had once the marriage of him and therefore was out of his ward he
shall no more have the marriage of him. In the same manner it is if the wardeyne
marye him and the wife dye, the child being within age of.xiiii. year, or.xxi.
years. And that the child may disagree to such marriage when he come to the
age of.xiiii year it is proved by the wards of the statute of Marton Cap. 6.
that says thus. De dominis qui maritauerint illos quos habent in custodia sua
villanis and alijs sicut burgences vbi disparage^tur, si tales homines furit
infra. 14 annos et talis etatis i matrimonio conse^tire no^ possint, tunc si
parents illius conquerantu^ dominis ille amittat custodiam illam visque ad
etate^ heredis. Et omne co^modu^ quod inde receptum fuerit conuertatur in
co^modu^ heredis infra etatem exiu^entis secundum dispositione^ parentum
propter dedecus et impositum. S^ autem fuerit.xiiii. annorum et vitra qua
consentire poterit, et tali maritagio consenserit nulla sequatur pena. And so
it is proved by the same statute that no dysperage shall be but where that he
that has the ward marieth him within the age of.xiiii. year.

Also it has been a question how these words should be understand. Si
parent^ conquerantur. etc. And it seems unto some that considering the statute
of Magna ca^ cap. vi. that wylleth that heredes marite^ ablque disperagacione.
etc. upon which this sa^ statute of Marton upon this point is grounded as it
seems and in so much that it wa^ never se^e that any accion was brought up
the statute of Marton for such disparagy^ against the wardeyne, and if any
accion (...) be taken upon such matter it shall be taken ^ commune presumpcion
before this time, or ^ some time to be put in ure, that these word shall be
understand in such manner. Si paren^es conquerantur.i. Si parents inter se is
mentantur, which is as much to say that (...) the cosyns of such a child
have cause to make lamentacion and complaynt among them (...) the shame done to
their cosyn so dysparag^ which is in a manner a shame to them all, than may the
next cosyn to who^ the heritage may not discende, enter and put out the wardeyn
in chiualry. And if he will not, another cosyn of the chyldes may do it and
he to take the issues and profytes unto the use of the child and of that yield
the child account when he comes unto his full age. Or else the child within
age may enter himself and put out the ^ardeyn. etc. Sed quere de hoc.

Also there is many other diverse disperarynges, which be not specifyed in the
same e^tatute. As if the heir that is in ward be ma^yed unto one that has
but one foot, or one ^a^d or is deformed or lame, or having an horable
disease, or else a great and continual inyrmitie or if the heir male be
married to a woman passed child bearyng. And many other causes of disperagyng
there be, but inquier ^or them for it is good matter to learn. And ^f heirs
males that be wtin age of.xxi. year, after the death of their auncesters
vnmary^. In such case the lord shall have the mary^ge of such an heir, and
have space and time ^o tender to him couenable marriage without ^ysperagyng
within the same time of.xxi. ^ere.

And it is to wit that the heir in ^uche case may choose if he will be
ma^yed or no. But if the Lord which is ^alled wardayne in Chiualrye tender a
couenable Marriage to such an heir, within the age of.xxi. year without
dysperagyng and the heir refuse, and mary not him self within the same age.
Than the said wardeyne shall have the value of the marriage o^ such an heir.
But if such an heir male mary himself within the age of.xxi. year again^ the
will of the wardeyne in chiualrye. Tha^ shall the wardeyne have double the
value ^ that marriage by the force of the estatute ^ Marton aforesaid, as in
the same statutes more fully comprised.

Also diverse tena^tes hold of their lord by knights service, and yet they
hold not^ escuage nor pay no escuage as they that ho^ their lands by castle
ward that is to saye^ keep a tower of a castle or a gayle, or some other place
by reasonable warnyng wha^ the lords here tell that enemies will come or ^come
into England. And in many other case a man may hold by knights service, and
y^ he holds not by escuage nor pays no es^age as shall be said in the tenure
of grant sergeauntie. But in all cases where a man holds by knights
services such seruic^ draws to the Lord ward and marriage. And if a tenant
that holds of his lord (...) service of an whole knights fee dye, his h^
being at full age of.xxi. year his heir shall if unto his lord. C. s. for a
relefe and he that ho^deth by the half fee shall pay. i. s.

Also if a man hold his land of his (...) by the service of two knights fees
than (...) heir at full age at the time of the death of his auncestre, shall
pay to his Lord.x. ^i. for relief.

Also if there be graundfather, mother, and son, and the mother dies living
the father of the son, and after the graundfather which held his land by
knights service dies seized and the land descends to the son of the
mother, as heir to the grandfather which is within age. In such case the lord
shall have the ward of the land but not the ward of the heir. For that none
shall be in ward of his body living his father, because the father during his
life, shall have the marriage of his heir apparaunt, and not the Lord.
Otherwise it is if the father be dead living the mother, where the land holden
in chiualrye descends to the son on the fathers side. etc.

Also if a man be feysed of land which is holden by knights service, and
makes feoffment in fee to his use, and dyed seysed to the use of his heir
within age, and no will by him declared, the lord shall have a writ of right,
of the body and the land. Likewise, if the tenant had dyed seysed of the
demeine. And if the heir be of full age at the death of his au^cestre: In such
a case he shall pay relief, likewise if he had been seized of the demesne,
and that is by the statute of Anno. 4. H. 7. Cap. 7.

Also there is a warden in right chiualry, and warden in deed in chiualry,
warden in right chiualrye, is where the Lord because of his lordship is seized
of the ward of ye land, and the heir vt supra. warden in deed in chiualry, is
where the lord in such case after his seysyn^ grants by deed or without
deed the warde^ of the land or of the heir or of both to another man by force
of which grant, the grant is in possession, than is the grant called
warden in deed. etc.

Tenure in socage. Cap. 5.
TEnure in socage, is where the tenant holds of his lord his tenauncy by
certain service for all manner of service so that the service be not knights
service. As where a man holds his land^ of his Lord by fealte and certain
rent for all manner of service, or else where a manne^ holds his land by
homage fealtee, and certain rent for all manner of services, for homage by
himself makes not knights service.

Also a man may hold of his lord only by fealte, and such tenure is tenure in
socage, for every tenure yt is not tenure in chiualry, is tenure in socage. And
it is said that the cause wherefore such tenure is said and has the name of
tenure in socage is thus. Quia hoc socagi^ ide^ est quod seruie^soce. Et hec
socasoce ide^ est quod caruca. s. one soke or one plough land. And in old time
before ye lamitacio^ of time of mind, great part of the tenantes that hyld of
their lords by socage, ought to come with their plowes every of the said
tenantes by certain days in the year, to air and so^e the lords lands of
his own graynes. But for that such works were do^ne for the live lode and
sustenaunce of their lords, they were acquitted against their lord of all
manner of services. And for this that such service was done with their plowes,
such tenure was called tenure in socage. And after that such service were
changed in diverse other manner service by consent of the tenauntes, and by the
desire of their lords, that is to say into a yerelye rent etc. But yet the
name of socage abides, and in diverse places tenantes yet do such service
with their plowes unto their Lords, so that all manner of services that be not
tenures by knights service be called tenures in socage.

Also if a man hold of his Lord by escuage certain. That is to say in
such form, that when escuage tenneth and is assessed by the parlyamente to a
more sum or to a less sum, that the tenaunte shall pay to his Lord, but
half a mark for escuage, and neither more ne less, to how great sum or
little sum that the escuage runs in this case, because the escuage is in
certain, before that any escuage is assessed. etc. Such tenure is tenure in
socage and not knights service. But where the sum that the tenant shall pay
for escuage, is not certain, that is to say where it may be that the sum
that the tenant shall pay for escuage may be at one time more and another
less, after that it is assessed etc. tha^ such tenure is tenure by knights
service.

Also if a man hold his land for to pay certain rent to his lord for castle
ward, such tenure is tenure in socage. But where the tenantes self ought by
him or by any other to make castle ward, such is tenure by knights service.

Also in all cases where the tenant holds of his lord to pay to him any
certain rent, that rent is called rent service.

Also in such tenures in socage, if the tena^^ have issue and dye, his issue
being within the age of.14. year, than the next friend of ye heyr to whom the
heritage may not discende shall have the ward of the land, and of the heue,
unto the age of the heir of 14. year, and such^ wardeyn is called warden in
socage. For if land dyscend to the heir by the father side, than the mother,
or some other nygh cosyn ^ the mother side shall have the ward, And if land
dyscend to the heir by the mother side than the father or the next fre^d of
the father side shall have the ward of such lands or teneme^tes. And when the
heir comes to the age of.14. year complet, he may enter and put out his
wardeyn in socage, and occupye the land himself if he will. And such warden in
socage shall take no issues or profits of such lands or tenementes to his
own use, but only to the use and profit of the heir, and of that shall yield
account when it pleases the heir after that the heir has accomplyshed the
age of.14. year. But such a wardeyn upon such accounte shall have allowance of
all his reasonable costs and expenses of al things. And if such a wardeyn mary
the heir within age of.14. year, he shall make account to the heir or to his
executours of the value of the marriage, though he took nothing for the value of
the marriage, for that it shall be arected his own folly, that he would marye him
with ^ut taking the value of the marriage without ^he marye him to such a
marriage that is worth in value as much as the marriage of the heir etc. Also if
any other man that is not a nygh friend. etc. occupy the lands and tenementes
of the heir as wardeyn in socage he shall be compelied to yield account unto
the heir, as well as his next friend. For it is no plee for him in a writ of
account to say that he is not his nygh friend etc. But he shall answer
whether he occupyeth the lands or tenem^tes as warden in socage or not. But
inquire if after that the heir have accomplyshed the age of.14. year, and the
warden in socage continually occupyeth the land till the heir comes to full
age of.xxi. year. If the heir at his full age shall have an accion of accounte
against the wardeyn of the time that he has occupied after the said fowretene
years, as against his warden in socage, or against him as against his baylyfe.

Also if wardeyn in chiualrye make his executoures, and dye, the heir being
within age and cetera, the executoures shall have the ward, during the
nonage. But if the wardeyn in Socage make executoures and dye, the heir being
within age of fowertene years, his executoures shall not have the ward, but an
other nigh friend to whom the heritage may not dyscende, shall have the ward.
And the cause of diversity is, for that the wardeyne in chiuairye has the
ward to his proper use, and the wardeyne ^ Socage has not the ward to his
own use, but to the use of the heir. And in such case, where the wardeyne in
Socage dies before any such accoumpte made by him, the heir is of that
without remedy, for that no writ of accoumpte lies against the
executoures, but only for the king. Also the Lord of whom the land is
holden in Socage after the death of his tenaunte, shall have relief in such
form. If the tenaunte hold by fealtee, and certain rent to pay yearly. and
cetera. If the terms or payment be to pay by two terms of the year, or by
four terms of the year, the Lord shall have of the heir of his tenaunte,
as much as the rent amounts that he should pay by year. As if the tenaunte
hylde of the lord by fealty, and. x. shyllinges of rent payable at certain
terms of the year, than the heir shall pay to the Lord.x. shillinges for
relief above these ten shyllynges that he shall pay for the rent. Look more
in the statute of Anno. xix. Henrye the seventh. Capitulo. xv. And in such
case after the death of the tenaunte, such relief is due to the lord
incontinent, of what age soever the heir be, for that such a lord may not
have the ward of the body nor the land of the heir. And the lord in such
case ought not to abide the payment of his relief after the terms and days
of payment of the rent, but he ought to have his relief incontinence. And
therefore he may incontinent dystrayne after the death of his tenaunte for
the relief. In the same manner it is, where a tenant holds of his lord by
fealte, and by a pound of cummyn, or a pound of pepper by the year, and the
tenant dye the lord shall have for his relief a pound of comm or a pound of
pepper.

In the same manner it is, where the ten^t holds to pay by year a certain
noumber of capons or he^nes, or a pair of gloves, or certain bushels of
wheat, and such other manner thing. But in some case the lord ought to abide
to distrayne for his relief till a certain time. As if the tenaunte hold of
his lord by a rose or by a bushel of roses to pay at the feast of S. John
baptist. If such a tenaunte dye in winter, than the lord may not distrayne for
his relief etc. until the time that the roses by the course of the year may
have their growinges. etc. Et sic de similibus. Also if any paraduenture will
ask why a man may not ho^ of his lord by fealte only for all manner of ^et^ces,
insomuch when the tenant shall make hi^ fealty he shall swear to his lord that
he sha^ do al services due, and when he has man fealty in such case, there
is none other seruic^ due. To this it may be said, that where the tenant
holds his land of his lord, yt behooves that he ought to do to his lord
some manner of service, for if the tenaunte nor hy^ heirs ought to do no
manner of service t^ his lord nor to his heirs, than by long tim^ continued it
should be out of remembraunc^ of whom the land was holden, of the lord ^ of
his heir or not, and than more after an^ more sooner will men say that the land
is (...) holden of the lord nor of his heirs tha^ other wise and upon this the
lord shall lose his ^chete of the land, or percase other forfaytu^ or profyt
that he might have of the land. S^ it is reason that the lord and his heirs
hau^ some service done unto him for a proof an^ a wytnes that the land is
holden in frank almoygne as shall be said in frank almoygne, an^ because that the
lord will not at the begynni^ of the tenure have any other services but fea^tie,
it is reason that a man may hold of hi^ lord only by fealte, and wha^ he has
made hi^ fealte, he has done all his service.

Also if a man let to another for term of life certain lands or tenementes
without speaking of any thing to yield to the lessours yet he shall do to the
lessour fealte, for that he holds of him. Also if a lease be made to a man
for term of years it is said the lessee shall do to the lessour fealte, for yt
he holds of him. And this is proved well by the words in a wrytre of waste
when the lessour has caused to bring a writ of waste against him the which
writ shall say that the lessee holds the tenem^tes of the lessour for term
of years. So the writ proves a nature between the^ etc. but he that is
tenant at will after the course of the common law, shall make not fealte,
because he has no manner of sure estate. But otherwise it is of tenant after
the custom of the manner, because that he is bound to do fealte to his lord
for two causes, one is because of custom, the other is because before that he
take his estate in such form to do fealte.

Frank almoygne. Cap. 6.
TEnure in Frank almoygn, is where an abbot or priour, or another man of
religion, or of holy church holds of his lord in Frank almoygne, that is to
say in latin. In liberam clemosynam, that is to say in free alms. And such
tenure began first in old time was seized when a man in old time was seysed
of lands or tenementes in his demesne, as of fee, and of the same land
ensuffed an abbot (...) his covent a pryour and his covent to have ^ to hold of
them and their successors in put^ and perpetual alms, or in frank almoygn,
or by such words to hold of the grant out or of the lessour and his heirs in
free alms. In such case the tenementes were holden in frank almoygn, and in
the same manner it is, where the lands or tenem^tes were granted in old time to a
dean and Chapter and to their successors o^ to a parson of a church and to his
successors or to any other man of holy church and to his successors in free
alms if he had capacity to take such grauntes or feoffeme^tes. etc. and such
as hold in free alms be bound of right before god to do orysons, prayers, and
masses and other divine service for the souls of the grant our^ or feoffours,
or for the souls of their heirs which be dead, and for the prosperity and
good life of them that be alive.

And for this, they do at no time no manner of fealte unto their lords for yt
such divine service is better for them before God, than any doing of fealte,
and also that these words free alms, or frank almoygn exci^de the lord to
have any worldly or temporal se^uice but only to have divine and spiritual
service to be done for him. etc. And if such that hold their tenementes in
free alms, o^ frank almoygne will not or fail to do such divine service as
it is said the lord may not distrayne them for the service undone. etc.
because it is not set in certain what service they ought to do but the lord
may of that complain to their ordinarye, praying him that he will set
punyshemente and correccion of that, And also to provide and see that such
negligence be no more done, and the ordinary of right ought to done that etc.

But where an abbot or a pryour holds of ^hs lord by certain divine service
in certain ^o be done, as for to sing a mass every friday ^n the weke for ye
souls etc. or every year at such a day to sing Placebo and Dirige etc. or to
find a chaplayne to sing mass etc. or to distribute in alms to an hundred
poor men an hundred pence at such a day, in such cas if such divine service be
not done the lord may dys^rayne etc. for that this divine service is in
certain by their tenure what ye abbot or the pri^oure ought to do. And in
such case the Lord shall have the seake. etc. as it seems. And such tenure
is not said tenure in free alms, but it is said tenure by divine service,
for in tenure in free alms, or frank almoygne, no mencyon is made of any
manner certain service, for none may hold in free alms or frank almoygne
if there be expressed any manner certain service that he ought to do.

Also if it be demanded if the tenaunte in frank marriage shall do fealty
to the donour or to his heirs before the fowerth degree be passed etc. it
seems that ye, for he is not like as to this intent to a tenant in free alms
or frank almoygne for that the tenant i^ free alms shall do, because of his
tenure divine service for his lord as it is aforesaid and that he is charged to
do by the law o^ holy church, and for that he is excused and dyscharged of
fealte. But tenant in frank marriage does not by his tenure such service And
if he do not to his lord fealte, than he does not to his lord any manner of
service neither spiritual nor temporal, which shou^ be an inconvenience and
against reason that a man should have estate of inheritance of a^ other, and
yet the lord shall have no man^ of service of him as it seems, and so it
seems that he shall do fealte to his lord before the fowerth degree be past.
etc. And when he hat^ done fealte, he has done all his service. A^ if an abbot
hold of his lord in fre alms, a^ the abbot and his covent under their common
seal alien the same land, to a secular man ^ fee simple, in this case the
secular man shall do fealte to ye lord for that he may not ho^ of his lord in
free alms, for if the lord ought not to have of him fealtee, than he shall ha^
of him no manner of service which should be an inconvenience where he is lord,
and the t^nement is holden of him.

Also if a man grant at his day to an abbo^ or to a pryour, lands or
tenementes in free alms or frank almoygne, these words free alms or frank
almoygne be void, for tha^ ^t is ordained by the statute which is called Quia
emptores terraru^* which statute was made Anno. 18. regis E. primi. That no
man may alien or grant lands or tenementes in fee simple to hold of himself,
so that if a man ^eysed of certain lands or teneme^tes which ^e holds of his
lord by knights service and at his day he grants the same land to an abbot
etc. in free alms or frank almoygne, the abbot shall hold immediatlye the same
tenementes by knights service of the lord of his grantour because of the same
estatute, so that no man may hold in free alms or in frank almoygne, but if
it be by title or prescripcion, or by force of a grant made to some of his
predecessors before the same statute. But the king may give lands or
tenementes in fee simple to hold in fre alms or frank almoygn or by other
service for he is out of the case of the statute, and note well that no man
may hold lands or tenementes in free alms, but of the grauntour or his
heirs, and that for the priuitie of the gift, and therefore it is said that if
there be lord mesne and tenant, and the tenant is an abbot that holds of his
mesne ^n frank almoygne, if the mesne dye without heir than the menalte shall
come by eschete ^o the said lord above, and the abbot than shall hold of him
immediately only by fealte, and shall do him fealte. for that he may not hold
of him in frank almoygne. etc.

And note well, where that such a man of religion holds his lands of his
lord in free alms etc. his lord is bou^de^ by the law to acquit him of every
manner of service that any lord above hi^ will demand or ask of the same
tena^tes. And if he acquit him not but suffers him to be dystrayned etc. than
he shall have against his lord a wri^te of mosne, and recover his damages and
costs of his suite.

Homage auncestrel. Cap. 7.
TEnure by homage auncestrell is, where ^ tenant holds his land of his lord
by homage, and the same tenant and his auncestor whose heir he is has hold of
the same land of the said lord and of his auncestres, whose heir the lord is
from time out of mind by homage and have done homage unto him which i^ called
homage auncestrell because of the continuance which has been by title or
prescripcion in the tenancie, in the blood of the tenant and also in the
lordshyp in the blood of ye lord. And such service by homage au^cestrel
draws to him warranty if the lord that is alive has received homage of such
a tenant, h^ ought to warrant his tenant when he is unpleded of the lands
holden of him by homage au^cestrel And also such service by homage au^cestrel
draws to him acquittance that is to say, the lord ought to acquyte hy^
tenant against al other lords above him of every manner of service. And it is
said that y^ such tenant be impleded by a Precipe quo^ reddat etc. and he
voucheth his lord to warranty, which comes in by process and asks of the
tenant what he has to bind him to warrantye, and he shows how he and his
auncestres whose heir he is have holden the land of the vouchee and of his
auncestres, whose heir he is by homage fro time out of mind, if the lord which
is vouched receives none homage of the tenant, nor of any of his auncestres,
the lord than if he will, may dysclayme in the lordshyp, and so put out his
tenant of his warranty. But if the lord which is vouched has received homage
of the ten^t or of any of his auncestres, than may he not disclayme but he is
bound by the law to warrant the tenant, and than if the tenant lose the land
in defaut of the vouche he shall recover in value against the vouche of the
lands or teneme^tes that the vouche of the lands and teneme^tes that the
vouche had at the time of the vouche or any time after. And it is to wete, that
in every case where the lord may disclaym in his lordshyppe by the law in
court of record, and of that will dysclayme his seignory is extinct, and the
tenant shall hold of his lord next above the lord which so disclameth. But if an
abbot or a pryour be vouched by force of Homage au^cestrel etc. though he has
never taken homage and cetera, yet he can not dysclayme in this case nor in
none other case, for they cannot deueste that thing in fee which has been
ve^ed in their house. Pasche. x. E. quarti.

Also if a man that holds his land by homage auncestrell alyeneth his land
to another in fee the alien shall do homage to his lord. But he holds not
of his lord by homage ancestrell for that the tenancy was not continued in the
hold of the au^cestres, of the al^en, nor the alien shall never have the
warrantie of his land of his lord, for that the continuance of the tenancye in
the tenant and a^ his blood by the alienacion is dyscontinued and so see that
the tenaunte that holds hy^ land by homage auncestrel of his lord, and such
a tenant alieneth in fee, though that (...) take estate of the aliene again
in fee he holds the land by homage, but not by homage auncestrell.

Also it is said, that if a man hold his land of his lord by homage and
fealte, and he had made homage and fealte unto his lord and the lord has
issue a son, and dies, and the lordshyp discendeth to his son. In this
case (...) tenant which did homage to the father, shall not do homage to the
son for that wh^ a tenant has made ones homage to his lo^ he is excused for
term of his life to mak^ homage to any other heir of the lord. B^ yet he
shall do fealte to the son and hey^ of his lord though that he made fealte
to hy^ father.

Also if the lord after the homage to hy^ made by his tenant grant the
service of h^ tenant by deed unto another in fee, and the tenant attorneth.
etc. the tenant shall not be compelled to do homage but he shall do fealtye
though he did fealte before to the grau^tor for fealte is me^de^t to every
attornem^t when the lordship is granted. But if a man be seized of a manor,
and an other man holds his land of him as of the manor aforesaid by homage,
ye which has done homage to his lord which is seized of the manor if after
that a stranger bring a Precipe quod reddat against the lord of the manor and
recouereth the manor against him and sueth execucion etc. in this case the
tenant shall once again do homage to him that recouereth the manoure for that
the state of him which received homage before is defeted by the recouere. And
it shall not lie in the mouth of the tenant to falsefy or defete the recouere
which was against his lord, and so se the diversity. In this case where a man
comes to his lordship by recouere, and where he comes by descent or grant
of the seygnorye.

And if a man tenant which ought by his tenure to do homage to his lord come to
his lord and say to him, sir I owe to do unto you homage for the tenementes
that I hold of you and I am ready to do you homage for the same tenementes for
the which I pray you that ye will now receive it and if the lord than refuse to
receive it, than after such refuse the lord may not distrayn the tenant for
the homage before that the lord require the tenant to do homage and the tenant
refuse to do it.

Also a man may hold his land by homage auncestrell and by escuage or by
other knights service as well as he might hold his land by homage auncestrel
in Socage.

Graunde sergeauntie. Cap. 8.
TEnure by graunde sergeauntie is where a man holds his lands or tenementes
of our sovereign lord the king, by the service which he ought to do in his
own proper person, as to bear the kings baner or his spe^e, or to lead his
host, or to be his marshall, or to bear his sweorde before him at his
coronacion, or to be his sewer at his coronacion, or his keruer, or butler or
to be one of his cha^berlaynes of his resceyt of his escheker, or to do such
services. etc. and the cause wherefore such service is called great sergeaunt,
is for that it is more honorable and worshipful, and dygne, than is the
service of the tenure by escuage for he that holds by escuage is not limited
by his tenure to do any more especial service than any other that holds by
escuage ought to do. But he that holds by graunde serg^aunty, ought to do a
special service to ye king But he yt holds by escuage ought not to do.

Also if the tenant which holds by escuage dye, his heir being at full age,
if he hylde by a knights fee, the heir shall poy^ but an. C. s. for his
relief. as it is ordained by statute of magna carta. Cap. 2. but he that
holds of the king by graund sergeantie and dies his heir being of full age,
shall pay unto the king for his relief the value of his lands or tenementes by
year, beside the charges and repryses which he holds of the king by grand
sergeantie. And it is to wete that seriantia in latin is seruicium, and so
magna seriantia is magnum seruicium, that is to say a great service.

Also those which hold by escuage ought to do their service out of the realm
but they that hold by graunde sergeaunt for the most part ought to do their
service within the realm.

Also it is said that in the Marches of Scotland some hold of the king by
cornage that is to say to blow an horn for to warn the men of the country.
etc. when they here that the Scotts or other enemies will come or e^ter into
England. etc. which seruic^ is grau^d sergeaunt. etc. but if any tenant hold
of any either lord than of the king by such service of cornage, that is not
graunde sergeauntie, but it is knights service, and draws to him ward
marriage, and relief, for none may hold by grand sergeaunte but of the king
only.

Also a man may see in the.xi. year of Henry the fourth that Cokayn than being
chyefe baron of theschequer came into the common place bryngyng with him a
copye of record in these words. Talis tenet tantam terra^ de domino rege
perseriantiam ad inuentendum ^num homine^ ad generam infra quatuor maria. etc.
That is to say, such a man holds is much land of our sovereign lord the king
by sergeauntie to war within the four seas, and he demanded whether he was
graunde sergeauntie or petie sergeauntie, and Hanke tha^ said that it was
graunde sergeantie, for that it was service to be done by the body of a man and
if that he may not find a man to do the service for him he must do it
himself. To who^ the other justices assented Cokayne tha^ said, the tenant in
this case shall pay relyese to the value of the land by year, to the which was
none answer, and note that al they that hold of the king by graunde
sergeaunt, hou^^ of the king by knights service, and the king of that shall
have ward marriage and rely (...) but the king shall not have of them escuage
(...) they hold not by escuage.

Petite sergeauntie. Cap. 9.
TEnure by petite sergeauntie is where a (...) holds his land of our
soueraygne lord the king to yield unto him yearly a Bow, (...) a sweord, or a
dagger, or a knyfe, or a spear, (...) a pair of gloves of Mayle, or a pair of
spurs gylte, or an arowe, or diverse arowe^ or to yield such other small
things touching the war and such service is but Socage (...) effect for that
ye the tenant by his tenure ough^ not to go nor to do any thing in his own
prope^ person touching the war. But to yield and pay yearly certain things
unto the king as a man ought to pay a rent. And note that no man may hold
land by graund sergeante nor by petit sergeauntie but of the king.

Burgage. cap. 10.
TEnure in Burgage is where an ancient Borough is of the which the king is
lord and they that have tenementes within the borough hold of the king their
tenementes that every tenant for his tenement ought to pay to the king a
certain rent by year. etc. And such tenure is but tenure in socage and the same
manner is where another lord spiritual or te^porall is lord of such a borough
and the tenauntes of the tenementes in such a borough hold of their Lord to
pay each of them yearly an annuell rent, and it is called tenut in Burgage
for that the teneme^tes within the borough be holden of the lord of ye
boroughe by certain rent. etc. And it is to wete that the ancient towns
called boroughes be the most ancient and eldeste towns that be within
England for the towns that be now be cities or countries in old time were
bo^oughes and called boroughes for of such old ^ownes called boroughes come
these Burge^es of the parlyament to the parlyamente when the king has summoned
his parlyament.

Also for the greatter part of such boroughes have diverse customs and vsages
which be not had in other towns for some borough has such custom that if a
man have issue of many sons and dies the youngest so^^ shall inherit all the
tenementes which we^ his fathers within the same borough as heir unto his
father by force of the custom the which is called borough English.

Also in some boroughes by the custom^ the wife shall have for her dower all the
tenementes which were her husbands.

Also in some borough by the custom a (...) may devise by his testamente by his
lands ^ tenementes which he has in fee simple with in the same borough at the
time of his death and by force of such devise to whom such deuyses is made
after the death of the deuiso^ may enter in the tenementes to him deuyse to
have and to hold to him after the found and effect of the devise without any
lyuen ^ seisin thereof to be made to him.

Also though a man may not grant ^ give his tenementes to his wife during the
couerture for that that his wife and he be b^ one parson in the law yet by
such custom may devise by his testament his tenemente^ to his wife to have and
to hold to her in ^ simple or in fee tail, or for term of life or ^ years
for ye such devise takes none effect ^ after the death of the deuisor. And if
a man^ diverse times make diverse testamentes and ^uers devises. etc. yet the
last devise and will made by him shall stand and abide.

Also by such custom a man may deuyse by his testament that his executours
may alien and sell the tenementes that he has in fee simple for a certain
sum to distrybute for the soul in this case though the deuysour dye seized
of the tenementes and the tenementes descend unto his heir yet the executours
after the death of the testatour may sell the tenementes so devised and put out
the heir and thereof make a feoffement alyenacion and estate by deed or without
deed to the^ to whom the sale is made unto.

And so may ye see here a case where a man may make a lawful estate and yet
he has naught in the tenementes at the time of the estate made and the cause
is for that that the custom and usage is such. Quia consuetudo ex certa causa
rationabili vsitata private communem legem. For a custom used upon a certain
reasonable cause barreth the common law And note well no custom is to be allowed
but such custom as has been used by title of prescripcion that is to say, from
time whereof is no e^ynd. But diverse opinions have been of time out of mind and
of title of prescripcio^ which is all out in the law, for some men have said
that the time of mind should be said for time of limitacion in a writ of
right, that is to say, fro the time of king Richard the first after the
conquest, as is given by the statute of westmynmer the first, for that a writ
of right is the most highest wryt in his nature that may be. And in such a writ
a man may recover his right of the possession of his auncesters of the most
auncye^t time that any man may hy^ any writ by the law. And in ^o much that
it is given by the said estatute that in such a writ none shall be hard to
ask of the seiso^ of his auncesters of more longer time than of the time of
king Richard aforesaid, therefore this is proved that continuance of
possession or other customs and vsages used after the same time his title of
prescripcion, and this is certain. And other have said that well and truth it is
that seisin and continuance after the limittacion. etc. is a title of
prescripcion as is aforesaid and by the cause aforesaid. But they have said
that there is also another title of prescription that was in the common law
before any estatute of limytacion of written etc. and that it was where a
custom or usage or other thing had been used fro time whereof mind of man
runs not to the contrary, and they have said that this is proved by the
pledyng where a man will plede a title of prescripcion of custom. etc. he
shall say that such custom has been used fro time whereof the memory of men
runs not to the contrary, that is as much to say, when such a matter is
pieted that no man than alive has hard one proof to the contrary, nor has
no knowledge to the contrary: and in so much that such title of prescripcion
was at the common law and not put out by none estatute. Ergo it abides as it
was at the common law, and the sooner in so much that the said lymittacio^ of a
writ of right. etc. is of so long time passed. Ideo quere de hoc, and many
other customs and vsages have such ancient boroughes.

Also every borough is a town, but not to the contrary, more shall be said of
customs in the tenure of villeynage.

Vylleynage. Cap. 11.
TEnure in villeynage is most properly wha^ a villayn holds of his lord to
whom he is vyllain certain lands and tenementes after the custom and manner or
else at the will of his lord and to do his vyllayn service, as to bear,
bring, and carye out the donge and fylth of the lord unto the land of his lord
thereto lay it, cast it, and sprede it abroad upon the land, and to do such
other manner of service, and some free tenauntes hold their tenementes after
the custom of certain manours by such service, and their tenure is called
tenure in villeynage, and yet they be no villains, for no land holden by
villeynage or villeyn lands, or any custom rysyng of the land shall never
make free man vylleyn. But a villayn may make fre land to be villayn land unto
his lord, as if a villayn purchase la^d in fee simple or in fe tail, the lord
of the villain may e^ter into the la^d and put out his villayn and his heirs
for ever, and after the lord if he will he may let the sam^ land to the
vyllayne to hold in villeynage Also if a feoffement be made to a certain p^son
or parsons in fee to the use of a vyllayn or if a vyllayn or any other parsons
be e^feffed to the use of a villayn, what estate so^uer the vyllayn has in
the use, in fe tail (...) term of life, or years, the lord of the villay^
may enter in all those lands and tenement^ likewise as if the vyllain had been
alone ^^sed of the demesne. And that is by the statu^ of. Anno. 19. H. 7. But
if a free man will tak^ any lands or tenementes of his lord by so^ villayn
service, that is to say to pay a fyne^ his lord for his marriage or for the
marya^ of his son or his daughter, than shall he p^ such a fine for the
marriage. etc. for that it ^ the folly of such a free manne to take in such
form lands or tenementes to hold of (...) lord by such bondage, yet that
makes not the free man villayn.

Also every villayn either he is vyllayn by prescripcion, that is to say, he
and his an^cesters have been villayns time out of mind or he is villayn by his
own confession in co^ of record. But if a free man have diverse ^sues, and
after confesses himself to be villa^ to another in court of record, yet his
issue which he has before the confession be fre, b^ the issue which he shall
have after the confe^ etc. shall be villaynes.

Also if a villain purchase lands and alye^^eth the same lands to another
before his lord ^nter than the lord may not enter for it shall be ^dged his own
folly that he entered not when ^he land was in his villayns hands. And so (...)
is of his other goods for if the villayn bie ^sel or give goods to another
before that the lord seaseth the goods tha^ the lord may not ^ease the^ but if
the lord before any such sale or ^ft comes within the house of the vyllayne,
^her such goods be and there openly among the ^eighbours claim the same goods
to be his and so seiseth parcel of the same in name of se^sin of all the goods.
etc. This is said a good ^eisin in the law. And the occupacion that the ^llain
has after such claim i^ the goods shall ^e taken in the law in the right of
the lord.

But if the king have any villayne that ^urchaseth lands and alyeneth before
that the ^ing enter yet the king may enter in the la^d (...) whose hands the
land comes to. Or if ^he villayne bye or sell diverse goods before that the
king sease the goods yet the king may sease them in whose hands that ever
they be. Quia nullum tempus occurrit regi, for no time renneth against the king.

Also if a man let land to another for term life, saving the reuercion to
him and a vyllayne purchases of the lessour the reuercion, in this case it
seems that the lord of the vyllayne may incontinent come to the land and
claim the same reuercion as lord of the same vyllayne and by this claim the
reuersion is incontinent in him for in an^ other form he may not come to the
reuerc^ for he may not enter upon the tenaunte for term of life and if he
ought to abide till after the death of the tenant for term of life than
happily he might come to late for pa^uenture the villayn will grant or alyen
it t^ another in the life of the tenant for term (...) life. In the same
manner it is where a vylla^ purchases the auowson of a church full of (...)
incombent that the lord of the vyllayn may^ come to the said church and
claim the auowson. And by this claim the aduowso^ is in him, for if he abide
till after the dea^ of the incombent and than present his cla^ to the said
church. Then in the mean tym^ the vyllayn might alyen the aduowson. etc. so
put out the Lord from his presentacion

Also there is a villayn regardaunt an^ vyllayn in gross. Vyllayne regardaunt
is (...) if a man be seized of a manor to which a vi^layn is regardant and he
that is seized of the said manor or they whose estate he has (...) the same
manor have been seized of the sa^ villayn and of his auncesters as villayns
regardant to the manor fro time out of mi^ And villayn in gross is where a
man is se^ of a manor to the which a vyllayne is regardaunt and he grants
the same vylla^ by his deed unto another than he is villains gross and not
regardaunt.

Also if a man and his auncester^ whole heir he is has been seized of a
vyl^ayne and of his auncesters as vyllayne (...) gross time out of mind such
been vyl^aynes in gross. And note well that of such ^hynges which may not be
granted nor a^ened without deed or find a man that ^il have such things by
prescripcio^ may not ^therwyse prescrybe but in him and his aun^esters whose
heir he is and not by these ^ordes in him and in those whose estate he ^ath
for that that he may not have their estate without deed or writing the which
behooves ^o be showed to the coure if he will have any ^duauntage of this and
because yt the grant and the alyenacion of a villain lies not with ^ut deed
or other writing. A man may not ^rescrybe in a villayn in gross without
shew^ng of writing but in himself that claims ^he vyllayn and in his
auncesters whose heir ^e is. But of those things which be regar^aunt or
appendaunt to a manor or to other ^andes or tenementes, a man may prescrybe
that he and they whose estate he has were sea ^ed of the manor or of such
lands or tenementes as regardauntes or appendauntes to ^he manor or to such
lands and tenementes etc. from time out of mind, and the cause is ^or this
that such a manor lands and tenementes may pass by alyenacio^ without deed.
etc. And it is to wit that nothing is named ^egardaunt to a manor but a
vyllayne. But ^ertayne other things as aduowsons and commune of pasture. etc.
be named appenda^te to the manor or to other lands and tenementes.

Also if a man in court of record knowledge himself to be vyllayn that never
wa^ vyllayne before, such one is vyllayne (...) gross.

Also a man that is villayne is call^ vyllayne, and a woman that is vyllayne
(...) called nyefe, as a man that is outlawed (...) called an outlawe, and a
woman that is ou^ lawed is called a wayne.

Also if a vyllaine take a free woman (...) wife, the issue between them shall be
villayn^ But if a nyefe take a freman to husband, the issue shall be free. And
that is contrary to the law ciuyle, for there he says that partus (...)
quitur ventrem.

Also no bastard may be vyllayne, (...) if that he will knowledge himself to be
a v^layne in court of record, for he is in the law^ Quasi nullius filius as
the son of no man for that he may be inherit out to no man.

Also every vyllayne is able and free ^sue all manner of accions against every
parso^ except against his Lord to whom he is v^layne, and yet in certain
things he man have against his Lord an accion of appe^ for the death of his
father or of his other a^cesters whose heir he is. Also a nyefe which is
ravished by her lord may have appelle (...) rape against him.

Also if a vyllayne be made executour ^ another, and the lord of the villayn
was ^detted to the testatour in a certain sum ^f money ye which is not paid,
in this case the ^yllayne as executour to the testatour shall ^aue an accion of
debt against his lord because he shall not recover the Det to his pro^er use,
but to the use of the testatour.

Also the Lord may not take out of the ^ossession of such a vyllayne that is
execu^ur of the deades goods, and if he do the ^yllayne as executour shall
have an accion of ^espas against his lord for the same goods (...) taken and
recover damages to the use of the ^statour. But in all these cases it behooves
^e lord which is defe^dant in such accions to ^ake protestacion that the
plai^tyf is his vil^yne or else the vyllayn shall be fraunchysed ^ough the
matter be found for the Lord a^ynst the vyllayne as it is said.

Also if a vyllayne sue an accion of tres^as or other accion against his Lord
in one ^hyre, and the Lord says that he shall ^t be answered for that he
is vyllayne ^gardaunte to his manoure, in an other ^hyre, and the playntyf
says that he is frank ^d of free estate and no villayne, this shall ^e tried
in the Shyre where the playntyfe ^th conceived his accyon, and not in the ^hyre
where the manoure is and this is in nor of liberty as it is adjudged. M. 40.
E. 3 And for this cause was made a statute in^ ix. year of Richard the
second, the tenure which ensues in such form.

Also for that where many vyllaynes ^nyfes as well of great lords as of other^
spiritual or temporal flee and go into (...) and places fraunchysed as the
city of Lo^ and other like places, and feign diverse i^ against their lords
because they would (...) themself to be enfraunchysed it is accord^ assented
that the lords nor none other sha^ forbarred of their vyllaynes because of the
answer in the law. By force of which ^tute if any vyllayne will sue any manner
of ^cion to his own use in any shyre where^ hard to try. etc. against his
lord, his L^ may chose to plede that the plaintiff is hi^ layne and to plede
another matter in ba^ if they be at issue and the issue be founde^ the lord,
than the villayn is villayn as he (...) before by force of the same statute. But
if issue be found for the vyllayn than is the layn frank and free for that the
lord took for his plee that the villayn was his vill^ but took it by
protestacion.

Also the Lord may not mayme vyllayn for if be mayme his villain he she that
be endited at the kings suite. A^ he be of that attaynt he shall for that
(...) grievous fine and ransom to the king* (...) it seems that the villain
shall not have by law any appele of mayme against his lord, for in appeal of
mayme a man shall not recover but his damages. And if the vyllayn in that case
recover damages against his lord, and has thereof execucion the lord may take
that that the vyllayn has in execucion from the vyllayne, and so the recouerye
stands void.

Also if the vyllayn be demandant in an accion royal or playntife in accion
parsonel against his lord if the lord will plead in dysabilitie of his person,
he may not make plain defense, but he shall defend but the wrong and the force
and demand judgment if he shall be answered and show his matter by and by
how he is vyllayn and demand judgment ^f he shall be aunswerde.

Also.vi. manner of men there be against whom if they sue accions etc.
judgment may he asked if they shall be answered. One is where the vyllayn
sueth an accion etc. against his lord as in case aforesaid. The second is
where a man outlawed upon an accion of Debt or trespass or upon any other
accyon or indytement, the tenant or the defendant may show all the matter of
the record and the out^ary and demand judgment if he shall be au^^wered because
that he is out of the law to ^ue any accion during the time that he is
out^wed. The third is where an aliene done ^t of the alegeaunce of our
souerayn lord the ^ng, if such a^yene sue any accion royal or parsonal, the
tenant or defe^dant may say that he was borne out of the kings allegeance^
ask judgment if he shall be answered. The fourth is, where a man by judgment
given against him upon a writ of praemunire facias etc. is ou^e of the kings
proteccion if he s^ any accio^ and the tenant or defendant show all the record
against him he may ask judgment if he shall be au^swered for the law and the
kings writtes been the things by which a man is protect and helped and so
during the time tha^ a man in such case is out of the kings prote^cion, he is
out of help and protect by the kings law or by the kings writ.

The fyfth is where a man is entered an^ professed into religion, if such a
parson sue a^accion the tenant or defendant may show tha^ such one is entered
into religion in such a pla^ into the order of saint Bennet, and is there (...)
monk professed or in the order of freres ^nours or preachers and is there a
friar professed, and so of other orders of religion etc. and af^ judgment if
he shall be answered, and the cause is for this that when a man enters (...) to
religion and is professed he is dead in the la^ And his son or next cosyn
incontinent shall inherit him as well as though he were de^ in deed, and when he
enters into religion, h^ may make his testament and his executours, a^ they
may have an accion of debt due to hy^ before his entie into religion or any
other ^cion that executours may have if he were dea^ in deed. And if he make
none executours wha^ he enters into religion, than the ordinary may commyt the
adminystracion of his goods to other as if he were dead in deed. The syxth is
where a man is accursed by the law of holy church, and he sueth an accion royal
or parsonal, the tenant or defe^dant may plede that he that sueth his accused,
and of this it behooves him to show the bishops letters under his seal,
witnessyng the accursyng and ask judgment if he shall be answered etc. but in
this case if the demau^dant or pleyntif cannot deny it, ye writ shall not
abate, but the judgment shall be that the tenant or defenda^t shall go quite
without day for this, that when the demaundant or playntif has purchased his
letters of absolucion and showed them to the court, he may have a resommons
or a reattachemente upon his original after his nature of his writ etc. But
in the other cases the wryt shall abate. et cetera. If the matter showed may
not be gaynsayd.

Also if a vilain be made a seculer priest, yet his lord may cease hi^ as his
vilain and cease his goods etc. But it seems yt if the villain e^rre unto
religion and is professed etc. that the lord may not take him nor seize hi^
for yt he is ded in the law. And no more tha^ if a free man may take a ^ife to
his wife ye lord may not take ne lease (...) wife of the husband. But his
remedy is to ^me an accion against the housebande, for that he took his niefe
to wife without his And so may the lord have an accion agayn^ the souerayn of
the house that takes and admits his vyllain to be professed in the sa^
house without license and will of his lord etc. and shall recover his damages
to the val^ of the vyllayn for he that is professed monk etc. shall be a monk,
and as a monk shall be taken for term of his life natural, except h^ be
derayned by the law of holy church, and h^ is holden by his religion to keep
his clous^ and if the lord may take him out of his ho^ than he should not live
as a dead parson (...) after his religion which should be in co^nent etc. For
if there be wardeyn in chiual^ of body and of land of a child within age, (...)
the child when he comes to the age of, (...) years, enter into religion and is
professed, t^ wardeyn has none other remedy as to the ward of the body, but
a writ of rauysh (...) of ward against the sovereign of the ho^ And if any
being of full age that is cosyn (...) heir unto the child enter into the
land, (...) warden has no remedy as to the ward of the land, because that the
enter of the heyre^ the child is lawful in such case.

Also in many diverse cases the lord (...) make manumyssion and infraunchisyng
to h^ vylsayn. ^anumission is properly when t^ lord makes his deed to his
villayn to enfachise him by this word Manumittere, wh^ is as much to say, as
extra manum. Et ex^potestatem alterius ponere, as to put him (...) of the
hands and the power of another. And for this that by such a deed the vyllain
is put out of the hand and power of his lord, it is called manumission. And
soeuerye manner of enfraunchesing made to a vyllayn, may be said a manumissyon.
Also if the lord make to his vyllayn an obligacyon of a certain sum of money
or grant unto him by his deed or an annuitie, or let him by his deed, lands
or tenementes for term of years, the vyllayn is enfraunchised. Also if the
lord make a feoffement to his vyllayn of any lands or tenementes by deed or
without deed in fee simple, or fee tail, or for term of years, and de^inereth
unto him the seysyn, this is an infraunchisynge, but if the lord make to him a
lease of lands or tenementes, to hold at the will of the lord by deed or
without deed this is no enfraunchisyng, for that he has no manner of certain
nor suertie of his estate, but yt the lord may put him out when he will. Also
of a lord sue against his villayn, a Precipe quod reddat, if he recover or by
nonsuite after apperaunce, this is a manumyssion, for this that he may lawfully
enter into the land without such suite. In the same manner it is if he sue
against his vyllayn an accion of Debt, or of accoumpte, or of covenant, or of
trespass, or such other, this is an enfraunchisyng. etc. for his that he may
enprison his vyllayn, and take his goods without such suite. But if the lord
^he his villayn by appele of felonye, this is none enfraunchisyng to the
villayn though yt matter of the apele is found against the lord because that
the lord may not have the villain hanged without such suite. But if the vyllain
were not endyted of the same felony before the appele sued against him and is
acquyted of the felony, so that he recover damages against the lord for the
false appele. And in this case the vyllayn is enfranchised because of the
judgment of damage that was given to him against his lord. And more cases and
matters there be by yt which a vyllayn may be enfranchised against his lord.
Sedde illis quere. Also if a lord of a manor will prescrybe the yt has been
accustomed within his manor time out of mind that every tenant within the same
manor that marieth his daughter to any man without lyce^ce of the lord of ye
manor shall make fine to the lord for the time being this prescrypcion is
void, for none ought (...) make such fynes but only vyllaynes for every free
man may freely mary his daughter (...) who^ it pleases him and his daughter.
And because that this prescripcion is against rea^ such prescrypcion is void.
But in the shyre (...) Rent of lands holde^ in Gauelkynd where is the custom
and time of mind the children males ought euenly to enherite this custom is
alowable, for this that it is with some (...) son because that every son is
as great a ge^tleman as the elder son, and because of the more great honor
and valor shall grow tha^ if he had nothing by his auncestres where
paraduenture he might not so grow. etc.

Also where by custom called borough Englysh in some borough the younger son
shall in herite all the tenementes etc. This custom, al so stands with reason
because that the yo^ger son if he lack father and mother because of his
young age may least of all his brethern help himself etc. But if a man will
prescribe that if any catel were upon the demesnes of his manor there doing
damage, that ye lord of the manor for the time being has used hi^ to dystrayn
them and the distress to retayn till fine were made to him for the damages at
his will, this prescripcion is void, because it is against reason that if wrong
be done to a man, that he thereof should be his own judge for by such way if
he had damages but to the value of an half penye he might assesse and have
thereof an hundred pound which should be against all reason, and so such
prescrypcion or any other prescripcion used if it be against al reason this
ought not nor will not be allowed before judges. Quia malus vsus abolendus est.

Rentes. Cap. 12.
THree manner of Rentes there be, that is to say, Rent service, Rent charge,
and Rent secke. Rent service is where a man holds his land of his lord by
fealte and certain rent or by other service and certain rent.

Or by homage fealte and certain Rent. And if rent service at any day that it
ought to be paid, be behynd, the lord may dystrayn for that of common right.
And if a man now will give lands or tenementes to another in the tail, yeldyng
to him certain rent by year he of common right may distrayn for the rent
behynd, though that such gift was made without a deed because that such rent is
rent service, but in such case where a man upon such a gift or lease will
receive to him rent service It behooves that the reuercion of the lands and
teneme^tes be in the donour or in the lessour, for if a man will make a
feoffment in fre, or will give lands in the tail, the remaynder over in fee
simple without a deed reseruyng to him certain rent, such reuercion to void
because yt no reuercion is in the donour and such a tenant holds his land
immediately of the lord of whom his donour held. And this is by force of the
estatute of we st^ 3 Cap. 1. Quia emptores terrarum for before the same
estatute if one had a feoffment in fee simple by deed or without deed, yeldyng
to him and to his heirs certain rent, this was rent service, and for this he
might dystrayn of common right. And if he made no reuercio^ of any rent nor of
any service, yet the feoffee hold of the feoffour by such services as the
feoffour held ever of his lord next above. But if a man by deed indented at a
day, make such a gift in the tail, the remaynder over in fee etc. or feoffment
in fee, and by the same indenture reserueth to him and to his heirs a certain
rent, and that if the rent be behynd that it shall be leful to him and to his
heirs to dystrayn etc. such rent is re^t charge, because such lands and
tenementes be charged of such distres by force of the writing only and not of
common right. And if such a man in such a deed endented, reserve to him and to
his heirs ^ertayn rent without any such clause set or but in the deed that
he may distrayne etc, that ^uch rent is rent secke, because that he cannot
^ystrayn to have the rent if it be denied by ye ^ame dystres, and if he was
neuerseysed in this ^ase of the rent he is without remedy as shal^e said
hereafter. Also if a man seized of cer^yn land grant by his deed Poll, or by
^nde^ture a yearly rent issuyng out of the same and to another in fee simple or
in fee tail, ^r for term of life etc. with clause of dystresse. ^c. then that
is rent charge, and if it be without clause of distress, then it is rent
secke, and ^ote well that rent secke Idem est quod red^itus siccus, and for
that, that no dystresse is ^ncident to it. Also if a man grant by his deed ^o
another and the rent is behynd, the grante ^ay choose if he will sue a writ
of annuite ^f it against the grauntour or dystrayn for the ^nt behynd and the
dystresse to withold till ^e be of that paid. But he may not do and ^aue
both together, for if he take a writ of ^unte than the lord is discharged.
And if he (...) not a writ of a^nuite but dystrain for the arerages and the
tenant sueth a replegiare etc. the grant auoweth the taking of the dystresse
in the land etc. in court of record than i^ the land charged, and the parson of
the grau^tour discharged of an accion of annuite.

Also if a man will that another shall hau^ rent charge yssuing out of the
lands but (...) will not that his parson shall be charged in (...) manner by a
writ of annuite, than he may have such a clause in the end of his deed.
^r^uiso semper quod presens scriptum nee aliqu^ in eo specificatu^ non
aliqualiter se exte^dat^ onerandum personam meam per breue de a^nuali redditu.
Sed tantummodo ad onora^ terram and tenementa predicta de annuali redd^
predicto. And than is the land charged and the parson of the grant our
dyscharged.

Also if a man make such a deed in such ^ner that if A. of B. be not yearly
paid at t^ feast of Chrystmas for term of his life of (...) shyllynges of
lawful money, that than it she be leful to the said A. of B. to distrayne for
in the manor of F. etc. this is a good Re^ charge, because that the manor is
charged the rent by way of dystresse. And yet the pa^ himself that made such a
deed is discharged this case of an accyo^ of annuite because the he granted
not by his deed any annuite the said A. of B. but granted only that may
dystrayn for his annuite.

Also if a man have a rent charge to hy^ and to his heirs issuyng out of
certain is (...) ^f he purchase any parcel of the land to him and to his
heirs, all the rentes is extincte and adnulled because the rent charge may not
^n such manner be apporcyoned, but if a man that has rent service purchase
parcel of the ^ande whereof the rent is this shall not ex^yncte all. but for
the porcyon for the rent ser^ice in such case may be apporcyoned and shall ^e
apporcyoned after the value of the land, ^ut if a tenant hold his land by
seruyye ^o yield to his lord yerelye at such a feast, ^n horse or an hawk,
or such thing sembla^le. if in such case the Lord purchase par^ell of the
land, the service is gone, because that such service may not be severed nor
ap^orcioned, but if a man hold his land of another by homage fealte and
escuage, and ^y certain rent if the lord purchase parcel of the land and
cetera. In that the rent shall be apporcyoned as is aforesaid, but yet in this
case ^he homage an fealtee abides whole to the lord, for the lord shall have
the homage and feal^e of his tenant for the remenant of lands and ^enementes
holden of him as he had before. etc. for this that such services be no
ancient ^ruyces and may not be apporcyoned. But ^he escuage may and shall be
apporcyoned after ^he quantity and rate of the land.

Also if a man have a rent charge, and his other purchases parcel of the
tenementes charged in fee and dies, and that parcel discen^eth to his son
that has the re^t charge now this rent charge shall be apporcioned after the
value of the land, as is aforesaid of rent service because that such a porcyon
of the land purchased by the father, comes not to the son by his own deed,
but by dyscente an^ course of the law.

Also if there be lord and tenant, and the tenant holds of his lord by
fealte and certain rent, and the lord grants the rent b^ his deed to another
etc. reseruyng to him the fealte and the tenant attorneth to the grau^ of the
rent, now such rent is rent secke to the grant for this that the tenementes
be (...) holden of that grant of the rent, but be h^den of the lord that
receives to him fe^tee. And in the same manner it is, where as holds his land
by homage fealte, and certa^ rent, if the lord grant the rent, saving to hi^
the homage such rent after such grant is (...) secke but where lands or
tenementes b^ holden by homage fealte, and certain rent the lord will grant
the homage of his la^ by his deed to another saving to him the ^menant of the
services and the tenant att^neth to him after the form of the grau^ now in
this case the tenant holds his la^ of the grant, and the lord that grants
(...) homage shall not have but the rent as re^ secke, and shall never dystrayn
for the rent (...) this that neither homage, nor fealty, nor ^cuage may be
said seck, for he yt has or ough^ to have of his tenant Homage, or fealte a^
escuage may of common right dystrayn for it if it be behynd for homage fealte
and escuage been, services by which lands and tenem^tes be holden and been
such that in manner may be taken but as services. But otherwise is of rent that
was once re^t service for this that when it is severed etc. by the grant of
the lord fro the other services, it may not be said rent service for this that
has not to it fealte which is incident to every manner of rent service, and for
this it is said rent secke.

Also if a man let land to another for term of life reseruyng to him certain
rent, if he grant the rent to another saving to him the reuercion of the land
so letten by his deed. etc. such rent is but rent secke, for this that the
grant has nothing in the reuercion of the land. But if he grant the
reuercion of ye land to another for term of life and the tenant at tourneth
etc. then has the grauntee the rent as rent service because he has the
reuercion for term of life. And so it is to be understand that if a man give
lands or tenementes in the tail reserving to him and to his heirs certain
rent or let land for term of life reserving certain rent if he grant the
reuercion to another, and the tenant attorneth all the rent and service
passes by the word of the grant of reuercion for this that all the rent and
service in such case be incidentes to the reuercion and pass by the grant of
reuercion. But though he grant the rent to another the reuerchon passes not
by such graunt^ et cetera. And so note well the diversity. And it is holde^,
Pasche duodecimo E. quarti. B^ it is adjudged. Anno. xxvi. libro Assysar^ where
as the services of the tenant in tay^ were granted that that was a good grau^
yet notwithstanding the reuercion remains

Also if there be Lord mesne and tenaunte, and the tenant holds of the mei^
by the rent of.v. shillynges, and the mesne h^deth over by twelve pence, if the
lord abo^ purchase the tenauncy in fee, then the seru^ of the menalte is
extynct for this that wha^ the lord above has the tenauncy, he holde^ of the
lord next above him. And if he ou^ to hold it of him that was mesne, than
(...) should hold one self tenauncie immedia^lye of diverse Lords which
should be (...) conuenyent, and the law will sooner suffer myschiefe for
that, than an inconuenye^ and for this the seygniorye of the mena^ is extyncte.
But in so much that the tenan^ held of the mesne by v. s. and the mesne held
(...) by.xii. d. so that he had more auantage by (...) than he paid to his
lord, he shall have the sa^ four shyllynges as a rent secke yearly of the lord
that purchased the tenauncy.

Also if a man that has rent secke (...) ones seized of any parcel of the
rene, and after if the tenant will not pay the rent the is behind, this is
his remedy. It behooves him to go by himself, or by another to the lands
and tenementes whereof the rent is yssuynge, and there to demand the
^rrerages of the Rent. And if the tenant deny to pay it, this denyinge is a
dysseisyn of the rent. Also if the tenant at the time be not ready to pay it,
this is a denying and (...) dysseisyn. Also if the tenaunte, nor none other be
dwelling upon the lands or tenementes when he asks the arrerages et ce^era.
this is a denying in law, and a dyssey^yn in deed, and of such dysseisyns he
may have an assyse of nouel dysseisyn against the ^enaunt, and recover the
seysyn of the Rent, and the arrerages and his damages and co^es of his writ
and of his p^e. etc. And if after such recouere the rent be another time denied
him, tha^ he shall have a redisseisin and recover double damages. And it is to
be had in mind, that this name assyse is Equiuocu^. For some ^yme it is taken
for a iure, for in the begyn^ing of the record of assyse of nouel disseisin,
the record shall begin thus (Assisa ven^ recogn^) which is to say ye iuratores
ven^ recogn^, and ^he cause is for this that by the writ of as^se is
commanded to the shyrif quod faciat.xii. ^beros and legales homines de
vicineto etc. vi^ere tenementum illud and nomina eoru^ inbre^iari. and quod
some eos per bonos sum^ quod sint coram ^usticiariis et cetera. pa^ati inde
facere recognitione^ etc. And for this that by force of such (...) original
writ a panell by force of the^ writ, ought to be returned etc. it is
said in the beginning of the record in assyse, Assisa ven^ recogn^ etc. Also in
a writ of right it is commonly said that the tenant may put^ him in good and
in the great assyse etc. Also there is a writ in the Registre called D^
magna assysa eligenda, so is this a good pro^ that this name assyse sometime is
put for the Iewry, and sometime it is taken for all the writ of assyse, and
after that intent it is mo^ properly and most commonly taken as assy^ of nouel
disseisin, is taken for all the writ (...) assyse of nouel dysseisin. In
the same manner a^syse of common pasture, is taken for all the (...) of assyse of
common pasture and assyse of more dance sire and assyse of darrayn presentmen^
etc. But it seems that the cause is why such writtes at the beginning were
called ass^ses, for this that by every such wryt it is commanded to the
shryfe that he sommon.xii. s. which is as much to say that he ought to ^mon a
iewry etc. and sometime assyse is taken for an ordinance for to set certain
thing in a certain rule and dysposicion, as an ordinance that is entered in
the ancient estat^tutes is called Assysa panis and seruicie. Also there be
lord and tenant, and the lord gra^teth the rent of his tenant by deed to
another saving to him the other service, and the tenant attourneth, this is a
rent secke an^ is aforesaid But if the rent be denied him (...) the next day of
payment, he has no remed^ for this that he had not thereof any possession But
if the tenant when he attorneth to the grant or after will give a penny or an
half penny to the grant in the name of seisin of re^t than if after at the
next day of payment the rent be denied him he shall have assyse of nouel
disseisin and so it is if a man grant by his deed a yearly rent issuyng out of
his land to another. etc. If the grauntour than after pay to the grant.i.
d. or an half penny in the name of seysyn of the rent than after the first day
of payment the rent be denied, the grant may have assyse or eis not. Also of
rent Secke a man may have assyse of mortdauncester or a wryt of ayle or
cosynage and all other manner of accions reals the case syeth as he may have of
any other rent.

Also there be two causes of disseisin of re^t service that is to say rescous
repleuyn and e^closure rescous is when the lord dystrayneth in the land holden
of him for his rent behind if the dystresse be reserved fro him or the lord
come upon the land and would dystrayne and the tenant or another manne will
not suffer him. etc. Repleuyn is when the lord has distrayned, and repleuyn
is made of the distres by wryt or by playnt. etc. Enclosure is if the lands
and tenementes be so enclosed that the lord may not come within the land and
tenementes for to dystrayn and the cause why such things so done be
disseisins made to the lord is for this by such things the lord is disturbed
of the mean by which he ought to have come to his rent. And four causes be of
disseisin of rent charge that is to say rescous repleuin enclosure and denyer
for denying is a disseisin of rent charge as it is aforesaid of rent secke and
two causes be of disseysin of rent secke that is to say enclosure and denyer
and yet it seems that there is another cause of disseisin of all the three rentes
aforesaid that is when the lord is going to the land holden of him for to
dystrayne for the rent being behind and the tenant hearing this encountreth him
and forstalleth him the way with force, and arms and manaseth him in such
form that he dare not come to the land for to dystrayne for his rent behind.
etc. for doubt of death or bodily hurt this is a disseisyn for this that the
lord is disturbed of the mean whereby he ought to come to his rent and so it is
if by such forstalling and manassing he that has re^t charge or rent seck is
forstalled or dare not come to the land to ask the rent behind.

The third Book.
Parceners. Cap. i.
PArceners be in two manners that is to say parceners after the course of the
common law and parceners after the custom parceners after the course of the
common law be where a man or a woman be seized of certain lands or tenementes
in fe simple or fe tail and has none issue but daughters and dies and the
tenem^tes discende to the daughters and the daughters enter into the lands and
tenem^ts so to the^ descended than they be called parceners and be but one
heir to their ancester and they be called perceners for this yt by the wryt
that is called Breue de participatione facienda the law will constrain the^ that
participacio^ shall be made among the^ and if there be.ii. daughters to whom the
land discendeth then they be called two parceners and if they be.iii. daughters
they be called three parceners, and four daughters four parceners and so
forth and if a man seized of lands in fe simple or in fe tail and dye without
issue of his body, and the tenementes discende to his systers they be parceners
as is aforesaid. In the same manner it is where he has no sisters but the land
discendeth to his auntes they be parceners, but if a man have but one
daughter she may not be said parcener but daughter and heir. And it is to
wete that particion between perceners may be made in diverse manners, one is
wha^ they agree to make particion and make particion of the tenementes as if
there be two parceners to divide between them the tenem^ts in two parts every
part by himself in seueraltie of even value and if there be three parceners to
divide the tenementes in three parts ^n, seueralte. Another perticion there is
to chose by agreement between the^ and certain of their fre^des to make the
perticion between the^ of the lands and tenementes in the form aforesaid. And
in such cases after such particion the elder daughter shall chose first one of
the pertes so divided which she will have for her part. And than the second
daughter after her another part. etc. if it so be that there be many systers.
etc. If it be not yt they ne be otherwise agreed between them for it may be
agreed between them that one of them shall have such tenementes and another
such tenementes, and without any such first eleccion and the part that the
elder sister has is called in latin E^nitia pars, but if the parceners agree
that the elder sister shall make particion of the tenementes in the form
aforesaid, and if she d^ than it is said that the elder sister shall chos^ the
last part after each of her other systers another particion and a lottyng there
is, as y^ there be four parceners and after such particion made of the lands
every part of the land is by it self written in a little scrow^ and it is
covered all in wexe in a manner of a little ball so that no man may see the
scrowe than is the four balls of wexe put in a Bonet to keep in the hands of
an indyffere^t man and than the elder daughter first shall put ha^ hand in the
Bonet which shall take a balle (...) wexe and the scrow within the same ball
for her purpartie, and than the second sister sha^ put her hand in the Bonet
and shall take another, and so then the third sister the thyrd^ ball. etc. and
in this case it behooves each of the^ to hold them to their chance and
alotment.

Also another particion there is as if there be four parceners and they will not
agree that particion shall be made between the^, than one of them may have a wryt
de particione facienda against the other three systers, or two may have a wryt
of participacione facienda, against the other or the three against the four at
the eleccion and when judgment shall be given upon such a write, the
judgment shall be such the particion shall be made between the parties of the
sheriff in his proper parson go to the lands and tenementes. etc. and that he
by ye oath of.xii. true me^ of his bailey wyke. etc. shall make particion
between the parties the one party of the same lands shall be assygned to the
playntyf or to one of the playntyfes, and another part to an another. etc. not
maki^g mention in the judgment of the eldest sister more than of the youngest,
and of the particion that he has, this done he shall make notyce to the
Justices. etc. under his seal and the seals of the xii. etc. and so in this
case may you see there the elder sister shall not have the first eleccion. etc.
but the sheryfe shall assygne the part that she shall have. etc. and it may be
that the sheryfe will assygne first a part to the younger sister, and the last
part to the elder. And note well that particion by agreement between parceners
may by the law be made among them as well by word without dead as by
deed.

Also if two meses dyscende to two parceners and the one mese is worth by
year.xx. s. and that other but.x. s. by year, in this case particion may be
made between them in such form that the one parcener shall have the one mese
and the other parcener shall have the other mese, and he that shall have the
mese of xx. s. and his heirs shall pay a yearly rent, of.v, s. yssuing out of
the same mese to another parcener and to his heir for ever, because ye every of
them shall have even in value, and such particion made is good enough, and
the same parcener that shall have the rent of.v. s. and his heirs may dystrayne
for the rent of common right in the same mese of the value of.xx. s. if the rent
of.v. s. be behind at any time in whose hands so ever the same mese comes
though there was never writing made of it between them in the same manner it is
of particion of all manner of lands and tenementes etc. where such rent is
reserved to one or to diverse parceners upon such particion. etc. but such rent
is not rent service, but re^t charge, of common right had and reserved fore
galtie of the particion. And note well that none be called parceners by the
common law but women or the heirs of women, and which come by lands and
tenementes by dyscent, for if systers purchase lands or tenementes of this
they been called Ioyntenauntes and not parceners. Also if two parceners of
land in fee simple make particion between them. etc. and in the part of that
one valueth much more than the part of the other, if they were at the time of
particion of full age, that is to say of xxi. year, than they always shall
abide and never be defeted, but if tenementes whereof be made particyons be
to them in fee tail, and the part that one has is much better in yearly
value than the part of the other. Howbeit that they be excluded during their
lives to defete the particion yet if the parcener yt has the less part in
value has issue and dies, the issue may dysagree to the particion and enter
and occupy in common that other part that is allotted to her aunt and so the aunt
may enter and occupy in common the other part allotted to her sister as no
particion thereof had be made. etc.

Also if two parceners of tenementes in fee take husbands and they and their
housebandes make particion between them if the part of the one be less in
yearly value the^ the part of that other during the lives of the husbands the
particion shall be in his force and strength yet after the death of the husband
the wife yt has the less part. etc. the same wife or woman may enter in her
sisters part as it is aforesaid and defete the particion, but if the particion
so made between the^ were such that at time of lotment were egal of yearly value
than it may not after be defeted in such cases.

Also if there be.ii. perceners and the younger of them be within the age of.xxi.
year and party^on is made between them, so that the part that is allotted to
the younger is less in value then the part of that other. In this case ye
younger during the time of her nonage and also when she comes to full age
of.xxi, year may enter in the portion of her sister allotted, etc. and defete
the particion but such a parcener ought to take heed when she comes to full
age that she ne take to her own use all the profytes of that teneme^tes to her
allotted, for that she agrees to the peticion of such age, in which case the
particion shall stand and abide in his force and strength etc. but para^iture
the profytes of the half she may take, leuyng the profytes of the other half
to her sister. etc. yet it is to wit that when it is sayt males and females
be of full age, that shall be understood of the age of.xx. year for if any
feoffement or grant relese confyrmacion obligacion or any other writing before
any such age be made by any of them. etc. or that any (...) in such age be
baylyf or receyuer with any (...) etc. all for naught and may be avoided. Also
a man before such age shall not be sworn in (...) jury nor no inquisicion.
Also if teneme^tes be given to a man in the tail which has of much land
in fee simple and has issue two daughters and dies, and the daughters ma^e
particion between them, so that the lands or fee simple be allotted to the
younger daughter in allowaunce of the tenementes tayle^, allotted to the elder
daughter, if after such partycion the younger daughter alyeneth the la^ in fee
simple to another in fee, and has issue, a son or a daughter and dies the
issue may enter in the tenementes tayled and them to hold in propartye with
their Aunt, and this is for two causes, one is for that, that the issue may
have no remedy of the land alyened by his mother for that the land was to
her in fee simple, and in so much that he is of the heirs in the tail, and
has nothing recompensed of that that to him belongs of the tenementes
tailed, and namely when such particion makes no discontinuaunce of the tail
as shall be said hereafter in the chapter of discontinuaunce. But the
contrary is holden. M. x. H. vi. that is to say that they ^aye not enter upon
the parcener that has his land tayled, but is set to his formedon. Another
cause is for that, that it shall be arec^ed the folly of the elder sister, that
she would ^gree to the particion where she might have and half the land in
fee simple and half of ^enementes in the tail for purpartie and so to ^e sure
without damage. etc. Also if a man seized in a plough land by just tail
and ^ereaseth an infaunte within age of another ploughe land and has issue
two daughters, and dies seized of both those ^oughe lands, the enfaunt than
being with (...) age, and the daughters enter and make par^icion that the one
ploughe land, is lotted (...) the purparte of the one as parcase to younger
sister in allowaunce of that other ploughe land that alotteth to the purparte
of that other, so that after the infaunte enters in the plough land of the
which he was disseased upon the possession of the parcener that has the same
plough land, than the same percener may e^ter into that other plough land that
the sister has and holds in parcenary with her, but if the younger sister
alie^ the same plough land to another in fee simple before the enter of the
infaunt, and after the child enters upon the possession of the alyen then she
may not enter in the other plough land, for this that by her alienacion ^ has
utterly dismissed her self to have any p^ of the tenementes as parcener, but if
the yo^ger sister before the enter of the infaunt man thereof a lease for term
of years or for terme^ life or in fee tail saving the reuercio^ to h^ and
after the child enters, there paraduenture it is otherwise, for this that she
dismis^ not her self of all that, that was in her, ^ has reserved to her the
reuercion and their simple. etc.

Also if there be three or four parcene^ that make particion between them, if
the pa^ of the one parcener be defeted by such lawfu^ enter she may e^ter and
occupy the same oth^ lands of all the other parceners, and comp^ them to make
new particion of the other lands between them. etc.

Also if there be two parceners, and the one takes an husband, and the
husband a^ the wife have issue between them, and the wife dies, and the
husband holds him in the half as ten^t by the curtesy. In this case the
percener that suruiueth and the tenant by the curtesy may well make particion
between them. etc. And if the tenant by curtesy will not agree to make particion,
than the parcener that suruiueth may have a wryt de participacione facienda.
etc. and compel him to make particion. But if the tenant by the curtesy will
have particio^ between them, and the parcener that suruyueth will not have it
then the tenant by the curtesy shall have no remedy for to have particion for
he may not have a wryt de participacione facienda, for this that he is not
parcener, for such a wryt lies for parceners all only. And so may ye see that
the wryt de par^icipatione facienda lies against tenauntes by the curtesye,
and yet himself may not have ^uch a writ.

Parceners by the custom. Cap. ii.
PArceners by the custom be where a man (...) leased in fee tail of lands
or tenementes that be of the tenure called Gauelkynde with ^n the shyre of
kent, and has issues diverse sons and dies, such lands and tenementes shall
^yscende to all the sons by the custom, and ^hey euenlye shall inheryte and
make party^on between them by the custom as fe^les do, and a writ de
participatione facie^^yeth in this case as between females, but it behooves in
the declaracion to make mention of the custom. Also such custom is in other
places in England and also such custom^ is in north wales.

Also there is an other particion that i^ of another nature, and in another
form the^ any of the particions aforesaid, as a man^e^ seized of certain
lands in fee simple has issue two daughters, and the elder is married, (...)
the father gives parcel of the same lande^ to the husband with his daughter
in fran^ marriage, and dies seized in the remena^ the which remenaunt is of
more greater value by year then be the lands given in fra^ marriage.

In this case the husband and the wy^ shall have nothing for their part of the
sayd^ remenaunt, but if they will put their lande^ given in frank marriage in
hotchpot with the remenaunt of the land with her sister, a^ if they will not
do so, then the younger life may occupy the same remenaunt, and take ^ her the
profytes only, and it seems that the word hotchpot is in Englysh a puddyng,
(...) in such a puddyng is not commonly put an^ only thing, but one thing
with another an^ for this that it behooves in such case to (...) the lands
given in frank marriage with the other lands in hotchpot if the husband a^ the
wife will have any thing in the oth^ remen^t. etc. This word hotchpot is but a
fa^ of similitude, and is as much to say as to put (...) lands given in fra^k
marriage and other lands in fee simple. etc. together, and this is to such
intent to account the value of all the lands that is to say, of the lands
given in frank marriage and the remenant that was not given and than particion
shall be made in this form that ensues. As put case that a man seized of.xxx.
acres of land in fee simple every acre in value.xii. d. by the year which has
issue.2. daughters. and the one is covert baron, and the father gives.x. acres
of the xxx. acres to the husband says his daughter in frank marriage and dies
^eased of the remenaunt, then the other sister shall enter in the remenaunt,
that is to say in the.xx. acres and shall occupy it to her own use, except
the husband and the wife will put their.x. acres even to the^ in frank
marriage with the other.xx. acres in hotchpot, that is to say together and than
when the value is known of every acre, that is to say, every acre is yearly
worth.xii. d. then the partycyon shall be made in such form, that is to say,
that the husband and the wife shall have above the.x. acres given to them in
frank marriage v. acres in seueralte of the.xx. acres and that other sister
shall have the remenaunt, that is ^v. acres of the.xx. acres for her part so
that accomptyng the.x. acres that the husband and ^he wife had in frank
marriage, and the other ^. acres of the.xx. acres, the husband and the wife have
as much in yearly value as that other si^ter has, and so always upon such
perticio^ ye lands given in fra^k marriage abide to the doners o^ to their
heirs. etc. after the form of the gift. (...) For if ye other parcener should
have nothing of this ye is given in fra^k marriage, of this shoud follow an
inconvenience and a thing against reason which the law will not suffer. etc. and
the cause why the lands given in frank marriage shall be put in hotchpot is this,
that when a man gives lands and tenementes in frank man age with his daughter
or with his other co^syn, it is to understand by the law that such gift made
by such words frank marriage ^ an auncyment of his daughter or or of his
co^syn, and namely when the donour and his heir^ shall not have any rent nor
service of him except fealty unto the fourth degree be pa^ etc. and for such
cause the law is that she (...) have nothing of the other lands and tenementes
descended to the other parceners. ^ but if she will put the tenementes given in
fr^^^ marriage in hotchpot as is aforesaid and if h^ will not put the lands
given in frank mariag^ in hotchpot, then she shall have nothing in the remenant
for this that it shall be understand i^ the law that she is sufficientely
auaunced t^ which auauncement she agrees and holds her content, and the same
law is in this ma^ter between the dones in frank marriage a^ the other parceners
as to put in hotchpot* etc the same law is between the heirs of the donees in
frank marriage and the parcener^ etc. if the donees in frank marriage die
before their auncesters or before such particion. etc. as to put in hotchpot.
etc. And note well that gifts in frank marriage was the common law before the
statute of weslmynster the second, and always after so has been used and
continued. etc.

Also such putting in hotchpot. etc. is where lands or tenementes that were
given in fra^k marriage dyscende fro the donours in frank marriage all only for
if the lands dyscende to the daughters by the father the donour, or by the
mother the donour, or by the brother the donour or other ancesters and not by
the donor etc. there it is otherwise, for in such case she to whom such gift in
fra^k marriage is made shall ^aue her part as if no such gift in frank ma^yage
had been made, for this that she was ^ot auaunced by him. etc. but by another.

Also if a man seized in.xxx. acres of ^a^de every acre of even yearly value
having ^ issue two daughters as it is aforesaid, and gives of this to the
husband of the dough^er.xv. acres in frank marriage, and dies sea^ed in the
other.xv. acres, in this case that other sister shall have the.xv. acres so
dyscen^ed to her only, and the husband and the wife ^al not put in such case
the.xv. acres to him even in fra^k marriage in hotchpot. etc. for this ^at the
tenementes given to him in frank ^aryage be of as good yearly value as the
over lands descended. etc.

For if the lands given in frank marriage were of as even value as the remnaunt
or ^ more value, then in vain and to none enter such lands given in frank
marriage shall put in hotchpot. etc. for this that she may h^ nothing of the
other lands descended. etc. f^ if she should have any parcel of the other land
dyscended then should she have more in year value then her sister. etc. which
the law v^ not. etc. And as it is said in the cases afo^sayd of two daughters
or two parceners, (...) the same manner and in like cases is, where be more
sisters after that as the case and the ^ter is. etc. And it is to wete that
lands a^ tenementes given in frank marriage shall ^ be put in hotchpot but with
the lands dy^ded in fee simple, or of lands dyscended in tail particion
shall be made as if no such (...) in frank marriage had be made. Also no la^d^
shall be put in hotchpot with other, but land^ that be given in frank marriage al
only. f^ if any woman have any other lands or te^mentes by any other gift in
the tail shall ^uer put such land so given in hotchpot. etc. ^ she shall have
her part of the remenaunt, ^cended. etc. that is as much as the other p^cener
shall have of the same remenant.

Also another partycyon may be (...) between parceners that varyeth f^the
partycyons aforesaid, as if the be three parceners and the youngest wo^ have
particion, and the other two wou^ not, but will hold in parcenary that that
to the^ belongs without particio^. In this case if one part be allotted in
seueralte to the youngest sister after that that she ought to have, then the
other may hold the remnaunt in parcenary and occupy in common without particion
if they will, and such particion is good enough. And if after the elder and
myddel parcener will make particion between them of that that they held, they
may well do so when they please. But where particion shall be made by force of a
wryt de participatione facie^d etc. there otherwise it is, for there behooves
it that every parcener have his part in seueralte etc. More shall be said of
parceners in the Chapter of ioyntenantes and also in the Chapter of tenantes
in common. etc,

Ioyntenantes. Cap. 3.
IOyntenantes be as a man seysed of certain lands or tenementes etc. and
thereof has enfeoffed two or three or four, or mo, to have and to hold to them
and to their heirs, or to have and to hold to them for term of their lives,
or for term of another life, by force of which feoffement they be seysed,
such be ioyntenauntes.

Also if two or three dissease another of any lands or tenementes to their own
use, then the dysseisours be ioyntenantes. But if they dysseyse another to the
use of one of them, the^ be they no ioyntenantes, but he to whom the use of the
disseisi^ is made sole tenant, and the other have nothing in the tena^cy but be
called coadiutors to the disseisin etc. And note well yt disseisin is properly
where a man e^treth into any lands or tenem^tes where his enter is not l^ful,
and puts hi^ out yt has the frank teneme^^ etc. And it is to wete yt the
nature of ioyntena^cy is yt he that suruiueth shall have only the hole tena^cy
after such estate as he has if the ioynture be continued etc. As if.iii.
ioyntena^t^ be in fee si^ple and the one has issue and dies, y^ they that
survive shall have the tenem^tes ho^ and the issue shall have nothing. And if the
second ioyntena^t have issue and dye, yet the thy^ that suruiueth shall have the
tenementes ho^ and shall have them in fee simple to him and to hi^ heirs, but
otherwise it is of parceners. F^ if.iii. parceners be, and before any particion
the one has issue and dies, that that to him belongs shall dyscend to his
issue and if such a p^cener dye without issue, then that, that to (...)
belongs shall descend to her heirs, so the they shall have this by descent and
not by the s^uyuour as ioyntena^tes have etc. and as the s^uyuour holds place
among ioyntena^tes (...) in the same manner he holds place among the that have
joint estate or possession with other of catel royal, or cattle parsonal. As if
a lea^ of lands or tenementes be made to many f^ term of years he that
suruiueth of the lesse^ shall have the tenementes hole to him durin^ the term
by force of the same lease. And (...) any horse, or other cattle parsonall be
given to many more, he that suruyueth shall have them to himself.

In the same manner it is of dettes and duties etc. For if an obligacion be made
to many for one duty, he that suruiueth shall have al de^ and so it is of all
other couenantes and contracres.

Also some ioyntenauntes may be that may have Ioynte estate and be
ioyntenantes for term of their lives and yet they have several inheritaunces.
As the lands be given to two men and to the heirs of their two bodies
engendered. In this case the donees have joint estate for term of their two
lives and they have several inheritance. For if the one of the donours have
issue and dye, the other that suruyueth shall have al by the suruyuour for
term of his life. And if he that suruyueth has also issue, and dye, that the
issue of the one shall have the half of the land, and the issue of the other
shall have the other half of the land, and they shall hold the land between
them in commune, and be not joint tenauntes but tenauntes in commune.. And ^he
case that such donees in such cases have Ioynte estate for term of their
lives, is ^hys, for this, that at the beginning lands ^ver given to the^ two,
which words without ^ore saying make a joint estate to the^ for tme ^f their
lives. For if a man will let la^d to another by deed or without deed, not making
me^^o^ what estate he has, and of this makes ^iuere of seisyn. In this case
the less shall hau^ estate for term of his life, and so in so much that the
lands were given to them, they hau^ a joint estate for term of their lives:
and the cause why they have several inheritance (...) this, in so much that
they cannot by possib^litie have an heir between them engendre^ as a man and a
woman may have. etc. then the law will that their estate and their
inheritance shall be such as reason will after the form and effect of the
words of the gy^ and that is to the heirs that the one enge^dreth of his
body by any of his wives, (...) the heirs that the other engenders of (...)
body by any of his wives. et cetera. (...) ^t behooves by necessite of reason
that they (...) have several inheritance. And in such case if the issue of
one of the donees after ye de^ of the donees dye so that he has no issue of
live of his body engendered, than the done or his heir may enter in the half
as in hy^ reuercyon, though the other of the done has issue alive etc. And
the cause is, for (...) much that the inheritance be severed. etc. t^
reuercio^ in the law is severed etc. and the fa^uour of the issue of ye other
shall hold no pi^ to have ye hole, and so as it is said of males in same manner
it is where land is given to.ii. males and to ye heirs of their.ii. bodies
began

Also if land be given to two females a^ to the heirs of one of them, this is
a go^ ioyntour, and the one has a freehold, and the other has fee simple, and
if he yt has the fee dye he yt has ye free hold shall have the hole by the
suruiuor for tme of life. In ye same manner it is where ten^tes be given to two,
and to the heirs of the body of one of them engendered, the one has free hold,
and the other fee tail. Also if two ioyntenantes be seysed of estate of
simple, and the one grants a rent charge by his deed to another out of
that, that to him belongs etc. In this case during the life of the
grauntoure, the rent charge is effectual. But after his decease the rent
charge is void as to charge the land, for he that has the land by the
suruyuour shall hold all the land dyscharged. And the cause is, for this that he
that suruyueth claymeth to have the land by the suruyuour. etc. and not by
dyscent of his fellow. etc. But otherwise it is of parceners, for if there be
two parceners of tenementes in fee simple, and before any particion the one
charge that, that to him belongs by his deed of a rent charge etc. and
dies without issue, and that that to him belongs dyscendeth to the other
parcener. In this case the other percener shall hold the la^d charged etc. for
this that be comes to the half by dyscent as heir etc.

Also if there be two ioyntenauntes in fee simple within one borough where the
lands and tenementes within the same borough be deuysable by testament, if the
one of the said ioyntenantes deuyse that, that to him belongs by testament
etc. and dye, this deuyse is void. And the cause is for this that no devise may
take effect but after the death of the deuysour. And for this that by his death
all the land incontinent comes by the law to his fellow that suruyueth by the
suruiuour which ne claymeth nor has nothing in the land, by the deuyse but in
his own right by the suruyuour after the course of the law etc. for tha^ cause
such deuyse is void.

But otherwise it is of parceners seized of tenementes deuysable in such case
of deuyse etc. Causa qua supra. Also it is commonly said that every iointenant
is seized of the land that he holds jointly etc. through and by all. And this
is as much to say that he is seysed by every parcel and by all etc. and this
is true, for in every parcel and by each parcel, and by all the lands and
tenementes he is jointly seysed with his fellows etc.

Also if.ii. ioyntenantes be seysed of certain lands in fee simple, and that
one lets that, that to him belongs to a stranger for ter^ of.ix. year and
dies within the term. In this case after his disseas the lessee may enter and
occupy the half to him lette^ during the term etc. though the lessee never had
possession of ^ in the life of the lessour by force of the lessee etc. And the
diversity between the cause of the grant of a rent charge and this case is
this. For in the grant of a rent charge by a ioyntenan^ the tenantes abide
always as they were before without that, that any has any right to have parcel of
the teneme^tes, but themself and the tenementes abide in such plyte as tkey were
before the charg etc. But where a lease is made by a ioyntenant to another for
term of years etc. incontinent by force of the lease the lessee has right in
the same land, that is to say of all that yt to his lessour belo^ged* and to have
that by force of the same less during his term etc. and this is the diversity
etc.

Also ioyntena^tes if they will, may make particion between the^ and the
particion is good enough, but they shall not be compelled by the law to do
it, but if they will make particion of their proper will, and agreemente, the
particion shall stand in his strength. P. iii. E. quarti.

Also if a joint estate be made of land to the housband and the wife, and to
the third parson, in this case the housebande and the wife have not in the
law in their right but the half etc. And the third parsone shall have as much
as the housband and the wife has, that is to say, the other half etc. And the
cause is for that the husband and the wife be but one person in the law, and be
in like case as if estate be made to.ii. ioyntena^tes, where the one has by
force of ioynture the one half and the other ye other half. In the same manner is
where estate is made to the husband and the wife and to other two men, in this
case the houseband and the wife have not but the third part, and the other.ii.
men the other.ii. parts etc. Causa qua supra. More shall be said of them
attouchynge ioyntenancy in the Chapter of tenauntes in common tenant per
Eiegit, and tenant by estatute merchant.

Tenauntes in common. Ca. 4.
Tenantes in common be they that have lands and tenementes in fee simple, fee
tail, or for term of life. etc. which have such lands and tenementes by
several title, and not joint title, and none of them know that, that is
several to him. But they ought by the law to occupy such lands and
tenementes in common, and vndeuyded to take the profits in common. And because
that they come to such lands and tenementes by several tytles and not by one
self joint title, and their occupacion and possessyon shall be by the law to be
among them in common, they be called tenauntes in common, as if a man enfeoffe
two ioyntenantes in fee and the one of them alieneth that, that to him
belongs to another in fee, now the other ioyntenaunt and the alyene be
tenauntes in common, for this that they be seysed in such tenementes by
several tytles, for the alyene comes in the half by the feoffement of the
ioyntenaunt, and the other ioyntenant has the other half by force of the
first feoffement made to him and to his first fellow, and so they be in by
several tytles, and by several feoffementes etc. And it is to wit that when
it is said in any book that a man is seized in fee, without more saying. It
shall be understand fee simple, for it shall not be understand by such word in
fee, that a man is seized in fee tail, except that there be put thereto such
addicyon that is to say fee tail.

Also if three ioyntenantes be, and the one of them alieneth that, that to him
belongs to an other in fee. In this case the alyene is tenant in common with
the other two ioyn tenantes. But yet the other two ioyntenantes be seysed of
the two parties jointly, and of these two parties the suruiuour between them
holds place. etc.

Also if there be two ioyntenantes in fee, and the one gives that, that unto
him belongs to an other in the tail, the donee and the other ioyntenant be
tenantes in common etc. But if the lands be given to two men and to the heirs
of their two bodies engendered the donees have joint estate for tme of their
lives, and if each of them have issue and dye, their issues shall hold in
common etc. But if lands be given to two abbottes, as to the abbot of
westmynster, and to the abbot of. S. Albons, to have and to hold to them and
to their successors, in this case they have incontinente at the beginning
estate in common, and not joint estate. And the cause is for this, that every
abbot or other sovereign of an house of religion before that he be made abbot
or souerayn, was but a dead man in the law. And when he is made abbot he is as
a man parsonable in the law, alonely to purchase and to have lands and
tenementes and other things to the use of his house and not to his own proper
use, as other secular men may, And for this in the beginning of they^ purchase
they be tenantes in common. And (...) the one of them dye, the abbot that
suruyueth shall not have al by the suruyuour but the successor of the abbot
that dies, shall hold the half in common with the abbot that suruyueth etc.

Also if lands be given to an abbot and to a secular man to have and to hold
to them, that is to say to the abbot and his successors, and to the secular
man, to him and to his heirs the^ have estate in common. Cansa qua supra.

Also if lands be given to two men to have and to hold, the one half to the
one and to his heirs, and the other half to the other, and to hy^ heirs they
be tenantes in common etc.

Also if a man seysed of certain lands enfeoffeth another in the half of
the same lande^ without any speech or assignme^t or limitati^ of the same half in
seueralie at the time of the feoffement, the^ the feffe and the feffour shall
ho^ the parties of the sa^d in common. And in ye same manner as is aforesaid of
tenantes in common (...) lands or teneme^tes in fee simple or fee tail In
the same manner may it be said of tenant^ for term of life. As the two
ioyntenantes i^ in fee, and the one lets to a man that, that unto him
belongs for term of life, and the other ioyntenant lets that, that to him
belongs to an other for term of life these two lessees be tenauntes in
common for term of their lives etc.

Also if a man let lands to.ii. me^ for term of their lives, and the one
grau^teth al his estate of that, that unto him belongs to another etc. than
that other tenant for term of life, and he to who^ the grant is made be
tenantes, in common during the time that both lessees be alive.

And it is to be remembered that in all other such cases though that they be
not here expressly named or specifyed, if they be in like reason they be in
like law.

Also there be two ioyntenantes in fee, and the one lets that, that unto him
belongs to an other for term of life during his life and the other tenant
that did not let, be tenantes in common. And upon this case a question may rise
as this, Put the case that the lessour has issue and dies, leaving ye other
ioyntenant his fellow, and living the tenant for tme of life, the question may
be such, if ye reuercion of the half etc. ye the lessour has, shall descend to
the ^ssue of the lessour, or ye the other ioyntenant shall have it by the
suruyuour. And some have said in this case, that the other ioyntenant shall
have the reuercion by the suruiuour, and their reason is such, when the
ioyntena^tes were jointly seized in fee simple etc. though the one of the^ made
estate of ye, that unto hi^ belongs for term of life, and though that he has
thereof ^ranktenement of that, that to him belongs by the lease, yet he has
not severed the fee simple. But the fee simple abides to him jointly as it is
was before. And so it seems unto them that the other joint tenant the
suruyueth, shall have the reuercion by the suruyuour etc. And other have said
the contra^, and this is their reason when one of the ioy^ tenauntes lets
this that to him belongs to another for term of his life, that by such
lease the franktenement is severed from the ioynture. And by the same reason the
reuercion that is dependant unto the same franktenement, is severed from the
ioynture. Also (...) the lessour had reserved to him a yearly re^ upon the
lease, the lessour only shall have the rent. etc. The which is a proof that
the re^cio^ is only in hi^, and that the other has nothing in the reuercio^
etc. Also if the ten^t for tme (...) life were inspleded etc, and made defaut
after defaute, than the lessour shall be only of this received to defend his
right, and his felow^ in this case in no manner shall be receued, wh^ proves that
the reuercion of the half is only in the lessour. And so by consequens, if the
lessour dye living the lessee for term of life the reuercion shall descend to
the heirs of the lessour etc. and not come to the other ioyntenaunt by the
suruyuour. Ideo quere. But (...) this case if the ioyntena^t that has the
franktenement have issue and dye, living the lessour and the lessee, than it
seems that the issue shall have the half in his demesne as ^ see by dyscent
for this that the frankteneme^t may not by nature of the ioyntour be annexed to
a reuercion etc. And it is certain that he ye lets, was seysed of the half
in his demesne as of fee, and none shall have any ioynture in his
franktenement. Ergo this shall discende to yssues. Sed quere. But if it be
thus, that the law in this case is such, that if the lessour dye, leaving the
lessee, and leauyng the other ioyntenaunt that has the franktenement of the
other half, that the reuercion shall descend to the issue of the lessour, then
is the ioynture and the title that any of them may have by the suruyuour by the
right of the ioynture adnulled and all utterly defected for ever.

In the same manner it is if the ioyntenaunt that has the franktenement dye,
leauyng the lessour and the lessee, if the law be such that his franktenement
and fee that he has in the half shall discende to his issue, then the
ioynture shall be defeted for ever etc.

Also if three ioyntenauntes be, and the one releaseth by his deed to one of
his fellows all the right that he has in the land, then has he to whom the
release is made the third part of the lands by force of the relese and he and
his fellow shall hold the other ii. parts jointly. And as to the third part
that he has by force of the release, he holds the third part with himself, and
his fellow in common.

And it is to wit that sometime a deed of release shall take effect and
shall be in ure to put the estate of him that made the release, t^ him to whom
the release is made, as in the case aforesaid.

And also if a joint estate be made to the husband and his wife, and to a third
parson, and the third person releaseth his right that he has. etc. to the
husband, the^ has the husband the half that the third parson had, and the
wife of this has nothing. And if in such case the third release etc. to the
wife not naming the housband in the release, the^ has the wife the half that
the third parso^ had. And the husband had nothing of this, that in right of his
wife, for this that in such case the release shall enure to put the estate to
him to who^ the release is made of all that, that belonged to him that made the
release etc. And in some case a release shall en^ure to put all the right that he
has that made the release to him, to whom the release is made. As a man
seysed of certain lands and tenementes, is disseised by two dysseysoures, if
the dysseisy by his deed release a^hy^ right et cetera. to one of the
dysseissours, than he to whom the release is made, shall have and hold all the
tenementes to his only, and put out his fellow of every occupacion of it.
And the cause is for this that the two disseisours were seysed in the
tenementes by wrong by them done against the law. And when one of them
happeth the release of him that had right to enter etc. This right in such case
rests in him to whom the release is made, and is in such plight as if he
that had the right had entered and enfeoffed him etc. And the cause is for this
that he that has before had an estate by wrong that is to say by dysseisyn now
by the release a rightful estate.

And in some case a release shall entire by way of extinguishment and in such
case such release shall help the ioyntena^t to whom the release was not made as
well as him to whom the release is made. And if a man be disseysed and the
disseisour makes a feoffement to.ii. me^ in fee if the disseis^ release to one
of the feoffours in fee by his deed tha^ such release shall enure to both the
feffees for this that the feffees have estate by the law that is to say by the
feofme^t and not by wrong done to any other.

And in the same manner is, if the disseisour make a lease to a man for term
of life, the remaindre over to an other in fee if the disseisi release to the
tenant for term of life al his right etc. This relese enureth as well to him
^n the remaindres to the tenant for tme of life etc. And the cause is for this
ye tenant for tme of ^fe comes to his estate by the course of the ^aw. And
for this the release shall enure and take effect by way of extinguishment of the
tyght of him that has relesed etc. And by this relese he tenant for term of
life has no great es^ate tha^ he had before the release made unto (...), and
the right of him that released is all vterip extyncte. And in so much that
such release cannot enlarge the estate of the ten^ for term of life it is
reason that the release shall enure to him in the remainder etc. More shall be
said of releases in the Chapter of release.

Also if there be two parceners, and the one alyeneth that unto him belongs
to another, than the other parcener and the aliene be tenantes in common.

Also tenauntes in common may be by tyt^e of prescripcion, if the one and his
auncesters or they that whose estate he has in the ha^ have holden in common,
the same half with the other tenant that has the other half and with his
auncestres or them whose estate he has at vndeuyded fro time whereof no memory
renneth etc. And diverse other manners may make and cause men to be tena^te^ in
common that be not here expressed.

Also in some case tenantes in common ought to have their possession several
accions, (...) in some case they shall join in one accion. F^ if there be two
tenantes in common and the be disseysed, they ought to have against the
dysseisour two assizes and not one assyse, fore ner^e of them ought to have an
assyse of (...) half etc. and the cause is for this ye tenant^ in common were
seized by several tytles, b^ otherwise it is of ioyntenantes. For if the^
be.xx. ioyntenantes and they be dysseised. the shall have in all their names
but one asp^ because that they had but one joint title.

Also if there be three ioyntenauntes and one releaseth to one of his fellows
all the right that he has and after the other two be disseased of the whole.
etc in this case the other shall have several assyses in this form, ye is to
say they shall have in both their names one assyse of the two parts etc. for
this that they held the two parties ioyntlye at the time of the disseisin. And
as to the third part, he to whom the release was made ought to have thereof an
assyse in his own name, for this that as to the third part he is tenant in
common etc. for this that he came to the third part, by force of the release
and not only be force of the ioynture.

Also as to sue accions that touches the royalty, there is diversity between
parceners that be in by diverse disce^tes, and tena^ts in common. For if a man
sealed of certain lands in fee have issue two daughters and ^ye and they
enter. etc. and each of them has issue a son and dye without particion made
between them by which the one half discendeth to the son of the one
parcener, and the other half discendeth to the son of the other parcener.
and they enter and occupy in coa^ and be disseased, in this case they shall have
in their two names one assise and not two assizes. And the cause is, that
though they come ^ by diverse disce^tes. etc. yet they be perceners and a writ
de participatione facie^da lies between the^. And they be not perceners having
regard or respect only to the seysyn and possession fro their mothers, but
they be parceners having more respect to the estate that descended from their
grandfather to their mothers. For they may not be parceners where their mothers
were not parceners before. etc.

And so to such respect and consideracion, that is to wit as to the first
descente that was to their mothers they have a title in parsonary, the which
makes the^ parceners. And also they be but as one heir to their common
ancester that is to say, to their graundfather from who^ the land descended to
their mothers. And for these cases before particion between the^, etc. they
should have one assyse though they co^ in by several discentes. etc.

Also if there be two tenantes in common of certain lands in fee, and they
gave the same land to another man in the tail, or let it to another manne for
term of life, yeldyng an a^nuitye or certain rent, and a pound of peper or an
hawke, or an horse, and they been seized of these services and after all the
rent is behind, and they distrayne for it, and the tenan^ makes them rescous.

In that case as to the rent and the pound of peper, they shall have two
assyse, and as to the hawke and the horse but one a^syse, and the cause why
they have two asyses as to the rent and pound of peper of this, in so much
that they were tenauntes, in common by several tytles and when they made a
gift in the tail or lease for term of life. etc. saving to the^ the reuercio^
and yelding to them certain rent. etc. Such reseruacion is incident to their
reuercion.

And for this that their reuercion is in common and by several tytles, as their
possession was before their rent, and other things that may he severed and
were to them reserved upon the gift or upon the lease which be incydent by the
law to the reuercion, such things so severed was of the nature of the
reuercion which reuercion is to them in common by several tytles. And it
behooves that the rent of the pound of peper which may be severed is to them
in common, by several tytles. And of this they shall have two assyses and
every of them in his assyse shall make his playnt of the half of the rent and
of the half of the pound of peper. etc.

But of the hawke and the horse which cannot be severed, they shall have but one
assyse for a man may not make a playnt in assyse of ye half of an hawke or of
the half of an horse. etc. In the same manner it is of other rentes and services
that tenauntes in common have in gross by diverse tytles.

Also as to accions parsonels, tenauntes in common ought to have such accions
parsonels jointly in all their names, that is to say of Trespass, or of
offenses that touch their tenauntes in common. As of breakyng of their howses,
breakyng of their closes, and pastures wastyng and defouling of their grass,
cuttyng of their wood and to fyshe in their pondes and such other. In this
case tenants in common shall have one accion jointly and recover jointly damages
because that the accion is in the parsonaltie and not in the realtie.

Also if two tenantes in common make a^ lease of their two tenementes to another
for term of years yeldyng unto them yearly a certain rent if the rent be
behind. etc. the ten^ts shall have one accion of det against the lessee and
not diverse accions for that the accion is in the parsonaltie.

Also tenauntes in common may make particion between them if they will thought
they shall not be compelled by the law. But if they make particion between
the^ by they^ agreement and assent such particion is good enough, as it is
adjudged in the book of assyse. P. 3. E. 4.

Also as there be tenauntes in common of lands or tenementes. etc. as is
aforesaid. In the same manner there be possessions and proparties of chatel real
and chatel parsonal. As if a lease be made of certain lands to two men for
term of.xx. years, and when they ^ther of possessed, the one of the leases
grau^teth that, that unto him belongs before ye term to another than he to
who^ the grant is made and the other shall hold and occupy in common.

Also if two ioyntenantes have the ward of the body and of the lands of the
child within age and that one of them grants to another that, that unto him
belongs of the same ward than the grant and the other that grants not shall
have and hold it in common. etc.

In the same manner it is of chatels parsonels as if two have a joint estate by
gift or by bying of an horse or an ox. etc. the one of them grants that
that to him belongs of the same horse or ox. etc. Than the grant and he that
granted not shall have and possess such chatel parsonell in common. etc. And
in such cases where diverse parsons have chatels reals or parsonels in common and
by diverse titles, if the one of them dye, the other that suruyueth shall not
have that by the suruyuour. But the executours of him that dies shall hold
and occupy that with him ye suruyueth as their testatour did or ought in this
life. etc. for this that their tytles and right in this case ^er several,

Also in this case aforesaid if two have estate in common for term of years
and the one occupy all and put the other out of his possession and occupacion.
Than shall he that is put out of occupacion have against that other a ^warde
e^ectione fyrme for the half against the other. In the same manner it is where
two hold the ward of lands or tenementes du^yng the nonage of a child, if
one put out the other of his possession, he that is out shall have a writ of
eiectment de guard of the half ^o^ this that those things be Chatels reals,
and may be apporcioned and severed. etc. But no such accion of trespass, that is
to say. Quadclausum suum fregit et herbam suam concu^ cauit and consumpsit.
etc. And such like accion^ the one may not have against ye other, for thy^
that each of them may enter and occupy in common. etc. through and by all the
tenemente^ which they hold in common. But if two be possessed of chatels
parsonels in common by diverse tytles, as of an horse or an ox or a bow^ if the
one take it all to himself out of the possession of the other, the other has
none other remedy but to take this of him that has do^ to him the wrong for to
occupy in common (...) he may see his time.

In the same manner it is of chatell rea^ that may not be severed as the case
aforesay^ two be possessioners of a ward of the body ^ a child within age, if
one take the child (...) of the possession of the other, the other has ^
remedy by any accion by the law but to take the child out of the others
possession when ^seeth his time. etc.

Also when a man in pledyng will she^ a deed of feoffement made unto him, or a
g^ in the tail, or a lease for term of life of a^ lands or tenementes, there
he shall say (...) force of which feoffement gift or lease he (...) seized.
etc.

But where a man will plead a lease or a (...) made unto hi^ chatel real or
parsonal, there^ (...) say perforce of which he was possesse^ More shall be
said of tenantes in common in the chapter of releases, confyrmacyons and
tena^tes ^ar elegit.

Estates upon a condition. Capi. v.
EStates that men have in lands or tenem^tes ^ be in two manners. That is to
say, they have estate upon condition in deed or upon condi^ion in law. Upon
condition in deed is, as a man by deed indented enfeoffeth another in fe
^eseruing to him and to his heirs yearly a certain re^t payable at one feast
or at diu^s festes ^ypere, upon condition that if the rent be be^ynde. etc.
that it shall be lawful to the feoffour and to his heirs to enter into the
lands or ^enementes. etc.

Or if the land be alyened to another in (...), to yield unto him certain rent.
etc. And if ^hap that the rent be behind by a weke after any day of payment of
it, or by month, or by a half year after any day of payment, that than it
shall be lawful the feoffour and to his hyres to enter. etc.

In this case if the rent be not paid at such a time, or before such a time
limited and ^cisyed within the condition comprysed in the adventure tha^ may
the feoffor or his heirs en^r into such lands or tenem^tes, and them in his
^st estate to have and to hold, and of his to ^uite the feoffee clean out,
and it is called estate upon condition, for this that the estate of the feoffe
is defensable if the condition he not parfourmed.

In the same manner it is if lands be given in the tail, or let for term of
life, or for term of years, upon such condition. etc. But where a feoffement
is made of certain lands reseruyng certain rent upon such condition that if
the rent be behind that it shall be law full to the feoffour and his heirs to
enter, and the land to hold till they be satysfyed or paid of their rent
behind. etc. In this case if the rent be behynd and the feoffour and his
heirs enter, the feoffe is not excluded cle^ out. But the feoffour shall have
and hold the land and take the profits till that he be satisfied of the rent
behind. And when he is satisfied, the feoffe may reenter in the same la^^ and
hold it as he did before, for in such case the feoffour shall have it, but in
manner for a distress in the mean time, till he be satysfyed of the rent. etc.
shall take the profytes in the mean time.

Also diverse words among other there be that by virtue of themself make estate
vyl condition. One is this word of condition as A enfeoffeth B. of certain
land to have a^ to hold to the same. B. and his heirs upon condition that
the same B. and his heirs shall pay or do to be paid to the foresaid. A. and
to his heirs yearly such rent. etc. In this cases without any more saying the
feoffee has estate upon condition. Also if the condition we^ such. Provided
always that the aforesaid B. pay or do to be paid to the aforesaid A. such
rent. Or if they were thus, so that ye aforesaid B. pay or do to be paid such
rent. In these cases without any more saving ye feoffee has estate but upon
condition, so that if he perform not the condition the feoffour and his heirs
may enter. etc.

Also other words there be in a deed that causes the tenauntes to be
condicioneis, as upon such a feoffement a rent is reserved to the feoffour.
etc. and after it is put in deed that if at chance the aforesaid rent to be
behynd in part or in all. etc. that than it shall be lawful to the feoffour and
to his heirs to enter. And this is a deed upon a condition. But there is
diversity between these words if it chance. etc and the words next
aforesaid. For this word if it chance. etc. is naught worth to such
condition, but if it have these words following, that is to say, that it
shall be lawful to the feoffour and to his heirs to enter. etc. But in these
cases aforesaid it needs not by the law to put such clause, that is to say,
that the feoffour and his heirs may enter. etc. for this that they may so
do by force of the w^ordes aforesaid, because they conceive to themself in
the law a condition, that into say, that the feoffour and his heirs may
enter. Yet it is commonly in all such ^es aforesaid to put such clauses in
the deeds, that is to say, if the rent be behind. etc. that it shall be
lawful to the so^ feoffour and his heirs to enter. etc. And thy^ is well done
to that intent for to declare and express to the lay men that be not learned
i^ the law, the manner and the condition of the feoffement. etc. As a man seized
of land as of franktenement, let the same land to another by deed ende^ted for
term of years, yelding unto him certain re^t, it is used to put in the de^
that if the rent be behind at the day of payment by a month. etc. That than
it shall be la^ full to the lessour to dystrayne. etc. and yet the lessour may
dystrayne of common right for the rent behind. etc. though such words ne^wer
set in the deed. etc.

Also if any feoffement be made upon (...) condition, that if our feoffour pay
at a cer^ day. etc. xx.li. of money that then the feoffo^ may enter. etc. In
this case the feoffe is called tenant in mortgage, that is as much to (...) in
french as mortgage, and in latin mort^ ^adium, and in English a dead pledge.
An^ seems that the cause why it is called mo^gage is for that, that it
stands in doubt if (...) feoffour may pay at the day lymytted suche^ sum
or not, and if he pay not, then the la^ that is put in pledge upon condition
for the paymente of the money, is gone from him (...) ever. And so deed as to
the tenant, etc.

Also as a man may make a feoffement (...) ^ee in mortgage, so may a man make a
gyfte^ the tail in mortgage, and a lease for ter^ of life, or for term of
years in mortgage. And (...) such tenauntes be tenantes in mortgage after the
state that they have in the lands, at ^etera.

Also if a feoffement be made in mortgage upon condition that the feoffour shall
pay such a sum at such a day. etc. as is between them ^y their deed endented
accorded and lymytted though the feoffour dye before the day of payment. etc.
yet if the heir of the feoffour pay the same sum within the day to the
feoffe, or pro^e^ him the money, and the feoffee refuses to ^eyne it, then
may the heir enter in to the ^andes. And yet the condition is if the feoffor
^y such a sum at such day. etc. and not ma^ng mention in the condition of
any payment to be made by his heir. But for this that the heir has interest
of right in the condition. (...) and the intent was but that the money should
he paid at the day set. etc. and the feoffee has no more damage to be
paid by the heir, then though he were paid by the father, et cetera, for
this cause of the heir pay the money or tends the money at the day set,
et cetera, and the other refuses it, he may well enter. But ^a stranger of
his own head that has (...) interest. etc. would tend and pay the money at
the day set then the feoffee is not ^unde to receive it etc.

And it is to be had in mind that in such ^e where such lawful tender of
the money is made and the feoffee refuses to receive (...) wherefore the
feoffour or his heirs do enter etc. then the feoffe has no remedy to have
the money by the common law, for this that it shall be erected his own folly
that he refused the money when lawful profer was made of (...) unto him. etc.

Also if a feoffement be made in such condition, that if the feoffee pay to
the feoffour a^ such a day between them limited.xx.li. tha^ than the feoffe
shall have the land to him and to his heirs and if he fail to pay the money
at the day. etc. that then it shall be lawful to the feoffour or to his heirs
to enter. etc. and if after before the day set, the feoffee sells ye (...) to
another, and thereof makes a feoffement upon him in this case if the second
feoffe (...) tend the sum of money at the day ^ette^ the feoffour, and the
feoffour refuses it. etc. (...) has the second feoffe estate in the la^d
cle^ without condition. And the cause is for, that (...) second feoffe had
interest in the condition (...) salvation of his tenauncy. And in this case
(...) seems that if the first feoffe after such sale i^ the land will tend
the money at the day (...) etc. to the feoffour, that shall be good enough for
the salvation of the estate of the secon^ feoffe, for this that the first
feoffe was pre^ to the condition, and so the tender of any of them is good
enough etc.

Also if the feoffem^t be made upon cond^ that if the feoffor pay a certain sum
of money to the feoffe that then it shall be lawful to the feoffour and to his
heirs to enter. etc. In this case if the feoffor dye before the day of
payment, and the heir will tender to the feoffe the money, such tender is void,
for this that the time within which the render ought to be made is past. For
when the condition is, that if the feoffor pay the money to the feoffe, this is
as much to say, that if the feoffour du^yng his life pay the money to the
feoffee. etc And when the feoffor dies then the time of the tender is past,
But otherwise it is, where a day of paym^t is lymytted, and the feoffour ^yeth
before the day then may the heir tender the money as it is aforesaid, for
this at the time of the tender was not past by the death of the feoffor. Also
it seems in such case where the feoffor dies before the day of payment if the
executors of the feoffor, tender the money of the feoffe at the day of payment,
the tender is good enough. And if the feoffe refuse this ^he heirs of the
feoffor may enter. etc. And the cause is, for this that the executors represent
the person of their restator. etc. And note well, ye (...) such cases of
condition of paym^t of certain (...) in gross touching lands or tenementes
^awful tender be once refused, he yt ought (...) pay the money is thereof
assoyled and clearly ^scharged for ever after.

Also if the feoffe in mortgage before the day ^f paym^t that shall be made unto
hi^ make his ^ntors and dye, and his heir enters into the la^d as he ought.
It seems in this case yt the feoffour ought to pay the money at the day set
(...) the executours, and not to the heyr of the feoffee for this that the
money at the beginning belonged to the feoffe in manner as a duty. And shall
be understand that the estate (...) made because of borowyng of the money the
feoffee, or because of another duty. A^ for this the payment shall not be made
to (...) heyr of the feoffe as it seems. But the wor^ of the condition may be
such that the pay^ shall be made unto the heir as if the condition were, that the
feoffor pay to the feoffe or to h^ heirs such a sum at such a day. etc. There
after the death of the feoffe if he dye before (...) day limited then the
paym^t ought to be m^ to the heir at the day set etc.

Also in such case of a feoffem^t in mortgage a question has been demanded in
what pi^ the feoffor is bound to tender the money to the feoffe at the day set.
etc. And some have se^ that upon the land so holden in mortgage (...) this
that the condition is dependant upon (...) land, and they have said that if
the feoff^ be ready upon the land to pay the money (...) feast or day set, and
the feoffee be not at t^ time there, that then the feoffour is exclu^ and
discharged of paym^t of the money, for t^ that no defaut was in him, but it
seems to men yt the law is contrary, and the defaut is i^ For he is bound to
seek the feoffe if he be t^ at any time in any manner of place within (...)
realm of England. As if a man be bound in ^n obligation of.xx.ii. upon
condition indosed upon the obligacion that if he pay to him to whom the
obligacion is made at such a day. (...) it. that then the obligacion of.xx.li.
shall lose his force and shall be holde^ for naught in this case it behooves him
that made the obligacio^ to seek him to whom the obligacion is made, ^f he be
within England, and at the day set ^o tender to him the said x.ii. etc. And
otherwise he forfaiteth the sum of.xx.li. comprysed within the obligacion, and
so it seems in the other case etc. And though that some have said that the
condition is dependant upon the la^d ^t this is not proved that the fesaunce of
the condition to be parfourmed ought to be mad upon the land. etc. No more then
if the condy^on were that the feoffour should do at such a any. etc. an especial
corporal service to the feste ^t naming the place where the corporal ser^ices
should be done. In this case the feoffor ought to do such corporal service at
the day (...) to the feoffe i^ whatsoever place in England that the feoffe be
if he will have auaun^ of the condition. etc. And so it seems in (...) other
case. And it seems to them that it ^albee more properly said that the estate
of ^e land is dependaunt upon the condition. (...) which is as much to say,
that the condy^on is dependaunt upon the said. etc. but en^re. etc.

But if a feoffement in fee be made reseruyng to the feoffor an annuel rent,
and for d^faut of payment a reentre. etc. in this case it ^deth not to the
tenant to tender the re^ wh^ it is behind, but only upon the land, (...)
this that this is a rent going out of the lan^ for this is rent secke. For if
the feoffour b^ once seized of this rent, and after he comme^ upon the land.
etc. and the rent is denied h^ etc. he may have assyse of nouel disseisin,
(...) though he may enter because of the condicyo^ broken yet he may chose,
that is to say, to ^ter or to have an assyse. And so is there d^sitie as to the
tender of the rent that is go^ out of the land and of tender of another (...)
in gross which is not going out of any (...) And therefore it shall be sure and
a good the for them that will make such feoffeme^e^ mortgage, to put and set a
specyal place w^ the money shall be paid. And the more sp^ all that it is put
the better it is for the feo^ As if A. enfeoffe.B. to have to him (...) to his
heirs upon such condition, that if pay to B. in the feast of saynct Mychaell
(...) archangell next comi^g in the cathedral ch^ of s. Paul of London
within.4. hours (...) before the hour of none of the same feast at (...) rode
loft of the north door within the sa^ church or any other certain place within
(...) same church that than it shall be lawful to (...) foresaid. A. and to his
heirs to enter. etc. I such case it needs not to seek the feoffe^ any other
place but in the place compr^ in the indenture nor to be there more longer time
than the time specifyed in the same inde^ture, for to tender or pay the money
to the feoffee.

Also in such case where the place of payement is limit, the feoffee is not
bound to receive the payment in none other place, but in the place so
limytted. But yet if he receive the payment in any other place, this is good
enough and as strong for the feoffour, as if the resceyt had be in the place so
limytted etc.

Also in this case of feoffeme^t in mortgage, if the feoffour pay the feffee an
horse or a cup of silver, or a ryng of gold, or any other such thing in full
satisfaccion of the money, and the other this receives, this is good enough
and as strong as if he had received the sum of money, though the horse, or
any of the other things be not the twenty part worth in value of the sum
of money, for this that the other has accepted it in plain and full
satisfaccion.

Also if a man enfeoffe another in fee upon condition that he and his heirs
shall yield to a stranger and his heirs a yerelye rent of.xx. s. and if he
and his heirs fail of payment of this, that then it shall be ^efull to the
feaffour and to his heirs to enter, this is a good condition. And yet in this
case, though such a yearly rent be called an annuell rent, this is not properly
a re^t, for if it shall be rent, it might to be rent service, rent charge, or
rent secke, and yet it is none of them, for if the stranger were seysed of this
and after it were to him denied, he shall never have assyse of this, for this
that it issues not out of any lands, and so the stranger has no remedy if
any such perelye payment be had behynd in this case, but that the feoffour and
his heirs may enter etc. and yet if the feoffour and his heirs enter for
defaute of payment, then such re^ is gone forever. And so such rent is but a
payment set to the tenant and to his heirs, that if they will not pay this
after the form of the indenture that they shall lease their (...) by the
enter of the feoffour or his heirs (...) defaute of payment. And in this case
it seems that the feoffee and his heirs ought^ to seek the stranger and
his heirs if they be in England, because that no place is limited where the
payment shall be made, and because that such rent is not going out of any land
etc.

And here note well.ii. things. One is the no re^t that is properly said rent
may be res^ued upon any feffement, gift or lease, but one^ to the feffor or to
the lessor or to their heirs, and in no manner may be reserved to any strang^
parsone. But if.ii. ioyntenantes make a lea^ by deed indented reserving to the
one a certain yearly rent, that is good enough to him to whom the rent is
reserved for this that (...) is prive to the lease and not a stranger to the
etc. The second thing is, that no enter or reentre which is all one, may be
reserved nor given to any parsone, but only to the feoffour or to the donour
or to the lessour, or to their heirs, and such enter may not be aliened nor
granted to any parson. For if a man let lands to another for term of life by
indenture, yelding to the lessour and to his heirs a certain rent, and for
defaut of payment a reentre etc. if after the lessour by a deed grasit the
reuercion of the land to another in fee, and the tenant for term of life
attorneth etc. if the rent after be behynd, the grant of the reuercio^ may
distrain for the rent, for this that the rent is incident to the reuercion, but
he may not enter into the land and put out the tenant as the lessour might
or his heirs if the reuercion had been continued in them et cetera. And in
this case the enter is taken away at all times, for the grant of the
reuercyon may not enter, Causa qua supra. And the lessoure for his heirs may
not enter, for if the lessour may enter. then he ought to be in his first
estate etc. and that may not be, for this that he has from him the reuercion
etc.

Also if there be lord and tenant, and the tenant make such a lease for term
of life, yel^yng to the lessour and to his heir such yere^y rent, and for
defaut of payment a reen^re etc. (...) the lessour dye without heir, during
the state of the tenant for term of life, by which the reuercyon comes to
the lord ^y way of eschere, and after the rent of the tenant for term of
life is behynd, the lord may distrayn the tenant for the rent behynd, but he
may not enter into the land by force (...) the condition etc. for this that he
is not heir to the feoffour etc.

Also if land be granted to a man for ter^ of years upon a condition, that if
he pay to the grauntour within two years.xl. marks, that then he shall have the
land to him and to his heirs. etc. In this case, if the grant ente^ by force
of the grant, and after he pays to the grant our.xl. marks within the.ii.
years yet he has nothing in the land but for term of the two years, for this
that no liuerey of seisin was to him made at the beginning, for if he had
franktenement and fee in this ca^ because he has performed the condition. T^
should he have frank tenement by force of the first grant where no liuerey of
seysin w^ made thereof, which should be against reas^ etc. But if the grauntour
had made liuerey of seisyn to the grauntee by force of the grant* then has
the grante the frank tenement a^ the fee upon the same condition.

Also if lands be granted to a man (...) term of five years, upon
condition that he pay to the grauntour within the first t^ year.xl. marks
that than he shall have fee ^elles but for term of the five years, and ^n^e of
seysin is made to hi^ by force of the gri^ Now he has in fee simple
co^dicione^ etc. An^ if in this case the grant pay not to the gra^tour the.lx.
marks within the same two first years tha^ immediately after the same two years
the fee and the franktenement is and shall be adjudged to the grauntour, for this
that the grauntour may not after the two years incontinent enter upon the
grant, for this that the grant has yet title by three years to have and to
occupy the land by force of the same grant. And so for this, that the condition
of part of the grant is broken and the grauntour may not enter, the law
shall put the fee in frank tenement in the grauntour. For if the grauntour in
this case made wast then after the breakyng of the condition etc. and after the
two years the grauntoure shall have his writ of wast, and this is a good
proof that the reuercion is to him etc. But in such case of feoffmentes upon
condition where the feoffour may enter lawfully for the condition broken etc.
There the feoffour has the franktenement before the enter. etc.

Also if a feoffment be made upon such condition that the feoffee shall give
the land to the feoffour, and to the wife of the feoffour, to have and to hold
to them and to the heirs of their two bodies engendered, and for de^te of such
issue, to remain to the right heirs of the feoffour. In this case if the
husband dye, living the wife before estate in the ^yle made to him, than ought
the feoffee by the law to make estate to the wife, as like to the condition,
and as like to the intent of of the condition as he may make it, that is to
say, to let the land to the wife for term of life without impechement of
waste, there maynder after her decease to the heirs engendered of the body of
her husband and hers, and for defaut of such issue, the remaynder to the right
heirs of the husband.

And the cause why the lease shall be made in this case to the woman sole without
empechement of wast is for this that the condition is, that the state shall be
made to the husband and his wife in the tail. And if such estate had be made
in the life of the husband the after the death of her husband, she had estate
in the tail sole which estate is without impechement of wast, and so it is
reason that if after a man may make estate to the intent of the condition etc.
that he shall make it etc. though that she cannot have estate in the tail, as
^he might have had, if the gift in the tail had be made to the husband, and to
her, in the (...) of her husband etc.

Also in this case if the husband and the wy^ have issue, and dye before the
gift in the tail made unto him etc. than ought the feoffee t^ make estate to
the issue and to the heirs of the father, and mother engendered, and for defa^
of such issue etc. the remayndre to the right heirs of the husband etc. And
the same law^ in other cases semblable. And if such a feoffour will not make
such estate when he is re^sonably required by them that ought to ha^ estate by
force of the condition etc. Then may the feoffour and his heirs enter etc.

Also if a feoffement be made upon condition that the feoffee shall enfeoffe
many men, to have and to hold, to them and to their heirs forever, and all
they that ought to have estate, dye before any estate made unto them, then
ought the feoffee to make the estate to the heirs of him that suruyue of the^
to have and to hold to him, and the heirs of him that suruyued etc.

Also if a feoffement be made upon condition to enfeoffe another, or to give in
the tail to another etc. if the feoffee before the perfourming of the
condition enfeoffe a strange parson, or make a lease for term of life, then
may the feoffour or his heirs enter etc. for this, that he has dysabled
himself to parfourme the condition, in so much that he made estate to another
and cetera. In such manner it is, if the feoffee before the condition
parfourmed, set the same land to a stranger for term of years. In this case the
feoffour or his heirs may enter and cetera. for this that the feoffe has
dysabled himself to make estate of the tenementes according to that, that was
in the teneme^tes when estate thereof was made unto him, for if he will make
estate according to the condition etc. the^ may the feoffe for term of years,
e^tre and put out him to who^ the estate is made etc. and to occupy this during
his term. And many have said, that if such a feoffement be made to a man sole
upon the same condition, and before that he has performed the condition he
takes a wife, then the feoffour or his heir may incontinent enter, for this
that if he has made estate according to the condition, and after dyed, his
wife shall be endowed and may recover her dower, by a writ of dower etc. And so
by taking of a wife, the tenementes be put in another plyte then they were at
the time of the feoffment upon condition, for this that no such woman was
dowable nor should be endowed by the law etc. In the same manner it is, if the
feoffour charge the land by his deed of rent charge before the parfourming of
the condition, or be bound in a statute staple, or statute merchant, that i^
such cases the feoffour and his heirs may enter. Causa qua supra. For
whosoever comes to the tenementes by the feoffment of the fe^fee, then the
tenementes must be liable and be put in execucion by force of the statute
aforesaid. But when the feoffour or his heirs for the cases aforesaid, have
entered so as the^ ought as it seems etc. Then all such thynge^ that before
such enter may trouble or encombre the tenementes so given upon condition, as
touching the same tenementes be vtter^ defeted etc.

Also if a man make a deed of feoffement to another, and in the deed is no
condition etc. And when the feoffour will make to him ^ouere of seisin by force
of the same deed, he (...) ^eth liuere of seisyn upon certain conditions etc. In
this case nothing of the tenementes passes by the deed, for this that the
condition is not comprysed in the deed, and the feoffement is of such force, as
if no such deed had be made thereof etc.

Also if a feoffement be made upon such condition, that the feoffee shall alien
the land to a man, this condition is void, for this, that when a man is
infeoffed in lands or tenementes, he has power to alien them to some person
by the law. For if such condition should ^e good, than the condition puts him
out ^f all the power that the law gives, which should be against reason, and
for this, such condition is void. But if the condition be such that the
feoffee shall not alyen to one such ^ming his name, or to any of his heirs or
^ys yssues etc. or such other like, the which co^^icions takes not away all
the power of a^ienacion of the feoffee etc. than such condition (...) good.

Also if teneme^tes be given in the tail, upon ^uch condition that the tenant
in the tail, ^or his heirs etc. shall not alyen in fee, nor in ^e, nor for
term of others life, but for their (...) lives. etc. such alyenacion and
condi^on is good. And the cause is for this that ^hen he makes such alienacion
and discon^nuance, he does contrary to the intent for ^hiche the statute of
westminster the second ^as made, by which estatute, the estates in the tail
be ordained for it is proved by the words comprysed in the same estatute, that
the intent of the making the same estatute w^ yt the will of the donour in such
cases should be observed. And when tenant in the tail, ^keth such
discontinuance, he does the contrary to that etc. And also in estates in the
tail of any tenem^tes when the reuercio^ of the f^ si^ple is in another person
wha^ such discontinuance is made, then the fee simple in the ren^ncion, or the
fee simple in the remayndre is di^continued, and for to put out that the tenan^
in the tail shall do no such thing against right such condition is good, as it
is aforesaid etc.

Also a man may give land in the tail upon such condition, that if the
tenant in the tail or his heirs alien in fee, or in tail, (...) for term
of an others life etc. And also that if all the issues coming of the tenant in
the tail, be dead without issue, that then it shall ^leful to the donour, and
to his heirs, to e^ter (...) And by such way the right of ye tail may b^
saved aft such disco^tinuance to the issue in the tail if there be any, so yt
by way of enter of donour or of his heirs the tail shall not (...) defeted by
such condic^, and yet if the tenant in tail in this case, or his heirs make
any di^continuance etc. he in the reuercio^ or his he^res after this yt the
tail is determined for d^faute of issue etc may enter into the land (...)
force of the same condition, and shall not (...) drieuen to sue a writ of
Formedon in the re^cion.

Also if a man may not plede in any accion that estate was made in fee, in the
tail, or for term of life upon condition, but if he vouch and record thereof,
or show a writing under seal proving the same condition. for it is a common
^endicion and learning, yt a man by pleding shall not defete any estate of
frankteneme^t by force of any such condition, but if he show the proof of such
condition in writing etc. except it be in some especial cause, but of chatels
reals as of a lease made for term of years, or of grantes of words made by
wardens in chiualry, and of such other. etc. A man may plede that such gifts
or grantes were made upon condition etc. without showing of any writing of
condition and in the same manner a man may do of gifts and grantes of chatels
parsonels and of contractes parsonels etc.

Also though that a man in some accyon may not plede an accion that touches
and concerns frank tenement without showing of wrytinge thereof, as it is
aforesaid, yet a man may be helped upon such condycyon by the verdyte of
twelve ^enne taken at large in Assyse of novel dyss^ysyn, or in some other
accion where the justices will take the verdite of the twelve ^urrours at
large. As put the case that a man seysed of certain land in fee, lets
the same (...) for term of life, without deed upon co^dicio^ to yield to the
lessour a certain rent, and for defaute of payement a reentre. etc. by force
of which, the lessour is seysed as of frankteneme^t and after the rent is
behynd, by which the lessour enters into the land, and after the less
arrayneth an assyse of Nouel disseisyn of the land against the lessour the
which pleads that he does no wrong, ne no disseisyn, and upon this the
assyse is taken.

In this case the recognitours of the assys^ may say and yield to the justices
their verdit at large upon all the matter, as to say that the defendaunt was
seysed, and so seysed, let the same land to the playntif for term of his life,
to yield to the lessour such an annuel rent payable at such a feast and upon
such condition yt if the rent be behynd at any such feast that i^ ought to be
paid, that then it shall be leful to the lessour to enter etc. by force of which
lease the playntif was seysed in his demesne, as of franktenement, and after
the rent was behynd at such a fest in such a year etc. for which the lessour
entered into the land upon the possession of the lease, and pays the
distression of the justices if this be a disseysin done to the playntif or not.
And than for this, that it appears to the justices, that this was no
d^sseisyn done unto the playntif. In so much that the entree of the lessour
was lawful vp^ him, the justices ought to give judgment, (...) the playntif
shall take nothing by his written of assyse. And so in such case the lessour
shall (...) helped, and yet no writing was never made of the condition, for as
well as the iurrours may have knoweledge of the condition that was declared
and reherased upon the lessee. In the same manner is of feoffement in fee, or in
gift in the tail upon condition, though never writing were made thereof etc.
And as it is said of a verdite at large in assise etc.

In this same manner it is of a writ of enter founded upon disseisyn, and in
all other accions where the justices will take a verdite at large there where
the verdite at large makes the nature of the matter put in the issue.

Also in such where the enquest may say their verdite at large, if they will
take upon them the knoweledge of the law upon the matter, they may say their
verdit general as it is put in their charge, as in the case aforesaid they may
well say that the lessour dysseised not the lessee if they will etc.

Also in the same case, if the case were such, that after this that the lessour
had entered for defaute of payment etc. that the lessee had entered upon the
lessour, and him disseised. In his case if the lessour arrayneth an assyse
against the lessee, the lessee may bar him of ^ys assyse, for he may plede
against him in ^arre, how the lessour that is playmyfe made ^t lease to the
defendant for term of life, sa^ng the reuercion of the playntif, the which is
a good plee in bar, inso much yt he know ^e^th the reuercion to be to the
playntife, and in this case has no matter to help him, but the condition made
upon the lease and that he may not pledge, for that he has no writing, and in
so much that he may not answer to the bar, he shall be barred. And so in this
case ye may see that a man is seized and he shall have no assyse. And yet if the
lessee be playntif, and the lessour defendant, he shall bar the less by
verdit of the assyse. But in this case where the lessee is defendant, if he
will not plead the said plee in bar, but plead no wrong nor dysseisyn that
the lessour shall recover by assyse etc. Causa qua supra.

Also because such conditions be most commonly put and specified in deeds
endented, some little thing shall be said here to the my son of indentures and
of a deed poll co^teining conditions. And it is to wete yt if the inde^ture be
by pertite or tripattie or quatriperte, all the parties and the indenture be but
one deed in the law, and every party of the inde^ture is of himself of as
great force and effect, as all the parties together. And the making of
inde^tures is (...) two manners. One is to make the^ in the the parson, another
manner is to make the^ in the first parson. The making in the third person,
(...) as in such form. This inde^ture made between A. of.B. of the one part,
and E. of.D. o^ the other part. witnesses that the foresaid A of.B. has given
and granted and by this pres^ deed indented, has confyrmed to the foresaid C.
of D. such la^d to have etc. upon the condic^ etc. In witness whereof, the
perties before said intercha^geably have put to their seals, or else thus. In
witness whereof, to one perte of this inde^ture remaining with the said C. of D.
the foresaid A. of B. has put to his seal, and to ye other pert of the said
inde^ture remaini^g with the said A. of.B. the said C, of D. has put to his
seal given etc. Such inde^tures is called indenture made in ye third person
for this that the ver^es be in the third person and such form the indenture is
the more sure making, for this yt it ^s more commonly used, the making of
indentures in the first parson is in such form.

To al true christen people to whom this present writing inde^ted shall come A.
of B. gre^ing in our lord everlasting, know ye me to ^aue given and granted,
and by this my present deed ^ndented, to have confyrmed to C. of D. such and
etc. Or else thus, know al me^ that be pre^ent, and the^ that be to come that I
A. of B. have ^en and granted and by this my present deed e^^cted have
co^fyrmed to C. of D. such land etc. (...) have etc. upon the condition
following. In ^tues whereof, as well I the said A. of B. as ^e foresaid C. of D. to
these indentures in^rchangeably have put to our seases, or else ^as. In witness
whereof to one part of this ^denture I have put to my seal, and to the ^ther
part of the same indenture the foresaid ^. of D. has put to his seal. etc.

And it seems that such an indenture made (...) the first parsone, is as good
in the law as (...) indenture made in the third parsone, when both parties have
thereto put their seals, for in the indenture made in the third parsone or in
the first parsone, if mencyon be made that the grauntour has set his seal
only, and not the grant, then is the indeature only the deed of the
grauntoure. But where a mention is made that the graunte^ has set his seal to
the indenture etc. then i^ the indenture as well the deed of the grau^tour as
the deed of the grauntee, and thus (...) is the deed of both, and also every
party of indenture is the deed of both parties in (...) case. etc.

Also if estate be made by indenture to (...) man for term of his life, the
remayndre to (...) other in fee upon conditions etc. and if the ^nant for term
of life, has set his seal to (...) party of the indenture, and after dies
and (...) in the remayndre etc. enters by force of (...) remaynder. In this
case he is holden to perform all the conditions comprysed with the indenture
as the tenant for term of (...) ought to do in his life and yet he in the
remayndre never ceased any parcel of the indenture but the causes is that in so
much that (...) enters and agrees to have the land by (...) of the indenture
he is holden to parfourm^ condition within the inde^ture if he will h^ the
land etc.

Also if a feoffement be made by deed P^ upon condition etc. And for this that
the condition is not performed, the feffour entre^ and happeth the possession
of the deed po^le if the less bring an accion of that enter against the
feoffour it has been questioned if the lessour may plede the condition. etc.
by the deed poll against the feoffe and some have said, nay, in so much that
it seems unto the^ that a deed pol, and the property of the same deed
appertains to him to whom the deed is made and not to him that made the deed.
And in so much that such a deed appertains not to the feoffour it seems to
them that he may not plede this deed. etc. And other have said the contrary
and have showed diverse causes. One is if the case be such that in the accio^
between them if the feoffe plede the same deed, and show this to the court. In
this case in so much that the deed is in the court the feoffor may show to the
court how in the deed by diverse conditions to be parfourmed of the party of
the feoffe, and for this that they be not parfourmed he entered. etc. and thereto
he shall be received by the same reason when the feoffor has the deed in hand
and shows it to the court he shall be well received to plede of this. etc. And
namely when the feoffor is preuy to the deed, for he ought to be preuy to the
deed, when he made the deed.

Also if two men make or do a Trespass to another, the which releaseth
to one of them by his deed, all accions Parsonels. etc. Notwithstanding he
su^th an accion of Trespass against the other, the defendaunt may well show
that the Trespass was done by him and another his fellow, and that the plaintiff
by the deed that he shows for the release to his fellow, all accions
parsonels and yet such deed apperteyneth to his fellow and not unto him, but
for this that he may have advantage by the deed, if he may show the deed to
the court he may well plede therefore by the same reason in the other case wha^
the feoffour ought to have advantage by the condition comprised with the deed
pol.

Also if the feoffe gave or granted the deed pol to the feoffor, such grant
shall be good, and than the deed, and the propertye of the deed, appertains
to the feoffour. And when the feoffour has the deed in hand, and pledeth it to
the court, it shall be the more understand that he came to the deed by a law
full mean than by a torcions mean and so it seems that they may well plede
such a deed poll, that comprehends condition. etc. if he have the deed in
hand etc. Ideo semper quere dubijs, quia per raciones peruenitur ad legittimam
rationem.

Estates that men have upon condition in the law be such estates that have a
condition in the law annexed to them, though it be not specified in writing, so
as a man grant by his deed in another the office of a parkeshyppe of a park
to have and to occupye the same office for term of his life, the estate that
he has in the office, is upon condition in the law, that is to say, that the
parker, well and truly shall keep the park, and do this that to his office
appertains to do, or otherwise that it shall be lawful to the grauntour
and to his heirs to put him out, and to grant that to another if he will.
etc. And such condition as is understand by the law to be annexed to some
thing is as strong as if the condition were set or put in writing. In the same
manner it is of grauntes of offices of stewardes, constables, bedles, bailyfes,
and other officers, but if such office be granted to a man to have and to
occupy by him or by his deputy, than if the office be occupied by him or by
his deputye as it ought by the law to be occupied, this suffiseth for him, or
else the grauntour or his heirs may put him out as it is aforesaid.

Also estates of lands or tenementes may be upon condition in the law, though
yt upon the estate made, there was no rehersall made of the conditions, as put
the case that a lose be made to the husband and his wife, to have and to hold
to the^ during the couerture between the^ in this case they have estate for
term of their two lives upon condic^ in the law, yt is to say if one of them
dye, or if divorce be made between the^. ye than it shall be lawful to the
leasor and his heirs to e^ter. etc. and that they have estate for tm^ of
their.ii. lives it is proved this. Every man that has estate or franktenem^t
in ^y lands or teneme^tes, either he has estate in fee, or in fee tail, or
for term of life or for term of another life, and by such lease, they have
franktenement. But they have not by that grant fe nor tail, nor for term of
another life. Ergo they have estate for term of their two lives, but this is
upon condition in the law in form aforesaid. And in this case if they make
wast the lessour shall have against them a writ of wast, supposing by his wryt.
Quod tenent ad terminum vite. etc. but in his ple, he shall declare how and in
what manner the lease was made, in the same manner it is if an abbot make a lease
to a man to have and to hold during the time that the leassor is abbot. In
this case the less has estate for term of his own life, but this is upon
condition in law that is to say that if the abbot dye, or resygne to be
deposed, it shall be lawful to his successors to enter. etc. Also a man may see
in the book of assise. Anno. xxxviii. E. iii. ^ plee of assyse in this form
that ensues assise of novel disseisyn was sometime brought against one. A.
that pleded to the assyse and was found by verdyt that the ancester of the
plaintyf devised the tenementes to be sold by the defendant that was his
executor to make distribucion of the money for his soul, and it was found that
a man after the death of the testatour rendered him certain sum of money for
the tenementes but not to the value and that the executour after held the
tenementes (...) his own hand by two year to the intent to have sold the
tenementes more derer to sum other and it was found that he had all this while
after taken the profytes of the tenementes to his own use, without any thing
doing for the soul of the dead. Mombray the executour in such case is holden
by the law to make the sale as soon as he may after the death of the
testatour and it is found that he refused to make the sale and so the defaut
was in him, and also by force of the deuyse he was holden to have put all the
profytes of the said tenementes to the deaths use, and it is found that he
has taken them to his own use, and so another defaut is in him wherefore it
was aiudged that the playntyf should recover. etc. And so it appears by the
said judgment that by force of the said deuyse the executour had none estate
nor power in the tenementes but upon condition in the law. etc. And in such
cases it needs not to have showed any deed rehersyng the conditions. etc. Ex
paucis dictis intendere plurima possis. More shall be said of conditions in the
chapter of discentes that takes away enter and in the chapter of relesses
and in the chapter of discontinuaunce.

Dyscentes. Cap. vi.
DIscentes that take away entres be in two manners that is to say where the
dyscent is i^ fee or in fee tail. Descent in fee that takes away enter is if
a man seized of certain lands (...) tenementes is disseased and the disseysour
has issue and dies of such estate. But now the tenementes dyscend to the
issue of the disseasour by course of the law as heir unto him.

And for this that the law puts the lands or tenementes upon the issue of
the disseasour that by force of the descent, so the issue comes to the
tenementes by course of the law and not by his own deed the enter of ye
disseysi is taken away and is thereof put to his wryt of enter upon disseysyn
against the heyreof the disseasour to recover the land.

Dyscent in the tail that takes away enter is if a man be disseased and the
disseasor gives the same land to another in the tail, and the tenant in the
tail has issue and dies seized of such estate and the issue e^et^ in this
case the enter of the dysseisi, is taken (...) way, and he is put to sue,
against the y^ of the tenant in the tail a writ of enter upon disseisin.
etc.

And note well that in such dysce^tes that take away enters it behooves that a
man dye seized in his demesne, as in fee tail for dying seized for term of
life or for term of another life shall never take away the enter. etc.

Also a dyscent of reuercion or of remaynder shall never take away enter. etc.
so that such cases that take away entrees by force of d^centes it behooves that
he ye dies seized have ^o and franktenem^t at the time of his dying (...) eis
such dyscent takes not away enter.

Also as it is said of discentes that descend to the issue of him that dies
seized. etc. the same law is where they have none issue, but ye ^enementes
dyscende to the brother or to the sister or to the uncle, or to some other
co^in of his that dies seized. etc.

Also if there be lord and tenant and the tenant be disseased, and the
disseasour alieneth to another in fe and the alien dies without heir, and the
lord enters as in his esche^e. In this case the disseysi may enter upon the
lord for this that the lord comes not to the land by dyscent but by eschete.

Also if a man seized of certain land in fee or in fe tail upon condition to
yield certain rent or upon other condic^ though that such tenant seized in fe
or in fe tail die seized, yet if the condic^ be broken in their life or after
their de^se. etc. this takes not away the enter of the feoffor, nor of the
donor or of their heirs for this that the tenancy is charged with the
cond^cion and the estate of the tenancy is condicio^ei in whose hands so ever
the tena^cye shall come. etc.

Also and if such a ten^t upon condic^ be disseased and the disseasor die
thereof seized, and the la^d desce^deth to the heir of the disseasor, now the
ent of the tenant upon condic^ that was disseased, is taken away but if the
condic^ be broken. etc. tha^ may the feoffor or the donor that made the e^e or
their heirs enter. etc. causa qua supra.

Also if a dysseysour dye seized, and his heirs enter. etc. the which endoweth
the wife of the dysseasour of the third part of the teneme^ts in this case as
to the third part that is a^ned to the wife in dower incontinent anon after
that the wife enters and has the possession of the same third part the
disseisy may lawfully enter upon the possession of the wife in the same third
part. And the cause is for this that when the wife has her dower, she shall
be adjudged rather immediately by her husband and not by the heir, and so as
to the franktenement of the same third part, the descent is defeted, and so ye
may see how before the dowement the disseisi might not enter i^ any part. etc.
and after the dowement he may enter upon the wife, and yet he may not enter
upon the other two parties ye the heir of the dysseasour has by descent. etc.

Also if a woman be seized of land i^ fee, whereof I have ^yght and title to
enter, (...) the woman take an husband and have issue between them, and after
the wife dies seized, and after that the husband dies, and the is^ enters.
etc. In this case I may enter upon the possession of the issue for this that
the issue comes not to the tenementes immedyatlye by dyscent after the death
of his mother.

Also if a dysseysour enfeoffe his father and the father enters and dies of
such esta^ seized, by which the tenementes descend to the dysseasour, as to
the son and heir. etc. In this case the disseisi may well enter upon the
dysseasour, notwithstanding the descent, for this that as to the dysseasyn the
dysseasour shall be adjudged in but as the disseasour, notwithstanding the
dyscent.

Also if a man seized of certain lands in his demean as of fee, and has
issue.ii. sons and dies, and the younger son enters by abatement in the
land the which has issue, and of this dies seized and the tenementes dyscende
to the issue, and the issue enters into the land, in this case, the elder
son or his heirs may enter by the law upon the issue of the younger son,
notwithstanding the dyscente, for this that when the younger son abated in the
land after the death of his father before any enter of the elder, the law
inte^deth that he entered in the clemyng as heir unto his father, and for this
that the elder brother naymeth by the same title, that is to say, as heir unto
his father, he and his heirs, may enter upon the issue of the younger brother
notwythstandyng the dyscent. etc. for this yt they s^ayme by one self title
and in the same ma^er it shall be if there be many dyscentes from one issue
of the younger son. etc. But in such case if the father were seized of
certain lands in fee, and has issue.ii sons and dies, and the elder son
enters and is seized et cetera. And after the younger brother dysseaseth him,
by which dysseysyn he inseas^ of fee, and has issue and of such estate dies
seized, tha^ the elder brother may not enter, but is put to his wryt of enter
upon disseasin for to recover the la^d. And the cause is for this, that the
younger brother comes to the tenementes by a wrong disseisin made unto his
elder brother. And for that wrong, the law may not entend that he claim as
heir to his father no more than a strange parson that had disseased the elder
brother that never had any title. etc. And so may ye se the diversity where
the younger brother enters after the death of his father, before any entry made
by the elder brother in such case. etc. And where the elder brother enters
after the death of his father, and is disseased by the younger brother. etc. In
the same manner if a man seized of certain land in fe has issue two daughters,
and dies and the elder daughter e^treth in the la^d claymyng all the land to
her and thereof only takes the profits and has issue and dies seized by
which her issue enters which issue has issue and dies seized and the
second issue enters. etc. Et sic vltra, yet the younger daughter and her
issue as to the half may enter upon every issue of the elder daughter,
notwithstanding such dyscent for this that they claim by one self title.
etc. But in such case if both two sisters come into the land to enter after
the death of their father, and thereof were seized and after the elder sister
thereof dysseased, the younger sister of that, that to her belongs, and
thereof is seized in fee, and has issue, and of such estate dies seized, by
which the tenementes dyscende to the issue of the elder sister than the younger
sister or her heirs may not e^ter. etc. causa qua supra.

Also if a man sealed of certain land has issue two sons, and the elder
brother is bastard, and the younger brother mulier, and the father dies and
the bastard enters and claymeth as heir unto his father, and occupyeth the
land all his life without any enter made upon him by the mulier and the
bastard has issue and dies of such estate seized in fee. and the land
descends to his issue and his issue enters. etc, in this case the mulier is
without remedy for he may not ent nor he shall have no accion for to recover
the la^d for this that it is an ancient law in such case used, but it has
been an oppinion of some me^ that shall be understand where the father has a
son a bastard by a woman and after he weddeth the same woman and after the
spousayle he has issue by the same woman a son or a daughter mulier, and the
father dies et cetera. If such a bastard enter et cetera. And has issue,
and dies seized. etc Than shall the issue of such a bastard have the land
clearly to him as it is aforesaid. etc And not any other bastard borne of
the mother that was not espoused to his father, and this is a good and
reasonable oppynyon, in such a bastard borne before the espousels
solempnysed between his father and his mother, by the law of holy church is
mulyer, though that by the law of the land, he is a bastard borne, and so he
has color of enter as heir to his father, for this that he is by one law
mulier, that is to say, by the law of holy church. But otherwise it is of a
bastard that has no manner of color to enter as heir, in so much that he
may not in (...) law be said mulyer. etc. for such a bastard is said.
Quasi nullius filius. But in such case aforesaid where the bastard enters
after the death of his father, and the mulier puts hi^ out, and after the
bastard dysse aseth the mulier, and has issue, and dies seized, and the
issue enters, then the mulier may have a writ of enter upon dysseisin
against the issue of the bastard, and recover the land. etc. And so may ye
see the diversity where such a bastard co^tynueth his possession all his
life without any interrupcion, and where the mulier e^treth and interrupteth
the possession of such a bastard.

Also if a child within age have title (...) cause to enter into any lands or
tenem^tes upon another yt is seized in fe or in fe tail of ye same lands and
tenem^tes, if such a man yt is so seized dy^ of such estate, so seized and the
tenem^tes descend to his issue during the time yt the child is with in age,
such descent shall not tol the enter of ye child but he may enter upon the issue
yt is in by descent. etc. for this that no laches shall be adjudged in a
child within age in such ^e. etc.

Also if the husband and his wife, as (...) right of the wife have title and
right to enter in the tenementes that another has in ^e or in fee tail, and
such a tenant dies se^sed. etc. In such case the enter of the husband ^s
taken away upon the heir that is by disce^t ^ut if the husband dye, then the
wife may ^ell enter upon the issue by dyscent, for this that the laches of the
housebande shall not ^rne to the wife and to her heir in preiudic^ (...) in
damage, in such case but that the wife and her heirs may well enter, where
such ^yscent is during the conuerture. etc.

Also if a man that is not of whole mind that is to say in latin. Qui non est
compos me^ ^is, has cause to enter in any such teneme^tes (...) such descent
vts^* be had in his life duri^g the (...) yt he was out of his mind, and after
die ^is heirs may well enter upon him that is (...) by descent. And in this
may ye see a case yt ^he heir may enter, and yet his ancester that (...)
the same title may not enter, for he yt was ^t of his mind at the time of such
descent the will enter after such a dyscent, if accion ^po^ this be sued against
hi^, he has nothing for (...) to plede or to help hi^, but say yt he was out
(...) and at the time of such disce^t. etc. And he (...) not be received to say
this, for this that us (...) of full age shall be receued in any ple by the (...)
to disalt or dissable his own person. But the heir may well dissable the parson
of his an^cester for advantage of the heir in such case for this that no
laches may be aiudged by the law in him that has no discrecio^ in such cas^
And if such a man out of his mind make a ^offement. etc. he may not enter ne
have ne have a wry^ called. Dum non fuit compos mentis. etc. (...) sa qua
supra, But after his death, his hey^ may well enter or have the same wrytt. D^
non fuit compos mentis at his eleccion. etc.

Also if I be disseased by a child within a^ alyeneth to another in fee, and
the alien die^ seized, and the tenementes dyscende to (...) heir and the
child being within age, m^ enter is taken away. But if the child with in age
enter upon the heir that is in by dyscent as he well may, for this that the
descent was during his noneage, than I may well e^ter upon the disseasy, for
this that by his e^tre he has defeted and adnulled the descen^ And in the same
manner it is where I am (...) used, and the dysseasour makes a feoffement (...)
fee upon condition. etc. And the feoffe dies (...) such estate seized. etc. I
may not enter upon the heir of the feoffe. But if the condition (...) broken
so that by such cause the feoffour enters upon the heir, now may I well enter
for this that when the feoffour or his heyre^ enter for the condition broken,
the dyscent (...) utterly defeted.

Also if I be disseased, and the dissea^ has issue and enters into relygion,
by for^ of which the lands descends to his issue, (...) this case I may
well enter upon the issue, and yet there was a descent. But for this that ^che
dyscent comes to the issue by the fa^ers deed, that is to say, for this that
he en^red into religion. etc. and the dyscent comes (...) him by the deed of
God, that is to say by ^ath. etc. mine enter is congeable, and law^ll, for if
I arrayne assyse of Nouel disseysyn ^gaynste my dysseasour, though that he
after ^nter into religion, this shall not abate my ^rytte. But my wrytt, this
notwithstanding shall abide in his force and strength, and my ^couere against
him shall be good by the^me reason, the descent that came to his issue (...)
his own deed may not put me fro mine ^tre. etc.

Also if I let to a man certain lands (...) term of twenty years, and
another dyssea^th me, and puts out the ^erme, and dies (...), and the
tenementes descend upon him ^re, I may not enter, and yet the less for ^e of
years may well enter for this that ^hys enter he puts not out the heir that
(...) by dyscent fro the franktenemente that unto him dyscended. But only to
have tenementes for term of years, that which is no ^lsing of the
franktenement of the heir ye (...) by descent. But otherwise it is where (...)
tenant to term of life, is disseased. etc. cau^a supra. etc.

Also it is said that if a man seized of tenementes in fee by occupacion in
time (...) war, and dies thereof seized in time of (...) and the tenementes
descend to his heyr, su^ dyscent puts out no man of his enter And of this
a man may se a ple in a wrytt (...) ^ye^. An.vii. E.ii.

Also no dying seized wherall the ten^mentes comes to another by succession
sha^ take away the enter of any parson. etc. For (...) prelates, abbots,
pryours, deanes, or parson of churches etc. though that there were ^tie
successions, this puts no man from (...) enter. etc. More shall be said of
discentes to (...) chapter of continual claim. etc.

Contynuall claim. Cap. vii.
Continual claim is, where a man h^ right, and title to enter in any
lands (...) tenementes whereof another is seized in fe^ in fee tail, if he
that has title to enter (...) contynuall claim to the lands, and ten^mentes
before the dying seized of him, that ^deth the tenementes. Than though she a
tenant dye thereof seized and the la^ and tenementes dyscende to his heir,
(...) may he that has made such claim or (...) heirs enter into the lands
and tenemen^ descended, because of the contynual cla^ made. Notwythstandyng
such dyscent. (...) in case a man be dysseased, and the dyss^ makes
contynuall claim to the teneme^^ in the life of the disseisour though the
disseysour dye seysed in fee, and the land dyscendeth unto his heirs, yet may
the disseisy enter upon the possession of the heir, notwithstanding such
dyscente.

In the same manner it is, if tenant for term of life alien in fee, he in the
reuercion, or he in the remaindre may enter upon the alien. And if such alyen
seysed of such estate without continual claim made to the tenementes before
^he dying seysed of the alyene and the tenementes because of the dying seysed
of the alyen descend unto the heir of the alyen. Tha^ may not he in the
reuercion, nor he in the remayndre enter. But if he in the reuercion, or he in
the remayndre that has cause to en^re upon the alyen made continual claim to
the tenementes before the dying seysed of ye ^yen, then such a man may enter
after the ^ath of the alyen as well as he might in his (...). etc.

Also if lands be let unto a man forterm ^f his life, the remayndre unto
another for ^nne of life, the remayndre unto the third ^ke, if the tenant for
term of life alyen to ^other in fee, and he in the remayndre for ^e of life
makes continual claim unto ^he land before the dying seysed of the alyen,
(...) after the alyen dies seysed. etc. and after (...) in the remayndre for
term of life dies be^e any enter made by him.

In this case he in the remayndre in fee may enter upon the heir of the
alyene, because of continual claim made by him that made the remayndre for
term of life, for this that such right that he has to enter shall go and
remain to him in the remayndre after him, in so much that he in the remayndre
in fee, may not enter upon the alyene in fee, during the life of him in the
remayndre for term of life, and because he might not make continual claym.
But when he had title to enter. But it is to see to thee my child how and in
what manner such continual claym shall be made, and to learn this. Three things
there be to understand.

The first thing is, if a man have cause to enter in any lands or tenementes
in diverse towns within one shyre if he enter in any parcel of the lands or
tenementes that be in one town (...) the name of the lands or tenementes that
been in one town to which he has right to enter within all the towns in
the same styre, by such enter he has as good possessyon and seysyn of such
lands or tenementes whereof he has title to enter as if he had entered into
every parcel, and this seems great reason, for if a man willenfeffe another
without deed of certain lands or tenementes that he has in many towns within
one shyre, and he will deliver seysyn to the feoffee of parcel of the
tenementes within one town (...) the name of all the lands and tenementes tha^
he has in the same town, and in all the other towns etc. all the said
tenementes etc. shall pass by force of the said liuerey of seysin to him to
whom such feoffement in such manner is made. And yet he to whom such liuerey
of seysin is made, has no right to all the lands and tenementes in all the
towns but because of the liuerey of seysyn made of parcel of the lands or
teneme^tes in one town A multo fortiori. It seems good reason, that when a man
has title to enter into lands or tenementes in diverse towns within i. shyre,
before any enter by him made, yt by the enter of him made in parcel of the
teneme^tes in one town in the name of all the lands and tenem^tes to the which
he has title to enter within the same shyre, this is a seisyn of all in him,
and by such enter he has possession and seisin in deed, as if he had entered
into every parcel etc.

The second is to understand, that if a man have title to enter into any lands
or teneme^tes, if he dare not enter in the same lands or tenem^tes nor in any
percel thereof for dout of be^yng, or for doubt of maymyng, or for doubt of
both, if he go and approach as nygh the tenem^tes as he dare, for such doubt,
and claym by words the tenementes to be his incontinent by such claym, he has
a possessyo^ and seysyn in the tenementes as well as if he had entered in deed
though he had never possessyon or seysyn of the same lands or tenementes,
before the said claim. And that the law is such it is well proved by a ple
of an Assyse in the book of assyse. Anno. xxxviii. E. iii. The tenure of which
ensues in this form.

In the county of Dorset before the same Justices it was founden by verdit of
Assyse, that the pleyntif which had right by dyscent of heritage to have the
tenementes put in playnt at the time of the death of his auncestre which was
dwelling in the town where the tenementes were, and by word claymeth the
tenementes among his neighbors, but for doubt of death he durst not approach
unto the tenementes, but brings assyse, and upon the matter found, it was
awarded that he should recover.

The third thing is to understand within what time the claim that is said
continual claim shall serve, and help him that makes the claim and his
heir. And as to this it is to wete that he that has title to enter wha^ he
will make his claim, and if he dare approach unto the land. Than it behooves
him to go unto the land, or to parcel of it, and make his claim. And if he
dare not approach unto the land for dread of beatyng, mayming, or death, than
it behooves him to go. and to approach as nigh as he dare toward the land or
parcel thereof, and make his claim And if his adversary that occupyeth the
land, dye seysed in fee or in fee tail within a year and a day after such
claim made, by which the tenementes descend unto his son as heir unto him,
yet may he that made the claim enter upon the possession of the heirs. But in
this case after the year and the day that such claim was made if none other
claym be made, if the father then dye seized, the morrow after the year and the
day, or at another day after. etc. than may not he that made the claim enter.
And therefore if he that made the claim will be sure always that his enter shall
not be taken away by such descent, it behooves him that within the year and
the day after the first claim, to make another claim in the form aforesaid.
And within the year and the day after the second claym to make the third claym
in the same manner, and within the year and the day after the third claim, to
make another claim and so forth, that is to say, to make an other claim
within every year and day next after every claim made, during the life of his
adversary, and than at what time that his adversary dye, his enter shall not be
taken away by no such disce^t. And such claym made in such manner is most
commonly taken, and called continual claim of him that made the claim. But
yet in case aforesaid where his adversary dies within the year and the day
next after the first claim, this is in the law a continual claim, in so much
that his adversary dyed within the year and the day after the same claim for
it is no need for him that made the claim to make any other claim, but at
that time that he within the same year and the day etc.

Also if his adversary be disseised within the year and a day after the claym,
and the disseisour dies thereof seized within the year and the day etc. This
dying seized shall not hurt him that made the claym, but that he may enter etc.
For whosoever he be that dies seized within the year and the day after such
claym, that shall not hurt him that made the claym, but that he may enter
though there were many dyinges seized and many discentes within the year and the
day etc.

Also if a man be disseysed, and the dysseysour dye seysed within the year and
the day next after the disseisin done, whereby the tenementes discende to his
heir, in this case the enter of the disseisie is taken away for the year and
the day that should help the disseisie in such case etc. shall not be taken
from the time of the title of enter grown unto him, but only from the time
of the claim by him made in time aforesaid. And for that cause it shall be good
for such a disseisie for to make his claym etc. in as short time as he may
after the disseisin etc.

Also if such a disseisour occupy the land by xl. years without any claym made
by the dysseisy etc. and the disseisy by little space before the death of the
disseisour make claim in ye form aforesaid, if so it fortune that within a
year and a day after such claim the disseisour dye seysed etc. the enter of
the disseisie is congeable, and for this it shall be good for such a man that
made no claim that has title to enter etc. when he hears that his
aduersarye lies lick to make his claim. etc.

Also as it is said in the cases put before where a man has title to enter
because of a disseisin etc. The Same law is where a man has right to enter
because of the title etc.

Also in this said presidentes may ye know my child by.ii. things. One is
where a man has title to enter upon a tenant in tail, if he make any such
claim unto the la^d etc. The^ is the state of the tail defeted, for that
claim is as an enter made by him, and is of the same effect in ye law as he were
upon the same tenementes, and had entered in the same tenementes as is aforesaid.
And then when the tenant in tail immediately after such claim continues his
occupacion in the tenementes this is a disseisin made of the same tenementes
unto him that made the claym. Et sic per co^sequens, the tenant then has fee
simple etc.

The second thing is, that as often as he ye has right to enter makes such
claym. and this notwithstanding his adversary co^tayneth his occupacio^ etc. so
often the adversary does wrong and disseisin to him that made the claim. And by
this case so often may he that made the same claim for every such wrong and
disseisin made unto him, have a writ of trespass. Quare clau (...) suum fregi^
etc. to recover his damages etc. Or he may have a writ upon the statute at
King Rychard the second made the fyfth year of his raygne, supposyng by his
writ that his adversary has entered into the lands or tenementes of him that
made the claim where his enter was not given by the law etc. and by such
accion he shall recover his damages etc. And if the case be such that the
adversary occupy the tenementes with force, and arms, or with a multitude of
people at the time of such claim. etc. Than may he that made the claim for
every such time have a writ of Forcible enter and recover his trebl^ damages.

Also here it is to see if the servant of a (...) that has title of enter may
by the commandment of his master, make continual claym for his master in his
name, and it seems that in some cases he may do this, for if he by his
commandment come to any parcel of the land, and there makes claim etc. In
the name of his master, this claym is good for his master, for this that he
has done all that that it behooved his master to do in such case etc.

Also if a master say unto his servant that he dare not go unto the land nor
to any parcel of the land for to make his claym etc. and dare not approach more
nygh unto the said land, save to such a place called Dale, and commands his
servant to go to the same place of Dale, and thereto make a claim for him
etc. of the servant so do etc. this seems as good claim for his master as
if he had been there in his own parson, for that the servant did all that his
master durst do and ought to do by the law in such case.

Also if a man be so sick or so lame that he may not in no manner come to the
land nor to any parcel of the same, or if there be a recluse that may not
because of his order go out of his house etc. if such a manner parson commau^d
his servant to go and make claim for him etc. and the servant dare not go
to the land, nor to any parcel thereof for doubt of beating, manne or death, and
for that cause such servant comes as nigh to the land as he dare for such
dread, and makes this claim etc. for his master it seems that such claim
for his master is good and strong in the law, for else his master should be in
to great mischief, for (...) may well be that such a parson that is sick (...)
lame, or recluse, can not find any servant that dare go unto the land nor to
any parcel ^f it to make the claim for him etc. But if ^e master of such a
servant be in good health ^d may and dare well go to the tenementes (...) to
parcel of it to make his claim for him ^c. if such a master command his
servant (...) go to some parcel of the land, and make ^n^ for him etc. And
when the servant is ^yng to do the commandment of his ^ster he hears by
the way such things (...) he dare not go to any parcel of the land (...) to
make any claim for his master, and (...) that cause he goes as nigh unto the
land (...) he dare for dout of death, and there he man claim for his master
in the name of his master etc. It seems that the doubt in the law in such
case shall be if such claim avails to his master, not for this that the
servant did not all this that his master at the time of commandment durst
have done.

Also some have said that where a man is in prieson and is disseysed and the
disseisour dies seized during the time that the disseisi is in pr^son, by
which tenementes descend to the heir of the disseisour, they have said that
this shall not hurt the disseisy that is in prieson, but yt he may well e^tre
notwithstanding such disce^ for this that he may not make continual claym when
he was in prison. And also if such a one that is in prieson be outlawed in an
action of debt or trespass or in appele of robbery etc. he shall reuert such
outlawry by writ of error etc. because he was in prieson at the time (...)
outlary against him pronounced.

Also if a recovery be had by disce^t against such a one that is in prieson he
shall avoid the judgment by a writ of error for this ye (...) was in prison
at the time of such defaut mad^ etc. And because yt such matters of record sha^
not hurt the^ that be in prison but that it shall be reuersed etc. A multo
fortiori, It seme^ that a matter in deed, that is to say, such dyscent had
when he was in prieson, sha^ not hurt him etc. specially for this that (...)
may not go out of prieson to make conti^nuall claim etc.

And in the same manner it seems to the^ where a man is out of ye realm in the
kings service for business of the realm, and if a man be disseised when he is
in the service of the king ^at such descent shall not hurt the disseise, but
for this yt he might not make continual claim (...) it seems unto the^ that
when he comes a^yn into England he may enter again upon ^he heir of the
disseisour etc. For such a man shall reuerse an outlary that is pronounced
against him during the time that he is in service etc. Ergo a multo fortiori.
He shall have ^e by the law in the other case etc.

Also other have said that if a man be out of ^he realm though he be not in
the kings service, if such a man being out of the realm be ^sseised of lands
or tenem^tes wtin the realm (...) the disseisour dye seized etc. the disseisy
being (...) of the realm it seems unto the^ that when ^he disseisi comes into
the realm that he may ^ll enter upon the heir of the disseysour, (...) ^tera,
and this seems unto them for two ^ses.

One is, that he that is out of the realm, (...) not have knowledge of the
disseisin made unto him by understanding of ye law, no more (...) that a thing
done out of the realm may (...) tried within the same realm by the oath of
(...) men etc. and compel such a man to make co^ti^al claim which by the
understanding of ye law (...) have no knowlage or cognisa^ce of such dis^s^
made or done, this shall be inconvenient ^ely wha^ such a disseisin is done unto
him, when he was out of the realm, also the dying seized was done when he was
out of the realm. For in such case he may not by possib^litie after the common
presumpcion make (...) continual claim, but otherwise it shall be (...) the
disseisie were within ye realm at the tru^ of the disseisin or at the time of
the dying seysed of the disseisour etc. An other matter the alleged for a
proof that when the statute (...) king Edward the third the.xxxiiii. year of h^
reign, by which estatute no claym is out (...) the law was such, that if a
fine were levied (...) certain lands or teneme^tes, if any that (...) a
stranger to the fine had right to have, (...) to recover the same lands or
tenementes, (...) he came not and made his claym thereof (...) in a year and a
day next after the fine levied he shall be barred for ever. Quia dicebatu^nis
quod finem littbus imponebat. And the the law was such, it is proved by the
sta^ of westminster the second. De donis condici^nalibus, where it speaks if
the fine be ^ed of ten^tes given in the tail etc. Quod f^ ipso iure sit
nullus, nec habeant heredes (...) illi quos spectat reuercio licet plene etatis
(...) it in anglia extra personam, necesse abbo^ clameum suum. So it is proved
that if a ^ger that has right unto the tenementes of ^wer out of the realm at
the time of the fy^ levied etc. shall have no damage though the such fine was
matter of record by greater ^son it seems unto them that a disseisin and (...)
^nt that is matter and deed shall not so grieve ^ym that was disseised when he
was out of ^he realm at the time of the disseisyn and also (...) the time that
the disseysour dyed seysed. etc. ^ut that he may well enter notwithstanding
^uch descent.

Also enquire if a man be disseised and he ar^n assise against the disseysour,
and the re^gnitours of the assyse challenge for the plain (...), and the
justices of the assyse will be adui^d of their judgments until the next
assise ^c. and in the mean season the disseysour dy^th seysed etc. If the said
suit of the assyse shall (...) taken in law for the said disseysyn a continual
claim, in so much that no defaute was unto him etc.

Also enquere if an abbot of a monastery dye (...) during the time of vacacion
a man wrong (...) enters in certain parcels of land of the (...) mastery
clayming the land unto him, and (...) heirs, and of that estate dies seysed,
and (...) land discendeth unto his heirs, and af^r that an abbor is chosen and
made abbot of ^ame monastery, a question is if the abbot (...) enter upon the
heir or not. And it se^eth to some, that the abbot may well enter (...) this
case, for this that the covent in time (...) vacacion was no parson, able to
make co^^al claim for no more than they be parso^ble to sue an accion, no more
be they parso^ble to make continual claym, for the covent (...) but as a dead
body without head, for in time of vacacion a grant made unto them i^ void,
and in this case, the Abbot may not have a writ of enter upon disseisin
against the heir, for this that he was never disseised. And if the abbot may
not enter in this case, than he shall put unto his writ of right the which
shall be to hard for the house by which it seems to them that the abbot may well
enter etc. Q^re de dubus legem been discere si vis qu^ dat sapere que iunt
legittima vere.

Relessees. Cap. 8.
RElesses be in diverse manners that is to s^ relesse of right that a man has in
lands o^ tenementes, and release of accions reals and parsonals, and of other
things relesse of all the right yt a man has in lands or tenem^tes etc. is
commonly made in such form or to such effect. Nouermt vniuersi per presents
me. A. (...) B. remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino de me and he^ meis quiet
clamasse E de. D. totu^ ius titul^ clameu^ q^ hu^i habeo vel quouismodo in f^
habere potero de et in vno mes^ cum pertine si (...) F. etc. And it is to
understand yt these word^ (remisisse and quiet clamasse) be of such effecte^
these words relaxasse etc. and also these words which be commonly put in
such deeds of (...) lesses. etc. that is to understand. Que quoms^ do in
futurum habere potero, be as words void in the law, for no right passes by
a (...) lease but the right that the lessour has at the time of his release
made for if it be father a^ son, and the father be disseised, and the son
living, his father releaseth by his deed to the ^sseisor all the right that he
has or may have (...) the same tenementes without clause of war ^atise etc. and
after the father dies ye son may lawfully ent upon the possession of the
disseysor for this yt he had no right in ye land living his father, but ye
right descended unto him by ^sce^t aft the release made by the death of his
^ather. Also in a release of all the right yt a man has in certain lands, it
behooves unto him to (...) ho^ the release is made in such case yt he have a
free hold in the lands in deed or in the law at the time of the release made,
for in every where he to who^ the release is made, has a ^ee hold in deed or
in law at the time of the release made etc. the release is good frankten^t
(...) law, as if a man have disseysed another and ^herof dies seized by the
which the teneme^^es descend unto his son, how be yt that ^ys son enter
not in the tenementes, yet he ^h a frankteneme^t in the law to him upon (...),
and therefore ye relese made is good enough and if he take a wife so being
seysed in the (...) howbeit that he never enter in deed and dy^th his wife shall
have thereof her dower. Al^ in such case of relese of al her right, how be (...)
yt he to who^ the relese is made ne has any ^ng in the frankteneme^t neither
in deed nor (...) law, yet the release is good enough, as if ^e dysseysour
have set land that he had by ^eysyn to another for term of his life,
saving the reuercion to him, if the disseisie or his heirs release unto the
dysseysour all the right etc. that release is good, for this that he to whom
the release is made, had in him reuercion at the time of the release made. In
the same manner if a lease be made to a man for term of life the remaynder
unto another to term of life the remayndre unto the third in the tail, the
remayndre unto the fourth (...) fee, if a stranger that has the right unto
the land release all his right unto any of them the remayndre, such release is
good, for this the every of them has a remayndre vested in him self, yet if
the tenant for term of life be dysseysed and after that has right (the
possession being in the disseisour) release unto one of the^ to whom the
remayndre was made all his right etc. That release is void, for that, that he
ne had in him no remayndre in deed, but all only a right of a remayndre, at
the time of the release made. Et not a, that every rel^ made to him that has a
reuercio^ or a remaindre in deed shall serve and help the^ that have the frank
tenement as well as them to who^ the release is made if the tenant have the
release in his hand etc. In the same manner a release made to a tenant for term
of life, or to a tenant in the tail, shall enure unto them (...) the reuercion
or to them in the remayndre (...) well as to the tenant of frank tenement, and
shall have a great advantage of that, if the they may show it, also if there
be lord and renaunt and the tenant is disseased, and the disseysi releaseth
unto the disseasour all the right that he has in the seigniorye or in the
land, the release is good and the seigniorye is extynct. And if the goods of
the disseysi be taken, and of them the disseasi sueth a repleg^are against the
lord, he shall compel the lord to auow unto him, and if he will auow upon the
disseasour, then upon the matter showed, the auowry shall be abated, for the
dyssease is tenant to them in right and in law.

Also if land be given to a man in the ^y^e reseruyng unto the donour and
his heirs a certain rent, if the done be dysseased, and after the donour
releaseth to the done all the right that he has in the land, and after the
donee enters into the land upon the dysseasour, in this case the rent is
gone, for this yt the dysseasy at the time of the release made was tenant in
right and in law unto the donour and the auowry of fine force ought to be made
upon hi^ by the donor for the re^t behind etc. But yet nothing of the right of
ye la^d yt is to say of the reuere than passes not by such release, for this
that the done to whom the release was made then had nothing in the land, but
only a right and so the right of the land, ne may not pass by such release
to the donee. In the same manner it is if a lease be made to one for term of
life, reseruyng to the lessour and to his heirs certain rent, if the lessee
be dysseased, and after the lessour releaseth to the less, and to his heirs,
and after the less enters, howbeit that in the case the ^ent is extincte, yet
nothing of the right passes. etc. causa qua supra. But if it be very lord and
very tenant and the tenant makes a feoffement in fee, the which feoffe never
became tenant to the lord etc. if the lord release to the feoffour all his
right. etc. that release is in all void for this that the feoffour has no right
in the land, and he is no right in the land and he is not tenant in right to
the lord but only tenant as for the auowry to be made, and he shall never
compel the lord to auowe upon him for the lord may auow upon him the feoffe
if he will it be otherwise it is where the very tenant is disseased as in case
aforesaid for if the very tenant that is disseased holds of the lord by
knights service, and dies, his heirs being within age the lord shall have
and sease the ward of the heir. And so he shall not have the ward of the
feoffor that made the feoffo^ in fee and so it is a great diuers^t^e between
these two cases.

Also if a man enfeoffe another in his land upon trust and to the intent
that he shall perform his last will and the feoffor occupyeth that same at
the will of his feoffes and after the feoffes release by their deed unto the
feoffour all the right. etc. This has be^ in question if such release be
good or not, and some have said that such release is good for this that no
priuitie was between the feoffes and their feoffour in so much that no lease
was made after such feoffemente by the feoffes to their feoffour to hold at
their will. etc. and some have said the contrary and that for two causes. One
is that when such feoffement is made upon confidence to parfourme the will of
the feoffour, that it shall be understand by the law that the feoffor by and by,
ought to occupy the land, at the will of his feoffees, and so it is such manner
of priuitie between them, as if a man make a feoffement to another parson and
they incontinent upon the feoffement will say and grant that the feoffour
shall occupye the land at their will. etc. Another cause they allege that if
such land be worth.xl. s. by year. etc. Than such a feoffour shall be sworn
in assyses and in other inq^stes in plees reals and also in plees parsonels, of
what great sommes soever that the playntifs will declare. etc. And this is by
the common law of the land. Ergo this is for a great cause, and the cause is
that the law will that such feoffours and their heirs ought to occupy. etc
And to take thereof the rent and all the profytes and all manner of yssues, and
revenues. etc. As though the tenementes were their own ^ythout interrupcion of
feoffes, notwtsta^ding such feffem^tes. Ergo the same law gives a priuite
between such feoffors, and their feffes upon confydence. etc. For which causes
they have said that the release made by such feoffes upon confidence to the
feoffour, or to his heirs et cetera. So occupying the land. etc. shall be
good enough and cetera. And this is the better oppinio^, as it seems. Also
releases after the matter in deed sometime have their effect by force to
enlarge the estate of them, to whom the release is mad, as if I let certain
land to a man for ter^ of years, by force whereof he is possessed, and I
release unto him all the right that I have in the land without more words
set or put in the deed, and deliver unto him the deed. Than he has estate but
for term of his life, and the cause is for this that when the reuercyon or the
remaynder is in a man the which will enlarge by his release the estate of
the tenant. etc. he shall have no greater estate but in the manner and form.
As if such a leasour were seized in fee and will by his deed make estate to one
in a cert form. etc. and deliver unto him seysin by force of the same deed if
in such deed of feoffement the^ be no word of inheritance. etc. Tha^ he
has estate but for term of life. etc. and so it is i^ such release made by
him in the reuercion, or in the remaynder for if I let land to a (...) for
term of life, and after I release unto him all my right without more saying in
the release, his estate is not enlarged. But if I release unto him and to his
heirs of his bo^ engendered, than he has fe tail, and if I release unto him
and to his heirs, than (...) has fee simple. So it behooves in such case to
specifye in the deed, what estate he to who^ the release is made shall have.
etc. And sometime release shall enure to set and putt the right of him that
makes the release to him, to who^ the release is made. As a man is dysseased
and he releaseth unto the dysseasour all the right that he has. In this case
the disseasour has his right, so that where his estate before was wrong, now by
the release it is lawful and right but note well that when a man is seized
in fee simple of any lands, or tenementes, and another will release unto him
all the right that he has in the same tenem^tes it needs not to speak of the
heirs of him to whom the release is made, for this that he had ^e simple at
the time of the release made, for if the release were made to him and to his
heirs for one day or for one hour, this shall be as strong unto him in the
law, as he had released to him and to his heirs for wha^ his right was gone
from him at one time by his release without any condition. etc. to him that had
fe simple it is gone for ever. But where a man has a reuercion, or a remaynder
in fe simple at the time of the release made there if he will release to the
tenant for term of years or for term of life, or to the tenant in the
tail, it behooves to determyne the estate that he to who^ the release is made
shall have by force of the same release. For this that such ^elease goes to
enlarge the estate. etc. of him to who^ the relese is made. But otherwise if is
where a man has but a right unto the land (...) has nothing in the reuerc^ nor
in the remayndre in deed. For if such a man release all his right to one yt is
ten^t of the fra^ktenem^t all his right is gone, though that no menc^ be made
of his heirs of him to who^ the release is made For if I let land to a man for
term of life, if I after release unto him for to enlarge his estate, it
behooves that I release unto him and to his heirs of his body engendered, or to
hi^ and to his heirs males of his body begotten or by such se^blable estate.
etc. or otherwise he has no greater estate tha^ he had before. But if my ten^t
for tme of life let the same land out to another for term of the life of his
less, the remai^der unto another in fe, now if I release unto him to whom my
tenant let for term of life I shall be barred for ever, though that no
mention be made of his heirs, for this that at the time of the release made I
had no ren^cion but only a right to have the reuercion. For by such a lease
with a remai^der over that my tenant made, in this case my reuercyon is
discontinued and such a release shall enu^e unto him in the remaynder to have
advantage of this as well as to the tenaunte for term of life for to that
intent the tenant for term of life and he in the remaynder be as one tenant in
the law, and be as if one tenant w^ sole seized in his demean as of fe at the
time of such release made unto him. Also if a (...) he dysseysed by two if he
release unto one of them, he shall hold his fellow out of the la^d and by
such release shall have sole possession, and estate in the land. But if one
dysseasour enfeoffe two in fee, and the disseysy release to one of them this
shall enure to both the said feoffees. And the cause of the diuersitye between
these two cases is repugnant enough.

Also if I be disseased, and the disseisor is disseased if I release to the
disseisor of my disseisor. I shall never have assise nor enter upon his
disseasour, for this that his dysseysour has my right by my release. etc. And
so it seems in this case that if there were twenty disseisors each after other,
and I release to the last disseisor he shall bar all the other of their accio^s
and their title. And ye cause is as it seems, for this that in many in cases
when a man has a lawful title to enter though he enter not. etc. he shall
defete al mean titles by his release. etc. But this is not in every cause as
shall be said afterward.

Also if a man be disseised the which has a sone within age, and dies and
being the son with (...) age the disseisor dies seized, and the land
descends to his heir, and a stranger abateth, and after the son of the
disseisy wha^ he comes unto full age releaseth all his right. etc. to the
that our. In this case the heir of the dysseysour shall have no assise of
mortdauncester ag^nst the abatour but he shall be barred of the assyse for this
that the abatour has the right of the son of the dysseasy by his release,
and the enter of the son was lawful. etc. for this that he was within age at
the time of (...) dyscent etc. but if a man be dysseased and the dysseasour
makes a feoffement upon condition that is to say to yield unto him certain
rent and for the defaute of payment a reentre etc. if the dysseisy release to
the feoffe upon co^dycion yet this alters not the estate of the feoffe upon
condition as it was before. In the same manner it is where a man is disseased of
certain land, and the disseasour grants a rent charge out of the same land
though that after the disse^sy releaseth unto the disseysour, etc. yet the rent
charge abides in his force. And the cause is in these two cases that a man
shall have none advantage by such release that shall be against his own
proper acceptance and against his own grant. And though that some have said
that where the enter of a man is congeable upon a tenant if he release to
the same tenant that this avails unto the tenant so as if he had entered upon
the te^ and after enfeoffed him. etc. this is not true (...) every case for in
the first case of these two cases if the dysseisy in fee enter upon the
feoffe upon condition and after enfeoffeth him, that the condition is all put
aside and void. And in the second case if the disseis^ enter and enfeoffe him
that granted the rent charge than is the rent charge avoided. But it is not
au^ded by any such release with an enter made. ^c. Also if a man be disseased
by a child with age the which alyeneth in fe, and the alyen ^eth seized and
his heir enters being the ^sseisour within age. Now it is in the elecci^n of
the disseasour to have a wryt of Du^ fuit ^fra etatem. Or a writ of right
against the ^eyre of the alyen and which wryt so ever he ^eth of the^ he ought
to recover by the law. And also he may enter into the land without (...)
recouere and in this case the enter of the dys^esi is taken away but in this
case if the dys^sy release his right to the heir of the alyen and after the
dysseasour brings a writ of ^yght against the heir of the alyene, and he
^neth the myse upon the clear right etc. the ^unde assyse ought by the law to
find that the tenant has more clear right. etc. tha^ has the dissesour for
this that the tenant has the ^ght of the dissesy and his relese which is more
^ncient and more clear right tha^ the right of the ^seasor, for by such release
all the right of the ^seisy passes unto the ten^t, and is in the tenant. and to
this some have said yt in such case where (...) has right to lands or tenem^tes
but his enter is not lawful, if he relese unto the ten^t. ^c. Than such release
shall enure by way of ex^guishment. As unto this it may be said that this is
truth unto hi^ that releaseth for by ^is release he has dismissed himself
clean of his ^ght as to his parson. But yet the right that ^e had may well pass
and go unto the ten^t by his release, for it should be inconvenient that such
an ancient right should be extinct al utterly. etc. for it is como^ly said
that right may not die But a release yt goth by the wai of extinguishm^t
against al persons, is where he to who^ the release is made may not have this
that unto h^ is released, as if there be lord and tenant, and the lord releaseth
unto the tenant all the right that he has in the lordship or all the right yt he
has in the land. etc. such a release goes by way of extinguishment against
al parsons, for this that the tenant may not have the same of himself. In
the same man^ is a release made to the tenant of the land of a rent charge or of
a common pasture for this that the tenant may not have that that unto him is
released. etc. So such releases go away by extynguishme^t against all parsons.

Also to prove that the graunde assyse ought to pass for the demandaunt in the
case aforesaid I have heard often in the lecture upon the statute of westminster
the second that begins. In casu quando vir amiserit per defalta^ tenementu^
quod fuit ius vxoris sue. etc. that is a^ the common law before the statute, if
a lease were made to a tenant for term of life the remaynder out in fe and a
stranger by a feigned accio^ recover against the tenante for term of life by
defaut, and after the ten^t dies, he in the remaindre had no remedy before the
statute for this that he had no possession of the land, but if he in the
remainder had entered upon the tenant for term of life and disseised him, and
after the ^enant enters upon him. and after the ten^t ^r term of life leaseth
by such recouere had ^y defaut and dies, now he in the remai^dre ^aye well
have a wryt of right against him that recovered, for this that the myse shall
be ^yned only upon the clear right. And yet in ^his case the seisin of him in
the remaynder, ^s defeted by the enter of the tenaunte for ^erme of life. But
paraduenture some will ^rgue and say that he shall have no writ of ^ght in
this case, for this that when the mise ^ioyned in such manner, that is to say,
if the te^ant have more clear right to the land in the manner as it is holden,
than the demaundaunt has in the manner as he demands. And for this that the
seisin of the demaundaunt was defeted by the enter of the tenant for term
^yfe, than he has no right in the manner as ^he demands. Unto this it may
be said that these words (Modo and forma prout. etc.) (...) many cases be
words of manner of plea^yng and no words of substance for if a man ^ing a
writ of enter (In casu prouiso) of alye^c^ made by the ten^t in dower to his
disenheritance, and pledeth of the alienacion made in fe (...) the ten^t says
that he aliened not in the man^ ^s the demaundant has declared, and upon this
^hey be at issue, and it is found by verdit that the tenant aliened in the
tail, or for term of another life the demaundaunt shall recover, and yet the
alienacion was not in the manner as the demaundaunt has declared.

Also if there be lord and tenant, and the tenant holds of the lord by
fealty only, (...) the lord dystrayneth the tenant for rent, and the tenant
brings a wryt of trespass against his lord for his cattayle so taken, and the
lord pledeth that the tenant holds of him by fealty and certain rent, and
for the ten^ behind he came to dystrayne. etc. And demau^deth judgment of the
wryt brought against hi^. Quare vi and armis. etc. And the other says, that he
holds not of him in the manner as he supposes and upon this they be not at
issue, and it is found by verdyte that he holds of him by fealte tantu^ in
this case the wryt shall abate, and yet he held not of the lord in the manner as
the lord had said for the matter of the issue is whether the tenant holds of
him or not. For if he hold of him though the lord distrayne for other services
that he ought not to have yet such writ of tn^s. Quare vi and armis. etc.
lies not against the lord but shall abate.

Also in a writ of trespass of bearyng or of goods taken if the defendant plede
nothing culpable in the manner as the playntyf supposes and it is found that
the defendant is culpable in another town or at another day tha^ the plaintiff
supposes yet he shall recou^. And in many mo other cases these words, that is
to say in the manner as the demandaunt or the plaintiff has supposed, be no
matter of substance of that issue for in a writ of right when the myse is
joined upon the clear right it is as much to say and to such effect that is to
wit, whether has the more right the tenant or ^he demaundaunte to the thing
so demanded. etc.

Also if a man be disseased and the disseasor dies seized. etc. and his son
enters by dys^ent, and the dissease enters upon the heir of the dysseasour,
the which enter is a dysseasy etc. if the heir bring assyse or a wryt of right
against the dysseysy he shall be barred. For this that when the graunde assyse is
sworn their ^he is upon the clear right and not upon the possession. etc. for
if the heir of the dysseasour had brought assyse of nouel dysseasyn, or a writ
of enter in nature of assyse and recovered against the dysseisi and sued
execucion yet may the dysseasi have a wryt of enter in the per against him of
the dysseasin made unto him by his father, or he may have against the heir a
wryt of right. But if the heir ought to recover against the dysseasi in the
case aforesaid by wryt of right then al his right shall be clear (...) gone, for
this that a fynall judgment should ^e given against him which should be against
reason where the disseisy has more clear right ^c. And know ye my son that
in a wryt of ^yght after this that the four knights be ^hosen in the graunde
assyse, than there is no ^eater delay tha^ a writ of formedon after ^his yt
the parties be at an issue. etc. and if ye myse (...) joined upon battle tha^
there is less delay

Also a release of all the right. etc. in some cas^ is good made unto him that is
supposed tenant in the law though he have nothing (...) the tenementes as in a
Precipe quod reddat^ if the tenant alyen the land hanging the wr^ and after the
demaundant releaseth to him (...) his right that release is good, for this that
(...) is supposed to be tenant by the suit of the demaundant and yet he has
nothing in the (...) at the time of the release made. In the sam^ manner it is
if in a precipe quod reddat, the t^nant vouche, and the vouche enter in the
g^rantye, if after the demaundant release to the vouche al his right. etc. this
is good enough for this that the vouche after this that he ha^ entered in the
garranty is tenant in lawe^ the demaundaunt.

Also as two releases of accions reals a^ accions parsonels it is so that some
accyo^ be myxt in the realtie and in the parsonaltie as if an accion of wast be
sued against the ^nant for term of life, this accion is in the realte for this
that the place wasted shall be ^uered, and also it is in the parsonaltie, for
this treble damage shall be recovered for the wrong and wast done by the tenant,
and for this in this ^cion a release of accion real is a good pice (...) bar
and so is a release of accions personels. I^ the same man^ it is in assise of
nouel disseisi, (...) this that it is mixed in ye realtie and in the p^sonaltie.
But if such assise be arrayned agay^ the disseasour the tenant of the
disseisour m^ ^lede a release of accio^s parsonels for to bart ^e assise but
not a release of accio^s reals for ^one shall plede a release of acc^ reals in
assyse, at the tenauntes. etc.

Also in such accions that behooves to be ^ed against the tenant of the
franktenem^t (...) the tenant have a release of accions reals (...) the
demaundant made unto him before the ^rytte purchased and he pledeth it this is
a ^od ple for the demaundaunt to say, that he ^at pledeth that ple, had nothing
in the fra^k ^neme^t in time of the release made, for that (...) had no cause
to have accion reale against ^ou.

Also in such case where a man may ^er in lands or tenementes, he may
have ^l this an accion real, which is given unto hi^ (...) the law against the
tenant. As in this case, ^e demandant release to the ten^t al man^ acc^ ^als,
yet this takes not away the enter of (...) demandant but the demandant may
well ^ier. Notwithstanding such release for this (...) nothing is released but
the accion. etc. In ^same manner it is of things parsonels. As (...) a man
wrongfullye take my goods, if I ^ease unto him al accions parsonels yet I
(...) by the law take my goods out of his ^ssession.

Also if I have cause to have a writ of desy^e of my goods agai^t another
though that ^elease unto hi^ for all accions personels, yet ^aye take my goods
out of his possession, for this that no right of goods is released t^ him but
only the accion. etc. Also if a man b^ dysseased, and the dysseasour makes a
feoffement unto diverse parsones to his use, and the dysseasour contynually
takes the profits (...) and the disseasy releaseth unto him all accion reals,
and after he sueth against him a w^ of enter in nature of assyse because of the
st^tute for this that he takes the profits. E^quyre how the dysseasour shall
be helped by (...) said release, for if he will plede the release g^nerally,
than the demandaunt may say that had nothing in the franktenement at the t^ of
the release made, and if he plede the rele^ specially the^ it behooves hi^ to
know a dyss^syn, and than may the demaundaunt enter land. etc. by his
conysaunce of the dysseas^ But paraduenture by especyall pleadyng may be
barred of the accion that he sueth though that the demaundaunte may ^tre. etc.

Also if a man sue appelle of felony of (...) death of his ancester against
another the the appellant release unto the defendant (...) man^ acc^ reals and
personels, this shall not help (...) defendant, for this that this appele is not
(...) acc^ real insomuch that the appellant shall (...) recover any realte, nor
such appele is no a^ parsonal. In so much that the wrong w^ unto his auncester
and not unto him but of release to the defendant al manner af accy^ than it
shall be a good bar in the appelle, (...) so a man may see that a release of a
manner of accions is better then release of all manner of accions and parsonals
etc.

Also in appele of robbery if the defendant will plede a release of the
appellant of all accions parsonels, this seems no plee, for an accion of
appele where the appellaunt shall have judgment of death. etc. it is more high
^han an accion parsonel, and it is not properly said an accion parsonal, and
therefore if the defendaunt will have a release of the appellant to bar him of
the appele, it behooves him to have a release of al manner of accions of appele
of release, or of all manner of accions as it ^emeth etc. But in appele of maym
a release of all manner of accyons parsonals is a good ple (...) bar, for this
that in such an accio^ he shall ^ecouer but damages.

Also if a man be outlawed in an accio^ par^onall by process of the original
and bring a ^rit of error, if he at whose suite was out ^ed will plede against
him a release of ac^ons parsonals this seems no plee, for by (...) said accion
he shall recover nothing in the parsonaltie, but al only to reuerse the outla^,
but a release a writ of error shall be a good ^ee etc.

Also if a man recover debt or damage and ^e release to the defe^dant al manner
of accions ^ the may lawfully sue execucion by Capi^ad satisfaciendum or by
Elegit, or by Fieri ^as, for execucion by such writ may not be said an
accion, but if after a year and a day the playntif will sue a Scire facias to
have execucion etc. the^ it seems a release of al accio^s shall be a good plee
in bar, but some have thought the contrary insomuch that the writ of Scire
facias is a writ of execucion, and is to have execucion. But in so much yt upon
the same writ the defe^dant may plede diverse matters after the judgment given to
put him from execucion as outlary and diverse other etc. therefore it may well be
said accion etc. and I tro^ that in a Scire facias out of a fine a release of
al manner of accions is a good ple in bar, but where a man has recovered
det^e or damage and it is accorded between them that the playntif shall be put
out fro accion than it behooves that the plaintiff make a relese to hi^ of al
manner of accions.

Also if a man relese to another al manner demau^des, this is the most best
release, that h^ to who^ the relese is made ca^ have, and most sha^ enure to
his advantage, for by such relese (...) al manner of demau^des al manner of
accions ^als and parsonals, and accio^s of appeles be gone (...) extinct, and
al manner of execuc^ be gone an^ extinct. And if a man had title to enter in an^
lands or teneme^tes by such release his titl^ is gone and if a man have rent
service or re^ charge or common of pasture etc. by such reie^ of al manner
demaundes to the tenant of the land whereof the service or the reentre is g^ing
out, or in what land soever the common be, the service and rent, and the common
is gone and extinct. etc.

Also if a man release to another all manner quarelles, or al controversies or
debates between them. Enquire to what matter, and to what effect such words
extend.

Also if a man be bound by his deed to another in certain su^me of money to pay
at the feast of S. Michael tha^ next following etc. if he oblige before ye said
feast release to the obligor al nations he shall be barred of the duty for
ever, and yet he might have no accio^ at the time of the release made. But if a
man let land to another for term of years to yield at the feast of saint
Michael next ensuing.xl. shillinges and before the same feast he releaseth to
the (...) see all accions, yet after the same feast he shall have an accion of
detie for the non payment of the.xl. shilinges. Notwithstanding the said
release. Study the cause of the diue^itie ^etwene these two causes.

Also where a man will sue a writ of right (...) behooves that he plede of the
disseisin of hi^ (...) of his au^cesters, and also that the seisi^ was in (...)
of the same king as he pledeth in his ple (...) this is an ancient law used as
it appears by report of a certain ple, in such form as ensues Sir John
Barrey brought a writ of ^ight against Raynolde A^shlyngton, and demanded
certain tenementes et cetera the ^se was joined in the bank, and the
original and the process were sent before iusti^es errantes, where the parties
came and the.xii. knights were sworn without challenge of the parties to be
allowed for this that the eleccion was made by assent of the parties with the
four knights and the oath was such, that I shall say troth etc. whether R.
of A. have more right to hold the tenementes that John Barray demands against
him by his writ of right or John to have the tenement* as he demands and for
nothing to let to say the troth as god me help. etc. without saying to their
estemyng and such oath shalb^ made in attaynte and in battle and in wagyng of
law for those do every thing unto an end. But John Barrey pleded of the
disseisyn of one Rafe his auncestre in time of king Henry, and Raynold upon the
mese joined te^dered half a mark for the time etc. and upon this said Clear
justice at the graund assyse, after this that they were charged upon the clear
right. Good man Raynold gave half a mar^ to the king to the intent that he find
that the auncestre was not seized in time that the demaundant has pleded no
further upon the right and for this ye shall say to us whether the auncestre of
John Rafe by name was se^sed in the time of king Henry as he has pleded or not
and if he find that he was not seysed in the time ye shall inquire no more and
if y^ find that he was seysed, than enquire farther of the right and after the
graunde assyse ca^ with their verdit, and saying that Rafe wa^ not seysed in
the time of king Henry, whereby it was awarded that Raynold should hold the
tenementes against him demanded to him and to his heirs quite out of I.
Barrey and his heirs to the remenant, and John in the mercy.

Confyrmacion. Ca. 9.
A Deed of Confyrmacion is most commonly in such form or to such effect.
Nouerint vniuersi etc. me A. de B. ratificasse, approbasse (...) confirmasse C.
de D. statum and possessu^ quos habeo de and in meswagio etc. cum pertinentiis
in N. and in some case a deed of confyrmacion is good and vaylable, and where
in the same cause a deed of release is not good nor vaylable. As I let land to a
man for term of his life, the which lets the same land to another for.xl.
years, by force of the which he is possessed, if I by my deed co^fyrme the
state unto the tenant for term of years, and the tenant in term of life dies
during the term of ^s years may not enter in the land during the same term,
yet if I by my deed of release have released to the tenant for term of years
in the life of the tenant for term of life the release shall be void, for this
that than no pri^itie was between me and the tenant for ^erme of years for a
release is not auaylable (...) the tenant for term of years but where a
^iuitie is between him, and him that relea^eth. In the same manner is if I be
disseised and ^he disseisour makes a release to another for term of years.
Also if I be dysseysed and I confyrme the state of the dysseisour than he has
a good and rightful estate in fee symp^ though yt in the deed of confirmacio^
no mention is made of his heirs, for this that he h^ fee simple at the time of
ye confirmacio^, for (...) such case if the disseisi confirm the state of
(...) disseisour to have and to hold to him for term (...) his life, yet ye
disseisour has fe si^ple and is seize in his demene as of fee for this that
when h^ estate was confirmed he had fe simple and in suc^ deed he may not
change his estate without ^tre upon hi^ etc. In ye same manner is if the esta^
be confirmed for tme of a day or for term of (...) other he has a good estate
in fe si^ple or co^^mare firmu^ facere. Also if.ii. be disseisours (...) the
disseisi releaseth to the one, he s^al ho^ his fellow out of the la^d, but if
the disseisi c^nfirme the state of the one without more sp^ in the deed, some
say yt he shall not hold his ^low out, but he shall hold jointly with him, (...)
this yt nothing was confirmed but his estate was joint, and for this some have
said that (...) ioynten^tes be and the one confirms the estate the other, yt
he has but a joint estate as (...) had before but if he have such words (...)
deed of co^firmacion to have and to hold to (...) and to his heirs all the
tenem^tes whereof (...) on is made in the confirmacion, than he h^ estate sole
in the teneme^tes, and therefore it is good and a sure thing in every
confirmacion have these words to have and to hold the ^nementes. etc. in fee
or in fee tail or for term of life or for term of years after as the cause or
the matter is, for to ye intent of some if a man set la^d to another for term of
life and after he co^fyrmeth his estate by these words to have and to hold his
estate to him and to his heirs, this co^firmacio^ as concerning his heirs is
void, for his heirs can not have his estate which was but for term of life
but if he confirm his estate by these words to have the same la^d to him and
to his heirs this confirmacion makes fee simple in this cause to him in the
land for this that they have and hold etc. goth to the land and not to the
estate yt he has etc. Also if I let certain land to a woman sole for term of
her life the which takes a husband, and after I confirm the estate to the
husband and to the wife forterme of their two lives in this case the husband
holds not jointly with the wife but holds the right of his wife for term
of his life but this confirmacio^ shall e^ure to the husband by way of remaindre
for term of his life if he survive his wife, but if I let land to a woman
sole for term of years which takes a husband, and after I co^firm the state
to ye husband and the wife for term of both their lives, in this case they
have ioynte estate in the franktenement of the land for this that the wife had
no frank tenement before. Also if a parson of a church charge the glebe of his
church by his deed, and the patron and the ordinary confyrme the same grant and
all that is comprysed within the same grant, than the same grant shallbe in
his strength after the purpose of the same grant, but in such case it behooves
that the patron have fee simple in the auowson or if he have estate in the
auowson for term of life or in tail, than the grant shall be but during his
life and the life of the parson that granted it. etc. Also if a man let land
forterme of life which tenant for term of life charge the land with a rent
in fee, and he in the reuercion confyrmeth the same grant, this charge is good
enough and effectual. Also if ordinary has nothing to meddle nor to do, the
patron of the chantry, and their chaplayn of the same chauntry may charge the
chau^try with a rent charge in parpetuitie. Also in some case these verbes dedi
and concessi have the same effect in substance and shall enure to the intent as
this verb confyrmaui, as if I be disseised of a plough land and after I make
such a deed etc. Sciant presents etc. Quod dedi to the disseysour the said
plough land etc. And I deliver al only the deed to him with out liuere of
seysyn of the land, that is good confyrmacion, and as strong in the law, as if
he had in the deed this verb confirmaui etc. Also if I let land to a man for
term of years, by force of which he is possessed, and after I make to him a
deed etc. Quod dedi vel concessi etc. the same land to have for term of his
life, and deliver him his deed than by and by he has estate in the land for
term of his life, and if I say in the deed to have to him and to his heirs of
his body engendered he has estate in the tail, and if I say in the deed to
have and to hold to him and to his hey^es he has estate in fee simple, for
this shall ^ure to him by force of confyrmacion to en^arge his estate. Also if
a man be disseysed, and the disseisour dies seysed, and his heir is (...) by
descent, after the disseisy and the heir of the disseisour make jointly a deed
to another (...) fee, and liuere of seysyn upon this is made ^s to the heir of
the disseisour that ensealeth (...) deed the teneme^tes pass by the same deed
by way of feoffement, and as to the disseisy that ensealeth the same deed, this
shall not en^e but by way of confyrmacion, but if the dis^eisy in this case
bring a writ of enter in the (per and cui) against the alyene of the heir of
the disseisour enquire how he shall plede that ^ede against the demaundant by
way of con^rmacion etc. And know ye this my child that it is one of the most
honorable, laudable, and profitable thing in our law to have the scyc^ce of
well pledyng, in accions reals and parso^ls and for this I counsel thee
specially (...) set the courage and cure to learn that. Also (...) there be
lord and tenant, and the lord con^rmeth the estate that the tenant has in the
tenementes, yet the seigniory holly abides to ^he lord as it was before. In
the same manner (...) is, if a man have a rent charge out of a cer^ land, and he
confyrme the state that the tenant has in the land, yet abides to the
confyrme the rent charge. In the same manner it is if a man have comen of pasture
in the land of any other, if he confirm the state of the tenant of the la^d
nothing shall depart from him of his common, but this notwithstanding the common
abides to him as it was before.

But if there be lord and tenant which holds of his lord by service of
fealty and.xx. s. of rent, if the lord by his deed confirm the state of the
tenant to hold by.xii. d. i. d. or by an ob. in this case the tenant is
discharged of all other service and shall yield nothing to the lord but that
that is comprised within the same confirmacion, yet if the lord will by the
deed of confirmacion that the tenant in this case ought to yield to him an
hawke or a rose yearly at such a feast etc. this reseruacion is void, for this
that he reserueth to him a new thing that never was parcel of the services
before the confirmacion, and so the lord may abbrydge the services by such
confirmacion but he may not reserve to him a new service etc.

Also if there be lord mean and tenant, and the tenant is an abbot that
holds of the mean by certain services yerelye the which has no cause to
have a quittance against his mean for to bring a writ of mean etc. In this case
if the mean confirm the state that the abbot has in the land, to have and to
hold the la^d unto him and his successors in frank almoyg^ or free aims etc.
In this case this confirmaci^ is good, and the^ the abbot holds of the mean
in frank almoygn, and the cause is for this, that no new service is reserved
for all the services specially specified be extinct and nothing is reserved to
the mean, but the abbot shall hold of the land, and that was before the
confirmacio^ for the yt holds in fra^k almoygn ought to do no bodily service
so yt by such confirmation it appears that the mean shall reserve unto him no
new service, but yt the lands shall be holden of him as it was before and in
this case the abbot shall have a writ of mean if he be distrayned in his defaute
by force of the said co^firmacion where parcase he might not have such a writ
before etc.

Also if I be seized of a villain as if a vyllayn in gross, and another takes
him out of my possession clayming hi^ to be his villain and after I confirm
unto hi^ the state that he has in my villain, this co^firmacio^ seems void,
for this yt none may have possession of a man as of a villain in gross and in
so much that he to who^ the confirmac^ was made was not seysed of hi^ as of his
villain at the time of the confirmacio^, such confirmac^ is void, but in this
case if such words were in the deed. Sciatis me dedisse and confirmasse tal*
etc. talem villanum meum, this is good, but this shall c^ure by force and way of
grant, and not by way of confirmacion etc. Also sometime these verbes (dedi
and concessi) enure by way of extynguyshement of the thing given or granted.
As a tenant holds of his lord by certain rent, and the lord by his deed
grants to the tenant and to his heirs the rent. etc. this shall enure to
the tenant by way of extinguishment, for by this grant the rent is extinct.
In this same manner it is where one has a rent charge of certain land, and he
grants to the tenant of the land the rent charge and the cause is for this
that it appears by the words of the grant that the will of the donour is
that the tenant shall have the rent etc. in so much that he may have no rent
out of his own land, for this the deed shall be understand and take for the most
advantage and avail of the tenant that it may be, and that is by way of
extinguishment. Also if I let land to a man for term of years and after I
confyrme his estate without more words put in the deed, he has no greater
estate but for term of years as he had before but if I release to him my
right that I have in the land without mo words put in the deed, he has
estate of frank tenement and so may thou child understand great diversities
between relessees and confyrmacions. And if I be within age and let land to one
for term of.xx. years, and he grants the land for term of.x. years so that
grant is but parcel of his term. In this case when I am of full age if I
release unto the grauntee of my lessee etc. This release is void, for this
that there is no priuitie between him and me. But if I confyrme his estate then
this confyrmacion is good, but if my lessee grant all his estate to another,
then my release made to the grauntee is good and effectual. Also if a man
grant a rent charge out of his land to another for term of his life, and
after I confyrme his estate in the said rent to have, and to hold to him in fee
tail, or in fee simple, this confyrmacion is void as to enlargeing of his
estate for this that he that confyrmed had no reuercion in the rent, but if a man seysed in fee of rent service or of rent charge, and he grants the
rent to another for term of life and tenant attorneth, and after he confyrmeth
the estate of the grauntee in fee tail or in fee simple, this confyrmacion is
good as to enlarge his estate after the words of the deed of confyrmacion, for
this that he that co^fyrmed the estate at the time of the confirmation had
the reuercion of the rent etc. but in this case aforesaid, where a man
grants a rent charge to another for term of life, if he will that the
grauntee shall have estate in the tail or in fee, him behooves that the deed
of the grauntee of the rent charge for term of life, be resurrendred or
councelled, and then to make a new deed of such a rent charge to have and to
take to the grauntee in the tail or in fee. Ex paucis dictis pinrima intend*
^e potes.

Attornement. Capi. x.
ATtornement is if there be lord and tenant and the lord will grant by his deed
the service of his tenant to another for term of years or for term of life or
in tail or in fee hi^ behooves yt the tenant attorne to the grant in the
life of the grauntour by force and virtue of the grant or otherwise the
grant is void and attornement is none other thing in effect, but when the
tenant has heard of the grant made by his lord, that the same tenant by
word agree to the said grant, as to say to the grauntee, I agree me to the
grant made to you, or I am well content of the grant made to you etc. but the
more common attornement is to lay, sir I attorn to you by force of the same
grant or I become your tenant etc. or to deliver unto the grant.i. d. ob. or
ferthing by way of attournement. etc.

Also if a man be seized of a manner which manner is parcel in demene and parcel
inseruice if he will alien in such manner to another, it behooves yt by force of
the alienac^ all the ten^tes that hold of the alienor as of this manner etc.
attourne to the aliene or otherwise the services abide continually in the
alienour, except tenantes at will, for it needs not the tenantes at will
attourne upon such alienacion etc. for this that the same lands or tenementes
that they hold at will do pass to the aliene by force of such alienacion.

Also if there be lord and tenant, and the tenant lets the tenementes to a
man for term of life the remayndre to another in fee, if ye lord grant the
services to the tenant for term of life in fee, in this case the ten^t for term
of life has fee in the services, but services be put in suspe^ce duri^g his
life but his heirs shall have the services after his death, and in that case it
needs not an attornement, for by the acceptance of ye deed of him that ought
to attorne, this is attornement in himself etc. but where the tenant has as
great and high estate in the teneme^tes as the lord has in the seigniory, in
such case if the lord grant the service unto the tenant in fee this enureth by
way of extinguishment. Causa patet.

Also if there be lord and tenant and the tenant makes a lease to one for
term of life, saving the reuerc^ unto him, if the lord grant the seigniory to
the ten^t for term of life in fee, in this case it behooves yt he in the
reuercio^ attorne to the ten^t for term of life by force of ye grant or
otherwise the grant is void for this that he in the reuercion is tenant unto
the lord.

Also if there be lord and tenant, and the tenant holds of the lord by
twenty ma^er of services, and the lord grants his seig^ory to an other if
the tenant pay or do any of the service to the grauntee, this is a good
attournement of, and for the services though that the tenauntes entente was to
attourne but of the same parcel, for this that the seygnyorye is an holy
thing, though that there be diverse manner of services that the tenant ought to
do.

Also if there be lord and tenant and the tenant holds of the lord by many
manner of services and the lord grants the services to another by fine, if the
grauntee sue a Scire facias out of the same fine for any parcel of the
services and has judgment to recover this judgment is a good attornement in
the law for all the services.

Also if the lord of the rent grants the services unto another, and the
tenant attorneth by a penny and after the grant distrayneth for rent behynd,
and the tenant to him makes rescous In this case the grauntee shall not have
assyse of the rent but he shall have a writ of rescous for that the gift of the
penny was but by way of attornement. But if the tenant had given unto the
grauntee the said penny as parcel of the rent or an half penny or a farthing by
way of seisin of the rent, then this is a good attornement and also it is a
good seisin to the grant of the rent. And then upon such rescous the grant
shall have assise etc.

Also if a man let tenementes for term of years by force of which the lessee
is sessed, and after the lord grants by his deed of the reuercion for term
of life or in tail or in fee, it behooves him in this case that the ten^t for
term of years attorne, or otherwise nothing passes such grant by such deed,
and if in this case the tenant for term of years attourne to the grant,
then by and by passes the franktenement on the grant by such attournement
without any liuere of seisin. etc. for this if any tiu^e shall be made or needs
to be made in such case, then the tenant for term of years shall be at time
of the liuere of seysyn out of his possession which should be against reason.

Also if land be let to a man for term of years the remaynder to another
for term of life reseruyng to the leasour a certain rent by year and liuere
of seisyn is made upon this to the tenant for term of years, if he in the
reuercion in such case grant his reue^ into another. etc. and the tenant that
is in the remaynder after the term of years atturneth ^is is a good
atturnement, and he to whom the reuercion is granted by force of such
attournement shall distrayne the tenant for tme a years for the rent due after
such attournement though the tenant for term of years never attourned unto
him, and the cause is for (...) where the reuercion is dependaunt upon he
statute of franktenement, it suffiseth that the tenant of the franktenement
atturne upon such grant of reuercion. etc. and it is to ^ytte that where a
lease for term of years or for term of life or a gift in the tail is made to
any man reserving to such a leasour or do^r certain rent, if such a leasour or
donour grant his reuercion to another, and the tenant of the land attourne,
the rent passes to the grauntee though in the deed of the grant of
reuercion, no mention is made of the re^t, for this that the rent is incident
to the reuercion in such case, and not econuerso, for if a man will grant
the rent, in such case unto another, reserving to him the reuercion of ye la^d
though the tenant attourne to the grauntee this shall be but a rent secke. etc.

Also if a man let land unto another for term of life, and after such lease
he confyrmeth by a deed the estate of the tenaunte for term of life, the
remayndre to another in ^e, and the tenant for term of life, accepts the
deed, then is the remaynder in deed to him to whom the remainder was given or
limytted in the same deed, for by the acceptaunce of the tenant for term of
life of the same deed the is a grant of him and so an attournement (...) law,
but yet he in the remayndre shall have none accio^ of wast nor other benifite
by such remaynder, but if that he have the same deed ^ his hand, by which the
remainder was granted unto him, and for this that in such case the tenant
for term of ly^e will retain to him the deed, to the entente that he in the
remaynder shall have no accion of wast against him, for this that he may not
come to have the possession of the deed et cetera. It shall be good in such
case for him in the remaynder that a deed endented be made (...) him that will
make the confyrmacion, and the remaynder over et cetera. And that he that
makes such confyrmacyon deliver a part of the indenture to the tenant for
tme of life, and the other part to him that has the remaynder, And than he by
showing of the part of the endenture may have an accion of wast against the
tenant for term of life, and all other advantage that he in the remainder
may have in such case.

Also if two ioyntenauntes be, which lets land to another for term of
life, yeldyng to them and to their heirs a certain rent by year. In this
case if one of the two ioyntenauntes in the reuercion release to the other
ioyntenaunt in the same reuercion, this release is good, and he to whom the
relese is made, shall have only the rent of the tenant for term of life, and
shall have a ^rytte of wast against them though he never attourned by force of
such release, and the cause is for the priuilye that once was between the
tenaunte for term of life, and them in the reuercion. In the same manner, and
for the same cause it is where a man lets land to another for term of his
life the remaynder to another for term of his life, reseruyng the reuercion to
the lessour, in ^hys case if he in the reuercion release to ^ym in the
remaynder. etc. And to his heirs all his right. etc. Then he in the remaynder
has a fee et cetera. And shall have a writ of ^aste against the tenaunte
for term of life without any attournement of him. etc

Also if a lease be made for term of life the remaynder unto another in the
tail, the remaynder over to the right heirs of the tenant to term of life,
in this case if the tenant for term of life grant his remaynder in fee to
another by his deed, that remainder by and by passes by his deed without any
other atturneme^t. For if any ought to attourne, in this case it should be the
tenant for term of life. And it were in vain that he attourne upon his own
grant. etc.

Also if there be Lord and tenant and the tenant holds of lord by
certain rent and knights services if the lord grant the services of the
tenant by fine, the seruyces be by and by in the grauntee by force of the
fine, but yet the lord may not dystrayne for any parcel of his services
without attur^e^s But if the tenant dye his heir being within age the Lord
shall have the ward of the body of the heir, and of the land, etc. Howbeit
that he never atturned For this that the seygnioury was in the grant
mayntenant by force of the fine. And also in some case if the tenant dye
without heir, the lord shall have the tenauncy by way of eschete. In the same
manner it is if a man grant the reuercyon to his tenant for term of life to
another by (...) the reuercion passes not to the grauntee, by force of the
fine, but the grauntee shall never have accion of wast without attournement. etc
But yet if the tenant for term of life alien in fee the grauntee may enter.
etc. For this that the reuercion was in him by force of the fine, and such
alienacion was to his dishenherytaunce. But in this case where the lord
grants the services of his tenant by fine, if the tenant dye, his heirs
being of full age the grant by the fine shall not have the relief nor never
shall distrayne for the relyef except there had been an attournement of the
tenant that dyed. etc. for of such things that lies in dystresse upon the
which a wryt of replegiate is sued. etc. a man ought to auow the taking good,
and right wise. etc. there ought to be attournement of the tenant. Howbeit
that the grant of such services be by fine. But to have ^arde of lands, and
tenementes so holde^ during the noneage of the heir or of them to have by way
of eschete there needs not any ^stresse. etc. But an enter in the land by
force of the right of the seignioury that the grant has by force of the fine.
etc.

Also in ancient boroughes or Cytyes ^her tenementes within the same boroughes
or cities, been deuisable by testament by the custom, and the use. etc. if in
such borough or city a man be seized of rent service or of rent charge, and
he deuiseth such rent or service to another by his testament and dies. etc. In
this case he to whom the deuyse is made may ^ystrayne for the rent or the
services behind, howbeit that the tenant never atturned. In the same manner it
is, where a man lets such tenementes deuysable to another for term^ of
life, or for term of years, and devised the reuercyon by his testamente to
another in fee or in fee tail and dies, and anon after that the tenant
makes wast, he to whom the deuyse was made shall have a writ of wast howbeit
that the tenant never attourned, and the cause is for this that the will of
the deuysour made by the testamente shall be parfourmed after the intent of
the deuisour, and so the effect of this lies upon the atturm^ of the tenant.
etc. Then parcase the tenant would never attourne, then the will of the
deuisour should never be parfourmed, and therefore the devise shall distrayne
or have an acci^ of wast. etc. without attournement, for if a man deuyse such
tenementes to another by his testament ( habend sibi imperpetuum) and dies and
the devise enters he has a fe simple, causa qua supra and yet if a deed of
feoffeme^^ were made to him by the deuisour of the sam^ tenement ( habend et
tenendsibi imperpetuo^ if lyuere and seysin were never there upon made, he
shall have none estate but fort^ of life etc.

Also if a man seized of a Manoure which is parcel in demean and parcel
(...) services and thereof be dysseysed but the tenaunte with holden of the
Manor, neue^ attourne to the disseisour in this case howbe^ that the disseisor
die. etc and his heir is in by d^cent yet may the disseisi dystrayne for the
rent being behind and have the service but if the tenauntes come to the
disseysour and say we become your tenauntes. etc. or otherwise mad by
attournement to him. etc. and after the disseysour dies seized. etc. then the
disseisy may not dystcayne for the rent, for this that all the manner
descends to the heir of the disseisour But if one hold of me by rent service
which is a service in gross and another that no right has claymeth the rent
and receives and takes the same rent of my tenant by coaccion of dystresse
or by other form and so disseaseth me by taking such rent, howbeit that
such a disseisour, dye seized by such taking of the rent yet after his death
I may well dy^ayne for the same rent being behind before the death of the
disseysour, and after his death and the cause is for this, that such is not my
disseisour but by eleccion at my will for howbeit that he took the rent of the
tenant I may at all times distrayne my tenant for he rent behind et cetera
so it is to me but is I will suffer the tenant to be by so much time behind
of paymente to me of the same rent, for the payment of my tenant to another
to whom he ne ought to pay is no dysseysyn to me nor shall not put me ^te
of my rent without my will and eleccyon, for how be it that I may have
^yse against such a taker et cetera, yet this (...) at my eleccion if I will
take him as my disseysour or not so that such discentes of rentes in gross ne
puts not out the lords fro their dystresse but that at each time they may
well dystrayne for the rent behynd, and in this case if after the decease of
him that so wrongfully take the rent. I grant by my deed the services to
another and the tenant atturneth, this is good enough, and the service by such
grant, and attournement incontinent be in the grauntee. etc. But otherwise it
is, where the rent is parcel of the manner and the disseasour dies seized of
the whole manner, as in the case before said.

Discontinuaunce. Cap. xi.
DYscontinuaunce is an ancient word in the law and has diverse
sygnificacions, (...) but as to one intent it has such a sygnificacion, that
is to say where a man has aliened to another certain lands or tenementes and
dies and another has right to have the same lands or tenementes, but he ne
may enter is them because of such alienacion. etc. As if an abbot seized of
certain lands and teneme^tes in fee, and he alyeneth the same lands and
teneme^tes to another in fee tail or for term of life, and the abbot dies
his successor may not enter in the same lands or tenementes, howbeit that if
that he has right to have the^ as in the right of the house, but he is put
to his accion to recover the same lands or tenementes which is called a writ
de ingressu si^ assensu capituli.

Also if a man seized of land as in the ^yght of his wife. etc. and thereof
enfeoffeth another. etc. and dies the wife ne may not enter but she is put
unto her accion the which is called cui in vita.

Also if tenant in the tail of certain land and thereof enfeoffe another.
etc. and has issue and dies. etc. his issue may not enter in the land,
howbeit that he has right and title to that but that he is put to his accio^
that is called a formed on in discendre.

Also if there be tenant in the tail and the reuerc^ is to the donour, and to
his heirs if the tenant make a feoffement. etc. and dies without issue, he
in the reuercion may not enter, but is put to his accion of formedo^ in the
reuerture, and in the same manner it is where the tenant in the tail of certain
land where the remainder is to another in the tail or to another in fee, if
the tenant in the tail alieneth in fe or in fe tail. etc. and aft dies with
out issue they in the remaindre may not enter, but be put to their writ of
formed on in the remaindre. etc. and for this that by force of such feoffem^t
and such alienacions in the cases aforesaid and in like cases they which have
title and right after the death of such a feoffor or alyesor may not enter but
be put to their accions, vt supra. Therefore such feoffements and alyenacions be
called discontinuaunces.

Also if tenant in the tail be disseased and he releaseth by his deed to the
disseysor and to his heirs all the right that he has in the same land* this
is no discontinuaunce for this that nothing of right passes to the disseisour
but for term of life of the tenant in the tail that made there lease. etc.
But by the feoffement of tenant in the tail a fe simple passes by the same
feoffement by force of lyuere of seysin etc. but by force of a release passes
by the same feffement by force of liuere of seisyn. etc. but by force of a
release passes, but the right that he may lawfully and ryghtfully release
without hurt or damage to other parsons which thereto have right after his
decease. etc. and so it is a great diu^sitie between a feoffement of the ten^t
i^ the tail and a relese of ye ten^t i^ the tail. But it is said yt if tenant
in the tail in this case release to the disseasour and binds him and his
heirs to warrantise. etc. and dies, and this warrantye descends to his
issue, then that is a discontinuaunce because of warrantise. etc. But if a man
have issue a son by his wife dies and after he takes another wife and the
tenementes be given to him and his second wife, and to the heirs of their
two bodies engendered, and they have issue another son, and than the second
wife dies, and after the tenant in the tail is dysseysed and he releaseth to
his dysseisour all his right et cetera, and byndeth him and his heirs unto
warrantyse, and dies, this is no dyscontinuaunce to the issue in the tail by
the second wife but he may well enter. etc. for this that the warrantyse
descended to his elder brother, that his father had by his first wife. In
the same manner where tenementes be descendable to the younger son after the
custom of boroughe English been tayled. etc. and the tenant in the tail
has issue two sons and is disseased and he releaseth to his disseasour all
his right with warrantise and dies, the younger son may enter upon the
disseysour notwithstanding the warrantyse, for this that the warrantise
descends to the elder son, for always the warrantise descends. etc. to him
that is heir by the common law.

Also if an abbot be disseased, and he releaseth to the disseisor with
warrantise, this is no dyscontinuaunce to hie successor, for this that nothing
passes by this release but the right that he has during the time that he is
abbot, and this warrantyse is expired by his provision or by his death.

Also if tenaunte in the tail be seized of certain land, and he lets the
same land for term of years by force of which lease the lessee is in
possession to which possession the tenant in the tail by his deed releaseth
all his right that he has in the same land to the lessee and to his heirs
for ever, this is no dyscontinuaunce, but after the decease of the tenaunte in
the tail his issue may well enter, for this that by such release nothing
passes but for term of life of the tenant in the tail. In the same manner if
the tenant in the tail confyrme the estate of the lessee for term of
certain years to have and to hold to him and to his heirs this is a
discontinuaunce for this tha^ nothing passes by such confirmacion, but the
estate that the tenant in the tail had for term of his life.

Also if tenant in the tail by his deed grant to another all his estate that
he has in the tenementes intayled to him to have (...) to hold all his estate
to the other and to his heirs for ever and delyuereth seysin according. In
this case the tenant to whom the alienacio^ was made has none other estate
but for term of life, and so it may well be proud that the tenant in the tail
may not grant ne ^lien ne make any rightful estate of the franktenement to
another parson but for term of his own life. etc. for if I give certain
land in the tail to a man, saving the reuercion to me, and after the tenant
in the tail enfeoffeth another in fe, the feoffe has no right estate in the
tenementes for two causes. One is for that by such feoffement my reuercion ^s
discontinued which is a wronger act and not a rightful act. Another cause is
if the ten^t dye and his issue sueth a writ of formed on against the feoffe,
the writ shall say and also the declaracio^ yt the feffe wrongfully hi^
deforced. etc. Ergo if he with wrong hi^ deforced he had no right estate.

Also if land be let to a man for term of his life the remaynder to another
in the tail if he in the remayndre will grant his remaynder to another in it
by his deed, and the tenant for term of life attourneth, this is no
dyscontynuaunce of the remayndre.

Also if a man be tenant in the tail of ^owson in gross or of common in
gross, if he by his deed will grant the auowson or the common to another in
fee this is no dyscontynuaunce, for in such case the grant has no estate but
forterme of the tenant in the tail that made this grant. etc. Note well that
such things as pass by way of grant made by deed, and not by act in the
country. etc. Such grant makes no discontinuaunce as in the case aforesaid
and other like cases. etc. And howbeit that such things be granted in fe,
(...) fine levied in the kings court. etc. yet they make no discontinuaunce.
etc.

Also if a man be seized in tail of lands deniable by testament. etc. and he
deuiseth it to another in fee, and dies, and the other e^treth this is no
discontinuance, for this that no discontinuaunce was made in the life of the
te^ment in the tail. etc.

Also if an abbot have a reuercion or a re^t service or a rent charge, and will
grant that reuercion rent service or rent charge to another in fe and the
ten^t atturneth. etc. This is to disco^tinuance. In the same man^ it is where
(...) abbot is seized of auowso^ or of such things that pass by way of grant
without liuere of seisin. etc

Also if there be graunde father tenant in the tail father and son, and the
graund father is disseased by the father, and the father makes a feoffement in
fee without warrantyse and dies, and after the graundfather dies, the son
may well enter upon the feoffe for this that this was no discontynuaunce in
so much that the father was not seized by force of the tail at the time of
the feoffement. etc. but was seized in fee by disseysin made to the
graundfather.

Also if a woman inherit have an husband within age, which makes a
feoffemente of the tenementes of the wife and dies, it has been questioned if
the wife may enter or not And it seems to some men that the enter of the wife
after the death of her husband shall be lawful in this case, for when her
husband made such a feoffement. etc. He might well enter notwithstanding such
feoffement during the couerture, and he might not enter in his own right but in
the right of his wife. etc. Ergo such right that he had to enter in the right
of his wife. etc. that right of e^ter abides to the wife. etc. after his
decease, and it has been said that if two iointenantes being within age make
a feffem^t in fe and one of the children dies and that other suruiueth,
insomuche ye both children might ent jointly in their lives, this right of
ent grows al to hi^ ye suruiueth, and so he may enter into the hole. etc.

Also the heir of the husband that made the feffement within age may not
enter, for this yt no right descends to such an heir in the cose aforesaid
for this that the husband had never my thing but in the right of his wife. And
also when a child makes a feoffement being within age, this shall never grieve
nor hurt hi^ but that he may well enter. etc. And this should ^e against reason
that such a feffemente made ^y him that was not able to make such a feffement
shall grieve or hurt other to Toll other of their entrees. etc. And for these
causes it se^eth to some that after the death of such an husband so being
within age at the time of the feoffement. etc. that his wife may well en^er,
etc.

Also if a woman inheritrice takes an husband and has issue a son, and the
husband ^eth, and she takes another husband, and that ^econd husband lets
the land that he has a^ the right of his wife to another for term of (...)
life, and after the wife dies, and after the ten^t ^ne of life surrendreth his
estate to the se^ husband. etc. Enquere if the son of the ^e may ent or not
in this case upon the second husband during the life of the tenant for term of
life. etc. But it is clear law in this ^se that after the death of the
tenaunte for ^me of life, the son of the wife continue may (...) ent for this
yt the discontinuance yt was ^de al only for ^m^ of life is de^mined. etc. by
(...) death of the same tenant for term of life. etc

Also if the parson or vicar of a church alyen certain lands or tenementes
parcel of his glebe. etc. To another in fee and dies or resygneth. etc. his
successor may well enter.

Notwithstanding such alienacion as it is said in a Nota. Anno. ii. H. iiii.
Termino Michael is quod sic incipit nota quod dictum fui^ pro lege. In a writ
of account brought by the master of the colege that if a parsone or a vycare
grant certain lands that is of the right of his church to another and dies
o^ chances that his successor may enter. And I trow that the cause is for
this that the p^son or vicare that is seized. etc. In right of the simple
dwelling in none other parson. And for this cause his successor may well
enter notwithstanding such alienacion. etc. for a bishop may have a wryt of
right of tenant of right of his Byshoppreycke, for (...) that the right of
fee simple abides in him and in his chapyter, and a Deane may ha^ a writ of
right et cetera, for this that (...) right abides in him and his chapter,
and an abbot may have a writ of right, for the that the right abides in
him, and in his conent, et sic de aliis calibus consimilibus. etc but a parsone
or a vycare may not have (...) writ of right. etc, but the hyghesse wry^
that he may have is a writ, de iuris vni^ the which is a great proof that
the ryght^ of fee simple is in obeyaunce, that is to (...) all only in the
remembrance entendeme^ and consideration of the law, for me seems that such
a thing in such a right that is said in diverse books to be in by obeysaunce
is as much to say in latin. S. talis res vel taie rectum que vel quod non est
in homine ad tu^c superstite sed ta^to modo est et co^cistit in consideratione
et intelligentia legis. etc. et quidem ^lii dixerunt talem rem aut tale rectum
fore in nubibus. etc.

But I suppose that they understand by these words in nubibus. etc. I have
said before.

Also if a parson of a church dye, now the frank teneme^t of the glebe of
the parsonage i^ no man during the time that the par^onag is void, but is in
obeysaunce, that is to say, in consideration and intelligence of the law, ^ll
another be made parson of the same church, and immediately when an other is
parson the franktenement in deed is to him as successoure.

Also some men paraduenture will argue and say, that so much that the parson
with the assent of the patron and ordinarye may grant a Rent charge out of
the glebe of his parsonage in fee, and so charge the glebe of the parsonage
perpetuallye. Ergo they have fee ^ple, or two or one of them has fee simple at
the least. etc. to this it may be answered that it is principle in law, that
of every land there is a fee simple in some man, or else the ^e simple is in
obeyaunce. etc. And onother principle is, that every land of Fee simple, etc.
may be charged with a rent charge in fee, by one way or by another. etc. and
when such rent is granted by the deed of the parson the patron and the
ordinarye in fee, none shall have no prejudice or loss by force of such
grant. But the grauntours in their lives, and the heir of the patron, and
successor of the ordinary after their deceases, and after such charge if the
parson dye, his successor may not come to the said church to be parson of
the same church by the law. But by prese^tment of the patron and admission
and institution of the ordinary. etc. And for this cause it behooves that the
successor hold him content and agreed with that which his patron and
ordinary lawfully have done before. But the cause that such rent charge is
gone for this that they which had entrees in the said church, that is to
say, the patron after the law temporal, and the ordinary after the law
spiritual were assented or parties unto such a charge. etc. and thus seems
the very cause that such glebe may be charged in perpetuite. etc.

Also if a bishop alyene lands which be^ parcel of his byshoppricke, and
dies, this is a discontinuaunce to his successoure, for this that he ne may
not enter, but is put to his writ. De ingressu sine assensu capituli. etc.

Also if a Deane alyen land parcel of his Deantye and dies his successor ne
may not enter, but he may have a wryt. Et ingressu sine assensu episcopi et
capituli. etc.

But if the Deane, and the chapitre have land to them, and to their successors
in commen. etc. How be it that the Deane alyen such lands, his successoures
may well enter for ^his that the francke tenemente at the time of the
alyenacyon was as well in the Chapitre as in the deane. But where the Deane is
sole seized as in right of his deanery, than such alienacion is discontinuaunce
to his successure, as it is aforesaid. Also some men will argue and say that
if an Abbotte and his co^ente be seized in their demean, as of fee of certain
land to them and to their successors etc. and the Abbot without assente of his
Co^ente alieneth the same land unto an other, and dies, this is a
discontinuaunce to his successors. etc. and by the same they will say, that
where a Deane and a chapitie be seized of certain land to them or to their
success^ures, if the Deane aliene the same lands. etc. this shall be a
discontinuaunce to his succesours. So that his successor ne may not ^e. etc.
To this may be answered, that ^here is great diversity beetwene the said
(...) causes, for when an Abbote, and the co^ente be seized. etc. yet if they
be disseysed the Abbotte shall have assyse in his own ^me without the
namynge of his Come. etc. And if a man may or will sue a ^ecipt quod reddat
of the same Lands than they be in the hands of the Abbotte ^d his Couente,
it behooves that such an accion be sued against the Abbot only without namyng
of the covent. etc. For this that al they be dead parsons in the law, save
only the Abbot that is Sovereign. etc. and this is cause of the souerayntie.
etc. for else he should be as one of the other monks of the covent. etc. But
the deane and the chapitre be no dead parsons in the law. etc. For each of
them may have an Accion by him self in diverse cases, and of such lands or
tenementes which the Deane and chapitre have in commune. etc. of they be
diseased, that the Deane and the chapitre shall have assyse, and not the deane
alone, and if an other will have an Accion real of such lands or tenementes
against the deane etc. it behooves him to sue against the deane and chapitre,
and not against the deane alone etc. and so appears great diversity between
these two cases. etc.

Also if the master of an Hospital discontinue certain land of his
hospital, his successors ne may not enter, but he is put unto his writ. De
ingressu sine assensu confirm^e^ sororum suorum, and all such wryts do pl^ly
appear in the register. etc.

Remytter. Capi. xii.
REmytter is an ancient term in the law and it is where a man has two
titles t^ land or tenementes, that is to say, of an elder title, and an other
of the latter title, and he comes to the land by the latter title, ye^ the
Law adiudgeth him to be in by force of the elder title, for this that the
elder title is the more sure title; and the more worthy title, and then when a
man is judged in by force of the more elder title, this is unto him said a
remitter, for this that the law shall admit to be in the land by the elder
title, as if the tenaunte in the tail, discontinue the tail, and after he
disseaseth his discontinue, and so ^yeth seized, where by the tenementes
desce^d to his issue, as to his co^yn inheritable by force of the tail, in
this case this is to him to who^ the tenementes descend, which has right by
force of the tail, a Remitter in the tail taken, for that that the law shall
put and ad^udge him to be in by force of the tail, which is his elder title,
for if he shall be in by forte of descent, then the discontinue may have a
writ of enter upon the dysseasyn in the per, against him, and recover the
tenementes, and ^s damages but in so much that he is in by ^rce of the tail,
the title and the intresse of the discontinue, is all utterly adnulled and
defeated. etc.

Also if tenant in the tail in feoffe in fee, ^s son or his cosyn
inheritable by force of the tail, the which son or cosyn at the ^e of
feoffement is within age, and after the ^enaunte in the tail dies, and he to
whom (...) feoffement was made in his heir by force ^f the title in the tail,
this is a remytter to (...) the heir in the tail, to whom the feoffement is
made. For how be it that during the life of the tenant in the tail that made
the feoffemente such heir shall be adjudged by force of the feoffement, yet
after the death of the tenaunte in the tail, the heir shall be adjudged in by
force of the tail. etc. and not by force of the feoffemente, and though that
such an heir was of full age at the time of the death of the tenaunte in the
tail that made the feoffemente, this makes no matter if the heir were within
age at the time o^ the feoffemente made to him, and if such a^ heir being
within age at time of the feoffemente comes to full age living the tenaunte
that made the feoffemente, and so being of full age, he charge by his deed
the same land with a comen of pasture, or with a rent charge, and after the
tenaunte in the tail dies. Now it seems that the land is discharged of an
other estate in the land, than he was at the time of the charg made, i^ so
much that he is in his remitter by forc^ of the tail, and so the estate that
he had (...) the time of the charge is utterly defeated. etc.

Also a principal cause is, why such a^ heir in the cases aforesaid, and
other case^ semblable shall be said in his Remytter, (...) for this that there
is no parson against wh^ that he may sue his writ of formedon, for against him
self he may not sue, and he may not sue against nonother, for none other is
tenaunte in the frank tenement, and for tha^ cause the law adiudgeth him in
his remytter, that is to say, in such plight as he had lawfullye recovered
the same land against an other.

Also if land be tayled to a man, and his wife, and to the heir of their two
bodies engendered the which have issue a daughter, and the wife dies, and the
husband takaeth another, and has issue an other daughter, and discontinueth
the tail, and after he dissey^eth the discontinue, and so dies seized, now
the land descends to the two daughters. In this case is to the elder
daughter that is inheritable, this is a remytter, but of the half, and as to
the other half, she is put to her accion of formedon against her sister, for
in this case two sisters be not tenauntes in percenary, but be tenaunts in
common, for this that they be in by diverse titles, for the one sister is in her
remitter by force of the tail, as to that that unto her belongs, And the
other sister is in as to that, that belongs to her in fe simple by the
descent of her father. In the same manner it is if the tenant in the tail
enfeoffe his heir apparaunt in the tail being the heir within age, and
another iointenaunt in fe, and the tenant in the tail dies. Now the heir in
the tail is in his remytter as to the half, and as to ye other half he is put
to his writ of form^d. etc

Also if tenant in the tail enfeoffe his heir apparent, the heir being of full
age at time of ye feoffem^t and after the ten^t in tail dies this is no
remitter to the heir, for this that it was his own follye, that he being of
full age would take such feoffement. etc. But such folly may not be adjudged
in the heir being within age, at the time of the feoffement. etc.

Also if tenant in the tail enfeoffe a woman in fee, and dies, and his issue
within age takes the woman to wife, this is a remitter to the child, and the
wife than has nothing, for this that the husband and the wife ben but one
parson in the law. And in that case the husband may not sue a writ of
Formedon, but if that he will sue against himself, the which shall be
inconvenient, and for that the law judges the heir in his remytter for this
that no folly may be areted to him being within at the time of the spousayles.
etc. And if the heir be in his remitter by force of the tail, it follows by
reason that the wife has nothing. etc. for in so much that the husband and
the wife be but one parson, the land may not be severed by halfes, and for
such cause the husband is in his remitter of the whole. But otherwise it is,
if such an heir be of full age, at the time of the spousayles, that than the
heir has nothing but in the right of his wife.

Also if a woman seized of certain land in fee, takes an husband, the which
alieneth the same land to an other in fee, and the alienee lets the same
land to the husband and the wife for term of their two lives, saving the
reuersion to the lessoure, and to the heir, in this case the wife is in his
remytter, and she is seized in deed in her demean as in fee, as she was
before, for this that the taking of estate shall be adjudged in the law, the
deed of the husband, and not the deed of the wife, so that no follye may be
judged in the wife that is covert in such case. And in this case the lessour
has nothing in the reuersion for this that the wife is seized in fee. But in
this case if the lessour will sue an accion of waste against the husband and
his wife, for this that the husband has made waste, the husband may not
bar the lessor for to show this that the taking of estate made unto him and
to his wife made a Remytter to his wife, for this that the husband stopped to
say this against his feoffement, and own reprysell of estate for term of
life to him and his wife, and yet the lessour has no reuersion, for this that
the fee simple is in the wife, so a man may se a matter in this case, that a
man shall be stopped by a matter in deed, though no writynge by deed indented
or otherwise be thereof made. But if an accion of waste, the husband make
defaut at the graunde distress, and the wife prays to be received, and is
received, she shall well show all the matter, and how she is in her remitter,
and shall bear the lessoure of his accion. For in every case that the wife is
received for defaut of her husband, she shall plead and have the same
advantage in pleadyng as she were a woman sole. And howbeit that the alienee
made the lease to the husband and his wife by deed endented, yet this is a
remytter to the wife, and though the aliene yielded the same land to the
husband and his wife by fine for term of their lives, yet this is a remytter
to the wife, for this that the wife covert that takes estate by fine shall not
be examined by the Justices. And here note well that when any thing shall
pass fro the wife that is couerte of husband by force of a fire the husband
and his conisaunce of right to another. etc. or make a grant and yield to an
other, or release by a fine to an other. Et sic de similibus where the right of
the wife passes fro the wife by force of the same, the wife in all such cases
shall be examined before that the fine be accepted. And such fines conclude such
wives couerte for ever. But where nothing is moved in the fine, but all only
that the husband and the wife take estate by force of the same fine, this shall
conclude the wife for this that in such case she shall never be examined.

Also if tenant in the tail discontinue the tail and has a daughter and
dies, and the daughter being of full age takes an husband, and the
disco^tinuaunce makes a lease of this to the husband and his wife for term of
their lives, this is a remytter in deed of ye wife, and the wife is in by force
of the tail, causa qua supra

Also if land be given to the husband and his wife to have and to hold to
them and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten, and after the husband
alieneth the land in fee, and takes again an estate to him and to his wife,
for term of their two lives. In this case this is a remytter in deed to the
husband and the wife maugre the husband, it may not be a remitter to the wife,
except it be a remytter to the husband, for this that the husband and his
wife be but one parson in the law, though yt the husband is stopped to claim,
this to be a remytter in him against his alienacion and his own repriseli as
it is aforesaid.

Also if Land be given to a woman in the tail, the remaindre to another in
the tail, the remaindre to the third in the tail, the remaindre to the
fourth in fee, and the wife takes an husband, and the husband discontinueth
the land of the wife, by this discontinuaunce all the remayndres be
discontinued. for if the wife dye without issue, they in the remayndre shall
have no remedy, but to sue their writtes of formedon in the remayndre when
they come to their time. etc. But if after such discontinuaunce estate be
made to the husband and his wife for term of their two lives, or for term of
an others life, or an other estate. etc. for this that this is a remitter to ye
wife, this is a remitter to al those in the remayndre. etc. for after this that
the wife that is in her remytter dies without issue they in the remayndre may
enter. etc. without any accion or suit. etc. In the same manner it is of them
which have the reuercion after such tail. etc.

Also if a man let a house to a woman for term of her life, saving the
reuersion to the lessoure, and after one sueth a faynte and fail accion
against the woman, and recouereth the house against her by defaute, so that
the woman may have against him a writ. Quod ei deforciat, after the Statute of
westminster the second, capitulo.iiii. now is the reuersion of the lessoure
discontinued, so that he ne may have no accion of waste. But in this case if
the woman take an husband, and he that recouereth lets the house to the
husband and his wife for term of their two lives, the wife is in her remitter
by force of the first lease. And if the husband and the wife make waste, the
first lessour shall have against him a wryt of waste for this, that in so
much that the wife is in her remitter, he is remitted to his reuersion.

But it seems in this case if he that here comes by the false accion, will
bring another writ of waste against the husband and his wife, the husband
has no remedy against him, but to make defaut at the great distress. etc.
And to cause the wife to be disceyued and to plead the matter against the
second lessor, and to swear that the accion by which he recovered, was false
and feigned in the law, and so the wife may bar. etc.

Also if the husband discontinue the land of his wife, and after takes
estate to him and to his wife, and to the third man for term of their lives,
or in fee, this is a remytter to the woman, but as to the moyte. And as for the
other moyte it behooves her after the death of her husband to sue a Cui in
vita.

Also if the husband discontinue the land of his wife, and go over the sea,
and the disco^tinue let the same land to the womanne for term of life, and
deliver to her seasyn, and after the husband comes and agrees to that
lyuereth her seasyn, this is a remitter to the woman, and yet if the woman had been sole at the time of her lease made to her, this should be to her a
Remytter, but in so much as she was covert baron at the time of the lease, and
the lyuere of seasyn made to her, though that she only take the lyuere of
seasyn, this was a remytter to her, because a womanne covert shall be adjudged
as an infant within age in such case. etc. Inquire in this case if the
husband when he comes again will disagre to the lease and lyuere of seasyn
made to his wife in his absence if this shall put the woman fro her remytter.

Also if the Husband discontinue the tenementes of his wife, and the
discontinue is disseased, and after the dysseasoure lets the laid
tenementes to the husband and his wife for term of life, this is a remytter to
the wife but if the husband and the wife were of couyn or consent that the
disseysin should be made, than it is no remytter to the wife, because she is a
disseysouresse. But if the husband were of couyn and consent to the disseysyn,
and not the wife, then such lease made to the wife is a remytter, because that
no defaute was in the wife.

Also if such a discontinuee had made estate of free houlde to the husband and
the wife made by endenture upon condition S. reseruinge to the discontinuee a
certain rent, and for defaute of payment a reentre, and because that the rent
is behind, the discontinue enters of this enter the woman shall have assyse
of nouel disseysin after the death of her husband against the discontinuee,
because that the condition was wholly adnulled, in so much as the woman was in
her remytter, yet the husband with his wife could not have assise because the
husband is stopped.

Also if the husband discontinuee the tenementes of his wife, and takes
estate again for term of his life, the remayndre after his dissease to his
wife for term of her life, in this case, this is no remytter to the wife
duringe the life of her husband, because that duringe the life of the husband,
the wife has nothing in the free hold but in this case the wife over live
the husband, this is a remitter to the wife because that a fre hold in law is
fallen upon her maugre her will, and in so much that she can have no accion
against none other parson, and against herself she can have no accion,
therefore she is in her remytter. For in this case though that the woman enter
not in the tenementes, yet a stranger that has cause to have Accion may sue
his accion against the woman of the same tenementes because she is tenant in
law, though she be not tenaunte in deed, for tenaunte of franktenement in deed
is he, that if he be disseysed of franktenement may have assise, but the
tenant in the law before his enter shall have no assise, and if a man feyfed
in fee of certain la^d has issue a son which takes a wife, and the
father dies seysed, and after the Son dies before any enter made by him
into the land, the wife of the son shall be endowed in the land, and yet he
had no frank tenement in the deed, but he had a fee and a frank tenement in
law, and so note well that a precipe quod reddat, may as well be mayntened
against him yt has the fra^ktenem^t in law, as against him that has
franktenement in deed.

Also if a tenant in the tail hawe issue. i^ Sons of full age, and he
lets the tayled land to the elder son for term of his life, the
remayndre to the younger son for term of his life, and after the tenant in
the tail dies. In this case ye elder so^n is not in his remitter because he
took estate of his father, but if thelder son die without issue of his body
the^ this is remitter to the younger brother because he is heir in the tail
and a franketenement in law, is fallen upon him by force of the remayndre, and
there is none against whom he may sue his accion. etc. In the same manner it
is where a man is disseased and the dysseysour dies thereof seized, and the
tenementes discende to his heir and the heir of the disseasour makes a lease
to a man of the said tenementes for term of life the remayndre to the
disseasour for term of life or in tail, or in fee, and the tenant for term
of life dies. Now this is a remytter to the dysseasy. etc. Causa qua supra.

Also if tenant in the tail enfeoffe his son and an other of the tayled land
in fee, and lyuer^ of seasyn is made to the other according to the deed, the
son not knowing thereof, nor agreynge to the feoffemente, and after he that
took the lyuere of seasyn dies, and the son occupies not the land nor
takes any profit of the land during the life of his father, and after the
father dies, now this is a remytter to the son, because the freholde is
fallen upon him by the suruyuour and no defaut was in him, because he never
agreed. etc. In the life of his father, and there is no^ against whom he may
pursue his writ of Formedon. etc. For if a man be disseased of certain land,
and the disseysour makes a deed of feoffement, whereof he enfeoffeth. B.C. and
D. And the liuere of seysyn is made to B. and C but D. was not at the lyuere of
seysyn nor never agreed to the feoffement nor never would, take the profits.
etc. And after B. and C. dye, and. D. over lives them, and the dysseisi
brigeth his writ, sur disseisin in the per, against the same shall sue all the
matter and how that he never agreed to the feoffement, and so he shall
dyscharge him self of damages so that the demaundaunt shall recover no damage
against him though that he be tenant of frank tenement of the land. And yet
the statute of Gloucester will that the disseisi shall recover damages on a wryt
of enter grounded upon the novel disseysyn against him that is found tenant.
And this is a proof in the other case that in so much as the issue in the
tail comes to the franktenement and not by his deed nor by his agreement that
after the death of his father this is a remitter to him, insomuche yt he can sue
an accion of formedon against none other parson.

Also if an abbat alyene the land of his house to another in fee, and the
alyen by his deed charge the land with a rent charge in fee, and after the
al^n enfeoffeth the abbot with license to have and to hold to the abbot and his
successors for ever, and after the abbot dies, and another is chosen and mad
abbot. In this case the abbot that is the successor, and his covent be, in
their remitter, and shall hold the land dyscharged, because that the same
abbot cannot have any accyon of wryt of enter. Sine assensu capituli of
the same lands against none other parsone. In the same manner it is where a
bishop or a deane or other such parsons alyen. etc. without assent. etc. And
after the bishop takes estate again of the said land by license to him,
and to his successors, and after the bishop dies his successor is in his
remitter as in the right of his church, and shall defete the charge. etc. causa
qua supra.

Also if a man sue a false accion against tenant in the tail, as if a man
will sue against him in wryt of enter in the post, supposyng by his writ that
the tenant in the tail had not his enter but by A. of. B. that disseased, the
graundfather of the demaundant, and that is false, and he recouereth against
the tenant in the tail by defaute, and sueth execucion, and after the tenant
in the tail dies, his issue may have a wryt of Form do^ against him that
recovered and if he will plede the recouere against the tenant in the tail,
the issue may say that the said A. of. B disseased not the graunde father of
him that recovered in the manner as his writ supposes and so he shall falsefye
his recouere. Also suppose that that was true that the said. A. of B.
dysseased the graunde father of the demau^daunt that recovered, and that after
the disseysyn the demaundaunte or his father, or his graundefather, by a deed
had released to the tenant in the tail all the right that he had in the
land. etc. And this notwythstandyng he sueth his writ of enter in the post
against the tenant in the tail in the manner as is aforesaid, and the tenant
in the tail pledeth to him, that the said A. of B. dysseised not his
graundfather as his wryt supposes, and upon this they be at issue, and the
issue is found for the demaundaunt whereby he has judgment to recover and
sueth execucion and after the tenant in the tail dies his issue may have a
wryt of formedon against him that recovered. And if he will plede the recouere
by accion tried against his father tenant in the tail, then he may show and
plede the release made to his father, and so the accion that was sued was faint
in the law etc. And it seems that faint accyon is as much to say in English,
feigned accyon, that is to say, such accyon that though the words of his
writ be true yet for certain causes he has no cause nor title by the law to
recover by the same accion And false acc^ is where the words of the writ be
false and in the two cases beforesayde if the case were such that after such a
recouere, and execucio^ thereof made the tenant in the tail had disseised him
that recovered and thereof dyed seized whereby the land also descended unto
his issue this is a remitter to the issue and the issue is in by force of the
tail, and for that cause I have put these two cases beforesayde to enfourme
thee my son, that issue in the tail by force of a dyscente made to him after
a recouere, and execucion thereof made against his auncester may be as well in
his remitter as he should be by dyscent made to him after a dyscontinuaunce
made by his ancester of the tayled lands by feoffement in the country or
otherwise.

Also in the same case aforesaid if the case were such that after the demaundant
had judgment to recover against the tenant in tail, and the same tenant in
the tail died before any execucion had against him whereby the tenementes
descend to his issue, and he that recovered such a scire facias to have
execucion of the judgment against the issue in the tail the issue shall plede
the matt as before is said and so shall prove that the recouere was false or
faint in the law, and so shall bar him to have execucion of the judgment.
etc.

Also if tenant in the tail dyscontinue the tail and dye, and his issue
brings a writ of Formedon against the discontinue being tenant of the
freehold of the land, and the discontynue pledeth that he is not tenaunte but
otherwise dysclaymeth fro the tenancy in the land, in this case the judgment
shall be that the tenant go without day and after such judgment the issue
in the tail that is demaundaunt may well enter in the land notwithstanding
the dyscontynuaunce. And by such enter he shall be adjudged in his remytter, and
the cause is because that if any ma^ne sue a precipe quod reddat against any
tenant of free hold, in which accion the demaunda^t shall not recover
damages, and the tenaunte pledeth not nontenure but otherwise dysclaymeth in
the tenauncy, the demaundaunt may not auerre his writ that he is tenant as
the wryt supposes. And for that cause the demaundaunt after that, that
judgment is given that the tenant shall go without day, may enter into the
tenementes demanded, the which shall be as great advantage to hi^ in the
law as if he had judgment to recover against the tenant. And by such enter
he is in his remitter by force of the tail, but by wryt the demaundaunt
recouereth damages against the tenant, the demaundaunt may aperre that he is
tenant as the wryt supposes, and that for the advantage of the demau^daunt
for to recover his damages, or else he shall not receive his damages the which
damages be or were given him by the law.

Also if a man be disseased and the disseysour dye his heir being in by
descent now the enter of the disseisi is taken away. And if the dysseysy bring
his wryt of enter upon the dysseisin in the par, against the heir, and the
heir disclaymeth in the tenauncy. etc. the demaundaunt may auerre his wryt,
that he is tenant as the wryt supposes if he will, for to recover his
damages. But yet if he will leave the auerrement et cetera, he may lawfully
enter into the land, because of the dysclaymer, notwithstanding that his enter
before was taken away. And that was adjudged before my master sir Robert Danby
late chief justice of the common place, and his co^paignions.

Also where the enter of a man is lawful though that he take estate to him when
he is of full age for term of life, or in tail, or in fe, this is a remitter
to him if such taking of estate be not by deed indented or by matter of record
that shall conclude or stop him. For if a man be disseased and thereof takes
estate of the disseisor without mede or by deed pol, that is a good remitter
to the disseisi.

Also if a man let land for term of life to another which alyeneth to another
in fe, and the alie nor makes estate to the lessour, this is a remitter to the
lessour because his enter was lawful.

Also if a man be disseised and the disseisor lets the land to the disseisi
by deed poll or without deed for term of years, whereby the disseisi enters,
this enter is a remitter to the disseisi. For in such case where the enter of
a man is lawful, and a lease is made to him though that he claim by words
in the country that he has estate by force of such lease or says openly
that he claymeth nothing in the land, but by force of such lease, yet this is
a remitter to him, for such claim in the country is nothing to purpose, but
if he claim^ in the court of record that he has estate but by force of such
lease and not otherwise then he is concluded. etc.

Also if two ioyntenauntes seized of certain land in fee the one being of full
age the other within age be disseised, and the disseisor dies seized and his
issue enters, the one of the ioyntenauntes being then within age, and after
that he comes to full age, the heir of the disseisour lets the land to
the same ioyntenaunt for term of their lives, this is a remitter as to the
half to him that was within age because that he is seized of that moyte that
belongs to him in fee, because his ent was lawful. But the other ioyntenaunt
has in the other half but estate for term of life by force of the lease
because his enter was taken away. etc.

Warrantye. Cap. xiii.
IT is commonly said that there be three manner of warrantyes, that is to say,
warrantie lineal, warrantie collateral, and warranty that begins by
disseisyn. And it is to wit that before the statute of Gloucester all warra^ties
which descended to them which were heirs to them that made the warrantie
were bars to the same heirs to demand any lands or tenementes against
those warra^ties except the warranties that began by dysseisyn for such
warrantie was never bar to the heir because the warranty began by wrong that
is to say by disseisin.

Warranty that begins by disseysin is such form. As where there is father and
son, and the son does purchase land. etc. and lets the same land to his
father for term of years and the father by his deed thereof enfeoffeth another
in fe, and byndeth him and his heirs to warranty, and if the father dye
whereby the warranty descends to his son, this warranty shall not bar the
son, for notwithstanding this warranty the son may well enter in the land
or have an assise against the alyen if he will, because the warranty began by
disseisin. For when the father that had no estate but for term of years made a
feoffem^t in fe, this was a disseisin to his son of franktenement that then
was in the son. In the same manner it is if the son let unto the father the
land to hold at will and after the father makes a feoffement with warranty.
etc. And as it is said of the father so may it be said of every other
auncester. etc.

In the same manner it is if tenant by elegit, ten^t by statute merchant or
tenant by statute staple make a feoffement in fee with warranty etc. this shall
not bar the heir ye ought to have the land because that such warranties
begins by disseisin.

Also if wardein in chiualry or wardeyn in socage make a feoffement in fe or in
fe tail for tme of life with warranty. etc. Such warranties be no bars to the
heirs to who^ the la^d shall descend because that they begin by disseisin.

Also if the father and the son purchase certain lands or tenementes to have
and to hold to them jointly. etc and after the father alyeneth the whole to
another and binds him and his heirs to warranty. etc. and after the father
dies, this warranty shall not bar the son of the moite that belonged to him
of the same tenementes, because that as to the moite that be longed to the son
the warranty began by disseisin.

Also if A. of B. be seized of a mese and. F of. G yt has no right enter into
the same mese clayming to hold the same mese to him and to his heirs but A. of
B. then is continually dwelling in the same mese. in this cause the possession
of the franktenement shall be always adjudged in A. of B. and not in F. of G.
because yt in such case where two be in one mese, or in other tenementes, and
the one claymeth by one title and the other by another title the law shall
adiudge him in possession yt have right to have the possession of the same
tenement. But in the case aforesaid if F. of G. make a feoffement to certain
bar tours and extorcioners in the country for to have maintenance of them of
the same mese by a deed of feoffement with warranty by force of which the said
A. of.B. dare not dwell in the same mese but goes out of the same mese, this
warranty begins by disseisin, because that such a feoffemente was cause that
the said A. of B. left the possession of the same mese.

Also if a man that has no right to enter in another tenementes enter into
the said tenementes and incontinent makes a feoffement to other parsons by
his deed with warrantie and deliver to them seisyn, this warranty begins by
disseisin, because that the disseisin and the feoffement were made as it were
at one time. And that this is law, ye may see it in a plee. Anno. xxxi. E.
ii^. i^ a writ of Formedon in the reuercion.

Warrantye lyneall is where a man seized of certain land in fee, makes
feoffem^t by his deed to another, and binds him, and his heirs to warranty,
and has issue and dies and the warranty descends to his issue this is a
lineal warra^ty. And the cause why this is a lineall warrantie, is not because
yt the warranty discendeth from the father to his heir, but the cause is
because that if no such deed with warrantye had been made by the father, than
the right of the tenementes should descend to the heir, and the heir should
convey the dyscent from the father. etc. For if there be father and son, and
the son purchase tenementes in fee, and the father disseaseth the son
thereof and alyeneth it to another in fee by his deed and by the same deed
byndeth him and his heirs to warrante the same tenementes et cetera. And the
father dies now is the son barred to have the said tenementes for he may
by no suit nor by any other mese have the said tenementes because of the said
warrantye. And that is a collateral warrantye and yet the warrantye descended
lyneally from the father to the son. But because that if no such deed with
warrantye had be made the son in no manner might conueye the title that he
has of the tenementes from his father to him in so much that his father had
no estate nor right in the tenementes, therefore such warranty is called
collateral warrantye. In so much that he that made the warrantie is
collateral to the title of the tenementes, and that is as much to say that
he to whom warrantye descended, could not conueye the title that he had in
the tenementes by him that made the warra^ty i^ this case if no such warra^ty
had be made

Also if there be graundefather, father and son, and the graunde father is
dysseased in whose possessyon the father releaseth by his deed with warrantye
et cetera. And dies, and after the graunde father dies, now is the son
barred of the teneme^tes by the warrantye of his father, and this is called
lyneall warrantye, because that if no such warrantye had be made, the same
might not have conveyed the right of the tenementes to him nor show how he
is heir to the graunde father, but by means of the father. etc.

Also if a man have issue three sons and is dysseysed and the elder son
releaseth to the disseisour by his deed with warrantye. etc. and dies without
issue, and after this the father dies this is a lineal warranty to the yo^ger
son, because that though the elder son dyed in the life of the father, yet
by possibility it might be that he might convey to him the title of the land
by his elder brother, if no such warranty had be made. For it might be that
after the death of the father the elder brother entered into the teneme^tes and
died without issue, and then the younger son shall convey to him the title by
his elder brother. But in this case if the younger son release with warranty
to the dysseysour and dies without issue, this is a collateral warranty to
the eldest son, because that of such land as was to the other, the elder
brother by no possibilitye might convey to him the title by mean of the younger
brother.

Also if tenant in the tail have issue three sons and discontinue the tail
in fe, and the myddle son releaseth by his deed to the discontinue and bind
him and his heirs to warrantise. etc. and after the tenant in the tail die
and the middle dies without issue now is the elder son barred to have any
recouere by a wryt of formed on because that the warrantye of the middle
brother is collateral to him, in so much that he may by no manner convey to hi
by force of the tail any descent by the mydle brother, and therefore it is a
collateral warra^tye. But i^ this case the elder brother die without issue,
now the younger brother may well have a formed on to the descendre and recover
the same land, because that the warranty of the myddle brother is lineall to
the youngest brother, because it may be that by possibilitye the myddle brother
may be seized by force of the tail after the death of his elder brother, and
then the youngest brother may convey his title of descent by the myddle
brother. etc.

Also if tenant in the tail discontynue the tail and has issue, and dye and
the uncle of the issue relese to the discontinue with warrantye and dye without
issue this is a collateral warrantie to the issue in the tail, because that
the warrantye discendeth upon the issue, which cannot convey himself to the
tail by mean of his uncle.

Also if tenant in the tail have issue.ii. daughters and dye, and the elder
daughter enters not into the whole, and thereof makes a feoffement in fee
with warranty, and after the elder daughter dies without issue, in this case
the younger daughter is barred as to the moy^e, and as to the other half she is
not barred for as to the moite that belongs to the yo^ger daughter she is
barred, because that as to the move that belongs to her she cannot convey the
descent by the means of her elder sister. And therefore as to that moyte, that
is a collateral warrantye, but as to the other moitye which belonged to her
elder sister by the same elder sister the warrantye is no bar to the younger
sister because that she may conceive her descent as to that moyte that belonged
to her elder by the same elder sister. And so as to that moyte that belonged to
the elder sister the warrantye as to that is lyneal to the younger sister. etc.

And note well that as to him that demands fe simple by any of his
auncesters she shall be barred by lyneall warrantie which dyscendeth upon him,
except it be restrained by some statute, but he demands fee tail by a
writ of Formedon in the descendre shall not be barred by lyneall warrantte,
except he have enough by descent in fee simple by the same auncester that made
the warrantie, but a collateral warrantie is bar to him that demands fee,
and also to him that demands fee tail, without any other descent of fee
simple except in cases that be restrained by the statute, and other cases for
certain causes as shall be said hereafter.

Also if land be given to a man, and to his heirs of his body begotten the
which takes a wife, and have issue a son between them, and the husband
discontynueth the tail in fee, and dies, and after the wife releaseth to the
discontinuee in fee, with warrantie and dies, and the warrantie discendeth to
the son. This is collateral warrantie, but if tenem^tes be given to the husband
and the wife and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten which have issue a
son, and the husband discontynueth the tail and dies, and after the wife
releaseth with warrantie and dies this warrantie is but a lyneall warrauntie
to the son, for the son shall not be barred in this case to sue his writ of
Formedon except he have enough by descent in fee simple by his mother because
that their issue in a writ of Formedon ought to convey to him the right as
heir to his father and to his mother of their two bodies begotten by fourine
of the gift. And so in such case the warrantye of the father and the warrantie
of the mother be but as lineal warra^ties to the heir. etc. And note well that
in every case where a man demands tenemen^es in fee tail by a writ of
Formedon, if any of the issue in the tail that had possession or that has no
possession make a warrantie. etc. if he that sueth the wryt of formedon might
by any possibilitye by matter that might be in deed co^ueide to hi^ by him yt
made the warrauntye by the form of the gift.

This is a lyneall warrauntye, and not collateral.

Also if a man have issue three sons, and he gives land to the eldest
son to have and hold to him to the heirs of his body begotten, and for
defaute of such issue the remaynder to the myddle son to him, and to the
heirs of his body begotten, and for defaute of such issue the remaynder to
the yo^gest son, and to his heirs of his body begotten in this case if the
eldest son dysco^tynue the tail in fee and bind him, and his heirs to
warrantye to dye without issue, this is a collateral warrantie to the mydle
son and he shall be barred to demand the same land by force of the
remaynder, because that the remaynder is his title, and his eldeste brother is
collateral to the title which begineth by force of the remaynder.

In the same manner it is if the middle son had the same land by force of the
remaynder, because that his eldest brother made no dysco^tynuaunce but dyed
without issue of his body and after the myddle son makes a dyscontynuaunce
with warranty, etc. and dies without issue, this is a collateral warraunty to
the youngest son and also in this case if any of the said sons be
disseased, and the father, yt made the gift release to the disseysour all his
right. etc. with warrantie, this is a collateral warranty to that son upon
whom the warrantie descended causa qua supra. And so note well that where a man that is collateral to the title, etc. releaseth with warrantye that is a
collateral warrantie.

Also if the father give land to his elder son to have and to hold to him
and to the heirs males of his body begotten the remainder to the second son.
etc. if the eldest brother alyen in fe with warranty. etc. and has issue
female and dies without issue male this is not a collateral warrantye to the
second son, nor shall not hurt him of his accion by Formedon in the
remaynder because that the warrantye discendeth to the daughter of the eldest
son, and not to the second son. For every wara^ty that discendeth,
discendeth to him that is heir unto him which made the warantye by the commen
law. etc.

Also if land be given to a man and to his heirs males of his body begotten,
and for defaute of such issue the remaindre thereof to his heirs females of his
body begotten, and after the donee in the tail makes a feoffement in fee
with warenty according, and has issue a son and a daughter, and dies, this
warenty is but a lineal warenty to the son to demand by writ of Formedon in
the discendre. And it is but lineall to the daughter to demand the same land
by write of Formedon in the remayndre, if her brother dye without heir male,
because that she claymeth as heir female of the body of her father begotten.
But in this case if her brother in his life release to the discontinuee. etc.
with waranty. etc. And after dye without issue, this is a collateral waranty
to the daughter, because that she can not conueye to her the right that she
has by force of the remaindre by any mean of descent by her brother, and
therefore the brother is collateral to the title of his sister, and therefore
his waranty is collateral. etc.

Also I have heard say that in the time of king Richard the second there
was a justice in the commen place dwelling in Kent, called Rikhyll, that had
issue diverse sons.

And his intent was, that his eldest son should have certain lands to him
and the heirs of his body begotten, and for defaute of issue, the remayndre
to his second son and so forth. And so the third son and cetera. And
because that he would that none of his sons should alien or make warrantie
for to bar or to hurt that other that should be in the remayndre etc. He
caused to be made an indenture to such effect, that is to say that the lands
and tenementes were given to his eldest son upon this condition, that if the
eldest son aliened in fee or in fee tail etc. or any of his sons aliened
etc. that then their estate should cease and should be void, and that then
the said lands or tenementes immediately should remain to the second son and
to the heirs of his body begotten, and that upon the same condition. S. that if
the second son alien etc. that then his estate should cease, and that than
the same lands and teneme^tes should remayn to the third son, and to the
heirs of his body begotten and so forth, the remaindre to other of his sons
and liuere of seisin was made according. But it seems by reason that all such
remayndres in the form beforesayde he void, and of no value, and that
for.iii. causes. One cause is because that every remaindre that begins by a
deed, it behooves that the remayndre be in him to whom the remayndre is tayled
by force of the same deed when the liuerey of seisin is made to him that has
the frank tenement. And such remayndre was not at the second son as the time
of liuerey of seysyn in the case beforesayd etc.

The second cause is if the first son aliene the tenementes in fee, then is
the fra^ktenement and the fee simple in the alyenee and in none other, and if
the donour had any reuercion by such alienacion, the reuercion is
dyscontinued, then though that by some reason it may be that such remayndre
shall begin his being and his growyng. Immediately after such alienacyon made
to a stranger that has by the same alienacion, franketenement and fee simple,
and also if such remayndre should be good, then might he enter upon the
alyenee where he had no manner of right before the alienacyon, which should be
inconvenient. The third cause is when the condition is such that if the eldest
son alien etc. That his estate shall cease, or shall be void. etc. then
after such alienacion etc. may the donour enter by force of such condition
etc. as it seems, and so the donor or his heirs in such case ought more sooner
to have the la^d then the second son that had no right before such
alienacion etc. and so it seems that such remayndres in the case before said
be void.

Also at the common law before the statute of Glocestre if tenant by the
curtesye had aliened in fee with warranty accordant, after his decease this was
a bar to the heir etc. as it appears by the words of the same statute. But
it is remedied by the same statu. that the waranty of the tenant by the
curtesy shall be no bar to the heir, except he have enough by descent by the
tenant by the curtesye, for before the said estatute that was a collateral
warantye to the heir, because he could not convey any title of descent to
the tenementes by the tenant by the curtesy, but only by his mother or other
of his auncesters etc. and that is the cause why it was collateral waranty.
But if a man enherite take a wife, which have issue a son between them and
the father dies, and the son enters in the land, and endoweth his mother,
and after his mother alieneth that that she has in her dower to an other in
fee, with waranty according, and after dies, and the warranty descends to
the son, now the son shall be barred to demand the same Land because of
the said warranty, because that such collateral warranty of tenant in dower
is not remedied by any statute. The same law is where tenant for term of life
makes an alienacion with warranty. etc. and dies, and the warranty descends
to him that had the reuersion or the remaindre. etc. they shall be barred by
such warranty. etc.

Also in the said case if it so were that when the tenaunte in dower alyeneth.
etc. the heir was within age, and also at that time that the warranty
descends upon him he was within age, in this case the heir may after enter
upon the alyenee notwithstanding the warra^ty descended. etc. because that no
latches shall be adjudged in the heir within age, that he entered not upon the
alience in the life of the tenant in dower, but if the heir was within age at
the time of the alienacyon, and after he came to full age in the life of the
tenant in dower, and so being of full age he entered not in the life of
tenant in dower, and after the tenant in dower dies there paraduenture the
heir shall be barred by such warranty, because it shall be accounted his folly
that he being of full age, entered not in the life of tenant in dower. etc.

Also it is spoken in the end of the said estatute of Gloucester that speaks
of the alienacion with warrantie made by the tenaunte by the curtesy in such
form.

Also in the same manner the heir of the woman after the death of her father
and mother shall not be barred of Accion if he demand the heritage or the
marriage of his mother by a writ of enter that his father aliened in the time of
his mother, whereof no fine is leuyed in the kings court. etc. And so by force
of the same statute if the husband of the wife aliene the heritage or marriage
of his wife in fe with warranty. etc. by his deed in the country, this is clear
law that this warranty shall not bar the heir except he have enough by
discente etc. But the doubt is if that the husband alyen the heritage of his
wife by fine leuyed in the kings court with warrantie et cetera, if this
shall bar the heir without any descent in value etc. And as so that I will
say here certain reasons that I have heard say in this matter I heard my
master sir Richard Newton late chief justice of the common place said once
in the same place, that such warranty that the baron makes by fine levied in
the kings court shall bar the heir though that he have nothing by dyscent,
because the statute says whereof no fine is levied in the kings court etc.
And so by his opinyon this warrantye by syne et cetera abides yet a
collateral warrantie as it was at the common law not remedied by the said
estatute because that the said estatute excepteth the alienacions by fine with
warrantie. And some other have said and yet say the contrary and this is their
proof, that as by the same Chapter of the laid estatute it is ordained that
the warrantie of the tenant by the curtesye shall not bar the heir except
he have by enough discente etc. though that the tenant by the curtesye leui a
fine of the same lands with warrantie and cetera, as strongly as he can, yet
this warranty shall not bar ye heir except he have assetes or enough by
descent etc. And I believe that this is law and therefore they say that it
should be inconvenient to understand the statute in such form that a man
that has not but in the right of his wife may by fine levied by himself of
the tenementes that he has but in the right of his wife with warrantie etc.
shall bar the heir of the said tenementes without descent of the fee simple
etc. where tenant by the courtesy can not do it. But they have said, that
the statute shall be understand after the form, that is to say where the
statute speaks, whereof no fine is levied in ye kings court this is to say
where no lawful fine is rightfullie levied in the same kings court and that is
whereof no fine of the husband and his wife is levied in the kings court, for
at the time of the making of the said statute every state of lands or
tenementes that any man or woman had that should dyscende to his heir was fee
simple without condition or upon condition in deed or in law. And because that
such fine then might lawfullye have been levied by the husband and his wife,
and that the husband and the wife, and the heirs of the husbands warrantie
etc. such warrantie should bar the heir etc.

And so they say that this is the understanding of the said statute, for if the
hu^band and the wife made a feoffement in fee by deed in the country the heir
after the decease of the housebande and the wife shall have a writ of entree
Sur cui in vita and cetera, notwithstanding the warrantie of the housebande.
Then if no such excepcion was made in the statute of the fine leuyed. etc. then
the heir should have the writ of enter. etc. notwithstanding the fine levied
by the husband and the wife because that the words of the statute before the
exception of the fine levied. etc. be generally. etc. that is to say, that the
heir of the woman after the death of the husband and the wife shall not be
barred of accion if he demand the heritage or the marriage of his mother by a
writ of enter that his father aliened in the time of his mother. And so it
should be in the case of the statute except such words were, that is to say,
whereof no fine is levied in the kings court. And so they say that this to
understand, whereof no fine by the husband and the wife is leuyed in the Kings
court the which is lawfully levied in such case. For if the justices have
knowledge that a man that has nothing but in the right of his wife, will
leuye a fine in his name only they will not nor ought not to take such fine
to be leuyed by the husband only without namynge the wife, therefore inquire
of this matter.

Also it is to wit that in such words where the heir demands the
heritage or marriage of his mother, this word is a disiunctyue, and is as
much to say, if the heir demand the heritage of his mother, that is to be
understand the tenementes that his mother had in fee simple by descent or by
purchase, or if the heir demand the marriage of his mother, that is to say,
the tenementes that were given unto his mother in francke marriage.

Also where it is moved in diverse deeds these words in latin. Ego et heredes
met. etc warrantizabimus et imperpetuum defendemus, it is to se what effect
has that word defendemus in such deeds. And it seems that it has not
the effect of warrantise nor comprehends any cause of warrantyse, for if it
should be so that it takes effect or cause of warrantyse, than it should be
put in some fynes leuyed in the kings court. And a man never saw that these
words defendemus was in any fine but al only this word warrantizabimus by
which it seems that this verb warrant^so makes warranty, and is the cause
of warantyse, and none other word in our law.

Also if tenant in the tail be seized of tenementes deuisable by testamente
after the custom. etc. And the tenant in the tail alieneth the tenementes to
his brother in fee, and has issue and dies, and after his brother deuideth by
his testamente the same teneme^tes to an other in fee, and byndeth him and his
heirs to warrantyse. etc. And dies without issue, it seems that this
warrantye shall not bar the issue in the tail if he will sue his wryt of
Formedon, because that his warra^ty descended not to the issue in the Tail, in
so much as the uncle of the issue was not bound by force of the same warrantie
in his life. And thereof that he could not warrant the land in his life, is in
so much that the devise could not take any execucion or effect but after his
decease, and in so much that the uncle in his life was not hold to warrante,
such warrantise ne may not discende from him to the issue in the tail and
cetera, for nothing may dyscende from the auncestre to his heir but the same
that was in the auncestre. Also a warrantye may not go without the nature of
tenementes by custom, but only after form of the common law. For if
tenant in tail be seized in tenementes in borough English, where the custom
is that al tenementes of the same borough ought to dyscende to the youngest
son, and he discontinueth the tail with warrantise etc. and has issue two
sons and dies seized of other lands and tenementes in the same boroughe in
Fee simple to the value and more of the tenementes tayled and so forth, yet the
youngest son shall have a formedon of the tenementes tayled, and shall not be
barred by the warrantise of his father though enough to him descended in fee
simple fro the same father after the custom, for this that the warrantie
discendeth upon the elder brother that is in full life etc. and not upon the
younger son. In the same manner it is of collateral warrantise made of such
tenementes where the warrantise dyscendeth to the elder son etc. this shall
not bar the younger son etc. In the same manner it is of teneme^tes in the
shire of Kente, which be called Gauelkinde, the which tenementes be
departable among the brethren etc. after the custom and cetera, if any such
warrantie be made by their auncestres such warrantyse discendeth all only to
the heir that is heir by the common law, and not to all the heirs which are
heirs of such tenementes after the custom etc.

Also if a tenant in tail have issue two daughters by diverse ventres, and
dies, and the daughters enter and a stranger disceaseth them of the same
tenementes, and one of the daughters releseth by her deed to the disseisour all
her right and binds her and her heirs to warrantise, and dies without issue
in this case the first ye suruiueth may well enter and put out the disseisour
of all the tenementes, for this yt such warra^tise is no discontinua^ce nor
collateral warra^tise to the sister that suruiueth, for this that they be of
half blood, and the one may not be heir to the other after ye common law. But
otherwise it is where there be daughters of tenantes in ye tail by one utter.

Also if tenant in the tail let tenementes to another for term of life the
remai^dre to an other in fee and the collateral auncestre confirms the estate
of the tenant for term of life and byndeth him and his heirs to warrantise
for term of life of the tenan^e for term of life and dies, and the tenant in
the tail has issue, and dies, now this issue is barred to ask the tenements
by writ of formedone during the life of the tenaunte for term of life,
because of the collateral descent upon the issue in the tail. But after the
decease of the tenant for term of life, the issue shall have a formedon. etc.
And upon this I have heard a reason that this case shall prove by another
case, that is to say, if a man let his land to another, to have and to hold
unto him, and to his heirs for term of another life, and the lessour dies,
leuynge him to whose life. etc And a stranger enters in the land that the
heir of the lessee may put hi^ out, for this that in the case next before
said, in so much that a man may bind him and his heirs to warrant to the
tenant for term of life, all only during the life of the tenaunte for term
of life, and the warrantise dyscendeth to the heir of him that made the
warra^tyse, ye which warrantyse is no warrantyse of inheritance but al only
for term of an others life, by the same reason where tenementes be let to a
man to have and to hold to him and to his heirs for term of another life,
if the father dye living he to whose life his heir shall have the tenementes
leuynge him to whose life. etc. For they have said that if a man grant an
annuity to an other to have and to take to him and to his heirs for term of
an others life if the grant dye. etc. That after his heir shall have the
annuitie during the life of him to whose life. etc. Quere de ista materia.

But where such lease or grant is made to a man or his heirs for term of
years, in this case the heir of the less, and the grant shall never have
after the death of the lessee or the grauntee that, that is so letten or
granted, for this that it is Chatell real, and all chatels reals by the
common law shall come to the executors of the grant or of the lessee and not
to the heir. etc.

Also in some cases it may be that howbeit that a collateral warrantyse be
made in fee. etc. yet such warrantise may be defeated and anyented. As the
tenant in the tail discontinue the tail in fee, and the discontinue is
disseysed, and the brother of the tenant in the tail releaseth by his deed to
the disseysoure all his right. etc. with warrantyse in fee, and dies without
issue, and the tenaunte in the tail has issue, and dies, now the issue is
barred of his accion by force of the collateral warrantyse descendynge upon
him, but if after this the discontinue enter upon the disseysour, than may the
heirs in the tail have his accyon of formedon. etc. for this that the
warranty is anyentyd and defeated. For when the warrantise is made unto a man
upon any estate that then he had, if the estate be defeted the warranty is
defeted.

In the same manner it is if the disco^tinuce make a feoffemente in fee
reserving to him certain rent, and for defaute of paymente and reentre etc.
and a collateral au^cestre releaseth to the feffee yt has estate upon
condition etc. and dies without issue though that the warrantise descend upon
the issue in the tail, yet if after the rent be behind and the discontinues
enters into the land etc. the^ the issue in the tail shall have his recovery
by a writ of formedon for this that, that warrantie collateral is defiled. And
so if any such collateral warrantise be pleded against the issue in the tail
in his accion of formedon he may show the matter as it is aforesaid, how the
warrantie is defeted, and so he may well mayntayn his accion.

Also if tenant in the tail make a feffeme^t to his uncle and after his uncle
makes a feffement in fee with warrantise etc. to another, and after the
feoffee of the uncle enfeffeth again the uncle in fee. and after the uncle
enfeoffeth a stranger in fee without warrantise, and dies without issue, and
the tenant in the tail will bring his writ of formedone against the
stranger that was in the feoffemente and cetera, by the uncle, in this case
the issue shall never be barred by the warra^tie that was made by the uncle to
the said first feoffee of his uncle, for this that the said warrantise was
defeated and anyented for this that the uncle took again to him as great
estate of his said first feoffe to whom the warrantie was made as the same
feoffe had of him. And the cause why the warrantie is anyented, in this case
is this that is to say, that if the warrantise were in his force, then the
uncle shall warrant unto himself that may not be, but if the feffee made
estate to the uncle for term of life or in fee tail, saving the reuercion
unto him et cetera. Or that he make a gift in the tail to the uncle, or a
lease for term of life, the remayndre over and cetera. In this that
warrantise is not all utterly aniented, but it is put^e in suspense during the
estate that the uncle had, for after this that the uncle is deadde without
issue, then he in the reuercion or he in the remayndre shall bar the issue in
the tail of his writ of formedon by the collateral warrantyse in such case,
etc. But other wise it is, where the uncle had as great estate in the land
by the feoffe to whom the warra^tise was made as he feoffee had of hi^ etc.

Also if the uncle after such feoffement made with warra^tise or a release made
by him with warrantise be attaynt of felony or outlawed of felony, such
collateral warrantie shall not bar nor grieve the issue in the tail for
this that by the attayndre of felonye the blood is corrupt between them etc.

Also if tenant in the tail be disceised, and after makes a release to the
disseisour with warrantise in fee and after the tenant in the tail is attaynt,
outlawed of felony and has issue, and dies, in this case the issue in the
tail may enter upon the disseisour.

And the cause is for this that no thing makes discontinuaunce in this case
but the warrantie, and the warrantie may not dysce^d to the issue in the tail
for this that the blood is corrupt between him that made the warrantie, and the
issue in the tail. For the warrantise always abides at the common law, and
the common law is such that when a man is outlawed or attaynt of felony, which
outlary is an attayndre in the law that the blood between him and his son and
all other which should be said his heirs is corrupt, so that nothing by
descent may discende to any that may be his heir by the common law. And the
wife of such a man that is so attaynt shall never be endowed in the tenementes
of her husband so attaynt.

And the cause is because men should more eschew to do felony etc. But the
issue in the tail, as to the tenementes tayled is not in such case barred
because he is inheryted by force of the statute and not by the course of ye
common law. And therefore such attayndre of his father or of his auncestre in
the tail etc. shall not put him out of his right, that he should have by
force of the tail etc.

Also if tenant in the tail enfeoffeth his uncle which enfeoffeth another
with warranty etc. if after the feoffe by his deed release to the uncle all
manner of warranty, or all manner of couenauntes reals, or al manner of demaundes
by such release the warranty is extinct. And if the warranty in such case be
pleded against the he^ye in the tail that brings his wryt of formedon to
bar the heir of his accion if the heir have and plede the said release.
etc. he shall defete the plee in bar etc And many other cases and matters be
there, whereby a man may defete warranties.

And it is to wit that in the same manner as collateral warrantye may be
defeted by matter in deed or in law, in the same manner may lyneall warrantie
be defeted. etc. For if the heir in the tail bring a writ of formedo^, and a
lineall warrantie of his auncester inherytable by force of the tail be pleded
against him with that that assets to him descended of fe simple by the same
ancester that made the warrantye if the heir that is demaundant may adnul and
defete the warranty, this suffiseth to him for the disce^t of other tenementes
of fee simple makes nothing to bar the heir without the warrauntye. etc.

FINIS.
Here begins the Table of this present book.
NOw have I made for the my son three books.

The first is of estate that men have of lands or tenementes, yt is to say.
Of tenant in fee simple. Tenant in fee tail. Tenant in the tail after
possibility of issue extinct. Tenant by the curtesy of England. Tenant in
dower. Tenant for term of life. Tenant for term of years. Tenant at will by
the common law. Tenant at will by the custom of the manner.


The second book.
The second book is of Homage.

Fealty. Escuage. Knights service. Socage. Frank almoigne or free alms,
Homage auncestrell. Graund sergeaunty. Pety sergeaunty. Tenure in burgage.
Teenure in vylleynage.
Of three manner of rentes that is to say. ^ent service. Rent charge, and rent
secke.


And these two small books have I made for he for to understand better
certain chapiters of the ancient books oftenures.

The third book.
The third book is of parceners.

Of ioyntenauntes. Tenauntes in common. Estates of lands or tenementes upon
condit. Discentes that take away entres. Continual claim. Relesses.
Confirmacions. Attournementes.
Remitters of garranties, that is to say, Garrantie lineall. Garrantie
collateral. And Garrantie that begins by disseisin.


And know thou my son that I will not that thou believe that all that that I
have said in the said books be law, for that will I not take upon me nor
presume. But of those things that be not law inquire and learn of my wise
masters learned in the law. Notwitstandyng though that certain things that
be noted and specified in the said books be not law yet such things shall
(...) the more apt and able to understand (...) learn the arguments and the
reason (...) law. For by the arguments, and (...) reasons in the law a man
(...) more s^ner come to the certain^ and to the knowledge of the law. Lex
plus laudatur quando ratione probatur. (.?.)

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and Star, by Richard Tottle, the.xvi. day of April the year of our
lord. M.D.LVI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


