THE MYSTERYES OF NATVRE AND ART: Contained in four several Tretises, The
first of water works The second of Fire works,

The third of Drawing, Coloring, Painting, and Engrauing, The fourth of diverse
Experiments, as well serviceable as delightful: partly Collected, and partly of
the Authors Peculiar Practice, and Invention by J. B

^^^nted at London for Ralph Mab and are to be sold by John Iackson (...)
Francis Church at the Kings arms in Cheapeside 1634.



TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, this ensuing Treatise has lien by me a long time, penned,
but in a confused and undigested manner, as I gathered it, practiced, or found
it out by industry and experience. It was not in my mind to have as yet
exposed it to the public view: but being solicited by the entreaties of
some, and those not a few, to impart to each particular person what his Genius
most affected; I was enforced as well for the satisfying of their requests, as
for the avoydance of many inconveniences, to dispose in some order such
Experiments as for the present I was content to impart. Expect no elegancy of
phrase, for my time would not afford that, (nor indeed my self to be the
transcriber.) I endeavored as much as I could, to write in plain terms, that
in regard of the easiness thereof it might suit with the meanest capacity. The
whole book consists of four parts: The first whereof treats of
VVater-workes. The second of Fire-workes. The third of Drawing, Painting,
Graving, and Etching. The fourth and last part treats of several
Experiments, as well serviceable as delightful: which because they are
confusedly intermixed, I have entitled them Extravagants.

Now my chiefest aim and end being the general good, I could wish a general
acceptance, but that is too uncertain to expect: I will content my self that
I am already certain that these my first and weak endeavors will find
acceptance with some, and I hope also with all honest and indifferent Readers;
as for others, hap as hap may me, it is not to be doubted, but that I shall
escape as well as many my betters have done before me. Farewell.

Your Wellwiller, J. B.

To my friend the Author, upon his Mysteries of Nature and Art.
When I scan over with a busy eye
The timely fruits of thy vast industry,
Observing how thou searchest out the heart
Of Knowledge, through the untrodden paths of Art,
How easily thy active mind discries
Natures obscure and hidden rarities,
No greater wonder than thy self I find,
The chiefest rarity's thy active mind,
Which so fore-runs thy age. Thy forward spring
Buds forth betimes, and thou art publishing
Even in the morning of thy day, so soon,
What others are to learn till th'afternoone.
Now since thy first attempts exposed thou have
To public censure, and the Die is cast,
Doubt not of good success: the early rose
(Thou know) is snatched at, even before it blows.
Climb higher yet; let thy quick-sighted eyes
Venture again for new discoveries:
Nor be thou mizer-like, so envious,
As to detain what ere thou find'st, from us;
No, make the world thy debtor; be thou still
As open-handed to impart thy skill,
As now thou art; and may thy teeming brain
Bring often forth such lusty Births again.
R. O.

Of Waterworks.
IT has been an old saying amongst Philosophers, and experience does prove it
to be true, Non datur vacuum, that is to say, Nature will not admit of any
vacuity, or emptiness. For some one or other of the Elements, but especially
Air, and Water do insert themselves into all manner of concavities, or
hollownesses, in, or upon the earth, whether they are such as are formed either
by Art or Nature. For the one it is so obvious, and manifest, as that it needs
not any proof at all. As for the other, I shall make it manifest unto you by
easy demonstration. Let there be gotten a large vessel of glass, or other,
having besides the mouth another hole (though but a little one) at the top:
pour water into the vessel by a tunnell thrust into the mouth of it, and you
shall find that as the water runs into the vessel, a wind will come forth
of the little hole, sufficient to blow out a candle being held over it. This
proves, that before the water was poured into the vessel (though to our sight
it appeared to be empty) it was full of air, which forced out of the vessel
as the water ran in; and the reason hereof is, because the water is by nature
of a massy, subtle, substance; and the air of a windy, light, evaporative
nature: The knowledge of this, with the rarifaction of enclosed air, is the
ground and foundation of diverse excellent experiments not unworthy the
knowledge of any ingenious Artist whatsoever.

The order of the things contained in the first book.
EXperiments of drawing water by the Crane.

Experiments of drawing water by Engines.

Experiments of forcing water by air compressed.

Experiments of forcing water by Engines.

Experiments of producing sounds by air and water.

Experiments of producing sounds by evaporation of water by fire.

Experiments of producing sounds by Engines.

Experiments of motions by evaporating water.

Experiments of motions by rarifying air.

Of VVater-workes.
To draw water by a Crane.
TAke any vessel, of what bigness you please, fill it with water, then take a
Crane (that is a crooked hollow Cane) one end whereof, let be somewhat longer
then the other; put the shorter end of it into the vessel of water, and let
the longer end hang out of the vessel, unto which longer end, put your mouth,
and draw in your breath, and the water will follow; then withdraw your mouth,
and you shall see the water run so long, till it come equal to that end of
the Cane which is within the vessel.

Another.
TAke a deep vessel, having two loopes on one of the sides, fill it nigh full
with water: then take a hollow Cane, like unto the aforesaid, but let there be
fastened unto the shorter end a wooden dish; put the longer end hereof through
the loopes on the side, and that end that has the dish fastened unto it into
the vessel of water, with your mouth as you did in the former, draw out the
air, and you shall see that as the water runs out, the Crane will sink
lower and lower, and so will continue running until the vessel be drawn
empty.

How to make a conceited pot, which being filled with water, will of it self
run all out; but not being filled will not run out.
MAke, or cause a pot to be made of what fashion best likes your mind, and
make a large hollow cane to stand up in the midst thereof; having at the
bottom 2 or 3 small holes; let the top of this cane be close: then make a hole
in the bottom of the vessel, and put up a little cane hollow at both ends,
into the other cane, so that the one end thereof may almost touch the top of the
great cane, and it is done. Note, that if you put into this vessel so much
liquor, that it swim above the top of the cane, it will of its own accord,
run and never cease so long as there is any liquor in the vessel; but if you
fill it below the cane, it will not run at all of it self: the reason whereof
is this; the air being the lighter element, does ascend into the higher place,
but being drawn as in the two first demonstrations out of the Crane, or
forced, as in this, by the weight of the water in the vessel, the water then
tends downwards unto its proper place.

How to dispose 2 vessels upon one foot, that (...) wine may run out of the
one, as you shall put water into the other.
LEt A, B, C, D, be the foot, at each end whereof, place a vessel equal in
bigness, the one to the other; as D, E; also let there pass a hollow cane
from the one to the other, as A, R, A, the ends whereof must almost touch the
tops of the said vessels; in the vessel D, there must be a hollow pipe, as
F, whereby you may by help of a tunnel power water into the vessel: also in the
vessel E, there must be a crane, as G; now if you fill the vessel E with wine
almost unto the top of the crane, and afterward stop the mouth of the
vessel, that the air may not breath forth, it will not run of it self: but
if you put water into the vessel D, the air contained in it, will pass
through the hollow pipe, A, R, A, into the vessel E, where striving for a
greater quantity of room, it presses the wine out of the vessel E, (by the
crane) answerable in quantity unto the water powered into the vessel D.

How to dispose 2 vessels upon one foot, the one being empty, and the other
almost full of wine, and yet shall not run out of the vessel, unless you
fill the empty vessel with water, and then the one shall run pure wine, the
other fair water.
LEt there be 2 vessels placed upon one foot, having a hollow cane passing
from one to the other (as I taught in the precedent problem) but let there be
2 cranes as F, G, one in each vessel; then fill one of the vessels with wine,
but not above the crane, so it will not run of it self: but if you power
water into the other vessel, until it be full, it will cause that wine shall
run out of the one, and clear water out of the other.

To make that the water contained in one vessel, shall ascend into another
vessel placed above it.
LEt A, B, C, D, be a vessel having a partition in the middle, as E, F, let
there be placed upon this vessel, a Cylinder of Glass clear, and very
transparant, that will contain the same quantity of water, that one of the
partitions will, as I, G, H; in the lowermost partition toward the bottom,
let there be a cock, and out of the same vessel let two pipes be made to
pass, the one whereof reaches almost unto the top of the Cylinder, the other
must come out by the side of the Cylinder: also out of the upper partition
there must come another pipe. Moreover there must be a hole, through the top of
the uppermost partition as Y. Fill the lower partition at the pipe, also the
upper partition by the hole Y: note then that if you turn the cock as the
water runs out of the lower partition, the water contained in the upper
partitio^ will ascend through the pipe into the glass Cylinder. When all the
water in the lower partition is run out at the cock, then the water which
before did ascend into the Cylinder, will fall back again into the upper
partition: after this manner may you compose an artificial water clock, if
you note the hours upon the Cylinder, and make the cock after such manner, as
that the water may issue out but by drops.

To make a cup or vessel that so often as you take the liquor out of it, so often
it shall fill it self, but never run over.
SVppose A to be a vessel full of water, having a pipe coming from the
bottom, and rising up into a cup of the just height that the vessel is of;
over the vessel filled with water, let there be placed another vessel, as E.
From this vessel must come a pipe, and reach with in the other vessel. Now
over this vessel there hangs, as it were, the beam of a scale; at the one
end whereof, is fastened a piece of board, having a leather nailed upon the
top; at the other end of this beam must hang a weight, but not full so heavy
as the piece of board lethered is. Fill both these vessels with water, and the
cup also; note then, that if you suck out the water in the cup by the pipe on
the side of it, the water in the vessel will come into it, until it is in
both of equal height: now as the water falls down in A, the piece of board
that is hanged unto one end of the beam falls after it (because it is
heavier then the weight) and so gives way unto the water in E, which runs
into it; and when the vessel is filled again with water, it bears up the
said piece of board against the pipe of the vessel E, so that the water can
run out thereat no longer, except the water be again drawn out of the cup*

Of drawing water by Engines.
BEfore I begin with these, take a word or two by the way. Let it be a
general notion that no engine for water works of what sort soever, whether
for service, or mere pleasure, can be made without the help of Succurs,
Forcers, or Clackes; every of which, I have orderly explayned both by words and
demonstratiue figures.

A Succur is a box, which is made of brass (having no bottom) in the midst
of which, there is a small bar goes cross, the same having a hole in the
middle of it; this box has a lid so exactly fitted unto it, that being put
into it, no air nor water can pass between the creuise: this cover has a
little button on the top, and a seame that goes into the box, and so through
the hole of the aforesaid cross bar, and afterward it has a little button
riueted on it, so that it may with ease slip up and down, but not be taken, or
slip quite out.

A Forcer is a plug of wood exactly turned and leathered about; the end that
goes into the barrel, is semicircularly concaue.

A Clacke is a piece of Leather nailed over any hole, having a piece of lead to
make it lie close, so that the air or water in any vessel may thereby be
kept from going out.

How to harden Leather, so as the same shall last much longer in succurs of
Pumps, then it does unprepared.
LAy such Leather as is well tanned to soake in water, wherein there has been
store of iron filings a long time, or else in the water that has lien a long
time under a grinstone, into the which such iron as has been from time to
time ground away, has fallen and there settled.

The making of a Pumpe to draw water.
SVppose A B C were a deep Well, wherein you would make a Pumpe to draw water
to the surface or superficies of the earth. First therefore you must provide a
pipe of Lead, or a piece of timber bored through, so long as will reach unto
the bottom of the Well: that part that stands in the water must be cut with
two or three arches, as it were, if it be wood; if Lead, it must have somewhat
to bear it a little from the bottom, that the water may thereby be let into
the pipe. Toward the bottom of the pipe in the water there must be fastened a
succur; also another of these succurs must be fastened about two foot above the
top of the ground; then have a bucket fitted unto the hole of the wood or
leaden pipe; let it be well leathered about, and have a clacke at the bottom
of it, and let it be hanged with a sweep as the figure shows: note that
after you have filled the distance between the lower succur, and the bucket
with water, that if you lift up the sweep, it will thrust down the bucket
upon the water, and press it, the water being pressed upon by the bucket,
bears up the clacke, and comes into the bucket; then if you pull down the
sweep, the clacke shuts, and so the water remaynes in the bucket, which
being drawn upward, there being nothing to follow but water, both the succurs
open, and there comes into the pump so much water as the buckets drew out.

The making of an Engine, whereby you may draw water out of a deep Well, or
mount any River water, to be conveyed to any place within three or four miles
of the same. Also it is used in great ships which I have seen.
SVppose A B C D to be a deep Well, and E F to be a strong piece of timber
fastened athwart the same, a good way in the water. In this planke let there be
fastened a piece of timber with a strong wheel in it, as G H, having strong
iron spikes drove athwart the wheel within the creuise, and strongly riueted
on each side: let them be three or four inches distant from each other. Let
there be likewise made in the said planke two holes, in which set two hollow
posts, that may reach to the top of the Well, or so much higher as you desire
to mount the water; let them be made fast that they stir not. In the bottom
of one of these posts, there must be fastened a barrel of brass, as G H, made
very smooth within, and betwixt those two posts at the top; let there be
fastened unto them both another piece of strong timber to hold them fast, lest
they start asunder; and in the midst of that make a mortice, and in it fasten a
strong piece of timber with a wheel like to the former mentioned; the pin
whereof ought to be made fast unto the wheel, and have a crooked handle to
turn about, that by turning of it, you may turn the wheel also. Then provide
a strong iron chain of length sufficient, having on every third or fourth
link a piece of horn, that will easily go through the brass barrel, and a
leather of each side of it, but somewhat broader then the horn; put this
chain under the lower wheel in the Well upon both the hollow posts, draw it
over the upper wheel, and link it fast and straight. Turn then the handle
round, and it will turn the chain round, whose leathers coming up the brass
barrel, will bear the water before them; this goes very strongly, and
therefore had need be made with wheels and wrought upon by horses, for so
the water is wrought up at Broken Wharfe in London.

To make an Engine, which being placed in water will cast the same with violence
on high.
LEt there be prepared a strong table, with a sweep fastened at the one end
thereof, to lift up and down; unto the end of the sweep, let there be linked
a piece of iron having two rods of length sufficient; let there be made a hole
quite through the midst of this table, whose diameter let be about five or six
inches; then provide two pieces of brass in form of hattes, but let the brim
of the uppermost be but about one inch broad, and have diverse little holes
round about it; also in the crown of this must be placed a large succur, and
over it a half globe, from the top of which, must proceed a hollow trunk
about a yard long, and of a good wide bore; then take good liquored leather, 2
or 3 times double, and put between the board and the brims of this, and with
diverse little screws put through the holes of the brimme, screw it fast unto
the top of the table. Note that the table must be leathered also underneath
the compass of the brimme of the lower brass. Now the lowermost brass must
be of equal diameter (in hollownesse) unto the other, but it must be more
spirall toward the bottom, and must have either a large clacke or succur
fastened in it; also the brim of this must be larger then that of the uppermost,
and have two holes made about the midst on each side one; bore then 2 holes in
the table, on each side of the brass one, answerable unto the holes of the
brim of the lower brass, through which holes put the two rods, of the iron
hanged unto the sweep through them, and riuet them strongly into the holes of
the lower brass. Place this in water, and by moving the sweep up and down,
it will with greater violence cast the water on high.

Experiments of forcing water by air compressed.
LEt there be a large pot or vessel, having at the side a piece of wood made
hollow, having a clacke of leather with a piece of lead upon it, within the
vessel also let there be a pipe through the top of the vessel, reaching
almost to the botom of it: at the top of which let there be a round hollow
ball, and on it a small cock of brass. Note that if you fill the said vessel
halfe-full of water, and blow into the hole of the pipe, at the side, your
breath will lift up the clack, and enter the vessel, but when it is in, it
will press down the clack: blow into it oftentimes, so shall there be a great
deal of air in the vessel, which will press so hard upon the water, that if
you turn the cock at the top, the water in the vessel will spin out a good
while.

Another.
LEt A, B, C, D, be a great vessel, having a partition in the middle: let
there be a large tunnell at the top of it, E, F, whose neck must go into the
bottom almost of the lower vessel: let there be a hollow pipe also coming out
of the partition, and almost touch the top of the upper vessel. In the top of
the upper vessel let there be another pipe, reaching from the bottom of the
upper vessel, and extending it self out of the vessel a good way: let the
top of it hang over the tunnell. In the top of the upper vessel let there be a
hole besides, to be stopped with cork, or otherwise: when you will use it, open
the cork-hole, and fill the upper vessel with water: then stop it close again,
and pour water into the tunnell, and you shall see that the water in the upper
vessel will run out of the pipe into the tunnell again. and so will continue
running until all the water in the upper vessel be run out. The reason
thereof is this; the water in the tunnell pressing the air in the lower
vessel, makes it ascend the pipe in the partition, and press the water in
the upper vessel, which having no other way but the pipe, it runs out
thereat.

The forcing of water by pressure, that is the natural course of water in
regard of its heaviness and thinness, artificially contrived to break out of
what image you please.
LEt A, B, C, D, be a cestern placed upon a curious frame for the purpose, let
the bottom of this frame be made likewise in the form of a cestern: Through the
pillars of this frame let there pass hollow pipes from the bottom of the upper
cestern, and descend to the bottom of the lower cestern, and then run all to
the middle thereof, and join in one, and turn up into the hollow body of a
beast, bird, fish, or what your fancy most affects: let the hole of the image
whereat the water must break out, be very small, for so it will run the longer.
Fill the upper cestern with water, and by reason of the weight thereof it will
pass through the pipes, and spin out of the hole of the image.

Experiments of forcing water by Engines.
LEt there be an even straight barrel of brass of what length and bigness
you please: let the bottom of it be open, and let the top be closed, but so
that it be hollow on the outside like a basin: in the midst whereof let there
be a straight pipe erected, open at both ends, also let there be another short
pipe at the side of it, which let be even with the top of the basin on the
outside, but stand a little from it on the side Having thus prepared the
barrel, fit a good thick board unto it, so that it may slip easily up and down
from the top of the barrel unto the bottom, nail a lether about the edges of
it, and another upon the top of it: on the underside of it let there be fastened
a good stiff, but flexible spring of steel, which may thrust the board from
the bottom to the top of the barrel: let the foot of this spring rest upon a
bar fastened acros the bottom of the barrel; let this board also have tied at
the middle a little rope of length sufficient. When you use it, bore a little
hole in the table that you set it on, to put the rope through, and pull the rope
down, which will contract the spring, and with it draw down the board: then
pour in water at the basin until the vessel be full: Note then, as you let
slack the rope, the water will spirt out of the pipe, in the middle, and as you
pull it straight, the water will run into the vessel again. You may make
birds, or diverse images at the top of the pipe, out of which the water may
break.

Another manner of forcing water, whereby the water of any spring may be forced
unto the top of a hill.
LEt there be two hollow posts, with a succur at the bottom of each, also a
succur nigh the top of each: let there be fastened unto both these posts a
strong piece of timber, having, as it were, a beam or scale pinned in it, and
having two handles, at each end one. In the tops of both these hollow posts
fasten two brass barrels, made very even and smooth within, unto these two
barrels let there be fitted two forcers, lethered according to art, at the tops
of these forcers must be fastened two yrons, which must be linked unto the
aforesaid beam; from each post below toward the end of the barrels, let there
be two leaden pipes, which afterward meet in one, to conduct the water up to
the place desired, which if it be very high, there will be need of some
succurs to catch the water as it comes.

The description of an Engine to force water up to a high place: very useful
for to quench fire amongst buildings.
LEt there be a brass barrel provided, having two succurs in the bottom of
it* let it also have a good large pipe going up one side of it with a succur
nigh unto the top of it, and above the succur a hollow round ball, having a
pipe at the top of it made to screw another pipe upon it, to direct the water
to any place. Then fit a forcer unto the barrel with a handle fastened unto the
top; at the upper end of this forcer drive a strong screw, and at the lower end
a screw nut, at the bottom of the barrel fasten a screw, and at the bar that
goes cross the top of the barrel, let there be another screw nut: put them
all in order, and fasten the whole to a good strong frame, that it may stand
steady, and it is done. When you use it, either place it in the water, or over
a kennell, and drive the water up to it, and by moving the handle to and fro,
it will cast the water with mighty force up to any place you direct it.

Experiments of producing sounds by air and water.
LEt there be had in a readiness a pot made after the form of the figure
following, having a little hole at the top, in the which fasten a reed or pipe,
also another little hole at the bottom: press this pot into a bucket of water,
and it will make a loud noise.

Another
LEt there be a cestern of lead or such like, having a tunnell on the top: let
it be placed under the fall of a Conduit, and at the one end of the top, let
there come out of the vessel a small pipe, which let be bent into a cup of
water, and there will be heard a strange voice. Over this pipe you may make an
artificial tree with diverse birds made to sit therein.

How to make that a bird sitting on a basis, shall make a noise, and drink, out
of a cup of water, being held to the mouth of it.
PRovide a cestern, having a tunnell at the one end of the top, and a little
cane coming out of the other end of the vessel; on the top of which let there
be a bird made to sit, also at the bottom of the cestern, let there be a crane
to carry away the water as it runs into the vessel. Place this vessel with
its tunnell under the fall of a conduit of water, and the bird will sing; and
if you hold a cup of water under his bill, he will drink and make a noise.

A device whereby several voices of birds cherping may be heard.
PRepare a cestern having diverse partitions, one above another; let them all
have cranes in the bottoms to carry the water from one to another; also let
each cestern have his several pipe, all of them coming out at the top of the
cestern, on whose tops let birds be artificially made, with reeds in them:
also in the top of the upper cestern let there be a tunnell. Place it under
the fall of a conduit of water, and you shall hear so many several voices as
there are birds.

A device whereby the figure of a man standing on a basis shall be made to
sound a trumpet.
PRepare a cestern having within on the lid fastened a concave hemisphere, in
whose bottom let there be made one or two holes: let there also be a hole in
the top of the said cestern, whereby it may be filled with water as occasion
serves. Also let there be made to stand on the top of this cestern the image
of a man holding unto his mouth a trumpet: this image must likewise have a
slender pipe coming out of the cestern unto the trumpet, in this pipe or cane
there must be a cock, nigh unto the cestern. Also there must come out of the
concave hemisphere at the side of the cestern, a little short pipe, having a
clack on it within the vessel. Fill the cestern about two thirds full of
water, and then cork it up fast, blow then into the vessel at the pipe on the
side diverse times, and the air will force the water out of the hemisphere, and
make it rise up on the sides of it; turn then the cock, and the weight of the
water will force the air out of the pipe, and so cause the trumpet to sound.

Hercules shooting at a Dragon, who as soon as he has shot, hisseth at him.
LEt there be a cestern having a partition in the midst, in the partition let
there be a deep succur, having a small rope fastened unto the top of it: let
the one end of the rope come out of the upper lid of the cestern, and be
fastened unto a ball, the other part thereof let it be put under a pulley
(fastened in the partition) and let it be carried also out of the upper cestern,
and be fastened unto the arm of the image, which must be made to slip to and
again, and to take hold of the string of a steel bow that is held in the
other hand. At the other end of the cestern let there be made an artificial
image of a Dragon, through whose body must come a small pipe with a reed
artificially fastened in the upper part thereof. Note then, that when you put up
the ball, the image will draw his bow, and when you let it fall, the Dragon
will hiss.

Experiments of producing sounds by evaporation of water by air.
PRepare a round vessel of brass, or latin, having a crooked pipe or neck,
whereto fasten a pipe: put this vessel upon a trevet over the fire, and it
will make a shrill whistling noise.

To make two images sacrificing, and a Dragon hissing.
PRepare a cestern having an altar of brass or tin upon it, let therebe in the
cestern a hollow pipe turning up out of the cestern at each end; also in the
middle within the altar, also on the side of the altar into the body of a
dragon artificially made, with a reed in the mouth of it. Let there be two
boxes at the tops of the pipes, on the ends of the cestern, having two crooked
pipes or cranes coming out of them. Fill the boxes with water when you occupy
it, also put fire upon the altar, and the dragon will hiss, and the water in
the two boxes being wrought upon by the heat of the fire coming through the
pipes, will drop into the fire. These two boxes ought to be enclosed in the
bodies of two images, and the two short cranes coming out of them in her arms
and hands.

Experiments of producing sounds by Engines.
PRepare a vessel after the form of the figure marked with the letters A, B,
C, D, place it upon a frame, as F, G, H; this vessel must have a hole in the
bottom, with a pipe fastened in it, as Q, to convay the water contained in it
into a vessel or tub set under it, marked with the letters R, S, T, also a
frame must be fastened at the top of it, as G, H, L, having so many bells with
little beaters or hammers to them (artificially hanged) as are requisite to
express your dedesired tune. Lastly provide a sollid piece of timber, whose
lower part must be fitted unto the aforesaid vessel, so that it may easily
slip up and down, and so high as that its foot resting upon the bottom of the
vessel, the upper part thereof may stand somewhat above all the bells. Note
likewise that that part of this wood above its bottom or foot must be cut away
about three quarters of an inch. Upon this wood thus fitted must be fastened
several pins equal unto each bell, from the top unto the foot thereof, so
disposed that they may orderly press down the inward ends of the hammers of
each bell, according as the tune goes: when you use it, fill the cestern
almost with water, and put the fitted piece of timber into it, and as the water
runs out at the bottom, it it will play upon the bells: note that it were
very requisite to have a cock fastened to the pipe on the bottom of the vessel,
that therewith you might at your pleasure stay the water. The like engines
might be made to play upon wire strings disposed upon a concavous water, to
make the music resound, but because this description gives light enough for
the framing of diverse other, I thought good here to omit them.

Experiments of motions by rarifying water with fire.
LEt there be an altar having a pipe coming out of it, and entering the body of
a hollow ball, let there come out of the same ball a crane, whose lower end
make to hang over a bucket fastened to a rope, and hanging over a pulley, of
which rope the other end must be wound about two spindles, having two doors
fastened unto them, and at the and of the same rope let there be a weight
fastened. So the fire on the altar will cause the water to distill out of the
ball into the bucket, which when by reason of the water it is become heuier
then the weight, it will draw it up, and so open the said gates or little
doors.

Experiments of motions by rarifying air by fire.
LEt there be a round vessel of glass, or horn, and on the top of it a
vessel of brass, and in the midst a hollow pipe spreading it self into four
several branches at the bottom: the ends of two of the branches must turn up,
the ends also of two must turn down; upon these four branches fasten a light
cord, with several images set upon it. Rarifie the air the^ by laying a
red-hot iron upon the top of the brass or tin vessel, and it will turn the
wheel about, so that you would think the images to be living creatures.

Another way.
FIrst prepare a round piece of wood, having a brass box in the midst, such as
they make to hang the mariners compass with, but a good deal bigger, round
about this piece of wood fasten diverse shreds of thin lattin, standing
obliquely or ascew, as the figure does represent; round about these fasten a
coffin of thin pastbord, cut into several forms of fishes, birds, beasts, or
what you please. Prepare a lantern with oyled parchment, sufficient to contain
it, in the midst of whose bottom must be erected a spindle with a narrow
point, to hang the pastbord cut into forms upon: upon each side let there be a
socket for to set a candle in, also let there be made a door in the bottom to
put the candles in at, and after to be shut, and it is done. If you set two
candles in the sockets, the heat of them will turn the whole pastbord of
forms round.

Amongst all the experiments pneumaticall, there is none more excellent than
this of the Weather-glasse: wherefore I have labored to describe the making
thereof as plainly as it possibly might be.

What the Weather-glasse is.
A Weather-glasse is a structure of, at the least, two glasses, sometimes of
three, four, or more, as occasion serves, enclosing a quantity of water, and
a portion of air proportionable, by whose condensation or rarifaction the
included water is subject unto a continual motion, either upward or downward;
by which motion of the water is commonly foreshewn the state, change, and
alteration of the weather. For I speak no more than what mine experience has
made me bold to affirm; you may (the time of the year, and the following
observations understandingly considered) be able certainly to foretell the
alteration or uncertainty of the weather a good many hours before it come to
pass.

Of the several sorts and fashions of Weather-glasses.
THere are diverse several fashions of Weather-glasses, but principally two.

1 The Circular glass.

2 The Perpendicular glass: The Perpendiculars are either single, double, or
treble.

The single Perpendiculars are of two sorts, either fixed or moveable.

The fixed are of contrary qualities; either such whose included water does move
upward with cold, and downward with heat, or else upward with heat, and
downward with cold.

In the double and treble Perpendiculars, as the water ascends in one, it
descends as much or more in the other.

In the moveable Perpendicular the glass being artificially hanged, moves up
and down with the water.

How to make the water.
I Must confess, that any water that is not subject unto putrefaction, or
freezing, would serve the turn, but Art has taught to make such a water as
may be both an ornament to the work, and also delectable to the eye.

Take two ounces of vardigrease in powder, and infuse it so long in a pint of
white wine vinegar, until it has a very green color, then pour out the
vinegar gently from the vardigrease: take also a pint and a half of purifide
May-dew, and put therein 6 ounces of Roman vitreoll in gross powder, let it
stand till the vitreoll be thoroughly dissolved; then mix this with the former
water, and strain them through a cap paper, and put it into a clean glass
well stopped, and 'its ready for use.

Another.
TAke a gallon of rayn water that has settled, infuse therein a day and a night
4 pound of quick lyme; stir it about with a clean stick oftentimes in the day;
in the morning pour the clear water off from the lyme, into a brass pan, and
add thereto 3 pound of sal armoniack; let it stand five or six hours,
afterward stir it about until it be of a perfect blew color, then strain it
through a brown paper rolled within a tunnell, and reserve it for your use.
This water is not so good for use as the former.

How to make the Circular glass.
FIrst you must prepare two glasses, the fashion whereof let be like unto the
figures marked with the letters A, B, and C, D. The glass C, D, is open at
both the ends, also in the middle there is a neck coming up of sufficient
wideness to receive the shank end of the glass marked with the letters A, B.
Then fill the glass C, D, a third part, with either of the waters, and divide
the glass into so many equal parts as you would have degrees; rarifie the
air in the head of the glass A, B, by holding it to the fire, which being yet
warm, reuerse the shank of it into the neck of the glass C, D. Note that if
the water do not ascend high enough, you must take the glass A, B, out again,
and heat it hotter; if it ascend too high, heat it not so hot. If it be in the
dog-dayes, and extreme heat of summer, 1 and 2 are good degrees; if the weather
be most temperate, then 3 and 4 are best; if a frost, 9 or 10. When you have
hit an indifferent degree, lute the joints very close, and fasten a ribben unto
the top of the glass to hang it by. In this glass the water will with cold
ascend the glass A, B, with heat it will descend the glass A, B, and ascend
the horns of the glass C, D.

How to make the single perpendicular glass, whose water ascends with cold,
and descends with heat.
PRepare two glasses after the fashion of these figures underset, F, G, I, I.
Always choose those upper glasses that have the least heads, else they will
draw the water too fast, and press it too low: also let not the shank of the
glass be too wide: it is no matter to be curious in choosing the lower
glass. Having provided both these glasses, make a frame for them about one
inch longer than the shank of the glass F, G, having a hole at the top to put
the same through. There ought to be a great deal of care had in making the
frame so, that the foot thereof may be of a greater compass than the top, to
the end that it may stand firm, and not be subject to be turned down, which
will distemper the whole work. After you have provided the frame, proceed to
the making of it after this manner. Put both the glasses into the frame, and
then divide the shank of the glass F, G, into so many equal parts as you
would have it have degrees; write figures upon paper, and paste them on (with
gum tragagant dissolved in fair water;) then fill the bottom glass 2 thirds
with the water, and rarifie the air in the glass F, G, so often until you
have hit such a degree as is most fitting for the temper of the weather, put in
a little crooked hollow cane for the air to pass in and out at, but let it
not touch the water: then stop it about the joints of the glass with good
cement, that nothing may come out. Make an artificial rock about it, with
pieces of cork dipped in glue, and rolled in this following powder, and it is
done.

The powder for the rock.
Take mother of Pearl 2 pound, small red Coral di* pound, Antimony crude 4
ounces, and make a gross powder of them.

To make the single perpendicular glass, ascending with heat, and descending
with cold.
PRepare two glasses after the fashion of the figure A, B, and C, D: let the
glass A, B, have a small pinhole at or about the top of all, and let the
glass C, D, have besides the hole at the top, another hole at the bottom with
a short pipe. Provide such a frame for this as you did before for the other;
then put the glasses into it, fasten the bottom glass to the bottom of the
frame, having a hole at the bottom, through which the pipe of the glass C, D,
may pass, fit a cork unto it: then lute the two glasses together, so that no
air may pass between the joining; divide then the shank into so many degrees
as you please, and figure it as before I taught you, then with the heat of a
candle, rarifie the air in the glass C, D, and fill it a third part full of
water, and then put the cork fast in. Note that if the first heating of the
glass raise not the water unto your content, you must repeat it over and over,
until it do: when it is sufficient, then stop the cork in very firm, that no
water may come out, and it is made.

How to make the double perpendicular glass.
PRepare two glasses like unto the figure marked with the letters A, B, the one
of them must have a small hole in or about the head thereof. Prepare likewise
for the bottom a vessel of the fashion of the figure G, H, having two mouths,
at each end one, also a cock in the middle, as K: divide then the shank of the
glass without the hole in the top, into equal parts, and set figures upon it*
next lute them both fast into the necks of the bottom vessel. (But first
remember to put them in a frame:) when the cement is dry turn the cock of the
bottom vessel, and rarify the air in the glass that has no hole at the top;
then set the bottom vessel a little way into a vessel filled with water, and
it will suck up the the water as it cools, when the bottom vessel is full,
also the water mounted in that top glass without a vent, up to a fitting
degree; (the temper of the weather regarded) then depresse (but gently) the
glasses into the vessel of water, until the water be come up into the glass
with the vent at the top sufficiently, that is, so that in both the glasses may
be contained so much water as will fill the shank of one, and about 2 or 3
degrees of the other; then turn the cock, and take away the vessel of water
from under them, let them down, and fasten the bottom vessel unto the bottom
of the frame, and make a rock about it, or else what other works you please,
that the art may not be discerned. Lastly, set figures upon both, but first
upon that without the vent, beginning from the bottom, and proceeding upwards,
then lay your hand upon the head of it, which will depresse the water, which
when it comes equal to the degrees, paste the same degree on the place of
the water in the other glass with the vent, and it is done.

AFter the same manner is the treble glass made: but whereas in the double
glass there was but one glass that had a vent at the top, there is two in
this, both whose shanks must contain the just quantity of water that the glass
without the vent will contain. If you do well observe the form of the
subsequent figure, you cannot go amiss.

How to make the moveable perpendicular glass.
FIrst prepare the glass A, B, fill it almost top-full of water, provide also
the glass K, L, having a loop at the top of it: divide it into so many equal
parts as you would have degrees, and on the mouth thereof fasten a thin board,
that will easily slip in and out of the bottom glass, make then a weight of
lead or brass somewhat heavier than both the glass and board fastened thereto;
and then tie a little rope to the loop of the glass A, B, and the weight at
the other end thereof. Rarify the air contained in the glass L, and reverse
it into the glass A, B, filled with water, and hang the plummet over two
little pulleys fastened in a frame made for the purpose, and as the glass K, L,
cools, the water will ascend the same, and so by the change of the outward
both the glass and water will move accordingly.

Of the use of all the several sorts of Weather-glasses.
ALbeit the forms of Weather-glasses are diverse, according to the fancy of the
Artist, yet the use of all is one and the same: to wit, to demonstrate the
state, and temper of the season, whether hot or cold; as also to foreshew the
change and alteration thereof.

1 Note therefore, that the nature and property of the water in all the glasses
that have no vent holes at the top, is, to ascend with cold, and descend with
heat. But in them that have vents, it descends as much as it ascends in
these.

2 The sudden falling of the water is an evident token of rain.

3 The continuance of the water at any one degree, is a certain token that the
weather will continue at that stay it is then at, whether it be fair, or
foul, frost or snow. But when the water either rises or falls, the weather
will then presently change.

4 The uncertain motion of the water is a sign of fickle weather.

The single perpendicular with a vent, moves upwards with cold, and downwards
with heat, and is quite contrary in quality to the former, only that it moves
uncertainly in fickle and uncertain weather, and keeps a constant place in
stayed weather.

These rules are all certain and true: now you may according to your own
observation frame other rules, whereby you may foretell the change of the
weather the water being at any one degree whatsoever.

A Water-clock, or a Glass showing the hour of the day.
LEt there be provided a deep vessel of earth, or any thing else, that will
hold water, as A, B, C, D, provide also a glass made after the fashion of the
figure marked with the letters E, F, G. It must be open at the bottom, and
have also a small hole at the top, through which if you can but put the point of
a needle, it is sufficient. This glass must not be so long as the vessel is
deep, by about two inches. Then take a just measure of the length of the
glass K, ^, G, and set it on the inside of the vessel A, B, C, D, from the
bottom toward the top, and then make a raze round about the vessel; there
must be fitted unto this earthen vessel, a pipe reaching from the top of the
outside thereof, (where there must be a cock unto it) and going to the bottom,
where it enters the same, and again extends it self almost unto the circle
or mark rased on the vessel A, B, C, D. Fill then the vessel with fair water
up to the raze, or circle, and turn the cock, and put the glass into the
water, and you shall see that the glass by reason of its heaviness, will tend
toward the bottom of the vessel, but very slowly, by reason that the air
contained therein has so small a vent: turn an houre-glasse, and at the end
of each hour make a mark upon the glass equal with the water, and it is
done. When the glass is quite sunk to the bottom of the water, turn the cock,
and with one blast of your mouth at the pipe, it will ascend again.

Another fashioned one.
PRepare a vessel, as A, B, C, D, having a very small cock unto it, whose
passage ought to be so small, as that the water might issue out but by drops.
Prepare likewise a vessel, as E, F, G, H, having at one end of it a pillar of
a foot and a half, or two foot high: let there be fitted unto this vessel a
board, so that it may freely without stay, slip up and down: toward one side
of this board, there must be a good big hole, which must be placed under the
cock of the other vessel. Then fasten unto the top of this board, the image of
Time or Death, and pointing with a dart upon the pillar aforesaid: turn then an
hour glass, and at the end of every hour, make a figure on the place of the
pillar that the image with his dart points at, and it is made. For note, the
dropping of the water out of the cock through the hole of the board whereon the
image stands, causes the same to ascend by little and little. Mark the
figures.

Another artificial Water-clock, which may be set conveniently in a double
Weather-glasse.
FIrst prepare a cestern, as A, B, C, D, partition in the middle, let there be
made two pipes, the one whereof must reach out of the upper cestern, and
descend almost to the bottom of the lowest cestern, as I, K; the other must be
a short one, and have a very small hole, that the water may thereby issue out
of the upper cestern but by drops; also at the side nigh the bottom of the
upper cestern, let a small pipe enter. To the upper cestern fit a board, (with
a piece of lead nailed upon it to make it somewhat heavy) so that it may easily
slip up and down in it; this board must have a loop to fasten a rope unto, and
you must so poyse the said board, that it being hung up by a line, may hang
even, and level. Then prepare a box to put over the cestern, which ought to
stand about six inches above the cestern. In the top of this box let there be
fastened a long pulley with a creuice to put a small rope over, in this creuice
it were fitting to fasten small pins, to the end that the rope might turn the
said wheel as the water faleth from under the board: let the spindle of this
pulley come out at one side of the box whereon there is a Dyall drawn,
containing so many hours as you would have it go for; unto this end of the
spindle let there be fitted a needle, or director, to show the hour, then put
a small cord over the pulley in the box, fasten one end thereof to the loop of
the board, and at the other end let there be tied a weight not quite so heavy
as the board, then fill the upper cestern with water, and the board will press
it out into the lower vessel, at the pipe O, drop by drop, and as the board
sinketh lower, it will by means of the rope upon the pulley, turn the index
fastened unto the spindle of the pulley about the dyall; you may set it by an
houre-glasse or Watch: when it is quite down, if you do with your mouth blow
into the pipe at the side of the cestern, the water will all mount up again
into the upper cestern.

A wheel which being turned about, it casts water out at the spindle.
LEt A, B, be a tub having in the bottom a brass barrel, with a hole open
quite through one side of it: let D, E, F, be a wheel, whose spindle must be
also hollow, and have a hole through one side of it, so that being put into the
hollow barrel, both the holes may be equal together. Note then, that so long
as these holes are equal together, the water will run out at the spindle of
the tub, but if you turn the wheel to another side, it will not run.

A water-presser, or the mounting of water by compression.
LEt there be provided a barrel of brass, of what length and wideness you
please, let it be exactly smooth within, and very tight at bottom; unto this
barrel fit a plug of wood leathered about, and let there be made diverse small
holes quite through it, wherein fasten diverse forms and shapes of birds,
beasts, or fishes, having very small pin-holes through them, for the water to
spin out at: you shall do well to make this plug very heavy, either by pouring
molten lead into certain holes made for the purpose, or else by fastening some
weight unto the top: fill the barrel with water, and put the plug into it,
which lying so heavy upon the water, it will make it spin out at the pin-holes
of the images placed thereupon.

How to compose a great or little piece of Water-worke.
FIrst prepare a table, whereupon erect a strong frame, and round about the
frame make a moat with a leaden cestern to be filled with water; let the leaden
moat somewhat undermine as it were the frame, which ought to be built in three
stories, one above another, and every one lesser than another. Within the
middle story fasten a very strong Jack that goes with a weight, or a strong
spring, the ending of whose spindles ought to be crooked, thus Z, whereby
diverse sweeps for pumps may be moved to and again, whose pumps must go down
into the moat, and have small succurs unto them, and convayances toward their
tops, whereat the water may be mounted into diverse cesterns, out of some whereof
there may be made convayances in their bottoms, by small pipes running down
into the river or moat again, and there breaking out in the fashions and forms
of Dragons, Swans, Whales, Flowers, and such like pretty conceits: out of
others the water may fall upon wheels, out of whose spindles, the water
turning round, may be made to run. In the uppermost story of all, let there
be made the forcer by air, as I taught before, or else a presser, having at
the top, Neptune riding on a Whale, out of whose nostrils, as also out of
Neptunes Trident, the water may be made to spin through small pin-holes; you
may also make diverse motions about this work, but for that the multitude of
figures would rather confound than instruct the Reader, I have of purpose
omitted them.



THE SECOND BOOK, Teaching most plainly, and withal most exactly, the
composing of all manner of Fireworks for Triumph and Recreation.

By I. B.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for Ralph Mab. 1634.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, there has a desistance been occasioned since the inception
of this work, by reason of the occurrence of certain Authors, that contrary
unto my knowledge had labored so fully herein; but after consideration had
(that for the most part they were but translations) I thought it might be no
less lawful and commendable for me than for others, to communicate unto such
as are yet desirous of further information, that wherein I have bestowed both
cost and pains. Notwithstanding, I have so used the matter, as that I might
not derogate from the estimation had of others to increase mine own. Read it
thoroughly, judge indifferently, and if thou likest it, practice considerately.
If thou art ignorant herein, I am sure it will instruct thee, and though well
experienced (which perhaps thou art) I make no question, but that thou may
find somewhat which thou have not heard of before; So farewell.

Your Wellwiller I. B.

Of Fire-workes.
I Have ever found (in conference with diverse desirous of instruction in any
Art or Science whatsoever) that the sum and chiefest end of all has been, to
know the reasons and causes of those things they were desirous to be informed
in. Wherefore I thought good, before I came to the matter it self, to set down
some few Praecognita or Principles (as I may so call them) whereby such as are
ingenious, upon occasion, may inform themselves, if they stand in doubt of the
cause of any thing that is hereafter taught.

Certain Praecognita or Principles, wherein are contained the causes and
reasons of that which is taught in this Book.
1 THe four Elements, Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, are the prima principia (I
mean the materials) whereof every sublunary body is composed, and into the
which it is at last dissolved.

2 Every thing finding a dissolution of those naturae catenae, that is, means
whereby their principia are connected, and joined together, their lighter parts
ascend upward, and these that are more gross and heavy, do the contrary.

3 It is impossible for one and the self same body to possess at one time two
places; It follows therefore, that a dense body rarefied, and made thin,
either by actual or potentiall fire, requires a greater quantity of room to
be contained in, then it did before. Hence it is, that if you lay your hand
upon a glass, having a straight mouth reuerst into a dish of water, it
rarifieth the air contained therein, and makes it break out thorough the
water in bubbles. Also, that gunpowder enclosed in the barrel of a gun, being
rarefied by fire, applied unto the touchhole, it seeks a greater quantity of
room, and therefore forces, the bullet out of the barrel. This is called
violent motion.

4 According unto the strength and quantity of a dense body rarefied, and
according unto the form and length of its enclosure, it forces its compresser
further or nearer at hand.

Thus much shall suffice to have spoken concerning the Praecognita: Now I will
pass ad majora, and ad magis necessaria: to wit, those necessary Instruments,
and several sorts of Ingredients, that ought to be had in readiness.

As for the instruments they are these; Morters and Pestles, Serces, also
several sorts of Formers, Paper, Parchment, Canuas, Whipcord, strong binding
thread, Glue, Rosin, Pitch, with diverse vessels meet to contain and mingle
your compositions in. The ingredients likewise are chiefly these, Saltpeter,
Rochpeter, Sulpher, Charcoale, good Gunpowder, Filings of steel, oil of
Peter, and Spirit of wine.

Instructions for choosing your ingredients.
SAltpeter is very good, if that being laid upon a board, and fire put to, it
rise with a flamed ventosous exhalation, raising no scum, nor leaving no
pearl, but only a black specke burnt into the board.

The best brimstone, is quick brimstone, or li^e sulphur, and that sort is best
that breaks whitest; if this cannot be gotten, take of the whitest yellow
brimstone.

The best Coals for use are the sallow, willow, hazel and beech; only see
they be well burnt. Every of these ingredients must be powdered finely and
searsed.

All kinds of gunpowder are made of these ingredients imposed, or incorporated
with vinegar, or aquauitae, and afterward grayned by art: The Saltpeter is the
Soul, the Sulphur the Life, and the Coals the Body of it. The best sort of
powder may be distinguished from others, by these signs:

1 If it be bright and incline to a bluish color.

2 If in the handling it prove not moist but auoydeth quickly.

3 If being fired, it flash quickly, and leave no dregs nor setlings behind it.

A device to try the strength of diverse sorts of Gunpowder.
IF so be you have at any time diverse sorts of Gunpowder, and it is your desire
to know which of them is the strongest, then you must prepare a box, as A, B,
being four inches high, and about two inches wide, having a lid ioynted unto
it. The box ought to be made of iron, brass, or copper, and to be fastened
unto a good thick plank, and to have a touchhole at the bottom, as O, and that
end of the box where the hinge of the lid is, there must stand up from the box
a piece of iron or brass, in length answerable unto the lid of the box: this
piece of iron must have a hole quite through it, toward the top, and a spring,
as, A, G, must be screwed or riueted, so that the one end may cover the said
hole. On the top of all this iron, or brass that stands up from the box,
there must be ioynted a piece of iron (made as you see in the figure) the
hinder part of which is bent downward, and enters the hole that the spring
covers; the other part rests upon the lid of the box. Open this box lid,
and put in a quantity of powder, and then shut the lid down, and put fire to
the touch hole at the bottom, and the powder in the box being fired, will blow
the box lid up the notches more or less, according as the strength of the
powder is* so by firing the same quantity of diverse kinds of powders at
several times, you may know which is the strongest. Now perhaps it will be
expected that I should speak of the making of Saltpeter, Gunpowder, Coals,
with the refining of Sulphur: but because they are so commonly to be had, and
to be bought at better rates than I know they can be made by any that intend
it for their private use, I have forborne it: There are diverse I am sure that
would willingly be in action: I have thought fitting therefore to set down
the collection of natural Saltpeter, which is a kind of white excrescence
growing upon stone-wals, and (as I have seen great store) in the arches of
stone-bridges. First therefore gather this white excrescence, and add unto it
Quick lyme, and Ashes, mingle them, and put them into a halfe-tub that has a
hole to draw the liquor out at; then put into this halfe-tub warm water, and
let it stand until all the peter be dissolved; let it then drain out at the
hole by little and little, and if the liquor be not clear, double a brown
paper, and put it within a tunnell, and strain the liquor through it. Then
boil it and scum it until it be ready to congeale, neither too hard, nor yet
too tender: then take it from the fire, and put it into shallow vessels, either
of earth or brass; set them in a cold place two or three days, and it will
shoot into isicles, and this is called Rochpeter. Thus much for the
ingredients. Now I am come unto the Formers, the number whereof I cannot
certainly determine, because it depends upon the variety of each particular
persons invention. Now that I may formally proceed, I will first make some
distinction of each kind in general; and then I will speak of every
particular contained in each general. Fireworks are of 3 sorts.

1 Such as operate in the air, as Rockets, Serpents, Raining fire, Stars,
Petards, Dragons, Fire-drakes, Feinds, Gyronels, or Fire-wheeles, Balloons.

2 Such as operate upon the earth, as Crackers, Trunks, Lanterns, Lights,
Tumbling bals, Saucissons, Towers, Castles, Pyramids, Clubs, Lances, Targets.

3 Such as burn in or on the water, as Rockets, Dolphins, Ships, Tumbling bals.

Part of either of the three kinds are simple, and part are compounded; part
also are fixed, and part moveable, First I will treat of the diverse
compositions, and then of the Formers, Coffins, and manner of composing every
of them.

Of the diverse compositions of fire works.
FIrst of the compositions of fire works, for the air; and therein first I
will speak of the compositions for rockets, because that all moveable
fireworkes have their motion from the force of them accordingly applied.

Compositions for Rockets of all sizes, according unto the prescription of the
noted Professors, as Mr Malthus, Mr Norton, and the French Author, Des
recreationes Mathematiques.
A Composition for Rockets of one ounce.
TAke of gunpowder, saltpeter and charcoale, of each one ounce and a half,
mingle them together, and it is done. Note here, as I told you before, that
all your ingredients ought to be first powdered by themselves, and afterward
mixed very well together.

A Composition for Rockets of two and three ounces.
TAke of gunpowder four ounces and a half, saltpeter one ounce, mix them
together.

A Composition for Rockets of four ounces.
TAke of gunpowder four pounds, saltpeter one pound, charcoale four ounces,
mingle them together.

A Composition for Rockets of four ounces.
TAke of gunpowder four pounds, saltpeter one pound, charcoale four ounces,
brimstone half an ounce, mingle them together.

A Composition for all middle sized Rockets.
TAke of gunpowder one pound, two ounces of charcoales; mingle them.

A Composition for Rockets of five or six ounces.
TAke of gunpowder two pound five ounces, of saltpeter half a pound, of
charcoale six ounces, of brimstone and iron scales, of each two ounces, mingle
them.

A Composition for Rockets of ten or twelve ounces.
TAke of gunpowder one pound and one ounce, saltpeter four ounces, brimstone
three ounces and a half, charcoale one ounce, mingle them.

A Composition for Rockets of one pound, or two.
TAke of saltpeter twelve ounces, gunpowder twenty ounces, and charcoale three
ounces, quick brimstone and scales of iron, of each one ounce, mingle them.

A Composition for Rockets of eight, nine and ten pounds.
TAke saltpeter eight pounds, charcoale two pounds twelve ounces, brimstone one
pound four ounces. Note that no practitioner (how exact soever) ought to rely
upon a receipt, but first to try one rocket, and if that be too weak add
more gunpowder, if it be too strong let him add more charcoale until he
find them fly according unto his desire. Note that the charcoale is only to
mitigate the violence of the powder, and to make the tail of the rocket
appear more beautiful. Note also that the smaller the rockets be, they need
the quicker receipts, and that in great rockets, there needs not any
gunpowder at all.

The Composition for middle sized Rockets may serve for Serpents, and for
rayning fire, or else the receipt for Rockets on the ground, which follows
hereafter.
Compositions for Stars.
TAke saltpeter one pound, brimstone half a pound, gunpowder four ounces,
this must be bound up in paper or little rags, and afterward primed.

Another receipt for Stars.
TAke of saltpeter one pound, gunpowder and brimston of each half a pound;
these must be mixed together, and of them make a paste, with a sufficient
quantity of oil of peter, or else of fair water; of this paste you shall make
little balls, and roll them in dry gunpowder dust; then dry them, and keep
them for your occasions.

Another.
Take a quarter of a pint of aqua vitae, and dissolve therein one ounce, and a
half of camphire* and dip therein cotton bumbast, and afterward roll it up
into little balls; afterward roll them in powder of quick brimstone, and
reserve them for use.

Another receipt for Stars, whereof you may make fiends and diverse
apparitions according unto your fancy.
Take gum dragant, put it into an iron pan, and roast it in the embers; then
powder it, and dissolve it afterward in aqua vitae, and it will become a
jellie, then strain it; dissolve also camphire in other aqua vitae. Mix both
these dissolutions together, and sprinkle therein this following powder.

Take saltpeter one pound, brimstone half a pound, gunpowder three pound,
charcoale half a pound; when you have mingled and stirred them well together,
mix them well with the aforesaid jelly, and then make it into little balls,
or into what fashion else you please, then cool them in gunpowder dust, and
keep them for use.

Compositions for receipts of fireworkes, that operate upon the earth.
FOr Rockets there needs only gunpowder finely beaten and searced.

Likewise for all the other sorts, searced gunpowder will serve, which may be
abated, or alayed with charcoal dust at your pleasure.

Compositions for fireworkes that burn upon, or in the water.
A Receipt for Rockets that burn upon the water.
TAke of saltpeter one pound, brimstone half a pound, gunpowder half a pound,
charcoales two ounces. This composition will make the Rockets appear with a
great fiery tail. If you desire to have it burn clear, then take of
saltpeter one pound, three ounces of gunnepowder, brimstone half a pound.

A Receipt of a composition that will burn, and feed upon the water.
TAke masticke half a pound, white Frankincense, gum sandrake, quickelime,
brimstone, bitumen, camphire, and gunpowder, of each one pound and a half,
rosin one pound, saltpeter four pounds and a half, mix them all together.

A Receipt of a composition that will burn under water.
Take brimstone one pound, gunpowder nine ounces, refined saltpeter one pound
and a half, camphire beaten with Sulphur, and Quicksilver; mix them well
together with oil of peter, or linseed oil boiled, until it will scald a
feather. Fill a canvas ball with this composition, arm it, and ballast it with
lead at the bottom, make the vent at the top, fire it well and cast it into
the water, and it will fume and boil up slowly.

A Receipt of a Composition that will kindle with the water.
Take of oil of Tile one pound, Linseed oil three pounds, oil of the yelks
of eggs one pound, new quick lime eight pounds, brimstone two pounds, camphire
fowr ounces, bitumen two ounces; mingle all together.

Another.
Take of Roch peter one pound, flower of brimstone nine ounces, coals of
rotten wood six ounces, camphire one ounce and a half, oil of eggs, and oil
of Tile enough to make the mixture into a paste.

Or take callamita one pound, sal niter and asphaltum, of each four ounces,
quick brimstone three ounces, liquid varnish six ounces; make them all into a
paste. Put either of these compositions into a pot wherein is quick lime, so
that the lime come round about the past; then lute it fast, bind it close with
wires, and set it in a limekill a whole baking time, and it will become a stone
that any moisture will kindle.

If you make a little hole in the top of an egg, and let out all the meat, and
fill the shell with the following powder, and stop the hole with wax, and cast
it into a running water, it will break out into a fire.

Take of salt-niter, brimstone, and quick-lyme, of each a like quantity, mix
them.



How to make stouple, or prepare cotten-week to prime your fireworks with.
Take cotten-week, such as the Chandlers use for candles, double it six or
seven times double, and wet it thoroughly in saltpeter water, or aqua vitae,
wherein some camphire has been dissolved, or, for want of either, in fair
water; cut it into diverse pieces, roll it in mealed gunpowder, or powder and
suphur; then dry them in the Sun, and reserve them in a box where they may lie
straight, to prime Stars, Rockets, or any other fireworks.

How to know the true time, that any quantity of fired Gun-match that shall do
an exployt at a time desired.
TAke common gun-match, rub, or beat the same a little against a post to soften
it; then either dip the same in salt peter water, and dry it again in the
Sun, or e^se rub it in a little powder and brimstone beaten very small, and
made liquid with a little aqua vitae, and dried afterward; try first how long
one yard of match thus prepared will burn, which suppose to be a quarter of an
howr, then four yards will be a just hour. Take therefore as much of this
match as will burn so long as you will have it to be ere your work should
fire, bind the one end unto your work, lay loose powder under, and about it
lay the rest of the match in hollow, or turning so that one part of it touch
not another, and then fire it.

A Water called Aqua Ardens.
TAke old red wine, put it into a glased vessel, and put into it of orpment
one pound, quick sulphur half a pound, quick lime a quarter of a pound;
mingle them very well, and afterward distill them in a rosewater still: a
cloth being wet in this water will burn like a candle, and will not be
quenched with water.

The Formers are instruments wherewith the coffins for the fireworkes are made
and formed, whereof in order; and first for Rockets that operate in the air.
The Formers for Rockets consist of two parts, represented by the two next
figures following, the uppermost whereof represents the body of the Former,
which must be made of Maple, Walnut tree, or of other close and well seasoned
wood, seven inches, wanting half a quarter in length, turned equally, and
exactly hollow quite through, the diameter of whose hollownesse, represented by
the line at the top marked at each end with a, e, must be one inch and a
quarter; the breech of the former is represented by the lowest figure, the
upper part whereof, must be made to enter the body of the Former; the height of
the whole breech, beside the broach is 3 inches and a half; it enters the
body of the Former, one inch and three quarters; the top of it must be made
like a half nutmeg, in the midst whereof (as Mr. Malthus and des recreationes
Mathematiques) there must be fastened an iron broach two inches and a half
long: then put the breech into the body, and pierce them both quite through as
the figures do represent at G and H; then make a pin as K, L, to pin them
both together, which must be made to take out at pleasure: then mark both the
body and breech near the said hole with this * or any other mark, that you
may thereby know how to fit them afterward.

The next figure marked with M, N, does express both the parts of the Former
pinned together; unto this Former there must be made one Rowler expressed by
the figure A; also two rammers expressed by the figures G H; they must all of
them be turned very even and smooth; let the diameter of the thickness of the
rowler expressed by the line on the top marked I I, be three quarters of an
inch, let it be eight inches long from I, to 2, and have a hole bored in the
very midst of the end, so wide and so deep, that all the broach of the former
may enter the same: this is to roll the coffin of paper and upon. The first
rammer noted with the figure G, must be seven inches and a half long, from 3
to 4, and have a hole at the end of it, as the rowler had; this rammer is to
ram the composition into the former (having the coffin in it) until it be
raised above the broach. The second rammer noted with the figure H, must be
five inches and three quarter long from 5 to 6, and it must have no hole at the
top as the other had; it serves to ram the composition into the coffin, when
it is once raised above the broach. The diameter of the thickness of these two
rammers must be a thought less than the diameter of the rowler, to the end
they may not hurt the coffin, being driven in. Now to make the coffins you must
take paper, parchment, or strong canuasse, roll it hard upon the rowler, so
often until it will go stiff into the body of the Former: then thrust it
rowler and all through the said hollow body of the Former; put then the broach
of the formers breech into the hole of the rowler, and with a piece of strong
packthred choke the coffin within half an inch of the rowlers end (which you
may do best, and with most ease, if you first dip the end of the coffin into
fair water, so that it may be wet quite through) after you have choked the
coffin, you must thrust the breech of the former, the coffin also with the
rowler in it, up into the body of the former: then pin the breech fast to the
body of the former with the pin, and on the rowler give one stroke or two with
a mallet lightly, then unpin the breech, and with the rowler thrust the coffin
out of the bottom of the former, lay it by until the end be dry. Thus you may
at leisure times make diverse coffins ready to use upon any occasion. The
following figure expresses an empty coffin.



Take one of these coffins, put it into the Former, and take the composition
for middle-sized rockets (mentioned before) and put thereof spoonful after
spoonful, until you have filled the coffin unto the top of the former, after
the putting of every second spoonful into the coffin, with a mallet give two
or three blows upon the head of the rammer, that the composition may be well
rammed into the coffin: every third or fourth driving M. Norton wishes (if the
rockets are to be fired in three or four days) to dip the rammer in
gum-dragant, and camphir dissolved in spirit of wine, or good aqua vitae: but
if it will be a month before they will be fired, then dip the rammer in oil
of peter, or liquid varnish, and linseed oil mixed together: If you would have
the rocket to give a report or blow, then within one diameter of the top, drive
a bottom of leather, or six or eight double of paper, pierce and prime either
of them through in three or four places, and fill the rest of the coffin with
whole gunpowder; afterward drive another bottom of leather, and then with
strong packthred choke the coffin close un^o it: then take the rocket out of
the Former, and prime it at the broach-hole with a piece of prepared stouple,
and bind unto it a straight rod 6 or 7 times the length of the rocket, and so
heavy, that being put on your finger, it may ballast the rocket within two or
three diameters of the same: mark the following figure, which represents a
rocket ready made and finished, A, B, the rocket, C, the stouple that primeth
it, D, E, F, the rod bound unto the rocket with two strings, G, H, I, the hand
that poyseth it.



How to make Serpents.
THe coffins for serpents are made of paper rolled nine or ten times upon a
rowler not much thicker than a goose quill, and about four inches long. The
coffins must be choked almost in the midst, but so that there may be a
little hole, through which one may see: the longest part of the coffins for
Serpents must be filled with the composition specified before: if you would
have it wamble in the air, then choke it not after the composition, but if you
would have it wamble, then halfe-choak it, as is demonstrated by the following
figure, the shorter end of the coffin must be filled with whole gunpowder, and
choked quite up, as appears at B, in the figure M, N, O, which is the figure
of a Serpent ready made.



How to make rayning fire.
TAke diverse goose quils, and cut off the hollow ends of them, and fill them
with the composition before mentioned, stopping them afterward with a little
wet gunpowder, that the dry composition may not fall out.

How to make stars.
I Have sufficiently taught the making of these in describing their
compositions, wherefore I will now only present the figures of them unto your
view; A, A, signifies two that are bound up in paper or cloth, and peirced,
and primed with stouple: the other two, E, E, signify those that are made up
without paper, and need no priming more than the powder or sulphur dust that
they are rolled in.

How to make Petards.
YOu must make the coffins for them either of white iron, or else of paper, or
parchment rolled upon a Former for the purpose, and afterward fitted with a
cover, which must be glewed on: these coffins must be filled with whole
gunpowder, and peirced in the midst of the broad end, and primed thereat with
prepared stouple; the paper ones must be covered all over with glue, and the
peirced. The figure of a Petard ready made, and primed, is signified by the
figure E.

How to make compounded Rockets.
FIrst you must make the Rocket I taught you before; you must not choke the
end of it, but either double down half the coffin, and with the rammer and a
mallet, give it one or two good blows: then with a bodkin pierce the paper
unto the composition, or else drive a bottom of leather fitted unto the bore
of the Rocket, and pierce it through in two or three places; then pare or cut
off the coffin equal thereunto; to this end of the rocket you must bind a
coffin wider a great deal then the Rocket is; strew into it a little gunpowder
dust, that it may cover the bottom of this coffin, and put therein with their
mouths downward either golden rain, or serpents, or both; also stars, or
petards; you must put some gunpowder dust among these; when you have filled the
coffin with these or such like, cover the top of it with a piece of paper, and
paste upon that a picked crowned paper, balast it with a rod, and it is
finished; the figure follows.



How to make fiends, or fearful apparitions.
THese must be made of the compositions for Stars, wrought upon cotton week
dipped in aqua vitae, wherein camphire has been dissolved, and after what
fashions your fancy does most affect.

How to make fire Boxes.
YOu must make the coffins for fire Boxes of paste-board, rolled upon a Former,
of what bigness you list; then bind them about with packthread, and glue over
the cords; also glue bottoms unto them, which must be pierced with a bodkin to
prime them at. In these boxes you may put golden rain, stars, serpents,
petrars, fiends, devils. The tops of these fire boxes must be covered with
paper as the compound Rockets. Note that you must strew gunpowder dust a pretty
thickness on the bottom of the fire-boxes, and prime the hole at the bottom
with prepared stouple.

How to make Swevels.
SWevels are nothing else but Rockets, having in stead of a rod (to ballast
them) a little cane bound fast unto them, where through the rope passes. Note
that you must be careful to have your line strong, even and smooth, and it
must be rubd over with soap that it may not burn. If you would have your
Rockets to return again, then bind two Rockets together, with the breech of
one toward the mouth of the other, and let the stouple that primeth the one,
enter the breech of the other; both kinds are expressed by the figures, the
uppermost whereof represents the single one; A B signifies the Rocket; D E,
the cane bound unto it, through which a rope passes. The lowermost
represents the double Rocket; A B signifies one Rocket, and C D another; E
the stouple that primeth the one, and enters the breech of the other; the cane
that the rope passes thorough is supposed to be behind the two Rockets.

How to make Gironells, or fire wheels.
THe making of fire wheels consists only in the placing of Rockets, with
the mouth of one toward the tail of another, round about certain moveable
wheels; wherefore I think it sufficient only to describe the diversity of
their fashions which follow.



How to make flying Dragons.
THe flying Dragon is somewhat troublesome to compose; it must be made either
of dry and light wood, or crooked-lane plates, or of thin whalebones covered
with Muscovie glass, and painted over. In the body thereof, there must be a
void cane to pass the rope through; unto the bottom of this cane must be
bound one or two large Rockets, according as the bigness and weight of the
Dragon shall require; the body must be filled with diverse petrars, that may
consume it, and a sparkling receipt must be so disposed upon it, that being
fired, it may burn both at the mouth and at the tail thereof; then hang the
wings on in such wise, that they may shake as the Dragon runs along the line;
you may dispose diverse small serpents in the wings; mark the figure.

How to make fire Drakes.
YOu must take a piece of linen cloth of a yard or more in length; it must be
cut after the form of a pane of glass; fasten two light sticks cross the
same, to make it stand at breadth; then smeare it over with linseed oil, and
liquid varnish tempered together, or else wet it with oil of peter, and unto
the longest corner fasten a match prepared with saltpeter water (as I have
taught before) upon which you may fasten diverse crackers, or Saucissons;
betwixt every of which, bind a knot of paper shavings, which will make it fly
the better; within a quarter of a yard of the cloth, let there be bound a piece
of prepared stoupell, the one end whereof, let touch the cloth, and the other
enter into the end of a Saucisson: then tie a small rope of length sufficient
to raise it unto what height you shall desire, and to guide it withal: then
fire the match, and raise it against the wind in an open field; and as the
match burns, it will fire the crackers, and saucissons, which will give
diverse blows in the air; and when the fire is once come unto the stoupell,
that will fire the cloth, which will show very strangely and fearfully.



How to make Balloones, also the mortar Piece to discharge them.
THe diameter of the hollownesse of the mortar Piece must be one foot, the
longer it is the further it will carry. Let the diameter of the hollownesse of
the sack be the third part of a foot, and half a foot deep* it must have a
square foot, and a portfire to strew into the bottom of the sack on the side
of it; this portfire is to be made like a cane about three inches long, and
have a bottom sodered unto the inside of the screw, which bottom must be
pierced with a small touchhole. This mortar piece may be made of iron, red
copper, or for a need with pastbord, armed with cord, and glewed over, but the
sack, and foot of it must be made of wood, and the pastbord mortar must be
nailed fast upon it. A Balloone must be made of canuasse rolled eight or nine
times upon a Former, it must be made so, that it will easily go into the
mortar piece; into this Balloone you may put Rockets, Serpents, Stars,
Fiends, Petards, and one or two Saucissons to break the Balloone; then choke
it up with cord, and prime it with a little cane rammed full of a slow
composition; fill the stock of the mortar piece full of whole gunpowder, then
screw on the portfire, O, then put the Balloone done to the bottom of the
mortar with the cane that primeth it, downward into the stock; then with tallow
or grease stop the chinks between the Balloone and the mortar, and it is ready
to be discharged, which you may do by putting fire to the portfire, and while
that burns, retreat out of harms way.

A, the figure of the morterpeece with its portfire. O, B, C, a Balloone ready
made. D, an empty coffin for a Balloone.

Of Fireworks for the earth.
How to make Rockets for the earth
THe moulds for these Rockets for the earth are not made like those for the
air, because that it is required that these should last longer, and have a
more gentle motion: observe therefore the following directions for the making
of them, which may serve for all occasions, without any alteration for bigger
or lesser. Let the diameter of their hollownesse be half an inch, let their
hollownesse be five or six inches long, let the rowler for to roll the coffins
on, be the third part of an inch thick, and let the rammer to charge it be a
thought less, let the breech be three quarters of an inch long, and let the
breech enter half an inch into the mould, then fill it with the composition
proper for it, observing those rules in the ramming it, as you did in ramming
rockets for the air; when you have filled it within an inch of the top of the
mould, double down a quarter of the coffin, beating it with three or four
strokes of the mallet; then with a bodkin pierce it in two or three places, and
then put in the quantity of a pistol charge of whole gunpowder, then double
down the half of the coffin, giving it a gentle blow or two with the mallet,
and with a strong packthred choke the rest of the coffin, and what remains
after the coffin is choked, cut it of, and it is made.

How to make Crackers.
IT is well known, that every boy can make these, therefore I think it will be
but labor lost, to bestow time to describe their making: only thus much, if
you would make a Cracker to give forty, fifty, a hundred, or two hundred
blows, one after another, then bind so many Crackers upon a stick, so that
the end of the one may join to the mouth of the other.

How to make Trunkes.
THese you may make of paste-board, paper, or wood, and of what bigness and
length you please, and ram them full of the composition of Rockets for the
earth; if you would have them to change color, then alter the composition that
is, put in two or three spoonfulls of the composition of Rockets for the water,
and ram that in, then put in two or three spoonfulls of the composition of
Rockets for the air, and ram that in, then put in two or three spoonfulls of
gunpowder dust, and ram that in, do so till you have quite filled it then
tie a bottom of leather upon it, and pierce it and prime it with stoupell;
after the same manner may you make lanternes and lights.

How to make tumbling balls.
MAke a ball of canvas, and fasten in it a double Rocket for the earth; you may
stuff the rest of the ball with a slow composition of two parts charcoale
dust, and one part of gunpowder dust, mingled together, and put diverse petrards
amongst it.

How to make Saucissons.
SAucissons are of two sorts, either to be placed upon a frame, or such like,
and so to be discharged with a train of gunpowder, or else to be discharged
out of the morter-peece. The standing Saucisson is thus made; you must roll
paper or canvas, nine or ten times upon a roller as A, B, and choke the one
end of it: fill it then with whole gunpowder, and then choke the other end
also, then cover all the Saucisson with cord, and glue it over; then pierce one
end of it, and prime it with a quill filled with gunpowder dust; place it upon
a form having a a hole for the quill to pass thorough; then fire it by a
train of gunpowder laid under the frame, it will give a report like a canon:
mark the figure F F.

How to make the flying Saucisson to be delivered out of the mortar piece.
MAke a coffin for this, as you did for the former; first, fill it almost with
whole gunpowder, then put upon that gunpowder dust, which you must ram hard
into the coffin, so that it may be one finger thick; then choke it close,
and arm, and prime it as you did the former. It is represented by the figure,
K M.

How to make a fire sword.
YOu must make a sword of wood, having a deep channel in the back of it,
wherein place first a Rocket for the ground; then two or three serpents
upright; (with their mouths inward) let the stoupell that primeth the Rocket
come under the mouth of the serpents, so that being kindled, it may set them on
fire, and enter the breech of the next rocket, so fill the channel quite full
with rockets and serpents, bind the rockets fast into the channel, but the
serpents must be placed so, that being once fired, they may fly out of the
channel, and it is made: mark the figure G, P.

The description and making of three sorts of Fire-lances.
TO make the first Fire-lance, whose figure is noted A, you must make a hollow
trunk of what length or bigness you please, either of wood, paper, or pastbord
rolled on a rowler, and armed with some cord and glue: first put into the
bottom of whole gunpowder about one or two fingers thick; then ram upon it a
pastebord peirced with a little hole in the middle, having a quill fastened in
it, which quill must be filled with a slow composition, or else with gunpowder
dust: this quill must stand up in the lance two or three inches; then fill the
coffin up to the top of the said quill with stars, and strew among the
stars some gunpowder dust, then put pastebord over them, having a hole for
the quill fastened in the former bottom of pastebord to pass; then upon this
pastebord ram gunpowder dust one or two fingers thick, then put a row of
serpents in, and in the midst of the serpents put a cane open at both ends, and
filled with gunpowder dust; this cane must be somewhat longer than the
serpents, and it must pass through a pastebord, which must be put over: then
put some more gunpowder dust, and ram it in upon it, and upon that put another
row of serpents, with a cane in the midst of them filled with a slow
composition, and upon them put gunpowder dust, or else a slow composition,
ramming it in till the lance be full; then put a pastebord upon it, and in the
midst of the pastebord put a little cane filled with a slow composition, then
fasten it upon a staff of what length you will, and it is made.

To make the second Fire-lance, you must prepare a trunk like unto the former,
first ram in the bottom of it some of the composition of rockets for the earth
about two fingers thick, then put a pastebord upon it, having a petard fastened
in the midst; this pastebord must be pierced in three or four places, round
about the petard, that thereby the powder that is rammed over the pastebord may
take fire: then ram in some more composition upon the petard, about two or
three fingers thick, then another petard, then more composition, so doing
until you have filled the trunk: then fasten it upon a staff, and and prime
it as you did the former, it is represented by the figure noted B.

To make the third Fire-lance you must have a trunk also, which must be rammed
full of a slow composition, of two parts charcoale dust, and one part gunpowder
dust well mixed, prime it as the former, then bore diverse holes round about it,
from the top to the bottom, into every of which holes glue a saucisson, or a
serpent, or a little ball filled with gunpowder dust, and having a petard in
the middle: either of these must be well primed, and their primed ends must be
toward the inside of the lance, so that as the lance burns downward, it may
orderly give fire unto the saucissons, bals, and serpents: the figure D
represents a lance having three rows of serpents, three rows of bals, and
three rows of saucissons, fastened round about it.

The description and making of two sorts of Fire-clubs.
TO make the first you must make an ovall ball of pastebord, canvasse, or
parchment glewed together, which you must first fill with a slow composition,
ram it in, and then bore diverse holes round about it, and put therein serpents,
fire bals, or what you will: fasten it upon a staff, and prime it in the top
with a cane filled with a slow composition: this is represented by the figure
A, A.

To make the second you must fill diverse canes open at both ends (and of a foot
long, or more, or less, as you think fit) with a slow composition, and bind
them upon a staff of four or five foot long; prime them so that one being
ended, another may begin: you may prime them with a stouple or match (prepared
as before) make an osier basket about it with a hole in the very top to fire it
by, and it is done.

The figure F, F, represents the staff, with the canes bound upon it. The
figure marked G, represents the staff having a basket wrought over it.



How to make a Fire-target.
MAke a Target of osier twigs, or else of light wood, and bind upon it diverse
canes filled with a very slow composition: the canes must be open at both
ends, and primed with stouple, that one may give fire unto another: in the
midst of all you may set up a large cane also, if you please, which you may
fill with the same composition as you did the others. Mark the figure L, M, N,
O:

Of Fireworks for the water.
How to make Rockets for the water.
THe diameter of hollownesse of the mould for Rockets that swim on the water,
must be one inch, and eight inches long: let the breech enter into the body of
the Rocket one inch, and it must have no broach at all in it. Let the diameter
of the thickness of the rowler be three quarters of an inch, the rammer must
be a thought lesser; then ram it full of the composition of Rockets for the
water; join to the upper end of it a Saucisson: then cover it all over with
melted pitch, rosin, wax, or tallow, to the end that the water may not spoil
the coffins; and to make it float along the water, bind a rod about two foot
long, as you did unto the rockets for the air: now if you would have the
rocket to change his actions, (that is, to swim one while above the the water,
and one while under the water) then put into it in the filling, one spoonful
of composition, and ram that in; then one spoonful of whole powder, and ram
that in; and then another of composition, and after that another of whole
gunpowder, so do until you have filled it quite. If you would have it change
color, then shift the composition diverse times, (that is, put in one spoonful
of the composition of rockets for the water, then another spoonful of the
composition of rockets for the air, or rochpeter and gunpowder mixed) until
you have filled it.

How to make a Rocket that shall burn a good while in the water, and then
mount up into the air.
FIrst you shall make a rocket for the water, and bind unto the lower end a
stick about two foot and a half long, having a large hole in the end thereof:
then tie unto it (but loosly, so that it may easily slip out) a rocket for the
air, and let the stouple that primeth for the rocket for the air, enter into
the breech of the water rocket, then let the end of the rod of the rocket for
the air enter into the hole of the rod of the rocket for the water: besmeare
then both the rockets with tallow, grease, or wax, or any oil color that the
water may not spoil the coffins of the rockets; then hang a stone at the
bottom of the stick that has the hole in it, to make it sink down into the
water; then fire the water rocket, and cast them into the water; the fired
rocket will burn in the water, and being consumed, will give fire unto the
other rocket, which being loosly tied, will slip the bond, and mount up into
the air. This is represented by the figure G, G. The floating rocket mentioned
before, is expressed by the figure noted I, K.



The description and making of two sorts of fire bals for the water.
FOr to make the first, you must make a ball of Canvas, about the bigness of a
Football, or bigger if you please, and fasten in it a double Rocket for the
water: if you will, also you may stuff the rest of the ball with the
composition that will burn under the water, and cut holes in the sides, and
therein fasten other bals, and petrards in them: then cover the ball over with
Tallow, Pitch, or painting, except the place where the Rocket is primed, and it
is done. It is represented by the figure noted with A, and it will tumble up
and down in the water.

To make the second fire-ball, you must first make a ball of Canvas,
Pasteboard, or such like, and cut a wide hole in the top of it, and place in it
a channel of Tin pierced in diverse places: fill the channel with the
compositions of Rockets for the water; against every hole thereof, place a
petrard: cover it with a cover, pitch it over, and prime it, then ballast it
with lead, or a stone, that the vent may burn upwards, and it is done. It is
represented by the figure B.

How to make a Dolphin.
YOu must make the body of it of Pasteboard glued together, fill the body with
the composition of Rockets for the water, pierce it in the back with diverse
little holes, wherein put Serpents, besmeare the body all over with the
following pap: Take gunpowder dust, four ounces, camphire, and sulphur, or
brimstone in powder, of each one ounce, make them into a soft pap with oil of
tiles, then bind unto it a large Rocket for the water, which Rocket must be
armed (as before) that the water may not hurt it: then ballast it with a wyre,
having at each end a piece of lead of weight sufficient, and it is done. Mark
the figure.

I might have been infinite in the describing of such like with Ships, Towers,
Castles, Piramides. But considering that it would but increase the price of the
book, and not better your understanding: since all consist of the former
works, which are so plainly described, as that the most ignorant may easily
conceive thereof, and (if any whit ingenious) thence contriue others, of what
fashion they list.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK Of Drawing, Limming, Coloring, Painting, and Graving.

By I. B.



LONDON. Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for RALPH MAB, 1634.

THE THIRD BOOK of Drawing, Painting, Limming, Graving.
THe Art of Drawing is in it self most excellent, and most worthy
commendations in whosoever it is: yea it is an Art so necessary unto all
ingenious Artists, as that in no wise they can be without it, and my self have
found it to be true, that the sight of a good draught is more unto an
ingenious person, then a whole Chapter of Information; Wherefore I have,
according unto my knowledge and practice therein, faithfully penned the same;
for the use of all such as bear affection unto the Art, and are desirous to be
instructed therein: And for that diverse persons cannot attain unto it, or
perhaps are loath to bestow any time to practice it: whereby they might come to
a requisite perfection: for such I have set down certain directions, and
those so facile, and easy; that persons altogether unskilful, may (having a
pattern) work very well; But before I begin, it behooveth that I prescribe
what things are to be had in readiness to work withal: first therefore
provide good smooth and clear paper, diverse plummets made of black lead,
oker, or black chalk, or else Charcoals made of Ash, Sallow, or Beech, split
in sunder, and pointed; also a wing: having provided these your implements, you
shall thus begin to work. First, let the thing, whose pourtrature you intend
to take, stand before you, so that the light be not hindered from falling upon
it, and with a pointed piece of charcoale draw it rustically; which when you
have done, consider a while whether all the parts thereof are proportionable,
and whether it carry the semblance of the thing that you drew it from, which if
it do not, wipe it out with your wing, and begin anew: but if it be faulty on
one part only, wipe only that part out, and draw it again; whenever it
likes you, or that you have so drawn it, that you can find no great fault in
it: wipe it over gently with your wing, so that you may perceive the former
strokes: then with your black chalk, or black lead plummets, draw it as
perfectly, and as curiously as you can, and shadow it according as the light
falls upon it; This way is workman like, and the most difficult of all, yet
by a little practice may easily be attained unto: so that the persons stand
well affected unto the Art. Instead of white paper, you may take light colored
blew paper, and draw upon it with charcoale, and white chalk pointed, which
will show very well: but note, that after you have made your draught, you must
wet it in fair water, and let it dry of it self; this will make the drawing
to hold fast on, which would otherwise easily be wiped off. This may serve for
such as are contented to take some pains to attain so noble a Science. But
for others there are diverse other helps, which follow in order.

How to take the perfect draught of any printed, or painted Picture.
TAke a sheet of Venice (or in stead thereof) of the finest white paper that
you can get: wet it all over with clean sallet oil: then wipe the oil off
from the paper, as clean as you can, so that the paper may be dry, otherwise
it will spoil a printed picture by the soaking through of the oil: having
thus prepared your paper, lay it upon any painted or printed picture, and you
shall see the picture through the same more perfectly appearing, then through
glass, and so with a black lead pen, you may draw it over with ease, and
better first with a soft char-cole, and then with a pen. After that you have
thus drawn the picture upon the oyled paper, put it upon a sheet of clean
white paper, and with a little stick pointed, or (which is better) with a
feather taken out of a Swallows wing: draw over the picture again, and so you
shall have the same very prettily and neatly drawn upon the white paper, which
you may set out with colors, as shall be taught hereafter.

Another way.
HAving drawn the picture, first open the oyled paper, put it upon a sheet of
clean white paper, and prick over the same drawing, with a good big pin, then
from the clean sheet, that is pricked, pounce it upon another: that is, take
some small coal, powder it fine, and wrap it in a piece of Tiffanie or such
like, and bind it up therein loosely, and clap it lightly over all the pricked
lines by little and little, and afterward draw it over again with a Pen or
Pencill, or otherwise as you please.

Another way very pretty and easy to be performed.
TAke some Lake, and grind it fine, and temper it with Linseed oil, and
afterward with a pen, draw with this mixture (in stead of Ink) all the out
strokes of any printed picture, also the muscles: then wet the contrary side of
the picture, and press it hard upon a sheet of clean white paper, and it
will leave behind it all the stroke of the said picture that you draw over.

Another way much like the former.
TAke Printers Blacking, grind it fine, and temper it with fair water, and
with a pen dipped therein, draw over the master strokes and out lines of the
muscles: wet then a fair paper with a sponge, and clap the picture upon it,
pressing it very hard thereupon, and you shall find the strokes you drew,
left upon the fair paper.

An easy way to lessen any picture: that is, to draw a picture from another,
in a lesser compass.
FIrst, with a ruler, and a black lead plummet, draw a line at the very top:
also another at the bottom parallel, or equally distant from the other: from
the upper line, let fall two perpendicular or plum-lines even unto the
lowermost line, so those four lines will make a square: now you must divide
this square into diverse equal parts, with a pair of compasses, and draw lines
with a ruler and black lead plummet, quite over the picture: so the less
lines will divide the picture into equal parts or squares: then take a fair
paper, and make as many squares upon it, as there is in the picture: you may
make them as little as you will, but be sure that they are equal, and of just
number with those in the picture. Having thus crossed your picture, and drawn
over your fair paper into squares, take a black lead pen, and draw the
picture by little and little, passing from square unto square, until you have
finished the whole: still observing the order of the squares as they stand in
either: then draw it over with a pen, in which second drawing of it over, you
may easily mend any fault: when it is dry, rub it over with the crum of white
bread, and it will take off all the black lead strokes, and your draught only
will remain fair upon the paper or parchment. Here I might have entered into
discourse of drawing paralels, perpendiculars, making of squares, and such
like: but to deal truly, I was as loath to trouble my self, as to weary you:
you shall need only to provide a ruler of thin brass or copper, having a
cross thwart one end of it: the charge will not be much, nor the use tedious:
the figure follows, noted A, B.



Let a, b, c, d, be a line given, whereon to erect a perpendicular or plumb
line: lay the ruler so, that the cross over the end of it, may lie full upon
the Line, then draw a Line by the side of the rule, and it is done.

A very easy way, to describe a Town, or Castle: being within the full sight
thereof.
FOr the effecting of this, you must have a frame made, and crossed into equal
squares with Lute strings, and figured at the end of each string: this frame
must have a foot, wherein it must be made to be lifted higher or lower as
occasion serves; also you must divide your paper that you are to draw upon
into so many equal squares as your frame contains: having the like figures at
the ends of each line that there is on the frame; before this frame must be
placed a style or bodkin having a little glass on the top of it for to direct
the sight. Note now that the nearer any thing comes unto the Center, the
lesser it appears: hence it is that a Town of a mile, or more long, or a
huge great Castle, at a distance may be comprehended, and that easily within
the limits of so small a frame; By the style direct your sight from one part to
another, beginning at one square, and proceeding through the rest in order as
they lie; Mark well the following figure.



How to make a Deske: by means whereof you may draw, and that most exactly
with great facility any printed picture, or sollid Image.
FIrst let there be a frame made, and with hinges let be joynted unto a board
of equal breadth unto it: let this frame also have two stays at the top, at
each end one, by means whereof the deske may be raised higher, or lower, as
need shall require; then fasten to the frame a piece of pure clear glass
fitted thereunto, and it is finished. The figure follows.

The Deske.



The manner of using this Deske is thus, If the picture that you intend to draw
be a printed one, then first fasten it next unto the Deske with wax, paste, or
such like: upon it fasten a sheet of fair paper: If it be in the daytime
place the back of it toward the Sun; if it be in the night that you work,
place a lamp behind it, and so you shall see perfectly every (even the least)
stroke of the picture, which with your pen you may draw as acurately as any
Limmer whatsoever. If it be a solid piece, then place it behind the Deske,
between the light and the Deske: then fasten a sheet of clean white paper
upon the Deske; raise then the Deske higher, or lower until you see the
perfect shadow of the image through your Deske, and paper, and then draw the
posture of the Image, and shadow it afterward (without the Deske) as light
falls upon it.

An easy way to take the natural, and lively shape of the leaf of any herb
or tree, which thing passes the Art of man to imitate with Pen or Pensill.
FIrst take the leaf that you would have, and gently bruise the ribs and
veins on the backe-side of it, afterward wet that side with Linseed-oyle, and
then press it hard upon a piece of clean white paper, and so you shall have
the perfect figure of the said leaf, with every vein thereof, so exactly
expressed as being lively colored, it would seem to be truly natural, by this
we learn, that Nature being but a little adjuvated or seconded with Art, can
work wonders.

Now for the farther information of such as are desirous of exemplarie
instruction, I have set down in order following the delineation of the
proportion of such things as in my judgment seemed most necessary for young
beginners, and those in such easy demonstrations as for the most part they
consist of equal squares, and require no more for their right understanding,
then diligent observation, I might have filled a whole Book of such like: but
having considered that what I had done, was a sufficient ground for a farther
procession, I thought fitting to leave each person to the exercise and practice
of his best Invention.



I thought fitting to give you a word or two, wherefore I have not made the
cross pricked lines to pass through the figures.
The reason is, 1 because the figure would have been thereby somewhat defaced;
2 because some choose rather to draw without such rules; 3 for others with a
ruler and black lead plummet they may cross the figures through, and with
white bread crumbs take out the same again at pleasure.

Of Painting.
THe principal end and subject of this Art, is to set out things both in
proportion of parts, and liveliness of color.

For the former, the proportion of parts, I have given sufficient information
for the meanest capacity in the precedent part of this tractat: now therefore
I will speak of the other, the coloring or setting out in colors. But first
provide a frame or Easel called by Artists, which is very necessary to work
upon, especially in greater pieces of work: the form whereof follows.

The Easel.

Also you must provide diverse little shells to put your colors in, also pensils
of all sorts, both for priming and other: a light ruler of one foot and a
half, or two foot long: and colors of all sorts ground very fine upon a
porphire or marble. Having provided these, you shall set to work, observing
the subsequent directions.

Painting may be performed either with water colors, or with oil colors.

First I will speak of water colors, wherein I shall observe two things.

First, the diversity of colors, and preparations. Secondly, their mixture,
and manner of laying them on the ground.

First of the first, the diversity of colors and their preparation.

Colors are either simple or compounded, merely tinctures of vegetables, or
substances of minerals, or both: the simple colors are such as of themselves,
being tempered with the water or oil, do give a color. The compounded are
such, whose ingredients do exceed the number of one. Vegetables are roots,
juces, berries, and such like things as grow out of the earth. Minerals are
such as are dig'd out of the earth, as earth, and stones, etc. All which follow
in order, as well their preparations, as description. First note that every
color to be ground, ought first to be ground with the gall of a neat: then let
them dry of themselves in a cold place, afterward grind them with gum water
for your use.

Now I am come to the second thing observable (to wit) the mixture and laying
the colors on the grounds, which is thus: your colors prepared for use, ought
to be tempered according unto direction, still observing a mean: and to that
end, mix them by little and little, till the color please you; first you must
lay on the ground color, and let it dry thoroughly: then with a small pensill,
prick on the second color, else it will be apt to run abroad, nor can you
work it so well, to make it seem lively, as you may by pricking it on,
especially in small pieces.

If you are to paint over maps, or printed pictures that have writing in them,
they use to lay on the thinnest colors, and always before you lay any colors
upon paper, wet the back side of it with fair water, wherein store of Alum
has been dissolved, and let it dry of it self: after wet it again, and let
it dry: do it the third time, for this will strengthen the paper, that the
color shall not sink through it, and moreover it will make the color show
the brighter, and last, the better.

To make Gum water to temper your Colors with.
TAke clean water, and put into it of gum Arabicke a little, and let it stand
until the gum be dissolved. Now you must have a care that it be neither too
thick, by reason of the Gum, nor yet too thin: for with the one you cannot
work well, and the other will not bind the color fast.

A Purple color.
TAke two pound of Heidleber, two ounces of Alum, half an ounce of ashes of
Copper, half a pound of water; put them into a Skillet, and let them boil
till a third be consumed: when it is cold, strain it into a clean vessel,
and let it stand a while, then strain it into another, and then let it stand
till it be thick enough.

A Crane Color.
You must only grind black Lead with Gum water.

Brown Color.
TAke good brown, and grind it with Gum water: his false color is made
with two parts brown, and a third part white lead, sad it with the same brown.

Hair Color.
Take Vmber or Spanish brown, grind it, temper it with Gum water.

A Blew.
Boil Mulberries with Alum.

An Emerauld Color.
TAke Verdigreese, and grind it first dry, and put unto it a little of the
Gall of a neat: also of Saffron, and the juice of Rue, of each a little: grind
them together, and put them into a shell, and let it dry there: when you would
use it, grind it again with Vinegar or Verjuce, and a little neats gall
dissolved in either of them. His false color is two parts green, and a third
ceruse: it must be sadded with a good green.

A Motlie green.
This color is compounded of red and green.

A black Color.
FIrst you must lay on a light black, mingled with white lead, and afterward
when it is dry, sad it with good black; for sad black, mix Indie Baudias
with Gum water.

A marble or ash color.
This is compounded of black and white.

A russet or sad Brown.
This color is made by compounding a little white, with a good quantity of red.

A brown Blew.
Take two parts of Indie Baudias, and a third of ceruse and temper them with
gum water.

A Brass Color.
This is compounded of Masticot and Vmber.

A gold yellow for Arms.
TAke Orpment, and Masticot, grind each by themselves: but in grinding of the
Masticot, add a little Saffron, and work with them. Note you may alay your
Orpment with chalk, and sad it with brown of Spain or O ker de Luke.

Azure.
TAke of white lead four ounces, of Indicum two ounces, put them into a leaden
pot with vinegar: boil them well, and that which swimmes on the top is the
color.

A purple or violet Color.
THis is a compounded color, and it is made either by mixing a quantity of
Azure, and a portion of Turnsole: or else by mixing a quantity of russet, and
a quantity of Azure:

Sanguine or Blood-colour.
THis is likewise a compounded color, and it is made by mixing a good
quantity of Cinaper with a little black.

Orange-tawny.
THis color is compounded of a bright red, and a bright yellow.

A Lyon-tawny.
THis color is made by mixing red lead and Masticot together.

A Carnation, or Flesh-colors.
FIrst you must lay on a white color tempered with gumme-water, and when it is
dry you must go it over again with Vermillion or lake, or else you must
temper ceruse and vermilleon together, and being dry, go over it again with
lake or vermillion.

A Peach Color.
This is compounded of Ceruse and Vermillion.

A Sky Color.
This color is compounded of vermilleon and azure.

A Blood red.
THis color is made of Cinaper, and afterward sadded with Vermilleon at the
sides, or else with a brown color. A bloody color, grind Cinaper, Lake, and
Cinaper tops, put them into good water, and if they be too light, put to them a
little Turnsole.

A Lincoln-greene.
THis color is compounded of a good green and Saffron.

A Poppin-jay green.
This color is compounded of azure, and masticot.

A good yellow.
TAke Saffron, or Cambugium, and temper it with gum-water, Sad it with
Vermilleon.

A sable or black.
TAke a Torch, hold it under a lattyn Basin, temper that black with
gumme-water.

A velvet-blacke.
BVrne harts-horne on a Colliers hearth; then grind it with the gaul of a
neat, put it into a shell, and let it dry in the shade: when you would use it,
grind it again with gumme-water.

To write gold with Pen or Pensil.
TAke a shell of gold, and put a little gum-water unto it, and temper it
together, and then you may write with it as with other colors.

To make Azure, or bise sadder.
TAke blew Turnsole, wet it in gum-water, and then wring it out, and mix it
either with Bise, or else overshadow the Bise with it.

Red Color.
TAke Vermillion, and temper it with gum water: His false color is two parts
vermillion, and a third part ceruse.

Another Red.
TAke russet, and temper it with gumme-water, clay it with ceruse, and sad it
with it self.

Another Red.
TAke Brassill in gross powder, alum in powder: steep them in gum water a
night and a day: then strain it, and keep it for use.

A green Color.
TAke Copper plates, put them in a copper pot, and put distilled vinegar to
them: set them in a warm place till the vinegar become blew, then put it out
into another leaded pot, and pour more vinegar into it again; let it stand so
till it become blew; this do so many times till you think you have enough:
then let it stand till it be thick.

To make good Ink.
TAke two handfuls of gauls, cut each gaul into three or four pieces, pour
into them a pint of beer or wine, then let it stand eight hours; strain it
from the gauls, and put vitreoll therein, and to the vitreoll a third part of
gum, set it on the fire to warm; but let it not seethe, and it will be good
Ink, and of these gauls you may make Ink four or five times more.

To seethe Brasill.
TAke an ounce of Brasill, twelve ounces of beer, wine, or vinegar, put it in
a new pot, let it stand a night; and in the morning set it on the fire, and let
it seethe till half be consumed: then put into it two penny worth of alum
beaten together, and as much beaten gum-Arabicke: stir them well together,
and let them seethe again; if you desire to have it somewhat dark, then
scrape a little chalk into it when it seetheth: let it not seethe over the
pot: when it is cold strain it through a cloth, and put it into a glass well
stopped.

Aurum Musicum.
TAke one ounce of Salarmoniack, one ounce of quicksilver of counterfein, half
an ounce of brimstone, bruise the brimstone, and set it on the fire, but let it
not be over hot (lest it burn) then take the Salarmoniacke, and the
quicksilver being in powder: mix them well together, then mingle with them the
brimstone: stir them well, and quickly with a stick till the brimstone
become hard, then let it cool, grind it on a stone, and put it in a glass
well stopped with wax, and set it in a pan with ashes; make a fire under it, and
let it stand half a day in that manner (but not over hot) till a yellow smoke
rises on it, and when the yellow smoke is gone it is prepared.

Argentum Musicum.
TAke an ounce of Tynne, melt it, and put thereto one ounce of tartar, and one
ounce of quicksilver, stir them well till they be cold: then beat all in a
mortar, and grind it on a stone; temper it with gumme-water, and write
therewith, and afterward polish it.

To write a gold color.
TAke a new hens egg, make a hole at one end, and let the substance out,
then take the yolke without the white, and four times as much in quantity of
quicksilver; grind them well together, and put them into the shell; stop the
hole thereof with chalk, and the white of an egg, then lay it under an hen
that sits with six more, let her sit on it three weeks, then break it up,
and write with it.

To write with gold out of a Pensil.
TAke honey, and salt a like quantity, grind them well, and put to them a
leaf of gold, with a little white of an egg; put it into a mussell shell, and
let it purify; then temper it with gumme-water, and write with it, pollish it.

Or else grind a leaf of silver, or gold, very small with gumme-water, and
wash it in a mussell shell as aforesaid.

To temper Azure of Bise.
TAke Azure or Bise, and grind it on a stone with clean water; then put it in
a broad glass, or shell, and when it has stood a while all the dregs will
fleet above, and the clean color will fall to the bottom; then pour out the
water with the dregs, and pour the azure in clean water again; then stir
the color and water together, and let it stand, and fine, and after that pour
out the water, and dregs again: do thus till it be well purged; then grind it
again on a stone with gumme-water, and put it into a horn, or shell; when you
paint or write, stir it, and let the stick drop into the pen, for it will
sink to the bottom as lead.

To temper Turnsole.
TAke Turnsole, and wet it once or twice in clear water, and let it lie till
it be well steeped; then wring it into a dish till the color be good, and sad;
with this you may flourish red letters, or vestures, and this color shall be
darked, sadded, or renewed with black ink.

To make coloring, called Vernix: to varnish gold, silver, or any other color
on vellem, paper, timber, stone, etc.
TAke Bengewine, and bray it well betwixt two papers, then put it into a viol,
and pour on it Aqua vitae, that it may stand above the bengewine three or
four fingers, and let it steep so a day or two; then put to it for half a
violl of Aqua vitae five or six chieues of Saffron slenderly stamped; this
done, strain it, and with a Pensil vernish therewith any thing gilded, which
will become bright and shining, drying it self immediately, and will continue
the brightness many years; But if you will vernish on silver, then take the
white that is found in Bengewine and dress it with Aqua vitae as before,
leaving out the Saffron, and the said vernish made with these only is very
good to varnish all things as well painted, as not painted: for it makes
Tables of Walnut tree and Hebene to glister if it be laid on them, and all
other things, as Iron, Copper, or Tin gilded, or not: it makes bright,
preserves and aideth the color, and dries incontinent without taking dust.

To make a double size to lay gold or silver on an embossed ground.
TAke Venice Ceruse, white lead, plaster of an old Image, or chalk, any of
these made in fine powder, and ground with the white of an egg, and a little
water: this will make a good bottom to lay silver on. But when you use any of
these to lay under gold, put to it a little Saffron, put not too much water;
mingle it after discretion, and look the size be thick standing: put the size
thus tempered, in a horn or shell in some Celler, or shadowed place, where it
may stand moist seven days, till it be perfect clammy and rotten, and once a
day stir it; the elder the size is, it is the better. If there stand any
bubbles on the size, put in ear wax, for that is a remedy thereto, and before
you lay it on your work, lay the size on a scrow, and dry it, and when it is
dry, bend it, and if it bend and break not, then it is perfect, and if it
break, put to it a little water to make it weaker, and prove if it cleaves
fast to the book, if not, put glayr thereto, and make it more steadfast: the
like size may you make of Gipsium, Bolearmoniacke, red or yellow Oker, Orpment
or Masticot, with brown of Spain, or red lead: if every of them be ground
severally, and tempered as before.

Of painting in Oil.
HEre you must provide one thing more then you did before: that is, a Pallet
(so called by Artists) whereupon you must put a small quantity of every such
color you are to use, the form whereof follows.

The Pallet.

The colors to be used, are altogether such dry substances as I mentioned
formerly: as Oker, Vermilion red lead, Vmber, Spanish brown, Lam-blacke,
Gambugice, Masticot, Orpment, Ceruse, or Spanish white, blew and green Bise,
Verdigrease, and a multitude of such like, which may be had at the Rose in
Cornehill, London.

Your colors must be ground all very finely, and tempered with Linseed oil;
and to preserve them, put them in little earthen pans, and put water upon them,
and cover them, that the dust come not at them: thus they may be kept a great
while, and from thence you may take them as your use does require.

There are diverse colors which without the admixture of another color, will
not be dry a great while; as Lake, Verdigrease, Lam-blacke: with such you must
temper a little Vmber or red lead.

Diverse Painters there are, that having haste of work, do use to temper their
color with one part of fat oil, and two of common Linseed oil, and by this
means they make the colors dry the sooner: this fat oil is only Linseed
oil exposed to the weather, and so it becomes thicker: yea sometimes you
shall see it so thick, that you may cut it almost like Butter: it may be made
likewise by boiling of it a little while, but the former is the best. As for
the tempering of your colors, I can prescribe no surer way then experience
with diligent observation.

Of Graving.
IT is possible for one to be a good Painter, and yet not to be able to draw
well with the pen, because there is not required in a Painter such a curious
and exact carriage of the hand: but it is impossible for one ever to Grave or
Etch well, except he can draw well with the pen. First therefore presupposing
you can do the first before you attempt the second, you must provide diverse
graving tools, both long and short: some for hard work, some for sweet work,
some for smaller work, and some for greater: also a piece of a Beaver hat, and
a good oil stone, smoothed on one side, and free from pin holes, and plates of
Copper or Brass exactly polished.

Of Gravers.
THere are two principal sorts of Gravers, the long and the short: the long
are straight, and for to engrave Plates withal, especially the greater, and
these are to be held as the figure following does express: where you may note
that the pummell of the Graver rests against the ball of the thumb, and the
point is guided with the forefinger. And there ought to be a little bag of
sand under your Plate, to the end that you might turn your plate upon it as
your work does require.

The second sort is a short Graver, and turns up somewhat at the end, and
that is to engrave Letters and Scutchions in plate seals, and smaller plates,
being fastened in some convenient instrument: this must be held likewise
according unto the expression of the figure following: where it is to be noted,
that the pummell of the Graver is stayed against the further part of the hand,
and is guided by the inward side of the thumb. It were needful that there
were a piece of leather like a Tailors thimble, about the end of the thumb,
waxed or glued, whereby to guide the Graver more steadily, and stay it upon
occasion.

How to make Gravers.
PRovide some good crosse-bow steel, and cause it to be beaten out into small
rods, and softened: then with a good file you may shape them at your pleasure:
when you have done, heat them red hot, and dip them straight down into soap,
and by so doing, they will be hard indeed. Note that if in the dipping of them
into the soap, you turn your hand never so little awry, the Graver will be
crooked. These Gravers made and hardened after this manner, do far exceed
all the other Gravers.

If your gravers be too hard, heat them a little, and thrust them into tallow,
and they will be tougher.

The oil stone is to whet your gravers on; drop one or two drops of sallet
oil upon it, and whet your graver thereon, and it will have an edge presently.

How to smooth and pollish Copper Plates.
BEcause that in the printing with Copper Plates, the least scratch, though it
be scarce visible, receives its impression, and so many times disgraceth the
work: I have set down a way to smooth plates for impression.

First, take a piece of Brass, or Copper, of what bigness you intend, of an
indifferent thickness, and see as near as you can, that it be free from fire
flawes. First beat it as smooth as you can with a hammer, then rub it smooth
with a pumice stone that is void of gravel, (least it race it, and so cause
you as much more labor to get the^ out) burnish it after with a burnishing
iron, having first dropped a drop or two of sallet oil on it: then rub it over
with a cole, prepared as is after taught, and lastly with a piece of beaver hat
dipped in sallet oil, rub it very well for an hour: thus you may polish it
exactly.

How to prepare your Coals.
TAke Beechen charcole, such as when they are broke, do shine, such as are
void of clifts, and such as break off even: burn them again, and as soon as
they are all through on fire, quench them in chamber lie: after take them out,
and put them in fair water, and reserve them for your use.

Having prepared all things in a readiness, you must have a draught of that
you intend to cut or engrave.

Take the plate then, and wax it lightly over, and then either pounce the
picture upon it, or trace it, or by drawing over the lines of the picture with
ungummed ink, reprint it upon the Plate: then work upon it, observing the
shadow, so that being printed, it may stand right, for it will be backward upon
your plate: when you have cut one stroke, drop a little sallet oil upon your
piece of Bever, and rub over the said stroke, for by this means you shall
better see the stroke, and how to cut the next equal unto it, and so the rest
proportionally distant one from another; but to work by a Candle, you must
place a glass of fair water between the Candle, and a paper between that
and the Plate, (which casts a true light) or you will never be able to work
truly and aright.

Of Etching.
ETching is an imitation of engrauing, but more speedily performed. Things may
be expressed to the life thereby, but not so sweetly as by the Graver. It is
thus performed* the Plate you are to etch upon, must first exactly be
pollished, afterward ouerlaid but very lightly with a ground made for the
purpose, (of which anon) and thereupon must be pounced, drawn, or traced, the
thing that you are to etch: then the said ground is to be pierced with diverse
styles of several bigness according as the shadows of the picture do
require: afterward the edges of the Plate are to be raised with soft wax and
strong water, (for so they term it:) (It is to be had at the sign of the
Leg in Foster Lane a Distiller) is to be put upon it, which in those places
were the strokes, are required to be lightly performed, is to be abated or
alayed with fair water, which having dured a while upon the plate, will eat
into it, as it were engraven, then put it into cold water, and wash it about,
and it will leave eating further, and then take off the ground and it is done.

Ared ground for Etching.
Take red lead, grind it very well, and temper it with varnish.

A white ground.
TAke one ounce of Wax, and two ounces of Rosin, melt them together, and add
thereto a quarter of an ounce of Venice Ceruse ground fine, lay it on while it
is hot.

A black ground.
TAke Asphaltum two parts, Bees wax one part; melt them together, and being
warm, lay it on very thinly with a fine lawne ragge. If it seem somewhat red
in any one part, hold it over the smoke of a Link or wax candle, and it will
be amended. Note that it is a principal thing in this Art to lay the ground on
aright.

Another way how to engrave with water.
TAke Verdigrease, Mercury sublimated, vitreoll, and alum, a like quantity,
beat all to powder, put them into a glass, and let it stand so half a day,
and stir it often, then lay on the plate, wax, mingled with Linseed oil, or
red lead with Linseed oil, and write in it that you mean to grave, then put
the water on it, and let it so remain half a day, if you will have it very
deep, let it lie longer. If you will engrave Images, etc. lay the wax on the
Iron or Steel, thin, and draw what you will thereon, that it may touch the
metal, then put the water into the strokes, and it will be engraven.

How to engrave on a flint stone.
TAke a Flint, and write on it what you will, with the fat or tallow of an Ox,
afterward lay the flint in vinegar, four days.

FINIS.
Place this between folio 14. and 15.

THE BOOK OF EXTRAVAGANTS: Wherein amongst others, is principally contrived
diverse excellent and approved Medicines for several maladies.

By I. B.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Harper, for Ralph Mab: 1634.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, forasmuch as there were diverse experiments that I could not
conveniently, or rather my occasions would not permit me to dispose in such
order as I would have done; I thought it would not be amiss to call them by
the names of Extravagants, and so to set them down as I found them, either
inserted amongst other my notes, as I put them in practice, or as they came
into remembrance.

How to make a light burn under the water, being a very pretty conceypt to
take fish.
LEt there be a glass, as A, having a hole at the bottom, to put a candle in
with a screwed socket. The socket must have a loope at the bottom, whereunto
you must hang a weight of such heaviness, that it may draw the body of the
glass under water. The neck of this glass must be open, and stand above the
water; also about the neck must be fastened a good broad piece of wood; round
about which (but on that side of it that is next unto the water) must be placed
diverse pieces of looking glasses; so the light of the candle in the glass body
will be multiplied according unto the number of them. All the fishes near
unto it will resort about it, as amazed at so glorious a sight, and so you may
take them with a cast net or other.

How to make an image hang in the middle of a glass.
MAke the lower part of the image of hard wax, and the upper part of wood, and
overlay it with oil colors; then put it into a globe glass filled with fair
water, and which way soever you turn the glass, the image will still hang in
the middle, and stand as it were upright; which, to my knowledge, has been a
thing causing no small admiration among diverse that have not understood the
cause of it.

How to make five or six dice of the ordinary bigness of dice, such as you may
game withal, and such as would be taken by their looks to be ordinary dice,
and yet all of them to weigh not above one grain.
TAke a piece of Elder, and pith it, lay the pith to dry, and then make thereof
with a sharp knife five or six dice, and you shall find it true that I have
said.

To lay gold on any thing.
TAke red Lead ground first very fine, temper it with linseed oil: write with
it, and lay leaf gold on it, let it dry, and pollish it.

To lay gold on glass.
Grind Chalk, and red Lead, of each a like quantity, together, temper them
with linseed oil, lay it on; when it is almost dry, lay your leaf gold on it,
when it is quite dry polish it.

To make iron as soft as lead.
TAke black flints, powder them very finely; then put the powder in an iron
pan, and make it red-hot, then cast it on a marble stone, till it be almost
cold, then make it red-hot again, and let it cool, and grind it so long till
it cleave to the stone, and grind as it were clay; then put that in a glass,
and set it under the eaves of a house, where the Sun comes not nigh in the
day, then the night after take out the water that you shall find in the glass
above the powder, then take that powder and grind it with the water, and put
it in a stillatory, and let it still out the half; afterward pour the water
again on the said powder, and still it again with a soft fire; then take and
seethe that water till the half be wasted, then take some iron blade that is
new broke, and put it together, and hold it so a little while; then take of the
water which was sod to the half, and with a feather lay it first to the one
side of the blade, and when the water is cold, lay it on the other side, and it
will soder fast with this water; and with this water you may make steel as
soft as lead. It is likewise a sovereign water to help the gout, being
anointed where the grief is, for it gives ease very speedily.

To color tin, or copper, etc. of a golden color.
TAke linseed oil, set it on the fire, scum it clean, then put therein of
amber, and aloe hepaticum, a like quantity, then beat and stir all well
together with the oil till it wax thick; then take it off, and cover it close,
and set it in the earth three days: when you would use it, strike your metal
all over therewith, and so let it dry, and it will be of a golden color.

To gild iron with a water.
TAke running water 3 pound, rochallum 3 pound, and Roman vitreoll one ounce,
of vardigrease one penny weight, saltgem three ounces, orpment one ounce, boil
all these together, and when it begins to boil, put in lees of tartar and bay
salt, of each half an ounce; make it seethe, and being sod a pretty while,
take it from the fire, and strike the iron over therewith, then let it dry
against the fire, and then burnish it.

To soder on iron.
SEt your joint of iron as close as you can, then lay them so in a glowing
fire; then take of Venice glass in fine powder, and the iron being red-hot,
cast the powder thereon, and it shall soder of it self. If you clap it in
clay, it will be the surer way.

To gild on iron or steel.
TAke one ounce of argall, three drammes of vermileon, and two drams of bol
armeniack, with as much aqua vitae, then work and grind them all together on a
stone, with linseed oil; having so done, put there to lapis calaminaris as big
as a hazell nut, and grind therewith in the end three or four drops of
varnish; take it off the stone, and strain it through a linen cloth into a
stone pot, (for it must be as thick as honey) then strike over your iron
therewith, and let it dry, and then lay your gold or silver on, as you would do
upon the varnish.

A varnish like gold, for tin, silver, or copper.
TAke small pots well leaded, then put therein six ounces of linseed oil, one
ounce of mastick, one ounce of aloes epaticum; make them altogether in fine
powder, and then put it into your said pot, and cover it with such another; yet
in the bottom of the uppermost pot make a small hole, wherein put a small stick
with a broad end beneath to stir the other pot withal, and when the pots are
set just together, close them all about with good clay, and cover them all over
also, leaving the hole open above to stir the other pot with the stick: set it
over the fire, and stir it as often as it seetheth, and when you will gild,
pollish your metal over first, and then strike this over the metal, and let
it dry in the Sun.

To lay Gold on Iron, or other metal.
TAke liquid Varnish l. 1. Turpentine, and oil of Lynseed, of each an ounce:
mix them all together: with this ground you may gild on any metal, first
striking it upon the metal, and afterward lay on the gold or silver. When it
is dry, polish it.

To make Ice that will melt in fire, but not dissolve in Water.
TAke strong water made with saltpeter, alum, and oil of tartar, of each, one
pound. Infuse them together, then put into them a little aqua ardens, and it
will presently coagulate them, and turn them into ice.

A cement as hard as stone.
TAke powder of Loadstone, and of flints, a like quantity of either, and with
whites of eggs, and gum dragant, make paste, and in a few days it will grow
as hard as a stone.

To make Paper waved like unto marble.
TAke diverse oyled colors, put them severally in drops upon water, and stir
the water lightly, and then wet the paper (being of some thickness) with it,
and it will be waved like a marble: dry them in the Sun.

To make Copper or Brass have the color of silver.
TAke Sal Armoniacke, alum, and salt, of each a like quantity, and with a
little filings of silver, let all be mixed together, then put them into the
fire, that they may be hot, and when they shall cease to smoke, then with the
same powder moystned with spittle, rub your Copper or Brass.

How to make glue to hold things together as fast as stone.
TAke of the powder of tile sheard, two pound, unslakt lyme, four pound, oil
of Lynseed, a sufficient quantity to temper the whole mixture; this is
mavelous strong.

To make a thin glue.
TAke gluten piscis, beat the same strongly on an Anvill, till it be thin;
after lay it to soke in water, until it be come very soft and tender: then
work it like paste, to make small rowles thereof, which draw out very thin,
and when you will work with it, put some of it into an earthen pot, with a
little water, over the embers, and skim the same very clean, and let it sees
a little while, then work with the same: keeping it still over the fire. With
this glue you may fasten pieces of glass together.

To make Iron have the color of Brass.
FIrst, polish it well, rub it after with aqua sortis, wherein the filings of
brass are dissolved: the like may be done with Roman vitrioll dissolved in
vinegar and fair water, of each a like quantity.

To make wood or bone red for ever.
TAke the powder of Brazill, mingle it well with milk, but so, that it be very
red, and put therein, either wood or bone, letting it lie in eight days, and
it will look red for ever.

How with one Candle to make as great a light, as otherwise of two or three of
tbe same bigness.
CAuse a round and double glass to be made, of a large size, and in fashion
like a globe, but with a great round hole in the top, and in the concave part
of the uppermost glass, place a candle in a loose socket, and at the same hole
or pipe which must be made at the side thereof, fill the same with spirit of
wine, or some other clear distilled water that will not putrify, and this one
candle will give a great and wonderful light, somewhat resembling the sun
beams.

A Cement for broken Glasses.
Beat the whitest Fish glue with a hammer, till it begin to wax clear, then
cut the same into very small pieces, suffering the same to dissolve on a gentle
fire, in a leaded pan, with a few drops of aqua vitae, then let some other that
stands by, hold both the pieces that are to be cemented, over a chafingdish
of coals, till they be warm: and during their heat, lay on the dissolved glue
with a fine pensill: then bind the glass with wyre or thread, and let it rest
till it be cold.

An admirable secret of representing the very form of Plants, by their ashes,
phi^osophically prepared, spoken of by Quertitanus and Angelus salae.
TAke says he, the salt both the fixed and the volatill also. Take the very
spirit, and the phlegm of any herb, but let them all be rightly prepared;
dissolve them, and coagulate them, upon which if you put the water stilled from
May dew, or else the proper water of the herb you would have appear, close
them all very well in a glass for the purpose, and by the heat of embers, or
the natural heat of ones body, at the bottom of the glass, the very form
and Idaea thereof will be represented: which will suddenly vanish away, the
heat being withdrawn from the bottom of the glass. As I will not argue the
impossibility of this experiment, so I would be loath to employ mine endeavors,
until I were expert therein.

A device to bend glass Canes, or make any small work in Glass.
LEt there be a vessel of Copper about the bigness of a common Football, as,
A, let it have a long Pipe at the top as C. which must be made so that you may
upon occasion screw on lesser, or bigger vents made for the purpose. Fill this
one third part with water, and set it over a furnace of coals, as F, G, H, I,
and when the water begins to heat, there will come a strong breath out of
the nose of the vessel, that will force the flame of a lamp placed at a
convenient distance as K: if you hold your glass in the extention of the flame
it will melt suddenly; so you may work what you will thereof. There are that
instead of this globe make use of a Pipe, as A, fastened in a stick as, F, of
which I have made use, but hold it not so convenient for those that are not
accustomed thereunto.

An excelleut Water for any Morphue, or scurvinesse in the Face.
TAke of quick Sulphur 2. ounces, black Soap, the rankest and illest favored
that can be got: bind them up in a cloth, and hang them in a pint of the
strongest wine vinegar for the space of nine days; herewith wash the Morphue
in the Face or elsewhere, and let it dry in of it self. This Water will for
the present stain the face with a yelow color, which will wear away in time.

How to soften Iron.
TAke of Alum, sal Armoniacke, Tartar, a like quantity of either, put them
into good vinegar, and set them on the fire: heat your Iron, and quench it
therein.

A good Cement for broken glasses.
TAke raw silk, and beat it with glass, and mix them together with the
whites of Eggs.

Another.
TAke of calcined flints, quick lyme, and common salt, of each a like
quantity: mingle them all together with the whites of Eggs; then take a linen
cloth and spread it over with this mixture, and put it upon the fracture, and
let it dry; afterward anoint it with Linseed oil.

How to cause that the same quantity both of powder and shot discharged out of
the same piece shall carry closer, or more scattering.
TAke the quantity of a pease of Opium, and charge it amongst the shot, and
this will make the shot to fly closer together then otherwise it would. This I
had of a Seaman, who had made trial hereof, as he said, and unto whom I sold
some for the same purpose.

A Bait to catch Fish with.
TAke Cocculus Indiae ss, Henbane-seeds, and wheaten flower, of each a quarter
of an ounce, hive honey as much as will make them into paste. Where you see
most store of Fish in the River, cast of this paste into it in diverse little
bits about the bigness of barley corns, and anon you shall see the fish
swim on the top of the water, some reeling to and fro as drunken, others with
their bellies upwards as if they were nigh dead; so that you may take them
either with your hands, or a small net at the end of a stick made for the same
use. Note here, that if you put the Fish that you thus take, into a bucket of
fair and fresh water, or if it rain after that you have cast this your bait
into the water, they will revive and come to themselves to your admiration; and
this was told me by a Gentleman of good credit, that has often made use
thereof.

I have heard that the stinking oil drawn out of the roots of Polipody of the
oak by a retort, mixed with Turpentine, and hive-honey, and being anointed
upon the bait will draw the fish mightily thereto, and make them bite the
faster: and I my self have seen fishes, as Roches, and taken in the dead time
of Winter with an angle, bayted only with paste made of Wheaten flower, but it
has been in the morning, and when the Sun has shined.

How to write without ink that it may not be seen, unless the paper be wet
with water.
TAke some Vitriol, and powder it finely, and temper it with fair water in any
thing that is clean, when it is dissolved, you may write whatsoever you will
with it, and it cannot be read, except you draw it through water wherein some
powder of galls has been infused, and so it will show as black as if it had
been written with ink.

How to make white letters in a black Field.
TAke the yelke of a new laid egg, and grind it upon a marble with fair
water, so as you may write with it: having ground it on this wise, then with a
pen dipped into it, draw what letters you will upon paper, or parchment, and
when they are through dry, black all the paper over with ink; and when it is
dry, you may with a knife scrape all the letters of that you wrote with the
yelke of the egg, and they will show fair and white.

How to sodder upon Silver, Brass, or Iron.
THere are two kinds of Sodder, to wit, hard Sodder, and soft Sodder. The soft
Sodder runs sooner then the hard: wherefore if a thing be to be sodered in
two places, which cannot at one time well be performed, then the first must be
sodered with hard soder, and the second with soft: for if the first be done
with soft, it will unsoder again before the other be sodered. Note, that if
you would not have your soder to run over any one part of the piece to be
sodered, you must rub over that part with chalk that you would not have it
run upon.

Note likewise that your soder must be beaten thin, and then laid over the
place to be sodered, which must be first fitted together, and bound with wire
as occasion shall require. Then take Burras, powder it, and temper it with
water like pap, and lay it upon the soder, and let it dry upon it by the fire:
Afterward cover it with quick coals, and blow them up, and you shall see your
soder run immediately: then presently take it out of the fire, and it is done.

Hard Soder is thus made.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of silver, and a three penie weight of copper, melt
them together, and it is done.

Soft Soder is thus made.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of silver, and a three penie weight of brass, melt
them together, and it is done.

How to gild Silver, or Brass, with water-gold.
FIrst take about. ii. of quick silver, put it into a little melting pot, and
set it over the fire, and when it begins to smoke, put into it an angel of
fine gold: then take it off presently for the gold will presently be dissolved
in the quick silver, which if it be too thin, you may through a piece of
fustian strain a part of the quicke-silver from it. Note likewise that your
silver, or brass, before you go about to gild it, must be boiled in argol, and
bear, or water, and afterward scratcht with a wire brush: then rub the gold,
and quicke-silver upon it, and it will cleave unto it, then put your silver or
brass upon quick coals until it begin to smoke: then take it from the fire,
and scratch it with your wire brush: Do this so often till you have rubd the
quicke-silver as clean off as you can, then shall you perceive the gold to
appear of a faint yellow color, which you may make to show fair with sal
armoniacke, bole armoniacke, and vardigrece ground together, and tempered with
water.

How to take the smoke of Tobacco through a glass of water.
FIrst fill a pint glass with a wide mouth, almost full of fair water: fill
also a pipe of Tobacco, and put the pipe upright into the glass of water, so
that the end of the pipe may almost touch the bottom of the glass: then take
another crooked pipe, and put it into the glass, but let the end thereof not
touch the water: wax then the mouth of the glass, that no air may come in
nor out, but at the pipes: then put fire unto the Tobacco, and suck with your
mouth, at the end of the crooked pipe, and you shall see the smoke of the
Tobacco penetrate the water, and break out of a bubble, and so come into your
mouth.

To color Ivory or any other bones, of an excellent green color.
TAke aqua fortis, wherein dissolve as much Copper, as the said water is able,
then let the bones that you would have colored, lie in the same all night, and
they will be like a Smaragdin color: Mizaldus.

How to make birds drunk, so that you may take them with your hands.
TAke such meat as they love, as Wheat, Barley, and lay the same to steep in
the lees of Wine, or else in the juice of Hemlockes, and sprinckle the same in
places where Birds use to haunt.

A way to catch Crows.
TAke the Liver of a Beast, and cut it in diverse pieces, put then into each
piece, some of the powder of nux vomica, and lay these pieces of Liver in
places where Crows and Ravens haunt. Anon after they have eaten them, you may
take them with your h^nds, for they cannot fly away.

How to take Crows or Pigeons.
TAke white Pease, and steep them eight or nine days in the Gall of an Ox:
then cast the same where they use to haunt.

You may make Partridges, Duckes, and other birds drunk, so that you may take
them with your hand: if you set black wine for them to drink in those places
whereunto they resort.

Another.
TAke Tormentill, and boil it in good wine: put into it Barley or other
grain: Sprinckle this in those places you have appointed to take Birds in, and
the Birds will eat the pieces amongst the grain, which will make them so
drunk, that they cannot fly away. This should be done in the winter, and when
it is a deep snow.

Another way to take Birds.
MAke a paste of barley meal, onion blades, and Henbane seeds: set the same
upon several little boards, or pieces of tiles, or such like, for the birds to
eat of it.

How to make Brass white for ever.
TAke Egg shells, and burn them in a melting pot: then powder them, and temper
them with the whites of Eggs; let it stand so three weeks: heat your brass
red hot, and put this upon it.

How to make Marble.
TAke vj. of quick Lime, put it into a pot, and pour upon it, one pint of
good wine: let it stand five or six days, stirring it once or twice a day:
then pour off the clear, and therewith temper flint stones calcined, and made
into fine powder, then color it, and make of it what you please, and let them
dry.

How to whiten copper.
TAke a thin plate of copper, heat it red-hot diverse times, and extinguish it
in common oil of tartar, and it will be white.

To make Saltpeter.
TAke quick lyme, and pour warm water upon it, and let it stand six days,
stirring it once or twice a day: take the clear of this, and set it in the
Sun until it be wasted, and the Saltpeter will remain in the bottom.

How to make Coral.
TAke of red Lead ground, 1. vermilion finely ground, ss. unquenched lyme, and
powder of calcined flints, of each vj. these powders must be tempered with a
Lixivium that is made with quick lyme and wine: add unto the whole a little
salt; then make thereof what you list; then boil them in linseed oil.

How to make Pearls of Chalk.
TAke some Chalk, and put it into the fire; there let it lie until it break:
temper it then with the whites of eggs. Then make of it diverse fashions of
Pearls, both great and small: wet them being dried, and cover them with leaf
gold, and they are done.

An approved and excellent plaster for ach in the raines of the back, or in any
other part whatsoever.
TAke one pound of black Soap, and four ounces of frankincense, and a pint of
white wine vinegar: boil all together upon a gentle fire, until it be thick;
spread it then upon a lether, and apply it unto the grieved place. If the ach
be very great and fervent, then add unto it a little aqua vitae, and it will
be much better.

An excellent ointment for the Shingles, Morphew, Tetters, and Ringwormes.
TAke a quarter of a pound of soap, and mingle with it two drams of the powder
of black Ellebor, litharge of silver in fine powder, two ounces, vardigrease
half an ounce, and a quarter of an ounce of glass in powder, and as much
quicksilver, make them all into an ointment by stirring them well together;
wherewith anyont the grieved parts. This is approved and true.

An excellent Balm, or water for grievous sore eyes, which comes either of
outward accident, or of any inward cause.
TAke two spoonfuls of the juice of Fennel, and one spoonful and a half of
the juice of Celandine, and twice as much honey as them both; then boil them a
little upon a chafingdish of coals, and scum away the dregs which will ascend,
but first let it cool somewhat, and then let it run through a fair clean
cloth: then put it into a violl of glass, and stop it close. Put a little
quantity of this into the eye. This medicine is approved, and more precious
than gold.

A speedy way to assuage the pain of any scald, or burn, though never so
great, and to take the fire out of it.
TAke old lawn rags, dip them into Runnet, for want of it dip them into verges,
and apply them cold upon the grieved place, shifting them for half an hour
together, as often as they dry: this I have known to give ease in an instant, and
quickly to take out the fire.

An approved oil for to heal any burn or scald.
TAke of housleek one handful, and of brooklime as much, boil them in a quart
of cream until it turn unto an oil; boil it very gently: with this oil a
little warmed, anoint the grieved place twice a day, and it will soon make it
well.

An ointment, very excellent and often proved, for the same.
TAke a good quantity of moss scraped from off a stone wall, fry it in a
fryingpan with a call of mutton suet a good while, then strain it, and it is
done. Dress the grieved part therewith once or twice a day, as you shall see
fitting.

Another ointment for a burn.
TAke one part of sallet-oyle, and two parts of the whites of eggs, beat them
together exceeding well, until they come to be a white ointment, wherein dip
the feather of a black hen, and anoint the grieved place diverse times every
day, until such time as the scales fall off, using in the mean while neither
clothes nor any outward binding. This, says Minshet the author, though it
seem to be a thing of no estimation, yet was there never found any more
effectual for a burn than it is.

An excellent ointment for a green wound.
TAke four handfuls of Clownes, Allheale, bruise it, and put it into a pan, and
put to it four ounces of barrowes grease, sallet-oyle half a pound, Bees wax
a quarter of a pound; boil them all until the juice be wasted; then strain
it, and set it over the fire again, and put unto it two ounces of Turpentine,
then boil it a little while more, and it is done. Put hereof a little in a
saucer, and set it on the fire, dip a tent in it, and lay it on the wound, but
first lay another plaster round about the wound, made of diapalma mollified a
little with oil of Roses. This cures very speedily all green wounds, as
says M. Gerard.

A Balsam of wonderful efficacy.
TAke Burgundy pitch, brimstone, and white frankincense, of each one ounce:
make them into an ointment with the whites of eggs: first draw the lips of the
wound, or cut, as close as you can, then lay on some of this spread upon a
cloth, and swathe it over afterward.

An excellent healing Water, which will dry up any old sore, or heal any
green wound.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Bolearmoniacke, powder it by it self, then take
an ounce of Camphire, powder it also by it self: also take four ounces of
white Coppras in powder: mix the Coppras and Camphire together, and put them
into a melting pot, and set them on the fire, until they turn unto water:
afterward stir it until it come to be as hard as a stone: then powder it
again, and mix it with the Bolearmoniacke: keep this powder close in a
bladder, when you would use it, take one pint and a half of fair water, set
it on the fire, and when it is even ready to boil, put into it three spoonfuls
of the powder; then take it off from the fire, and put it into a glass, and
let it stand until it be clear at the top, then take of the clearest, and
wash the sore very warm therewith, and dip a cloth four double in the same
water, and bind it fast about the sore with a rowler, and keep it warm:
dress it thus twice a day.

A Water for a Fistula
TAke one pint of white wine, 1 ounce of juice of Sage, three penie weight of
Borace in powder, Camphire in powder the weight of four pence: boil them all
a pretty while on a gentle fire, and it is done: Wash the Fistula with this
water, for it is certainly good, and approved to be true.

A Water for the Toothache.
TAke ground ivy, salt, and spearemint, of each an handful: beat them very
well together, then boil them in a pint of vinegar; strain it, and put a
spoonful of it into that side that aketh, and hold down your cheek.

Another Water approved for the same.
TAke red rose leaves half a handful, Pomegranate-flowers as many, two gauls
sliced thin: boil them all in three quarters of a pint of red wine, and
half a pint of fair water until the third part be wasted: then strain it,
and hold a little of it in your mouth a good while: then spit it out, and take
more. Also if there be any swelling on your cheek, apply the strainings
between two clothes as hot as may be suffered. This I have known to do good
unto diverse in this City, when as they have been extremely pained.

To make a Water for the eyes.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris, and burn it in the fire nine times, and quench it in
white wine, and beat it into powder, and when you use it, put it into
rose water, and drop the water into the eye.

For Deafness.
TAke a good quantity of Camomill, and two handfuls of green Wormwood, and
seethe them in a pot of running water till they be very well sodden, and put a
funnell over it, and let the steame go up into the ear, and then go to bed
warm, and stop your ear with a little black wool, and a grain of Civet: do
this morning and evening, and with Gods assistance you shall find ease.

An excellent Electuary for the Cough, Cold, or against Phlegm.
TAke of Germander, Hissope, Horehound, white Maidenhaire, Agrimony, Bettony,
Liverwort, Lungwort, and Hart's-tongue, of each one handful: put these to nine
pints of water, and let them boil to three pints; then let it cool and
strain it. To this juice put of clarified honey half a pound, fine powder of
Liquorice five ounces, fine powder of Enulacampana root three ounces, boil
them to the thickness of an Electuary. Take of this at any time, but specially
in the morning fasting, as also at night when you go to bed, or two hours
after supper, the quantity of a Wallnut or Nutmeg.

A very excellent salve to heal, well proved, for any old sore, or new wound.
TAke of Wax, Rosin, Sheeps suet, Turpentine, of each a like quantity, Sallet
oil also as much: mix them all together, and take the juice of Smallach, of
Planten, of Orpin, of Buglosse, of Comfery, of each a like quantity: let them
boil until the juice of the herbs be consumed; and in the seething put a
quantity of Rose Water, and it will be a very good Salve.

A sovereign Water to heal a green wound: and to stanch blood.
TAke a pottle of running water, and put thereto four ounces of Alum, and one
ounce of Copras, and let them seethe to a quart, and then strain it, and keep
it in a glass, and wash the wound, and wet a cloth, and lay to the sore, and
with Gods help it will soon be healed.

For the Biting of a mad Dog.
TAke brine, and bathe the wound: then burn Claret wine, and put in a little
Mithridate, and so let the patient drink it; Then take two live pigeons, cut
them through the middle, and lay them hot to his hand if he be bitten in the
arms. If in his legs, to the sole of his feet.

An Oil for any Ach.
TAke a pound of unwashed butter, and a handful of red mints, and a handful
of camomill, a handful of rue, two ounces of oil of Exeter: stamp the herbs
to a juice, and boil them with the butter; strain them in a cloth, and rub
them out very well: this so done, take the oil of Exeter, and put to them, and
stir them well together, and put them into a gally pot, and where the ach is
anoint the place against the fire, and lay a brown paper on it, and wrap a
cloth about the place, and keep it warm: proved to be excellent.

To stanch the bleeding of a cut.
TAke a piece of a felt hat, and burn it to a coal; beat it to powder, and
put it in the cut, and it will stanch the bleeding presently. Or else apply
linen rags that in the spring of the year have been often washed in the
sperm of frogs, and afterward dried in the Sun.

For an ague, to be laid to the wrists.
Take a handful of soot, a spoonful of bay salt, half a spoonful of pepper;
bruise them together, and temper them with two yelks of eggs; spread it on a
cloth, and lay it to the wrists.

Almond milk for the cough of the lungs.
TAke four spoonfuls of French barley well washed, and boil it in three wine
pints of fair water, unto a pint and a half; then take it from the fire, and
let it cool, and settle; then take the clear liquor, and strain therewith a
quarter of a pound of sweet almonds blanched, and beaten; then set it on the
fire, and let it boil a while till it begin to grow thick; then beat two yelks
of eggs, and put them to it; stir them well together, and put to it as much
fine sugar as will sweeten it, and a spoonful of damask rose water, and so let
it boil a while longer, till it be as thick as good cream; eat of it warm
twice or thrice a day, but at breakfast especially.

For a scald head.
TAke a pint of running water, and as much Mercury as a good walnut, three or
four branches of Rosemary; boil these all together till a third part be
boiled away, or thereabout, and every morning and evening wash the infected
place with some of this water cold, and a quarter of an hour after or less
anoint the place with lamp oil, and every morning after the first dressing try
to pull up some of the hair as easily as you can: have care where you set this
water, for it is poison. If you shave the head, and apply a plaster called
Emplastrum Cephalicum cum Euphorbio, it is also excellent.

For to heal a red face that has many pimples. Proved.
TAke four ounces of barrowes grease and as much oil of bays, half an ounce
of quicksilver killed with fasting spettle, then take two spoonfuls of wild
tansie water, or honisuckle water, and let all be ground in a mortar three
hours at the least, until you see nothing of the quicksilver, and so keep it
close in a glass; the older, the better; and when you go to bed anoint the
face, and look that you keep it from your eyes.

To wash the Face, if it be given to heat.
TAke Snailes, beat them shells and bodies together: steep them a night in new
milk: then still them with the flowers of white Lillies.

To make Vsquebach.
TAke a gallon of the smallest Aqua vitae you can make, put it into a close
vessel of stone; put thereto a quart of Canary Sack, two pounds of Raisons of
the Sun stoned, but not washed, two ounces of Dates stoned, and the white
skins of them pulled out, two ounces of Cinnamon grossly bruised, four good
Nutmegs bruised, four good Liquorish sticks sliced, and bruised, tie up all
your Spices in a fine linen cloth, and put them into your Aqua vitae, and tie
up your pot very close, and let this infuse a week, stirring it three times a
day, then let it run through a jelly bag close covered; keep it in glass
bottles.

To make Almond Butter.
TAke two pound of Almonds, and blanch them, and let them lie all night in cold
water: then grind them in a mortar very small, and put in a blade of Mace or
two; then strain it through a strong cloth as near as you can, that the milk
be not too thin, and let it seethe a prettle while: then put in a little
Rose Water, and a little salt when you take it off the fire, and stir it
still: then take a big cloth very clean, and let two hold it; then you must
take the milk and cast it round about the sides of the cloth that the whay may
come from it; then with a saucer put it down from the sides: then knit the
cloth, and hang it up until it have left dropping; then take it forth, and
season it with fine Sugar and Rose Water.

To make Ielly for one that is in a Consumption, or troubled with a looseness.
TAke the feet of a Calfe, and when the hair is clean scalded off, slit them
in the middle, and cut away all the black veins, and the fat, and wash them
very clean, and so put them in a bucket of fair water, and let them lie four
and twenty hours, and in that time the oftener you shift them in fair water
it will be the better; then set them on the fire in two gallons of water, or
somewhat less, and let them boil very softly, continually taking off the
scumme and fat which rises; and when the liquour is more then half boiled
away, put into it a pint and a half of white wine, and as it boyleth there
will come a foul scumme upon it, take it off still clean, and when the Ielly
is boiled enough, you may know, for your fingers will stick to the spoone;
then take it from the fire, and with a Cullender take out all the bones and
flesh, and when the Ielly is almost cold, beat the whites of six Eggs, and
put into it, and set it on the fire again, and so let it boil till it be
clear: then strain it through a clean cloth into a Basin, and so let it
stand all night long; the next morning put it into a skellet, and put to it a
pound of Sugar, half an ounce of Cinnamon broken in pieces, one ounce of
Nutmegs, an ounce of Ginger bruised, and a good quantity of large Mace; boil
all these together till it taste of the Spices as much as you desire, and when
it is almost cold, take the whites of six eggs, and beat them, and put into it,
and set it on the fire, and when it rises wild it in half a pint of white
wine; then strain it through a jelly bag.

To stay the flux.
TAke Date stones, and beat them to fine powder, and take the quantity of one
of them, and drink it with posset drink, or beer; use these two or three
mornings together, and after as often as you find occasion; this is very good.

In the month of May gather of the reddest Oak leaves you can get, and still
them, and when need requires make pap thereof, mingled with milk or fine
flower, sugar, and cinamom, as often as your stomach serves to eat it.

To make green Ink.
TAke green bice and grind it with gum water, and if you will have it a
sadder green, put a little saffron to the grinding.

To make blew Ink.
TAe fine flower, and grind it with a little chalk, and alum, and then put it
in a violl.

For an Ague.
TAke a handful of hartstong that grows in the field, and a handful of bay
salt, and beat them both together in a mortar, and lay this to both the wrists.

A water good against the plangs, or to be given after a surfeit.
TAke red Sage, Celendine, Rosemary, Hearbegrace, Wormwood, Mugwort,
Pimpernell, Dragons, Scabious, Egrimony, Rosa solis, and Balm, of e^ch a
handful, or like quantity by weight; wash and shake them in a cloth; then
shred and put them into a gallon of white wine, with a quarter of an ounce of
Gentian roots, and as much of Angelica roots; let it stand two days and two
nights close covered, and then distill it at your pleasure, and stop the glass
very close in which you keep the same.

To avoid urine that is stopped with the stone.
TAke as much black soap as a walnut, temper it with eight or ten leaves of
English saffron, spread it upon a round leather as big as the palm of your
hand, and cover the navell of your belly therewithal, and it shall cause you
to make water.

For the stone and strangury.
TAke the filmes that is within the mawes of geese, and let them be purely
dried, and then make powder thereof, and drink it with stale ale, and it will
help him with Gods grace. Proved.

For scald heads.
TAke green Coperas, and mingle it with cream till it be turned yellow, and
let it stand three or four days: then take primrose roots, leaves and all,
with May butter, and beat the roots and leaves in the butter, and boil them
together with a little beer and butter, and let it touch no salt.

To cure an old Ulcer.
TAke a quart of the strongest Ale that is to be gotten, or brewed, half a
pint of raw honey, two ounces of roch alum beaten, half a pint of Sallet
oil, and the quantity of a Tennis ball of common washing Soap, one ounce of
stone pitch beaten; one ounce of Rosin beaten, two ounces of yellow wax: boil
all these together, and strain them through a thin linen cloth; and this will
cure any old Ulcer.

A Water to cleanse, and mundifie old rotten sores and ulcers.
TAke a wine pint of stilled water of Planten, as much white wine; put therein
two ounces of Roch alum, a dram of Verdigrease, a dram of Mercury
sublimed: boil all these together, and keep them in a thick glass being
stoped with wax very close that the strength go not out; this will cleanse and
mundifie old sores* It will also heal a Fistula if you use a siering, so that
the water may come to the bottom of the sore.

The Medicine of medicines proved for the Stone.
TAke a quantity of eg-shels, wash them clean; those are the best whereout
chickens are come; dry them very dry in an oven, or between two tile-stones;
then make powder thereof, searce it, and mingle it with sugar, or powder of
licoras to give it taste, and let him use it as often as he needs, morning
and evening, either with Rhenish wine, white wine, or stale ale, a spoonful of
the powder at a time, and use to make water in a clean basin, and so you shall
see the deliverance hereof.

A precious water for the sight.
TAke Smallage, Fennel, Rue, Verveine, Egrimony, Daffadill, Pimpernell, and
Sage, and still them with breast milk together with five drams of frankincense,
and drop of it in your eyes each night: often proved.

For the Flux to stay it.
TAke the yolke of an Egg, and beat it, then mix with it one grated Nutmegge,
and lay it on an hot tyle stone to bake, and eat thereof fasting, and before
Supper, and after meals, and it will stay it. Often proved to be excellent.

A good Powder for the Gout.
TAke fine Ginger the weight of two groats, and Enula-campane-roots dried, the
weight of four groats, of Liquorish the weight of eight groats, of Sugar Candy
three ounces; beat all these into a powder, searce them fine, and then mingle
them together, and drink thereof morning and evening, and all times of the
day. Approved.

A special Medicine for the Collicke.
TAke Horehound half an handful, of Sage, and Hysope of either as much,
twelve leaves of Betony, of Centaury six crops, one Alexander-root, four
penie weight of Enula-campana roots powdered, Spikenard of Spain one penie
worth; seethe all these in three quarts of fine wort to a pottle, and draw it
through a linen cloth, and take three spoonfuls at once morning and evening.

To take away redness of burning of the Eyes.
TAke the white of an Egg, and beat it very well with a spoonful or two of
red Rose Water, then put thereto the pap of a roasted apple, mingle them well
together, and spread it upon a little Flax; so lay it on the eye, binding it
on with a linen cloth.

For the Rheum in the Eyes.
TAke the white of an Egg, and so much Bolearmoniacke as will thicken it, and
spread it on a round plaster of sheeps leather, and lay it on the temples on
that side the Rheum is.

The Ointment for the same.
TAke Lapis Tutiae and burn it in a fire-shovell of quick coals, quench it
in a poringer of woman's milk, do so half a score times, then grind it in a
clean mortar till it be very fine powder, then mingle it with fresh Barrows
grease till it look russet: anoint your eyes with a little of it when you go
to bed.

For Deafness.
TAke Rue, and rub it between the palms of your hands until it be so bruised
that you may make thereof a tent; then dip it in sweet sallet oil, and put in
each ear one, so that you may pull them forth again. This do for seven or
eight days, and change the tent every day.

Take a quarter of a pint of Angelica water, of Cardus Benedictus water, and
of white wine, of either a like quantity: mingle them together, dividing the
same into two equal parts; drink it in two several mornings: then the next
night after the taking of the second draught of water, take the fish of an
oyster, and put it into a fair linen cloth, and stop the same into the ear
that is thickest of hearing, and lie on that side as long as you can: in the
morning pick that ear as clean as you can, and after that take a draught of
the best ale you can get, with a toast of household bread toasted very dry, a
reasonable quantity of nutmegs; use the same every morning for five or six
days, fasting after the taking hereof two hours, every time you take it.

For the cough of the lungs.
TAke two handfuls of Rosemary, and strip it of the stalk, one of Hissop, and
seethe them in a pottle of running water, till it come to a quart, and then put
a quarter of a pound of fine sugar, and let it seethe a little, and scum it,
drink it morning and evening.

A present remedy for all manner aches, and bruises in the Bones.
TAke a good quantity of Wallwort, and a certain quantity of Balm, and
Smallach, and stamp them, and take a pound of May Butter, and temper them very
well together, then make them into round bals, and let them lie for the space
of eight days after, and then stamp them again as you did before: then take
it, and fry it, and strain it, and put it into an earthen pot: This will help
the bruise, be it never so black.

For burning, or scalding.
TO take out the fire, beat onyons very small, and bind them to the place. To
heal it, take half a pound of sheeps suet, as much sheeps dung, a quarter of
a pound of the inner rind of an Elder-tree, and a little Housleeke: fry them
altogether, and strain it, and use it as a plaster, or make a serecloth of
it, and apply it to the grieved part.

For Burstnesse of old, or young.
TAke nine red Snailes, lay them between two tyles of clay, so that they
creep not nor slide away, and bake them in the hot embers, or in an oven, till
they may be powdered, then take the powder of one of the Snailes, and put it in
white wine, and let the patient drink it in the morning at his rising, and
fast two hours after, and drink these nine Snailes in eighteen days, that
is, every other day one. And if the sickness be so old that it will not heal
in eighteen days, begin again, and drink other nine Snailes, and he shall
be whole. Probatum est.

A Salve for all sores.
TAke a pound of sheepes-tallow, and a pound of Turpentine, and a pound of
Virgin-waxe, a pint of Sallet oil, a quarter of a pound of Rosin: take also
Bugle, Smallach, and Plantaine half the quantity of the other, or so much as
will make a pint just: boil all these together upon a soft fire of coals,
always stirring it till a third part be consumed; then take it from the fire,
and strain it through a new canvas cloth into an earthen pot.

For Bleeding.
TAke a black Toade in May, dry it between two tile stones, and hang it in
Sarcenet about the parties neck.

To procure sleep.
TAke Betony, Roseleaves, Vinegar, Nutmeg, and the crummes of Rye-bread: put
this in a cloth warm to the poll of the head.

For the Cough.
TWo handfuls of last Saverie, steep it five days in white wine vinegar, put
into the vinegar half an ounce of Pepper, at the five days end draine out the
vinegar, and as soon as the bread is drawn, set them in a Pewter dish into
the oven, and stop it up, and let them stand all night. In the morning take
them out of the Oven and powder them. Take of this powder and drink it with
Sack, so much of it as will lie on a threepence.

A Gargill for the ^vula.
TAke a pint of good strong Ale, and as much Sack, and a good quantity of
long pepper, and bruise it grossly, and boil it from a quart to a pint, and
let the parties gargle their mouths, and throats as warm as they may suffer
it.

If the pallat of the mouth be down, it will fetch it up.

For Deafness very excellent good.
TAke the hoofes of the Neats feet after they be sodden, and hold them in a
cloth so warm as may be to your ear, diverse times together one after another.
they will last to be warmed in the same they were sodden in some three or four
days without sowring.

FINIS.

