The Portraiture of Hypocrisy, lively and pithilie pictured in her colors:
wherein you may view the vgliest and most prodigious monster that England has
bredde.

LVKE VI. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I speak.

APOC. III. I know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou
werest cold or hot. Therefore because thou art luke warm, and neither cold nor
hot, it will come to pass that I will spue thee out of my mouth.

Imprinted by Robert Robinson, for John Dalderne. 1589.

To the virtuous and right worshipful Sir Anthony Therold knight, his
duetifull and daily Orator John Bate, wishes health and prosperity with
increase of godliness, full perfection of all Christian knowledge and
happiness, everlasting in Christ Jesus.
Having often considered the sundry courtesies which I have received at the
hands of many, to whom I must and do confess my self deeply indebted, and
unable in any small part to repaie. I find none to whom I ought to
acknowledge my self so dutifully bound for their benefits, as to your
worship, the great bounty whereof I have often and plenteously tasted: for
which cause partly pricked forward by duty, as also encouraged through your
singular courtesy, knowing you to be a fauorer of the Gospel a maecenas to
learned men and good literature, a good member to that weal Public wherein
you live. I am so bold to crave Patrocinie to this little Dialogue; in which is
pourtrayed certain Worldlings Hypocrisies: which I do not present as though
the portrayture it self were worthy acceptaunce, but as an earnest penie of
my well meaning and testimony of a grateful mind. After that I had thoroughly
pondered how greatly many in the dotage of this world do deceive themselves
under the cloak of falselie challenged Christianity, who account it as easy
a matter to be a christian, as it is to say the Lords prayer, the Creed, and
ten Commandments, and who also esteem themselves sufficiently to have
discharged their duties if they come to the Church for fashion sake, hear a
little, and practice less: I thought good to set a broch certain common
Hypocrisies too commonly hatched in the common wealth of England, which little
labor my desire is, may be accepted of the virtuous and godly, for as for the
godles and wicked their censure much I esteem not, unto whom we may well
say, as does Augustine, what does it profit them to be called that they are
not, and to usurp a strange name: if they love to be called christians, let
them show forth the fruits of Christianity, for Christians have their names
of Christ, and therefore as they challenge the name by inheritance, so must
they be coheyres of his holiness. If they will be as they would be called,
let them learn to crucify the concupiscence of the flesh, and mortify the
lusts thereof. If they will be called faithful, as they trust in the mercy
of God through Christ Jesus, so let them exercise themselves in all good
works: if they will be called the members of Christ, let the^ take pains to
frame themselves according to their head as far forth as it is possible in
this life: holding themselves assured that it is impossible the head should be
of one will and the members of an other. If a man boast that he fears God and
lives christian like, and nevertheless contemns God and casts his
commandments behind him, not doing him honor in heart by obedience, to whom
with lips he acknowledges subjection, is it not too too gross hypocrisy?
True it is in deed these men can pretend and carry a goodly show that they
love God, it is nothing else but a sinful and basterdlie love: for if the
hollownesse of their hearts were laid open, we should find that they hate
him, for like as malefactors could wish in heart there were no Judge, no
order, no policy, no government in the world, that they might commit
mischief with more liberty: even so these, what copy soever their
countenance carries, in mind they despise God, and if it were possible, would
pluck him out of heaven. Thus hoping your Worship will shield this little
portraiture from the assaults and censure of others which are led more by
affection, then reason: I cease and crave pardon, for daring to present so
slender a gift, which I acknowledge, is not beautified with flowers of humane
wisdom, nor indicted with eloquent style, as those commonly are which are set
forth to the world, rather to feed the humors of wanton readers, then for any
delight to do good, wishing to your Worship long life, increase of knowledge,
perfect felicity of the life to come.

Your humble Orator. John Batt.

To the Christian Reader.
THE lamentable security (good christian Reader) of very many men who by
their life and conversation do show that either they acknowledge no God at al,
or think that God (as it is in Homer) does so dally out the time amongst I
know not what Ethiopians, that he has no leisure at all to look on the state
of mankind: has moved me to set abroch this little portrature of hypocrisies,
wherein the corruptions of such double faced protestants are in some part
discovered, whose actions are not answerable to their christian profession. For
although these men, marvelous wise in their own conceits, persuade themselves
that they are sufficiently learned unto salvation: yet are their cogitations
darkened, and they are strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance
that is in them. And therefore the life of these men may not unfitly be
compared unto the life of a mad man, or one that is infected with the falling
sickness. For even as mad men, or they which are spent with the falling
sickness, do wound themselves and know it not, do strike them selves and feel
it not, and even them when they think them selves to stand fastest, do slip
most sodenlie into dreadful danger: even so these men, which persuade
themselves that they be sharp sighted, when they are as blind as they that
are blind on both eyes, are so far past all sense of sin and feeling of Gods
judgments, that though they be strike^, they know it not, and although they
be beaten, they feel not the blows. No, they think that they walk in the
light, when they grope up and down in gross and palpable darkness: they
think they live when they abide but in death, and promise to themselves
liberty, being (in very deed) those bondslaues of the devil, which pluck
upon their own pates a speedy damnation. The pattern of which careless men
thou may behold in the person of this carnal Autophilus, who in his
discourse with the good christian Philoxenus to smoother his sins and hide his
hypocrisy, has always an excuse as good as an Aperne made of figtree leaves:
here in my only desire is, that this my poor labor may be accepted of the
Lord, and profitable to his people.

A DIALOGVE no less pleasant than profitable, betwixt the good Christian
Philoxenus, and the carnal Autophilus, wherein such worldlings are perfectly
depainted, as hide their hypocrisy under the color of falselie challenged
Christianity. By John Bat Master of Aries, and student in Divinity
Philoxenus. Autophilus. I Did marvel Autophilus, to see you march toward
the Sermon so speedily. I trust that the spirit of ye Lord has wrought some
good work in you, that you are desirous to learn wisdom at the mouth of the
minister, whereby you may be made wise unto salvation.

Autoph. Truly sir, I have almost forgotten you, it is so long since I did see
you. If you knew the intent purposed wherefore I came to the preaching, or the
profit which I have reaped thereby, I suppose you would rather condemn me
for my intention, than commend me for the commodity that I have gained at the
mouth of the Preacher.


Philox. Few such words Autophilus may suffice. They sound of the spirit of
iniquity. I would be sorry that your mind should meet with your mouth
herein.


Autoph. Would you wish me to swear, as I am an honest man and a Christian,
I speak what I think, and which you, if you urge me, shall understand at large.


Philox. I perceive your complexion is choleric, take heed you vnplat not
your patience, and swear not by your honesty. But since you have called your
intent in question. May I crave the cause of so great have, for your pace
declares, you were loath to come too late.


Autoph. Be there none here but we our selves?


Philox. None at all as I suppose.


Autoph. Will you conceal it, if I make manifest my mind unto you?


Philox. Persuade your self, that I am your friend in these things wherein
neither God is dishonored, nor your Christian brethren hindered.


Autoph. Tush I like not conditions, perhaps it concerns my credit to
conceal the cause hereof.


Philox. If either your credit or commodity bid honesty farewell, I am not
meet to make your secret friend. I hope there is no danger in broaching so
honest a matter as this is. Why therefore should you make it so curious?


Autoph: Because I know not the intent of the demander, howbeit as I desire
not to disclose it, yet because I am loath you should wax ielous, you shall not
depart unsatisfied. Believe me sir, I went more for fashion than for favor,
that either I did hear to master Doctor or his doctrine.


Philox. I thought how I should find you Autophilus, you made the matter so
curious, I fear me in the end I shall find you an hypocrite.


Autoph. You cut me off before I come to a full period: the sense is yet
imperfect. If there had been no greater occasion to have moved me to come to
this place, than the profit I thought to have reaped at the hand of the
preacher, we had not met here to day.


Phil. Is there any thing more commodious (miserable man) than to seek to save
thy soul? Is any thing more necessary than to hear the word preached, or any
jewel more precious than wisdom?


Autoph. O Sir, I came to receive money this day, to the value of two hundred
pounds, and as I am an honest man I esteem more of two hundred pounds, than of
three hundred preachings. For if you think that I came so speedily to hear a
Sermon, you are greatly deceived, notwithstanding hearing the report of the man
to be famous, that he was a stranger and an excellent fellow, I thought good to
go see him for company sake. But shall I tell you Philoxenus: in that mind I
am in, I will never hear him again whilst I live.


Philox. Do you not like of him as a good messenger, that will without fear
or favor discharge his duty, and manfully declare that message which was
ministered unto him.


Autoph. Messenger or not, I know not what he has in charge, but one thing I
am sure of, that such as he, are far unmeet to be made magistrates, here
is nothing now a days in the mouths of a great number of them, but crying
out against covetousness, usury, briberie, belly cheer, surfeiting,
drunkenness, and such like.


Philox. Tell me Autophilus, wherefore he is unmeet to be made a magistrate?


Autoph. Wherefore? because pride, covetousness, vaineglorie, whooredome,
lechery, should kiss the stock^s.


Philox. And no less worthy, for if I may be judge, the gallows is too good
for them. But in deed such has been the corrupt nature of the wicked and
ungodly of this world, that they have always loathed such as would simply
and in singlenes of heart tell them, or freely reprove them for their manifest
sin and manifold transgressions. In the prophet Esaias his time the people
cried out to the seeers and prophets yt they would speak flattering things
unto them. Esai. 30.
Abner could never abide Rispah Isboseth, to tell him of his going into Rispah
his father Saules concubine: 2. Sam. 3
Mich. 2.
The Prophet Micha tells us that the sin companions of his time liked well
of such Prophets as would prophecy unto them of Wine and strong drink. The
same cankred corruption, if not more grievous, is at this day. The wicked would
have their sins smothered
The wicked best like of those ministers which either can say nothing, or else
flatter and sooth them up in their sins, taking them as it were by the hand,
and lulling these graceless babes a sleep in the cradle of security: They
best like of those which dawbe with untempered mortar, and sow entising
pillowes under their elbowes: which preach unto them of Wine and good Ale, of
rioting, reuelling, and running unto all manner of ungodly excess: Amos. 8
I remember the Prophet Amos has a complaint against the rulers of his time,
that they would make havoc of the poor and needy for old shoes. If the
same Prophet were now living, he would add to this another complaint as
grievous, that the ministers of our time are so wicked and ungodly, that they
will smoother the sins of men, and sell the truth of GOD for mourning gowns,
for tieth cocks, and tieth sheues. I would to God that woeful experience
proved not this to be true: for undoubtedly although a man were so blotted and
blurred, that all the wafer in the sea could not wash him, yet shall you find
one flattering tongue or other, that will support him in his sins, and justify
him in his uncleanness, and although he were as black as the black horse
mentioned in the Revelation, yet shall ye find a black Prophet with a black
mouth, and an headlong tongue will color him as white as the white sheep that
is new come from washing, and if a false tongue could do more than that, it
is set to sale for a small price. Thus the children of GOD are berefte and
robbed of their garments, when flatterers give titles, and justify the wicked
in their abominations.


Autoph. I tell you troth Philoxenus, to speak what I think, I utterly
mislike of these saucy merchants which check and control their
superiors: there is nothing but the law, damnation, damnation. What man? We
live under the gospel, and therefore, if they will needs be preaching let
them preach the gospel. I warrant you S. Paul being a minister of the gospel,
used no comminations, nor threatninges, but obsecrations and beseechings, as it
manifestly appears in sundry parts of his Epistles. 2. Cor. 20. 2. Cor. 10.1.


Philox. If thou had been in Herod's court, thou would have been one of
the first that should have termed John Baptist a saucy Jack for his
controwling of Herod. Thou art one of them which would have thy sins
smothered, although incessantly thou offendest against the majesty of God. But
what discreet father is he, which if his child should play the unruly and
stubborn boy, would stroke his head and tell him he were a good son, and not
rather fatherly reprove him, and sharply correct him with a rod. What prudent
master will commend his servant for neglecting his commandment? In like
sort will you be trucebreakers of the Lords couena^ts, and yet look to be
flattered? will you impeach the Lords honor, blaspheme his holy name, tread
and trample under foot his glory, and yet hear of mercy? will you steal,
murder, commit adultery, and yet hear of nothing but the gospel? will you rest
in sin, live in error and ignorance, sling overthwart the fields after your
own disordered lusts, walk in the bypath of ungodliness, Discrete Ministers
not unlike to skillful Chirurgians.
and yet make no reckoning to be rebuked? what skillful Physician or
experienced Chyrurgian, will apply a supplying salve to an old festred sore?
and not rather use searing, launsing, cerzing and searching of it to the
bottom? no, no, gross humors must have strong purgations, festred sores must
have sharp salues. Knobby timber must have hard wedges: and rough horses must
have rough riders. It is a lamentable thing to consider the waful estate and
condition of our days: such pillage and pollage, such guile and disguising of
matters, such swearing, tearing, and tossing of the name of God like a
tenisball, from one blasphemous to an other, such leasemongring and inhauncing
of rentes, such pride, rioting, and ruffanisme, such drunkenness and surfeting;
such wantonness and chambring, that wickedness does rage as a water floude, and
iniquity has gotten the upper hand: and yet notwithstanding men fret like
chafed Bulls when they are brotherly reproved for their wickedness. As touching
saint Paul, it is true that he is a Minister of the gospel: But it is not true
that he always deals with the spirit of mildnes and lenity, for with the
proud and arrogant he deals more sharply, and more roughly: look through the
Evangelists with a single eye, and see how sharply Christ Iesus-dealeth with
the scribes and pharisees, although they bragged and boasted as much of their
upright conversation as do our english hypocrites: although they sat in Moses
chair and taught the law, Luke 18. Math. 23. John 8.
yet are they called of the son of God a wicked and an adulterous generation,
blind guides, painted sepulchers, the sons of the devil. There were in saint
Paul's time such as made their brags and vaunts of the law: Phil. 3.
yet are they called of the Apostle dogs, evil workers, enemies of the cross
of Christ. Wherefore there ought to be a singular wisdom and discretion in
the ministry, to distribute the word of truth aright, to break to every one
his portion of the bread of life, to preach the law to whom the law belongs,
and the gospel to whom the gospel appertains, Judgment to whom Judgment
belongs, and mercy to whom mercy appertains. Order preposterous to preach
the gospel before the law.
For to preach mercy and forgiveness of sins before men see their sins
and know their miseries: by the preaching of the law is to preach the gospel
unprofitably: he that does not see his sins in the law as it were in a
glass is ignorant what misery is in himself, and what mercy is in God.


Autoph. Well Philox. I perceive you are become a fether of a left wing, I
knew when it was not so with you, howbeit this gear will take no color:
neither can I see but that a great number have done more harm then good by
their preaching. It is a piteous case to see how those towns which have had
honest simple men, and quiet souls that would not meddle with other men's
matters are now troubled and molested by a company of saucy fellows who can
abide no good fellowship, no sportes, no pastime, no not so much as upon the
Sunday. Was not good fellowshippe (think you) used before they were borne? I
can tell you Philox. there be a thousand of this mind, that if the bloody
pretense of the proud Spaniard had taken place, we might have thanked these
busy fellows for it.


Philox. It was with me Autoph. sometime as it is now with thee, both blind in
judgment, and corrupt in conversation: I did prostitute my self unto all
kind of wickedness, having no sense of my sins, no fear of punishment, no
feeling of the judgments of God, until such time as the Lord by the preaching
of his word, and the power of his holy spirit, gave me new eyes to see better,
and a new heart to discern better: afterward, as a man come out of a dumpe, I
wondered at ye gross and palpable darkness wherein I was before, neither have I
had this feeling in my self: but also I have known and do know many which
before their conversion, and inward alteration of mind, Mark this ye civil
honest men.
were reputed for as civil honest men as ever trod upon a shoe, as
substantial men as any were in the parish they dwelt in, as simple dealers,
honest livers, good housekeepers, as any of their neighbors, neither was it
need to tell them of it, and yet now yt the Lord has effected an alteration
and change in them, they think far otherwise of themselves, their eyes be
opened, and their judgments illumined. For now they see, that which they saw
not before. Luke. 16.
Now they understand yt there is great ods betwixt the judgment of God and the
judgment of men, and that God oftentimes in just judgment condemns whom ye
world unjustly justifies. I speak this Autoph. because thou call me a
fether of the left wing, wherein you dealest after ye accustomed manner of
hypocrites which speak reprochfully of me^ converted unto God. For ye world
loves his own and bristleth and stormeth when as God plucketh away one fether
from his wings. True prechers of the word called sowers of sedition.
That which thou obiectest against ye ministers and zealous folowers of ye
gospel is no nouelty, how yt they are the cause of strife, sedition, wars,
broils, hurliburlies wherewith ye world is disquieted: against which slandrous
speeches and offensive outcries, ye godly must confirm their minds with ye
notable saying of our savior Christ in ye gospel I came not to send peace but a
sword, Luke. 12.
for I came to set a man at variance with his Father, and the Daughter against
the Mother, and the Daughter in law against her Mother in law, and a man's foes
shall be they of his own household: for the word of peace does separate as it
were ye gold from ye dross, the wheat from ye chafe and the good from ye bad:
and from hence it is ye the wicked become so outrageous, and do whet their
teeth to persecute the painful laborers in the Lords vineyarde calling them
the troublers of the common wealth: 1. King. 18.
unto whom we answer as Elias answered to King Achab, that not he, but the
King was the troubler of the Country: Even so not the ministers which teach
the word painefully, but these ungodly ones which defame them despitefully,
trouble the common wealth, and hurt the health of the Church. The unbelieving
Jews at Thessalonica cried out against Paul and Silas saying these fellows
that have troubled the whole world are come hither also. But Paul speaking
against ye Jews his enemies and persecutors, said, they, as they have killed ye
Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, so do they perseeute us: they please not
God, and are adversaries to all men, resisting us yt we should not preach the
gospel unto the Gentiles to their salvation, that they may still fulfill their
sins, and so at last, the endless anger of God may fall upon them. It is to
be feared, it is with us, as it was with the Jews in the prophet Jeremy his
days, a few that embrace the word of the Lord with profit. The rebellious
Jews objected against Jeremy, that since the time they began to leave the
worship of their idol gods, and to hearken to the preaching of the word of
God, they never had any jot of felicity, but that mishaps by troops fell one
upon the neck of an other: hereupon they said to Jeremy: when we made
sacrifice to the Queen of heaven (that is to say, to the sun) all things
went well with us, we had abundance of corn, etc. After the same manner say
many of our time, it was well when we heard mass, when we went on pilgrimage,
when we worshipped before images, when we gave to monks and priests: the fear
of God was greater, and there was more love and good fellowship in a day then
there is now in half a year.


Autoph. A thousand are of that mind Philox. neither can you make them
believe, but then it was a good world, when a man might buy as many eggs for a
penny as would serve him half a dozen meals.


Philox. What drunkenness, what astonishment, what madness has dazeled the
eyes of men yt they should see nothing? what sleighty elusions of Satan has
covered their spirits that they should believe nothing? Is this the thank
that we render unto God for the preaching of the gospel? what madness can be
compared unto this? The Lord does offer us salvation freely without money or
money worth: and we had rather feed like swine on husks and shales, pay for
popish dotages and dirty devises. The Lord does offer us drink of the
welsprings of Israel, the fountain of everliving water, and we had rather
drink of the filthy puddle of men's deuillish inventions. He sends his
ministers amongst us to sow the incorruptible seed of his holy word, to rouse
up these lumpish spirits of ours and to bring us to repentance: and we accuse
his word to be the cause of our sins and miseries, and his ministers to be the
sowers of sedition and discention. But tell me this one thing Autoph. art thou
persuaded yt the preaching of Noe, was the cause of the ouerwhelming of the old
world with waters? or ye good persuasions of Lot, the cause why Sodom, and
Gomorra was burned with fire and brimstone from heaven, or the forewarning of
our savior Christ unto the Jews to be the cause of the destruction and
desolation of that famous city Jerusalem?


Autoph. How should I be so persuaded, since it was the fulness of their
abhominatio^s which kindled ye wrath and indignation of God against them?


Philox. In like sort it is not the word of God which makes our sins and
miseries abound, causes dearth or penury, stirs up sedition, strife or
contention: it is our sins and enormious offenses that draws the heavy
judgments of God upon us, let lewd tongues therefore for shame leave off to
blaspheme and to lash out at random against the gospel of Jesus Christ: let us
remove far from us the causes of our miseries, namely, contempt of the word of
God, covetousness, oppression, swearing and tearing of ye name of God for vain
trifles, profanation of the Lords Saboth, drunkenness, surfeting, rioting, etc.
and let us know assuredly, that the happy and prosperous victory which God has
given to the professors of his gospel in putting a snaffle in the mouths, and
an hook in the nosthrels of merciless Tyrants and bloody persecutors of his
children, it was for his name sake, his word and his truths sake. Therefore
let us with humblenes of heart beseech the Lord of his entire goodness to send
daily more and more painful laborers into his vineyard, to water the vine of
England with the moisture of his holy word, and that all idol pastors and
hirelings may be rooted out.


Autoph. Yet more ado about hirelings, I pray you whom do you call hirelinges
or idol pastors, it may be that I shall mistake you?


Philox. The very same Autoph. whom thou call simple fellows and quiet
souls, which care not whether the people committed to their charge, sink or
swim, stand or fall, live or die, be saved or damned: which either for fear or
favor dare not once mewe or open their mouths to reprove the sins of the
wicked: which are more fit for ye tauern than ye temple, for ye plough than ye
pulpit: which are more fit for ye slaile than to feed the flock of Christ.
The shepherd if he want knowledge may confer with his Dog, and if the seely
husba^dman want wisdom he may ask counsel of his whip, for the lips of these
idols preserve no knowledge.


Autoph. Now as I am an honest man, and a Christian, I have heard many
vnreuerent speeches, and reproachful raylings, and yet never heard I any thing
against honest men so uncharitably spoken.


Philox. Beware how you iudgest, lest you condemn ye prophets themselves. Esai.
50.
Esaias calls the ministers of his age, blind watchmen, dumb dogs, greedy
dogs. The prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 22.
terms ye prophets, conspirators, greedy raueners, deuourers like Lions. The
prophet Zachary, Zach. 11.
in zeal of ye spirit, terms them no better tha^ idols, I could reckon many
more sharp sayings of the Prophets against such biters of the Lords people,
but take these for a taste and cease to call the godly and zealous followers of
the Lord, despitefull and malicious dealers, because they will not justify the
wicked in their ways, say that good is evil and evil good, make darkness
light, Esaias. 5.
and light darkness, call sower sweet, and sweet sower, to whom the Lord does
threaten that horrible woe of revenge.


Autoph. Shall you make me believe that the prophets speak of those, which such
as you are, call dumb ministers, and not rather of the enemies of Gods truth?
never whilst you live. Why man these love God, regard his truth, exhort and
edify to the uttermost of their power: I pray you call to mind that saying of
the prophet Zachary, who dare despise the day of small things, and things of
no reputation? who dare reprove the Lords soldiers lapping water like dogs?
The stately champions being sent home, who dare vpbraid? Elizeus, his plowing,
Peter's, fishing, Paul, All this concludes nothing for the supporting of a
blind guide.
his tentmaking, Mathews, pilling and powling? who were they that despised
Jesus Christ because he was a Carpentors son? Let these men beware lest
hereafter they be like them in torments whom now they do imitate in tau^ts. Who
would vpbraid Luther with his monkery, since S. Paul, was so long a Pharisee
and S. Augustine, a Manichee. Why do you despise these brethren? Do you think
that they which bring them into the church know not what they do? You might as
well accuse the one as the other, if you durst. I am sure there is as great
care as may be taken by the bishops and their substitutes at this day to admit
such to the ministry as be learned, and such as they are well persuaded of by
men of good calling and credit to have lived an honest and godly life, what can
bishops do more? they be no Gods.


Philox. You are not ye first Autoph. that have answered this matter with such
a flimflam, howbeit this coin will not go for current, when as it is tried by
ye touchstone of Gods truth. But do the prophets speak of those which regard
not ye truth of God? If ye were granted to go for good coin, must not men
therefore be roughly spoken unto when they commit wickedness? Is ye sinner so
tender yt he may not be touched? Idol pastors says Autoph. love god, and
regard his gospel: I doubt when ye Judge shall hold his Assise, and the book
of account must be laid open, there shall need no Proctour to plead against
the^, no clark of Assise to read their inditements, no great inquest to cast
them, for their own consciences shall both accuse and condemn them for the
contrary. Is not this ye true badge, and cognizance whereby ye shepherds over
the flock of Christ are known to love the son of God by, The cognizance of
careful Ministers feeding of the flock.
If thou love me, feed my sheep. Where is then the love of those shepherds
yt never had any care of feeding of the flock of Christ? what shall become of
them which have pinched and pined to death ye souls of their poor brethren,
for want of spiritual sustenance, when they shall drink as a just recompense
of their iniquities the bitter cup of Gods eternal wrath and indignation in ye
kingdom of darkness, and in ye fearful presence of Satan, where the doleful
drums of Gods anger shall continually sound in their ears: where shall be
weeping, howling, and endless lamentation? It were ten thousand times better
for them to hear of their sins now, that they may be brought to repentance,
and make their hearts smart for the same, then hereafter to cry woe and alas
that ever we were borne, when the day of repentance is past, and the gate of
mercy is shut up. That which you infer of Elizeus his plowing, Peter's
fishing, Paul's tent making, together with the rest, makes nothing at all for
the maintenance of a blind guide: we despise the^ not for that which they have
been, but we lament for that which they are. Neither are we ignorant that the
Lord has chosen ye simplest and basest of the people, to set abroach the glad
tidings of the Gospel, and to confound the wisdom of the wisest. As
touching the care of Bishops in constituting of Ministers, Philoxenus could
find in his heart to justify them, if their own carelesnes did not condemn
them. I would they had a little better learned that lesson of S. Paul to his
Timothy, 1. Tim. 5. Care in constituting ministers.
Lay hands suddenly on no man. Which lesson if it were as well practiced, as I
would to God it were, then should men of sound doctrine, polished with good
gifts of the mind, adorned with good Art, and furnished with all kind of
science and knowledge, receive this calling: then should such as be constant in
the faith, painful to til the Lords husbandry, faithful, zealous, watchful,
laborious, and of a tried conversation, be sent to labor in the Lords
vineyard, whereas oftentimes we see the contrary, that ignorant men of
corrupt conversation have that calling granted unto them.


Philox. This is a new learning in deed, when such green heads dare presume to
reprove their elders, as though they knew not what to do, unless they were
advised by you. Undoubtedly for mine own part, I will tell you Philox. if I had
xx. benefices, I had rather bestow xir. of the^ upon those against who^ you so
bitterly inueigh, then one upon a controuler, whom it seems you favor so
much.


Philox. Do you call it a new learning to reprove the sinner? Did not John ye
Baptist being but a base and conte^ptible man, reprove king Herod to his beard?
Luke 3.
Did not David being a child reprove and tell the elders of their faults? and
says, I am wiser tha^ the aged, Psalm. 119.
because I have kept thy commandments. 1. King. 18
Was not Micheas singular when he reproved and resisted 400. false prophets? 1.
King. 22.
Was not Elias mighty, when he withstood all ye false prophets of Baal? God
has made the vile and basest to confou^d the proud, and very babes to co^fou^d
ye mighty. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings (says ye prophet) have
thou ordained strength to still the enemy and the auenger. Psalm. 8.
To flatter men in their sins, were ye next way to make the^ rot in their
filthiness, and therefore sinners must make their rekoning to be rebuked. Let the
wicked therefore cease to make hue and cry over ye country, saying such are
proud malicious men, because they will not run to the same excess of riot, but
rather reprove ye wais of ye ungodly: unless they will take in ye prophets,
Christ and his Apostles, and charge the^ we ye same crimes. Let the^ consider
yt of the prophet Esaias. O how beutiful are the feet of the ambassador that
brings the message from the mountain, and proclaims peace, that brings
the glad tidings, and preaches health, and says unto Sion, thy God is thy
king: Let them consider that of our Savior Christ, He that hears you,
hears me: and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. But shall I tell you wherefore the word of God is
hated of the world, and the Ministers thereof envied: because it contains
sharp corrosiues against secure consciences, because it requires mortification
of the flesh, quickening of the spirit, a lively faith, and unfeigned repentance:
and this is one of the especial causes wherefore Autophilus favors the good
Ministers so charitably as he does, insomuch as if he had twenty
Ecclesiastical livings, he had rather to bestow nineteen of them upon
blind watch men, than one upon a vigilant shephearde, that has care to look
up the lost sheep of Israel. Here if I should but glaunce at our English
Simoniacks, I know that I should rather displease than content. Wherefore I
will say nothing of Church robbers, merchant buiers of Ecclesiastical
dignities, following the steps of their grand patriarch and predecessor Simon
Magus. I will not say that they are more wicked and ungodly than the Jews, for
they would not put the price of blood in their treasury: but these merchauntes
have so enlarged their consciences, that they can find in their hearts to make
merchandise of men's souls for money. Symonie put to his shift.
I will wink at the iugling that is now a days touching this sin of
Symonie, and the pretty fine plays betwixt master Parson and his Patrones, as
if they would cast a mist before his sight that made the eye, by making a fair
gloss upon a bad matter, and putting a golden coat upon an ill favored body.
But hear you Sirs, all this will not pay the shot, when the reckoning comes to
be made. I could say how that Gentlemen Papists bestow most commonly their
Ecclesiastical livings upon dirt dawbers, and such as are in no indifferent
measure graced for that calling: that thereby they may bring the Gospel of
Christ Jesus into contempt. Tse, tse, not a word of the corruption of covetous
Gentlemen in this point, how far they will seek within six months for sir
John lack latin, lack learning, lack conscience, and religion, that will
make no bones to commit Symonie. Oh what keeping counsel on both sides!
Master Parson swears, that if he have twenty pound yearly rent of an
hundred, he has the whole given him: The Patron says, as he is a Gentleman,
he has given him al, and yet his conscience witnesses, that he has given him
the third part. Thus if both they can play fast and loose cleanly, to dazzle
the eyes of the world, they care not, if for companies sake, they go both
together to their crafts master, which taught them the trick of such
sleightie conueyances. In the mean time, neither the Patron, if he may sheare
the sheep, while master Parson sheareth the hogs, and scumme the best fat
from his pot: neither master Parson, if he may have a little living, cares
what does become of poor souls, for whom Christ Jesus vouchsafed to shed his
most precious blood: but by whose means so ever it comes to pass, that the
flock of Christ suffers spiritual famine, he shall as surely answer for
the same, as he which beholds that so horrible an offense, lives for ever.
For this is the cause, that where there ought to be such as are able to
teach, 2. Tim. 3
to reprove, correct, and instruct, such as ought to be stars, Dan. 12
to give light to the Church, both in regard of their doctrine and
conversation, there are wandering Planettes, giving no light, neither in their
doctrine, nor in their deeds: Against whom the curse of GOD is threatened.
Iere. 23
Woe be unto the shepheardes of Israel that feed themselves, should not the
shepherds feed their flocks? Ye eat up the fat, ye cloathe your selves
with the wool, Ezech. 34.
the best fed do you slaie, but the flock do you not feed, the weak have
you not, strengthened, the flock have you not healed, the broken, have ye not
bound together, the driven away, have yet notbrought again, etc.


Autoph. If you would inueigh against Symony Philoxenus, you may go to Rome,
for it is banished many years ago out of England: As for that which you call
Symony, it is nothing else but a simple contract which ye lawiers call, Do vt
des. I give that thou may give again. And if this be not done without
crazing of a man's conscience. I doubt we have a thousand cracked consciences in
England.


Philox. Alas good sir Symony, how is he put to his shifts, and yet all will
not pay the shot, when the reckoning comes to be made. Notwithstanding were it
not for this same, Do vt des, many which set their talents like Eagles on
Ecclesiastical liuinges, which flaunt it out like brave lads of this world,
and set a brazen face on the matter, might go in thread bare cotes hanging
down their heads for very shame: and herein I appeal to their own
consciences, if there be any conscience at all in them. For certainly if they
did bear that zeal to the ministry, which at a blushe many of them do
pretend, they would not geld the livings of poor ministers to maintain their
own surpassing pride. But to leave them Autophilus, and to come to your self.
I pray you tell me how many sermons you have heard within one whole year?


Autoph. That I may not lie unto you, By the length of his foot measure the
rest of that kind.
I have not heard many. For I am none of those that will go four or five miles
to a Sermon, and yet. I trust. I shall do well enough for all that, as long as
I have a good faith in God, and do no body no harm: What man, should I leave
my pleasures and profits, and fall to following the Preachers? Do they think
that none shall be saved, but such as read Scriptures and hear Sermons? God
shield man, but they which do not go to hear Sermons, should be saved as well
as they. Why may not one serve God at home in his house, having good books and
good prayers, as well as if he heard all the sermons in the Country. You shall
never make me believe the contrary, I have the Bible in my house, and a few
prayers, and now and then I have a little crash for recreation sake.


Philox. O fie Autophilus, thou stand too much in thine own light, and
bewraiest what folly and ignorance is in thee. if thou think to be saved
by any other means than that which God has appointed in his holy word, what
madness can be like unto this, that when GOD has absolutely spoken any thing
in his word, we should except against it, and so as it were give him the
lie? When GOD has told us that the teaching of his word is the ordinary
means to salvation, shall we hope to have fellowshippe amongst the elect
children of GOD, and yet despise the good means that GOD has ordained to
bring us into his kingdom? When GOD has aduouched a thing to our faces, will
we say, I hope it is not so. This is nothing else but infidelity, which
vomiteth up al good things, poisoneth the very entrayles of a man, stops
the way to good graces, and barreth us from repentance. Wherefore use thy
liberty, say thou art a Protestaunt, renounce the Pope, yet except thou
love the preaching of the word, even as thou love thine own soul, and
do delighte in the Gospel of our savior Christ, as in thy life, thou do
walk in the sins of a corruptible man.


Autoph. Stay there Philoxenus, for I know as honest men as ever broke bread,
yt keep good houses, give much to the poor, no craft nor crinking in buying
and selling, and yet iwis they will not go a furlong out of their way to hear
a Sermon and do you not think that these are sound Christians?


Philox. I dare not say so, for what have you here reported, but Socrates,
Aristides, Scipio or Fabritius, each of the have performed as much and more
too. for although at some times those men may show themselves very careful of
Christian civility, and may also for a fashion decree such constitutions and
laws, as of themselves being good, may rightly tend to the performance of
honesty: yet because they are not truly and inwardly touched with a love of
religion, Jude. 1 Number. 22.
they are but makers of sects, fleshly, not having the spirit, and therefore
in effect no better than Balaams blind Ass that braied forth the truth on a
sudden, without any taste, or feeling any force thereof in her self: or like
to that same proud Priest Caiphas, who prophesied at unawares of the passion
of Christ, he himself not understanding therein the hid mysteries of God, but
with the wicked king Saul, he uttered a bare sound of words without any sense
in himself. And yet for all this I deny not, but the Lord in his singular
mercy may turn these their attempts to the good of his Church: even as also
he turned the prophesies of that bewitched Balaam, into a singular blessing of
Israel. How be it, as concerning themselves, they feel not the power of that
spirit which so extraordinarily works in them: Wherefore the Lord for his
mercies sake enlighten the eyes of your heart, and circumcise the foreskinne of
your understanding Autophilus, that you may hunger after the bread of life,
more desirously then as yet you do. I pray you, answer me this one thing? Is
it not a token, when you loath your meat, that your body is out of temper,
and that you are ill at ease.


Autoph. You have hit the nail on the head, for when I am in health, I have a
very good stomach to three meals a day.


Philox. Certainly if your body were no better dieted than your soul, you
would quickly be hunger staruen. Herein is a proportion betwixt your soul
and your body, that even as your body, if it be not diseased, will covet
repast, food, and sustenante: the loathing whereof is a token of
distemperature. In like manner the longing after the word of God, is a token
that thy soul is in good plight, in perfect state, and in the pathe to
eternal felicity: whereas on the contrary side, the loathing of the word,
the sural delight thou take in hearing it taught and preached, bewraieth a
crazed and a cursed soul in the broad way to everlasting death and
damnation. Wherefore I counsel thee as one that pittieth thy case, do as they
do that are diseased in body: Like as they take counsel of skillful
Physicians, that by receites of medicines they may recover their former health,
and have a good stomach to their meat: even so, sithence Gods word goes
against your bad stomach, and that you cannot digest the same: yea, rather your
soul lotheth than loves it, bow the knees of your heart: the Lord stretches
out his arms daily to embrace you. He knocks at the door of your conscience
with many good persuasions and exhortations, that he may bring you to
repentance. Christ the Physician of your soul is easy to be spoken
withal: he is more ready to grant, than you are to ask. Pray unto him,
that by the power of his holy spirit, he may work in your soul an hungring
after the word, John. 4
which is the bread of salvation, a thirsting after the drink of life, whereof
whosoever drinks, shall not thirst for ever. Consider ye needfulnes of this
food, whereof if you do but meditate, no doubt it shall cause an appetite unto
the same, unless you be utterly, by the bewitching of satan, bereft of your
wits, and have no care of your souls health. That soul must needs perish
which is destitute of heavenly food. For without the word there is no faith,
and he that believes not, shall perish everlastingly. The wrath of God abides
upon him that believes not, says our savior Christ. To conclude, Gods word
is the incorruptible seed, as S. Peter teaches, wherewith the children of
wrath through the fall and corruption of our first parents are begotten and
borne anew by the virtue and grace of Christ Jesus. Wherefore, if your souls
health, the escaping ftom danger of eternal damnation: if the desire you have
to be called the son of GOD may preuail with you, hear the word of God: and
not for fashions sake, but as one that would understand the will of his master.
Hear it, I say, and keep it: follow it, meditate on it day and night.


Autoph. I were sick in deed Philoxenus, if all this counsel were
necessary: I will now say more, since you move me unto it. Hypocrites divinity
sone learned.
I know as much as the wisest of them can teach me. They can teach me n^ more
but the Lords prayer, the Apostles Creed, and the ten commandments, and this
could I do many years ago, it is but learning one lesson of the Prophet
David, that is to wit, Eschew evil, and do good: or else this brief Epithome
of the ten commandementes, Love God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy
self. There is not any one of them that can teach me any more.


Philox. There is no Christian (as I hope) of your mind, for then the wrath
and indignation of GOD cannot be but hotly kindeled against them.


Autoph. Yea, ten thousand.


Philox. The more, the worse. If it were so easy a matter to become a good
Christian: the Disciple of Christ to learn the will of God, as you make it,
what need we of the Prophets, Christ or his Apostles? what need we of the
writs of the sacred Scriptures? What need we the Preachers and Pastors of
our souls, so diligently to labor to bring man to salvation, so carefully
to sow the seed of the word, so vigilantly to keep watch on the Lords
tower, so earnestlye to labor in the Lords vineyard, so painfully to seek
for to drive away the wolves from the Lords flock, so industriously (like
good husband men) to till the Lords ground, so zealously to plant true piety
in the hearts of people, and to pluck up wickedness and ungodliness by the
roots.


Philox. In deed, as you say Autophilus, the Lords prayer, the Creed, the
ten Commandments, to eschew evil and do good, to love GOD, is soon
said, but not so soon learned as you take it. And first as concerning your
praying, I believe you use it but a little. You count so easy, for if if you
were set to the school all your life, I think you would scarce take out this
lesson, Be fervent in prayer. For first in every godly prayer must of
necessity be these five things considered. Five circumstances belonging to
fervent prayer.


First, earnestness of heart in him that prays. Secondly, consideration of
the causes which move him to pray. Thirdly, who it is to whom he prays.
Fourthly, for whose cause he is heard. And fiftely, what he ought to ask.
Which circumstaunces, Autophilus, I doubt be wanting some of them in such as
you your self are. But I pray you since it is so easy a matter, as you say
it is, to be a Christian, and seeing that you are so deeply learned, as it
seems you are not. Tell me whether you have learned that little lesson of the
Apostle to the Thessalonians or no, which is, Pray continually.


Autoph. That were enough to cloy a full stomach, and to let all things else
run at randon. I like not of such husbandry: sometimes in deed, I pray,
although seldom, for you know that such as I am cannot have leisure to learn
this lesson, Pray continually: we have somewhat else to do iwis: otherwise
you might beg us.


Philox. I thought how I should find you, your praying is not unlike the
desire which you have to the preaching. To the one when you go, it is for
fashion and not to fructify: you use the other seldom, and yet full of
hypocrisy. Naie this is a truth, he that will not emploie an hour to learn
the will of God at the mouth of the preacher, cannot, nor will not spend half
an hour in invocation and prayer. The small pleasure in hearing the preacher,
an argument of slender delight in prayer.
The small delight in the one declares the slender appetite to the other: Such
prayers are not only not acceptable, but destable: not pleasant, but loathsome
in the ears of the Lord. He that turns his ears from hearing the laws of
the Lord, his prayers shall be abominable, Pro. 18. Eccle. 15
says Solomon. Praise is not seemly in the mouth of the ungodly, for he is
not sent of God, says Esaie. But of good fellowship, tell me this one thing
Autophilus, what move you commonly to pray, since, as you say, you are so
skillful in the science of praying, which notwithstanding you practice very
seldom, by your own report.


Autoph. I would be sorry Philoxenus, if my prayers were no more auaileaable
then you say: which if it be so, there be more deceived beside my self. As
for the cause which pricketh me forward to my prayers: Hypocrites pray in
adversity, and wax proud in prosperity
the chiefest is adversity: for when I see any temporal danger or distress
draw near my bodily calamity, and misery imminent: any loss of living,
any want of good success in worldly affairs, then commonly, as one in
troubles, I make a few prayers, praying GOD in plain English, to send me
good luck, as they call it.


Philox. A few, quoth you, the fewer the better, if such be the cause moving
you, how like an Ass do you in this matter behave your self? He will not
labor unless he be beaten, neither will you call upon God unless you be
whipped with the scourge of some worldly calamity. The true causes of
effectual invocation.
But hold this for a surety, that unless the spirit of GOD above all other
things move you thereunto, your lip labor is lost, and your wind spent on
waste. For as to pray is the gifts of GOD, so can we not earnestly,
zealouslie, and heartily power out our prayers, and invoke the name of GOD,
unless he from whom every good and perfect gift proceeds, move us
thereunto. For there be diverse and sundry causes concurring, which may move
us to pray, as namely the commandment of God. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, Psalm. 50 Mark. 13 Col. 4.
and I will hear thee, and thou shall* praise me. Watch and pray, continue
in preyer. Neither in that he has only commanded, but that also he has
promised to hear our petitions. As in the Psalm before mentioned, Math. 7.
Luke. 11
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. Ask and ye shall
have, knock and it shall be opened, Seek and ye shall find. Unto you,
says Christ, I say, Ask in my name and it shall be given to you whatsoever
ye ask in my name, Esaie. 55 John. 16
namely that which is according unto my fathers will. Seek diligently, knock
with perseverance continually, and after this manner, Whosoever asks
receives, he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. This sentence answers that most comfortable saying of the Prophet:
Seek the LORD while he may be found, Call upon him while he is nigh. As
that also, Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. We
may add to this commandment the greatness of his benefits also, as, that
of a piece of clay he framed us to his own similitude and likeness in
innocence and righteousness, without either spot or stain. In that when we
were all captives, and made the servile bondslaues of satan, through the fall
of our first Father Adam, he redeemed and ransomed us, and that with no small
price, but with the precious blood of his only begotten son Christ Jesus. In
that he of his infinite mercy vouchsafed to elect and choose us to salvation,
before the foundatio^s of the world were laid. In yt he has justified, Heb. 9
sanctified, and endued us with his holy spirit, and elected us to eternal
life. We may add heereunto also the weakness and infirmity of our own
nature, since we are so easily seduced to mischief, so unable to do the
deeds of righteousness, so weak of our selves to resist Satan, and to make
war against the works of darkness. Which although with many other, are
especial causes to move us unto prayer, yet the chiefest agent herein is the
holy Ghost: which thing we may learn out of the words of the Apostle. The
spirit, says he, Romans 8.
helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the
spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be expressed..
And he which searches the heart knows what is the meaning of the spirit,
for he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.
Agreeable to this it is, that Christ himself witnessed it to be a spiritual
revelation, Math. 16.
that he was acknowledged of Peter. The same thing does the Apostle testify
saying, that no man can say, Lord Jesus, but in the holy spirit. The same
thing does John Baptist testify, that is to wit, that he knew not Christ of
him self, but by the instruction of the holy spirit. Likewise Moses, whiles
he vpbraided the people of Israel, their ingratitude and forgetfulness, gave
them notwithstanding to know by the way, that what knowledge so ever he
himself had he received it of the Lord: and the Lord promises that he will
give unto the people of Israel, an understanding heart, that he may be known
of them. But briefly, if you desire your prayer may be forcible and
effectual, learn this one lesson of saint Cyprian, The mind of him that
prays must be lifted up to heavenly things.
that holy and blessed Martyr of Christ, which is after this manner. When we
stand occupied in prayer we must with our whole heart watch and be diligent in
prayer: let all worldly and fleshly thoughts depart, neither let the mind
think upon any thing else at that time, then only that which it prays. Let
the breast be always shut against the adversary, and let it be open to
God only, neither let it suffer the enemy of God to enter into it in the time
of prayer, for he oftentimes steals upon us, and enters in, and subtly
deceiving us turns away our prayer from GOD, that we may have one thing in
our heart and an other thing in our mouth: yet not the sound of the voice, but
the mind and the sense ought to pray unto GOD with an unfeigned affection. Thus
much Cyprian.

How is it then possible that the covetous caytiue, whose mind is continually
on his mucke: the proud man, whose GOD is self love: the lecherous, whose
heart is with his Harlot: the Drunkarde, whose mind is on bybbing, should
pray. What say I, how is it possible? No, no, it is impossible: such may cry
without ceasing, help us O dear Christ our Savior, deliver us O Lord we
beseech thee to hear us, John 9.
But the Lords ears are stopped against their cry, God hears not sinners,
that is to wit, unrepentant men wickedly and impudently perseuering in their
sins.

Wherefore Autophilus, this lesson I tell you, is something hard; yea, and so
hard, that it will never be learned, unless you have that chief and
principal Schoolemaister, Gods spirit chief Schoolmaster to prayer.
namely, the holy Spirit of Almighty God, to instruct you: which lesson when
you have indeed well and perfectly learned, turn over the leaf and then
brag of knowledge and understanding, otherwise as good never a whit as never
the better: it is not the mumbling of the mouth, but the fervent zeal of the
mind: it is not the sound of the voice, but the sense and understanding of the
heart which tuneth pleasantly and acceptably in the ears of the Lord, Math. 15.
else the Lord will say. This people draws near unto me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me.


Autoph, But is all this true that you tell me, or else are you disposed to
jest?


Philox. You shall find it so Autoph. Quandocunque reddideris rationem
villicationis tuae.


Autoph. But are all necessarily required to an effectual prayer which you
have briefly repeated?


Philox. Yea it is most true.


Autoph. Then know you what you said, as good nothing at all, as nothing the
better, I esteem it best to save some labor, that whereas the Apostle wills
us to pray continually, I will pray never a jot, for I will tell you Philox.
that which I hope you will conceal, sithence it concerns a multitude, more
then my self, for I have heard Master Parson read sometimes, when my mind
has not been otherwise occupied or exercised, that we ought to pray at our
down lying and at our vprising, yea at al times: which thing I for mine own
part have but seldom practiced, yet notwithstanding at night when I have most
leisure, I could find in my heart to pray a little, but commonly sleep
overcomes me before I come to the end of my Pater noster, so that I neither
consider to whom I pray, what I pray, or what moves me to prayer. In the
morning, yea and all the day long my brains be busied about other matters, for
you know that I have more affairs to be conversant in then one or two.


Philox. Have regard to the saving of your soul, do not let the devil
possess that which ought to be the temple of the holy Ghost. If you should
make supplication to an earthly Prince, Note this.
I do not doubt but you would have regard of Majesty, respect of Person,
consideration of the cause moving you thereunto, with singular foresight into
the suit it self, doing nothing, so far as in you consists, either
rashly or unseemly; that the rather your suit might be performed and
accomplished, and the action therein commended.

Shall we then for temporal and transitory affairs before earthlye Kings
and Princes, have such regard of upright behavior, have such care of every
circumstance pertaining to our cause, such respect of excellency and
worthiness, that if al things were not performed and painted praise worthy,
we would accounte the strongest joint of our credit to be greatly blemished
and crazed. And shall we then so negligentlie, securely, and carelesselie
behave our selves before that great and mighty Monarch, the Lord of heaven
and earth, seeing it has pleased his most high Majesty, to admit us, which
are nothing else but most vile worms, duste, and ashes, so familiarlie and
friendly to talk and confer with him by prayer? Shall we, I say, more
irreverently behave our selves, than if we should talk with some Hind, or
any of the vulgar and common sort? shall we having such carnal and fleshly
minds, fraught full of iniquity, full of mischief, and all kind of
wickedness? and shall we dare presume either to open our mouths, or once to
move our lips before him, which does not only see our outward vnreuerende
dealing, but also knows inwardly what we are, even full of all filthy
venom and stinking poison: Surely if the Prince unto whom you make your
humble supplication, although that you outwardly profess and proteste
loyalty and due obedience, did understand that inwardly you pretended and
practiced treason and treachery against his own proper person, I think that
your suit should not only not be granted, but that you your self also
should pay the due price and just recompense worthy of so foul and
mischievous an intention. Man may deceive man, no man may deceive the Lord
which tries the very hearts and reins: and will the Lord (think you) I
mean the Lord of heaven and earth, hear the prayers and inuocations of him
that not only handles his cause so carelessly and negligently, but also
carries a treacherous crucifying mind against his divine Majesty, that is, a
mind full of covetousness, envy, pride, vain glory, lechery, gluttony,
unrighteousness, and wilful ignorance. Nay rather he hears him not, but will
plague him with everlasting and unspeakable torment in hell, for that he so
rudely and brutishly behaueth himself in so high a matter.


Autoph. If a man were easily to be moved from a quiet and settled mind, this
were sufficient to drive him into melancholy.


Philox. The more at quiet your mind is in this behalf, Satan lulleth
hypocrites a sleep in the cradel of security.
I doubt the devil has the more dealing with you, and that he has lulled you
a sleep in the cradell of carelesnes and security. Beware of such settled
rest, it is a great sign that Satan having besieged thy soul, has by
ensnaring brought it to his own Bow, for the further thou art from him, the
more pernicious and perilous darts of temptation will he cast against thee
sometime seeking to puff thee up with pride: if he cannot so prevail, he
straight ways encountereth with covetousness, and sets upon thee with
usury, making thee to hoarde and heap by hook or crook, to snatch by right
or wrong, to rake by violence from thy poor brethren, who have more need then
thy self. If by this subtlety he prevails not, he will seek to assault thee
with drunkenness, whoredom, and lechery, ambition, and vain glory. Lastly he
besieges thee with hypocrisy, and idolatry, so that if thou feel no fight
betwixt the flesh and the spirit, I say it is a great sign that thy estate is
more desperate. Fili, accedens ad seruitutem dei, Eccle. 2.
says Ecclesiasticus, Stato in iustitia, etc. That is, my son if thou will
come into the service of God, stand fast in righteousness, and arm thy soul to
temptation. For which cause it is that Gregory says, Hostis noster quanto
magis sibi contrabellare conspicit, tanto magis impugnare intendit.

Which thing also might seem to be figured in Holophernes which assaulted the
Israelites resisting, saying thus: Judith. 11.
Judith, I have not hurt the man which would be captive and in bondage to the
King of Babylon: as for the people, if they had not despised me, I should not
have lift up my spear against them.


Autoph. You Philoxenus, may speak what your pleasure is, nevertheless, I
always carry with me a quiet conscience free from any care or calamity: for
what thing should tempt me, I have the world at will, my bags be well
bumbasted, and my Barnes well filled with corn: I have Coin in my Coffers,
and carry a countenance in my Country, and I have wealth at will. To brag of
my woorshippe, were small wisdom, and yet I am a Gentleman; I have had as
little adversity I think as any has had.


Philox. If Gregory should be your Judge in this case, he would pronounce a
very hard sentence against you, which is after this manner.

Continuus successus rerum temporalium certum futurae calamitatis indicium.
Continual temporal prosperity presageth tortures infernal.
which is to say, the continual success of worldly matters is an assured
show of calamity to come. Again the same.

Iter electis suis Deus asperum facit, ne dum delectantur in via, obliuiscantur
eorum quae sunt in patria. That is, God has made an hard traveling for his
chosen, lest while they are delighted with any thing in their way, they forget
those joys in that Country whereunto they direct their journey.

If a man had a journey to make to the furthest part in the world, A
Comparison.
who would not think and also count him a mad man, if by the way he
beholding diverse delights and pleasures, should one while gaze upon this toy,
sometimes upon that, and in the end should forget whither he was going,
Christians are compared to wayfaring men, amongst whom I doubt if we should
examine many we should find a number of foolish travelers, which neither
weigh how far they have to go nor which way, but wander aside for every
vain pleasure: yea, although they propounde to themselves heaven, as the least
mark they shoot at, yet they go the broad way iocundly, and void of all
care which leads them in the end to the pit of eternal perdition.


Autoph. You may preach till you be weary, and cry out against sin till you
be hoarse, you shall never make a number believe this, or at the least to
consider of it.


Philox. True it is, and yet this is the path to godliness and eternal
felicity. Nothing worse the^ inconsideration.
Whereas on the other side security and inconsideration is the door to utter
destruction and damnation. For what makes the covetous so little to regard the
curse of God thundering against them, but lack of consideration? What makes
the proud and hauty heart to run headlong into the fiery wrath of his
Creator, but inconsideration, what makes the lascivious Lecherer to live so
loosely, to make his body a loathsome sink of sin, the receptacle of the
devil himself, either by lusting after or retayning his neighbors wife or
daughter, but inconsideration? what makes swash-bucklers to delight so much in
Ruffanisme, to stamp and stare like helhoundes, to swear and forswear
themselves so diuellishly and desperately, but inconsideration? In fine, what
drives so many Thieves to the gallows, so many wretched souls to hell but
want of consideration? Alas, if we be about any bargaining, as buying or
selling of Land or Lease, we will both consider and consult, nay for fear we
should light on the lash, we will have counsel I warrant you, although we
pay well and truly for it: we will ride and run, and be well advertised, yea
we will use consideration in matters not worth two strawes. But in this
business how to attain the Kingdom of Heaven, how to make a purchase which
shall last for ever, without the which obteining, it had been better we had
never been borne; good Lord it is wonderful how slackely, and how
drousily men go about it. Nay, he that will go to Westminster again, and
again, and crave counsel with Cappe and courtesy, will scarcely go a furlong
from home, to learn the duty of a Christian, what is his duty toward God,
and what he ought to perform toward his brethren: herein wants
consideration, and herein Autophilus, if such as your self would vncloake
and lay open the closet of their own consciences, to search and examine every
corner of them, I fear you should find more stains and blemishes then can
easily be either washed or wiped away.


Autoph. If this be true Philoxenus, many thousands deceive themselves, for
who had not rather ride forty miles to a learned Lawyer, to know his advice
and counsel in worldly affairs and give him twenty shillings for twenty
words, then go to the Church where he may have, as you say, the glad tydinges
of the Gospel preached and teached to his own edyfying and souls health: and
surely me thinks not without some just cause, for it is as easy a matter for
any man to be a Christian as it is to be a learned Lawyer, and more easier
too. Why? it is no more, but to say the Lords prayer, the ten
Commandments, and the Creed, as I said before, or else there be in the
Land too many Christians nickenamed.


Philox. You are nickenamed Christians indeed, no better then Atheists, and
Infidels: you cloak your hypocrisy with the visarde of falsely challenged
Christianity, and brag of the name, rejecting the thing it self: you covet
to be called by the name, and account it an excellent ornament, yet you neither
desire to learn the duty, nor to live according to the same vocation. But that
which is spoken by the Prophet shall light upon your pates, and not miss,
Quia tu repulisti scientiam, ego te repellam, says the Lord, after you have
boasted of your praying, in excusing of the which how aptly you played the
part of an Ass, who if he be not stark blind, cannot plainly see? The Ass
is a slothful creature, which will do nothing without whipping: even so
Autophilus, according to your own confession, Hipocrites like unto Asses.
when as the scourge of any worldly and temporal calamity is like to touch
you, then your Pater noster is in your mouth, and the devil in your mind: You
name God with your tongue when your heart is on your halfepeny. For there where
your treasure is, Math. 6.
there will your heart be also: and in this one regard your condition is most
desperate, in that by the slight and subtilty of Satan, by the deceitful
persuasion of the devil himself, you think you know much when as you know
nothing, unless this, how to serve the world, the flesh, and the devil: of
such it is said in the fifth of Esaias, Esaias. 5.
Vae quod sapientes in oculis vestris, et coram vobismet ipsis prudentes
videmini. Proverb.
And in the 26. of the Proverbs, Vidisti hominem sapientem sibi videri?
maiorem illo spem habebit insipiens. Oh blind and senseless creatures, more
blind than they which are blind on both eyes, for they know their own
blindness, although they know little else, but you know not your own
blindness, but rather seem wise in your own conceits, and count your selves
good Christians, when as your conversation is unseasonable in the Lords taste,
and your prayers untuneable in the Lords ears. For how can he invoke the
name of God which believes not? How can he believe which has no faith? And
can he which has no faith be saved? This is everlasting life to know God,
and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ.


Autoph. Do you think yt we have no faith? Or can we not (think you) say our
Creed? Then in deed we had lived too long and learned too little.


Philox. Yea certainly, I think you can say it: and as it is reported, so
could Caesar's parrot: hypocrites confession much like to Caesar's parrot.
neither do I doubt it but the devils can say it. And yet neither is the parrot
nearer heaven, nor the devil further from hell, the one bableth and
understands not what she says: the other believes that there is a God, and
therefore trembles and quaketh.


Autoph. Well might the Parrot prate by custom, but she lacks understanding.


Philox. And as the Parrot learned it by custom, and understood it not: even
so some of you say it for custom, not once considering what it is, nor what
you say.


Autoph. Yet shall you not persuade us, but that our belief is as good as the
best.


Philox. Even such as is pourtraied of S. James in the second Chapter, Iam. 2.
Tu credis quod vnus Deus est, et been facis: Demones credunt, et
contremiscunt. Thou beleeuest that there is a God, thou do well, the devils
believe and tremble also.


Autoph. This is notable stuff in deed, will you make the devil more
religiously faithful, than they that profess the name of Christ.


Philox. I dare not call you religiously faithful, for this is not a true
faith, whereby you shall be saved, but a vulgar knowledge, which carries a man
as near unto God, as the beholding of the Sun beams does carry him unto
heaven: notwithstanding in that they believe all things to be true, which are
spoken of God, and written in sacred scripture, yea and quake and tremble when
mention is made of his name: even as the thief and wicked malefactor
fearfully is terrified with the countenance of the judge, ready to denounce
sentence of condemnation against him: confess according to your own
conscience, do they not go beyond you very far?


Autoph. It may be Philoxenus, that there be some such as you make report of,
which carry such courageous hearts, that although they hear all the thunder
clappes of Gods judgments, from the first Chapter of Genesis, unto the last
leaf of the new Testament, denounced against sin and sinners, they would
hardly quake or tremble.


Philox. Call you these courageous stomachs? Naie it is a flintie, yea, rather
a dullish mind so ensnared through the subtle sleights of Satan, so choked
with the thornie cares of this world, so drowned with the desire of earthlye
doung, so dazeled and blinded with the delight of worldly pleasure, that it
neither hungreth for the joys prepared for the good, Hypocrites are Atheists.
nor is terrified with the torments threatened against the wicked, that it
neither regards God, nor seeks after his kingdom, neither is afraid of
the devil, nor of the unspeakable pains of hell fire, and that I may speak yt
which is true, neither thinks that there is a God in heaven, who is the
rewarder of the just, neither any devils in hell who are executours of Gods
terrible wrath and indignation against the wicked and unjust.


Autoph. Will you then make us worse then devils and no better than Atheistes,
seeing we can say our Creed, and the confession of our faith, as readily and
as cunningly as the most curious clarke of you all.


Philox. I know and confess that this one word Credo, contains a great
force and efficacy toward the edifying and saving of your soul, if it be
said and performed, as it ought to be: and how that is, How we must be-God.
learn of Saint Augustine himself. It is not enough to believe al things which
God has revealed in his words are true, that he himself is also truth and
verity, and cannot lie: for this is but Credere Deo, which things the devils
do as well as his self, standing in a greater fear of his judgment. But in
Deum credere, as says Saint Austen, is by believing to run unto him, by
belief to cleave and take fast hold upon him, and as a member to be
incorporated and ingrafted into the body of Christ. Whereby it is evident,
that he which wilfully and obstinatlie stops his ears, and turns them
away from hearing of the word, and as it were, malepertlie does oppose
himself against the Lord, does filthilie and abominably when as he says
Credo in Deum, Hypocrites lie when they say their belief.
I believe in God. No, no, God neither admits such belief, nor such
believers.


Autoph. Does not Saint John say, He that believes in me, has eternal
life.


Philox. True it is, Si non credideritis non permanebitis, A similitude.
says the Prophet Esaie. For which cause, says Augustine, Ruinam videtur
quaerere, qui sine fide vult aedificare. And the same Augustine says, That even
as the boughs and branches of the tree do wither away, unless they receive
sap and nourishment of the root: so what good work so ever you intendest, or
what false face of fained sanctity and holiness like an hypocrite, thou do
pretend to the worldwarde, it is dead, and works nothing at al to the
edifying of thy soul. Therefore although hypocrites seem at the first blushe
to show some resemblaunce of the sons of GOD: Hypocrites do nothing but sin.
yet so long as they remain in the corruption of their first nature, they can
do nothing but sin. Their alms deeds are turned to sin, being given
hypocriticallie to be praised of men. Mat. 6.
Their solemn sacrifices are turned to sin, Esaias. 1 Iere. 6. Amos. 5 Mich. 6
being not done in faith, and with mortification of the flesh. The prophet
says, that before God they are accounted of no better than the killing of a
man, the cutting in sunder of a dogs neck, the offering up of swines blood,
or the blessing of an Idol. Eccle. 4 Heb. 11
Their prayers are turned to sin (being no better as they proceed from their
uncircumcised lips) than the sacrifice of fools. And in deed, as without
faith it is impossible to please God: so it is not so easy a matter to attain
to some perfection thereof, as many do esteem it. For true faith is the
special gift of God. No man comes to me, unless my Father draw him,
says our Savior Christ. Again, Flesh and blood, says Christ to Peter,
confessing him in a true faith, has not reveled this to thee, but my father
which is in heaven. Unto which Paul seems to alude, saying: We are not able to
think any good thing of our selves, but all our ability is of God. Now then
Autophilus, try and examine your self whether you be in the faith or or no,
least you dream of a shadow not having the substance.


Autoph. You do me great wrong if you doubt of my faith, for I promise you, I
am past all doubt for that matter.


Philox. I offer you no wrong in wishing you to make trial of your faith:
because I see you glory in that which you have not. Heb. 3
Beware therefore least that there be in you an heart of infidelity to fall
away from the living God. For this know, and the spirit does witness the same,
there is no filthy concupiscence of adultery, no rotten words of uncleanness,
Infidelity the root of uncleanness.
no oppressing of the poor, no greedy desire after worldly gain, no falling
away from the living God for such vanities: but infidelity is the root and the
branch, the beginning and the ending, an unbelieving heart causes all in all.


Autoph. I cannot but confess thus much: in the mean while Philoxenus, I hope
you are well persuaded of my faith.


Philox. I am persuaded you make the bare title of faith and christianity a
shrouding sheet for your sins. For how should you have the thing, when you
reject the means whereby God does give the same: which is the ministry of the
word. Not that it consists in their power to give faith, for yt is done by
the power of the holy spirit which God sends into ye hearts of his children
to open the eyes of their understanding, yt that may be rooted inwardly which
by the ministry of the word touches their ears outwardly. So that there is
a perpetual relation betwixt the word of God and a true faith. And in deed it
is as impossible to separate faith from the word of God, Perpetual relation
betwixt faith and the word. Esaias. 55 John. 20
as it is to take the light from the Sun, whereof it has ye beginning. For
which cause the spirit of the Lord cries out by ye mouth of the Prophet Esaie,
saying: Hear me and your soul shall live. And John the Evangelist pointing
out the fountain of this faith, says, Psalm. 95
Haec scripta sunt vt credatis, These things are written, that you may believe.
And ye prophet David being about to exhort ye people to faith, speaks after
this manner, To day if you will hear his voice, etc. Whereas to hear,
oftentimes is taken to believe. The Lord might from heaven without preaching,
have bestowed in Christ faith upon Cornelius ye centurion at Caesarea, but yet
by an Angel he sends him to the preaching of Peter, Acts. 10
and whilst Peter preched, god worked effectually in his heart by ye power of
his holy spirit, causing him to believe his preaching, according to ye of ye
Apostle, Who is Paul, or what is Appollo, but ministers by who^ you have
believed, according as God has given to every one. I have planted, Apollo
watered, but God has given increase. So then he that planteth is nothing, nor
he that waters, but God which gives increase. Which doctrine agreeeth with
Augustine, where he says, That which we have to learn at men's hands, let
every one learn, yea learn, at man's hands without disdain, and let us not go
about to tempt him in whom we believe: neither being deceived, let us not
think scorn to go to Church to hear or learn out of books, loking still
when we shall be rapt up into the third heaven. So that faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word. Romans 10
But how shall they believe in him in who^ they have not heard, and how shall
they hear without a preacher? All this I speak to this end Autoph. yt you may
know how faint your faith is, because I perceive in you such hypocrisy, yt
when you come to ye sermon, which is seldom enough, it is more for fashion
than for edifying, as you report of your self, when as without hearing of the
word, you can have no faith at all. But well may you mock ye world, and
deceive your self, but God neither is mocked nor deceived, for if true faith,
the glory of God, and the salvation of your souls, be not appointed as ye
purpose of your coming to hear the word preached, you had better stay at
home, than come and count your self amongst ye number of the faithful, to
worship the deuel, even the^ when you would seem most saintish, coming with no
more reverence to ye same, nor with so good a mind, as you would go to see some
Histrio play ye fool, to hear a tale of Robin hood, neither regarding ye
honor due to God nor godly things, nor making any difference betwixt the
eternal truth and verity, and old wives tales and fables: which thing, if
nothing else declare, yet your drousines in attending, your lazines and slacknes
in praying, your slender profiting in learning, proves to be true. So yt
although you will seem Christ's scholars, yet your fruit declares that you
are the disciples of the devil. Yea, and although you seem to be members of
Christ his Church, you are the synagogue and sink of Satan.


Autoph. I marvel Philoxenus, that you will be so cholerik in these matters.
since these things touch more than a few, and some of them, I am sure, more
wiser than your self.


Philox. God make them wise to salvation, wherein if some of their wisdom
should be weighed in a balla^ce, persuade your self, that they will prove
themselves as wise as fools, as senseless as stocks, more brutish than wild
beasts.


Autoph. Do you think yt if the matter were so dangerous, and their case so
desperate, as you account it, yt they would not look more straightly to
themselves. Yes I warrant you, ye cup companions, Ale bibbers, Ale knaves, Ale
knights, I would have said, would not lie quaffing and drinking so freely,
until their legs can neither go for sto^bling, nor their tongs scarce call for
their penie pots for wambling, especially on the Sabbath, when they should
serve God. Do you think that Dicke swash would make no more bones to crucify
Christ himself, wounding and tearing him from top to toe, if he thought that
blaspheming of the name of god were so damnable, as it is thought to be? Do you
think that the filthy lecherer and loose living man would wed himself to
lust, the covetous and greedy cormorant with his long nails, would scrape and
scratch all the skin of the poor man's shoulders, yea, and as it were grate the
very guts out of his belly, if he thought it such an offense to murder a
man, as is pronounced against him: I would you could persuade him so.


Philox. S. Paul says, that neither whooremongers, adulterers, fornicators,
unclean persons, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Which thing if they
will not believe in earth, when they shall dwell with the devil in pains and
torments for ever, he will suade and persuade them, making the^ either pay the
price of presumption, or infidelity. Notwithstanding true faith is quick of
sight, and will straight have an eye to the word of God: touching which word
our savior Christ has said in the Gospel, Math. 24
Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word (says he) shall not pass. Here
the word is coupled to two most excellent elements. Air and Water are feeble
and unstable, but the heavens though they turn and move, yet keep they a
wonderful constancy in their course: the earth also is most stable and
immovable: yet is it much more easier for these elements to be loosed, than
that one jot of the word of God should pass unperformed. Yea the word of God
is most stable and immovable, and as all the world, if they should lay all
their strength and power together, are not able to make it day, when once it is
night, or cause the day to break out sooner than the course of the heavens does
command, so not al worldlings, though they never carry so great a pomp, power
and pride with them, and seem little Gods in their own conceits, shall be once
able to infringe and weaken, to break and abolish so much as one title of the
word of God, who is God everlasting, chiefly good, wise, just, mighty, and
true of word: as such miscreantes and unbelievers shall thoroughly feel and
understand, when it shall please him to power his wrath and vengeance upon the^
for their hypocrisy.


Autoph. You threaten us, Hypocrites continually harp on this string.
Ex no^ concessis. As though we do not confess the same faith, and profess
the same religion, and say ye same prayers, and Pater noster, yea, and come to
the church when we have nothing to do, wherein, unless we be deceived, we
satisfy the duty of Christians.


Philox. You come in deed by leisure, and profit a little: I do not doubt but
you can speak as sanctishly as the best believers and holiest men of God: you
can allow of virtue, and reprove vice.


Autoph And is not that well, I am glad you like of us in some regard.


Philox. Well, no, no, most wicked hypocrites could say so much. Such as we
have read to have been in the Church in the time of Christ and his Apostles, as
namely, Judas, Ananias, and Saphira, Simon Magus, Demas, Himeneus, and
Alexander, they could hide their knavery under the painted color of
hypocrisy, notwithstanding I hope you will not call them good Christians.


Autoph. Judas captain to hypocrites.
Would you prove us such to our Savior as Judas, or such rebels against the
word, as Demas, Himeneus and Alexander. It is evident that these were out of
the Church. But we will say and stand to it that we are of the church.


Philox. Not all of the church which come to the church Romans 9
Such hypocrites as you are, only in the outward communion and fellowshippe of
the church, although they boast and brag of the titles of the same, they are
not all Israelites, says Saint Paul, which come of Israel, neither are they
all children straight way, because they are of ye seed of Abraham. But in
Israel shall thy feed be called. The faithful therefore are only the true
and lively members of Christ: whereas hypocrites having not put off the
vizardes of false pretended holiness cannot lawfully be cut away from the
Church, until such time as like runnagates they fly to the Tents of Satan,
and join hand and hand in deed with the devil whom they have served:
until such time I say they are taken for the true inhabitauntes of the Church
and lively members of Christ's his body: although God himself, who sees their
hearts and searches every corner of their conscience, does well enough
discern what false knaves they are. Albeit they can send out fair words
from their filthy hearts.


Autoph. I can scarsely understand this, for me thinks you speak
contradictions, namely that we are of the Church, and that we are not of the
Church.


Phelox. I say you are of the outward visible Church: because like painted
hypocrites ye seem godly Christians, when as you are nothing less, although
for company you come to hear Gods word, say your Pater Noster, partake of the
Sacraments, and use public confession of your faith. But God sees what you
are, whether you believe faithfully or fainedly, truly or hypocritically, you
shall not play bo peep before him. This may be explaned by that
Arche-hypocrite Judas, the betrayer of his Master, who as long as he set not
abroch his deceiptfull or rather most deuillish service neither by word nor
deed, but as professing no small friendship, accompanied Christ, Judas
reputed for one of the Church until he set his treachery abroch.
being the Steward of his family, and all this while was accounted for a
member of Christ his Church, and yet for all this Christ called the self same
Judas a Devil: and when he spoke of his chosen, and lyuelie members, he was
shut out. So that Judas was not a member of the inward and Holy Church,
neither had any fellowship in the Gospel of Christ, although he were a member
of the outward Church numbered amongst the godly society of holy men. In
which Church, those which carrye so godly shows of Christianity are
contained, as the proud, ambitious, covetous, envious, gluttonous, lascivious,
lecherous, Hypocrites in the Church as rotten members in the body.
cursed speakers and the like, who neither are the sons of God, by the grace of
adoption, nor members of Christ by sanctification of the spirit, but as rotten
members in the body. For excellently says S. Austen, that evil men or
hypocrites are that in the Church, that chafe is amongst Wheat, Cockle in
standing corn, Traitors in a City, and runnagats amongst Soldiers. But it
is plain, that wheat is the cleaner, standing corn the lustier, Citizens the
safer, and soldiers the stronger, when runnagats, traitors, cockle, and chafe
are separated from them.


Autoph. If we be so badde as you would make us, so stinking carrions and
putrified members, it were pity but we were cut off.


Philox. You shall be known what you are in the end of the world, when the
godly shall be separated from the ungodly, for as the darnel is bound together
and cast into the fire, and the wheat is gathered and laid up in the barnes
to be kept, so shall it come to pass, that the wicked and ungodly shall be
given over, to be punished in pain and torments for ever: and the godly
shall have eternal joys and life everlasting, according to that sentence
pronounced in the 25. of Matthewe, Matthew. 25.
namely, go ye cursed into everlasting fire and torments which is prepared
for the Devil and his angels whom ye serve casting me and my commandments
behind you. But to the godly. Come ye blessed of my father, possess the
joys prepared for you from the beginning. Come ye my friends whom the world
took for vile and execrable, but whom my father takes for honorable and
praise worthy, for the crosses, calamities, displeasures and damages that for
my sake ye have suffered: take and possess the inheritance of my fathers
kingdom. Wherefore as in the time of Noe, Who has not the Church to his
mother has not God
whosoever was without the Arc could not not be but drowned, even so whosoever
the Church as his mother does not conceive and bring forth, nourish with her
pappes, and as it were carry in her bosom, to his Father.
there is no remission of sins to be looked for of that person, no salvation,
as witnesses the Prophet Esaias and Ioell, unto whom subscribed Ezechiell, when
he pronounces, That there shall not be any in the Catologue of Gods people
which shall not have part in that heavenly inheritance. But if your faith be so
firm as you say, it is I hope no small matter shall remove you from confessing
of the same: Nay I am sure you will spend life, land and living for Christ's
sake.


Autoph. I will not brag what I dare do, notwithstanding if there be no
more faithes but one, I would do something which I will not say.


Philox. This man deemeth himself as deep a divine as the learnedest doctor
of them al, and yet thinks there be diverse faithes. No no, Autophilus there
is but one baptism, one faith, one Lord and Savior of all, Jesus Christ: for
the constant profession of which we must forsake all, yea and our selves also.


Autoph. It is a great matter to forsake my self, and more then I would
willingly do, but is there no more then one faith? I am deceived if I have not
heard of plurality of faithes.


Philox. Although in the world there are sowed many and sundry faiths, that is
to say religions, as that there is an Indian faith, a Jewish faith, a faith of
the Mahometistes, Sundry religions but one truth.
a faith of the Georgians, a Papisticall faith: yet is there but one true
Christian faith, the abridgement whereof is briefly contained in the articles
of our belief and at large taught in sacred scriptures of both the Testaments:
which faith whosoever does not constantly profess, denies Christ himself,
and therefore shall be denied of his father.


Autoph. I pray you go not about to disquiet my conscience, as touching these
matters you shall find me no Papist, I warrant you.


Philox. No nor no protestant neither.


Autoph. You might as well call me no good subject.


Philox. You are no better then you should be.


Autoph. I think you would have me of no religion?


Philox. I would you did not prove it so.


Autoph. What do I prove? nothing I hope, yt I have cause to be ashamed of.


Philox. You prove your self to be a luke warm Laodician, a Newter, and such
a one as is neither whot nor cold, I would says John to the Church of
Laodicia, Thou wearest either hot or cold, Apoc. 3.
but because thou art between both, and neither cold nor whot, I will spue
thee out of my mouth, because thou say I am rich and incresed with goods and
have need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched and miserable,
poor, blind, and naked. It may seem yt these Laodicians went about to match
together ye world and the Church, Christ and Mammon, light and darkness, God
and the Devil. Not unlike to the same Church wherein the spirit of God
commends nothing. Autoph. I am loath, yet must I speak it because it is true,
I fere me we have too many in this little church of England, for who hears it
not now a days boldly boasted of in ye mouths of many miserable caitiues, I
play the grace of a gospeller and the swashing soldier, I can play at dice and
Cards, swill and quaffe, go a whore-hunting, live looselie at my pleasure,
and yet when occasion shall serve, countenance it as curiously as the most
cunning Clarke of them all, so that the covetous man thinks that he can serve
God and Plutus the glutton, God and Ceres the drunkard, God and Bacchus; the
wanton Leacherer, be partaker betwixt God and Venus. Mungrell Christians.
Thus whilst they will serve the Devil, yet will they be called and
accounted good Christians, and the children of God: the Lord for his mercy
sake illumine their hearts, that they may see and have some feeling of their
desperate estats, that they may consider of the great mercy of God, sparing
them so long and giving them so large a time of repentance, or else woe woe to
them and their souls if they still continue and persiste in their sins and
make no commodity thereof, yea contemn Gods innumerable mercies, (...), says
John, I would it were better with thee then ye Church of Laodicea. May we not
as rightly lament the estate of a number in this land which think they know
much when they know nothing at all, which esteem themselves wise enough unto
salvation, when as if they should be asked account of their faith, they would
prove themselves doltes and block-heads? May we not wish it were better with
them, and that they were altogether cold or thoroughly hot? were it not better
with them if they did either openly follow the world and the lust of the
flesh, and boast nothing of Christianity, neither seem to have any thing to
do with religion, or else contemn the world, detest the Devil and his
works, abandon wickedness, fly from sin, love godliness, and live an holy
life? for they neither forsake the world nor follow Christ, but make a mingle
mangle of Christianity, playing as it were at half stake betwixt GOD and the
Devil. Such Newters and Iackes on both sides the Lords stomach cannot digest,
they which outwardly show themselves to be Christians in resorting to holy
assemblies and bring minds with them set upon nothing but mischief, are
abominable unto the Lord, who forbids to plowe with an Ox and an Ass
together, to make a garment of Linsie woolsie, to power new wine into old
bottels, to patch an old garment with new cloth, to join heavenly wisdom
with worldly folly, Christian religion with unrighteous Mamon. What says ye
lord to these mungrels, which make as it were an hotch potch of Christianity,
I would you were either hot or cold: Better to be an open sinner the^ a
dissembler.
it were better that ye esteemed your selves sinners and heathenish, then that
you should be such hypocrites and dissemblers, for then there were more hope of
recovering your souls health, according to that: if your were blind, you
should have no sin, but now you seem so righteous in your own conceits, so
sufficiently taught, so furnished with godly rites and holiness, that you think
it not well to go to Christ his school any longer. You are so laden with
learning, or the Devil has so inueigled you, yt you contemn the institutio^s
of Christ, and prefer your own mixtures and hypocrisies before gods eternal
verity: fie for shame, either make ye tree good, and the fruit good, or else
make the tree evil and the fruit evil, for the tree is known by the fruit.
Matt. 12. As if Christ should have said, away with this outward show and
colored cloak of holiness, away with this outward fained show of sanctimonie:
either be good or evil, righteous, or unrighteous, religious or irreligious:
fie upon you painted sepulchers, what is more contrary to holiness then
hypocrisy? Nothing further from sincerity then simulation.
what further from sincerity the^ simulation, why then bost you of faith and
righteousness, since you are unbelievers of no religion? it may well be said unto
you, as Christ said unto the Pharisees, That Publicans and common harlots shall
go before you into the kingdom of God. Let all Newters and ambodexters which
can so cunningly carry two faces under one hood, learn to frame their lives
according to ye word of God: let al idle lubbers learn what a horrible offense
it is to flatter worldlings in their wickedness, for all newtralitie and
lukwarmnes ye lord does detest and abhor. For as lukwarme water is a ready
instrument to provoke a vomit, so the Lord through his justice can not but
spewe out of his mouth such stinking and rotten members such mungrels as make
such a mingle mangle of Christianity, which go about to temper together light
and darkness right and wrong, sweet and sower, holiness and hypocrisy, God
and Mamon, Christ and the Devil: cease then Autophilus to provoke the Lords
wrath any longer, do not still persevere in ignorance, for it is a great
evil and the beginning of desperate blindness: away with this persuasion of
holiness, unless I shall say unto you as the Lord said to the Church of
Laodicia, Thou know not that thou art (...) miserable, wretched, and worn
out with evil. It is a woeful thing when a man is at deaths door and as it
were about to be swallowed up of the Devil and neither sees, nor yet has
any feeling at all of his iminent misery. How greatly is he deceived which
thinks that he is rich and yet is altogether (...) a poor naked beggar.


Autoph. I thank God I am sufficilie rich, and more rich I will be if I live
twenty years to an end. Tush Philoxenus, if you speak this concerning my self
I would you wist that I am neither so blind but I can distinguish current
coin from copper, neither so poor but if a piece of land lie to my liking I
can perhaps fetch as many red ruddockes as shall pay the price of it.


Philox. I know you have Lynceus sight in worldly matters, Worldlings like to
luke warm Laodicia^s.
and so had the Laodicians, who could use merchandise, buying and selling and
with craft and worldly policies. But yet in heavenly wisdom indeed they were
stark blind. The Pharisees also whom Christ called blind were well sighted in
worldly matters, but in heavenly matters as blind as beetles. Although they
were gallantly clad in tryme arraye, yet as touching true knowledge they were
destitute and naked of good works and void of the wedding garment. O that
Ruffians, swashbucklers, gallants of this world, who either think that there
is no God, or else that he is a sleep, or at the least fear not his
judgments. O that such proud pecockes and hautie hearts which carry so sharp
eyes to spy out mischief, to commit it, and think them selves in heaven, if
they might be gorgeous in this world, would mark these things well, who
stumble daily in desperation and can not see it, and go naked from the top
to the tooe, I say naked from al goodness, and yet feel it not. Faith the most
gorgious attire.
For he alone is well cladde which by faith has put on Christ Jesus. He alone
feels it in his heart, and possesses spiritual gifts according to that in
the first Chapter of S. Paul the first Epistle to the Corinthians, I give
thanks to my God always for you, 1. Cor. 1.
for the grace of God that is given you in Christ Jesus, because you are in all
things enriched by him in every word and in all knowledge, like as the
testimony of Christ is confirmed in you, in so much as you are not destitute in
any gift, etc. Learn Autophilus of S. Paul, How to purchase true treasure.
what it is to be truly rich, and that worldly wealth is stark beggerie in
regard of these heavenly treasures: learn of Christ how to make a purchase
of treasures, first seek the kingdom of God and all other things shall be
given you. Sell that you have, give alms and prepare your bags which wax
not old, even a treasure that fails not in the heavens, where no thief
approaches, nor moath corrupts: read the sixth to Timothy, the 29. of
Ecclesiasticus, and the 23. of the Proverbs. 1. Tim. 6. Eccle. 29. Prou. 23.
Then shall you know what is true riches, and how you shall use this worldly
dross and dunge. If one should offer you poison in a painted cup, you would be
loath to taste of it although it were pleasant to the taste.


Autoph. If you think I am werie of my life, you deceive your self.


Philox. Neither be you weary to live well, cease to drink sin which is the
poison of your soul, eue^ as beasts drinks water. Howsoever the devil does
color his knauerie, making you believe you know yt which you know not: that
swet is sower, and sower sweet, good bad, and bad good: it is but his
subtlety to drive you into the fearful disease of security, thereby to poiso^
your soul to everlasting damnation: your belief is gross if you lock it up
in your breast without either sense or understanding of the same does stand
you in as much stead as a preservative still put in your pocket serves to your
health if you never use it. The flint stone unless it be beaten causes no heat,
neither ye Pommander, unless it be chafed causes any smell. Even so, unless you
meditate on the word to understand the same, have a desire to learn daily ye
will of the Almighty, it avails nothing at all, and in the end as good never
a whit as never the better.


Autoph. Here is nothing but learn, learn, I think we shall let all alone
and fall to praying and saying I know not what, can you teach me any more tha^
to resist sin and to do good, to love God above al things and my neighbor as
my self, Tushe here is more ado then needs.


Philox. Oh Autophilus. Nunquam satis docetur quod nunquam satis discitur. It
is never taught enough which is never learned enough. Where a Scholemaster has
Classem asinorum, it will be long or he beat a good instruction into their
brains. It is a hard matter to make a worldling to become a good Christian.


Autoph. Thousands think it not so difficult a matter as you make it.


Philox. But whether do you think Autophilus, it is an easier matter to be a
Tailor, a weauer, a Cobbler, or of some such like occupation, then to learn the
duty of a Christian.


Autoph. I cannot tell, but I have known one bound Apprentice to one of these
occupations seven years, and yet in the end has carried away no more cunning
then he has need off.


Philox. Oh good Lord, what blockishnes is this? We will bind our children
Apprentises to base trades and occupations, seven or eight, nine or ten
years, and esteem it little enough, yea, and all we will contend with our
trades to have a good report, and to be famous: Eccle. 1.
but to attain to the perfection of a Christian life, Ephe. 2.
to walk worthy of Gods servants, fructifying in every good work, 1. Pet. 2.
to become creatures of Christ: Psalm. 36.
to do good works, wherein he has prepared that we should work to learn to
die unto sin, and live unto righteousness: to learn to decline from evil
and do good: to leave to do peruersly and learn to do well: how lumpishly
and drowsily we go about either as though we supposed the duty of a
Christian not worthy the learning, or the reward not worth the travel. A
Comparison.
If one man in a Country should pay his servants greater wages by a thousand
degrees then the rest, who would not count himself a happy servant if he
might come into favor and service with so good a Master: surely, either must
we count Christ a liar, or else praise him for the best pay Master, which
promises such infinite rewards to those which serve him: as namely, that they
should eat with him and drink with him, yea at his own table: reign with
him and possess his kingdom; and such like. Oh hearts made of hard metal
which so great rewards cannot move!


Autoph. Who is it that (says he) does not serve him?


Philox. I know, they will say so: they serve him a trust indeed, if a man
had such servants, he would send them packing. Is it good service for a
servant to say to his Master: Sir, your work shall be done, and do it never
a whitte? No, no, good pay Masters must have good servants, God must be
served with all our hearts, all our minds, and with all our strength, the
loose man cannot yield to concupiscence, and serve God: the covetous man
cannot lay up treasure in earth, and in heaven. Let us then dear brethren for
Christ his sake, practice that same good counsel of the Apostle. Gala. 6.
Let every man prove and examine his own works, whilst yet there is time
and place of repentance, least that we tumble headlong into the bottomless
pit of perdition, and come with a tarde peccauimus. It is to late to lock,
and make fast the door when the Steed is stolen: as the mercy of God if we
use it in time, may serve for our Salvation: so, if we use delay, and make no
account of the same, but refuse it when it is offered, it will turn to our
bitter curse and damnation. The night will come when no man can work any
longer, John. 6.
let us not refuse so precious a jewel as time is. A good husband will sow
his seed while it is fair weather, and a prudent Merchant will lay out his
money, whilst the market endures: there is none but will consider these
things, unless he be wilfully blind, and given over to the mischief of
Satan, unless as it is faide by the Prophet, He has made a league with
death and a covenant with hell it self: Esaias. 28.
Unless he will count it but a gamball play, to cast himself headlong to
destruction, and damnation both of body and soul. I cannot deny, but the devil
has blinded the eyes of many miserable wretches, that herein they are not
different from your opinion, that if they can say the ten Commandments, they
think they can do as much as is requisite: but I would to God they would
learn one lesson more which Moses taught the children of Israel: namely, That
these words must remain in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 6. Gods children must learn
this lesson.
that they should meditate upon them both at home, and abroad, when they go
to bed, and when they rise in the morning. Oh that this lesson were learned
all our life long then should we not have so many nickenamed Christians, and
then should not security send so many thousand souls to hell fire, Not
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. It is not enough to
profess the faith, with our mouth, to say, Lord have mercy upon us, good Lord
forgive us, and all the rest. But a good conscience is required, and the
spirit of renouation, Why do ye call me Lord, and do not those things which
I command you, Luke 6.
says Christ, Luke 6. It is not enough to say, Iereme 7.
the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. It is not enough to say, I
hope to be as soon in heaven as the best, I believe as well as the best. The
devil deludeth thee, whosoever thou art that so think, Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of the Lord shall be saved.


Autoph. Then shall none be saved, for who is able to do his will or keep his
commandments?


Philox. I know Autophilus, that none is able to do his will, or fulfill his
commandments: but to do the will of the Lord, is to endeavor our selves
with our whole mind and strength to fulfill that which he commands:
although we do the best we can, we are unable to perform the same. What it is
to do the Lords will. 1. John. 1.
For if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us. And yet the same John says: Every man that is borne of God sins not.
That is, he is not willingly given to sin, as are the wicked which have no
care of his commandments, neither to keep them nor to meditate upon them.
Saint Paul, penning the perfect duty of a Prelate, to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.
says, Meditate, ponder, and consider upon this: I did run the way of thy
commandments which I have loved. Says the Prophet David: Oh Lord how have
I loved thy law? it is my meditation all the day long: It is not without good
cause that the Prophet annexeth the loving of the commandments, and the
meditation of them: for that which we love most dearly commonly that we most
think upon: yea, we joy to think of that which we love: which if it be so,
surely, I doubt many Christians of us carry a cold love either toward God,
or his commandments, unless we will seem to love him as he that beat his
own father, and said it was for love: so no doubt we love him indeed: that
is to say, we will not stick to give him a blow on the face. Sinners strike
God on the face.
For who so sins and offends against the Majesty of God, does as it were
strike God on the face, and crucify Christ again. But alas, if every man
would enter into some straight examination of himself, who is there which
with the Prophet David, makes the commandments of God his daily meditation,
neither this only in the day time, but in the night also? Who is he that can
say: Thy judgments Oh Lord, are sweeter unto me then honey? Who is it that
can truly say, he has desired them more then gold and precious stones? Nay
who is it almost to whom they seem not as bitter as gall: Because they require
repentance and mortification, who is he but esteems that which the Apostle
calls dross, and dung, more delectable and pleasant than the judgments of
the Lord. If a man loves me (says Christ) he will keep my Commandementes.
John 14.
If this were well marked of you, it would not seem so easy a matter to be a
good Christian as you account it. As the children of God are known by two
marks, so are also the bondslaues of Satan. The cognisances whereby Gods
children are discerned from Satan's impes.
The marks of Gods children are sometimes internal, sometimes external: the
inward, are repentance, faith, godliness, and a sound conscience: the outward,
hearing of Gods word, and godly conversation. So likewise, on the contrary
side, Satan's impes are known by their inward and outward notes: inwardly, in
that they are without faith, deuoyde of all godliness, of an ill conscience, of
no good affection toward the Ministry: outwardly, by contempt of the word
and a leude life. Ponder these things Autophilus, and thoroughly examine them,
and see whether you carry about with you the cognizance of Gods child, or the
badge of the devils bondslaues: and after due examination, if you find your
self rather a limme of Satan, then beloved of the Lord, recoyle, pluck back
your foot in time, lest that the curse of eternal damnation fall upon you
sooner then you look for it. And whereas you said, that to eschew evil, and
do good, is all that the Preachers can teach you, or require at your hands; I
grant it so, and more then you go about to perform. To sin of your self
you are apt enough, and the devil is ready to teach you: but if a man should
demand of you how you shall resist sin, or do good, I do not doubt, but he
shall find you mum-budget. A Comparison.
If we had to make war against any foreign Prince about to invade the
Country wherein we live, and nevertheless sit at home in the chimney corner,
saying amongst our selves, we know well how to prevent the enemy, it is but
to muster such Soldiers as are meet for war, to gather an Army, and
courageously to bid them battle: would we (...) account our selves salfely
defensed, or destruction further from us, if this were once said: might not
rather our overthrow move laughter to all such as hear of it. This
proportion, Autophilus, would be diligently pondered: there is no Christian but
has a continual combating against the world, the flesh, and the devil, for
which cause our life is called a warfare upon the earth, and every good
Christian a soldier: for as soldiers do lie in wait to beat back and resist
the enemy, so ought we to be vigilant in resisting sin and the temptations
thereof, and as to know the means how to resist the enemies, and not put it in
practice can profit us nothing at all: so if we say, to resist sin, and do
good is the perfect duty of a Christian, neither learn how to resist sin,
or to do good, it does nothing at all prevail. If we say, to love God above
all things and our neighbor as our selves, is the perfect duty of a
Christian, and yet neither learn how to love God, nor exercise charity
toward our brethren, we are as near the perfection of Christianity, as he
that can say, that the chiefest point of a Tailours trade is to to shape and to
sewe, A fit Analogy.
is near to the excellency of a perfect workman.


Autoph. Well, we are deceived if we love not God above all things: you shall
hardly make us confess the contrary.


Philox. Do you remember what you said unto me when we began to enter into
communication?


Autoph. What is that?


Philox. If you be not forgetful, you said that if a greater occasion had not
urged you then hearing of the word, we had not met here to day: and moreover
that you more esteemed of two hundredth pounds, then of three hundredth sermons.


Autoph What prove you of this?


Phil. That you love God nothing at al.


Autoph. Then it were pity I did live.


Philox. You love the world more then his word.


Autoph. I said not so yet.


Philox. No, what mean your former speeches?


Autoph. Whatsoever I said, there be no few that will confirm it.


Philox. The more the worse.


Autoph. Should we let all run at random, and follow the Preachers? must we
love God and nothing else?


Philox. I say not so, for all the creatures of God are exceeding good, and to
be beloved: but nothing ought to be made equal in love with God, or to be
preferred before his love. We must love God with all our hearts, Deuteronomy. 6.
with all our souls, and with all our might. In regard of which love, we must
both loath and tread under foot all things that seems good in all the
world. Yea, this love overcomes all mischiefs whatso ever which otherwise
seem invincible. The Apostle Paul proclaims this with a zealous and vehement
motion. Who shall separate us from the love of God? Shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as it is
written: for thy sake are we killed all day long, and are counted as sheep to
the slaughter: nevertheless in all these things we overcome through him that
loved us. For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angel, nor rule, nor
power, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Hitherto the Apostle. The nature of a faithful friend
is not to offend, but to reverence him whom he loves: he is the better when
his eye is upon him, his delight is to talk with him, his heart is to do for
him, his great pleasure to be present with him, he willingly will not see him
iniuried, nor patiently hear him slandered, no cross nor calamity shall
unloose the long contracted knotte of friendship. Indeed we all say we love
God, but few of us fear to offend him: we can say we like well of his word,
but we do not reverence it as we ought. We will talk of him: but how, in
swearing, staring, cursing and banning, but to talk of him, or with him, as
though we loved him, that is to give him thanks, praise him, or pray unto him,
or meditate upon his word, we use it but a little. And I doubt we have many
Christians which scarce once in four and twenty hours make mention of him
after this manner. The desire we have to see our friend, is an Argument we
love him dearly: the slender desire we have to see God, that is, out of his
word to learn his will, shows that we love him so greatly that we care not
if we never see him. One friend will grieve to hear an other ill spoken off,
but few there are which if they hear the name of God most villanously
blasphemed, all his commandments broken one upon the neck of an other, that
will rebuke the sinner, as if he loved God, and loathed to see him mangled and
torn from top to toe of wicked Miscreaunts, which make no conscience of
keeping his commandments. To intend treachery against an earthly Prince, is
an offense not pardonable: neither is there any good Subject, but will both
reprove and reveal the same, but to commit Treason against him, which is
the only Monarch and Ruler of Heaven and Earth: that is, malapertly,
negligently, and carelessly to sin, and transgress his commandments: I
say, to drink sin as beasts drink water, some of us make no bones: we
wink at one another wickedness, and part stake in diuelishnesse, not
considering that there is one in the Heavens which hears, whisper we never so
softly: and sees, cloak we it never so secretly: according to that of the
Prophet David, God shall reign snares of fire upon sinners, fire and brimstone
with the tempestious winds, shall be the portion of their cup: they shall be
turned into hell: their teeth shall be dashed in their mouths: their arms
shall be crushed and broken: they shall fall away from the face of the earth.
These and a thousand such like threatninges by the holy Ghost are thundered out
against sin and sinners, which being well weighed, may fear a flinty heart
from offending.


Autoph. As though there were any which did not fear Gods judgments.


Philox. Why then fear they not to offend him, not only by breach of his
commandments, and by preferring most vilest creatures before him, but by
bearing also an inward grudge in heart against his Majesty, and would if it
were possible pluck him in pieces, or at the least wise wish that he were not
so? but search the ground of your own conscience Autophilus, and tell me if it
would greatly grieve you if there were no immortality of the soul, no account
after this life, no reckoning, no judgment, no heaven, no hell.


Autoph. What should move you to think so of me?


Philox. Because I doubt you fear not God.


Autoph. But how prove you it?


Philox. This fear is stirred up by preaching and reading of the word.


Autoph. Yet more adooe about preaching: Here is no praying, no faith, no
Christianity, no godliness, no love, no fear of God, without preaching: I
marvel what you would have men to do?


Philox. I would have you first seek the kingdom of God, and to abandon this
your hypocrisy, and not rather to hearken to ye temptations of the world, and
to the suggestions of Satan, than to the will of GOD revealed in his word.
What dronkennes is this? The world promises but temporal and transitory
things, and yet we seek them even with greediness. The Lord promises most
excellent and eternal treasures, and we make slender account of them. What
shall we say? Does he promise golden mountains, or is he faithless in his
words? Else why run we a great way for small wages, and take so great pains
for a few pence, and yet scarce go out of the door to purchase a kingdom? Why
contend we so shamefully for trifles of no price, and make so small account of
Gods everlasting wealth immutable, treasures eternal, reward inestimable,
endless honor and glory immortal? Why do we vainlie consume our selves with
sorrows? Why do we weary our selves with so many worldly cares? sithence ye
love of this world is enmity to God, Iam. 4 John. 2
And if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him.


Autoph. If you think that you can make me^ at odds with the world, you are
in a wrong box: no, no, they love it too well, both noble men, Gentlemen, and
men of meaner estates, and by your patience, there be a company of your own
crew, who although they favor it not in words, yet follow it in their works.


Philox. That is too true, and much to be lamented, for in deed the pleasures
and profits of this world have stolen away the hearts of many, and caused
zeal and religiousnesse to be frozen up. Men rise up early to eat and to
drink, to buy and to sell, smile merrily on gain coming in, and welcome it with
yelding both hand and heart to give entertaiment: Their stomachs are hungry,
and there is no end of seeking gain, laying up in store, making the barnes
wider, joining house to house, and land to land: So that now if one go about
to dissuade men from the thornie cares of this world, Esaie. 5
he speaks to the belly, which has no ears, he speaks to them which
seem as if they were in a dream, and his speech is not unlike his which
speaks with a strange tongue, for they are made drunk with the plesures of
this world, they reele and totter to and fro against the posts thereof, and
the wine of the fornication of this world, has cast them into a dead sleep,
Heb. 12
insomuch as they neither know, neither will know, till it be too late, that
they they have sold their birthright for a mess of pottage, and that they
have lost the precious and inestimable pearl of Gods everlasting kingdom, for
that which glistereth, and yet is no gold.

As touching those speculatiue Deuines, whose religion is only made of
words, and therefore are meet to speak in the air, they are no companions
of my crewe, neither any such prating and prattling professors as talk much
of Religion, but make it the by-paith of ungodliness. We cannot serve both
GOD and mammon. The son of God has spoken it, and therefore I am sure you will
believe it.


Autoph. God forbid I should think the contrary. But yet me thinks I can not
but marvel why Christ should hate the world, since it is so beautiful, so
glorious, and so excellent a creature as it is.


Philox. As it is the creature of God it is good, for whatsoever God made is
very good. But yet the world is now depraved and corrupted: yea, Totus mu^dus
(as says Saint John) in maligno positus est. 1. John. 5
All the world is set on naughtiness For that it has a spirit contrary to
the spirit of Christ, for Christ requires humility, holiness, and meeknes:
the world hunteth after pride, vain glory, and ambition. Christ requires
patience, pardoning of enemies and abstinence: the world teaches malice, envy,
and reuengement. Christ requires chastity, mortificatio^, bearing of the
cross, with contempt of al earthly pleasures: the world pricketh forward to
wantonness, pleasures of the flesh, and all kind of vanity. Finally, it
shuts the doors against God and godliness, and poisoneth to destruction
the hearts which it possesses. And this is the cause why Saint Paul cries,
Romans 12
Nolite conformari huic seculo. Who would not renounce it, and the
wretchedness thereof, if once he consider that most fierce and terrible
saying of our savior Christ, namely, John. 17
I beg not mercy and pardon for the world, but for those which thou have
given me out of the world. A most fearful and dreadful saying, Cursed art
thou whose heart it pearceth not. In what woeful state is he that has not Christ
for his friend? That sweet Jesus, that lamb of God which takes away the
sins of them which believe in him, yea, whose mediator Christ is not unto
his Father, what will become of him? Shall not eternal destruction follow him
and fall-vpon his soul?


Autoph. It is a common custom amongst you, to say well and pray to Christ:
but when it comes to following, you fail in the chiefest point.


Philox. Although that string sound untuneable, yet hypocrites nevertheless
cease not to harp on it. But now since you offer an occasion to enter into
speech of following, let us I pray you make some rehearsal of those things
which are spoken of the Preacher concerning this point, Math. 16
whose text I am sure is printed in your memory, and so much ye rather,
because it does express the badge and cognizance of every good Christian.


Autoph. I have matters enough to do, and some things else to busy my
brains with, than to carry text away, it is enough for the Preachers and
Ministers, and those which have nothing else to do, to perform that.


Philox. I am sure you speak not as you think, your memory is not so frail,
nor your mind so carried with other matters, but you are able to bear away so
brief a text as Toll crucem et sequere me, Math. 16
Take up thy cross and follow me.


Autoph. Now you put me in mind of it, I remember very well, for I was sure
he made much a do about the following of Christ. But hear you sir, let it not
seem so strange yt I forgot the text, for I dare undertake that amongst five
hundredth at a Sermon, three hundredth may be picked out by the poules, which if
they should be examined concerning the profit which they have reaped, would
yield as simple account as I do.


Philox. If a man would spend an hour in showing how and which way you
might compass some land and living, although it were to the utter undoing of
your poor neighbor, could you not carry every circustaunce, and also if
any occasion should serve, deliver the same speeches, or at the least the
substance of them?


Autoph. And good reason, for who cannot bear that away best, wherewith he is
most acquainted.


Philox. No reason at all, unless it be reason you should be enemy unto
your own salvation. What is this but a secret kind of Atheism, and denying
of the Lord God? Vae dissolutis cord qui non credunt Deo. Woe unto the
careless which believe not God.


Autoph. Would you have such as I am to carry away whole preachings, I tell
you it is enough for them which are conversant in Scriptures, and let them
trouble their brains and they list, for I have some thing else to do.


Philox. Hereby we may see what disease you are sick of, you are one of them
which had rather hear from Rome, Constantinople, or else where: you had rather
hear Tom piper sing a song of Robin hood, though nothing else but ribaudrie,
than to hear men talk of religion or devotion in your presence, which thing
is the cause that you are not acquainted with these matters. And to be plain,
such as you, can make a hotch potche of all religions, saying, that matters
albeit pertinent to salvation, are of no weight, or else pertain only to the
learned, yea, and you think you may apply your selves to any company, to any
time, to any Princes pleasure for matters of life to come, and so in the end
you pass over your lives more dissolutely, and in less consideration of God
than Ethnikes.


Autoph. You set your divinity on the tentars, if you judge others whose
consciences you cannot search.


Philox. We have a rule from Christ himself, How to discern an hypocrite.
Math. 12
how to decypher and discern you, By their fruits ye shall know the^, such
tree, such fruit. The mouth speaks from the abundance of the heart, If we
live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Let us not brag of
spiritual actions, and live carnally. For such as are carnal minded have
nothing to do with Christ nor Christianity. He that will live godly, let him
shake off the cares of worldly vanities, James. 3
since the world is an open and opposite enemy to Christ, as it has been
before spoken. John. 14
For Christ himself says, that the world cannot receive the spirit of
truth, neither he nor any his are of the world, though they live in the world.
And it is certain, that Paul the elect vessel esteemed it but as doung. But
good Lord how few have we like unto Paul in this point: he esteemed this
world as doung. We count it a felicity here to live pleasantly, racking our
consciences, stretching our credit, and set our honesty on sale, 3. Reg. 3
that we may inioye that which is not worth the labor. Solomon having
proposed unto him what he would require, desired not wealth, riches, How wide
worldli^gs are from true wisdom.
revenues, the overthrow of his enemies, long life, or the like, but a wise
and understanding heart, whereby he might discern betwixt truth and falsehood.
Oh would to God we had many in this regard like to Solomon, which would more
esteem of heavenly wisdom, than of transitory wealth. Saint Paul desired to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Worldlings set the cart before the horse.
Math. 6 2. John. 2
we wish to live always being made dronk with worldly delight. First seek the
kingdom of God, says Christ, et cetera adijcientur. But we either as it were,
suspecting Christ of rashness in promising, or insufficiency in perfourming,
first seek the world, and after the kingdom of God by leisure. Love not,
(says John) the world, nor things which are in the world. Which lesson we
learn backwards, for we first love the world, and to speak plainly, 1. These. 5
some of us love nothing else but the world. Pray continually, says the
Apostle. How preposterously we deal in this respect, who lives godly in
Christ Jesus, and lamenteth not what small devotion we have to praying and
praising God for his benefits? Who has eyes and beholds not? If some sinful
and wretched man, taking good like to a servant, should bestow on him some 20.
marks a year, would he not look for thankfulness at his hands, A comparison.
that he should come at a beck, run, and ride when occasion shall serve, atte^d
upon him when he has cause to use him? will not that servant also apply
himself to his masters pleasure, show himself thankful for so great a
benefit received, and spend his life in so good a patrons behalf? If
contrariwise, he should show himself graceless for so great a good turn,
who would not point at him, as the pattern of an ungrateful person. Who can
bestow so great benefits on us, as our most gracious God? who has made us,
and that according to his own image, ransomed us from the slavery of Satan
when we were lost, Genesis 1.
and not only redeemed us, 1. Pet. 1
but is also well pleased to bestow a kingdom upon us, to live and reign
with himself for ever.


Autoph. Who is he but will confess it?


Philox. And who is he yt is thankful for it? who will show themselves so
thankful for this benefit so unspeakable as commonly some will for a slender
good turn received at their friends hands. He that will not go to the door to
hear Gods word preached, will much less deny himself and take up his Cross
and follow Christ.


Autoph. Math. 16
I must needs confess that I account it an hard saying to forsake and deny my
self and to follow him.


Philox. But I can tell you an harder saying then that.


Autoph. Math. 25
What is that?


Philox. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil And his Angels.


Autoph. I beshrew me if I thought of that.


Philox. Oh Autophilus, remember the end and thou shall not do amiss. They
that bear the Cross for Christ's sake shall never fear that sentence: which
otherwise is fearful to a crazie conscience.


Autoph. It is said indeed that the servant of the Cross which live after
the example of him which was crucified shall approach and come nigh unto Christ
with great boldness.


Philox. Why then are we so mad as to fear that which is the way unto
heaven, for herein is joy of mind, It is necessary that Gods children bear
the cross.
celestial comfort, aid against enemies, perfection of holiness. Then die
with Christ, and live with Christ: suffer with Christ, and reign with Christ.


Autoph. It may be so I would, and yet me thinks I am loath to forsake this
world.


Philox. But if thou will carry the Cross willingly and chearefully it will
carry thee to an happy end: namely, where there is no misery. But if you
carry it with a grudging mind it will be heavy to bear, and yet shall you
bear it perforce, 2. Tim. 3
but it is necessary that every one suffer cross and calamity for Christ's
sake.


Philox. Yea verily, Who so ever will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution: Acts. 14
yea, and we must of necessity enter into heaven through many tribulations:
Heb. 12
where the Apostle uses this word Oportet: again, he whippeth every child
whom he receives: if every one then none excepted, which thing is urged so
far of the Apostle, that he seems to set it down in the same place as an
axiom or plain assertion.


Autoph. Me thinks I could be content to favor and to follow Christ, Many
favor, but few follow Christ.
notwithstanding I would not drink of this cup.


Philox. Christ may have such friends enough, which will favor him, and
love his kingdom: but few that will suffer with him: many that will bear him
company in comfortable things, but relent in adversity: many that will sit
at meat with him, but few partakers of his continency: many play the good
fellows at an inch in the breaking of bread, but few willing to drink of his
cup: many that will admire at his miracles, which notwithstanding count his
Cross a reproach.


Autoph. Yet cannot I be persuaded but that it is a Paradoxe, that all men must
drink of the cup of affliction, and for mine own part, I esteem virtue a
most precious gem, and could be content to do much, if it might be with
quietness of mind, but to bear this which you call the Cross, is unwonted to
me and more then I can well away with, and I could name some which count it
an unreasonable demand to be touched in this point.


Philox. You build upon a false ground, if you think it possible to serve
God with worldly ease, for albeit tribulations and persecutions are not in all
ages and all places alike, yet is there none of Gods children but at sometimes
feel affliction both internal, and external. Multae tribulationes iustorum,
says the Prophet David. Psalm. 33.
The just do suffer many tribulations, Math. 8
they that fail in the same ship with Christ, must be tossed with the same
tempestious winds and raging waves of the sea. He that is of Christ his church
must suffer crosses for Christ's sake.


Autoph. I thank God I never tasted of the cup of affliction, so that I know
not how sower it is, neither shall I as I hope.


Philox. How can that be, since the life of man is a warrefare upon earth,
replenished with misery by the just judgment of GOD after the fall of Adam.
What greater war, Satan tempeth by sundry sleights.
than continually to combat against the concupistence of the flesh, to bid
battle against the world and the devil, which have to many gynnes wherewith
to beguile us, so many trappes to ensnare us, so many sleightes to supplant us,
so many trippes to overthrow us, sometimes to make us proud by erecting to
dignity, sometimes to make us desperate, by detecting us to poverty, sometimes
by flattery to make us vaineglorious, sometimes by threatening to make us
impatient, yea verily this old serpent, plusquam mill habet nocendi arts.
Going about, as says saint Peter, Like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. Wheresoever God has a Church, the devil will commonly seek to have
a Chapel next adjoining: where there is a righteous Abell, Genesis 4.
there is commonly a cursed Caine, to persecute him: where soever there is some
of Isreal's seed, Gene. 21.
there is some of Ismaels brood ready to annoy him: where there is a Jacob,
there is an Esau: Genesis 27.
where there is a David, there is a Saul: 1. Reg. 18.
where there is Christ, there is a Judas at hand to be tray him: Mat. 26.
where there is a Paul, there is a Nero ready like a bloudsucker to persecute
him. The Church continually afflicted.
And such affliction has been allotted to the Church from the beginning to
the time of Noe: from Noe, to Abraham: from Abraham, to Moses: from Moses, to
Christ: and so shall it be to the worlds end: which indeed is meet and
necessary: for hereby we are humbled, Why gods children suffer affliction.
purged and instructed: yea, it is as it were a schooling to the children of
God. The Lord does try by laying his Cross upon our necks, and purifieth
us in the Furnace of affliction, even as gold is tried in the fire, and as the
husbandmen which when their Corn is somewhat too rank, do mow it down: and
prune their trees, not to destroy them, but to make them bear more
abundantly: so likewise the flesh of ours in time of peace is luskish,
lumpish, lasie, and drowsy, slow to godly and Christian exercises, but wedded
to earthly dung, and given to vain delights.

Now therefore it is not only expedient, but also very necessary, that
misery, trouble, and afflliction should come to stir up this dull and
sluggish lump, for which cause the Saints are compared to iron, which by use
is somewhat worn and diminished, but lying unused is eaten with ruste more and
more. Dearly beloved, says Saint Peter, Think it not strange that ye are
tried with fire, 1. Pet. 4.
which thing is to try you as though some strange thing happened unto you.
But rejoice rather in that ye are partakers in the afflictions of Christ: that
when his glory is revealed, ye may be merry and glad. 2. Tim. 2.
For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we be patient
we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he shall also deny us. Those
which he knew before, he had also predestinate, says the Apostle to the
Romans, Romans 8.
that they should be like fashioned to the shape of his Son, that he might
be the first begotten amongst many brethren. It is good for me, says the
Prophet David, that thou have humbled me. Psalm, Psalm. 119.
119.

And here is just occasion offered to touch the examples of the Saints. Did
not the Lord himself tempt Abraham, after he had chosen him, Genesis 22.
by making him yield to the slaughter of his tender child? Genesis 26.
Did not Isaac feel Famine, Examples of Saints afflicted.
and one mischief as it were iumping and falling upon the neck of another to
vex and grieve him withal? Was not Jacob compassed about with many troubles
whilst he was yet in his mothers womb, and saw nothing: began to strive with
his brother whose bloody hands he had much ado to escape in his stripling age:
exiling himself from his fathers house into Syria, where he was roughly racked
in the school of affliction; at his return ready to be swallowed up of
sorrows: whose childrens untoward behavior, had been enough to have killed
him in his latter days. Also being enforced for want of food to go into a
foreign Country. Furthermore, was not Moses grievously afflicted first by
Pharao, and his Princes, afterward by his own household, and Country men.
Was not David the Lords anointed grievously molested of his Master Saul, who
was even mad against him to bring him to destruction, what injury suffered
he of his son Absolon: to be brief, the rod of affliction was always
striking upon his pate. Here might at large be spoken of the sense of the old
Testament of whose tribulation the Apostle seems to make a brief and
compendious Epitomie, Hebrews, 11. That some were racked, some reproched, some
chained, Hebr. 11.
some imprisoned, some cut in pieces, some stoned, some slain, with the
sword, some went about in hairie cloth, in skins of Goats, in great
extremity pressed and tormented wandering and hiding themselves in deserts,
hills, caves and holes under the ground. Paul, speaking of himself, says,
If any other be the Ministers of Christ, I am more, in labors more
abundantly, in stripes above measure, in imprisonment more plenteously, in
death more often, of the Jews I received five times forty stripes save one,
thrice was I beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice I suffered shippewracke, a
day and a night have I been in the deapth, in iourneying often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of mine own Nations, in perils among
the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils
in the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren, in labor and travail, in
watchinges often, in hunger and thirst, and fastinges often, in cold and
nakedness, besides those things which outwardly come unto me. The trouble
which daily lies upon me, Luke 24.
is the care of al churches to come nerer. Math. 10.
If Christ, whose whole life was nothing else but crosses and afflictions,
could not enter his glory, but by suffering, is it reason that the servant
should be privileged above his master? The ten persecutions.
What should I here speak of the Apostolic Church which even to this day is
most bloudilie persecuted of Antichrist and his hellhoundes? What cruel
persecutions were there in the space of three hundred and eighteen years,
when the Church Apostolic was as it were, in the infancy? First by Nero that
blood sucker: secondly by Domitian, who banished John into the I Will of Pathmos:
thirdly by Traiane, who published most terrible Edicts against the Christians,
under whom that most notable preacher and martyr Ignatius, with many excellent
servant of Christ were cast unto wild beasts to be torn and devoured:
fourthly by Verus, under who^ Polycarpus was burnt in fire, and Iraeneus Bishop
of Lions beheaded with the sword, Fifthly, by Septimius Seuerus, who crowned
many a Saint with the garlande of martyrdom, amongst whom is reckoned Leonidas
ye Father of Origene. Sixthly, by Julius Maximinus, who plaide the bloody
tyrant against the Church. Seventhly by Decius, who proclaimed most horrible
Edictes against the faithful, in whose time was Saint Laurence broiled upon a
gridyron. Eighthly by Licinius Valerianus, who plaide the tyrant against Christ
and the members of his body, in which bloody broyle were slain Cornelius and
Cyprian, two most excellent men. Ninthlie, by Valerius Aurelianus, who rather
intended than ended his wicked and ungodly practices. Lastly by Dioclesian,
Maximinian, and the rest, whose horrible persecutions against the Church of
Christ are very perfectly depainted of Eusebius, who was a spectator and eye
witness of so bloody a pageant. But to come to our selves. What lions abroad,
what foxes at home have conspired to murder ye members of Christ, had not the
Lord in mercy discovered their conspiracies, and prevented their treacheries,
putting a hook in the nosethrils, and a snaffle in the mouths of merciless
tyrants? What mercy has he showed in shielding and sheltering us, from the
tyranny of the bloody Spaniardes, who intended the overthrow of our
Country, the sacking of our cities, the murdering of men and women, to dash
the brains of tender babes against the stones. These are Satan's impes,
Antichristian helhounds, which think to swallowe up all things an hundred
furlonges before them, which lie in wait to stop the passage of the Gospel,
and to extinguishe the light of Gods holy word, gaping after those black days
of darkness. But he whose dwelling is above the clouds, holds the stearne, and
governs all things both in heaven and in earth, and is able even with one
blast of his breath to overthrow all their wicked devices, although the heathen
rage and imagine vain things. The kings of the earth stand up and assemble
themselves together against the Lord and against his anointed. Although they
take wicked counsel, and devise deuillish means to banish out of the world
the godly professors of his Gospel, although they travail with wickedness
and conceive and bring forth mischief lurk in secret with their garrisons,
like lions stretch their greedy throats, open their devouring mouths to
swalowe up the Lords flock, yet can the Lord destroy them, and such fruits
of theirs; as heretofore of his infinite mercy he has done. He has from the
beginning and will also protect this boat and little bark of his tossed
amongst so many perils and miserable surges in the raging sea of this
troublesome world, that it perish not being overwhelmed, for which cause we
pray the good Lord to visit this little vine of England with thy right
hand, hemme thy flock within thy hurdles, that either by devilish subtlety,
woluish cruelty, or Antichristian hypocrisy, they be not scattered. Bless
Lord those Cities and Towns, where thy Gospel is purely preached, that they
may live in peace which love thy law: make we beseech thee peace within their
walls, and prosperity within their Palaces: make strong the locks of our
Ports, and bless thy children within them: put peace for our bands, and fill
us with the fat of thy Corn, that thou King of glory, and Lord of Hosts
may enter in by our gates, and thy pure word not only abide within our
walls, but also in our wills. Thou which breakest the bow, and snappest the
spears in sunder, and burnest the Chariot with fire, protect us from
slaughter, and scatter the Nations which delight in war.

Thou Lord extinguish the fire and flames of discord, which can conclude a
peace for us with the stone of the ground. Compel the Woolfe to lie down
with the Lamb, and the Leoparde with the Kidde: work a conversion in the
hearts of those which prefer uncertain riches and vain pleasures of this
vile, sinful, and wretched world, before the profession of thy truth and
preaching of the Gospel.


Autoph. Amen. For surely the Lord has miraculously delivered us from their
devouring and greedy ravening mouths.


Philox. You say well Autophilus, in commending him for our marvelous
deliverance, but will you be mindful of so great and manifold benefits?


Autoph. I hope so.


Philox. Then be so.


Autoph. Can you prove the contrary?


Philox. I would Autophilus proved it not. It is a common and usual practice
now a days amongst Hypocrites, to carry about with them faintlike mouths,
and devilish minds: to say Amen, to every good prayer with their mouth, when
their hearts are worldly and wickedly excercised. But it is not painted words
which please the Lord, but the works of righteousness, and obedience wherein
he delights: to take up the Cross and follow Christ, and to deny a man's
self which Autophilus will never do, are two not able marks of Gods children.


Autoph. Be not to rash in judging.


Philox. Then leave to be Autophilus.


Autoph. Indeed so shall I forsake my self, but as yet I mean it not: and
yet have you moved me so far, that since the Gospel and persecution go
both hand in hand together, I could be content to suffer sometimes
persecutions, but not continually, for such as I am can hardly away with
continual afflictions.


Philox. I am not ignorant how naturally men are infected with the disease
Philautia: that is to say, self love, how much they are addicted to it, and
they esteem of themselves. But if any man comes to me, says our Savior,
and hates not father, mother, wife, children, yea, and his own self, cannot
be my disciple. Not that we should envy, or be malicious toward them, but
that we have such affections toward them, that nevertheless the love of the
son of God be above all things. Of such an holy hatred Abraham is a worthy
example, who had rather be cruel against his own son, even to the death,
then in one point show himself disobedient. Let the husband therefore love
the wife, the wife her husband, the father his son, the son his father. So
that their humane love, draw nothing from the spiritual love of Christ. Now
therefore Autophilus, since there are but two ways, the one narrow and rough,
difficult to the flesh to be traueled: the other broad, smooth, and leading to
destruction. Tell me briefly whether you had rather go with worldly ease to
eternal damnation, then to take up the Cross, and go the narrow way to
life everlasting: for one of them we must needs run at length: that is,
either to joy or utter perdition.


Autoph. I cannot tell what you call worldly ease, but I am sure I would go to
heaven.


Philox. Walk not then after the flesh, but after the spirit: they that frame
themselves after the will of Christ, are his lively members: they which love
not themselves, nor the world, loath their former life, fear to fall into
sin: at a word, they which crucify the flesh with the affections, and
lusts thereof, shall possess those joys.


Autoph. What I do, it pertaines not unto you: you shall not answer for me.
A string whereon hipocrites are wont to harp.
I doubt not but I am clothed with Christ's righteousness, I hope that
Christ's perfect obedience yielded unto his father shall make satisfaction for
me.


Philox. A goodly countenance of honesty and pretense of fleshly Christianity:
do you think that Christ will hold you for righteous, when you give your
self to unrighteousness, what is this but a dishonouring of him and a
scorning of him for his redemption of you, as if Christ should accept the
proud man for lowly: him for a lover of God, which is a lover of himself: him
for a delighter in God, which only delights in vain pleasures: him for
mindful of Gods benefits, which is altogether unthankful: him for a chaste
person, which is a whoremonger: him for sober, which is a drunkard, and lastly,
him for a true worshipper which is an Idolater.


Autoph. I hope you cannot justly affirm, that I am stained with any of these
vices.


Philox. Does your conscience acquit you:


Autoph. What is that to you?


Philox. I ask you for no harm, notwithstanding, if every stitch of your
conscience were thoroughly ripped up, I fear we should find it sore sick of
many of these sins. Beware of Idolatry, it is the Mother vice from whence
do spring many other.


Autoph. Idolatry (quoth you) I thank God I never knew what it meant.


Philox. So much the worse: you may be sick of that disease and know it not.
1. Tim. 6.
Beware of Covetousness, it is the root of all evil. Which also is called of
the Apostle Paul, Ephe. 5.
Idolatry.


Autoph. Call you Covetousness Idolatry, either I forgette it, or else I
never learned it: as for my Covetousness care you not, Worldlings cloak
Covetousness under the color of good husbandry.
I know my self to be far enough from it, unless you will call good
husbandry Covetousness as many indeed are wont, for now a days, a man must
lashe out, set Cock on hoope, spend all on the poor, and in House keeping,
or else he shall be counted a Niggarde, nay verily, do what we can, we shall
offend some parties. If we be wary then are we accounted Covetous: if
liberal, then unthrifts: and thus they term every thing at their pleasure.


Philox. Nay, you put on fair visards on beastly and ugly monsters, hyding
covetousness under the cloak of good husbandry: pride under the show of
handsomenes, stoutnes under the color gentry: and thus although the covetous
of cormerants store up treasures in their Palaces by violence and robberies,
eat up poor men even as Beasts eat grass, keeping it under, nothwithstanding
all this is the point of good husbandry. Covetousness husbandry.
Good husbandry said I: No verily, as bad as may be: for the winning of a
few pence to loose Gods love: and for to have rich chistes and coffers stuffed
with red ruddockes to leese the favor of the everlasting God. No, Autophilus:
Number. 22.
Balaam being greedy of money, for the which he was about to curse Gods
people, might have excused himself, saying, it is a point of good husbandry.
But if Achans stealing of gold and precious clothes against Gods commandment:
4. reg. 5.
for the which he was stoned: if Gehezias selling of Naamans health, which
came by the grace of God: Math. 27.
if Judas his treachery against his Lord and Master selling him for thirty
pence: Act. 5.
if Ananias and Saphyra their lying to the holy Ghost, were good husba^dry:
then may these chambred fellows, keeping themselves close in their counting
houses, laying their bags under their elbowes, and dreaming of their
ruddocks, then may they well say, that they play the good husbands in their
filthy greedines and sparing of every od halfpeny. But this good husbandry is
nothing else, but a net of the devil, in the which whosoever is taken, loses
life everlasting: and as the seely bird goes down into a pitfall for a worm
and loses her life, or the mouse for a piece of Bacon is taken in the trap;
even so it is with them which you call good husbands, which cast themselves to
everlasting destruction both body and soul for trifles, not worth ye traueling
for; according to that of the prophet Barucke, Barucke. 3
Where are they now which heaped together gold and silver, and which made no
end of their scraping together? And immediately he answered, Exterminati sunt
and descenderunt ad inferos. They are rooted out, they are gone down into
hell. James. 5.
Like unto that of S. James. Now go to ye rich men, weep and howl in your
miseries that come upon you, your riches are rotten, and your gold and silver
is rusty, and the rust thereof shall be a testimony against you: it shall feed
on your flesh as fire, you have hoarded up wrath for your selves in the last
day.


Autoph. Would you have us give all away, and go a begging: by the faith of
an honest man I never meant it, get more when I can, I am determined to keep
that which I have.


Philox. This is a rude speech, sauering neither of Christ, nor Christianity.
Take heed says Christ, beware of Covetousness, for no man's life stands in
the abundance of things which he possesses: showing the same by the
similitude of a certain rich man, who having not roomth where to bestow his
fruits, said: I will pull down my barnes, Luke. 12.
and build greater: and therein I will gather all my fruits, and my goods: and
I will say unto my soul, thou have much goods laid up in store for many
years, take thine ease: eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him,
Thou fool, this night do they require thy soul again from thee, the^ whose
shall all these things be? And so is every one that gathers riches to
himself and not riches toward god. Had not this rich man better to have
purchased a place in heaven where to live eternally, then to have hurded up
heaps of the greedy gold, laid house to house, and land to land? What
avails all his treasures, possessions, al revenues, all fair buildinges?
what avails his barnes full of Corn? to what purpose shall they serve, when
our most just and terrible God to the wicked and covetous shall say: Read
rationem villicationis, Come give account of thy Bayliwicke: May it not please
the Lord so to deal with Autophilus: Eccle. 31.
Hearken therefore to that of the wise man, Qui diligit aurum non
iustificabitur: He that loves gold, shall not be justified. Woe be unto you
rich men, for you have received your consolation in this life. What a sore
saying is that of Christ, when he pronounces, That it is as easy a matter for
a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of heaven?


Autoph. That is an hard saying in deed, but you shall not make me believe
that these words have a literal signification, for I know riches are good:
neither will I learn the contrary.


Philox. It is most certainly true, that riches are not ill of them selves,
neither of their own nature bring impedimentes unto us, whereby we may be
hindered from gods service: but the impediment comes of our corrupt nature,
otherwise we might blame the author. For as the suffering of the Father does
oftentimes bring corruptions to the Child: even so it can not almost be
avoided, but that the more abundance is given to some, A similitude.
the more they ingourge themselves and take a surfeit as it were of the same:
such is the wickedness of ma^s nature. So that they to who^ wealth and
substance, riches and revenues do increase, are tied with the chains and
bands of the Devil, The covetous tied in the chanes of Satan.
least they should aspire into heaven, and are so bewitched with Satan's
iugling that they account nothing commodious but the flowing vanities of this
wretched world: rejecting that wholesome counsel of the Prophet David: Psalm.
61.
Nolite cor apponere. That is, set not your hearts upon the love of riches.
Such miserable caytiues as are thus fettred with the chains of Satan, kept in
bondage and flauery of their own riches, we may justly compare unto cur Dogs,
which when they have fed upon the carrio^ and filled their bellies, lie down by
it and keep away the seely birds, that they may rather die for hunger then
eat of that whereof the Curs have too much. So likewise the wretched man,
couetously scraping and scratching from the poor, and withholding that which
is none of his own, although he have too much, had rather see his poor
brother go naked in the streets, and faint even unto the death through
famine, then depart from that which he may well spare to the releeuing of his
extremity. So is he kept in pri^^ of his goods: so is he kept in subjection of
the devil, so is he continually tormented. I say, tormented in getting, more
tormented in keeping, and most of all in losing. For which cause it is no
marvel if our savior Christ calls them the riches of iniquity, in regard of
the effect.


Autoph. You may say your pleasure against riches and rich men, notwithstanding
you shall not persuade me but that a rich man may be an honest man.


Philox. It is a vain collection of you to infer such a conclusion upon my
former words, as though such were my intent.


Autoph. Why then do you compare us to Dogs?


Philox. Indeed, Autoph. I compare covetous cormorants to cur Dogs, not
without just cause. Yet I say not but that a rich man may be an honest man:
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and Job, were very rich me^ and also very good
men. Joseph of Arimathea was very rich: So likewise Zacheus was a rich man.
Neither is it said of the Apostle, none are called being rich, but he says,
1. Cor. 1
Not many rich are called: nether in an other place, yt they which are rich,
but which seek to be rich, fall into many temptations. And again, ye love of
money is ye root of al evil: 1. Tim. 6.
not money it self. Charge the^ that are rich says yt Apostle, Heb. 13
ye they be not high minded nor trust in the uncertainty of riches but in the
living God. Let us therefore be without covetousness. Beware of possessing other
men's goods: restore to every one that which is his own. The Lord has raised
up to us most grievous plagues against violent possessors of other men's goods:
he has, and can scatter abroad unjust goods, by wars, mishaps, and diverse
calamities. For the Prophet Esaias cries out saying: The Lord shall enter into
judgment with the Elders and Princes of his people: and shall say unto them: It
is ye that have burnt up my vineyarde: the spoil of the poor is in your
houses. And Amos in the third Chapter of his Prophecy cries: They stoore up
treasures in their palaces by violence and robbery. Amos. 3.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, miseries shall invade thee on every side of
the land, and the enemy shall bring down thy strength or riches from thee
and thy palaces shall be spoiled. For proof hereof we see that oftentimes the
wrath of God lights upon them, and their goods which are so gotten. We see
that they which here possessed thousands, are worn out by little and little,
now the half, then three parts, in the end al runs at randon, and beggerie
ouertaketh them. So does Gods curse utter it self upon them, and although that
perhaps wealth lingereth, and at the first God is not that avenged, yet
notwithstanding God sends them diseases and afflictions, whereby he holds
them as it were upon the rack and forture. As if he should say, what have thou
done, thou wicked traitor? Thou have offended me all the times of thy life,
and yet have thou borne thy self in hand that all shall go well with thee if
thou might have riches enough, but thou must now be made to know that all
the raking up of riches which thou can not enjoy can stand thee in no
stead. Thus may we see what reward they have which enrich them selves, as it
were in despite of GOD: insomuch that all their scrapings and scratchinges are
nothing else but cords to ensnare them, mistes to blind them, venom to poison
them, and baits to choke them.


Autoph. Indeed, It may be that for my own part toward my old age: when
death is about to come upon me, some part of restitution may be made, but as
yet I mean it not, especially until the year one thousand five hundredth
eighty eight be past: for they say, that will prove a troublesome year.


Philox. Oh foolish man which makes account to live long, what is more
certain then death, and what is more uncertain then the hour of death? This
is a plain and evident token that you have no part in the Gospel of Christ
Jesus: Zacheus, as soon as he was received into the favor of Christ, and
understood the works of truth and equity, began to cast his accounts whom he
had privily iniuried or violently oppressed: yea, he immediately without delay
not only promised but also performed restitution.


Autoph. It may be I know not who^ I have iniuried. But if perhaps I have dealt
violently, as I hope you will not accuse me: yet by this means I should fall
into ignominy, that is to say by open restitution.


Philox. O sir, you can find means to rob the poor without infamy, and can
you find no handsome way to restore that which is wrongfully gotten without
the cracking of your credit and estimation? Tush if you mean faithfully to
make restitutio^, I doubt not but ye spirit of the Lord will teach you a ready
way how to perform so good an intent without obloquy and ignominy: but if you
mean to dally and jest with the Lord, the devil can teach you a thousand
excuses. The best whereof will never set your conscience at quiet liberty.


Autoph. Perhaps he is dead whom I have defrauded, and therefore how should I
make restitution.


Phil. Then have you ye poor and needy, on whom to bestow your riches, unto
who^ you may deal your unjust gotten goods.


Autoph. How shall they make restitution which have prodigally spent them?


Philox. Such fellows are to acknowledge their faults, and to repent them of
their sins from the bottoms of their hearts: and if it come to pass, that
riches afterward increase, they ought to be so much the more liberal of their
own, as before prodigal in spending other men's. Notwithstending who sees not
how contrary to Gods wode we deal in this respect. He that has gotten
thousands by that same so ugly a monster usury: He that has purchased lands
and living by extortion and covetousness, so if that every man had his own,
he might go a begging, yet never has regard of restitution. Nay he will
paynt out his swelling pride, and mayntaine I warrant you a port with other
men's pence, and satisfy his pleasure in the bowels, blood, and sweat of the
poor man's brows. But it were better for thee, whosoever thou art, to pluck
down thy pecocks pride, and thy ruffling riote, and to consider with thy self
whereof thou live, and still to endeavor thy self to make restitutio^ as far
as in thee consists. It were better thou did beg a while in earth, then
to abide the unspeakable pains of hell fire for ever. Briefly, whatsoever thou
would that men should do unto thee, that do unto them: and what thou
would they should not do unto thee, that do not unto them.


Autoph. Pretense of wife and children.
I have wife and children and I must and will see them provided for according to
their calling: I think my father was an honest gentleman and lived honestly
amongst his neighbors, he left me riches which I have well increased and am
thereby come to credit and countenance in my country, in them consistes my
estimation, for which cause I love them the rather, and as my father dealt with
me, so am I also to deal with my own children. That is to leave them like
gentlemen, for now a days he yt has nothing is less then nothing set by.


Philox. Fie for shame Autoph. what a conscience is this? have you learned this
excuse out of Gods book? what a madness is this, that a man should condemn his
soul to hell fire for ye enriching of his posterity? Or what comfort is it, to
a damned soul everlastingly burning in the slames of hell fire to consider
that by his usury, covetousness and extortion he has left his son a
gentleman behind him? who would hasarde his soul for such vanity, since
riches have no power to profit or pleasure us: but only such that are
bestowed in the use and service of God? and our poor brethren, and yet what
carking and caring is there, even when we are upon our death beds, for our
children, kinsfolks, and friends: which time especially, our souls are to
talk with God by prayer and meditation.


Autoph. Would you not have the father to care for his child: as simple a
Scripture man as I am, I can tell that Paul calls him worse than an Infidel,
that cares not for his wife and children.


Philox. I say not so, for I confess that the father ought to care for his
children: but what manner of care is that, such a one namely as ought to move
him to call upon God, to have a recourse unto him, from whence all good things
do come. This care must move him to forwarne his children yt they live in
sobernes, to be contented with a little, to labor that God may bless them, that
every one of them walk in their vocation, holding themselves in the ancor of
Gods providence, being assured yt he will never fail them yt put their trust
in him faithfully, willing the^ all to hold fast by this promise. Thy God will
not forsake thee. Be not careful says Christ, for your selves, what you shall
eat, or what you shall drink, nor yet for your body what raiment you shall put
on, Is not the life more worth then meat, and the body more of value then
raiment? Whereby immoderate care is forbidden, and yet every one of us ought to
labor according to our vocation.


Autoph. What would you have gentlemen to labor which are brought up so
daintely that the Sun may not shine on them? would you have the Courtier play
the Country man, and each delicate Dame to fall to her distaffe? Now as I am
an honest man, I am determined if I may live seven years to an end, so to
provide for mine, yt I hope they shall be able to live without the sweat of their
brows.


Philox. It is the fashion of worldlings to fancy an immortality in this life,
and to think yt they shall live seven years after they be dead. And as
touching this daintines which you talk off, I say it is a filthy thing,
loathsome in the eyes of God. As also there is no greater vanity then that any
of us should boast of his gentry: for are we not Adams children by nature,
cursed heirs of death, nothing but a lump of sin, and consequently must
needs be loathsome to our God. Let then the hautie man brag of his Pedigree,
and the covetous man damn his soul to hell fire to make his son a
gentleman, notwithstanding this is their offspring, this is the top of their
nobility, that there is a sink of sin in them, that they be Satan's
bondslaues, that they have the wrath and curse of God hanging over their
heads, and briefly, that being banished from the kingdom of heaven, they be
delivered to torments and tortures everlasting: but that it has pleased our
most gracious God to ransom and redeem them by so precious a price, as is
the blood of his son Christ Jesus. And yet it must needs amase a godly man
to see how every one does hunt for worldly honor. How says the simple hind?
if I had but a plowland, my estate were happy. So likewise the husbandman
gapeth after the degree of a yeman, the Yeman would be a Gentleman, the
Gentleman a Knight, the Knight a Lord, the Lord a Duke, etc. And so in
conclusion, the poor and simple hind, if possible would, be a Prince: few or
none at all are content with their estates, but desire honor and estimation in
this world, which is nothing else but vanity, and as it were, a man's shadow,
which the more that a man follows, the more it flies away, and when he
flies from it, it follows him again, and the only way to catch it, is to
fall down upon it: So falls it out with them which gape after worldly
promotion, the faster they follow it, the further it flies, the further they
fly, the faster it follows, and in the end the only way to win honor,
is to be humble?


Autoph. Do you make no difference in men's estates? would you have the simple
and mean man vaunt himself above his degree and calling?


Philox. Not so, but let the Prince have loialtie due to his excellency, the
noble man honor due to his dignity, the Gentleman reverence as his condition,
the yeman esteemed as he is worthy of. It is not that which I gainesaie, but
the vanity of pride and ambition.


Autoph. Hypocrites call pride handsomnes.
So such fine headed fellows misconster every thing at your pleasure. He that
carries a courageous mind you call ambitious, and he that cares to be
handsome, you term proud hearted.


Philox. Nay, you should say the contrary, that pride like an hypocrite hides
himself under the shadow of hansomnes, and ambition under the color of
couragiousnes, but if you will needs make your son a Gentleman, as I perceive
it is your intent and purpose, send him to the school of virtue, for true
nobility was never begun but by virtue, and he that holds nobility by
descent from his ancestors without virtue, is no better than a monster, in yt
he breaks the bonds of the nature of true nobility. Virtue fountain of true
nobility.
If Christ had listed to brag of his nobility, he might have had as
sufficient cause as he that carries ye greatest port, who came of as great a
stock as any was in the world: but he being the son of God, called himself
the son of man, yt is, the son of the virgin Marie: and more than all this,
called himself by the name of shephearde, Worldlings like to children and
fools
the which is counted a co^temptible and base name amongst men: but it is with
worldlings after the manner as it is with infa^ts and children, which esteem
more of a painted babble, than of a precious jewel, and count it a more
excellent thing to flourish according to the glittering pomp of this world,
than to live godly in Christ Jesus. For proof whereof, who lists may see
how foolish men are wont to wonder at vanities, saying, how happy he is, how
rich, how mighty, in what authority, what a tal fellow he is, of what goodly
stature, how beautiful he is, what a lusty galland, but look upon heavenly
gifts, and of this worldly men account not of: these miserable men love their
own miseries, being so far wide from true felicity, that they think that in
abundaunce of these things a happy life does consiste, and albeit that
without carking and care, many are not able to provide necessaries for this
mortal life, yet if they were sure to live always, they would not set a point
by the kingdom of God, which wretched caitifes so miserably overwhelmed with
earthly vanities, that they can think of nothing else but earthly gewgaues,
shall one day mauger their hearts, understand how vile and how vain things have
been, wherein they esteemed their chief felicity.


Autoph. It is meet that a Gentleman go like a Gentleman, and that fine dames
be daintily attired, would you have Joan go as fine as my Lady? Let Courtiers
court it, it is but a credit to go gaie, or else many are deceived.


Philox. It is a credit in deed, and so, many carry all their credit on
their backs, which proud pecockes, if they were plucked as they should be,
would hang their heads for very shame. Pride of women portraied.
Was there ever such exesse and superfluity as is at this day, and in this
land, men making themselves monsters, and women disguising themselves like
puppets. The Prophet Esaie speaking of the attire of women, Esaie. 3
so curious in tricking and trimming up themselves with all their pretty
trinkets, does so decypher them, as if he had an inventory of their chests, I
say, he does displaie them even from the crown of their heads, to the sole of
their feet, As their ouches and brouches, their slippers, the calls, the round
attire, their sweet bals, their bracelettes, their attire of their heads,
their head bands, their tablettes, their earerings, their rings, their
muflers, their costly apparel, their vailes, wimples, their crisping pinnes,
their glasses, their lymnes, and their lawns, and such like knackes: and he
tells them that God can well skill to make reformation, since they were set
on the hoigh, and all bent upon bravery, setting cock on the houpe, and having
no care of amendment. But now a days ruffianisme is more rife than ever it
was, and pride seeks to display his arms by all kinds of disordered
varieties, they are still devising of some new babble or other, and are never at
an end. Now French fashions, now Italian toies, and al to make English fools:
and thus whilst we are so busy in making our bodies brave, our souls are
eaten to death with rust and ranker. The Lord commanded the Jews, that they
should not wear garments of linsie wolsie, that is, they should observe a
simple and natural fashion of their attire, and not to use such gaie glorious
flim flams, and to seek after superfluous deckings. For when men do so, it is
as if a man should disorder a whole house, or turn the pots and the platters,
mingle the sheets with the towels, toss and tumble all things topsie turuie:
the like madness, I say, is committed, when we do not rightly and orderly
apply to our uses those things which God has bestowed upon us, but mingle
them according to our own imaginations, and is it not a wonder to see what
pretty knackes fine heads can invent to feed fond desires. For as soon as
they see the foolish Gentleman to be tricked with the delight of some new
devised Lucyferlike tricks, then begin they to set such dainties abroch as may
make fat fools, and lean purses. Oh this is brave, says one, this will
trick it, says another, I will have a new devise, says the third. Thus is
their striving and emulation, who should possess the highest place in the
school of vanity, and many there be which, were it not for the maintaining of
their pride, might keep good hospitality, relieve the poor, do good to the
common weal wherein they live, whereas now they hang such flim fla^ about their
necks, and lay so much upon their backs, that they are not able to spare any
thing from their bellies, in the mean time naked need is sent packing, and no
regard is had of the use of Gods creatures. What should I say, there is nothing
else but confusion in our lives, we are as blind as beetles, and made dronken
with the dregs of vain excess: if some good men which lived in the time of
simplicity, should see how men at this present do lead their lives, how one
day they must have this toie, an other day that, and the third day a new
babble, some must shifte twice a day, or else they have not played their parts.
If some, I say, which lived in yt time of simplicity, did but see what
forging of fine conceits there is to put that toie out of use, which was
invented but three days a go, and all to get money, and also how others lash
out to maintain their port, which must needs be in print, I warrant you,
would they not clappe their hands at them, yea, would they not spit at such
fondness?


Autoph. Fie, fiie, there is no wise man but will laugh at you, and I know
every dainty dame will scorn you. Is it not meet that a Gentleman should
have a gown for the night, two for the day, some for winter, and some for
Summer, one all furred, an other half faced, one for this day, an other for
that? Should not a Gentleman have change of attire, to shifte twice in one
day, one after ye French fashion, and an other after the Turkey, call you
these toies?


Philox. Oh Autophilus, the Israelites were content with such attire as God
gave them, although not gorgious, and God so blessed the^, that their shoes
and hose lasted forty year, and those which were worn of their Fathers,
their children took no scorn to wear them afterward: but we are never
content, for some will not stick to bestow more on a dancing shirt, than is
sufficient to buy an handsome suit of apparel: others hang their revenues about
their necks, and in the end some will not stick to ieoparde the best joint
about them, to maintain their proud estate: another if he have not money to
buy him gayish clothes, yet that he may play his part in the pageant of pride,
will lash out all his money in his purse upon great buttons. Another because he
will be in the fashion, will bestow two pound of daglockes in panching his
doublet, the true liuerie and cognizance of his master whom he serves. Another
because he would have a trick above the rest, must wear his hat without a
band, and go with vngartered hose, as either he would have people to laugh at
him, or show that he is weary of his life: and that which is most
abominable, some there are which take bravery in their long hair, loking
grimly as if they were fraye bugs to fear children, or satyrs and savage
creatures come out of ye woods. Thus they which are made men by ye work of God,
created to serve him in true righteousness and holiness al ye days of their
lives, by Circes, I should say, by Satan's enchantments, are changed into Apes,
Hogs, and Asses, behauing them more brutishly tha^ ever did the Ethnikes
themselves.


Autoph. As touching men, it were pity they should become such monsters as
you would make them, and as for women, albeit they have tongue enough to
answer for themselves: notwithstanding I will speak for them in this
behalf. Is it not meet, think you, that they curle their hair, paint their
faces, go fine and gayish, to the end they may delight their husbands eyes,
and to retain his love toward them? yes, yes I warrant you, if you should
control them to their faces, A cloak under which women hide their pride.
they could very quickly shape you such an answer.


Philox. A shameful thing were it, and if they should so answer. First in
respect of their husbands, and then in regard of God especially: in regard
of their husbands, for that in so saying, they should charge him to be
delighted with the work of the devil, as though that a wise and christian
husband had rather that his wife should paint her self and flourishe like a
common harlot, than go like a grave matrone: in respect of almighty GOD, for
that they which do color their faces, and die their bodies, do therein go
about to reprove the excellent work of him that made them, insomuch that they
do seem, as it were ashamed of his workmanship. The true ornaments of women.
Paul teaches them another lesson, that they should deck themselves with
shamefastness and soberness, not to curle their hair, to die their faces, to
glitter with their gold or precious clothes. A common proverb it is amongst
the Grecians, that it is not gold or pearl that beautifieth a woman, but good
and honest conditions: so that in stead of their gaudes, embroderies,
bracelets, and borders, they should only delight in the decking of Gods laws:
that ought to be their jewels: in sted of their frontlets and bracelettes, and
in stead of their rings and costly gemmes upon their fingers, they should have
Gods laws before their eyes, and at their fingers ends, so that if they
should look upon themselves, yea although but upon their nails, it should
come into their minds to think that they have a maker, who fashioned the^, and
whose pleasure it is they should wholly frame themselves in true obedience and
service all the days of their life. And in stead also of beautifying and
garnishing of houses, in making them of a glorious and sumptuous show, to the
end it may be said, this is the house of some man of honor and estimation,
the law of God ought to be written upon it rather, according to that in the
sixte of Deutronomie, Thou shall bind them, says Moses, that is to wit, the
words of the law, as a sign upon thy hands, and as frontlets, written
between thine eyes: thou shall write them upon the entry of thy house, and
upon thy gates. But to deal more plainly Autophilus, do but tell me this,
Pride cause of dearth and penury.
what is one of the chiefest causes why the poor are almost pined through
penury, and such a famine now does show it self in the land, as it does?


Autoph. I cannot directly tell you, I hope you will not say that pride is the
cause thereof.


Philox. Yea truly, how can it be any otherwise, while one man spends that
which might serve a multitude, and few there be which distribute of that
abundaunce which they have received, being made drunk with the dregs of
excess and superfluity, when we neither keep a mean in them, bestow them to
the profit of our poor brethren, nor yet are mindful of him of whom we have
received them. If a Father perceive his child to cramme himself too full, and
be given to over much greediness of the belly, A comparison.
he will cut him smaller morcels: and if he see him over licorous, and to have,
as they call it, a white bread tooth in his head, he will give him the
contrary, else he shall mar his child. If this be so, then if we abuse the
benefits of God distributed in so good order, conspiring even an alteration of
nature it self, is it any marvel if the Lord do give us smaller
morselles, and cut us shorter commons, making us glad to snappe at a
cruste? is it any marvel if we vnhallowe the creatures, seeking to create a
new world, to feed on fond desires, if the Lord do send a morraine
amongst our cattle, send an unseasonable seed time, and an untimely harvest,
send a famine and dearth into the land, for the wickedness of the people? I
fear me England is in the way to overtake Sodom and Gomorrha, the partners
of proud hearted people, for when as the Lord had given them abundance and
plenty of all things, and they were grown fat, then began they to kick
and spurn against the foster Father, to exercise cruelty and oppression
against the poor, and to run headlong and headlong unto desperation.


Autoph. If every thing were so out of temper, as you would seem to make it,
it is marvel that the Lord does not power his heavy wrath and indignation
upon the land, as he did upon those wicked Cities Sodom and Gomorra.


Philox. The judgments of the Lord are secret and vnscrutable, he may come
before we be ready for him: he is patient to us ward, as teaches Peter, 1.
Pet. 5
and therefore we must learn Autophilus, Heb. 10
to make a commodity of the Lords patience: although he be long in coming,
and loath to execute his judgment upon us, yet at the last he will come:
although he forbear in drawing the sword of justice against us for our
sins, yet if we defer amendment of life until such time as he be enforced
to strike, he will pay us home to utter perdition both of boot and soul, and
therefore let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, least he
deal roughly with us in the day of visitation, yea, let us bow our necks in
time, for if the mighty hand of the Lord do fight against us, we shall not be
able to bear it. It is an horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, says the Apostle, if we stay until he show him self our enemy, we shall
find that he is the God of justice, and the God of revenge, yea and that he
to a ^eree and terrible God against such as are lulled a sleep in the cradle
of security.


Autoph. If God were so angry as you would seem to make him, many men's cases
were to be thought more desperate, and dangerous. No, no, God is merciful,
favorable, and full of compassion, at what time so ever a sinner does repent
him from the ground work of his heart, he will receive him, his mercy is over
all his works. I know well enough that he would not the death of a sinner, and
therefore make the matter no worse, then it is: for if men did not think that
God did wink at many things, they would look better about them then they do.


Philox. Why how now Autophilus, now you mende the matter well, see how you
slip from one sin to an other there is not a more ougly monster, neither any
thing more abominable to the Lord then presumption. Presumption portraied.
I do not d^^^ but that God is merciful and patient to us ward, that he
would have none lost but receive all to repentance, as Saint Peter teaches
notwithstanding, it is a badde conscience, that because he is merciful,
therefore woe should abuse his mercy: because he is the God of compassion,
therefore we should presume upon his patience: such wicked ones are to
understand that God has two arms, the one of justice, and the other of
mercy: and those which will not make any commodity of the Lords patience,
must be smitten with the sword of justice. Saint Paul teaches an other
lesson, That we should not contemn the riches of his mercy. Romans 2.
If he promise thee mercy and grace to day, says saint Augustine, thou know
not whether he will proffer it thee to morrow: If he offer thee life and
momorie this week, thou know not whether he will proffes it thee the next
week. And therefore Autophilus, beware of presumption, lest deferring
conversion from hour, to hour: from day, to day: from week* to week: from
year, to year: the judgment of God suddenly overtake you. Our lives do
hang at a twine threede as it were, and we are suddenly ouerturned, we may
learn this by experience: has not one suddenly been drowned: an other broke
his neck with a fall: an other been suddenly stain by the sword: an other
fallen into the hands of thieves, and thereby cruelly murdered: an other fallen
down dead in the streets. We have seen or at the least might have seen some
of these fearful tragedies: as for the time of our life is short, sixty
years and ten: it is cut off quickly and we fly away, says the Prophet
David, We have spent out years as a thought. Our life for the shortness and
inconstancy of it is compared, The shortness of man's life.
to grass, to a vapor, to smoke, to a weauers shuttle, which slideth away
swiftly. Even so experience teaches, to day a man to morrow none. Besides
this death is such a Somner as will have no nay, neither will be corrupted by
any bribes: who whether he come first or last, early or late, will not be
resisted. And therefore as Solomon reports: That man is blessed that fears
in his heart. That is to wit, calls upon himself whilst it is to day:
dallieth and delayeth not until he be compelled and constrained to acknowledge
from whence he came, and whither he must return. But as for such misercants
which do bleare out their tongues like mad men, and fret like chafed Bulls,
setting themselves against the judgments of God, and like Giants making war
against the forewarning of his messengers as did the old world against Noe the
Preacher of righteousness, until the moment of destruction. These must at
length see^e that the Lord has a naked rod of: vengeance, and a Scepter of
justice when they shall deadly pay for their proud presumption. For the Lord
has no mercy for such as walk in the vain delights of sin, Deuteronomy. 29.
and in the stubbornes of their own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst: that
is, joining one horrible sin to another. Let the wicked forsake his ways,
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, Esaias. 55.
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him.


Autoph. Has not Christ spoken it Philoxenus, that whosoever believes in him
has eternal life. I would you knew it, I hope to be saved by the death of
Christ, as well as the best of you all: and therefore if you go about to
persuade me otherwise, I will shut up for you trouble my conscience.


Philox. Would thou make the death of Christ a baud for thy sins, and so
work that villainy against Christ? Do thou think ye Gods mercy is common to
all? No, no, thou make the reckoning without the Host: and when it comes to
the vpshoote, thou shall steep short: for it will prove far otherwise, thou
shall find Gods mercy turned into justice, and Christ his death turned into
worm wood: because thou hate knowledge and choosest not these are of the
Lord.


Autoph. We shall never have done if I follow you up and down at randon as
you lead me.


Philox. Nay we should never have done if we should display all the vanities
and hypocrisies of worldlings.


Autoph. Tush, tush, you term every thing at your pleasure.


Philox. I term them as they are, and I would you were not made drunken with
worldly pleasure.


Autoph. I will end with you for I have a further matter in hand which shall
bring more profit and pleasure then all this before spoken.


Philox. What is that Autophilus.


Autoph. If I should tell you, we should never have ended: therefore adieu for
I have much to do.


Philox. Much to do indeed, for an hypocrite to hate the world, deny
himself, take up his Cross and follow Christ.


FINIS.

