CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS OF THAT REVEREND, religious and faithful servant of God,
and glorious Martyr of Jesus Christ, M. RANDAL BATE, which were part of his
daily meditations in the time of his sufferings, whilst he was prisoner in the
Gatehouse at Westminster.
THE FIRST SECTION.
Every part of Wisdom is from heaven, from the father of Lights.
MOst glorious and eternal Lord God, which have vouchsafed by Jesus Christ in
all times, to publish thy counsel and holy will to thine own people, and raised
sufficient witnesses against superstition and wilworship. For the clearing of
thy truth, vouchsafe thy presence with thy weak servant in this business, that
desires thy glory, and the good of thy people. That so much of thy truth as is
needful for our times may be plainly made manifest, to the conscience and
heart of all that belong unto thee. Lord, thou have appointed Jesus Christ to
be our Shepherd, and promised thy Word and Spirit should not leave thy people:
Thou have brought us to be partakers of the first resurrection, and drawn us
out of the world to know thee in part, and love thy name. Oh therefore send
thine annoynting eye-salue and cause such a light from heaven to shine in our
dark hearts, as all contrary thoughts and conceits that rebel against Christ
his Kingdom may be subdued, all lukewarmenesse may be expelled, and that all
with one heart and free persuasion of mind, may worship thee the only King
and Lawgiver of the Church, according to thy will in the unity of the Spirit,
Amen.

IN all times (dear brethren and much beloved) it has been found true, that
satan sowes tares, where the Lord has sown wheat: which come up in the night
so sec^etly, and are so like the wheat, that they are scarce discerned by any,
till they have overgrown the corn and choked the same: nay which is more;
Errors never want men very busy and dilligent in tending and nourishing them,
so that if they have not the chief place, and be kept with all observance, you
shall see their Patrones fly in men's faces for the least neglect. This too
lamentable experience of the Churches condition sufficiently proves amongst
both Jews and Gentiles: For the lying serpent, though he study to poison all
men's souls with damnable doctrine, yet more principally the visible Church, wh
ch being a fountain of living waters troubled by him, filthy streams must
needs flow thence to all the world. Besides, when the Church corrupts Gods
worship, in whole or in part, devising any thing of her own, it greatly hardens
wicked men in their superstitions and devised Religions; who seeing the same
outside in the Religion of God which they themselves follow, are hindered from
discerning the grave and simple Majesty of Gods true worship, thinking this to
be but like their own, an invention of men; or at least, that men are not
altogether taught of God in this way, nor receive all that they profess from
him alone, but do borrow many things, and devise some of their own to
beautify that which by forra gne beauty is evermore deformed, sowcing an old
patch of a different color into a new garment which makes a rent, where all
was well before. To prevent wh ch offense, though unfittest I acknowledge of
any, I have undertaken th s small Treatise, wherein far be t from me, to seek
any disgrace of the State, because I d scover some corruptions in the Church;
for it is the Ministe s duty to reprove. With much thankfulness we all
acknowledge Gods mercy toward us in the light and liberty we have enjoyed by
means of three renoumed Princes, whereof two are fallen asleep, and one now
the Lords anointed, surviveth: on whom the Lord multiply all graces of his
Spirit. Neither do I think that men of any reasonable understanding wi^ think
the publi hing of the t uth in a plain manner any disgrace, if it be done in
way of exhortation: for suppose I should err in judgment, yet the thing being
done in love and humility, with all respect and due regard unto the State, I
doubt not but his Majesty and the State under him, will take it as a fruit of
love from him that unfeynedly seeks their peace, and happiness.

I know it will be said we are factious, and sow discord, and therefore
deserve sharp punishment for troubling the quiet and peace of the State. But
men's cen^ures do not fear me; nor is my life precious unto me, so as my race
may be run with joy and a good conscience; whether I ^iue, it is unto Christ,
and for h m, or whether I dye, it is unto him and for his Glory. And let not
any of our opposit^s dream but the Lord will raise up such by his Spirit that
shall rep^oue th^se remainders of superst tion more and more ^^a^ply, till he
come himself in his own person. He will not be overcome by men, but will set up
his Christ in all his Ordinances.

As for troubling the State, I profess I do not trouble the land; for we
adhere to Christ, and walk by his light only; And let all men know it is far
better they should hear the sharpest reproves that do most cut, then fee^e
the sma^t hand of God for continuing unreformed: which men cannot but look for,
if they go on in this way, which the Lord has ^o often reproved and dehorted
us from.

Many, I suppose, on the other hand, will blame and censure me, because I t ach
not an utter depa^ture from a corrupt form of worship, whom I do seriously
desire to peruse the grounds herein contained for their satisfaction in this
point.

Wherefore, considering no just cause of offense is given to any, for the
substance of the matter especially, and the necessity there is to witness the
truth, I have published this to settle the judgment, and inform the
conscience of them that want better means. I know, and see what an hinderance
it is to many in mayn points and duties of Religion to doubt in matters of
small moment, in show and circumstantiall; I know how many men's hearts are torn
each from other, and divided about these things. Many going further on the
right hand in detestation of errors then they are called by the Lord: Do not
these call upon every man for the use of his tallent, that the hey and stubble
built on the foundation may be removed by the approach of the light, and all
may walk in one way making truth and peace to kiss each other.

Only there are two things yet questionable; 1 For the manner of handling these
controversies, it seems nothing fit, that such plain and simple stuff should
be brought to the building of the Tabernacle especially there be ng so many men
of excellent parts, furnished with all manner of learning and sound judgment,
that might travel with more success in this business. To which I answer from
my heart, that I could with it to be so; and ^f they be not otherwise employed,
I do desire them to perfect and go through w th what I have rudely begun. For
mine own satisfaction in th s doubt, this has persuaded me to do that which I
have done, through Gods assistance.

1 The light and resolution I have attained, through Gods blessing, by these
grounds following.

2 How wonderful the Lord is to glorify himself in weak means, when men
go not beyond their calling, and the gifts bestowed upon them.

3 The comfort some have had in the reading of these things.

A second doubt is, that many may be hereby b ought into danger if they will
follow these ruses taught, and dissent from the common customs and received
orders.

To which the answer is easy.

1 The fire does ever follow Christ, where he is truly Preached, and his
Ordinances desired and followed.

2 It is better Gods people be troubled by men, then by their own conscience,
and live in the least sin against God.

3 Trouble is raised already, and this is but to advise men for what willingly
to suffer trouble.

Let no man therefore malign this poor fruit of my prayers and meditations,
but read it with the same spirit of love I write it, and so doing doubtless
thou shall gain something that may profit thee in a good way.

Christ himself is a rock of offense, for the rising and fall of many in
Israel: witness all ages wherein many in the visible Church have been
offended, and stumbled at some part of his doctrine, sacraments and government,
Many are not the sheep of Christ but belong to another Kingdom, ne there can
they believe because we tell the truth. It is not to be expected therefore th s
poor writing of mine should find any better intertainment in the world then
the great Shepherd himself, and all true Prophets that followed him,
Nevertheless my desire and humble prayer is that men may not stumble and dash
themselves in pieces by their falls, and make others st mble to.

Wherefore (deer Christian) thou that tenderest thine own and others good, take
heed to thy self of falling upon this stone. It is no small nor light matter,
either to deride and scoff at the truth when it is brought unto thee; or to be
made worse, or turned further in affection from Christ and his servants; read
Math. 18, howsoever men think by their witty and nice distinctions to evade
the plain light, and cast mists before their own and others eyes, and joining
herewith power and authorized credit, uphold their Kingdom, yet the truth is
they shall be broken in pieces, and the Kingdom of God shall be taken from
them, and given to a people that will bring forth the fruit of it. It is not
possible to hold the Gospel among us and reject th^se truths and the like, and
persecute the servants of God for them. Nay further danger then this comes, for
men stumbling before others come to be scandals and offenses to others, and so
Mat. 13, shall be gathered by the Angels and cast into eternal fire.

Contrariwise blessed is the man that is not offended in Christ, but receives
him as he offers himself in his Word, to be the true and only King, Priest
and Prophet of his Church.

Wherefore to prevent that which the wisest are in danger of (for the builders
cast away Christ) and all others by them, I desire thee before thou judge of
these things following, see thou be one fitted for this business, And therefore

1 See thou have learned so^ndly the maine grounds of Religion, m lk must be
well d^gested, before men can d^gest strong meat. It is a shame indeed that m^n
should be so ^gnorant in such times, as God has given under Christ an Princes,
and it is one sin that brings captivity and desolation. Learn these
Principles well therefore, and thou ^na^t be the better able to discern of every
spirit: otherwise he that cannot read nor see the great things of the Law, it
is not possible he should see any lesser points.

2 See thou be well acquainted with thine own blindness and brut^sh folly, for
such shall be made wise by Christ that become fools in themselves: a man that
knows not this shall be like the Pharisees, that when Christ is preached most
plainly, their eyes shall not s^e, nor their ea^es hear the things of God.

3 Men must be such as turn from their sins at the correction and reproof of
God, that profit by the word and judgments they have been under: then the Lord
will be their Teacher, and power out his mind unto them, and cause men to
understand his ways, till then the vail covers them. The natural man
discernes not these things; such therefore as deteyne the truth in injustice,
live in sins against their conscience, or go on in a secure course, being
never changed; let them never expect that further truths should be made known
to them, but that which they have shall be taken from them.

4 Such as exercise themselves in prayer much, and often med tation, with
feeling and hunger after knowledge, Iam. 1, It is well known this is the key to
open the closet of God, and where should men see the truth but in the presence
of God? Such therefore as through their unbele^fe, and profane contempt of
this Ordinance of God, set themselves to school to men only, and think by a
little study at furthest to comprehend any truth, deceive themselves, as well
as the ignorant and impenitent person that cannot or dare not come to God,
whose heart respecting wickedness accuses and daunteth him, if not seared up,
or benumbed, Prove. 2.1.

5 See thine heart be not set much upon these earthly treasures and wordly
happiness, for such an heart will neither cry nor call earnestly for, nor esteem
of the truth but sell it for a morsel of bread: It is well known affection
corrupts the judgment, and a man for the present evil world will make the
Lord speak pleasing th ngs, and entertain any lie for the truth that may br ng
earthly possessions and prosperity, Phil. 3, 2 Pet. 2.14.15.

6 Such as make conscience of small matters n^their own practice, as petty
oaths, justing, lies, idle speeches, which is the true sea of the Lord, Prove.
3, Psalm. 25, For as for men of the Pharisees judgment, to w t, that the Lord
only forbids great sins; no marvel, if they swallow such lesser matt rs.
Thou must therefore exercise thy self in this, namely n all things to keep a
clear conscience toward God and man, especially herein that thou be careful
to give no offense, through the use of thy Christian liberty, to thy brethren,
Romans 14.13, 1 Ioh. 2.10, and account nothing sma^ that God commands, Math 5.19.

7 That thou have a sound love of the truth and Christ especially, 1 Cor. 8,
for the devil will pluck treasures from thy mind, and rob thine
understanding, if thou do not receive the truth in love, 2 Thessalonians. 2. The truth
therefore must be deerer then thousands of gold or silver; unto thee the Gospel
and every branch of it, as the pearl. As for them that respect the Word, as
they respect an other history, or never busy themselves about either
knowledge, faith or p^act^se: From these, Truth, the heavenly Manna shall be
taken away, and chaffy Traditions which w ll damn their soul^s shall be sent
them. Thou therefore must love the truth rather then thy cred te, be content to
change thy mind when the light comes, buy it at any rate.

8 That thou be resolute to walk in the truth, Ioh. 7.17, though it cost thee
all thou have: For he that hates not father, mother, house, lands, and all for
Christ's sake, cannot be his disciple; men must cast up their accounts before
what the truth will cost, and resolve to give the full price even to hate their
life for Christ: All must deny themselves therefore, take up their crosses and
follow Christ, Math. 6. All that e^de to know, and reason only, all fearful
ones that dare not follow the light, darkness shall cover them, they shall be l
ke Paul's companions, Act. 9, that heard a sound but saw not Christ, neither
heard what the Lord said unto him.

9 That men hate the whore of Babell thoroughly, and all her abominations, Apo.
14.4, it is ^hewed who she is, and how dangerous a thing it is to communicate
with her, Apoc. 14.9.10, else how shall they come out from her: Such therefore
as th nk it no way so dangerous to communicate with Antichrist, and are of such
quiet disposition that they can well enough brook Popery, shall be like the
scorners that seek wisdom but shall not find it, for men must hate all vain
inventiventions that will have the truth dwell with them.

10 Such as judge not of Religion, and the worship of God, either by the
pleasing of our senses, liking of our own heart, or judgment of carnal reason,
Numb. 15.39, for these are not admitted to judge of the Lord nor his ways:
nothing but the Lord, and that which is from him, can or may judge of the Lord.
As for such as seek for carnal delight, rather then true edification, and
judge by themselves what the Lord requires and approues, no marvel if they
like a strangers face better then of their own husband. For nature goes a
whoring after men's devises, and is ever fond of it own inventions, Math. 15,
like the Jews that would offer up their children to Moloch, but robbed the
Lord of his tithes.

11 Such are willing to be instructed of very babes, becoming little children
like eloquent Apollos, that was content to be catechized by Aquilla and
Priscilla, men must learn the truth especially where it is practiced, and many
Truths from them that are weaker, and far more ignorant happily ^n other
things then thy self; hum^^ity and wisdom dwell together: Paul though he had
seen Christ ^n the way, he must go to Ananias to learn further what he
should do. Act. 9. Such therefore as despise learning of any, save the great
Rabbis and ancient Fathers, and will not be beholding to any ^eane pers^^age,
for most dif^^cuit truths, are like the proud Cor^^thians, 1 Cor. 12,
doubtless such shall go astray with the Pharisees, Ioh. 9.

12 Such as by the spirit of God in themselves understand the Scriptures in
some measure, and try the spirits both writings and speeches, not depending
upon any, 1 Ioh. 4, 1 Thessalonians. 5. For every man is a liar and may er^e, and the
Church must be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, upon the
Rock Christ: Wherefore such as ground only on men's opinions, or the Traditions
of the Elders, are men's Disciples, and God may justly deny them the knowledge
of saving Truths. Let all men take heed of this Popish evil, of an implicit
faith; for it is natural to all men, it gives way to all superstition: it is
gross negligence not to respect what seed is sown in thy soul. And to end
all, remember these two things. 1 That men depending on others shall ever be
uncertain, for men do change and vary: 2 In all times some points of Religion
very needful to be known, are mysteries to the learned world, hid from the
wise and prudent, Math. 11.

13 Receive each truth for conscience, nothing for singularity or novelty, to
content the state present, or to please men, for such are hypocrites, that
Christ is an offense unto. For though in some things corruption be resireyned,
and the branches cut off for a time, yet hereby corruption is dangerously
nourished, and more deeply lodged in the heart, which will break out at last
with much violence, to the great discredit of the profession; witness Judas,
Saul, and them that go out of the Church in all times, such hang upon the
Church, but are dead members; neither let any think we desire such scholars
and followers, nor let the world imagine they have gotten a great prey, when
they have perverted a learned scholar: For he is but as a withered branch,
that Christ has cut off, fit enough, and for nothing else fit, but to build up
the Kingdom of Satan. Nor let Gods servants be discouraged as though they were
quite overcome, when they loose a seeing Champion: for his spirit that was good
he leaves behind him in the Church, an other shall inherit it, and enjoy his
Talent, even he that had most before, and is found most faithful.

See thou be not content with a form of Religion, denying the power thereof:
such a one as come near the Lord with thy lips, and honor him with thy
mouth, but thy heart is far from him. Such the world is full of in all ages,
which makes men ready to entertain will worship, and any devise of man: if
therefore thou seek not to proceed by sound judgment in Gods service, doing
nothing but what thou have warrant for from the Word; or coldly worship God
without any zeal or cheerfulness, or without true reverence of his great
Majesty, and faith in Christ; Never expect the Lord should manifest his will
unto thee, in these Truths following.

SECTION. II.
THus (Christian Reader) thou see what to repent of in former times: and what
have been the mayn lets and impediments of thine ^ucrease in knowledge using
the means: wherefore when thou dist^^t^^t and scornest happily at the grounds
following: see thy consc ence accuse thee not in some want of preparation;
which doing, I doubt not, but we shall be of the same judgment, or at least
have the same heart and mutual love according together. For pride, and
profaneness, and men-pleasing chiefly sunders the affection: when thou
read set thy se^fe as in the presence of God, to learn from him, and do not
wi fully shut thine eyes against any light that shines from heaven.

Now that with more facility we may pass to the several doubts controverted,
I will propound through the grace of God, some general grounds from whence
light may be fetched, to determine all o^ the most of th^se, or the like
questions.

1 The first ground, that all will worship: which is worship devised by man and
arbitrary or free is abhorred by the Lord. The second commandment forbids
making to our selves the least sign fying ceremony, Numb. 15.39, Col. 2, noth
ng pleases God but what comes from heaven: for outward service pleases no
further then it is done in obedience to God, and is an expressing of inward
worship: Therefore this will worship being done not in obedience to God, but to
our own and others will, Isa. 24.13, it is not accepted of God. To this all
agree, for it was the Pharisees sin that they took up of themselves many
washings not commanded of God, nor forbidden by him, but indifferent in
themselves.

2 The Lord has given a perfect Platform and absolute Rule, how he will be
worshipped in the time of the new Testament. For Christ that has ever taught
the Church and directed Moses and David, much more coming in his own person,
has fully manifested the will of his Father: Else he should be less faithful
then the servant: in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, so
as in him we are complete, and need not further to seek nor borrow any light
from the greatest Angels in heaven, for matters concerning God or his worship:
Therefore they are accursed, Gal. 1, that preach any other doctrine besides that
the Apostles have preached, and left unto us, 2 Timothy 3, The Scripture makes the
man of God perfect and absolute to every good work; and it is a light unto our
feet, and to our paths, so as not a foot is set toward heaven, but where, and
how it should be placed is evidently showed. The Scripture is so large that it
meets with all doubts; else the Lord should not be so provident as man, who
meet in their laws with all they can conceive. Now the Lord foresees all
doubts. Further the Scripture g ues direction how to use things indifferent, 1 Timothy 4, in our common use, therefore much more in a religious. This for the
substance is held by all our sound Divines against the Papists,

3 The Lord is very strict for observing every thing commanded in his service,
without any addition or detraction in the least things; Deuteronomy. 4.2, Moses must
do all according to the pattern showed in the mount. The Lord punished Aarons
sons for offering strange fire, Vzzah for offering to stay the Ark; and he
forbids to be called Baali, Hes. 2. The Lord is a jealous God, 2 Com. and his
authority is weakened when men presume to do any thing in his worship and serve
ce: God will be the same in punishing that he is in forbidding Math. 5, the
least jo e or title shall not pass, but all must see fulfilled.

4 The least sin may not be committed to enjoy all the Ordinances of God, Romans
3. For, 1 The Lord may take men away in the act of doing evil before they come
to any good: 2 It is is a great dishonor to God to do any sin to a good
end; as though the Lord could not provide for thy soul, without sinning
against him, and s^rving Satan first. 3 It opens a gap to all superstit^on upon
a good meaning, and a gap to injust^ce in men's dealings. 4 The least sin
done, espec^ally witt^ngly and willingly, brings judgment upon the doer. 5 God
in such times when without sinning against him we cannot enjoy them, calls us
for the while to humiliation, or removing his glory from that place, calls
otherwhere to ab de, Matthew. 15: Men Men may not deny duty to these parents in
rele ving them to offer unto God, it makes the commandment of God of none
effect; which for to do, for any man whatsoever, is a most ho^r b^e sin.

5 A little leaven leavens the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5, men dote ever upon their
own dev s^s, and have ng o^c^ (...) the bounds God has set them, run fu^t^er
and further Besides, the Lord so kn^t^a h^s worship and o^dinances togeth^r,
that ^orruption of one co^rupts the ^est, and without curing, and restoring in
time, expells all Gods institutions, and leaves men nothing but their own
stuff: For men withholding the truth in injustice, are forsaken of God and
become fools, because they worship not God as God, that is, as he reveals
himself in his works and word. Leaven is a Gangreen, 2 Timothy 3.

6 The offense of the weak in the abuse of things indifferent much more
superstitious which none in earth can command; this may bring damnation unto
thy brother: Therefore that is most uncharitable, and none can command against
charity. The Mag^strate is keeper of this Law, and ought not to see it broken.
This is a sin against Christ, Woe be to him that offends the least of these
little ones, Math. 18. In this the Scripture is so large, 1 Cor. 10, and Romans
14, because men are witty, having no sense nor tenderness of conscience in
themselves, nor true love toward the sincere servants of God, and therefore no
care of their growth in grace, and prosperity of their souls, only puffed up
with knowledge and a form of Religion that they have devised, I say they are
so cunning to offend their weak brethren for which Christ dyed, under
colorable pretenses, Math. 12.23, ad 8. Divine order it self gives way to
charity toward men's bodies, much more a humane to men's souls. All power is to
edification, not destruct on.

7 All men are bound to protest and stand out against all superstitious
will worship: especially that of the Church of Rome, so as they may leave the
pure truth to posterity now in this light of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 6, Apoc, 14.4.
Saints are redeemed and bought from among men, and virgins which are not
defiled with women; that is, w th whorish and idolatrous service; Else, how do
we answer the great mercy and goodness of the Lord, if we deny not all
ungodl^nesse, Tit. 2. 2 They are guilty of former superst tions if they cast
not away all idols, 2 Command. 3 They wrong their posterity, making them e there
to drink troubled waters, or suffer persecution for standing against that wh ch
they yielded unto. 4 This is a part of that victory which Christ has gotten
for all his, over the world, that will lay claim unto it.

8 To do a th ng doubtingly, by the example of others, may bring damnat on to
the party so sin ng, Romans 14.23. Men may sin aga nst the r conscience and so
stumble and fall. 2 Men may be given over in other things to the like, to
follow men. And this holds in following any one, though never so learned. For
not many, nor prudent have the truth revealed unto them: in every age there
being some mysteries in Religion, which learning or study cannot attain to
without a special assistance, and working of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 2.

9 It is a great sin to observe pleasing Traditions, because they are
commanded by men and have a show of wisdom, Col. 2, Esa. 29. It argues men are
led only by an humane spirit, and follow corrupt nature, that studies more to
please it self and men, then to please the Lord. This gives way to all
idolatry whatsoever, Apoc. 21, the fearful have their portion with idolaters.
It is to give away the Lords right, and makes men they cannot with any zeal or
love, preach or practice the main truths of God. Our Savior Christ refused to
be subject to the Pharisees washings; a ceremony out of Gods worship, not
corrupted so by idolaters, but in other kinds commanded and appointed by God.

10 A thing indifferent having holiness put in it, cease to be indifferent,
and becomes simply evil and abominable, for then it is will worship, as the
brazen serpent: 2 God only must sanctify things Relatiuely for an holy use,
Io. 2, Mark. 11.

11 That is not a thing indifferent which the holy Scriptures has commanded or
forbidden in general or special, in any infallible example, or by
consequence: For every man is bound to the will of God, simply being made
known. That men are bound to examples it may appear: 1 Because the Holy Ghost
records them for our learning and practice, Romans 15, Christ's example is brought
to prove we must not please our se^^ es, so that divine examples bind when
they are not against a divine Rule. 2 It is the manner of Scripture to propound
diverse duties only in examples because they move much. 3 Infallible examples
were guided immediately by the holy Ghost, and therefore are sure rules for us
to follow even in circumstances; And see Math. 21, how our Savior Christ
proves by consequence the resurrection, against the Sadduces.

12 Circumstances of holy actions are commanded by the Lord in the general, as
time to meet, to hear the word and receive Sacraments, the Table to set bread
and wine upon; but in the particular, the Church may appoint what is fittest
for order and edification, from the general rules and examples of holy
Scriptures, ever knowing we are bound to follow the Traditions and Ordinances
of Christ and his Apostles, as they they have delivered them unto us, 1 Corinthians. 11.12.

13 This word only, is to be understood in every commandment; yea, in every
part of Gods worship, so as no other god may be adored save I^hovah, nor after
any other manner then he commands, Mat. 4.10, with Deuteronomy. 6.10, For to fear the
Lord and keep his commandemants is the whole duty of man. 2 Men going beyond
the bounds appointed by the Lord, sin against him. 3 Men are expressly tied to
the Law and Testimony Isa. 8. 4 Men are in darkness, and know not which way
they walk except the light of the word guide them. 2 Pet. 1.

14 Every particular Congregation assembled lawfully in the name of Christ;
that is, after his own institution, with the Officers given and appointed, has
full liberty of her self to execute Discipl ne, being independent to any other
Ecclesiastical power on earth whatsoever, Math. 18, Having reproved the
offender by 2 or 3, then tell the Church or Congregation, after which is no
higher power: Whatsoever they bind on earth is bound in heaven. Paul reproved
the Corinthians that they had not excommunicated the incestuous person.
Bu^erus, ibi totum Christi Regnum, there is Christ's whole Kingdom, neither may
any take away that which Christ has given; for upon his shoulders is the
government, and he has all authority, and will have it thus dispensed;
wherefore if Naboth would not sell the inheritance of his fathers, much less
may we sell the inheritance of Christ: Nor did Christ subject one Congregation
to another, for that step to the Popedom came in long after: And all Pastors
being equal by Gods institution, are forbidden to exercise authority one over
an other, or expect any such title as may import it, or affect preeminence,
like Diotrophes.

15 Commanding or following humane Traditions; for carnal policy, or good
intent, brings an utter ruin, and insensible judgment upon any Kingdom, Hos.
5, witness Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel, Gideon for making the Ephod.
Then men 1 grow strangers from Gods own worship: 2 To think Religion is but a
devise of man: 3 They put down the servants of the Lord: 4 They despise and
resist the Lords word brought by his servants.

16 Of all men, Ministers are bound to abhor the least relics of idolatry,
and can be least forced to the use thereof, Lev. 21.5. For first, they draw
nearest unto the Lord, who is a consuming fire, and will be sanctified in them
that come near him. 2 Ministers must lead the people in this, as in other
duties: 3 The most zealous servants of God have been ever very forward against
all superstitious monuments. 4 Magistrates and people have a special charge,
Lev. 21.5. to sanctify the Priest which was then the Lords Minister.

17 The Church has not all her light at once, nor by one instrument: Christ
comes to his people as the Sun rises, first, the day dawnes, then darkness is
quite expelled, and at last the Sun is in his strength. For, 1 the servants
of God at first, do set themselves against the great and maine corruptions of
the time, as Luther, and the former servants of God did against the foundations
of Babell. 2 The Lords manner is to proceed from lesser to greater, as may
evidently be seen in the six days work in the creation of the world. 3 All men
receive the spirit, but by measure, and for a special work. 4 That the Church
might be careful to bring forth many children to God, and fervently and
ardently to pray for the conversion of the Jews, at whose coming home
wonderful light shall appear to the whole world.

18 A whole visible Church, when it abounds with men of excellent graces for
Magistrates and Ministers, may yet omit duties commanded by the Lord, and do
many things without warrant from the Scriptures. So in all the days of the
Judges, and good Kings, they on itted keeping of the feast of Boothes, as it
appears. They sacrificed in the high places in Iehosaphats time. So the first
and purest times after Christ, began shortly in many ceremonies to be too
superstitious. For 1 much ignorance is in us all, and Gods Spirit is promised
to l^ade us no further then we do take heed to the Word: 2 In things
absolutely necessary. 3 The Church is too careless in some things, and we all
are too prone to rest before we have done our whole work.

19 Consent of Writers Orthodoxall is had, though not mentioned, where
Scripture is plain for any point. This appears, 1 because the Church is led by
the same Spirit the Scriptures were penned and inspired by. 2 God has in all
times, and ages, some witnesses to stand for him and his truth. 3 Gods children
have the same mind, and walk in one way. This consent is either in the
grounds, and common principles, though they do not come to the particulars,
because, these things were not then controverted: Or in will and heart, as if
such truths had been propounded to John Hus, and Ierom of Prage, as are now,
they would have heard and approved the voice of Christ; or, in the like of that
kind: as in all ages Gods servants have to fight against, and do evercome
some special enemies and corruptions that trouble the Church. So Wickliffe in
his time against some errors of the Romish Synagogue, Luther against more,
Calvin and Beza against more.

20 Reason enlightened, and guided by the spirit of God, and subject to the
Word, is the voice of God. This is part of the image of God, even that wisdom
which God renewes by his Spirit, Mat. 12.13, This holds, so as these cautions
be observed. 1 The Scriptures must be the ground upon which reason is built:
The Scriptures are the premises, reason draws the conclusion from thence. 2
The like reasoning appears in the Scripture. 3 That man's reason be never used
against any part of Scriptures nor experience: for either Scriptures, or
experience to the contrary, overthrows all the shows of reason. 4 So as men by
reason presume not to understand the deep things of God, that is, the mysteries
of Religion which the Scriptures reveals not, Col. 2.5 Reason must submit to
the Word, and believe the truth thereof, though we cannot conceiu the manner
how it should be, Ioh. 3.6 Reason especially in divine things, and the worship
of God, serves only as a watchman to discern what the will of God is, which is
our wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4. So then part of our faith must be built upon reason thus
informed.

It is a thing no less dangerous then odious, to meddle with Princes
authority, not that they themselves cannot endure any higher power (though
naturally all men would be as Gods) but chiefly because enchanting flatterers,
seek to bewitch Princes and themselves, being void of all conscience of duty
toward God, full of hatred toward his children, and divellish blind zeal
for superstition, and self love toward themselves, and would persuade
Princes, as Iesabel did Ahab, that because they are Kings they may do what
they please, and usurp not men's only, but Gods right too, and sit in his
Chair. Such were they that came to Ioash, 2 Chronicles. 24. Such were David's
enemies. And these men, to the intent they may bring about their divelish and
malicious intendments, pretend to be the only true hearted subjects in the
Kingdom, and that men of another disposition, though far more faithful to
God and his Magistrates, yet dissenting and severing from their errors, and
not bowing down to them, are factious and trouble the peace of the Kingdom: So
did Haman report of the Jews, Esth. 3. And that their accusation may not seem
frivolous, they bring some complaints for the breach of laws devised by
themselves, (as snares to take the righteous in) no way tending to the safety
or honor of the Prince, or the public good of the Church or Commonwealth.

Though these men abound in every age, and by their policies ra^se themselves
to high plac^s, their kingdom being of this world, and the Lord disposing and
appointing them as scourges for his own people; yet, because it is the Churches
duty to teach all the truth, and seek the good of men's souls, and of Princes
especially, (by whose means so much good is enjoyed) and that this is true
love to show the way of life, though it be by sharp reproves, therefore for
Princes good, ^f so be the wise and gracious God so appoint, that these things
may be v^iwed of them, and for the peoples good, that they may know how to carry
themselves toward Authority, I have indevoured from the rule of justice, that
appoints every man his standing and office, and bounds them with strait charge
that none shall pass the lists prescribed to man fest this point; which I
acknowledge is far fitter for the more judicious to have handled. The name of
Kings and Princes is sacred, they are styled Gods by the Lord himself, and
children of the most High; next to himself to be honored of all men:
Wherefore from the Scriptures these things following are evident concerning
them.

1 That this high calling is an Ordinance of God, immutably to continue for the
good of man till Christ restore the Kingdom to his Father, for it is moral,
and of necessity, never abrogated by God. This, all firmly hold against
Anabaptists. Secondly, for their authority, that they are highest and supreme
in both kinds, civil and ecclesiastical, this is plain ^n David, Solomon,
Josiah, who were chief, the high Priest being under them, the Prophets in like
manner. This is not doubted of, therefore no stay is to be made in it, The
only question, and thing is.

1 That Princes have authority in things Ecclesiastical to see the service of
God done in due and beseeming manner, so did David, so did Josiah. This
authority is in ordering fit circumstances in performing holy duties, as times
of meeting, and of humbling themselves by fasting etc. Princes are bound to
this: for the careless serving of God brings judgment upon the people, 1 Cor.
11.2 The more care they have for the Lord to be reverenced, the more careful
will he be of their honor, Psalm. 2.

2 Princes have authority to examine and try all canons and constitutions of
men, to see that nothing be thrust into the Church by deceivers. This
authority is in binding Ministers to the true word of God, both for matter and
manner in preaching, prayer, administering Sacraments, and execution of
discipline. Thus they are straightly bound to keep the charge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 13. The Magistrate is the keeper of both Tables, this is the treasure of
his Kingdom, that which makes him victorious against enemies, the happiness of
his own soul, and his subjects, the glory of God, and the good of posterity.

3 Princes have authority to bring all things, both Callings and Ordinances to
tho first inst tution, abrogating all former customs and pract ses which
dissent from the Law of God, and disanull such statutes, as make them to be in
force and credit. So did Josiah reform Salomons errors, and all the idolatry
set up before. This reaches to the overthrow of all Antichristian rites that
are brought into the house of God. This he is bound unto in the second
commandment. So did Moses break in peaces the golden Calfe, and the good Kings
took away the Groves and high places their ancestors had set up. Magistrates
must not suffer whorish bravery to be provoking the eyes of Gods glory. Thus
did our Savior Christ.

4 Pr^nces have authority to remove things of a good use at first, when they be
corrupted and abused, and of no use. So did Ezekiah the brazen serpent: This
reaches to all things not actually abused, but in danger to be abused, such
were Idol Temples that the good Emperor overthrew. So may the Magistates
remove Witnesses out of Baptism now b^ing unprofitable. This rule they are
bound unto, both by the second and third commandment, by that care they owe to
their subjects in preventing their hurt. It is the Lord only that must keep
others from abusing holy things; now the Lord w^ll keep only things of his own
appointment, and such as are profitable. If amongst the Israelites, an ox were
used to push and gore, and it were testified to the owner, and he did not put
him to death, if any were hurt by him, the owner was to answer either with his
life or goods, Exodus 21.29.30. So Magistrates not removing dangers are
accessory to all the falls which thousands catch thereby.

5 Princes have authority to compel all their subjects to covenant with the
Lord to serve him only according to his will. So did Joshua, Ios. 24. So did
Asa and Josiah, So did Moses and the Elders of Israel, Deu. 26.5. So did the
great King Nebuchadnezzar, that saw but one special work of the Lord, in the
delivering of his faithful servants: So did Ezekiah. And this reaches to make
Laws and public Edicts that bind all. To punish the obstinate offenders
with death, to send for men with command to come to the service of the Lord; so
did the former Pr^nces: This men are bound to, Psalm. 101. For 1 all men are
superstitious, or Atheists naturally, and therefore they need to be kept in
compass, and drawn to the means. 2 All men following their own inventions
pollute the land, and bring judgments thereupon, like the men that claue to
Baal-Peor.

6 Princes have authority to send out Ministers fitted with gifts to preach the
Word, so did Iehosaphat, The Magistrate is to s^e that the Lord may have most
glory in the publishing of salvation, that Christ's Kingdom be set up, that none
perish for want of means, Therefore are they called Gods especially.

7 Princes, in things not commanded by the Lord but left indifferent, ought
rather then otherwise to make distinction twixt their people and Idolaters,
Deuteronomy. 4.1.2. For first Gods people are the children of the Lord God to be holy
unto him in a peculiar manner. Secondly, The Lord has used so, to put many
bars twixt us and Idolaters; and then indeed things indifferent so used most
edify the Church. Thirdly, Idolaters are made hereby the sooner to consider of
their Religion. Fourthly, of all persons Ministers are most bound to abhor
the least relics of idolatry, and can be least forced to the use thereof,
Levit. 21.5, they draw nearest to the Lord that is a consuming fire. 2
Magistrates and people have a special charge to sanctify the Priest, Lev.
21.8.

8 Magistrates are bound to be so careful, that the people fall not back to
idolatry, that they are bound to remove all idolaters; especially false
Prophets and Seducers, Deuteronomy. 13.6, Deuteronomy. 17.2, Deuteronomy. 7.2, Exodus 32, Ex. 22.20,
2 King. 10, Iehu, Josias, 2 King. 23, Elias. For 1 these pervert the straight
ways of the Lord. 2 It is as great a sin, now to call upon a Saint or an
Angel, as it was to offer to an Idol. Therefore all Princes should follow
Asaes worthy example, 2 Chronicles. 1^.13. The sum of all is, that Princes may
reform abuses, and establish the pure worship of God among their people.

If it be said. This seems to be a burden and abasing to Princes, rather then
any honor, the Answer is plain, That it is the honor of the creature to
procure the honor of God. Thus do the Angels, 2 It is great honor to be
about the Lord in any place. 3 All offices are but ministeries. 4 None but the
Magistate can do this.

This Authority, though the Scriptures manifest that others executed it, yet
with all they do it with the consent of the Princes: 2 By the advice and d
rection of the Prophets of God: so did David: 3 By drawing on the people in the
demolishing of Idotry.

Thus thou see in part wherein the Magistrates Authority consists; now follows
to show wherein it is limited in the positions following.

1 The Magistrate cannot institute any thing in the outward worship of God.
None of the Kings of Judah, without extraordinary warrant did; but reform,
which is to remove superstition, and bring men to the true worship of God. 2
The Lord has commanded that men should not add, which binds directly in
outward worship. 3 The Lord has given direction for as much service as he
requires of men, and will accept, Isa. 29.13, Io. 2. What better color then to
have mony-changers, and sheep in the Temple to further and speed the service of
God, and dispatch the unacquainted Israelites that came from far. But this, (as
all humane helps not sanctified by the Lord do,) prophanes the house of God,
and therefore justly banished thence by our Savior Christ. Nothing may come
nearer the Lord then he appoints, and all that comes from man is filthy, and
defiles both the Lord, and the user.

2 Circumstances in Gods worship are not free, neither in these things may
Princes command what they please, 1 Chronicles. 28.19. Solomon has a pattern of the
Temple, and direction for the place, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. So for the ordering of men
to these and these offices: Because all things being inexpedient edify not,
Acts 1, Acts 6, 1 Corinthians. 10.

3 The Princes commanding of a thing indifferent, is no sufficient ground for
the usage of it in the service of God. For first, all things must be sanctified
by the Word, which shows the right use of these things. Also Princes commands
in things indifferent in many cases, are not to be obeyed. As 1 if the party
cannot be resolved of the lawfulness of them, then the Lord forbids to use
them. 2 If they hurt or destroy: for all power is for the good of others. 3
Though they be indifferent in themselves, yet having been monuments of
Idolatry, or being now abused by Idolaters in state of divine worship, Hes. 2.
4 When they are commanded for ill ends, as to be signs of the new covenant of
grace: for men may not ordain new signs of the covenant of grace.

4 Princes may not appoint significant ceremonies, the second commandment
forbids it, Ezech. 43.8, These are parts of Gods outward worship, for they are
religious actions: 2 They lessen the esteem of Gods own Ordinances: 3 There is
no such example in the whole Scripture of any holy Prince that did any such
thing. 4 Christ is the only Teacher of his Church, therefore all doctrins and
ceremonies, not appointed by him, are to be rejected; for we are bound to hear
his voice only. 5 As these abound, so has the Lord withdrawn his presence
from the visible Church, Ezech. 43.8. 6 The Lord accounts nothing his, but what
he appoints. 7 The will of God only makes things acceptable to him, and
profitable to the Church.

5 Princes have not power to bind the conscience, Isa. 33.21, Iam. 4.12. For 1
they cannot make a thing simply evil. 2 They cannot discern nor punish the
inner man; that is only the privilege of the Lord. 3 Christians are not
servants of men, but only of Christ, that has purchased his right over the^
dearer then any creature is able to do. To bind the conscience is properly to
enact such laws as bind all men simply, both inwardly and outwardly, at all
times, and in all places to obedience, as to things good in their own nature,
under pain of eternal damnation. Nevertheless understand this without any
prejudice to the Magistrates authority, that all men are bound for conscience
to obey Magistrates in their lawful commands, not for conscience to him, but to
Gods ordinance and commandment, and the common good intended in political
laws, which charity binds unto.

6 No Magistrate can exempt from obedience to the Lord. Therefore none can bind
wherein God either simply will have us free, Act. 15, or wherein he has bound
us before otherwise by his word, or example recorded for our direction, wherein
Scripture is not plain in any rule: For then examples bind, Act. 4, Col. 2.
Magistrates are but servants of the Lord, therefore cannot exempt from obedience
to him. 2 Men cannot save us from the wrath of God, therefore cannot bind
against God. 3 Th^s is to set up another God, when men's commands are observed
against Gods. It is foolishness therefore to imagine, because the Magistrate
commands, men may do such things as are not justifiable in the sight of the
Lord, and think that the sin lies only upon the Magistrate, and that they are
free; for it is but a cloak worse then that of Adam, the woman gave it me, and
therefore I eat, what duty the Lord injoynes men, or what sin he forb^ds, no man
can dispense w^thall.

7 No man can exclude any officer, or debar the execution of callings appointed
and enjoined by the Lord Christ, which is King of his Chrch, Math. 28.19.20.
For, 1 No calling is appointed by Christ, but it is a member and part of the
Body, and it is dangerous to lame or maym his Spouse. 2 These are the gifts
which the Lord bestows upon his beloved, and to rob her of them, is a kind of
sacriledg. 3 These all further the Kingdom of Christ and his glory, and the
good of men. Who dare therefore, or can hinder, or take away any of these? 4
This is to vaunt themselves as God, like Antichrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Wherefore a
common error is detected plainly, to wit, when men imagine Christian
Magistrates may put down whom Christ has set up. Of such, let all men beware;
for they seek themselves and not the Lord, and to please men; and with all hurt
both Commanders and Obeyers.

8 Princes have no authority to give to one calling that which the Lord has
appropriated to another; that which is the Minister, to give to the Magistrate;
nor the Magistrates to the Minister. These are severed of the Lord, and
therefore cannot be conjoined by man, Vzzah the King, which is the head, might
not take to himself the office of the Priest, much less give it to others.
This is stealth, Romans 12. Our Savior Christ would not take the office of a
Judge upon him. Why is this written but to teach, that though men have gifts to
discharge two such callings, yet they may not conjoyn them?

9 Princes are simply prohibited from making any mixture of Religion even in
small matters, Deuteronomy. 12.2.3.4, Lev. 19.19. For 1 it is a dishonor to the Lord
to borrow fio^ Idolaters. 2 Every humane device abused by Idolaters is
accursed, and men may not convert it to the worship of God.

10 Princes must stay where the Lord bids stay, till they have particular
direction from the Lord what to do further, 1 Samuel 14. It was Saul's sin that
went further then he should. If men will do but so much as the Lord enjoins,
they will never do more. Also it is dangerous, especially for Magistrates to
transgress the bounds prefixed them.

11 The sum of all is, that a Christian Magistrate cannot alter the outward
worship of God, Deuteronomy, 12. This was Ieroboams sin, it was Ahaz sin, it was
Manasses sin, the sin of the false Apostles Col. 2. For when the Lord will have
any thing altered, he makes it known extraord^narily to his servants. N^^ther
is this any disparagement to Princes authority, that they cannot enact and
injoyne any of these things; for th^s is the right of God, who in this kind,
has committed all authority to Christ only, upon whose shoulder the
government is; in these things Princes may punish Heretics, and are bound to
deal severely with such as have made them, and others, even the Israel of God
to sin, and so bring many plagues upon themselves and their Kingdom, for
presumption in these sins. See how the Lord punished Saul for daring but to
sacrifice to the true God a right sacrifice, before Samuel came, ^t lost him his
Kingdom. What is this written for, but to teach us, that Kings who will usurp
upon Gods right, the Lord will make them no Kings? For he spoils them that
spoil him. How dealt the Lord with Vzzah for presuming upon the Priests
office? Did not leprosy cleave unto him for ever, for his proud presumption in
breaking the bounds God appoint^d? Why was Ioash puni^^ed for hearkening to his
Pr^nces, and turning from the stra^ght way of the Lord, but to teach men, that
though they think the State will not bear another course, then superstition
and men's invention hatched, yeeld^ng thereunto, they shall loose more by
declining, then possibly they can by withstand ng corrupt on? What did the Lord
to Manasses for setting up himself in the house of God? And has not th^s sin
chiefly overthrown the Roman Emp^re, and brought the Turk in amongst us,
because Princes g^ue the beast their authority, suffering him to appoint and
execute what laws he would, though never so much derogatory to the Lords own
right?

Against th^^ sin the Lord manifests his anger soon, either threatening by his
Proph^ts spir tuall judgen ents in loosing their respect, w^thin a while
poverty and weakness, l^ke sickness to the body, to se^z upon the Kingdom.
Wherefore be wise o ye Princes, and learned ye Judges of the earth, to
discern, not what best likes us, and brings most liberty. This they, Psalm. 2.2,
did well enough discern and chu^e: nor what has been of some continuance, for
E^rours are ancient, and Tares are sown when men sleep: nor what is b^st
agreeable to humane w^s^dome, or grounds of Machivilian policy: That is earthly
wisdom and sensual, the bane of the Church: But what is best pleasing unto
the Lord. Discern who seek themselves and who Christ, who are the servants of
God, and who worship Baal. And serve the Lord in reverence, kissing the Son,
lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way of your desires. Nource up no
longer such cruel children as destroy their parents, and take all in time to
themselves, as all do to whom Princes give more then they should. Nource the
Church, and be as rain to the new mown field, refreshing the righteous of the
land, that many souls may bless you.

SECTION III.
HAving hitherto treated of some main grounds of the Magistrates authority,
the pillar of arbitrary government. It remains to come to the controversy
concerning the persons by whom the Church is to be governed. In handling
whereof, I desire the Christian Reader, well to weigh the grounds against the
form so much extolled now a days.

I know there are three special things that make men, otherwise not
evill-minded, qu^te rej^^t our cause: which he that w^ll j^dge ^^ght of, must
lay aside, else he shall b^^ bl^nd^d, so as he cannot d^scern the truth.

1 The first is long and ancient custom in the Church of Christ, wh ch to many
is a law stand^ng in great force. For th^s first po^nt know, there is no
prescription against the King, much less against the King or heaven; and even
the best Churches have had bad customs (w^tnesse the Patr^a^kes Polligamy) in
do^ng evil, and the omission of the feast of Boothes, which was not kept from
Ieshua till Josiah. Therefore thou must not so look what this or that man that
were before thee, have done, as what Christ the ancient of dares has commanded
thee to do. And the longer by any forged evidence his right has been kept
from him, the more should every one strive in his place, to set him in
posses^^on again.

2 A great Obstacle is the allowance of the Magistrate of this government;
therefore such as stand aga nst this form seem to derogate from Pr nc^s
authority. For that then, though I know t dangerous to meddle w th ^uch
persons, yet the controversy being tw^xt God and man, who fears not the Lord
more then all men? Therefore this must firmly be held ever: That the best
Princes are subject to command and appoint things unlawful and hurtful to the
people. Thus did David in numbering of the people, thus Salom^n. 2 The
Magistrate is overborn with shows of reason, as though this were the most
profitable form. So the sin lies heavy upon them that persuade him. 3 They
that are the Defendants far more incroach upon the Magistrates right then we
do. As, God willing^^ all be showed in the things that follow hereafter. 4
Read in Hos. 5, the great sin of the Is^a^lites for following the command of
the Prince in subjecting themselves to the Trad tions then in force. For
Magistrates, as they have all authority from the God of heaven, so ought they
and all others to obey absolutely, so far as may stand with his good pleasure.
Men must not like flattering Athiests, imagine that Princes commands, e^ther
justify evil, or abolish the nature of that which is good.

A third let is old Adam, yet raign^ng in men, which is the greatest enemy to
the Kingdom of Christ; and in this, ^gnorance in many makes them stand for the
present government, dreaming that we would have a strange confusion in the
Church of Christ; not conceiving what order was established in the Apostles
time, and that this order now in place, keeps out the order which the Lord
himself has established.

Therefore, read first I beseech you brethren, and then judge righteous
judgment: we would have Christ reign over all, and each keep in that compass
he has appointed, doing their several offices, without intermedling with
strange businesses, which weaken and unfit them for the Churches service. A
second argument of corrupt nature is carnal desire of liberty, which is the
strongest adversary to beat down and vanquish. For men have ever resolved to
break the bonds of Christ, and not to have him reign over them. This makes many
to rage and blaspheme the contrary form to these times, because they are like
untamed heyfers that cannot bear the yoke of Christ. This should rather
persuade against this present form of government, since men naturally are
enemies to God, and cannot brook the Ordinances rightly to be administered: and
s^condly that to suffer men to have their own will, is a thing most dangerous
to them, as to the Israelites in choosing their King, or obtaining Quails. Oh
consider, thou man, that art called a Christian, how thy disobedient life
causes the way of God to be evil spoken of, and so thou layest stumbling
blocks before Papists and Turks, and bring fearful woes upon thy self.
This comes in part for want of strict discipline: and therefore be content to
deny thy self, and fall not upon Christ. And o ye that sit in the throne of
God, make way that Christ this King of glory may come in, and set up his throne
amongst us outwardly.

Many objections against this truth are brought, especially the antiquity of
Diocesan Bishops, which have been even since the Apostles times: the seven
Angels, Rev. 2.3, they say were Diocesan Bishops, and Histories mention the
being and continuance of them in the Church. To this it is, and may be truly
answered. That there are diverse kinds of Bishops. 1 Apostolical, which only
are parishionall, these were Pastors, Teachers and Elders. 2 Such as were
Pastors only, though over many Churches, such were the Bishops of the
Primitive times. 3 Diocesan Bishops which came in afterward, and so they rose
till they came to the Popedom. That Diocesan Bishops were in the Apostles
times, it wants all show of reason, as is proved sufficiently before. For that
out of Rev. 2. and 3, I refer the Reader to the discourse betwixt Mr. Downam,
and the Answerer of h^s Sermon. Only consider, that cannot possibly be meant
of Diocesan Bishops. For Acts 20, Paul left none such, but there all Elders are
Bishops. 2 All Ministers are Angels, therefore it cannot be meant of Diocesan
Bishops. 3 It is against all h^istorie, both Divine and Ecclesiastical to
bring in any such consoc ation of Churches, witness the Centuries. 4 The Lord,
if there had been diverse Congregations in those places would have spoken, as
Paul does Gal. 1, To the Churches of Galatia; to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, etc.

1 It may be demanded how these could creep into the Church, and men never espy
them? Answ. Those first times were very troublesome, which cunning and
deceitful men make their advantage, for they fish in troubl^d waters best of
all.

2 In Cities there was but one Congreg^t^on when the churches were first
planted, and so but one Pastor, which was called Bishop only; which when the
Church increased and more congregations were established, yet continued his
careful oversight (which was then his Bishopric) not so much for desire of
preeminence, as either of ignorance of his duty, in this kind, or provident
care and respect such had of their brethren.

3 Men gave reason and ca^nall policy too great rule both in ceremonies and
discipline, and the Church then laboring with content^ons, thought that the
appointing of one over the rest, would be a means to still all, and keep them
in order.

4 Men being chosen at first as arbitrators rather then Judges; for the
excellency of their graces, and deserts to the Church, then for any authority
of their places; Others following in the same seats, of more ambitious spirits,
though inferior in gifts, did challenge superior^ty by a kind of succession.

5 The dignity of the Cities, and liberallity of the first Emperors, did much
help forward this business, not intending any hurt: For the mystery of
iniquity did work cunningly and invisibly.

Having removed out of thy mind, what blinds many an eye, now a little
consider what grounds the Scripture affoords against this form of government.
And first that, Luke 22.24.25.26, wh^re the Disciples contending who should be
greatest, our Savior remoues this conce^t, by showing them plainly they strove
for that their condition was not capable of. For the kings of the Gentiles and
their officers, have both t^mporall authority and great Titles fitting their
estate, But you shall have neither such authority one over another, nor such
titles: but he that is greatest in gifts and respect, let him arrogate no more
over his brethren then if he were the least. This place is plain, not only
against ambition, but superiority in degrees, authority and titles. 1 Because
it is made a property incommunicable of Princes and Civil Magistrates to have
such authority. 2 Because Christ's Kingdom must not be like the kingdoms of
earthly Princes, but like Christ conversing amongst his scholars. In the 27
verse. he shows directly though we were masters, yet we should be amongst them
that are under us, as if we were servants. The first part therefore shows
their foolishness in desiring that which could not be given them, which was
indeed ambition: The other reproues their desire of commanding and Lording over
their fellows.

2 The second Argument against Lord ruling Diocesan Bishops is from Acts 20.28,
where the Apostle shows the office and nature of an Apostolical Bishop, which
is a person set over a flock by the Holy Ghost, to feed that Congregation of
Christ with others: Here by feeding according to the usual manner of
Scripture Discipline is meant too, as may be gathered from Ezech. 34, and Ioh.
20. In which places feeding extends to all Ministerial duties, whereby the
good and salvat on of the flock may be procured. This place proves, 1 that
there should not be one alone, but many, which have the care of the same flock.
2 That they are all bound to tend the flock, exercising discipline to the same;
for the Apostle speaks to all. 3 Though there be difference in respect of the
dispensation of their Ministry, yet they are alike in respect of the
generallity and extent of their charge, secondly, in that all are to concur
and have their several gifts and diligence employed both in doctrine and
discipline. 1 This place upon this ground quite overthrows Diocesan ruling
Bishops, because they are alone. 2 They have no pa t cular flock, and so by
consequence are no Ministers. 3 They challenge sole jurisdiction to themselves
and their officers, debarring all others from meddling.

3 A third place of Scripture 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3, Elders are to be (...) overseeing
the state of the flock over which they are. If therefore the Elder and Bishop
be all one, and that the Lord has put no d^fference b^twixt them, then there
ought not to be one alone, which either is to arrogate the name or nature of
Bishop. This place is strengthened from the place forealledged Act. 20, where
the Elders are first called Presbyteri, afterward Episcopi: This is plain in
Tit. 1.5, compared with the 7 verse. where Elder and B^s^op are all one. Where
God has appointed many to one common business, man may not restrain it to
one. This is to add to one, and dimin^^h from others, both which bring c^^ses
upon the doers.

4 Phillip. 1, There were diverse Bishops in one Cit^e, therefore in those times
one alone had not any such Diocesan Bishopric, as ours claym. All that were
exercised in any Ministerial function, or employed for government, are saluted
by the name of Bishops: Therefore it is plain, one alone was not Bishop, nor
one more then another; By which may be showed plainly, that the Angel Revel.
2, signifies the whole body of the Ministry: For Metaphorical places must be
expounded by plain places. So Psalm. 34.8, and 79.2, and in many other places.

5 Ephesians. 4.11, 1 Timothy 3.1, where the Apostie describes the Ministers and
Officers of Christ, he has not mentioned any such one which should have the
superiority and jurisdiction, which proves firmly there ought to be none such:
for no work, no office. Now the holy Ghost has not assigned any such work to
any. 2 The Holy Ghost describes most exactly the office of the high Priest,
and his garments apart from the ordinary Priests: So he would now, if there
had been any such order in them. 3, 1 Timothy 3, H^e describes the o^lice of
Deacons and Widows and would he not these? 4 The Apostle salutes in his
Epistles all Orders, Phil. 1.1, and there is no mention of a Diocesan Bishop.

6 Argum. Discipline is in the hands of the Ministers and Elders, and whole
Church, Math. 18. Therefore not in one man's hands. This place is firm; for the
Church is made the highest to which the last appeal is, and that which rents
and severs corrupt members, from the body; This therefore cannot be one man: For
Ecclesia ever signifies a company, and number coming together. All these
places are firm, and mainf^^^ plainly the unlawfulness of any Diocesan Bishop.

Now follow some reasons proving the same truth, that there ought not to be
Diocesan Bishops.

Reas. 1. Christ measures out gifts to all, according to the place and office
they sustain and are to discharge. But no man has gifts sufficient now to
dischage this great and weighty calling, to execute discipline over a whole
Province. That this is plain appears, in that the Apostles themselves appointed
in every Congregation Discipline to be executed, and did not arrogate authority
over the Churches, but gave charge that each Congregation should execute
discipline it self. 2 It as hard, if not more difficult, to execute
discipline, as to feed all a Diocese or Province, by teaching: But who dare
arrogate so much to himself? 3 Who is there now a days, that has an hundred
times more sufficiency then an able Minister? which he must have by
proportion, having so many charges under.

2 It is not lawful for man to devise a calling and office which excludes any
Ordinance, and Calling appointed by the Lord, for that never comes from heaven:
But Diocesan Bishops exclude Elders that are appointed by the Lord, as may
appear, 1 Timothy 5.17, and ^ha^ more fully hereafter (God willing) be showed.

3 If Diocesan Bishops were from God they should have place in the Church
according to the quality of the work wherein they are exerc sed, and for which
they are chiefly instituted: But they have no place, according to the work of
Discipline, which is infe^^our to the M^nistery of the word, as serving only
to make it effectual; whereas they hold a place above the most painful
Ministers of the Word.

4 Appointing Diocesan Bishops, argues Christ Jesus of want of providence, as
though he had not foreseen enough what is needful and fitting for his Church
in all times: whereas he is the wisdom of the Father, and one that sees all
things in an instant with their circumstances; therefore could not but see what
dissension would arise in his Church after his departure. 2 It argues Christ of
want of power, as though Christ could not sufficiently procure the weal of his
Church by his own means, except men's device, and policy concurred with all.

5 It is unlawful for carnal policy to devise any calling, and place it above
the calling of God. This is like Ahaz his Altar, with the Altar of the Lord:
But Diocesan Bishops are merely a fruit of carnal policy, and placed above
Pastors, Teachers and Elders, which are appointed of the Lord. This Argument is
firm, for things of Divine Institution, are most excellent, and most
necessary; therefore ought to keep their place, and order above all men's best
inventions.

6 Any new government, where the Lord has set a former, is a dispising of the
Lord, because he can govern without it, ^ Sam. 8.7. If in the Commonwealth, as
well in the Church.

7 Setting up this calling, robbes the Ministers of their calling and being,
therefore it is unlawful: For Ministers by reason of Diocesan Bishops, are not
rightly introduced, they can not come in by the means and way Christ has
appointed, that is, by the election of the people etc. And they must be no
further nor longer Ministers then they are licensed by them; As much therefore
(as Gregory spoke of universal Bishops) as is given to these, so much is taken
away from the true and lawful Ministers of God.

8 It is a horrible and crying sin to subject the sons of God and members of
Christ, to any one man in spiritual discipline: what then is it to subject the
Ambassadors of Christ that are sent by the Lord, and make themselue, when
their Master has given the^ liberty, and freedom from such? This argument is
firm, because all Ministers are servants of the Church, not Lords over the
heritage of Christ. This is therefore to encroach upon Christ's right.

9 It is great presumption to continue this form of government, which has been
so hurtful to the Church already. Is not th^s to tempt God? will not the burnt
child dread the fire? Cannot long experience of former and latter times,
procure so much at our hands as that we should prefer the Lords own
Ordinance before men's inventions?

10 New Lords, new laws: Altering the Governors has ^t not altered and
changed the form and manner of governing and rules and laws to be observed in
discipline: so that Scriptures are not now in such request, but men must make
Canons of their own, thereby to hold the people in subjection.

11 No new Lord spiritual but he claymes further authority then the Lord has
given to any man on earth. So has the Pope, so do all that exercise Lordship
in the Church of Christ: Because when men have once past the bounds, they run
further: as that authority Christ gives, and the Scripture warrants, is not
sufficient to ^pho^d their kingdom withal, so do these claim, not only
general subjection, and an oath of car^on call ob^d^ence both of Ministers and
people, which is great usurpation: but take further authority to appoint and
institute teaching ceremonies to stir up the dull mind of man, to speak in
their own phrase.

12 They that erect another strange government, withdraw their hearts from
Christ, and seek not so carefully to be taught by him, but rest like the
Israelites in their King. This we see generally amongst us; as it was, and is
in Popery, men trust others, themselves meanwhile ignorant and secure. So do
our ignorant; nay people more prudent to, trust the Bishops, as they are
called, and never search the Scriptures then selves, to know such things, as
nearly concern them, nor will credit the truth it self preached by others,
that are the faithful Ambassadors of Christ, because of the supposed learning
and knowledge in these men. This argument is sound, because all occasions of
sin, and especially idols, and corrivals with Christ are to be removed.

13 Christ promises his presence equally to every Congregation; therefore none
may lay claym to have such authority, as our Ordinaries challenge: for where
there is no special promise, there is neither privilege nor authority. Now
Ordinaries have no special promises made them.

14 No man ought to take any thing upon him, except it be given him from
heaven: these men have it from the earth, Io. 3.

15 Donation of Princes is no sufficient ground for men to exercise authority
over their fellows: 1 Because it is directly against Christ's commandment; 2
Christ though he were the Son of God, yet had both an immediate voice from
heaven to consecrate him, and the Word to prove his calling by: So John
Baptist, which examples bind us to have a direct word for every calling
brought into the Church.

In a word, how can men answer soundly and thoroughly, Popish arguments for
Primacy, or overthrow that opinion which has overthrown more souls, then any
heresy, or heathenish dream ever in the world has done; if they admit this
superiority of Bishops over Diocesses? Wherefore in this respect I am persuaded,
Christian Reader, thou do easily see, that the Ministers that stand out
against this, do but that which thou and I ought to do, striving for Christ's
Kingdom, and Privileges, and Laws to be kept entire to himself. And as his
Prophetical and Priestly offices, have been suffered for; so must men suffer
for this, and by suffering they shall prevail.

Why therefore do any speak against men in this kind? since they do it in
love to Christ, for the good of the Church, s^ewing all due respect to the
Magistrate, notwithstanding in this they dissent from him, procuring the peace
of the Commonwealth, as much as any in their places.

SECTION IIII.
NOw thou see, Christ an Reader, the unlawfulness of Diocesan Bishops in the
Church of Christ, because they exercise a spiritual authority, without any
license from Christ the King of his Church, to whom all authority is committed,
and given by the Father, and from whom all that are lawful and profitable to
the Church, receive their installing. From hence then any one may gather the
nullity of a Diocesan Church, which is a little to be stood upon, before we
come to the things following a Diocesan Bishop. And first to show what we
understand by it for our better proceeding. By Diocesan Church I understand the
conjoyning of many Congregations under one man's government, commonly called the
Bishop of the Diocese. That this is plainly diverse from; nay, contrary to the
constitutions of the Church of the Apostles, it may appear by these grounds
following.

1 Neither Christ nor his Apostles left any such canons for ordering of the
church: which certainly they would not have omitted, if they had judged this
form best and fitting: For they set down both by precept and example what
respect and regard is due to other Churches; much more would they have set down
what respect men owe to their Diocesan. And particularizing the duties of
servants to their Masters, and people to their Ministers. Did they not add
some precepts how Minister and People should obey their Ordinary? This argument
holds firmly, especially considering the Apostle John survived all the other
Apostles; who saw the state of the Congregations, and wrote the prophecy of
the future estate of the Church, what it should suffer. Without question if
there had been any such innovation, he would have mentioned it.

2 Our Savior Christ Mat. 18, from the reproof of one or two, referres it to
the Congregation, not to a Diocesan Bishop, and ratifies in heaven what they
do in his name he^re on earth: If they could produce any such promise, and
direction for their Diocesan Bishops, we would with all willingness subject
unto them; for we stand out for Christ, not for our selves.

3 The Apostles wrote unto the Churches as Parishionall, not Diocesan Gal. 1.2,
to the Churches of Galatia, 1 Pet. 5.2, which argues that ^n these days they
were free and entire, not having such dependence of an other by bond and duty.

4 Every Congregation had power to exercise all discipline; to elect their own
officers, and to depose, as occasion and necessity required, 1 Cor. 5, Romans 16,
Cenchrea had her Deacon, and was a Church, Ioh. epist. 3, Acts 14.

5 The Apostle John reproved Diotrephes that affected superiority 3 epist. and
that he cast out such as the Church would have received, or rete^ned.

6 There is no such title given to any in all the Scriptures as argue they had
any sovereignty or rule over other Congregations: Now titles are Symbola rerum,
notes and evidences of things signified by them, and the Scripture gives each
other for the purpose and office fitting titles.

7 It was in use in the times of the primitive Church, as both the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Ecclesiastical history witness, that one Church should help
an other in all duties, both in soul and body, without exercising authority
one over another: so did Jerusalem, Antioch, and Samaria. When they doubted in
like manner of any question, if private answer, could not satisfy public
Synods were appointed, Act. 15, other consociation then this, the Church knew
none, till at least three or four hundred years after Christ, neither can an
Author of credit be brought to the contrary, as witness Centuriae
Magdeburgenses.

Now as this Diocesan Church has no ground in Scriptures, nor in antiquity,
till things began to decline, so neither can it have any being in true reason,
as may appear by these Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because whole Christ is where his Word is preached and Sacraments
administered. There is his whole Kingdom. This is Bucers Argument to prove
Discipline in every Congregation, and not to have them depend one upon an
other: in every Congregation there is the Word and Sacraments.

2 It is most fit in all sense, that the Ministers which teach should also
exercise Discipline, as those which have most exact knowledge of the persons
amongst whom they live: Secondly, as they that are to give account for the
people: And thirdly, that preach to them, and therefore are to govern the^
outwardly, which is less then to preach. Fourthly, as they that are hereby to
maintain there respect and place by the sword which the Lord has given them.

3 This conceit raised up by the Pope, and partly holds him up till this day.
For if there may be Diocesan Churches, why not universal? Both spr^ng and are
grounded upon the same sandy foundation of carnal policy, and from time to
time still nourished by Ambition. Why do men then take the one, being alike,
and leave the other?

4 This excludes that holy communion which every Congregation might have one
with an other, as it was in the Primitive times; when they sent to the
neighbor Churches, who were not slack either to send Ministers or letters,
whereby they might be informed, and receive satisfaction in all doubts: whereas
now many Churches are bound to one man's pleasure and arbitrament, whom by his
definitive sentence determining matters, (though never so unrighteously) men
are bound to obey as their ordinary, without further ado.

5 The Lord was wont, howsoever the Apostles and Prophets were ceased, yet to
raise up men of excellent gifts and graces, who like the Judges amongst the
Israelites with their light, after a sort directed the whole Church; not by any
authority: but as the Modern Divines, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, P. Martyr, and the
rest; by manifesting the good will of the Lord. Now men by bringing in this
devise of theirs, have stopped the course of Gods blessing, as much as in them
lies.

6 This has brought the people to exceeding trouble, bondage, and costs, it
brings in a rabble of Appa^ators, that sell sin, and procure pardons for
others: which doings, and officers, with the Proctors and the rest, what
blemish are they to our Protestant reformed Churches? To conclude all with that
place before mentioned, Acts 20, Ministers are to take heed to all their Flock,
which these cannot do. Secondly, they must be set over the flock by the Holy
Ghost: Now what he does, he does by the Word, which is flat against these,
therefore there is no Diocesan Church. Thirdly, neither can whole Diocesses and
Provinces come together to hear their Shepherds and Pastors, which were fit:
whereas thus in all their life many neither see nor know him that pretends to be
over them as their Bishop.

7 Is not this a tying of the Church to places and persons, to bind men to
Bishops seas, like that sea of Rome?

Wherefore, Brethren, ye that have been deceived, think not scorn to learn from
one inferior far in gifts, in these things: But hearken to the Lord, that it
may go well with you. You see you have no evidence for these places, but
prescription and possession, which though with men they may seem good, yet with
the Lord, they are nothing: he respects not custom, nor long continuance of
time, but the right, and that which was from the beginning. Wherefore look, as
the men that had married them wives of the heathens at Nehemiaes command, put
them away: so since you have undertaken a strange charge, such as the Lord
forbids, dare not to continue not. He that will forsake father and mother,
house and lands for Christ's names sake, shall receive an hundred fold even in
this life, besides assurance of heaven. A great reward is in this promise of
God, and should be valued by you more worth then all the present honors and
possessions you are endowed by man with all. Wherefore consider what an offer
the Lord makes to buy your places of you, whereas he might throw you out as
usurpers: at a dear rate, he offers an 100 fold. If men should make but such
an offer that were well able to perform it, and thereto bind themselves, would
not your hearts be glad like the Levite, who having served Micah, being offered
a great place, to be Priest to the Tribe of Dan, made no question? Why, think
brethren, God is most true, and all-sufficient, and he that writes this has
experience of it, wherefore neglect not such great kindness of the Lord offered
unto you. And look as David said to the men of I^dah. Why are ye last to bring
home the King? so may I say unto you, why are ye so backward to bring Christ
into his Kingdom? As your places were the means to set up Antichrist in his
Throne; so let your voluntary forsaking of them be a means to pull him down.
Oh think what a blow it would give him, and how it would shake and overthrow
the very foundation of his house. You know not how many might be won by this:
you know well Sampson, that he might be avenged on the Lords enemies, laid
down his life. So, much more, should ye part with your state and pomp, which
is but vanity, and will fade like as the grass and flower of the field. You
know one of your Predecessors, who left off his Bishopric, as too heavy a
burden for him. How should your names flourish in all after ages? Whereas if you
do continue, you make your selves guilty of the sins committed in and by
those callings before. You shall fulfill the measure of your iniquity: you
shall corrupt other Nations for a while, as the Pope did, and then know for a
certainty, that either you shall be given over as dogs, as he has done the
beast of Rome, or else the hand of the Lord will be in terrible manner against
you. You cannot but discern how unprofitable; nay, how hurtsome you have been
unto the Church of God, if you well consider but the present times. Oh let not
coveteousnesse or ambition make you stop your ears, or be like the
stiffenecked Jews, that gnasht their teeth at the sharp reproof that Stephen
gave them. But hearken to me, that God may hearken to you. Take these things
from love in him that writes, who seeks your good, and having begged it at the
hands of the Lord, hopes at least in some to see it come to pass.

SECTION V.
FRom that jurisdiction which these men claim, we come now to their temporal
sword, the best weapon to defend a bad cause withal. In handling whereof we
shall be the more sparing; because it is both more evident to all, and more
largely stood upon by others. Herein the

1 Ground is our Saviour^. Refusing to devide the inheritance betwixt two
brethren, who was all-sufficient, because it was without the compass of his
calling, to leave an example to his Ministers to the end of the world what to
do. Though it may seem profitable, and a great means of good, as this might,
yet it proves contrary, for things prove not according to man's purposing, and
intendment of them, but to the Lords institution, and appointing of them.

2 Ground, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, Ioh. 18.36, not an external
kingdom, as learned Whitakers observes against Bellarmine, but internal. These
differences a^^ assigned by him, 1 outward Kingdoms have certain and visible
Kings, Christ is a heavenly King, acknowledged not seen by the eyes. 2 in
external Kingdoms subjects a^^ governed civilly, Christ governes his
spiritually. 3 External Kingdoms are grounded and upheld by power, riches,
armies, and outward succession, but Christ preserues his Kingdom by a secret
power and force. 4 Outward Kings are ordained for outward benefits of this
present life, Christ's kingdom is in spirit and inward blessings: Wherefore
Christ's Kingdom should endure, ^f all Princes in the world be against it. As ^s
there affirmed ^n h s first Question, Whether the government of the Church be
Monarchical?

3 Our Savior Christ directly affirms, that he sent his Disciples as he was
sent, being baptized with the spirit, and so the Apostles before they went
their embassage, were sent to preach, and therefore were to rule with the power
of the spirit, not by any external o^ humane power.

4 Our Savior forbids his disciples to exercise authority over one an other,
as Kings and Princes, as is showed before This place is firm against the
temporal sword, so alleged by Mr. Whitakers. What has a Bishop to do with
Empire or government, a Priest with a Scepter? Christ leaves no such power;
nay, plainly forbids, they should be temporal Princes. This is the voice of
the spirit of God.

5 The Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 2, says, No man that goes a warfare entangleth
himself with the businesses of this life, that he might please him that has
chosen him for a Soldier: whence it is plain, every man is bound to attend on
that office, and bend himself thereunto, which the Lord has assigned him. 2.
That men that do not so, cannot nor do please the Lord; therefore to entangle
themselves with the business of this life, is against all heavenly wisdom.

6 1 Pet. 5.3, Ministers are charged not to rule over the heritage of the Lord:
To which place I doubt not, but if the adversaries had the like for them,
against Elders, they would not doubt to throtle that Ordinance of God. If any
say, this place cannot be meant of temporal authority, because they could not
have it in those times, Princes being so adverse to them. To this, the answer
is easy: first, the Apostle wrote this for us also that should come afterward:
secondly, then they might affect it, and seek it, and over the Church after a
sort usurp it, the people standing ^n such awe of the Ministers in those times.
And there is in this place an excellent motive to dissuade from Lording ^t over
the people, for they are the inhe^^tance of God and of Christ, and it is
dangerous to challenge dominion over his possession. 2 There is as excellent a
way frewed whereby they might draw on the people, and b^^ter then by
compulsion, that is by g^ving good example unto them, which by taking th^s upon
them, is left off.

7 The Apostles would not leave their calling of the Ministry of the Word to
provide for the poor, which is a duty very necessary in it self: therefore
who is he that makes conscience of profiting the people, and the discharge of
his Ministry, that dares offer to take this charge upon him.

Besides these plain grounds, plain reason evinceth the unlawfulness hereof,
For,

Reas. 1. To undertake such another calling, as makes a man unfit for each, is
merely unlawful and ^nprofit^bl^: herein he wrongs the Church and
Commonwealth. So do th^se men, For who is sufficient for these things? says
the Apostle, speaking of the Min^stery. And if these be a burden great enough
for any of the greatest gifts to go under: what if an other be laid upon the
same man's shoulders? Sure he can carry neither, but must n^cessarily e^ther
cast off the former, or quite sincke under both.

2 It wrongeth Christ, as though he could not, or would not defend his Church,
except his servants, like Peter, should fight for him, with an outward sword.
Cannot he stir up Magistrates, and the spirit of prudence, to be as nursing
Fathers, to his Church.

3 This makes the Ordinances of Christ, Excommunication, and other Censures, to
be of none effect nor regard, when they add such corporal punishments
themselus. This is plain; for who respects their Excommunications now a days.

4 This was not seen in the Church, till past 300 years.

Wherefore, as our Savior said to Peter: Put up thy sword, he that takes the
sword shall perish with the sword; so let all men be wise and learn well to use
the sword of the spirit against their own pride and ambition, and the sins of
the times in others, and no doubt they w^ll soon leave off that temporal sword.
What that reverend Whitakers speaks to the Bishop of Rome, That if they had any
spark or drop of piety and Rel gion, they would leave this sword. So say I to
you brethren, (disda^n not what was spoken by him) for Religions sake leave
this to the civ^ll Magistrate, whose it s: Else know, you take from Caesar, and
the State, that which neither is nor can be yours. And though you th nk, l^ke
Peter, to smite your enemies with this sword, yet you profit not Christ, nor
w^ll he b^ thus defended by you. And undoubtedly look, as the Kings of the
earth s^all waken out of that slumber, wherein they a^e as drunk with the cup of
the whore, and burn her up, and destroy her with those swords that have fought
for her, and defended her: So though Protestant Princes suffer you, and give
you authority for a while, for the t^yall of his servants, yet the Lord will
ra^se up the spirit of some (who knows how soon?) that shall require at your
hands the hurt you have done with th^s sword, and take away your authority and
honor, and make you naked.

SECTION. VI.
THE next controversy touching D^ocesan Bishops is their t^tles; which though
^t may seem a matter too n^ce and small to b^ ^nsisted on; because so many
worthy D^vines have past it over, and made nothing of ^t: yet if we consider
what danger has come to the Church by varying and altering words, and how
str^ct the servants of God have been in some cases, it will not be amiss to
give some taste of this matter in hand: especially since our opposites a long
while were content to claim, and hold this their authority only from the
Prince, but now cla^m it as from God, thereby condemning all other Churches in
the world that have the D scipline of God amongst them. But to proceed to the
matter.

1 It is directly against Luke 22, where our Savior forbids all humane pomp,
either in honor or t^tles: Be not called Graciosn Lords: As though he should
say; It shall come to pass that great places, dignities and styles shall be
offered you, but accept not of them, for it shall not be so amongst you: whence
it is plain that all that will be successors of the Apostles, must not enjoy
such titles as belong to the great men of the world. So as this place contayns
worthy reasons to dissuade and show the unfitness of all such things. 1 Th s
is the property God has annexed and coupled to the Magistrates, who are called
Gods, and it is most fitting they have such external pomp. This Argument is
firm; for may they do wrong to the C^v^ll Mag^st^ate, as they do if they
usurp his titles? 2 Christ himself has no such Titles, but was as a servant.
3 All of us are here abiding with Christ in his temptations, and it is no time
now in this great combat to be expecting great titles. 4 Our Kingdom is not of
this world, but Christ has purchased and provided for us a Kingdom hereafter,
and there shall the glory of the Ministers chiefly be revealed. These Arguments
make as much against titles, as they do against the authority of Ministers.

If it be said, then Princes and Mag^st^ates may not have these t^tles. The
answer is plain, the Lord gives them in a special manner to their Callings,
and denies them to the Ministry. 2 The Lord will have his glory and Majesty
externally to shine in Princes, and the^fo^e they have all allowed for
magnificence and st te: But his glory in his Ministers, he will have showed in
his gifts upon them, and the exercise thereof.

2 Argum. It is Pharisaism, either to affect law full titles, or challenge or
assume such as are any way derogatory to Christ or our brethren, to Christ when
there is one Lord, 1 Cor. 12, Ephesians. 4. Men claim this to be Lords over his
heritage, to exercise a genemission and power, and that unlimited, without
preach^ng of the word to them whom they rule over: this is against Christ, and
their fellow servants. 2 To be masters in many things, to be heard for them
selves, and teach without instruction from Christ, as in things either
substantial or for order, to thrust upon the Church what they have no warrant
from the Word for, but only authority, and because they are the Church; This
is against Christ. 3 To be fathers to the chu. and to beget Ministers, and give
the H. Gh.

All these are derogatory, which all may see to be the meaning of the holy
Ghost, both to Christ, and the true members of the Church. For Christ's Kingdom
and Lordship is usurped after a sort by the former: His Prophetical office by
the second. Thirdly, his Priestly and Kingly office both, by the last. For it
is his privilege to send out Ministers to give the Holy Ghost, and bless the
people. To the members, who are subjected to men in outward discipline, forb
dde^; Be not servants to men; to men in teach^ng, whereas we are commanded to
hear Christ, and him only. To men in ordayning, and such special blessing as
they seem to bestow both by imposit^on of hands, and confirmat^on, whereas all
Ministers have alike power for the ministerial dispensat^on of these This
Argument is plain, neither can any deny it, that is not possessed with a
Pharisaicall spirit.

3 Ap^stles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, never had any such
T^tles, nor gave any such one to an other, Peter calls Paul, beloved brother.
So in that famous council at Jerusalem, the council styles themselves,
Apostles, Elders, and brethren, called Barnabas and Paul etc. men beloved, 1
Pet. 5.1, Peter calls himself Elder. But these men, as if they were abashed to
make known their calling of the Min^stery, styles then selves like Earls, as
Richard of Canterbury etc. as though that were more pl^asing to them to be like
the world in state and honor, then Christ and his Apostles.

4 The names and titles of Archbishops, Metropolitan etc. came not in till past
300 yea^es after Christ, when the Church began to d^cline, and changed into an
earthly Monarchy, and the H^erarchy of Rome to be erected and established, when
Bis^ops began to have civil authority granted them; and Bishops were chosen,
some of Magistrates and great Lords, as histories ment^on: wherefore this was,
and is a property of Antichrist to arrogate such high glorious titles.

5 Bishops have no authority over Ministers, nor are capable of civil
authority by the Canons and Laws of Christ, wherefore they are not to have any
title. For the Argument is firm: Titles being symbols and notes of the things,
are to be denied to such as have not the nature of the things.

6 Wordly and earthly titles, make men to be thought only of the world, and so
procures but worldly reverence, loses the true respect which is due to the
Ministers of the Gospel.

SECTION. VII.
THus thou have been lead (Christian Reader) a long time to see the nakedness
of these men, that vaunt it out so glor^ously in the world, whereby may many
questions be resolved.

Quest. 1. Whether it stands more for the glory of God, and the good of Church,
and Kingdom to suffer these men to hold the government in their hands, and not
permit the Ministers to preach and exe^cise discip^ine, or econtra?

To this it is plain, that the Magistrate is to do to them, as our Savior
Christ dealt, Ioh. 2, in whipping out buyers and sellers, and money changers;
these might better come into the Temple, then these Bishops into the Churches
of God, and had more necessary use, but they had abused holy things, and made
it a den of thieves.

First, consider a little, gentle Reader, and the Lo^d remove prejudicate
opinion from thee, what these do to the Church and Commonwealth. I appeal to
every man's conscience, whither they are not, and do not show themselves
enemies to the sincere preaching of the Gospel, the scepter of Christ's
Kingdom, and the glory of our land.

Secondly, do they not lay heavy burdens upon Authority, laying all the wrong
they do upon his Majesty, and so work a hard conceit of his Majesty in the
hearts of his best loving subjects, as though it were his will men should be
put out, and silenced, not convinced before by Scripture, which was his
Majesty's pleasure?

Thirdly, do they not cause great profaneness in the land, which weakens any
K^ngdom?

1 By their own preaching, seldom, cold, general, unfitting the times and
seasons, calling good evil, making sad the hearts of Gods people, and
st^engthning the hands of the wicked, that none can return from his wickedness.

2 By their disgracing and troubling the most zealous servants of God, which
causes great offense; and they in this case are guilty of the overthrow of
many a soul, which by such persecutions is turned out of the way.

3 By sending forth such a rude Ministry, as cannot deliver the counsel of the
Lord, nor give every one their portion in due season, but a^e blind guides,
making many fall into the ditch with them.

4 By enacting, and continuing such Canons in force as keep out many able
Ministers, thrust out those that Christ himself has sent, as they cannot deny
themselves, make many a one break peace of conscience to undergo them, and to
loose his gifts in a great measure: Besides discomfo^t in his calling, and
grieving others, making many also to spend all their study to just^fie the
ceremonies, which are now cont^overted, and setting a fire the house of God,
and making way for Antichrists return.

5 They bring the ordinance of God into contempt, through their slubbering,
coveteous and profane handling of them. Who respects the Sabboths, ministry of
the word, o^ c^nsures of the Church?

6 Do they not take authority from his Majesty to execute statutes against
Papists, and yet suffer them contrary to his Majesty's pleasure, and to the
indangering of his royal person and State?

7 Then bad example in specches, seeking the world, etc. and their servants
profane licentiousness.

Fourthly, they have much living, which they prodigally mispend and riot out in
pomp and vanity, to their own hurt and othe^s.

Fifthly, do they not oppose and directly deal against the Statute Laws of
the Kingdom, and seek to bereave his Majesty, and loyal subjects of their
inheritance?

Sixthly, do they not impoverish many of the Kings subjects by their
proceed^ngs, which h^nders them in their Callings, the common serv^ce all owe
to the King and Country, and disables them from such taxes as otherw^se they
might be able to discharge? The Mag^st^ate ^s bound to keep and see kept both
Tables, and to remove what hinders the observation of either; which these men
do, in every man's judgment well weighing things.

Wherefore the conclusion is easy, I doubt not, and will be assented unto. For
what good heart can endure such a heavy burden to lie upon his Majesty, as
these men lay upon him: howsoever they would seem to be his only friends, and
please him in every thing, like Baals false Prophets.

Quest. 2. Whether a man may yield obedience unto them?

Answ. Not in that authority which is proper to them, and comes from themselves
as they are Bi^hops: 1 This is an acknowledging of them: 2 Men must stand fast
in their Chr^st^an l^berty, Gal. 5.1, and not suffer men to rule over t^em at
their pleasure, Col. 2.

Quest. 3. Whether are Minist^rs to be ordained by them?

Answ. 1 One man only has no authority but rather many together ought to lay
on their hands.

2 All Ministers may ordayn as well as a Diocesan Bishop, having the like
authority and succeeding the Apostles, one as well as the other, which in the
primitive times was usual.

3 None may receive their authority from them, so as they should be their
substitutes.

4 Every congregation has power, from Christ as has been showed, and was
practiced in the primitive church.

5 They require both canonical obedience and subscription to their decrees.

6 It is doubtful, whether they are Ministers or no, since they are not
elected by any people, nor have any particular flock, neither does the holy
Ghost set any such over his people.

7 Ordination ought to be performed with fasting and prayer. All which he that
considers well, and makes conscience will discern easily what is best to be
done.

Qu. 4. Whether may men give titl^s unto them or no?

Answ. Consider well the former grounds, and to this add;

1 This is a confession of the mouth.

And 2 it is an acknowledgment of subjection due unto them.

3 It is a lie, when they are not Lords, and we know it.

4 Though their Lordship seem to be civil, yet the ground is spiritual,
their Bishopric authority following the same.

SECTION VIII.
NOw lest any should think we rob the Church of much good, and bring in
confusion with abolition of these Diocesan Bi^hops, therefore ^t shall be requ
site in the next place to treat a l tt^e of these officers, which the
Scriptures mention in the t^m^ of the new Testament, which are chiefly the
Elders, which are to assist the Ministers in the guiding and governing of the
Church.

They are called Elders in respect of their age, and office, which was to
govern with the Ministers, and perform all private duties for the good of the
congregation, as necessity required, as to pray with the sick, to admonish,
reprou, and join with the Minister in excommunication, to ordain officers for
the congregation, and to provide by all good means for the outward good of the
Church. That these ought to be^n every Congregation, we hold firmly aga^^st the
maintainers of this strange and uncouth discipline. And it may appear first out
of Math. 18, where Christ's institutes what is needful for the Church, whereof
this is one: secondly, the Church does what it does, not confusedly, but by the
ministry of some: thirdly, the promise is made ^n binding and roosing to two or
three, which imposts that though the right of the keys be in the whole
Church, yet the Ministry thereof is in some few selected and chosen out for
that purpose: Our Savior alludes to the custom of the Jewish Synagogues
wherein there were Eld^rs.

But howsoever this place may seem too weak, at first sight to build the
erection of this office upon, yet the practice of the Apostles withal
compared, and the directions they have left to the Church in this case, will
put all out of doubt to him that wrangles not for himself, and to please men.

To go along therefore in the Scripture, and first the Acts of the Apostles,
which conta ns a type and map of the prim^tiue times, and purest Chu^ches that
ever were in the world, ment^on these, Acts 15.4, and 22, which place cannot be
understood but of such ^u^ing Elders of the people as were amongst the ^ewes,
not of teaching Elders. For the Apostles were as the Ministe^s, and did perform
all Ministerial duties, having none their Curats under them as Bishops had
afterward. For Evangelist, were to accompany the Apostles in planting Churches,
neither ^s there any mention of any such here. 2 They are d^stinguished here
both from the Church called the brethren, and Apostles. Neither can this title
be understood of Pastors, because the Apostles were wont to appoint them only
when Churches were gathered, and they were to leave them, as may appear, Acts
14.23, and Tit. 1.5. 3 These here mentioned are as assistants to the Apostles,
governing and ordering the Churches business, as both here, and Acts 21, where
they are present with the Apostles, and in none other office nor use employed
but only this. Lastly, Paul and Barnabas, and some others, came up to
Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders which had ca^e of the Discipline, and
Religion with them.

The third place is Romans 12.8, he that rules in or with diligence; where first
the Apostle distinguishes this ruling, both from the ministry of the Word,
and from distributing and showing mercy. Hence therefore there must be some to
rule in the church. 2 Men are charged according to their callings and measure
of gifts received, to exercise themselves for the churches good: who sees not
plainly that the Regiment of the church is not in one Lord Bishops hand, since
Bishops are not in each congregation where they rule? 2 That this ought to be
where the Ministry of the Word is. 3 This diligence cannot be meant of a three
years visitation, nor yearly Synods, wherein presentiments are Rece ved: (what
bold and impudent face once dare think so wickedly of the Apostles,) but of
that continual care and oversight which they should show toward the sheep of
Christ, which ever need some spiritual med^cine and Physic for their souls.

4 A fourth place is 1 Cor. 12.28, where the Apostle reckons up the several
gifts and offices, which God himself has set and appointed in his church.
Apostles are chief, then Prophets and Governments. There the Apostle
distinguishes Governments from the Ministry of the word: 2 Being appointed by
the Lord, none can remove them but he again: 3 The Lord gives extraordinary
means for soul and body in extraordinary times when a church is to be
planted, because there want ordinary means: 2 to procure the more authority and
respect to the church then, and ever he gives sufficient. 4 The Lord has s^t
government in the church which the Magistrate cannot alter. 5 The church is a
perfect body that has members sufficient to uphold and m^n^ster to all its own
necessities; neither is this to be neglected, that the holy Ghost both here,
and Romans 12, sets Government after Deaconship, as though he saw how some would
arise and conjoyn things severed by the Lord, which to preve^t he shows these
are not to be so conjoined, as though the Minister should have all the
government in his own hands, but some special persons are to be assi^n^d which
may govern the Minister themselves.

5, 1 Timothy 4.14, with imposition of hands of the Presbytery; which is to be
understood of the College of Presbyters, containing these amongst others. For
these had a special hand in electing and ordaining all church officers: 2
these joined in making decrees for the government of the church, Act. 15,
therefore much more in executing of them: 3 Timothy was called ordinarily at
first, not to be an Evangelist as appears, Acts 16, Paul called him to that,
after the Churches had witnessed of him. 4 The Apostle Paul, Acts 20, speaks to
them amongst others, that they should tend the Church, and they have ng
government in their hands were to suffer no wolves to come in.

But because men of a contentious spirit, whose greatest hopes depend upon the
contrary discipline, will ha^dly yield t^ll plain force drive them (nay force
of the word will not, till the sword of the Magistrate compells) therefore the
next place is, 1 Timothy 5.17, in deluding of which place many sweat much in
vain: for the Apost^e being to give direction to Timothy how to carry himself
in the Church of God, shows h m his duty toward every condition, as widows in
the beginning of th s chapter; next, Elders, and such as rule well are worthy
of double honor, especially such as labor in the word and doctrine, which
first words implies necessarily that there were then in the Church Elders that
did govern the Churches, which did not labor in the word and doctrine: 2 Such
ought to be had in special account that do rule well: 3 Such as labor in the
word and doctrine ought more to be respected then they that only govern. 4
That all M^n^sters are to have a spec^all hand in the governing of the Churches
commuted to them.

I will not much insist upon this place more, for I know some adversaries need
not so much conv^ct on as to have their h^a^ts persuaded. Pray thou that
read, that the Lord would persuade them to dwell in the t^nts of Shem, and
be content to suffer here with their brethren, that they may ^a^gn with Christ
hereafter. Many adversaries will not set themselves to learn the t^^th, but
being drunk with selfe-concert, th^nk nothing good wine, but what they draw
then selves. But the Lord reveals himself to the humble. There was never
doctrine so vile but preferment and riches made ^t find favor^tes.

Th^s the pract^ce of the Church, and test money of the ancient, witnesses
Ciprian, Ambrose, Tertullian, etc.

By all which may be understood, Hebr. 13.17, Where obedience to their leaders
is enjoined; now these were Elders, preaching and lay, which had the government
then of the Church: therefore Christians are bound to subject to these. 2 That
of Iam. 5.14, send for the Elders of the Church, may well be understood of this
order of Elders, being to perform many private duties; specially ^f the
Ministers should either be publicly employed, or necessarily hindered. 3 That
Rev. 4.4, l^ving creatures having six wings full of eyes; which vision is of
the ^^^b^e Church, and fitly expounded: For by wings are the helps meant, which
are spoken of, 1 Cor. 12.28. and eyes that are within are the Elders, which are
as eyes for the people to see by; and informing the Minister of their estate,
they fit him the better to speak unto the people, which place so expounded is
far more forcible to per^wade for this discipline, then Apoc. 2, so expounded
for Lordbishops: for that exposition agrees not with the Scripture, it wants
all proof of holy Wr^t to uphold ^t. It agrees not with the practice of the
Apostles, who in Ephesus and Philippi set many that had the name and nature of
Bishops, as is plain both in Acts 20.28, and Phil 1.1. This agrees not with the
word Angel, who in this place signifies all that labor in word and
d^scipline, being sent of God to the churches, as the context proves in all the
churches. And as this po^nt has testimony of Scriptures, and of the Ancient,
so may it appear in all sound reason to be most fit for the church of Christ.

1 To omit that this was in use amongst the Jews in time of the old Testament,
and no way ceremonial nor jud^ciall but moral, which the light of nature
taught the Gentiles after a sort in their civil government, who with their
Consuls had their Senate.

2 Because the Apostles would not have Ministers hindered in their study, but to
take heed to reading and med tat^on, that they may by searching the Scriptures
be made w^se to salvation, and perfectly be furnished to every good work.
Therefore it is fitting there should be men of wisdom, gravity, and respect
chosen to oversee the people, and observe their manners, and do less
businesses in admonition and correctien.

3 This best benefits the simplicity of the Gospel, and of the Church now in
the time of the new Testament, where all outward pomp cease, which was used
before in the Leviticall Priesthood, to figure o^t Christ's heavenly and
wonderful graces.

4 To have Churches so combined and consociated under one high Priest is merely
Jewish, which was to signify all ought to be subject to Christ the great high
Priest, who is come, and alike in all, if there be equal gifts. All
congregations are equal, none having power one over an other; and therefore
each is to have its Governors?

5 Every congregation being a true church, and so a perfect body, should and
must have power to preseru it self, by expelling and removing the dissolute,
and electing n^w officers.

6 God has given gifts unto men for this end, which being so employed bring
great good and benefit to men, further the Ministry, keep all in good order,
and prevent dangers in the b^g nning.

7 The Question being betwixt Lordbishops and these, the expulsion of them is
the introduction of these.

8 There is no such danger in this government of corrupt on, as where one man
has al in his hands: he may corrupt a whole D^ocesse, nay Kingdom; but th^se,
though evil, corrupt but their own congregations. 2 Here men are prone to be
over-carried with antiquity, the place being so eminent, and the power so
great: but experience testifies, that where this government is used, there is
a more special blessing of God; more purity and beauty, in the face of these
Churches, wicked men are sooner found, and more terrified. But of this more
hereafter.

Here one Question may be propounded, that is, why is not the duty of these set
down in the Scriptures, nor their names?

Answ. A description of the Bishop and Presbyter, is a description of these
Elders that are Bishops.

1 Overseers of the flocks, for these places contain rather a descript on of
their sufficiency, and moral part, and holy conversation, which ought to be in
these, though in a more excellent measure in the Pastors and Teachers, then of
the applying of them to these ministerial duties which are proper to the
Pastors. This is plain to all that considerately peruse the Texts: And this
answer is grounded on that 1 Timothy 5.17, where the Apostle intimats the work is
an excellent work of them that rule well, else why are they to have double
honor? 2 Calls them by the same name that Pastors are styled by, as in the
former places of Scripture.

If it be said their duty is not assigned: the Answer is plain, their office is
to rule by the sword of the Spirit, Word, and churches censures, reproof and
excommunication. The rule and laws are the word, the manner is to be according
to the practice of these duties in Scriptures, being admonition, reproof, and
excommunication of each, whereof we have several and manifold examples.

Object. 2. This brings men into base subjection, which ^s not fit, nor that
men of state should be subject to such mean officers. Answ. 1, No Officer that
Christ has appointed, ought to be accounted mean or b^se. 2 It is not a
subjection unto men, but to the ordinance of Christ. 3 Men are no more subject
to these Elders, then they are to be to the Ministry of the Word. 4 It is
nothing impairing the state or dign^ty of any one whatsoever; for they are not
to meddle w th these things, but as Physicians and Surgeons seek the curing of
diseases in the souls.

Ob. 3. If ^t be said now, men are petty Popes, there being none to over rule
them. The answer is plain, here are many to rule, Pastor, Teacher and Elder. 1
These are bound strictly to the rule of the Word. 2 Besides, the Church may say
to Archippus, Take heed, etc. Col. 4.17. 3 Other neighbor churches may and
ought to admonish them, which if it take no place, they are altogether to
declare their judgment touching such a Congregation. 4 The civil Magistrate is
and ought to punish every congregation (the leaders especially into sin and
error) according to the quality and degree of their offense, if they do not
conform to the right manner of worshipping God.

SECTION. IX.
FRom this which has been showed both against Diocesan Bishops, and in just
fying the wis^dom of God in lay Elders, as they are called, each may see what
we are to judge of the Officers now in use amongst us; I will speak of two, as
being both the chief, and containing under them all the rest.

The first is the Chancellor under whom there are Archdeacons, Offic^als, and
all that rout springing up with the beast, about which I need not spend so long
time in confuting of their office, considering the former grounds against this
Diocesan Discipline.

Before I come to handle the arguments against them, consider well these
grounds.

1 The name of a Church does belong to every congregation, not properly to the
clergy, as they are now called; so the holy Ghost speaks in the Scripture.

2 That such callings are Antichristian, which sprung up w th Ant christ, and
served ^^m a long time only, and uphold such a government as his is, though
they maintain not such doctrine. So though Cardinals should profess the
Gospel, yet their office is Antichristian, because of the former ground, which
is plain; for Antichrist is not a person, but a succession of men opposing
Christ in his Ordinances, and Offices, as well as otherwise.

3 Some good use that a calling may have, and some benefit that it brings, is
no sufficient ground to warrant it in the church of God. 1 Because there is
nothing, but at least is well intended, and carries a show of good when it is
brought into the church. 2 It may be that keeps out some other calling, that
would bring far more profit and benefit to the church. 3 It may be it has
some inseparable evil annexed or coupled with it.

Now upon these grounds sufficient and weighty reasons may be founded from the
Scriptures to prove the unlawfulnes of this office, which is for one in a
Diocese to have authority for keeping courts, to prove wills, to right men for
disorders, and scandalous sins, especially breach of their traditions, and to
censure men with their kind of penance and excommunication.

Arg. 1. Every man in the Scriptures tha^ has office in the church, must be
able to justify it by the Word: So John Baptist, Mat. 3, Ioh. 1. So the
Apostles themselves, Act. 2, out of Joel 2, Gal. 1.1. In the old Testament, the
very porters of the house of God, and singers were ordered by the Spirit of God
in David; and in the new Testament Deacons and Widows are mentioned, but these
men have no pattent from the Lord, there is no place once to mention their
name, nor the like in all the Scriptures; therefore their place and calling is
not from God.

2 Discipline belongs to every particular congregation, without which though
men may be a church (desiring it after they are convinced of it), yet they lie
open to miserable dangers of their spiritual enemies, and cannot be so
compacted and knit together as a congregation and church of Christ ought to be.
This is plain in those churches, Revel. 2 and 3, that are each both commended
or dispraysed for their exercising of discipline. 2 Christ has given the keys
to every particular congregation that has the Ministry of Word, and power to
use them Mat. 18. Therefore these men's office is sacriledg, for it steals the
holy things of God from each congregation whereby their souls are miserably
impove^^^ed.

3 It is a thing most absurd, inconvenient and burdensome that the Pastor in
each congregation should have authority from Christ to absolve and remit in the
Ministry of the Word, and retain and bind, and having part cular knowledge in
his own congregation of the manners of men, according to which he propounds
the doctrine of the Gospel, releasing some, and adjudging others; yet that
this man must stand to the arbitrament of a st^anger, that never happily saw
any in his congregation, who shall be absolved, who retained: by whom for the
most part he is enjoined not to admit such as wholly clean to the Lord, and
suffered and forced to admit such as he in his Ministry has condemned, and
the world sees to be filthy swine. This argument is grounded upon the sentence
and maxim of our Savior Christ, What God has conjoined, let no man sever. He
has joined the ministry of the Word and the exercise of Discipline together,
therefore no man should sever them.

4 These came in with Antichrist, and are part of that Hierarchy. When that
Prelates had gotten that spiritual sword into their hands, and backed with
Princes authority, had established themselves, and made their kingdom like the
Princes of the world, as in other things, so in this, they must for their state
have their Chancellours and Officialls etc. This is plain in History: and the
Argument is firm against them, because all man's inventions, Antichrists
especially, are abon enable, unprofitable, and exceeding hurtful to the church
of God, and contrary to Christ's own Ordinances.

5 These chancellors, men cannot bring into the church, being merely secular,
as they are termed, and civil, and therefore no such power belongs to them to
cast out and excommunicate, especially since they never proceed by the rules of
the Word, but by their own will and canons. Th^s is his Maj^st^es argument in
the conference against their practice, which is one special part of their
office. This is grounded upon th s, that no man has any authority, but he
that is elected and assigned by the Church to that government he exercises in
the same. But these are not elected nor approved by the church.

2 To bring in, and cast out belong to one and the same calling.

3 It is reb^llion against God for to innovate any thing in the government of
the church established by God: th^s was Corah, and h^s accomplices sin, that not
content with the office of the Levits, they would come nearer the Lord then the
Lord called them; by taking that upon them which he committed not unto them.
Therefore reproof, ^ame, and great punishment, shall be their best reward.

6 As Christ is the only King of his Church, so it is his instituting of any
Calling, that makes it a member of him, and the church: and that union and
dependence which a Calling has w th Christ, puts life into it, and makes it
effectual for the good of the church. Now this call ng has no un^on with
Christ, being not a member instituted by him of his body the Church; therefore
it is not, nor can be profitable. This is pla n in sense; for the member that
is not united to the head and heart, can receive neither life nor sense from
them. And 2 as men cannot make any one member of his body, nor couple any to
the principal member, the original of life and motion; much less can they
add to Christ's body, they may as men do, put to a wodden leg, or a glaifie
eye, when they cut off the strong and proportioned members, that would have
carried the body surely, quickly and easily.

7 Their call ng is maintained by the censures of the church, turning them into
pecuniary mulcts, which ought not to be, these things not being saleable. This
causes so great corruption and sin to be so lightly passed over: And the
rather because they must live in some pomp and worldly dignity, and have so
many in their courts which live upon the same means.

By this we may discern what to judge of their excommunications: for there
ought to be for open sins unrepented of, the persons being admonished thereof,
and to be denounced by the M^nister, and agreed upon by the whole Church. Whese
therefore the cause is merely good, for which men are excommunicated, that is to
say, either for performing some Christ an duty, or refusing subjection to men's
trad^tions, in the service of God, there Christ absolues, Ioh. 9.

2 When it is not done by the church that has the keys, but by some usurper
that has no right unto it, it is like the sentence of a drunken man, upon an
other to be hanged or stabd, because he will not pledge him or carrouse. No man's
sentence but the Judges condemns; nor any but they that God appoints judges:
Neither may men seek absolution from them, for they have no authority. 2 Their
excommunication is the cross the Lord would have men bear if we cannot avoid.
3 They sever us but from the world, and drive us nearer to Christ. 4 It
maintains them in their usurpation, covetousnesie, and pr^d^, to seek unto
them.

Quest. 2. Whether a man may sue in their courts? Answ. For causes
Ecclesiastical, o^ criminal, which come within compass of the to be
punished, I think ^^s unlawful. For, 1 men must rather protest against this
wo^k of darkness. 2 These things may, and ought to be ordered by Arb^t^ators,
if it be possible: if the lawful Magistrate fail, suffer all etc. And the a
gument against suing one another, 1 Cor. 6, holds more firmly against this:
first, those were lawful courts, these unlawful: secondly, it was scandalous
then; so it is here: for they are as great enemies to sincere Religion as these
were: thirdly, though a man's cause be never so good, yet thou being one that
fear God truly they will sentence thee, and pronounce unrighteous judgment
against thy person, not minding the justice of thy cause. For a good man makes
a good cause bad there, as an evil man procures favor to a bad cause:
fourthly, their authority is as Ecclesiastical, which is not in the Kings
power to grant, but must proceed from Christ: fifthly, they have lost the keys
to whom they were g^ven.

We have spoken of the first of those call ngs, which flowing from the office
of Diocesan Bishops is unlawful. Now of the second, that as, Church wardens,
comprehending those other, bound to the same things they are enjoined to.

Against which, though the former grounds overthrow the^r call^ng, yet more
special are to be adjoined; because it ^s hard to root out any such long
customary office, though unlawful. For besides, that most men prefer custom
before the law of God, they do not once make scruple of any thing ^stablished,
but swa^low all that is presented unto them, without examination. Wherefore that
with more facility we may end this controversy, observe these grounds.

1 That all men are bound to preseru that liberty which Christ has purchased
and bestowed upon them, Gal. 5.1. And we are expressly b dden, that men should
not have dominion over us, e^ther over our souls to beleeu and ye ld to what
they teach, Col. 2, or bodies, in spiritual consideration, for we are Christ's.
2 Every subject is bound to fight and strive with spiritual weapons, ^or
Christ's Government and Kingdom to be set up where he is. 3 That the meanest
office under an un^awfull form of government, ^s part of that government, and
though not to deeply p^^nged in sin as others, yet g^ilty of the^r sins that
are chief in a measure. 4 That the^e ^s no part of Christ's Kingd m, nor no
truth of the Word so small, b^t ^t is worth suffering for, and dying for; as
the godly Jews surfered because they would not cat Swines flesh.

Upon these grounds and the like, how discrepant and opposite these are to the
government of Christ? For, 1 these keep out the Lords own Officers of ruling
Elders, which we have proved Christ has left in h^s church, they being in the
Apostles t mes not contradicted b^t approved, and therefore of Divine
Institution. In this resp^ct t^erfore they are like Diocesan Bishops, who keep
out Ministers and people too, from their right in government of the church,
though they do not equal them. That they do k^ep them out it is plain, for
they take upon them now to order things for the churches government, so that
ignorant people can discern no want. This argument is firm, because one
ordinance of God does not hurt, nor keep out an other. 2 That which keeps out
Gods ordinance keeps out the Lord (with some spec^all blessing) for his
children, present in each of his o^d nances. 3 This in part s^uts the Kingdom
of God.

A second argument against Churchwardens is, because these are corrupted and
degenerated, like the office of the m^nistery that was quite changed unto a
Priesthood in times of popery. So as now they have lost their right in
government of the church, and yielded shamefully to Ant^christ, whose servants
and vassals they were so long time together. So as it is not more lawful to be
a Church warden then a Mass Priest; for both of them receiu their present
being from the man of Sin. This argument is firm, because such retain the Mark
of the b^ast in part 2. The same l ght coming, and the same spirit in a great
and powerful manner that was in the Apostles times, all darkness and
corruption ought to be removed.

3 These keep out the Deacons, who are expressly commanded and appointed, Acts
6, 1 Timothy 3, and confound this with their office, which shows both their office
to be new and unlawful. For that the Holy Ghost establi^hed, the Apost^es
both gave charge they should be elected, and they were in the p^^m^t^ue Church
many years together, t^^l Ant christ got the day, and s^t up ^^s throne. This
is no small wrong to the church to keep out those that were to d^str^bute to
the poor so carefully in each congregat^on, that there should be no want to
any: they ea^^d the Mini sters, and therefore are called Helps, of which
hereafter. Wherefore, as Ester spoke of Haman in procur^ng the overthrow of the
Jews, The enemy could not recompense the Kings loss; no more can they: for
they wrong the poor, give not such testimony of their love, and liberall^ty
which the office of the D^acon does proclaim, and make v^sible to the world.
Neither must we think it enough that there are good laws established. For
experience witnesses the necessity hereof, n^^ther ought men to confound what
Christ has severed. The Chr^stian Mag st ates duty is to see both Min^sters
and people subject to Christ's Ordinances, not to invent any new.

4 An office dev^sed by man, ever serves man, not God; witness all the
Hierarchy dev sed by Pope, who served but men's amb tious thoughts, never
furthered the Kingdom of Christ. Now this office is merely devised by man: For
they deny them to be Elders mentioned in the Scriptures; and how far different
they be, any man may see that compares them together. Churchwardens have no
stroke in the disc^pline, or excommunication. Elders were to tend men's souls,
and procure their good by admonition, reproof etc. Churchwardens are to tend
the church walls and see that there be a fair surplus prov^ded, and such
Trumpery: Elders sprung from Christ, and might look for a b^essing and
protection in their calling These are from Rome and cannot expect any such
blessing or protection from God in their course. Elders were not annual as
these are.

5 These officers uphold an unlawful Hierarchy and Government, they receive
their oaths, wh ch is their enstalment from them, whereas the church and
congregat^on ought to choose, and ordain them. 2 They present all to them
again, giving them the power to punish and censure. 3 They must obey every
edict and precept that comes from them, or the rural deanes, poor ignorant
sotts, more unlawful officers then themselves.

This argument is firm against them, since they that maintain Christ's enemies,
are justly to be reproved and accursed, if they do not repent.

6 Churchwardens, as the government stands now are bound to most unlawful
conditions, to present the true Min ster for not using superstitious rit^s; to
keep other Min^sters from preaching there, except they have license; to present
men for not joining with a dumb Minister: and in a word, to see that their
Canons be exec^ted to the full: and herein they are inst^uments of sin, and
m^anes of troubling the s ^vants of God; which brings woe upon men. This cannot
be denied. The serpent was accursed for b^ing but the instrument of sin.

7 This is a great stumbling block to the Separation, making them th^nk all our
Church is and stands subject to Ant^christian government. For these depend of
the Bishop and Deanes, and have a k^nde of Regency in the Church.

Wherefore considering these things, brethren, who have been through ignorance
or want of consideration hitherto m slead, hearken, and leave off hence forth.
Your witnessing of the truth of Ch^ists Government, without all doubt, will
bring more true rest and peace to your souls, then you can find comfort in
your outward peace, which you may reap by conforming to men's wills and
pleasures.

Consider how you undertake the profession of Christ with a full pu^pose to
^eau all to enjoy him. Let me int^^at you for your own good, that you will
thoroughly and seriously consider of these things in your own hearts, and cover
not your selves with some fig leaves, that you or others may find for you. What
a daunt ng will it to be the opposits, when the people stand against their
courses? And go they cannot that want legs or feet, which you are to them.
Think what every age has given for Christ and his pure worship, and shall we
give nothing? So metimes reformation and discipline begins with the servants,
who for shame drive others from their unlawful courses. Howsoever, keep your
selves that no unclean thing touch you, and that you k^ep nothing unclean to
defile others withal.

SECTION X.
HAving showed in the former Treatise, what Officers are unlawful, springing
up with Antichrist, and therefore in all reason to die with him. Now lest any
should conceiu we herein would put all o^t of order. It will be exped^ent to
show such offices, as Chr^^s;t has left ^n his Church for the good of men's
bodi^s, which are a cording unto the^r necessities to be dis^^^buted unto. E
there men want outward means for wh ch D^acons are appointed: or are weak and
sickly, or t^avelling strangers, and need attendance; for tha^ end the Lord
has appointed Widows.

1 For D^acons, Act. 6, we have the institution div^nely expressed; the
Apostles though careful to still all complaints, yet having greater care of
men's souls would not be hindr^d in the Ministry of the Word, know^ng and
affirming that the preaching of the Gospel, is the highest work of the
Ministry. Where men may observe that consc^onable and w^se Min^st^^s, that
seek to do the r duty to the Lords l^king, w ll not ad^oyn other offices to
the M^n^stery of the Word. For men receive grace but for th s, or that Calling;
and one will hinder an other, be men never so provident. But by the way, lest
any should think Constables, or Churchwardens, or the like, suffic^ent enough
for this business: as the Apostles we^e most careful of their own Call ng, so
do they teach an excellent course for the provision of the poor, to choose
men of good report, full of the Holy Ghost and of wi^edom, which they might set
over this business. Thi^ being very grateful and acceptable to the whole
Assembly, they set seven before the Apostles, who by imposition of hands and
p^ayer ordained them, and admitted them into this office: which greatry and
wonderfully furthereth the Gospel, as it is the nature and property of all
Gods ordinances, that coming together they may further one another, and the
common good which men receiu by the^; whence we have the necessity of this
ordinance of God, lest the Minist^r should be hindered in his calling. 2 The
institution by the common consent of the Apostles, which now b^nds all in the
new Test. they being the foundation of the church of the Gentiles. 3 Election by
the church, and ordination by the Apostles: and 4 the benefit ar^sing hence.
This place is so plain, that me thinks an ingenuous heart, that loves the
truth, and ways of Christ, and reverenceth the min^stry of the Apostles, should
not cav^l^, but yield willingly hereunto. For what the Apostles taught the
people to do, Christ had commanded before, Mat. 28.21. For they in their
Ministe^y could not err.

Only one exc^ption may be made. That if this were so n^^dfull an Ordinance,
then why did they not teach ^t the church before? The Answer is plain. 1 Because
the Lord would have men to see the want of this ordinance of God, that so they
might discern the necessity of it, and not think they were burdened with more
Officers then need requires. 2 H th^^to the church was but newly gathe^ed, and
as soon as ^t came to be inc^eas^d, so soon they appoint^d this Office.

A second g^ound is that, 1 Timothy 3.8, where the Apostle sets down as of
Ministers so of Deacons, what men they ought to be, honest, etc. Th^s belongs
to us, as well as the former, of Minist^rs. 2 The Apostle directly affirms,
that T^mothy according to his direct on should carry himse^se in the house of
God, which is the Church of the living God, and the pillar and ground of truth,
v. 15: which glorious titles, why are they added, but to show that no man
should dare to come and ex^cute any office in the house of God, save such as
were called and fitted thereunto. 2 That the Min^sters that would preserve the
church pure, must carefully tend to the choice of such officers, as are found
both for doctrine and manners. 3 That no man should dare to alter any order, or
remove or h^nder any office God has appointed, who in special manner is Lord
of this Congregation and Assembly: From whence the rest of the world are to
learn that truth they have in matters of Religion. And it is memorable, that
Timothy needs direction how to govern the Church being so excellent an
instrument: Does not this sufficiently prove that ^o man can govern the church
though he were an Evangelist, except he have direction even in that speciality,
from the Lord himself, by means of them that were immediately taught by him?
Therefore let no man dare to go against this institution of the Apostle, except
he can show better warrant or higher authority to exempt him from these canons,
then Paul had to bind to obedience.

A third Ground, in which we will be shorter, is that Romans 12, he that
distributeth in simplicity, that is trustily, without respect of persons. This
therefore being one of the offices (not duties) and callings, there the Apostle
shows both that they ought to be in the church, and how to execute their
places, that they should know their callings, and be content with the same,
studying to do service in the same, which is the best means for unity, and to
prevent the manifold distractions, which intermedling each with others place,
and office brings.

A fourth ground is, 1 Cor. 12.28, where these officers are called helps.

Fifthly, The planting of them in every church, as appears, Phil. 1.1.

Sixthly, the continuance of them long in their own nature, which is to
distribute, teaching only when the Lord fits them in a special manner for the
same.

Grounds of these are, besides such as are mentioned before. 1 The Lord takes
care both for souls and bodies of men, and therefore institutes such offices
peculiarly serving for that purpose. Because there is no such office and
calling, it is impossible things should be so well ordered, and provided for.

2 Because the hearts of Gods children may be the more free from fear, and
with more diligence follow their own callings, having men of such graces to
provide for the poor.

3 That the Church may be the more enriched with heavenly and spiritual
blessings; for she receives grace and gifts for the discharge of each calling.

4 That men may be more willingly stirred ud to help the poor, and needy,
considering that the Lord has appointed a special office for that purpose.

5 That there should be no complaints, but that all the poor might be
comforted against their poverty and wants.

The second kind of Offices ^s the Widow, called Diaconesses, of which much
needs not to be spoken: Only consider, 1 Timothy 5, where the Apostles shows what
sort of widows he would have chosen, both for religion, conversation, and
years; where it may appear, these were not chosen only to receive but to do
some good. The Apostle reprehends idleness, wherefore he does not appoint them
only to receiu, but to do some service. 2 Why should he require such an age,
except they were to attend strangers? in performance of which duty he would not
have the least suspicion of uncleanness to fall out, as much as may be. This
is firm, for other widows wanting means must be provided for by the Church,
as well as these.

2 This Office is set down, Romans 12, She that shows mercy with
cheerfulness; their office theefore was to be the instruments of the church in
showing mercy to them that were sick, or travelers.

3 Romans 16, Phebe was servant, and Minister of the Church of Cenchrea, now
women could not exercise any public office in the congregation.

The grounds and reasons of this are, besides the same with the former: 1
Wisdom, to employ such, as being to receive maintenance, from the church, are
fit for nothing but th s, and fittest for th s. 2 That none may lack any thing
for their good and preservation. 3 That men may be the rather encouraged to go
about the Churches businesses, having such to attend them.

This kind of discipline, though it seem strange and novellous, because it
has been so long omitted, through the corruption of men in times of Popery,
yet plain reason shows it every way most fitting and profitable. For 1 This
expresses most liuel^ly the ca^e and watchful eye of Gods special providence
toward every member and part of the church. 2 This imposes on the Pastors
sufficiency of gifts, holy carriage, necessary residence, diligence in
preaching, which are the very life of the Church.

SECTION. XI.
HItherto gentle Reader, through the assistance of Gods spirit searching the
Scriptures, I have endeavored so to give Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
that the Lord may retain his right, and be absolute King amongst us, which is
the glory and safety of a nation and people. When thus Moses, Joshua, and the
succeeding Judges governed Israel, it was well with the land; Religion and
prosperity going hand in hand jointly together: Thus in David's time, Hezakiahs
time and others. But when any st^pt into the Lords throne, and served the Lord
after a new fashion, borrowing from foolish heathens that were aliens from
Israel; peace and plenty straight vanished, and the Lord sent strangers, into
whose hands he sold his people.

Wherefore since this teaches the right way to strengthen Kingdoms, and
establish Princes in their throne. Mourn thou that seek the peace of Israel,
that this doctrine should find such small acceptance, and hard entertainment,
and wonder at the shameless impudency of them, that dare avouch themselves
friends to Christ, and the Magistrate too, and yet clean put out Christ, that
themselves may reign, and cause the Magistrate to sin against Christ, and so to
procure Gods anger upon himself. These are Achans that trouble Israel, by
taking to themselves the accursed thing, which the Lord has consecrated
causing dissension, where else there would be a happy unity. But lest I seem
too censorious, and of spleen to wound any. Let us now further proceed, from
the former grounds, to demonstrat^ the unchangeablenesse of Discipline, that
ordinance which the Lord has left to govern his church by. In treating whereof
we do nothing against the authority of the Magistrate, but only contend for
the faith which is given us by the Prophets and Apostles.

That it may appear therefore how far wide they are that imagine the
government of the Church a bit^ary, and what wrong they do to the Lord; what
wrong to Princes to inwrap them in there sins, and to fight against the Lord
with his own authority, what wrong to his Church in thrusting such a
government, as being not approved by the Lord, cannot be blessed of him for the
good of his people, let us consider Matthew. 18.15.16, where the Lord shows the
end of discipline, the recovering and bringing home again of that which was
soft, the order and degrees of Discipline, by private admonition, then by two
or three, lastly, to acquaint the Congregation. All which not reclayming the
sinner, he is to be accounted as an heathen, and the Church to have no
communion with him. 3 There the power is given to the church to bind and loose.
4 The manner, not one to do this but, some company together, and calling upon
the name of the Lord to proceed according to the rules aforesaid. This place is
so plain, that the devils cannot withstand it. It is an order from the wisdom
of the Father, by the Son, which is the Prophet of his Church: therefore the
men that are adverse to it make themselves guilty of the blood of men's souls.

For election of Officerrs, we have from the Apostles, Act. 1, Act. 6, Acts 14.

From all which, the manner of bringing in of officers may be learned.

1 Every church must have her Elders.

2 These must not be appointed, till places be vacant.

3 Every congregation ought to have such as look to men's bodies, and
necessities.

4 The Congregations are to choose some, and present them.

5 They are to be ordained with prayer and fasting.

6 No one may do this alone, but all Ministers jointly in the places over
which they are to be set.

These places bind us: 1 These things the Apostles learned from Christ, Act.
1.3. 2 As the Father sent Christ, so Christ sent his Apostles: 3 These things
are written for our learning.

Romans 12 7.8, see elsewhere, The Apostle reckons up offices, which men may not
confound, teaching and exhortation, comprehending the Doctor and Pastors
offices; governning, Elders, distributing, Deacons, showing mercy, the Widows.
These must needs be distinct offices, else they are not pertinently inserted by
the Apostle. 2 It shows that men had diverse gifts for the same. 3 That they are
to continue, because they are members of Christ's body, without which the body
cannot consist. This place binds us.

1 Cor. 5. The church is reproved for not executing this Discipline in
Excommunication: where is a notable-description of the manner how it should be
performed: first, the persons on whom it is to be executed must be such as are
within: secondly, such as have committed some notorious sin.

2 The persons by whom it is executed, 1 the whole Church gathered together: 2
such as have power to cast out.

3 The power by which they are to do it, is not humane authority, but Christ's
authority, which he gives to every congregation to cast out the evil.

4 The manner, first mourning for such offense: secondly, meeting together, and
calling upon the Lord: thirdly, having the like spirit Paul had.

5 The act it self of Excommunication; to be cast out from amongst the Church.

6 The end, 1 that the corruption might be mortified: and 2 that grace and
spiritual part might be preserved and restored.

7 The necessity of it, 1 lest the whole church be guilty of the sin: 2 the
salvation of the party sinning: 3 lest others be infected with the same, or
like wickedness.

This place binds us, being for the good of the Church, as it is a Church, and
not appropriated to them in Corinth.

2 All the arguments and motives are general, and bind all.

Acts 15. The Holy Ghost sets down the manner of governing of the church.
First, when there arise questions and controversies, that trouble the minds of
any; whence we learn these conclusions.

1 That it is the duty of all Ministers to take notice of such opinions as are
hatched and spread, contrary and besides the form of doctrine received.

2 In the conf^ting of those opinions that are novellous and dangerous,
ministers are to seek the counsel and direction of others, wherefore these
ought to be Synods assembled.

3 The persons that are to meet, are Ministers, Elders and people.

4 The Ministers and Elders are to have the managing and ordering of matters,
in ^isquisition of truths.

5 Nothing is rashly to be concluded, but much cons^^atation and disputation is
to be used before.

6 Men must not burden those that have received the spirit of God, and true
faith, with any (...) which the Lord has not (...) it is to t^mpt the Lord.

7 That which Ministers themselves know not necessary, they are not to impose
on any, as necessary.

8 Obtruding of any thing of men's own, upon Churches, troubles and overthrows
the souls of men.

9 Amongst equals there may be for order one as Moderator, which hearing all
men's judgments is to conclude according to the determination of the Scriptures.

10 Things that may be done, yet troubling others, are not, nor ought to be
forced upon men.

11 Men are so far to yield to keep peace with their brethren, as is
possible; and yet to do nothing against a good conscience.

12 In Synods greatest sins must chiefly be interdicted.

13 To prevent offense to the brethren that are weak, we may, and the Church
ought to conclude things indifferent to be abstayned from by all.

14 Charity ought to be the ground of that which the Church commands in things
indifferent.

15 The Churches decrees bind not, save as they further the salvation of
others, and prevent offense.

16 The whole Church is to take order for the execution of such wholesome and
profitable constitutions as are agreed upon.

17 The Church of God is to procure respect to their decrees by persuasion of
learned and holy men, rather then by threats and compulsion.

18 There ought nothing to be agreed upon, and urged upon the Church by such
Synods, but what is necessary for the present times.

19 Things concluded on rightly by the Church, are to be observed, though not
as necessary to salvation, yet as profitable to prevent offense.

20 The churches decrees freeing men from the bondage of ceremonies, are very
comfortable to the servants of God.

21 The church has power to send Ministers from place to place, upon occasion
to other churches, from whence they may not return till they may be dismissed
thence.

The necessity of this: first for the peace of the Church: secondly, to detect
such as under the name of the church obt^ude things upon the Church without
command.

The excellency and authority of these: First, the spirit of God is specially
amongst them that gather rightly together: secondly, God will bless their
decrees for the great good of the church.

The rule of judging things here is first by the authority of Scriptures, which
is both affirmative and negative: 2 the peace of men's consciences which ought
tenderly to be regarded: 3 outward peace of the Church amongst the true members
of the same.

1 Cor. 14, The Apostle sets down how men should perform public service to
the Lord, whence for our direction these positions may be learned.

1 That men must chiefly bend themselves to prophecy and teach the people: th^s
binds us also to seek the good of the people.

2 Since the devil in all ages has endeavored to corrupt Gods ordinances,
and remove preaching, that is most profitable; therefore the greater care must
be had of all, that we do not suffer his policies to prevail.

3. Men should not speak with strange tongues in public without interpretation.

4 No public duty is to be performed which does not edify.

5 Prayer and thanksgiving are to be conceived by one alone.

6 Private persons are to give assent and testify the same by voice in the
end, by this word Amen; every one in his own person, not one called Clark for
others.

7 Good things, not done in a good manner, cease to be good.

8 The whole Church ought to meet together to perform public worship.

9 Unbelievers may be suffered and admitted to hear.

10 Such things as may discredit Gods Ordinances and worship, to simple
persons, and men of different religion, being not commanded by the Lord, ought
to be avoided, as kneeling in the Sacrament, etc.

11 True preaching must be such as makes ignorant and wicked men acknowledge
Gods presence with his Ordinances. 2 Such as lays open the very secrets of
men's hearts.

12 They whom the word soundly works on, will worship God, and reverence his
Ministers. It is not ceremonies that maks Ministers known, but the Word
preached soundly.

13 Every man ought so to employ his gifts as the church may have most benefit
by him.

14 Two or three Prophets at the most, are to speak at one public ordinary
meeting.

15 Prophets must discern for the people that no false doctrine be broached by
any.

16 Prophets ought to speak one by one.

17 The church has need of all men's gifts.

18 Since the end of the Ministry is to gain knowledge and comfort to all
men, all must labor in the word for these ends.

19 Men must so order things, as all may exercise their gifts for the public
good.

20 Every man's doctrine and preaching, may and should be tried and discerned by
the Prophets.

21 The disorder and dissension which is in the church, springs not from the
Lord.

22 The order appointed by the Lord, keeps peace.

23 No woman ought to speak in the public congregation.

24 All holy actions must be done with a seemly decency, which is, in fitting
and reverent manner, suitable to the action we go about. So as the benefit of
the exercise may redound to others.

24 All holy things must be done in order, so as one holy action be not
confounded, and drowned by another; but each part of divine worship, and every
person is to have his proper place.

Means for Decency and Order.
1 The nature and use of each gift, and duty must be known.

2 Men must carry themselves not so as they please themselves and win credit,
but as they may profit best the church, and keep peace with others.

3 Observe in the like case what Gods servants have done before, that are
mentioned in Scriptures.

This place binds because it is the commandment of the Lord. 2 All the reasons
are general.

Tit. 1.5, Titus must do all things in Crete, according as Paul had commanded
him: nothing was left to his own a bitrament: now Titus was an Evangelist, and
had greater power and authority then any ordinary Pastor, therefore the church
may not after the government left by the Apostles. For out of these words,
these positions arise naturally.

1 That Paul taught a form and manner of ordering churches.

2 Titus was bound to this and to none other.

3 Deacons and Elders, and the least things are described by the Apostles, and
left us in their writings, as afterward shall appear (God willing.) These
things bind us, as Moses writings bound the people of the Jews: for they were
sent to us, to make us Christ's disciples, and plant churches; therefore
discipline is no ways arbitrary.

4 The Apostles are enjoined to teach the churches to observe all things which
Christ had commanded: Whence it is plain, that men must be taught the will of
God for the way and means of salvation: 2 they must be dedicated to the Lord
by Baptism? 3 they must be taught to keep all things besides which Christ has
commanded, Sacrament of the Lords Supper etc. and Discipline: 4 Christ is
present where these things are, to bless them to the churches good: 5 they
ought to continue to the end of the world: 6 the church ought not to be
burdened with things not commanded by Christ.

This place binds firmly: 1 because Christ, Mat. 18, gave such commandment: 2
the Apostles taught these things to the churches, therefore they were commanded
by Christ before.

Ephesians. 4, Christ has given gifts unto men, both callings and abilities which
are sufficient, and only profitable to his church. These gifts are for
restoring of the Saints, and work of the Ministry, and therefore contain
discipline under them, which both restores the Saints and is a work of the
Ministry; therefore the churches government is not arbitrary: From hence note,

1 It is Christ's privilege to appoint Ministers, and the degrees thereof. 2 That
he appoints both extraordinary and ordinary: 3 He appoints sufficient for his
church. 4 The same that teach men by the Word, are to execute discipline over
them.

Hitherto by the Scriptures has this truth been proved. Now evident reason
grounded on holy Scripture proves the same.

Reas. 1, Christ by Moses taught how the church should be governed in the time
of the old Testament, both for the officers, Priests, high Priests and Levits;
therefore it cannot be, but that he coming in his own person, that was the
Day Star and Sun of righteousness, from whence all the other borrowed their
light, must needs teach his church how it should be ordered and governed, for
the light foretold extended to all things concerning the churches good.

2 The Church is the house of God, and therefore to be governed according to his
own will, which he has manifested for that end: and it is not to be supposed,
since the Lord requires us to set our houses in order, and he amongst men is
counted a careless unthrift, that leaus his servants to do what they l^st,
that he will himself neglect to give order, how both steward, and children, and
servants should be dealt withal. And if it be presumption for meaner persons
to dare to intrude and govern noble men's houses, according to their own will,
what is this to rush into the house of God, and sway all all things there by
affection, or carnal reason, without direction from God?

3 No human wisdom is sufficient, or able to govern the church of Christ,
wherein so many diseases are to be healed, and businesses to be dispatched for
the good of men souls, and preserving the people of God, and upholding the
Kingdom of Christ. Who is sufficient when he has all things to his hand, for
doctrine both matter and manner? Then much less is he able to govern, when
neither the persons nor manner is expressed. And if the worth est servants of
God were not able, not durst order any thing but what they learned from the
Lord; who are they that conce^t their own w^sedom, as though they were able to
bear this burden, and undergo this task, not being extraordinarily qua^^^ed by
the Lord? For all the instruments of the material Tabernacle, Temple or Church
in the new Testament, had both extraordinary direction from the Lord, and
extraordinary gifts for that they should do.

4 No man can show any license or patten^ from God, wherein he is warranted to
govern the church according to his own will; but rather contrary; not to add
or diminish from that which is written in the book of God.

5 The Scripture is perfect, making the man of God perfect and absolute to
every good work: therefore how to govern the church is taught in the Scriptures,
which are the will of God.

6 Christ left not his church without government and a special form of
discipline; for that were confusion; that would lay open the church to all
dangers, and no Polity or Soc^ety can long continue wherein Order and Discipline
is not observed: therefore it cannot possibly stand with Chr sts care and
wisdom that Discipline should be neglected.

7 Arbitrary forms of government overthrew the face of the church, and brought
in the Popes Supremacy (which is an argument it is not from God) who vaunts
himself as God, appointing what laws he will, and decrees, to hold men in awe
and subjection to himself, that he might Lord it over Kings and Princes: nor
is it to be supposed but that which is arbitrary will ever be corrupted: for
man's will and mind being naturally so vain and wicked, wanting a law to direct
and contain it in obedience, of it self grows corrupt, and abuses the power
which is given to it.

Here two Questions are to be answered.

1 Whether this form of discipline instituted by Christ may be altered? The
Answer s, it may not by any whosoever. The grounds of it are these following.

1 It is a special privilege of Christ's Kingly Office to govern his Church
outwardly by discipline, as well as by the Word, Christ has this Scepter and
Rod, and none ^^e for the souls of men; he has the Key of David, he that is
Prince over the Kings of the earth: wherefore no man has power to alter this,
for that were to advance man above Christ.

2 The Lord uses to for^shew his people what should be altered before it come
to pass, that changes disturb not their minds. This is plain; for thus be did
before he placed his name in Jerusalem, before Christ came, before the
Gentiles were to be called: Wherefore if the Lord would have altered this, he
would have told it his Disciples, else Christ should not be so faithful a
Prophet as Moses, who showed that covenant was to endure till Christ should
come: else Christ should not show all things needful to his Church.

3 The Lord shakes the heaven and the earth but once, after Moses and the
Prophets, Hag. 2, Heb. 12, therefore there is no alteration afterward of any
thing touching the worship of God. The Lord joyneth a renewing of his covenant,
with the institution of all things any way needful for his Church.

4 To desire a new form of government is to cast off the Lord from reigning
over us, 1 Samuel 8.7, which place binds in Ecclesiastical as firmly as in
Civil.

1 Because the Lord instituted this, as well as that: 2 there was no express
commandment that the people should ever be tied to this form of government,
but that it was rather appointed that they should have a King, and his duty
described: 3 the people desired it because they would be like the world in
state and pomp: 4 they did not first know the Lords pleasure, but headily
followed their affections. This place shows that men who alter the government
appointed by the Lord, though it should be into another form lawful in it
self, despise the Lord: 2 that such exclude the Lord from reigning over them.

Like to this is that Judge. 8.22, where Gideon being offered the Kingdom,
refused it for this cause, that the Lord might reign over them; which plainly
shows what wrong they do to the Lord, and his people, which bring in another
government then the Lords? For the Lord else would reign, defending his people
from all spiritual enemies, gently carrying his lambs upon his shoulders, and
leading them that are great with young, Esaias 40.11, whereas now Satan is every
where let in by seducers and idle shepherds, the Lords name is not known; his
goodness and mercy obscured and hid; men are tossed up and down, hindered in
their callings, loosing their money, and maintaining unprofitable d^oans.

A second quest^on, how may the discipline of Christ be known? Answ. by the^e
notes.

1 For the persons, Christ precisely forbids any one man to exercise Lordship
and A^thority over his people, Luke 22. This w^ll be more apparent hereafter,
therefore the government wherein any one Lo^ds ^t over the rest is not Christ's,
but where there is equality for jurisd^ction.

2 That which is most ancient, nearest, or rather one with the form followed by
the Apostles, undoubtedly is Chr^sts. Now such is not primacy of one over an
other.

3 That in the which men proceed in their censures by the rules of the Word,
which teaches who ought to be bound, and who ^oosed. But so do not they which
govern by Popish canons, by forced oaths; but such as proceed by admonitions,
rep^oofs, etc. according to Mat. 18.

4 That which best provides for the safety of men's souls, and most furthers
every man in the di^charge of his duty, that is from Christ; for he only so
governes; none else having such w^sedom or will. Such is not the government by
some one person over many congregations, which he is not able possibly to
oversee, but the contrary.

5 Which proceeds not after the manner of a worldly government, fearing men
with outward to^ments, fines, imprisonment, and the like, but in the power of
the spirit, and giv ng men over to Satan. Christ maintains his government by
no such forcible means.

6 That which is contrary or much opposite to the government of Rome: for
Antichrist corrupted (...), Sacraments and all: and ^t were worder ^f this
should not be corrupted, by wh ch he reigns most, and most effectually
e^^ablisheth his kingdom amongst men.

By all which, men not prejud^cate; and desirous to learn and practice the
truth, may understand what that is so much urged and pressed, rather by force
of arms, then evident ground of Scr ptures.

SECTION. XII.
SAtan has many devises to bring in errors amongst men to be entertained, he
changes himself into an Angel of light, comes in the name of Christ, Mat.
24, in the name of his best servants, 2 Thessalonians. 2, and of the Church: he comes
under pretense of glorious ends, to bring in devises of men. Wherefore that we
be not deceived by him, it shall not be amiss to speak something of the
Churches authority, and what power it has. Herein I propound some grounds.

1 That all the authority of the Church is rather in the Word and Ordinances of
God, then in their persons; so as without the Word and Ordinances the persons
are of no force. The power is in the Word, not in the Minister; in
Excommunication, not in the person that administers it.

2 The authority of the Church, though it may be usurped, yet it cannot rightly
be translated unto other officers, then Christ has committed it to.

3 The Churches authority is but ministerial; all she does, or can do, is as
a servant to Christ her husband, whose properly the keys are, Rev. 1.

4 All authority is to the edification and profit of the Church; none has
authority to hurt it, or lay stu^bling blocks before any.

5 All her authority in the use of every thing, is limited by the Word, which
is her charter and lease.

Hence it may appear what authority she has, and what she has not. What she
has I describe in these Propositions following.

1 The Church may read, interpret and publish the Scriptures of God.

2 The Church by the Scriptures may bind and loose, both in the Ministry of
the Word, Mat. 16, and Discipline, Math. 18, over all that are of the
congregation.

3 The church has authority to use aright, all the creatures and Ordinances of
God; all things be hers, 1 Cor. 3.

4 The church has authority from the generals of the Word, and the light of
Nature, to appoint things for the decent and orderly administration of the holy
things of God, 1 Cor. 11, and 14.

5 The church has authority to decree for the avoiding of offense, the
forbearing or using of any thing indifferent: for this is but the commandment
of God which the church manifests.

6 The church has authority over the members to dispose of them for the good
of other places.

1 Churches have no authority to teach any new doctrine, but are bound to the
Law and Testimony, Isa. 8, Deuteronomy. 4.

2 The Church has no authority to teach by any way, but only by the Word, and
those rites which Christ has left; by which he speaks: Math. 15, the Pharisees
are reproved, because they invented washing of hands to teach purity by.

3 The church has no authority to appoint any new Sacraments, Math. 28, 1 Cor.
11.

4 The church has no authority to join any thing she ordaines to the holy
things, as parts of Gods worship, absolutely necessary; or as means to
explicate any thing that seems more obscure in the service of God. The first is
plain, Esaias 33, formerly proved: the second is as plain, since Gods own worship
is his face: secondly, men that have and exercise the gifts of the Spirit,
shall sufficiently clear all and manifest it to the understanding, and
conscience.

5 The church has no authority to institute a new Discipline, this is plainly
proved in an other place.

6 The church has no authority to institute ceremonies or rites. 1 Which are
not decent, and fitting the nature and quality of that present ordinance of
God. 2 Orderly, as first, that each thing be done in his due place; public
things, publicly; private things privately: secondly, things more execellent
and necessary to be respected in the first place. 3 That things be done by
public persons that be public. 4 For Edification to build up in the graces
of God, loathing of Antichrist, whereto the church is bound in a special
manner, in these last times of the world.

7 The Church has no authority coactiue, but perswasiue, Act. 15, 1 Pet. 5.

8 The churches authority, and commanding of a thing does not make it simply
good, nor simply binds, but only ad (...), if there be no scandal, nor
contempt, it is no sin to break the same. 1 The nature of things cannot be
changed by any humane laws. 2 Paul, after the Decrees, Acts 15, taught, that it
was not simply unlawful to eat any meat.

9 One company of men assembled have no authority to impose things upon many
churches: 1 Because none now has Apostolical authority: 2 Each congregation
is a body independent of any Ecclesiastical power.

10 The Church is bound by the law of love from using such things as are
offensive, being otherwise in her power and liberty, 1 Cor. 8.

Whether they may be a Church that stand subject to Antichrists Government?
Answ. 1 If they dissent in judgment, and dislike in affection.

2 If they hunger after all means to have true Discipline, Mat. 5.

3 If they profess and witness, as they are called, against this false
government.

4 If men exercise a holy Discipline amongst themselves in admonishing and
exhorting one an other.

5 If they perforce and by compulsion yield to suffer such as usurp
Ecclesiastical government, under pretense of his Majesty's laws.

These things in truth where they are, argue and prove men to be members of the
true catholic church. 1 A promise of life is made to such, Math. 10, and Math.
5. 2 Others sin in usurping over them defiles not them. 3 It is a kind of
discipline to the true church suffering for discipline, God blessing it to his
people. 4 The church of God in times of Popery wanted this outward form. 5 This
outward form is necessary to the wel-being of a reformed church, not to the
being simply of Christians, for subjection of the whole man to the laws of God,
properly make a Christian.

Yet lest men should imagine they are well enough that lack this: and secondly,
lest some should think we plead for Baal. Therefore observe that the people, and
congregations that want this outward government are in great misery in the
outward man, and are wonderfully blemished.

1 He that breaks the least of Gods commandments, and teach men so, shall be
called the least, that is, none in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.

2 The government of Christ rightly administered, is a means to keep out Satan
from reigning, it walls in the Church, the want of it makes the people exposed
to every danger, and loses many a soul.

3 One Ordinance of God wanting, and another strange devise of man brought in
the room thereof, brings other Ordinances of God out of request, and in time
expells them.

4 Men though they want discipline, yet they are bound to perform such duties,
the more in private one toward an other.

SECTION. XIII.
IT is the duty of all the servants of God, to keep themselves unspotted of the
world, especially in the service of God, which Satan chiefly seek to corrupt,
as being the image and face of God.

Wherefore having showed before what, men are to avoid; now it remains to show
whom. And herein first of Reading Ministers, the bane of many souls; and in
speaing of them to show: 1 their unlawfulnes: 2 Their nullity: 3 That they are
not to be joined withal, nor maintained in that calling.

Arguments to prove their unlawfulness.
1 In the time of the old Testament, Priests and Levits were to teach the
people, to discern betwixt the clean and unclean, etc. therefore in the time of
the new Testament, wherein there is more abundance of spirit promised, and more
plentiful declation of Gods will, the Ministers ought to be able to teach Gods
people twixt good and evil.

This argument holds firm, since the Lord has as great care of his Church now
as then; and is as careful to have them avoid sin.

2 Where vision fails the people perish, Prove. 29.18, these men are no Seers,
nor have any vision but darkness and night.

3 They are dumb dogs, Isa. 56, that cannot bark, blind watchmen, shepherds
that cannot understand. What a lively description of a reading Minister here
is? He cannot understand what pasture is good or fitting for the people; he is
a blind Watchman that can foresee no danger, nor plague coming, when they do
hear Wolves are toward and amidst the flock; yet they have no mouths to bark
and fright them away. Let no man be so bold as to cavil at the Scriptures
which are so plain, that he which runs may read them.

4 They cannot divide the Word rightly, which is the chief work of the
Minister of the Word, 2 Timothy 2.15, which who so cannot do at all, is none of
Gods workmen: they who cannot, nor will study to do well, and righteously, are
none of the Lords servants.

5 They cannot defend the truth, nor stop the mouths of gainsayers, which
every Minister ought to do, Tit. 1. Else how shall errors and heresies be
prevented? and to run to others in this case, will yield small relief;
considering the unwillingnesse of the most to be taught, or take any pains at
least to seek instruction.

6 The Lord thrusts out Laborers, not Loyterers into the Harvest, such men as
do some execellent work for the good of his Church, Math. 9, Ephesians. 4, 1 Timothy
3.1. These men are idle, their work is not so excellent, nor is it special,
and proper.

7 The Shepherd that has nothing more then the Sheep have, cannot possibly
keep the sheep well, for then sheep might keep themselves, and the calling of
God is unprofitable. These have not so much as many sheep.

8 They are not fit to meddle with the soul, to seek it in time; being
distempred, they cannot show man Gods righteousness, neither pray for him;
they cannot seek that which is lost, nor bring back that which is driven away;
nor heal the sick. Now Ministers are chiefly sent thus to benefit the soul.
And if they cannot help in time of distress, they are miserable comforters,
like Jobs friends.

9 A Min^ster must preach and be instant, in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy
4.2. Hence it is plain what preaching is, namely, an expounding and applying of
the word of God, to build up the people of God, improving error, rebuking sin,
and exhorting upon sound doctrine. Are men so blind that they cannot see the
truth in this, but would make reading, preaching?

10 2 Timothy 2.25.26, Ministers must instruct with meekness such as are contrary
minded, proving etc. It is plain hence, the Minister must be able to instruct
all that are misled through error, and instruct them in the right way: 2 That
men's salvat^on depends upon the right applying of the Word.

11 The word thus barely read, has not the power and majesty that is mentioned
in Scripture, neither that efficacy and power in converting souls: which
argues it is not the arm of God.

12 Ministers are the Lords Ambassadors, and Stewards: these men cannot speak
nor sue to the souls for Christ, to beseech men to receiu him: neither can
they be faithful unto their Lord. They are the shame and dishonor of
Christian Churches, as though the Spirit of God were not purchased by Christ
for the furnishing of men for his Church. It is in effect to deny Christ's
victory over the enemy of our salvation, 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3.

13 He that wins souls is wise; these are not wise.

I suppose none will vouchsafe to Reply for these, that have any spark of piety
to God, or pity toward his people. Only some Non-residents, that keep poor
underlings; or greedy Patrones; or Popish Atheists, that would have the light
of the Gospel die; or poor ignorant people that never knew what the Gospel
meant; or men that would live at their own wills in all licentiousness; these
happily would undertake the plea against Christ. But it were better their
tongue should cleau to the roof of their mouth, then they should once dare go
about the overthrow of Christ's Ministry. Hear therefore and consider, that it
may go well with you.

Having showed the insufficiency, now follows the nullity of these men; which
the rather I insist upon, because many would be content, if they were
insufficient, being Ministers (carnal men, never so much regarding how the
Lord is served:) But being no Ministers in Gods acceptance, I hope it will work
upon them.

1 Therefore Hos. 4.6, God pronounces them none to him: (that is in his
acceptance) they are none whom God pronounces to be none: reading M^nisters
are pronounced none (in the sense mentioned) by the Lords own mouth, which
cannot lie. Who are you therefore, oh ye Prelates that ye dare admit of such! Or
who are you, o ye people, that ye are contented with such as cannot come to
the Lord for you, whose prayers are not accepted by the Lord for you! This
Argument is firm and cannot be gainsaid; For if the authority of man be enough
to displace whom God has sent, shall not the Lords authority much more
displace whom man only has sent?

2 He which wants either the nature, or essential property of a Minister, is
not a true Minister; for the nature and property of things cannot be severed
from the things themselves. But reading Ministers want either the nature, or at
least the essential property of a Minister: This appears, because the Minister
is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7, and his lips should preserve
knowledge. To teach the people is an essential property and difference twixt
the Minister and people. Whence it also appears that there is no difference
amongst Gods Ministers for the substance of their Calling. For each one is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. 2 He which is not a Messenger is no Minister,
for that is common to all. 3 He whose lips do not preseru knowledge is no
Messenger. Who sees not that the Reading Minister differs in the substance of
his Calling? 2 That he has no Message. 3 That his lips do not preseru
knowledge, but loose it rather. How dare ye counterfeit therefore the Lords
place any of you whom the Lord has not sent?

3 Christ has not gifted nor appointed for the good of his Church, Reading
Ministers, therefore they are none of his. For he is the King of his Church, and
men can no more bring in Readers then Friars amongst the people of God. 2
Ministers run because they are sent by him. 3 Christ will bless none but such
as he sends. That reading Ministers are not gifted, nor appointed, it is plain
from Ephesians. 4, where all are reckoned up that are allowed by Christ: which place
is left as a rule of trying Ministers. Try them by their office, and use of the
same.

4 Math. 28.19.20, Ministers must go and teach making others Christ's
Disciples, and teach them to obseru what he has commanded. Reading Ministers
hence are none: for he that has no authority from Christ, has none; for he
has all authority in earth as well as in heaven: Reading Ministers are not
sent by Christ. 2 They cannot so teach as others may be made the disciples of
Christ. 3 They cannot teach the converted to keep the Ordinances of Christ unto
the end of the world, which is added, lest any should think, that either men
converted, and Churches planted should not need the Ministry of the Word, or
that in some times of scarcity, men may put in Readers.

5 Math. 24. He that is not faithful, nor wise, is not set over the family of
the Lord, to give them their portion in due season: But Reading Ministers are
not faithful nor wise, neither know men's portions, neither the portion of one
nor another; for they cannot discern twixt a civil man, and the child of God;
neither know the portion of the weak nor of the strong; neither can they give
each one their portion in due season. This is plain by Experience.

6 Whom the Holy Ghost has not set over the people he is none: but these are
not set over by the Holy Ghost; for there is no rule nor example to warrant
them. This Argument is grounded on Acts 20.28, where the Holy Ghost is the
Author of the Ministry. 2 The persons are Elders, that are and ought to take
heed to themselves and others. 3 Are to feed and govern the Church of Christ;
which does not agree to the order of Reading Ministers.

7 He who is a Bishop of God, must be apt to teach; but these are not; for they
have no Ministerial gift, nor have they the form of wholesome doctrine. This
Argument is grounded upon Paul's Canons, 1 Timothy 3.1.

His wrok, who is a Minister, is so excellent, that who is sufficient for these
things? But reading ministers have no such work of excellency, but any young
Scholar may be sufficient for this work.

Every true Minister is successor to the Apostles in the substance of their
Calling, which is teaching the whole counsel of God to that Congregation they
are set over by the Holy Ghost: But these Readers are successors to dumb Dogs,
and blind guides. All divine relation is grounded either on the nature of the
thing, or some divine Institution, which indeed is the proper ground. To be a
Minister is a Divine Relation, and has no such ground in these men.

Object. 1. These are sent by the Church, therefore they have authority.

Answ. It is the privilege of Christ by his Spirit, to send forth Ministers,
as may appear, Math. 28, compared with Acts 20.28: 2 the Church has no
authority against the Word, this is against the Word to have such Ministers: 3
the Church has no more authority in Ordination then in Excommunication, but
Ioh. 9, whom men had unjustly excommunicated, the Lord absolved.

Object. 2. These are called dumb dogs, therefore Dogs.

Answ. The argument is not firm, from the name to the thing: For, the divill
raised up by the witch of Endor, is called Samuel: 2 they are so called, that
it may be known to whom the Holy Ghost speaks.

From hence it is plain how unlawful a thing it is to join with Reading
ministers, in any ministerial duty, either praying, or administering the
Sacraments; For,

1 All worship done to the Lord must be justifiable by the Word, and warranted
by same: But this worship is not. There is no place of Scripture to prove the
lawfulness of this service done by a Reader. This argument is strong. For the
Scripture is a perfect rule for all things, but especially for the worship of
God. And to use another worship then can be warranted, is to sin against the
Lord; and to follow blind devotion without judgment, which brings us to death.

2 It was the sin of Jeroboam that as he devised a new worship, so new
Priests of the lowest of the people. This is both a new worship never known in
the Church, t^ll Antichrist got in, to have only a s^t form of prayer; and
they are of the lowest of the people that are ministers of it, wherefore it is
but as Ieroboams worship.

3 Christ is not there by his institution, gifts nor spirit, which is the very
life of Christian duties. And the servants of God must be where their Master
is; which is, where m^n are gathered together in his name; which is, by his
institution, and gifts, and presence of his holy Spirit.

4 These are no true Ministers, as is proved before, therefore not safe to join
with them: that which they do is not pleasing to God, they having no Calling
thereunto, it is like the sacrifice of Core and Dathan, and the sacrifice of
Vzzah.

5 Men cannot thrive, nor grow in grace by such exercis^s, that have grace
already: they cannot come to see the^r misery, nor be st^rred up to r^nue the^r
^ep^ntance, that have this grace already, nor can they keep the Sabbath hereby.
W^tn^sse the exper^ence of poor Christians ^n this case, that are spiritual,
and can judge of things: these being wells, and clouds without water.

6 Men cannot possibly be fitt^d to ^eceiu the Lords Supper by such a
M^nistery: for th^s requires that each should b^ able to examine himself,
which none can do but such as are taught the g^ounds of Relig^on. 2 Men should
be st^rred up to this duty, being all so backward, as is pla n in the practice
of the Cori^t^^ans, which these m^n cannot do. Now what dang^r it is to
receive the Lords Supper unwo^thily, you may see, 1 Cor. 11, What good or
benefit can a man have by a dumb Dog, or a blind Gu^d^?

7 The people should seek the law at his mouth, whose lips prese u knowledge,
Mal. 2, and go to that shepherd that can feed them, and that Watchman that
can admonish them of danger; but th^se men's lips do not preseru knowledge.

8 These make no difference, having no discerning, but read Apocryphal
writings, and all that is in their way, which being directly against the Word,
command^ng Christ only to be hea^d; how can men join in the same with any
comfo^t?

9 Men hard^n the ^gnorant in this ev^ll way, and g^ue offense both to the b^nd
Min^st^^s and people, mak^^g as t^ough this were s^fficient to salvat on.

10 Men by this p^oclaine the^r small account of Gods own Ord^nances, which
they might enjoy by the same pa ne^, cost, o^ removal, or ^lse profit
themse^ues more in pr^vate.

You therefore, dear br^thren, that live under such, consid^r wh^t you do^; you
live as Athi^sts indeed upon the ma^te^. For what are your prayers, and
rec^iving of Sac^am^nts, which you th nk is the best serve ce of God, but a
provoking of the Lord to anger? That you should dare to send such a l^me and bl
nde m^ss^nger to the Lord of Frosts, and such sacr^fices withal coming from
the drowned in ignorance and superst^t^on: and that you should put the Lords
name upon such a M^nister which is not s^^t, nor allowed by him? Do you not
deprive your selu^s of those excellent and p^ec^ous treasures in the Gospel of
Christ, because you want a man to preach them? Ep^es. 3, Do you not hereby
^ndanger and loose your souls, which live in ignorance? 2 Thessalonians. 2. Do you
know the anger of the Lord will be upon you for this? Hos. 6. Would you choose
for the bodies sake, such a Physician as has no skill at all, nor any good
report to have cured any under his hand? Or such a Counselor, as could not
advise, but read you a statute, or book-case, at all adventures? Would you
trust your sheep with an Idoll-shepheard, that cannot tend them? And will ye
make so small account of your souls, thus to pass them over? O return and
seek the Lord, ye have hitherto sitten in ignorance, and in the shadow of
death: you never knew what the Gospel meant, nor what a God the Lord is:
witness the base and wicked conceiving of him, and carriage toward him in
public and private. Wherefore let this move you to provide you a man of
understanding, that may be able to f^ed you. Turn you therefore from all your
evil wa^es, that ye may be brought to Sion, the place where the Lord will be
found, and seen of all his people. Let none be so hardy as to maintain these in
their Callings.

SECTION. XIIII.
THe next sort of Min^sters, whereof some doubt, whether they may hear them or
no, are such as conform to these ceremonies now controverted. Which howsoever
it come in them from an utter hatred of Popish devises, and an heart careful
to keep themselves unspotted of the world, yet without all quest^on they err.

Concerning th^s therefore, that more clearly the truth may be boulted out, we
will propound some grounds to stay upon.

1 The Ordinances of God remain pure and holy, though men be corrupt that
administer them; and so are like the Lord.

2 Private men are bound to try the doctrine of M^n^sters, and look to that
rather then be examin^ng of their entrance into that Calling, they are in, this
all the Scriptures run upon.

3 God does good to his Church by the gifts he has given to wicked men for his
people: For they are from the Holy Ghost given to restore the Saints, and for
the work of the Ministry.

These things considered, it may appear upon sufficient grounds, that men may
lawfully hear.

1 Such as are conscionable in their Ministry, though they err in judgment
for the Ceremonies, and be ordained according to the manner of the times:

For first these have the substance of a lawful calling, elect^on and
approbation from the people.

2 Dissension in lesser matters has never hindered either Communion, nor
est^em^ng one of another, twixt the servants of God. Phil. 3.

3 These are sent of God, though not by this way, they are not unlike to Jacob,
whose the blessing was, though he should not have sought ^t by lying.

4 Their sin in admission is their own personal sin, and cannot hurt others,
not partaking with it.

5 Men may and ought to receive their send^ng, not from men, but from the Lord
of the Harv^st.

Object. It seems to approve their sin, since men partake with them in their
Ministry which they have gotten unlawfully. Is it not to communicate in
stolen goods?

Answ. No, for they ought to be admitted, and the Ministry is the^rs, and the
Congregations choosing them: only, it is their error to come in by a wrong
way. Now to st^al is to take from men that which does not belong unto them,
which cannot be applied to them.

A second sort of Ministers are bad, and corrupt in doctrine and manners: these
preaching many truths from God may be heard: For,

1 They sit in Moses chair, Matthew. 23.2, Moses chair is the doctrine of Moses,
otherwis^ they should have sit in Aarons chair, if he had spoken of the Calling.

2 Otherwise we should not yield absolute obedience to the doctrine taught,
except it were Moses doctrine.

3 The main cause why the people should hear these is manif^sted by our
Savior; but this is not so much succession in Calling, as succession in
Doctrine.

1 These Pharisees had corrupted their Call^ng.

2 They perverted the Law with their Glosses.

3 Were ignorant of the righteousness of faith.

4 Hipocrites in life, and bitter enemies to the Kingdom of Christ.

5 They preached the Word without authority, coldly, as did not stir affections.

2 Argu^ Doctrine and gifts are the Churches, who may take their own from a
very theife.

Yet these Cautions must be observed.

1 That we be able in some measure to discern and try the spirits.

2 That w^ be compelled by necessity.

3 That we b^ careful to get what p^ivate and pub^^que help possibly we can.

4 That we hunger after other powerful means, and as soon as the Lord offers
any we remove and follow the light.

5 Refuse private conversing with them.

6 Contend for the truth in any part oppu^ned by them.

Object. May not Popish Jesuits, or the like, then be heard.

Answ. Th^se are the professed servants of the beast, not of Ch^^st, for they
have quite changed the Ministry into a Pri^s^hood.

2 We are quite separated from this false Church, by the commandment of the
Lord, and the Magist^ate, and all Chu^ches assenting to the same.

3 Th^se do plainly seek to seduce us, and withd^aw us from the wor^h^p of the
true God; all which cannot be found ^n these of our own Church, from which we
have ^o such warrant to separate, nor do seek to draw us qu^te from Christ in
fa th.

Yet thus far let me speak to you of the Ministry, thus corrupted, that are
negligent, and do not sorwa^n the people of God of danger. You that look to
your own ways, and make your belly your God: You that preach as they Ier. 5,
that other Lords may ^ule over the flock of Christ. Consid^r what you are; Are
you not men of God? Should not you be holy that draw near to the Lord? Should
you trouble the waters with your T^aditions, that none can drink almost w th a
good consc^ence? Should you make the sacrifices of God abhorred by your
d^ssol^tenesse? Should you smite with your tongues your fellow s^rvants, whose
Min^stery and conversation you know is better then your own? Should you use the
flock of Christ as you do, never visiting of them many of you? If woe be to
them that join house to house; what shall become of you that join Congregation
to Congregation, and to these prebenships, D^anries? etc. Should you be
terrible to the humbled and afflicted souls? Surely, the Lord will judge for
his people. Hear you that force men to things against their conscience, without
warrant from the Word: You that accuse the truth of God of fa^^ood, that oppose
ho^^nesse and sincere obedi^nce to the whole word: You that make sad the hearts
of the righteous, and preach^ng pleasing things, st^^ngthen the hand of the w
cked, that none can ret^r^ from h^s wickedness; that propound the truths you
teach, generally and confusedly in frothy eloquence, glorying to fill your
Sermons with patcht up sentences of heathens; Beware, and turn and fly from
the wrat^ to come. You lay open the land to m^sery. Will not that move you to
pity? And to stir up your selves to preach sincerely, and dilligently! you
bring the blood of souls upon your heads, Ezech. 34. Woe be to you without
repentance: for the Lo^d will be sanctified in them that come near him, and you
shall be despised or destroyed. The Lord will raise him a faithful Samuel in
your sted, who shall speak his words faithfully to his people. Shift it not
off, saying, this is the word of some malicious foolish Puritan: for these woes
are against such sins, which whether they be in you, I refer it to the
Lord, your own conscience, and all indifferent men to judge. This I would not
have thought, as spoken against all that conform, God forbid. But against such
as conforming, or not conforming, live scandalously, and are ^nemies to the
Gospel of Christ; not enduring others should exceed them ^n g^fts, or pa^^s in
their M^nistery, or in strictnes^e of l^fe. Hear you, or else the Lord will
curse your blessings, and your great l^v^ngs shall make you the more miserable.

SECTION XV.
TO proceed without w^tnesses by the oat^ ex officio is not lawful against
any, especially against M^n^sters, For

1 It ^s against the law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.4, and 19.15, this law is confirmed
by Christ and his Apostles in the new T^stament.

2 It is against the law of nature to accuse our selves; nature teaches men to
procure their own good.

3 It is against the direct command of our Savior, Math. 18, where he would
have no censure of the Church to p^sse upon men, except they being admoni^^ed,
be proved by two or three w^tnesses to be obstinate.

4 It is against common reason, that Ministers and Christians, that are subject
to most vile and false reports, should be forced to purge themselves, upon
every light and vain persons informat^on.

5 It is against the rule of Paul, 1 Timothy 5, Against an Elder receiu not an
accusation under two or three witnesses.

6 It is against the laws of the land, both Statute and Common laws.

7 It is against the nature of an human law, which is but to punish for open
sins, Deuteronomy. 17.4.

8 It is to search the things God leaves by his providence to be revealed in
their time, 1 Timothy 5.24, Some men's sins go before, and some follow after.

9 It is against all equity: For men may be both judges and parties.

10 It is against the law of love to accuse our brethren, and it it is to play
the devils office.

11 No law nor custom of Nations, save the Spanish Inquisition uses this, for
searching out of true Christians, Acts 25.16.

12 It is against the speech and solemn profession of Doctor Whitgift, that any
should have this oath urged against them in case of life, liberty, or scandal.

13 It is against all conscience, that a man should bring himself into
trouble. If the Lord, or his Magistrates, do inflict a punishment, patience may
bear, and the Lord may give strength: But who can look for such peace when we
are our own executioners?

14 It is against the pract^se of our Savior Christ, who being accus^d, and
asked many things of scandalls, would answer nothing: only, he witnessed a
good confession touching his person, and his office, Matthew. 26, and 27.

15 It is to approve of some special privilege in these men, which is not in
any other of his Majesty's officers for just^ce; that these ex mero officio,
should proceed against men.

16 From the inconveniences men fall into that take this oath. The a^ticles and
interrogatories being drawn as snares to entangle men in, and to get matter
against them, when they can find none apparent.

17 It is against the law of friendship to reveal secrets: and especially for
Ministers.

18 As it is now used it will not free men from trouble, for they use
extremities to them that take it: except men forsake their sincerity and yield
to their wills.

19 It is against the nature of an oath, which is to end a controversy amongst
men in causes criminal, before Judges; neither can any use hereof be given.

20 It is against the word of the Lord in Jeremy: Thou shall swear in judgment.

21 Wisdom in Governors has other means then this to find out secret
offenses, w^tnesse Solomon.

Object. 1. The woman suspected of adultery was to purge he^ self.

Answ. The thing there suspected is very evil, such as might dissolve marriage.

2 It is Ceremonial; witness the Ceremony annexed to it, having joined with
it a miraculous event in the guilt e.

3 The thing is known about which she is to be sworn.

4 It is but one particular case, not many interrogatories.

Object. 2. Exodus 22.10.11. The man that is suspected of theft ought to clear
himself by an oath.

Answ. It was before the Judges of the land.

2 It was in cases criminal: that were simply evil, and not in cases of
conscience.

3 There was an open wrong and loss to the one pa^ty.

4 It was but to one particular, not to ^nsnare him any way.

5 His oath ended the controversy.

Now these things cannot be found in this; for it is not before the Judges of
the land, though I would not much stand with them for it; yet it has ever been
of evil report, for Ministers to deal by vio^ence, in so much as in t^mes of
Popery, the Clergy, so called, were abashed themselves to condemn any.

2 These things for which they object the oath to us, are merely good, and not
punishable by any of the laws of the Land. It is necessary first to convince
the party, that to do such things as are objected (suppose to meet together
and pray) are simply evils and sins: 2 to prove them punishable by the laws of
the Land.

3 Here is no wrong by the exercises of Religion to any, but much good: what
difference there is then any may discern.

4 Here are many insnaring interrogatories; and men search not so much for the
truth, as to wring it out after such a manner, as may be prejudicial to him
that swears; there is as much subtilty and uncharitableness showed herein as
in any thing.

5 In this oath the controversy is not ended, but many times begun.

SECTION. XVI.
HEre it will not be amiss to insert some things of the communion wh ch the
(...) may have in private, to perfo^m private duties. F^^st, therefore o^serue
these grounds.

1 What duties cannot be perform^d in publ^que, ought to be performed in
p^ivate.

2 That God has not restrained nor bound any pa t of his servic^ to the
public places only; but so as necessity urgeing, we may us^ the same in
private, it b^ ng not against the nature of the Ordinances.

3 The Ordinances of God are properly the inheritance of the ch^lor n of God.

4 The Commun^on of the Sa nts ought to be, to build up one an other. Hence it
will follow,

That it is not unlawful to preach the wo^d pr^vately: For, 1 Christ d^d it in
every house, whose example in all moral things, without all question we are
bound to follow. 2 The Apostles Acts 5, they had then tolle^at^on to preach,
they were not proh^bited herein, they followed Christ, and we are therefore to
follow them. 3 The Apost^e Paul, Act. 20 20, makes this one Argument of the
conscionable discharge and faithfulness in his Call^ng, that he had taught
from house to house. 2 He propounds h mselfe as a pattern unto them. 4
M^n^sters are the laboure^s and servants to the Church, and ought therefore in
private and publ^que to inst^uct them. 5 Act 8, Phillip joined to the chariot:
whence it ^s plain, the Lo^d w^ll have his serv^n^s to tak^ all occasions to
win any. 6 That which may tend, and is ^equisite to ed^fication being the
desire of Gods children, ought and may be used by the Ministers; but pr^vate
teaching may, and does build up ^uch, Ioh. 11. 7 M^nisters may read the
Scriptures, and therefore give the sens^, and teach the people to make use of
the same. 8 The t uth of God must be taught, and when ^t cannot in public,
then ^t must be taught in private altogether. 9 None but Popish Canons, and
German inter^ms were ever aga nst it, till now. 10 The f^nction of the
Ministry is so large and weighty, that take all occasions, and do to the
uttermost, yet much a do to do our office in any sort. 11 There are no sound
arguments against this course, for Christians to be exercised in private; only
such reasons as savor of sloth or profaneness are brought against us. 12 That
which every private man is bound to, that the Ministers of God are much more
bound to; But private men are bound according to their gifts, Deuteronomy. 6, and
Deuteronomy. 11, to instruct and admonish, and stir up others.


Nevertheless this ought to be done so, as men do not neglect public
means, for which private should prepare, and fit us.

2 So as Ministers do not disable themselves from doing the public duties.

3 So as men do not neglect any necessary duty in their special Calling.

A second kind of communion is to admonish and reprove some scandalous
professors; for these, men may meet together. For, 1 Discipline is the healing
of the sick soul, and finding that which was lost, which all in their place
are bound to, Math. 18. 2 Paul commanded the Church to mee^ 1 Cor. 5, for this
end. 3 Men that do not reprove others are guilty of their sins, and hate them,
Lev. 19. 4 Examples of all times warrant this; our Savior Christ in abso^v^ng
the man cast out, Ioh. 9. 5 Gal. 6.1, A charge is laid upon all that are
spiritual. Breth^en, therefore I beseech you consider these things; men's souls
are precious, the devil is polit^ck, ever like a roa^ing L^on, watching for
his prey: the long^r men hold on in any course, the hardlie^ are they
reclaymed. 6 Men d^pa^t ng away draw many others with them, and so Christ
loses many sheep for want of tending. 7 In common dangers when public helps
are wanting, every one is more tied to his b^othe^: ^oue in this c^se must
especially appear.


A third kind of Communion is to exho^t and stir up another by conference,
and to rep^at Sermons; this ought to be, though d^scipline be set up, at times
conven^ent.

1 Hebr. 10.24, 25, Men must consider one another to provoke to love and good
works.

2 Men must not forsake the Assemblies which are private Meetings; since each
must exhort one another. Every man is bound as he has received the gift to
minister the same: 1 Pet. 4.10, therefore men ought to meet.

3 Private Conference helps each ones weaknesses, both in memory and
understanding: one does supply another want.

4 Ier. 6, Men must stand and inquire.

5 These exercises make men blessed and happy, Psalm. 1.

6 Experience proves them to thrive best which use these meetings, in a holy
and reverent manner.

7 The practice of all ages witnesses this, Mal. 3.

8 The nature of Gods spirit is to draw the Saints together in one; where, in a
more special manner, he is present assisting them.

A fourth kind of Communion is to pray and humble themselves; this is plain,
Acts 12, where the Holy Ghost records it, and the fruit of it appears in Peter's
deliverance, and Ester.

2 No duties that may possibly be performed ought to be omitted when the Lord
^als for them. These duties of fasting and prayer, the Lord calls for, in time
of calam^ties, Math. 9.

3 Every Christian ought apart to fast, if he have no company, or no
convenient means with others; as Daniel, Nehemiah: but ever we must covet as
much as ^s possible to be together, where the Lo^d is especially present, Act.
13, Math. 18.

4 Many private and more special causes, which are matters of great weight,
and urgency which are to be comm^nded to the Lord with fasting; this being the
means, which ever the Saints have used to stir up themselves and others by,
Luke 2.

5 It is a sin not to be expiated, bringing certain judgment when men do not
fast and humble themselves: the Lord calling thereunto, Isa. 22.

6 Experience shows this practice, to keep life in men, and preserve them
from dee^^ning, to keep a foot the ministry of the Word, Act. 13.

7 The devil and our own corrupt natures are special enemies to this exercise
of Religion.

8 Only the true children of God can discern dangers plainly before they come,
therefore they ought to meet together, though others do not that see no danger.

By all this we may see whence that advise is, which is too much followed; to
wit, to bring in Popery again, in doing whereof they obseru Machivill^an policy.

1 They nourish the people in ignorance under blind Guides, that so they may
readily receive any thing, and have no discerning tw^xt truth and ^rrour: For
all men natu^ally like well of this Religion, as pleasing to the senses and
carnal reason.

2 Let there be Popish ceremonies and customs retained; for all that while it
is well enough; many people never mind so much the doctrine that is taught, as
the Ceremonies that are seen.

3 They that are chief let them favor Papists. 2 Persuade to a commoderation.
3 Suppress them that are greatest Antipapists, both Ministers and people, that
will be so forward.

4 Let men be kept in a d^slike of the right way, by inveighing against it, as
schismatic, and d^abolicall.

5 Let men teach the people the great authority the Church has in command^ng.
2 Let them teach how the people ought quietly to submit themselves to their
Minister whatsoever, and be content with him. 3 Let them that seek Reformation
be made odious to the people. 4 Let them be taught not to search things
doubtful, but believe their Minister. And in cases controverted, let men rely
rather on the great learning of the present Church, and reverend antiquity,
then to follow these new Geneva-like preachers, that will have nothing
warranted but that which is approved by the Scriptures.

6 Let not the Gospel be freely preached: For these exercises of preaching,
and prophesying cut down the kingdom of the Pope. This is so full of light,
that if it be preached so plainly as many do, it will lay open all.

7 Let men have such a kind of serving God, as will not stir nor trouble
them, but altogether please and delight. Let them have such preaching, singing,
organs etc.

Are not these from Satan? Are they not directly against Christ and his
Kingdom? And the Kings Majesty and his Kingdom? which falls or stands, not with
a Bishop and Ceremonies, but with the Kingdom of Christ rather; witness that
experience of the Fr. King, who revolting from the truth, how did the Lord meet
with him? Wherefore be wise o ye Elders of Israel, and sleep not you that are
the Lords Watchmen. The devil sows tares, and the peace of the King, and weal
of the Kingdom depends upon the suppression of Popery. Take heart every
trueh^a^ted Christian, and stand in your places against such courses, as bring
either Atheism or Idolatry. Keep up the Word soundly preached by the Ministers
of God, which are the strength of the land. Encourage the servants of God that
are most ca efull to please the Lord. Cause that there be a general turning to
the Lord by fasting and prayer. Let the Sabboths of God be kept and sanctified,
and t^y then whither the Lord stay not his judgments, and bless the land more
then ever. Then you shall be called, The Restorers of the Breaches.

And if you be not more careful to seek the Lord, and walk by his wisdom,
know that all human power cannot uphold your Kingdom against Satanicall d^vises.

SECT. XVII.
Whether it be fitting to bury in Churchyards?
Answ. IT seeems no, For the Scripture and practice of all the Saints is
against it.

2 Men place religion and holiness in it, and when things indifferent come so
be abused, they are not lawful to be used.

3 This has and does cause so many prayers to be read over the dead.

4 The covetousness of Priests and Friars, has been a special means of this
course.

Whether it be not not needful to pull down Churches built for the honor of
Idols?
Answ. It seems it is. For 1 Hos. 4.15.

2 The house of Baal was destroyed.

3 The high places ought to have been d^stroyed.

4 It is a part of holiness to overthrow the Groves, Deuteronomy. 7.

5 The name and memorial of Idols ought to be rooted out.

6 To dedicate Churches to a Saint is Idolatry, which ought to be removed.

7 The gold of graven Images is an abomination to the Lord, and an accursed
thing, therefore also Churches which ^are so defiled.

Object. These places were unlawful because the Lord had chosen a special
place where be had put his name.

Answ. That reason is never given: 2 the pollution by Idolatry is ever urged as
the chief cause.

Means that the people may be fitted for Reformation.
1 Men must hunger after all Gods Ordinances.

1 Must set their hearts to seek the Lord by earnest praying, and turning unto
him.

3 They must obseru an holy Discipline amongst themselves in admonishing and
reproving one an other, etc.

4 Must touch no unclean thing, abhorring all Romish Relics, and Ant^christ
especially.

5 When men mourn for the burdens laid upon them, and groan for the misery of
others.

6 Rejoice in the forwardness of them that are most zealous, not envying one
an other.

7 That special prayers be continually offered up to the Lord for the
Magistrate.

The danger of separation after the manner now used by some.
Let none imagine that because I write against the practice of Seperat^on, that
therefore I hate the persons, whom I am pe^^wa^ed th^o^gh tende^nes of
conscience do w^thsta^d these corrupt^ons.

Hear th^^fore a friends reproof who tenders your good, and desires the holy
ordinances of God, and in all th ngs to keep a good conscience. Sometimes
affection may outrun soundnes of judgment, and in s^eking to fly more then is
sin, we fall into greater corr^ptions, and nourish much ^vill in us.

Brethren, disdain not to read a few lines which I know cannot abate your zeal,
and may through Gods blessing make your course more comfortab^e. Consider well
therefore of these g^ounds I lay, as a way to that wh ch follows.

1 That there is in each a natural affect^on like zeal; as in other graces,
the deceitful heart will counterfeit gr^^e, so in th^s; witness Iehu: there is
an error on the right hand.

2 That this blind zeal carries men headlong without examination or sea^ch of
their ways to censure others, when there is no power further to hurt.

3 Men may oppose corruptions in public, and yet neglect to fight against sin
resolutely, and zealously in themselves, thereby thinking to please God highly.

4 That Tolleration is not approbation Act. 17.30.

5 It is the desire of Satan and our own^ to separate, from the true children
of God, upon any occasion whatsoever, these enemies much respect.

6 Men rending themselves from the true Church, as no Church, cannot tell where
to stay, nor to whom to join themselves which makes their rents incurable.

7 Men may join themselus to the purest Congregations, if it be without
condemning others, as nothing.

8 Christ is not ever accompanied withal his ordinances in act, but many times
he goes in one or two amongst his people. A Church holding the foundation,
though it err in many particulars remains a Church still.

9 Many commands bind the Magistrate to redress things amiss, which private
persons cannot possibly reform.

10 Gods Ordinances make us one with the Lord, and with men, no further then
they are one with the Lord.

These things agreed upon, I doubt not but men will yield to these Arguments
following against total separation.

First, there ^s a true Minist^ry in the Chu^ches of England, therefore it ^s
lawful to join with them.

That there is a true Ministry it may appear.

1 Because men have gifts to dispense the Word.

2 Men are chosen by the people.

3 Grave and godly Preachers do approve of the ent^^ng ^n of many.

4 Men have ord^nation though not aft^r the purest manner, but corrupt, which
coming to their knowledge they repent of.

5 Men exercise their Ministry, not by virtue of a^y power from men, but
because the Lord hat^ s nt them.

6 The hand of the Lord is with them, to prosper h^s own wo^k, so as men are
brought to the Lord.

Secondly, where the Gospel is soundly preached, and men yield obed^ence to
the known truth, thereto we may saf^ly join. For these are the ^eep of Christ,
Ioh. 10.

Object. The Gospel is not faithfully preached, many truths are concealed.

Answ. The main and fundamentfull truths, which give life to a Christian are
purely and wholly taught, as the doctrine of faith and ^epentance.

2 Other circumstantiall truths are taught too: 1 generally to the
und^^stand^ng of the w^se: 2 in practis^, in that men do abstain from all
things they judg^ to be sin: 3 They suffer that is sa^d upon them for
refusal hereunto: 4 Some have taught th^se t^uths controv^^t d, by writing and
private R^solut^on: Suppose ^t be a want amongst us, as I confess men have
been too wary, for the most part, in this kind: yet notwithstanding consider,
each want does not bring a nullity of the Ministry.

3 Reason. Men must not separate, till the Lord separate; for Gods people must
follow the Lo^d, not go before him, and they must not be holyer then he, who
is of purest eyes.

Now the Lord is not s parated till he give men over, and send no mo^e
Prophets to turn them to him: for till then, though men have forsaken the Lord,
yet he forsakes not them.

4 All Christians are bound to follow the Lamb whersoever he goes; and join
with him against the sins of the times; therefore m^n should not separate so,
and leave Christ, but each to help and stand for Reformation, encouraging the
servants of the Lord that are sent out to protest against corruptions.

5 No instance can be given that ever the servants of God have severed, or were
commanded to separate further then from the corruptions of the time, to have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, to touch no unclean thing.

6 Men mourning for sin, not acting, nor joining in consent in any known evil,
are not guilty of others sins: therefore Lot was not guilty of Sodoms sin,
seeing they vexed his righteous soul, 2 Pet. 2.7, Eze. 9, in the Churches of
England men may do thus.

7 This kind of separation obscures the good providence of God toward the
land, which gives some liberty in his service, but with some pains, cost and
other crosses, which usually accompany the pure worship of God. This is no
small sin, to bereave the Lord of the glory of so great mercy in spiritual
blessings, as he has showed toward our land.

Secondly, this passes rash judgment upon many reverend Preachers, and godly
people.

Thirdly, men hereby despise, and so loose the b^nefit of the prayers of the
Saints, which is the greatest ben^fit in the wo^ld, next to the min^ste^y of
the Wo^d.

Fourthly, men so separate as they join to no reformed Church that holds and
pract^seth the same holy Ordinances of God which they desire, and walk in the
same way of obedi^nce with them.

8 Whereas they might give testimony to the truth in suffering for the
Ordinances of God, now they suffer for separation from the Word preached.

9 The power of the Gospel does as much app^ar in any of the Professors, being
in our Church, as it does when they are separated, which should not, if they
only had the O^d^nances of God.

10 Gods children may eat their own meat though dogs and sw^ne be admitted,
through the neg^^gence of them that should exerc se Discip^^n^.

Wherefore b^^thren follow after truth, b^t^n love, that you may have the more
inward pe^c^, and do the more good. Oppose error, b^t not any truth: fight
against the world, but s^^rr not against the ch^^d^en of God. Make not the
Church weak by your r^nting from it: nor give occasion to the adversaries to
speak evil of those truths you hold, and ordinances of God which you seek.

SECTION XVIII.
BEcause it is so often in the mouths of men, that these things controverted,
are things indifferent: therefore it will not be amiss to set down some
special rules for discerning and using things indifferent.

A thing indifferent properly is a mean, twixt good and evil, and in it self
neither good nor evil.

1 It is a mean seated twixt the extremes, having not the nature of either
extrem: So that a thing commanded or forbidden by the Lord is not indifferent.

2 Twixt good and evil: therefore that which is a mean in respect of some other
sin is not indifferent; as fornication is less ^vill then adultery, yet evil
and not indifferent, the like may be said of degrees of goodness.

3 In it self; that is, in its own nature: for in the particulars every action
is good or evil. So that the goodness or evil of a thing indifferent, is not
from it self, but from the user: if he be pure or impure, from the
circumstances, from the manner of doing it: So that an action of the same kind
may be evil in one, in another commendab^e: The laws of man cannot make the
things that are indifferent, simp^y good or evil; ^o^ t^en they should change
the very nature of things, which men cannot.

What things are indifferent.
THe things that are indifferent are such as are left unto man's free cho se,
for the exerc^se of wisdom, faith, sobriety, love, and the l^ke graces of God
in him. Where by the way we may observe; why some things are left indifferent.

1 Because in their own nature they are neither good nor ev^^l, and therefore
not to be commanded or fo^b^dden.

2 Because the Lo^d would have a^l his grac^s, and the powers of men's souls to
be the more exerc^sed: for the hardest things in Religion, are often about
things in^^fferent.

3 There should be infinite rules given then, for these cases are innumerable,
and so the knowledge of things absolutely needful should be hindered.

The particular kinds of things indifferent are.
1 Meats and drinks: it is true, there is nothing of it self unclean.

2 Garments are things indifferent.

3 Recreations.

4 The time of public assembling together upon the Sabbath.

5 And lastly, whatsoever a man may do without impiety toward God, or wrong
to man.

In the use of things indifferent; first every man must learn the right use
from the Word, 1 Timothy 4, for our own reason is very bl^nd here^n, and custom
exceeding corrupt, and this must the rather be rememb^^d: Because,

2 Man must give account to Christ for his using things indifferent.

3 Every man must be fully persuaded in h^s own conscience, that the thing he
does is lawful n it self; this persuasion is a certain knowledge in his own
heart and conscience from the light of the Word, and the spirit of God shining
in him. This excluds doubting: 1 that is sin. So is 2 depending upon others, or
following others example: 3 When men are persuaded, but by shows of reason, or
of men, not by sound grounds out of the Scripture.

4 Each man must be very wise in using this liberty. 1 Men must discern what is
expedient and may further to edify others. 2 Men must discern times and
circumstances.

5 Men must be very careful in the use of things indifferent lest they be
brought in bondage to them in judgment.

6 A man must use them soberly.

7 A man must use them as things indifferent, without opinion of holiness, or
merit, or necessity.

8 A man's end must be ever Gods glory, and his own good: this excluds al using
of them to the honor of any Idol.

9 Men must be very thankful for the liberty purchased by Christ, though they
should not enjoy the things in this life.

10 Men must not seek themselves only in the use of things indifferent.

11 Men should choose that way, that may most fit them for their serving of God
in both their callings.

12 Men must stand fast, and not loose their right purchased so deer.

13 Men must be content to be restrained by the Magistrate, from the over
common use of a thing indifferent, for the public good. These rules being
given of God, no man can command against them.

14 Men must not despise and judge one another, for the use or forbearing of
things indifferent.

15 Men must use them in love.

16 Every man is bound to use a thing, or forbear it, as it may most benefit,
and build up others.

These things must be remembered; because the mind of man is wanton naturally,
and in things indifferent, takes more liberty far th^n ^t ought.

Secondly, because in all times many would abridge Gods children of their
liberty.

Hence it may easily appear, that the grounds of one side, to u^ge these things
upon us, are weak; and that the exceptions on our side, are not foolish and
frivolous, as may appear both from their nature, and use.

From their nature, because these things now controverted are not ind^fferent.

1 Because they are b^eaches of the second commandment.

2 Are Idolothits.

3 Are against order, decency, and edification.

4 There is as great reason why the weak should be born withal, for not doing
th^se, as the Jews for not believing Christian liberty by Christ, from Moses
ceremon^es.

S^condly, their use is not according to the rules; For, 1 Men cannot prove
these things indifferent from the Word. 2 Men would persuade others, if it be
sin, it is the Magistrates sin, none else. 3 Men would force others by
commanding only, not persuading: secondly, their persuasions are example and
antiquity, which are no grounds for the conscience to restion. 4 Men would have
us to yield to their discretion in appointing such things, without any
examination of expediencie. 5 Men are brought in bondage to them, to use them
whether they profit or no. 6 Men imag^ne all good order is broken, if these be
not used. 7 How can they be used, without show of approving the superstition of
Rome? 2 what good does any man reap hereby? 8 Men seek themselves, and out of
an opinion of learning, take liberty to do what they please, like the
Corinthians. 9 Men stand not fast, but make themselves servants of men. 10 Men
judge us as Schismatics and Heretics for not conforming. 11 Men sin against
Christ in offending their brethren, as afterward shall appear. 12 Men are
bound in conscience rather to suffer any disgrace, then to offend their
brethren. 13 Though things should be indifferent, yet the rules of using them
are not from man's will, but from Gods wisdom: whereas here they do by these
things offend God.


Obj. They that oppose these things controverted, are peevish and malicious.

Answ. That is not true, since they are conscionable in other things, and they
subject themselves to be taught by the Word, and are willing to be informed.

Of Scandal or Offense.
Offense is properly that which hinders one in any good course.

This is of our selves, when we continue some lusts of the flesh unmortified,
Mat. 5.

This is grievous to God, and fearful to us: for it depriues men of heaven. So
Herod and Judas.

2 Offense is of profane pharisaicall men; this is by preaching and confessing
the truth, and leading an holy life: So many are now a days offended, that men
should preach the Word fa^thfully and zealously, and that men should be forward
to hear and pray, and perform good and necessary duties. This is not to be
respected, our Savior Christ bids, Let them alone.

Reas. 1. God must be obeyed.

2 The truth must be witnessed.

3 None of Gods plants should be offended.

4 This will discover all hipocrites, and lay them open.

A third offense is to temporary Professors, this is by persecution, Mat. 13,
and Mat. 24.

This cannot be avoided, wicked men will ever be in the world, and enemies to
the kingdom of Christ.

This is a sign of perdition without repentance, to be offended and offend.

A fourth offense is, called properly, an offense given. This is either to the
wicked, or to the ch^ldren of God; and to both, either by falls doctrine, or
want in manners.

1 False doctrine, as Romans 16.17.

2 Evi^l facts are such as cause the Gospel, and the name of God to be evil
spoken of. This offends both the wicked, which are driven fu^ther off from
Relig^on, and hardened ^n their sins: and the children of God, who are
reproached, and her^by let, this makes the ^^ghteous scarcely b^ saved.

3 Dissension of Teachers, either through false doctrine, o^ unskilful
propounding of some points.

4 Abuse of Christian liberty, when men as Peter, dissemble and deny that I
berty they have for fear of man, Gal. ^. Or 2 o^t of their knowledge, using what
in it self is lawful, unseasonably and ind^scretly, without regard of others:
This is that so much spoken against, Romans 14 1 Cor. 8, and 10.

This ^s either, 1 when men blaspheme and speak evil of our liberty for our
foolish using of it, Romans 14.16.

2 When the weak brother is grieved, Rom 14.

3 When he is drawn to do any thing, whereof he is not fully persuaded; this is
to sin against Christ, and beat the weak conscience of others, and that
^ither to his utter dashing and casting away: or 2 to his fall: or 3 to his
weakening or discouraging from going so fast in his journey: all these are
noted, Romans 14.15.

All these may be by the use of things indifferent, and they are against love
and charity: we ought to deny our selves, and seek the good of others.

2 These are against Christ.

3 Against that w^s^dom which ought to be in us.

A fifth offense is by a show of evil, which Christians are bound to avo^de, 1 Thessalonians 5, 2 Cor. 8, 1 Timothy 5.14, I will the younger widows marry.

The retayning and using of the Ceremonies in cont^oversie^s offense g^v^n.

First, in doctrine; men cannot defend them without Popish grounds, as very
Pap^sts see.

Secondly, this backsliding of some, hardneth many wick^d men, and casts
reproach upon the forward servants of God. It is a w^ck^d action in any to go
backward, and come nearer R^me again, whereas they should fly out of her.

Thirdly, this caus^th such dissension of Teachers amongst us.

Fourthly, men abuse their liberty (suppose these were indifferent, which
cannot be proved) in thus using them.

1 Many dissemble, and profess they dare not otherwise do, then use these,
and so deny that liberty Christ bath purchased.

2 Many a weak brother is exceed^ngly grieved hereby.

3 Many are drawn to do that which they are not persuaded of: 1 Some to their
dashing, so as they turn from Christ to the world again, and prone bitter
enemies to Christ: 2 Some fall fearfully: 3 All are h^ndred, and made less
zealous and careful in the work of the Ministry, and less resolute against
Popery.

Fifthly, here is a great show of evil, and conformity with Antichrist, whereby
the ministry of men is made less glorious amongst others.

So that from hence we see, we have ground sufficient, not to conform to these
ceremonies. Wherefore do ye judge (oh ye censorious and ridged brethren) such,
who you know of conscience abstayn from doing these things? The command of a
dread Sovereign we acknowledge, and one whose good and safety we every way
desire.

SECTION. XIX.
THough it may seem lost labor to go over this subject, which is so largely
and learnedly handled by men of excellent gifts; yet since the ceremonies
remain, and are more straightly urged then before. Therefore it is fitting we
should never rest till these bleyns of our Church be removed: we must contend
for the faith, and leave many testimonies to posterity, of the dislike of these
human inventions.

First, therefore to propound some general grounds touching the nature and use
of these things.

1 It must be remembered that the Communion book contains in the judgment of our
adversaries, a brief and sum of Gods outward worship. This is plain since
themselves call it divine Service. 2 They require more reverence to this, then
to the Ordinances of God: 3 They command this chiefly, and punish men most for
absence from this: 4 They give charge none of this should be omitted for
preaching: 5 They appoint such Ministers as can do nothing else but read this:
6 They bind men to this, though they have no preaching in the Congregation.

2 These now controverted Ceremonies are imposed to stir up the dull mind of
man to the remembrance of his duty; in their Preface to the Ceremonies.

3 They are so imposed, as men must be in bondage to them and use them, without
respect of any man's weakness whatsoever.

4 Men deem them fitting not only for these times, and this present Church,
but fitting every place: for they desire and labor to bring all strangers to
the same Ceremonies.

5 In experience, these Ceremonies are utterly unprofitable, and do not
further the Gospel of Christ.

6 These ceremonies have been too long in the Church.

7 They were brought in, in times of darkness, when many corruptions had
gotten in. The Surplus and Kneeling can not be proved to have been before the
height of Popery.

8 These Ceremonies have been all grossly abused to Idolatry, and will worship
by the Papists, from whose hands we receiu them.

9 There is no damage nor hurt at all, to any Ordinance of God, or Calling he
has set in his Church, by the removal of them.

10 They are chiefly held and maintained now, as it seems by the Prelates
words, to uphold their Lordship. For no Ceremony, no Bishop. If they have not
these Ceremonies, wherewith shall they smite their fellow servants? whose abode
in the Ministry, by the light of the Gospel, would cause such light to shine,
that all would easily discern the unlawfulness of these Callings.

11 They are burdens, and matters of grief to all, or the most conscionable
Ministers in the land.

12 They so count of these, that they had rather loose 300 godly able
Preachers, then not have these Ceremonies used every where.

The first argument against Ceremonies, is out of Ex. 20.24.25, where note
these two Conclusions. 1 That the Lord loves not outward pomp, nor man's
inventions in his service: for the Lord will have the altar of earth; or if it
be of stone, it must not be of hewn stone. 2 That man's pollishing, and
adorning any thing, without special warrant, defiles the same.

These arguments are firm against our Cemonies: 1 Because they are but outward
pomp, and man's inventions, as themselves grant: 2 Outward adorning of the
Minister with this surplus-garment pollutes him, since they have no warrant for
the same.

Argum. 2. Lev. 18.3, After the doings of the land of Aegipt, and after the
doings of the land of Canaan shall ye not do, neither walk in their
Ordinances.

This place proves that men must not do as idolatrous heathens do. Whence
obseru.

1 That which is an ordinance of the heathens ought to be abhorred, being not
grounded on the Word, or light of nature: To worship God outwardly after their
own manner, with any thing whatsoever men devise is the manner of heathen, and
idolaters. This place and the like made the Cemonies unlawful at the very
first bringing in of them.

2 That we must not walk in their Ordinances: but to use the Cross and Surplus
are the ordinances of the Papists now: they straightly enjoin them; they can
and do lay best claim unto them: other Reformed Churches have rejected them.

If any man say this place is meant of their abomination in uncleanness,
defiling themselves after their manner.

The Answer is plain, the place is general, including all their manners and
customs, as may be gathered out of the text. Ordinances signify for the most
part, if not ever, the Ceremonies. 2 Because the Lord binds them only to his
Statuts and Ordinances, v. 4. 3 The Lord abhorrs as much or more, the
inventions of men, and the manner of the heathens in his service, as outward
uncleannes. Therefore argumentum a pari necessario concludit.

Arg. 3. The Lord will have his children unlike Idolaters outwardly, and
especially the Ministers of his Word. This proposition is grounded on Lev.
19.27.28, compared with Lev. 21.5. Whence it is plain, that to enjoin ministers
conformity with idolaters, is unlawful for him that commands, and him that
obeys. For the Lord forbids it by this reason, which none can satisfy; for he
offers the bread of the Lord. Whence learn, that he that performs public
worship to God, must not be like Idolaters. Ministers now perform public
worship to the Lord. Neither let any say, that the Cross, Surplus, and
Kneeling are trifles: for so men might say of cutting round the corners of
their head, or marring the corners of their bea^d.

Argu. 4. From Deuteronomy. 4.3.4, etc. Whence we learn: 1 That the Lord w^^ have no
more done in his worship, then he teaches and commands in his Word. 2 That
adding or detracting n the service of the Lord by doctrine or ceremonies,
without special warrant hinders the keeping of Gods commandments. 3 That the
keeping of those things God commands will only make people wise, and happy. 4
That the Lord is near in mercy to them that walk in his ways. 5 That men must
make no similitude or likeness of any thing in the service of God; but they
must learn by hearing the Word of the Lord.

Which things are plain against our Ceremonies. For, 1 men have no word for
these, therefore they are unlawful. 2 Men add by carnal reason unto the
ordinances and worship of God these Ceremonies: which is as unlawful as to
detract any Ceremony and ordinance God has appointed to his people.

3 These hinder the keeping of Gods Commandments. 1 Because carnal reason is
unmortified that leads men. 2 Men please their affections: both which hinder
Gods Commandments from being kept Romans 8. 3 Men dote upon their devises when
they are used, which hinders them from ^ouing the Lord and his ordinances with
all their heart. 4 Men so strive to bring in these, and to keep them in, as
that all their labor is spent herein.

If it be said that this is meant of adding or detracting, in the substance of
Gods worship.

Answ. This cannot be so understood. 1. Because the Lord forbids all adding,
and this in Ceremonies is adding: 2 Because the Lord binds to the manner
prescribed, as well as to the matter, Deuteronomy. 32. 3. Men may not add in
doctrine, nor detract; therefore not in Ceremonies. 4 Because the Lord punished
them when they varied in the least Ceremony and circumstance from the pattern
in the mo^^nt.

Arg. 5. Deuteronomy. 7. All the monuments of Idolatry should be destroyed.

2 The Church ought to have special outward holiness more then any other people
has: a part whereof is in overthrowing such pollutions.

3 The Lord will have all sorts of Images to be destroyed. The Lord will not
have his chidren communicate with Idolaters either in their religious
Ceremonies or outward communion.

Hence we learn: 1 That these ought to be destroyed, since they are to us
monuments of Popery; they bring that to our remembrance: 2 Now they are
appendants of that religion only at this day 3 They are as dangerous to us as
the monuments of these Gentiles were to the Jews.

4 The Lord will have his children go as far from Idolatry as is possible; now
we retayning their Ceromonies have Communion with them.

If it be said this place speaks of them that are open Idolaters and had
devised these things themselves. The Answer is, that Papists are open
Idolaters, 2 They devised these things of themselves, and though they should be
before Popery, yet they might be and were beginnings of Popery.

Arg. 6 Dev. 7. two last verses. Things dedicated to Idols, and abused in state
of worship, may not be turned to private uses, much less to public in the
service of God.

2 That men should utterly detest and show their greatest hatred against the
monuments, and things abused to Idolatry.

3 These are accursed things and men coveting the same become accursed.

4 Man may not pick things lawful in themselves out of idolatrous worship, and
apply them to what use he will.

This place is against these Ceremonies in question that have been in state of
religious worship: therefore ought to be abandoned.

2 Men are bound both inwardly, and outwardly, to manifest their great
detestation and loathing of such things; therefore ought not to use them. 3 The
retaining of th^se things brings curses upon minister and people. God Lays a
special curse upon his own creatures abused to Idolatry, much more upon man's
devises.

Object. This place holds, but for the individuals, not for the generals. For
Gold might be used, and that afterward about the service of God.

Answ. 1. These Ceremonies were never in use, but Religious, and therefore the
Argument holds firm a pari, from the like. All the Gold that was defiled by
Idolaters ought to be abhorred: So all Crosses and Surplusses have been abused,
for they had no other use; therefore to be abhorred.

2 Gold in it self, as it is the creature, is not here detested, but in this
form, and for this use. So the matter simply of a Surplus, as it is the
creature, is not unlawful, no the other Ceremonies, but in this form, and
applied to this use, which is in the general of Crosses and Surp^esses: which
was but in special for the other.

3 The Lord brought in Gold and Images too of diverse creatures into the
Temple: But this Law is not to bind the Lord, as none other is. For laws binds
the creature, not the Creator: therefore it remains firm; that these being such
accursed things should be utt^r^y abandoned, and though picked out amongst many;
yet without question, far worse then the gold about the Images.

Arg. 7. Deuteronomy. 12.3, the very names of idols ought to be rooted out of the
places where they have been worshipped, and v. 30 and 31, men may not choose how
they will seru the Lord. 2 God will not be served by his people, in the manner,
nor with those things appointed by man, that Idolaters worship their God
withal; for they bring in every thing that the Lord abhors. 3 Men are not to
add any thing to the worship commanded of God, though they keep the substance
and add but little. 4 Whatsoever is not commanded in the worship of God is
forbidden.

These grounds are plain out of the text; and they are sufficient, if we had no
more places of Scripture to overthrow these Ceremonies. For 1 if the names of
Idols should be destroyed, then much more these ceremonies, which are much
more accursed.

2 These Ceremonies were of men's choosing at first, and therefore unlawful then.

3 Idolaters, worship God at their Idols, after the same manner, with these
things, therefore they are unlawful: and if these be admitted, why not all
Popish trumpery upon the same grounds?

4 Our Churches retain the substance of Gods worship, yet they add these of
their own devising, which is directly against the commandment.

5 They are not warranted any where, wherefore forbidden to all.

Arg. 8, Deuteronomy. 14.1.2. 1 Men in civil things should not be like Idolaters, nor
follow their fashions.

2 Holy people must avoid all outward things which may defile them, and they
must be as the Lord would have them.

3 The Lord severs his people from all other people in their Rytes and
Ceremonies.

This place is very direct against these things.

1 Because it is more to be like Idolaters in religious reverence, then in
civil fashions. And suppose these should be used but for a civil respect
amongst us, they were unlawful, as they are now used, in the Colleges of the
Universities.

2 It is not in any man's power to ordain and appoint what garment they will, or
Ceremonies to be used.

3 It is sin to join and be one with those from whom the Lord severs; now the
Lord severs us from Papists, and the Lords will is, we should differ from them
in these rites, as well as in doctrine.

Obj. This was spoken to the Israelites in respect of the heathens.

Answ. The causes are general, we are the children of the Lord: 2 We ought to
be as holy as they: 3 the Lord has chosen us to be a peculiar people unto
himself from Popery, and Mahumetanism, and Judaism, and Heathenism.

Arg. 9. Deuteronomy. 16.21, Men must not bring any thing of their own devising, near
the Ordinances of God.

1 Men may not set up statues, or pillars, for religious use. This place is
firm against the Ceremonies controverted; because Cross, Surplus, and
Kneeling, are brought near the Ordinances of God, which makes the same
unlawful, as if they were parts of Gods worship; in their Confession.

2 They are statutes and pillars for religious uses.

Judge. 8.29. Good intents, not directed by the Word, prove very hurtful in the
end to the devisers.

2 All men take the least occasions to follow superstition.

3 Men's inventions draw their hearts wholly to them from the Lords true
worship, since they are their own children, as it were.

This place is direct against our Ceremonies: they have good intents, as order
and decency etc. But men are not directed by the Word, no more then Gideon was
in his Ephod: therefore they will prove hurtful, even to be a snare to them
that establish them, and their posterity. And they are not friends nor Seers,
to the State that draw authority to press these upon any.

2 When occasions and stumbling blocks are laid before men, they fall straight
generally, neither will doctrine prevent the same; therefore these ought to be
abandoned; and it is presumpt on in any to use, or retain them.

3 These rob the Lord of that due worship he should rece^u from us: wherefore as
theeus, such ceremonies ought to be severely dealt withal, and quite cast out,
like Agar when she began to be so presumptuous, as to exalt her self above
her Mistress, as these do already; the most, more esteeming them then they
do the Ordinances of God.

Arg. 10. From examples, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, David and Solomon did nothing in the
service of God, but what they had express particular direction for, 1 Chronicles.
28.11.19.

Hence we obseru: that that which was not lawful for Prophets, and men of such
excellent pa^ts and authority, is not lawful for any other Magistrate or
Minister. These had showed them how they should build the Lords Temple, in
every particular work for his service.

This reason is firm, because all the Kings of Judah, as they were zealous and
forward for the truth, so they had care to bring the people and Priests to that
form which David and Solomon left for Religion.

And hence it may appear that men's wisdom is to do things according to the
will of the Lord, not to vary any thing from the pattern given, and bring in
Ceremonies or their own devising.

Arg. 11, out of 1 King 12.28, Ieroboams sin was in departing from the pure
worship of God.

1 In regard of the place, he chose Dan and Bethel.

2 In the manner, he set up Calucs, as signs of Gods presence.

3 He made a house of high places, where they should offer sacrifice.

4 That he made Priests of the lowest of the people.

5 That he ordained a feast of his own heart.

6 All this he did for carnal policy, lest the people should again return to
Rehoboam.

7 This he did in show, with great advise, and counsel, whereas he had resolved
before what to do.

As for the first, things cannot be committed so now, since the Lord has not
bound his people to any certain place; yet this is to be observed, how they do
enjoin men not to go where the Word is most purely and sincerely taught, and
take such places, where there is nothing many times acceptable to the Lord.

1 Though men set not up graven Images, yet these Ceremonies are breaches of
the second commandment, as those were; since they are similitudes for
Religious ends.

2 Men tie the Lord to teach by them, and put his children in remembrance, and
work upon the affections, by them to stir up the dull mind of man, and to
teach man, not to be ashamed of Christ.

3 What are their great Cathedral Churches, but houses of high places? First,
because they draw men from their particular Congregations: Secondly, because
they are built in that form, and for such use, as is not warranted, to have
their singing and chanting, which is as mere Barbarism, as if they did it in a
strange language.

4 Do not these make their Priests of the lowest of the people, ignorant sots?
This is too plain. Do they not admit their singing men to offer up prayers
and thanksgiving unto God? 2 Every man that has some learning though unfit to
teach, and scandalous in life is suffered.

5 Do they not ordain feasts of their own heart, as are all the feastivall
days?

6 Is not their fear, if the people should have the true manner of Gods
worship; they would depart from their Canonical Obedience?

7 Do they not seem to consult and proceed by advise in their Convocation
house; when it is plain they had determined what to do before?

Arg. 12, 2 King. 21.4 and 7, In Jerusalem will I put my name.

Hence Obseru, 1 that the worship of the Lord is his name.

2 Where the Lord is worshipped, nothing but of the Lords appointment ought to
come.

This place is direct against these ceremomonies: First, because none is to
manifest the Lords face, in any manner or institution, besides the Lord
himself: Secondly, the Lord being worshipped amongst us, none of these, being
humane inventions, ought to come in place.

Arg. 13. 2 Kings 23.

1 All the instruments of Idolatry ought to be destroyed.

2 The places that have been hallowed for Idolatrous service, men ought chiefly
to pollute.

3 The Priests that have been Idolaters, should not be admitted to the Altar
of God.

This proves these Ceremonies should be quite abolished, since they have been,
and are instruments of Idolatry, as it is apparent in Popery.

2 If places should be defiled, then much more ceremonies, that are more
ta^nt^d: secondly, less necessary.

3 Ministers may repent, and yet in this case not be admitted. What then shall
we say of Ceremonies, that cannot be sanctified nor cleansed by any man, as
men may be, and are repenting, by the Lord?

Grounds of this law and practice.
1 The great purity and holiness of the Lord.

2 The detestation and hatred all ought to have and to show against all
Idolatry, and false worship: we ought to be jealous, as the Lord is.

3 To prevent apostasy and backsliding in times to come.

4 To prevent danger to the weak.

Arg. 14, 2 Chronicles. 15, The order amongst Ministers and public persons ought
to be observed, v. 10.

2 True Ministers must keep the charge of the Lord, v. 11.

Hence it is plain that Gods order, and that distinction he has made should
stand, and none of man's be brought in. 2 Ministers must serve the Lord only
according to his commandment, and not worship God according to man's will.

Argum. 15, 2 Chronicles. 15.17, the high places ought to have been removed.

Hence obseru: 1 that all worship ought not only to be for the substance
allowed of God, and 2 for the person performing it; but in circumstances
agreeable to the will of the Lord: therefore this manner of worship of God,
though it be sound in the substance; 2 in the Ministers lawful; yet in
circumstances, it is unlawful.

Ob. God had tied his worship to Jerusalem, so he has not now to this or that
manner.

Answ. 1. His not commanding of the manner, ^s a forbidding of the same.

2 He has (as has been, and by Gods blessing shall be hereafter proved)
forbidden this manner.

3 The very nature of the covenant now made with us, shows it, which is not
obscure, typical, adumbratory; but all things are plain: secondly, here the
Lord gives freedom from all Ceremonies, Gal. 4: thirdly, his children have
abundance of spirit in sted of Ceremonies.

4 The faithfulness of Christ proves it, who left all things as perfect, as
Moses.

Arg. 16. People forsaking the pu^e worship of God, can never stay, as appears
in Jeroboam: all the Kings of Judah that were evil, grew worse and worse.

This Argument is plain against our Ceremonies, which being ^etained will bring
in other things of the same and like nature, that may be justified by the like
grounds.

The reason of this is, men forsaking God wittingly and willingly in the least
things, the Lord forsakes them, and gives them over into a reprobate sense.

2 Men take not the Word to stay them now, for they have trangrest the bounds
and limits of it.

3 It is nature of will worship, Romans 1, and Isa. 29, to destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and make men sottish.

Arg. 17 All uncleanness and filthiness ought to be carried out of the house
of God, before Gods worship be erected in it, 2 Chronicles. 29.

Hence, these ought to be expelled, for they are spotted by the flesh, defiled
by Antichrist; and what superstition has defiled, if the Lord ordain it not,
cannot be cleansed again.

2 These were never clean nor holy: for there is no word to warrant them, which
must sanctify all.

Arg. 18, 2 King. 18.4.

1 True zeal and hatred of Superstition abolisheth all monuments of Idolatry.

2 Things, though of good use at their first Institution, yet being abused to
Idolatry, ought to be abolished, as the Brazen serpent.

3 Many things pass unreformed, even through the hands of good men.

4 Abuse of things to Idolatry does abase them, and should make them vile in
our eyes, if they be not perpetual Ordinances of God.

It is not enough to take away the abuse of Idolatrous relics, but the very
matter should be removed, burst and burnt, according to the nature of it.

This place is very firm against these Cemonies in question.

1 Because these were never of good use in the Church.

2 Though they had, yet being now so grossly abused, they ought to be quite
abolished, since they have now no necessary use in the Church.

3 They are too vile (a filthy Surplus and Cross) to come into the presence of
Lord, who likes nothing, but what he appoints himself.

4 Men cannot prevent the abuse of Idolatrous relics they being continued.

5 Though they could, yet ^t were not lawful to surf^r them for civil uses.

This example binds us, as is plain out of the text: For first, the Holy Ghost
commends it in Hezekiah; and such things are written for our learning: 2 He did
c^eau to the Lords commandment, and departed not from him: 3 these
Commandments were given Moses.

Arg. 19. Psalm. 137.3.4.5.

1 There ought to be nothing in the worship of God, but what is from the Lord.

2 Men are bound in circumstances to worship the Lord according to his
commandment and will: in the Place; therefore also in Garments.

3 Affirmative Commands in the service of God, exclude all men's own inventions,
though they be not specified.

4 Men forget Jerusalem, and are careless of the Church, that please
Idolaters, and worship God after their desire, in any corrupt manner.

5 It is better a man never preach, then do any evil in preaching.

This Psalm quite overthrows our Ceremonies now imposed.

1 They are not from the Lord, no more then the reading of Apocriphall
scripture.

2 Men are bound to administer Sacraments as the Lord has commanded, (...)
such ordinary garments as our Savior Christ and his Apostles used, as they
administ^ed Baptism in: they that would not sing the Lords song in a strange
place, would much more refuse to do it in a strange garment.

3 Though these particulars, Cross, Surplus and Kneeling, be not specified,
yet in that they are not mentioned in the Wo^d, it is enough to prove they
should not be used, for each strange manner of worshipping the true God, is
hateful in Gods eyes.

4 It is plain therefore, that Ministers refusing to yield to these things
imposed, do not sin, though they be h^ndred so as they cannot execute their
Calling.

Ob. God had bound his worship to Jerusalem; therefore it was unlawful to
worship in any other place: But he has not bound himself to be worshipped in
this manner; without Cross, and Surplus, and kneeling.

Answ, The Lord has plainly bound men to worship him in spirit and in truth.

2 The Lord in his new covenant, has as well manifested his will as in the old,
there men might add and annex nothing, without special and imediate
revelation from God; therefore not now.

3 As Jerusalem, because it was chosen of the Lord, and appointed the place
where he would be worshipped, was by this made holy, and so it lawful for to
worship there and no where else; So the Lord having chosen no peculiar garment,
nor appointed any cross or kneeling, they are not holy, but to be accounted as
strangers, that may not come near the house of the Lord.

Arg. 20 Isa. 30.22. Men inwardly taught by the Lord cannot endure the least
cover of Idols.

2 True turning to God maks men cast away the precious monuments of Idolatry.

3 Gods children must be pure inwardly, and outwardly, casting away all tokens
of spiritual adultery.

4 Men taught by the Lord see filthiness in garments abused to Idolatry,

5 Men that return to the Lord must go as far as is possible from superstition.

6 Things abused to Idolatry, should be cast away with reproach and disgrace.

This place is firm against our Ceremonies in controversy. 1 Because these
were covers and ornaments of Idols: the priest being an Idol to offer up
Christ, and to forgive sins, which are privileges of God. 2 Under this all
Idolatrous signs and garments are contained. 3 The best and sincerest
Christians through the land abhor these.

The second ground is also against these, because they have been ornaments of
Idols. for to that end does the Mass Priest wear them. 2 If precious
ornaments should be cast away, how much more these base Ceremonies?

3 The children of God must not have one taken from Idolaters, nor one ceremony
or sign of Idolatry past; these are signs of Superstition past, therefore to be
cast away.

4 Filthy and menstruous clouts, ought not to be brought near the Lord, nor are
decent garments for the minister of the gospel; such are these; therefore not
fit to come near the Lord, nor are decent garments for the minister of the
Gospel.

5 Men must protest against it, and go as far as is possible from it. But now
men protest for the covering, though they forsake the Idolatry. 2 Men cast it
not away, but draw it near unto them and come near the Papists herein.

6 Men cast them not away with disgrace, but honor them, in bringing them into
the service of the Lord, and speak well of them.

Hence we see, it is not nicenes but a care to keep a good conscience, makes
the ministers and people of God abhor these Ceremonies in question.

Arg. 21. Out of Hos. 2.16.17. Things lawful abused to Idolatry, are defiled
and ought to be abandoned, as the name of Baali.

2 The Lord will have nothing like Idolaters in his service, he hates all
names, and memorialls of Idols.

3 The Lords people should not name Idols without detestation.

4 The utter abolishing of Idolatry is the way to all happiness for a kingdom.

This place is plain against our Ceremonies, though they were lawful at first
institution, yet now Idolatry defiles them, and they ought to be abandoned.

2 The Lord will not have us serve him outwardly like Idolaters in the least
Ceremony: For names are less then Ceremonies. Therefore what the Lord abhors
no man must dare to bring near him. But he hates and forbids these, as it is
plain in the text.

3 The Lord is wonderful Jealous, of his true worship he will not have the
heart lift up unto vanity, nor the mouth speak of Idols, except it be to
reprove them: the Lord makes all his people such. Consider yourselues therefore
all ye that can endure well enough these Ceremonies whether the Image of God
in this respect be in you or no?

Hence it is plain, men are bound to that utter detestation and loathing of
idolatrous signs and garments, and gestures, which some show in England.
Because this promise must be fulfilled.

2 Men are married to Christ, therefore it fits they should be chaste, and far
from all show of whorish behavior, and lightness; such as the whore of Rome
teaches.

3 This is the best way to root out Idolatry utterly, and to establish the true
service of God.

4 This is the best way to all happiness to a Kingdom, which we ought by all
lawful means to procure.

What have they deserved therefore at your hands, that you should thus deal with
them, that seek your good in all their courses? Their preaching, praying, and
living you cannot deny. And in this the Holy Ghost clears them.

Be encouraged therefore every faithful subject, and good Christian, to
continue thine hatred of all Romish Relics; for certainly this will bring
good to your selves and the land too.

Arg. 22. Mat. 15.3.4.5.

1 All Traditions that cause the breach of any commandment are utterly
unlawful.

2 It is the property of humane Traditions to cause the breach of Gods
commandments.

3 Men that join their traditions with Gods commandments do what lies in them
to throw the Lord out of his Throne?

4 It is a sign of hypocrisy to be zealous in urging humane Traditions.

5 The breach of a human Tradition does not defile men.

6 Men are not bound to the Traditions of the Elders.

This place is plain against our Ceremonies.

1 Do they not cause the breach of each commandment of God, as is learnedly
proved in a discourse of the Cross, and especially this commandment that men
should be apt to teach, and careful to teach, which now is made void by this?
For men say, if he be a quiet, peaceable, conformable man, it is well.

2 They cause those the Lord has sent to be thrust out, and the fathers of
men's spiritual life to be neglected.

3 That which causes breach of Gods commandments, should not men abandon and
abhor? 2 Should men bring their own traditions into the Church? 3 These
Ceremonies will do hurt, if they be not cast out before; it is their nature
and property to do hurt, and they are ever worse in the latter end then at
first.

4 Is it not presumption and rebellion against God to join men's own devises to
the Ordinances of God, without warrant from God? And are not men to keep the
Lords right in standing against them?

5 Should such hypocrisy be seen amongst us, that men should press with
violence their own traditions; and be like the Scribes, who when they teach the
law of God, are without power? Mat. 7.

6 These commandments of men are made doctrines to teach: So are all our
Ceremonies, as it is plain by the Preface to them.

Grounds therefore besides these mention^d, why we should stand against them,
are out of this place.

1 The servants of God are not bound to men's traditions.

2 The great esteem men have of their own traditions, which Gods servants
should protest against.

3 The great inconvenience that comes by some of their traditions in sight, as
has been showed before, and shall be (God willing) hereafter.

4 The true zeal men should bear to have the Lords commandments kept which
cannot be where these are so much esteemed.

5 Avoiding hypocrisy.

6 It is but lost labor to worship God thus.

23 Arg. out of Mark. 11.16.

1 Things of good use out of Gods service ought not to come into the house of
the Lord.

2 Nothing but that which the Lord has s^nctified ought to come near him,
witness Na^ab and Abihues strange fire.

This place is plain against all our Cereremonies, even Kneeling, because
though of good use in other parts of Gods worship, yet in this it ought not to
come.

2 These Ceremonies should not be admitted n^ere the Lord, since they are not
sanctified, and men endanger themselves, that presum to bring them near the
Lord.

Wherefore Ministers ought to their uttermost power seek the abolishing of these
ceremonies: in this, they are like unto Christ.

Arg. 24. Ioh. 2.15.16.

1 In darksome times many things are corrupted in the service of God, as twixt
Malachy and Christ, which the light coming burns up.

2 The Lord will not admit any man's devises to further the service of God,
besides the Word.

3 Men's colourablest devises in Gods worship, when they are considered by a
zealous heart, are vile and odious.

4 True zeal is for the Lords pure worship and service.

4 True zeal is with fervent desire of reformation of small matters in show,
being amiss.

This place is plain against our Ceremonies; they came in, in the times of
Popery, and the light of the Gospel discovers them to be filthy, and has cast
them out of many places already.

2 The Lord will not admit these ceremonies to further his worship: what he saw
convenient and fitting he commanded, neither let men think their comeliness
and decency shall be omitted: for these are commanded by the Word. These
Ceremonies have not so good use as those men's commodities, wherein they seemed
to do good, and show care both of Gods worship, that it might be ever provided
for; and man's ease and speed, that he might have ready at hand, sacrifices to
offer.

3 What true zeal abhors, ought to be constant: but true zeal abhors these;
therefore.

Here are Grounds therefore to stand against all.

1 Because show of reason is no sufficient ground to bring any thing into the
service of God.

2 Bringing in of these things defiles the house of God.

It is not therefore foolish preciseness, but the image of Christ, that would
have these things utterly cast out of Gods worship.

Arg. 25, out of Ioh. 4.22 and 23.

1 Men that worship the true God after their own manner, worship they know no^
what.

2 The worship of God in the time of the new Testament, is not carnal but
spiritual.

This place is directly against all our Ceremonies now in controversy.

1 Because men worship without ground, as the Samaritans did, neither do they
know they are accepted.

2 This worship is carnal, and Jewish, we ought to worship God in spirit, and
not in any outward things of man's appointing.

This place therefore does warrant men to stand against these traditions of men.

1 Because every one ought to be assured, that that which he does unto the
Lord, be accepted of him; which the Word only does teach.

2 The true worship of God only brings salvation and good unto men.

3 Men must worship God in spirit and truth; and so they have all such promises
made good unto them as the Lord manifests in his Word. Such are promised to
have their hearts circumcised, to judge themselves vile etc.

Hence therefore, it may well be demanded; how men can suspend Ministers for not
conforming to such things as ought not to be used in time of the new Testament?

Arg. 26, out of Col. 2.

1 Verse. 3. All the Church needs to know, is manifested by Christ, in his Word,
Sacraments, and Discipline.

2 Verse. 6. As men have received Christ, so they must walk in him, without
adding or diminishing or altering.

3 V. 8. Traditions of men that are not from Christ deceiu^, and ought to be
taken heed of.

4 V. 10. Whatsoever the Lord would have us know or do in his service, he
has revealed by Christ: therefore Order is taught.

5 Men that walk according to the light received by Christ are perfect, and
need not (nor ought they take) from any other.

6 V. 18. Men must not subject themselus to be taught or judged by others,
without the word, and except they have that doctrine and judgment from Christ.

7 V. 20. It is a thing very absurd, for Christians freed by Christ from
Ceremonies of God, to be brought in bondage to men's traditions.

8 It is the world, not the true Church that stands upon human devises.

9 V. 21. False Teachers sanctify that which God leaves indifferent.

10 V. 22. Men's mere commands and doctrine in matters of religion are of small
value: the word of God only gives life to outward Ordinances to be the worship
of God.

11 Men's devised traditions have but a show of wisdom; men endued with the
spirit can see foolishness in them.

12 Man's most glorious inventions in any will worship are of no reckoning or
worth.

13 Men's traditions that seem most to profit in any kind, do not, but nourish
corruption directly.

These grounds plainly overthrow all our traditions and government
Ecclesiastical, as may appear in each particular.

1 If these things had been necessary, Christ would have taught them, and they
might have been learned from his Word.

2 Every man is bound out directly from altering any thing, or adding, in
doctrine or traditions to the Church. Therefore we are bound to the primitive
times, and the example of Christ and his Apostles. Now we have nothing for
these Ceremonies, nor this Government from Christ; but receiu him without
Cross or Surplus, from the Apostles; therefore we ought not to receive the
same, nor walk in them,

3 Men do but deceive others that urge these Ceremonies. 2 We are in effect
bidden here not to Cross, wear the Surplus, or Kneel, since they are but
traditions of men.

4 This order is not from Christ, nor is it pleasing to the Lord.

5 It is foolishness to superad to Christ's bond of perfection, which he has
set Christians: 2 Nothing devised by man can make any jot better; for they are
perfect by Christ: 3 None ought to put away such as obseru Christ's rules from
the service of God, being Ministers or people, since the Lord counts them
perfect: 4 to receive these, as better then without, is to deny perfection by
Christ.

6 The Churches doctrine, if it be not Christ's doctrine is nothing: 2 Men must
not believe such as preach things they cannot prove by the Word: 3 Men's judging
thee, except the Word condemns thy doing, and thy person, should not fear thee.

7 It is not the spirit of the Apostles to urg humane Ceremonies so strictly
upon men. 2 Christ has set us free from all manner of Ordinances in his
worship, that are not from him, and will justify our not conforming to them.

8 To urge these upon us, is to make the Church like the world; Christ's Spouse
like the whore of Babel. 2 It is a note of worldlings, that they urge and yield
with all willingness to humane traditions.

9 Do not men sanctify the Cross, and Surplus, Festival times, and this
Government, which Christ has never commanded but forbidden?

10 There is no word for these Ceremonies, and therefore they are none of Gods
worship.

11 These ceremonies are but the commandments of men, and doctrines of men,
and therefore in Gods worship not to be yielded unto, since human authority is
not sufficient to bind in Gods worship.

12 This government seems only to be, but is not, a wise invention: for it is
a means rather of much confusion and hurt, as is showed before: 2 Ceremonies
have done no good, but hurt, both to Papists and Protestants, though in carnal
policy they were retained at first; therefore all arguments for these, are but a
show of wisdom; let none be deceived with them. 2 Men that refuse these
ceremon^es have true knowledge, and discern that the opposits are deceived and
missed: 3 Men are not to use them, since Christians are to be truly wise, not
in show only.

13 Men are not to offer up that to the Lord, which is nothing worth, halt and
maimed things: 2 Men are not one whit the worse for omitting humane traditions:
3 How can this be justified in the sight of God, to deprive Ministers of their
Ministry, and people of their food for trifles?

14 These Ceremonies please the flesh only, and therefore are not to be used.

By all these it may appear, that Christians have great cause to withstand all
human traditions.

1 The commandment of the Apostle speaking immediately from Christ.

2 Christian liberty dearly purchased, for which we are to stand.

3 These things are merely unprofitable.

Therefore do not please your selves: 2 Resolu that if you do forsake all for
Christ, to give his Gospel passage, you shall have all, and more then you
have: 3 God will find out all the shifts and fair pretenses, whereby wrong to
the brethren is done.

Our Ceremonies are far worse now then they were at the first, For

1 Because the danger was not then so discerned.

2 Question was not made of them, nor did the light then appear in these things.

3 They had not been so abused: a man though he like a stranger, and could be
content to marry her a virgin; yet having played the whore openly, who of any
honest disposition would take her to wife?

4 Now it is more scandalous to Papists.

5 Then it brought no such loss of Ministers to the Church as now it does.

Further it will not be amiss to explicate such grounds as those holy men have
brought to light in this matter, especially since my chiefest endeavor in this
whole Treatise, and aim is, to inform the weak and ignorant.

Numb. 15.37, to the end. Where the Lord having taught the people his whole
will before, now adds some helps whereby they may keep in remembrance the
things delivered; whence we may note: 1 The property of those times was to be
taught by Ceremonies, and shadows, they being then children. 2 The privilege
and care of the Lord, that when his people are to be taught by Ceremonies, he
appoints and institutes them. 3 The Lord institutes such Ceremonies as are in
civil use to put his children in remembrance of good duties. 4 The Lord
appoints in Ceremonies the matter and manner both, leaving nothing to man. 5
Man may not appoint what helps he will, but must stick to the helps ordained
by God, which are sufficient. 6 The Lord when he appoints Ceremonies of
remembrance, institutes such as are continually before us, in sight or hearing.
7 The Lord teaches the signification and use of his Ceremonies; so as he
appoints no Ceremony but for some special good unto man. 8 Men in religion
must not follow their affection, to frame such a form of Religion, as pleases
nature. 9 Men are directly forbidden to make their own wisdom any guide and
leader in the things of God. 10 It is spiritual whoring in the service of God
to do any thing by changing, adding or detracting, for to please our selves,
or by our own understanding. 11 Men are exceeding prone both to invent and
follow others inventions, in the service of God, whereby their hearts are turned
from God.


It is a most dangerous practice, and can never be justified, to bring human
ceremonies into the service of the Lord; speaking against them will not
prevail, nor suffice, to keep men from abusing them.

1 While men teach the use of these, their own inventions; they leau untaught
the doctrine of God.

2 The most teach very seldom, whereas these Ceremonies are used continually.

3 Teaching and avoiding occasions of sin must go together.

4 Men are set on fire with lust after these, before doctrine come, and the
heart being fixed upon them will not hear.

5 Though teaching might prevail with those of understanding, conscience, and
sound heart; yet in every Congregation, there are many ignorant and carnal,
both young and old.

Who would say that it were wisdom, charity, or conscience, to bring a
whoremonger, an harlot into the room with him, and such a harlot as he
delighted in, only bidding him not abuse her, what though he should not
commit the fact? which were strange, there being great lust in one, and no
resistance in the other. (For human Ceremonies have no divine power in them to
hinder spiritual fornication, but rather power to draw men on to commit this
sin) Yet would not the heart be stirred up? For is it not the nature of the
objects to stir up the faculties, and bring to act what else should ly dead?

Wherefore without question this is a tempting of God, when there is no
necessity of these things that are so dangerous, that they should be used, and
imposed with such necessity. Further men so extol them for the most part; that
with their praising of them, the simple are bewitched, and their corrupt nature
which should be mort fied, is the more increased. Plain experience witnesses,
that this is not able to ^oot out that religious respect and kind of holiness
men put in these Ceremonies.

Obje^. If men affirm these and the like places are not to us but to the
Israelits. I Answer, they are for us, Romans 15.

2 We have the same corrupt nature and disposition.

3 The Lord is as strict for himself, and as careful to prevent sin in us, as
in the Israelits.

4 These are moral, and therefore common to all.

5 We have the sins of these set down expressly in the new Testament, which are
equivalent to them, 2 Cor. 6.

6 These are expositions of the second commandment, and therefore appertain to
us.

Ezech. 43.7.8. The Holy Ghost brings in, and describes the practice of men
truly repenting and turning unto God.

1 Showing that their former evil courses begin to be utterly loathed,
especially corruption in Gods worship, which is his Name. Hence obseru; that
the Lord accounts nothing his, but what he himself institutes.

2 That man's institutions, though intended to Gods honor, defiles his name.

3 Men truly turning from Popery, should not, nor will not defile Gods worship
with their devises.

4 All human devises, joined to the word and worship of God, are abominable in
his sight.

5 Conjoyning of men's devised Ceremonies to the Lord, though men retain the
worship of God, and his institutions, defiles the name of Gods holiness.

6 Adjoining of men's devises, makes a separation twixt the Lord and his people:
1 It remoues Ministers: 2 It lessens Gods gifts in many: 3 It withdraws the
peoples hearts from the pure worship of God: 4 It grieves the spirit of the
Lord in his children.

7 Men's joining of inventions brings down the wrath of the Lord upon a people.

8 The full removing of men's corrupt inventions, brings the Lords continual
presence.

9 When men are ashamed of their own devises, then the Lord will show them how
he will be worshipped.

All which are strong Arguments to an heart tendering the good of his own and
others souls, to root, out and cast far away all these devised Ceremonies of
man: therefore as Eliah said to Ahab, It is not I that trouble Israel, but thou
and thy fathers house that forsake the commandment of the Lord. So I say from
God, that it is not we that trouble the land, but it is these men that will
have on foot their own devises, as though the Lord should have no lights in his
Sanctuary. It is they that bring in Popery: they that provoke the Lords anger:
it is they that fight and speak against heaven: they hinder a learned and able
Ministry; they rent in sunder Pastor and people: they make the Altar of the
Lord and his worship, either to be despised, or to be covered with tears. And
yet these men are had in request, and honored, and thought favorers of the
State, and friends to the Kingdom and Church. Oh England, who has bewitched
thee, that thou should not know the things that belong unto thy peace? Oh
that thou would know and receiu instruction and correction from God
himself? What mean so many judgments in our land, if the Lord be not angry?
And discipline being neglected amongst us, do you not feel the strokes of God,
avowing the truth and calling of those Ministers, that have pronounced threats
against the land? Is not the hand of the Lord heavier, and the burden he
makes you bear greater, then the burden which he would have you take up?

Obj. To alter were a disgrace for the Church.

Ans. 1 It is more disgrace not to alter.

2 Men's Credit must give way to Gods glory and the Churches good.

3 It causes wonderful rents in the Church, which are a greater disgrace then
this would be.

4 The Lord will certainly reform, if men do not.

5 Men at first did not intend this should be a perpetual rule to posterity,
but only for the present it seemed the best way to draw on the people to our
religion.

Obj. 2. This doctrine brings confusion, and so much ado.

Ans. Zeal in reforming seems tumultuous, as our Savior Christ, when he
overthrew the tables of the money changers.

2 It seems much ado, because men are loath to part with their own conceits;
else things were soon ended, and ordered.

3 It is no small matter to bring the Church from the darkness of Popery, to
that measure of reformation which is required.

Quest. Why have men joined with these hitherto?

Ans. 1 Want of consideration of these particulars.

2 Many no doubt have sejoyned, and severed from them, at least in affection.

3 Men must do as they are farther enlightened and guided by the spirit of
God, who from step to step leads his people.

Jewish Ceremonies might better be tolerated then ours.

1 These were once commanded by the Lord, ours never.

2 Those were not commanded as necessary: but only some things to be done or
forborne for offense sake.

3 Those the Apostles knew would perish of themselves, Jerusalem being
destroyed; But these being joined to the worship of God as things decent will
not fall with Rome.

4 There was a time for the death and burial of those Ceremonies which was to
be effected by the ministry of the Apostles, informing the Churches, of the
right use and abolition of these Ceremonies; till which time some Ceremonies
were indifferent in right use.

SECTION XX.
HAving showed the unlawfulness of these Ceremonies; in the next place we are
to persuade for the removal of them: Therefore the second Commandeement should
be fully known and acknowledged, and so the Lord shall have great glory. Now
the substance of this commandment is to bar the door against all false
worship, and human inventions, wherein the Lord forbids man to make to himself
of his own head, all religious Ceremonies: This commandment being (as all
others are) a common head to which all, the very least things in that kind are
to be referred: And the Lords backing this with such forcible reasons, should
move all honest and good hearts. It is the Lord that forbids, who dare
countermand or bid the contrary. 1 It is thy God by covenant that thou have
given thy name unto. 2 It is thine husband, if authority will not persuade, yet
let love rule thee. 3 The Lord is a jealous God, and cannot endure any part of
divine worship to be given to man's devises, that they should be counted his
Name, the Lord sees this to be the beginning of declining. 4 The Lord visites
the sins of parents, that have instituted and followed these devises of man
in his worship, upon the children that so reverence their forefathers, and
antiquity, that they will tread in their steps, and retain the same Ceremonies.
5 All this devising of Ceremonies, and appointing of them is hatred against the
Lord. 6 Pure worship of God argues men do truly love him, and have care to
keep his Commandments. 7 This brings blessings upon us, and many generations,
even thousands that worship the Lord according to his will.

Hearken, o ye men, brethren, and fathers, unto the Lord our God, and cease to
provoke him to wrath; it is too long we have lived in the breach of this
commandment, troubling them that have desire to walk sincerely with the Lord.

A second Ground is, because then Christ shall be known to be the only King of
his Church, and men shall not dare to propound any thing as doctrine, nor urge
the servants of God to any practice, but what the word commands. Now under the
name of the Church and Christian Magistrate: How is the Kingdom of Christ
weakened by some? Then shall that Ezech. 34.24, be fulfilled. I will be their
God, and my servant David shall be Prince amongst them.

A third ground is the beauty of Gods face, and the glory of the Gospel should
more appear, and shine forth, which now is clouded heerby many ways. For 1,
men wrest the Scriptures for the defense of these: 2 the whole counsel of God
cannot be freely preached: 3 that divine order in each Congregation is
dissolved, which should show who are sheep and who are goats: 4 the Lord is
brought in favoring the wicked, and making sad the hearts of his own servants;
for men of tender consciences are accused and traduced as turbulent spirits:
Men should then bend themselves to teach the main grounds of Religion, which
now are unknown: and how dear should this be to us Englishmen especially, by
whose means our land has been so highly honored, and wonderfully lifted up
above others.

4 Christian meetings and holy communion of Saints (the nourisher of grace)
wherein men might be benefitting and edifying one another, should be suffered:
Whereas men now meeting for holy ends, are troubled, as making Conventicles
dangerous to the State. What were it for our Magistrates to have the prayers of
so many good hearts, for their safety? Then should that be fulfilled, Zachar.
8.20.21, etc.

5 The Gospel should be freely preached, there would then be nothing to hinder
either admittance or continuance, in the Ministry. This liberty of the Gospel
procures continuance of our liberty; and tho restrayning of this makes the Lord
depart, and brings bondage, captivity, and the sword upon the Nation. Then
should the people that sit in ignorance and the shadow of death, see a great
light, and so many should not perish for want of vision.

6 Magistrates should be out of danger of those threats, Hos. 5, for passing
their bounds, and Esa. 29, none should make Israel sin and wound their
consciences with these lesser things at first, and then afterward fall into
extremity and height of wickedness.

7 Ministers should have more gifts and more authority: for the setting up
these, restrain the spirit of God; and such urging of these, without ground
from the Word makes that their ministry grow far less respected. People
should be driven from Formality and superstition, that now come to delight
themselves in unprofitable Ceremonies, and so delude the Law: Then should that
be fulfilled, Hos. 2.18.

Popish grounds for maintaining their devises should fall, and so Babell should
be cast down, and the way shut against all superstition hereafter: Thus men
shall bring that blessing upon them, Psalm. 137.

The people that are in bondage so as they may not examine things, but receiu
all, should freely try the spirits, and so hold that which is good.

Peace should be established, 1 With the Lord, where they that break the least
of his commandments, and teach men so, shall be counted little, or none in the
Kingdom of God.

2 Peace with our Christian Prince that is over us, when as the adversaries of
Gods people shall have nothing, like the adversaries of Daniel to accuse them
off: then shall the King be to the just, as the rain upon the mowen grass,
Psalm. 72.

3 Then shall there be peace twixt inferior Magistrates and Ecclesiastical
persons, who should not intermeddle confusedly each in others Province, nor one
be so adverse to the other.

4 Peace twixt Ministers, whose hearts burn on against another, for these
trifles: some count us schismatics and heretics; and others count them
Popish, to plead for Baal: How happy a thing it is and profitable for brethren
to dwell together in unity?

5 Peace twixt Minister and his people, the Minister shall not be then an
hatred in the house of God: nor shall he spy to entrap others that sincerely
and purely worship God, as Hos. 5.1.

6 Peace twixt a man and his neighbor, whereas now men reproach and revile one
an other for no other cause but dissenting in these; then should be fulfilled
that, Esa. 13.

7 Peace with the reformed Churches, from whom to dissent (having had so long
and prosperous a time to get knowledge in, and to reform things that are amisle)
and to speak evil of them that brought such light into the world, is shame and
sin; it indangers their estimation, we being so great and happy a Nation. But
if we do abuse our prosperity, and vaunt our selves because of that, to please
the Lord, and so draw others to us, we shall drink deep of the cup of Gods
anger.

8 Peace with our enemies, when our ways please the Lord, Prove. 16.7. We shall
not need fear the power of the Papist, when we hate their sins.

Grounds and certainty of this peace.
1 Then men shall be of one judgment when these fire balls shall be removed. 2
The blessing of the Lord shall be upon us, if we do hear and obey, Psalm. 82.
3 All shall set themselves more to please the Lord; and drawing nearer to him
is the best means of concord amongst our selves. 4 Wicked profane men shall
have the staff taken out of their hands, wherewith now they smite the Kings
faithful subjects. 5 Popish and superstitious persons that now lie hid amongst
us, and kindle this fire, shall be discerned and expelled.
Are they then enemies to peace, that desire reformation, and the removal of
these? Are they not such as pray for the peace of Jerusalem? Why are they
troubled as enemies to State and Prince? And most high and mighty King, how
happy shall you be, if as laboring to set such peace amongst Kings, you set
this peace in the Church?

SECTION. XXI.
BY the former grounds I doubt not, but men desirous to have the Lords name
sanctified, his Kingdom flourish, and his will done, will easily condescend to
have these things removed, which so trouble the servants of God, being merely
unprofitable, as all humane inventions are. Only now for the time, till they
be removed, men must know how far they may join in the worship of God where
these things are in use; which part is needful for all to learn, since the
servant of God must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but reprove them rather.

Therefore first consider these grounds following.

1 That these Ceremonies in controversy are imposed upon the people, as well
as Minister, as may appear in the Preface to the Ceremonies in the Service
book, and that in the name of the people, the Minister pronounces, We receive
this child, etc.

2 That the Church of Rome is an Idolatrous Church full of Idols.

3 To eat of things offered unto Idols, and partake in Idolatrous Ceremonies is
sin.

4 It is the property of superstitious and idolatrous things to infect and
pollute the places where they are.

1 Our Savior Christ cast out all those mony-changers that had seated
themselves in the house of the Lord before he taught in the Temple, and Josiah
cleansed the Temple before he offered in it: This therefore shows men should not
offer their sacrifices where there are abominations and filthiness.

2 Men must show an utter dislike and hatred of the garment spotted by the
flesh, Deuteronomy. 7, they must not take it into their house; 2 Cor. 6, it must not
be touched.

3 Men must flee from all Idols and Idolothits, and must not look upon them.

Though men may cavil at the former places, as being meant of the innner man,
yet the latter are plain. This touches men in that it is imposed upon all.

2 Men do not flee from it, but draw near unto it.

3 The worship there performed is not pure but mixed, for men are commanded to
break the second commandment.

4 Though the personal sins of the Minister do not hurt the people, yet his
Ministerial and public sins do hurt, which he performs from the people to
God.

5 What example can be brought where the holy men of God have communicated with
such things.

6 Men are bound to protest against all these corruptions.

Obj. Men hate them in heart.

Answ. The Lord in each commandment, in the second especially, forbids the
least inward respect from the body.

2 It it an appearance of evil by which many may be offended, weak ones
especially.

Obj. 2. Presence is not approbation, since men are not present for that
purpose: and secondly men may be present to hear corrupt doctrine taught,
therefore where corrupt ceremonies are used.

Answ. Presence only is not approbation, if men have a calling thither.

2 If they protest openly against the same.

3 Consider, that the Lords bids thee come thither, but man bids thee sin, if
thou come to worship God after the order of the Congregation wherein this is
enjoined, it is not only thy bare presence that argues thine approbation, but
this thy yielding in show to Ceremonies.

4 All men's presence together does uphold and continue them.

Obj. Men may be present at false doctrine Math. 23, why not at these then?

Answ. 1 Men are not certain that then, and there he will preach false doctrine.

2 Men in that case are bound, if it be possible to hear sound Teachers; and
ordinarily to frequent where false doctrine is taught, is dangerous and a
tempting of God, if men be not very strong, and forced by necessity thereunto.

3 Preaching is Gods ordinance, but the other is not, but man's invention.

4 We have warrant for our presence at the one, not at the other.

Obj. Men may communicate with them that kneel, why not with other Ceremonies?

Answ. This seems to be commanded each one in special, who not kneeling, do
protest against it.

Quest. Whether parents may bring their children to be Crossed?

Answ. No: for first men may do nothing to their children but what themselves
would have done to themselves, if they were to be baptized now: And what good
heart could endure this Idolatry?

2 It is a special dishonor to the Lord, which men should avoid, both by
themselves, and in and by others.

3 This, as all human inventions, hinders from the child, when it is wittingly
done by the Parents, the power of Baptism, as much as is possible.

Obj. Men's not bringing their sacrifices to the Lord was a sin, though the
Priests were evil, 1 Samuel 2, why then is not our not beinging our children to
be baptized our sin in like manner?

Answ. 1 That it was the peoples sin, it does not appear in the text.

2 That was properly their personal sin; whereas the Minister makes the cross
in the name of the people.

3 They inverted the order, and that which they did was out of the service of
God: th^se do add of their own in the service of God.

Lev. 15.8, Whomsoever the leprous person spitteth on, on touches, v. 11,
having not washed his hands in water, he shall be unclean. This sign fies
uncleanness by sin, who is so touched by another sin, is defiled by it;
this holds firmly.

Deuteronomy. 22.10, Plow not with an Ox and an Ass at once. It is plain the Lord
abhorrs all mixture of religion and superstition.

Deuteronomy. 23.14. The Lord forbids any uncleanness, lest he depart, a little
uncleanenesse, wittingly and willingly suff^ed makes the Lord depart

Ex. 20. The second commandment forbids any human device to be respected and
reverenced in his worship.

H^s. 4. Men must not go up to Gilgall and Bethaven, and swear the Lord
lives; for he will not have his worship mixed.

Zephan. 1.5. The Lord will visit such as swear by the Lord and Malcham: That
is, such as join any thing to the Lords true worship.

Col. 2.20. Why as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with
Traditions? This place proves that it is the property of the men of the world
to receiu Traditions.

Math. 15, to join human Traditions in the worship of God, is to worship God in
vain, if men be convinced of the unlawfulness of these traditions, or if they
place their principal serving of God in them.

2 Cor. 6. Be not unequally yoked with infidels, exponente Beza, in any
action, either per se, or (...), illicita.

These places prove the commanding of superstitions unlawful. Secondly, the
using of such by the Ministers. Thirdly, the people joining with them.

1 The Minister stands in the room and person of the people, and does offer for
them.

2 Christ is after a sort expelled out of his place when human devises are
brought in.

3 The places speak to the people most of them, or all, directly binding each
particular.

Obj. Christ is there present; therefore we may be there.

Answ. The consequence is not good, because Christ may be, and is there as God.

2 Christ is there in his Ordinances to convict the wicked, and build up his
weak children that do not discern the evil of these Ceremonies.

3 It is requisite that Christ calls us thither, as well as that he be there.

Obj. 2. Another sin cannot defile us: but this is an others sin.

Ans. 1 It is an others sin, and mine too, not only by my presence, for that
is not sufficient to make one guilty; but first he is appointed to do it for
me, and so does it not for himself only.

2 The worship is mixed.

3 In Christ's privileges it is necessary we give no subjection to any
stranger, but plainly stand for Christ.

Obj. Another wickedness at the Sacraments does not hurt the worthy receiver;
no more does the Ceremony used by the Minister hurt him that hates it.

Answ. The case is not like: Because here each one does receive for himself;
but there the Minister is the public person that stands in the room of the
people.

Obj. Protestation against sin is not ever necessary.

Answ. If we neither do it, nor seem to do it: But if they seem to do
evil, and protest not, do they not give offense to others and endanger
themselves.

Obj. This will drive men to separate.

Answ. It will keep them from Separation, for being taught that in some
Assemblies, they may partake in Gods Ordinances without mixture, they cannot
deny to be present.

Obj. All the alleged Arguments prove it unlawful for the Minister, but not
to the people.

Answ. 1 We must remember what any Minister does of his own head, besides the
common rites appointed by the Church, that is a personal sin; but when a
prescript Liturgy is appointed for Ministers and people, and rytes with all,
then it seems not to be the Ministers sin only, but the peoples too, who
join in that worship: For it is appointed to all to worship God thus.

2 It is performed by all, at least in show.

Now the places are plain for the people as well as the Minister.

Having treated of the true discipline, and corrupt Ceremonies: Now in the next
place we may see whether Ministers be justly deprived of their Ministry. Him
that doubts and will consider wisely, I doubt not but these grounds will
satisfy.

1 No Scripture binds to the obedience of such things: Why should men be more
wise then the Lord, or more holy, or put men out of Gods service for things he
requires not at their hands? I would fayn learn of one of the opposites how
they will clear themselves before God for this? is it not hypocrisy to go
beyond the Lord?

2 The Lord frees all men directly from human inventions, Col. 2, are not men
put out of their living and fee-simple which Christ has purchased and bestowed
upon them?

3 These things are toys and trifles in the opposites judgment, and matters of
conscience to the other side; yet for these they deprive the Church of God of
their Pastors. What? Is not a good Minister worth a chip? Do you nothing
respect your brethren, nor men's consciences?

4 This practice is quite contrary to the practice of our Savior Christ: he
whipped out all that brought any thing into the Temple, besides that was
instituted; and these whip out men for not bringing in men's dev^^es.

5 It is against all sense and reason, that workmen appointed by the Lord, that
do his work faithfully, even in the Stewards judgment, should be put out from
their work, because they please not the stewards eye for their apparel? As
though men should put out a labourer, because his wastcoat is not white.

6 Our Savior did not restrain him that cast out devils though he followed not
him: and why do you hinder such as cast down the strong holds of Sa^an,
because they do not follow you? Surely a good servant prefers his Masters work
and credit, more then his own pomp.

7 They are specially called that are virgins not defiled with women, Romans 14,
these follow the Lamb whither he goes, even these that are redeemed from
amongst men, now counted factious? How dare any presume to think them unfit
whom he holds in his right hand? Are you grown so proud, that you will fight
with the Lamb, and wart against heaven?

8 There is no example of the like practice in Scripture or Writers, save
amongst Papists; but many of the contrary, some put to death, some restrained
from their Ministry, because they went to idolatry.

9 It was his Majesty's pleasure they should be convinced first, and then
censured, which how it has been performed all the world is witness of, which
sees what offers of disputation have been made, what ample and learned books
come forth, which yet could never be answered.

10 These men are greatest enemies to Papists, the danger of our State, which
daily increase and spring up, as the lights in any place are removed. It is
against all policy therefore to stop these; which if their Ministry were
profitable for nothing else, yet they may be kept as stones to weigh the
balance even.

11 Do but indifferently consider them and us severally: their Religion, is it
not lip-labor, and mere formality like theirs? Esa. 29.13. May not natural
men go as far as they require?

2 They do not teach soundly the doctrine of repentance, giving warning of
judgments, or of the particular sins which bring the same, which good
Watchmen should do.

3 They take away preaching out of the land, both by extolling reading, and
preaching so as the people can gather nothing by it. And under color of long
prayers, pr^s^e men by their Canons more strictly to their divince service,
then to the Word preached.

4 They cannot endure men should examine, doubt, and search into things; they
would persuade the people these things belongs not to Tradesmen, but to
Scholars and Ministers; of a contrary mind was our Savior.

5 They punish more severely the breach of a Tradition of their own appointing,
then the breach of Gods commandment. Is not this Pharisaicall hypocrifie?

6 They are glad to use Papists Arguments against us, and ours against them; as
it has been proved in experience, that they have held their grounds.

7 They set up vile, profane and ignorant Ministers over Congregations: is not
this to let in Wolves? far contrary was Paul's practice and counsel, Act. 20.

8 Ambition, covetousness and pride, where dwells it but amongst them? Is
not their Kingdom of this world? Such was not Paul, nor our Savior Christ.

9 These men build upon human Ceremonies, holding this position: no Ceremony no
Bishop: a ^it prop for their Calling to rest upon.

10 They justify many things, because the Church cannot be perfect; as though
the least corruption should be born withal in the Spouse of Christ, that is
known and pointed at.

11 They grow in nothing, save in carnal wisdom and cunning to defend their
own traditions.

12 Things openly evil in their own judgment, are not red^essed amongst them;
as unpreaching Ministers, Non residents, Pluralists, taking Gods name in vain,
and notorious profaneness.

13 They hate and forbid the very substance of Religion in practice, as
Christian Meetings, and the like.

14 M^n that are under their Ministry, how naked, poor and miserable are they?

I beseech you that mind the good of your souls, be not overcarried with an
external pomp and how of learning, but examine and thy all things.

2 Consider all men are liars, that no man ought to be credited further then
they have sound testimony of the Scripture, which is the rule and ground of
faith, and the light of the Church.

3 That all men are bound to try the spirits whether they be of God or no.

4 That men must not be your Doctors and Masters, but you must try all things,
and hold that which is good.

5 Has not every man the spirit by measure? though therefore they are learned
that oppose; yet in many things they may be ignorant.

6 That the Highest Callings have been corrupted and counterfeited, as
Prophets, Apostles, high Priests: who therefore grounds upon men, builds not
upon Christ, and the Scriptures are only judge of all opinions and practices,
to this the Apostles subjected themselves, and our Savior. The contrary is the
gap to all error and superstition; witness the Popish Church, who giving all
to the Clergy, and suffering themselves to be led by these, into what monstrous
and fundamental errors are they fallen? Christ is the only Prophet of his
Church; Every man must speak that which he has received from Christ, and the
ground of a man's judgment that would not be carried about with every blast of
new doctrine must be infallible.

Vouchsafe on the other hand to consider the way so much spoken against.

1 It holds the doctrine of the Scriptures, according to the practice of our
Savior, and the purest times of the Church, and nothing else, Act. 20.

2 This cleaus to the whole truth of God, and to every part of it, Math. 5.19.

3 This way most opposes the whore of Babylon, and overthrows her grounds, is
most zealous against all her inventions; these are the virgins, Rev. 14.

4 These are taught of God, so as they do not depend upon man, but discern the
voice of Christ, Ioh. 10.

5 The Majesty, grave simplicity, and power of Gods Ordinances does most
appear, in the wise, free, holy, bold, fervent and constant use of the same,
changing men hereby into the image of God.

6 This prays according to occasions, and feeling of our inward wants, by the
motion of Gods spirit, Romans 8.

7 Men in this way seek the glory of God in the spreading of his truth, and the
good of men's souls, Ioh. 7, not speaking evil of the most forward, nor by the
show of learning seeking to raise themselves.

8 In this way men take up their crosses and follow Christ, Math, 16: they
suffer much hardship for the Gospel, whereas the other ready for every wind,
avoid the Cross.

9 In this way is the true communion of the Saints, both for communicating of
the graces of the spirit, and of outward blessings, Act. 2.

10 Natural men most hate it, and the more wicked any is, the more evil they
speak of it, and of them that teach and practice it, Romans 8.

11 This crucifieth the flesh only, whereas others use their liberty as an
occasion of the flesh; this therefore is a straight way.

12 This brings peace to the souls of men, both while they do these things,
and suffer for them.

13 Men falling from this way, spiritual judgments have followed them
sensibly, they have grown far more licentious and vain etc.

14 What are these men zealous against, but plain sin, and such things as
zealous men in Scriptures have been adverse unto, as ceremonies devised by man,
and abused to Idolatry?

15 This way teaches, that men ought freely of love, to give all respect,
obedience, subjection, and life too, for the good of the Prince, Romans 13.

16 This teaches that it is only in the power of the Civil Magistrate to
punish offenders.

17 Where this way has been soundly and faithfully taught, there men are most
easily held in subjection to the Magistrate.

18 What painful and conscionable Minister but justifies this way.

This way is schism in many men's account, and termed damnable and many things
which they cannot prove are objected against this in the cares of his Majesty:
But truth will overcome, and Christ must prevail, though they have brought us
to 300, yet these are enough to vanquish the great army of the Aramites. Nay,
if there were but two men they should overcome: All that have fought for it
have overcome, and Christ has gotten victory for us; be wise therefore, and
kick not against the pricks: The Lord is with us, fight no more against the
Lord, but let there be peace amongst us, only hinder us not in our Ministry,
and saving men's souls.

And for you brethren, whose ears are filled with bitter invectiues, daily
thrown out against you, judge righteous judgment; Paul may strive with Peter,
though his ancient much in the service of the Lord: neither let our miseries
and crosses cause you to think our standing not to be sound. Consider Christ's
own servants, the Prophets, how they have been dealt with all. Has not the
visible Church, that had the Keys then under show of zeal for God, and love to
the Church cast them out? Esa. 66. And must not times come, that he shall think
he does God good service that kills you, which is not meant of the heathens,
that always were so minded, but of the visible Church? And is not Christ a
rock of offense, and a stumbling block? Are not many offended at him? Think of
this each that reads, that you have no understanding naturally of the things of
God to discern, but rather ye are prone to misjudge both of the persons and
things.

SECTION. XXII.
HAving spoken touching their Ceremonies and communion with them. In the next
place it remains to speak of their prayers, wherein much is controverted.

For set form of prayer; wherein though I think them not unlawful; yet for the
Minister, I am persuaded be sins.

1 Because experience shows that prayers conceived are more pertinent, and do
more affect then set form of prayers.

2 All might be more briefly and plainly done, for the profit of the Auditory.

3 It is a disgrace to the Gospel to borrow from Papists any of their
Liturgies, as though we had not the spirit of God to help us in this, as well
as in preaching.

4 It is the duty of the servant of God, to pray for the people, as well as
teach them, and as he varies in the one, so ought he in the other, and exercise
the gift of the Holy Ghost.

5 It is a dangerous stumbling block to many others to content them selves with
a set form of prayer, and strive for no more.

6 As the Lord in preaching for the good of his children, does minister many
things in the present, besides our best meditations when we have to our utmost
endeavored ourselves; so in prayer, who knows but the Lord would afford more
plent full matters and affections to profit the people with all?

7 We have no example in the new Testament for any prescript Leiturgy.

8 Conceiving prayers, would expel our Idol Ministers, and stir up men with
more affection and preparation to come thither, even Ministers themselves, and
it would manifest the Ministers care over his people (for the best trial of a
Minister is by his prayers) whereas the contrary upholds an insufficient
Ministry, and makes the Minister ordinarily do no more, then if amongst
heathens he were to read a Grammar lecture, and consture some harsh barbarous
Latin to his Country Auditors.

9 The Holy Ghost is given to help in prayer, as well as in any other part of
the Ministry.

Obj. It is not required of a Ministry to be able to pray.

Answ. This is supposed as he is a Christian.

2 The man that can preach conscionably for the most part has gifts to pray.

Obj. Many cannot pray.

Answ. Nor never strive for it, having this glorious, but blasphemous pretense,
that these prayers of then selves, where there is nothing else are good serving
of God. 2 That they are better then such as are conceived by the assistance of
the Holy Ghost.

Answ. 2. There ought to be two in every Congregation, a Pastor and Teacher,
and if gifts were denied to one, yet no doubt but the Lord would give to the
other.

Obj. 3. There would be many idle prayers offered up.

Answ. This does more corrupt, and is more dangerous for the manner the heart,
(which is the chief thing in prayer above the matter) then this for the matter.

2 They would doubtless, if there were the like ignorant and unconscionable
Ministers that are now; but this Discipline would sweep them away.

3 Men should be admonished for this, and if they did continue, then order to
be taken with them.

Wherefore considering this, that many inconveniences come by this which we have
now, we desire that there might be a consultation how to reform in this, as
well as there has been in the preaching of the Word.

Now for the people, how far they are forbidden to join in any unlawful
prayers.

Answ. 1 Where unlawful things are asked; either such things as are not
blessings, or such things to be removed, as are not evil simply.

2 Wherein they profess to ask without faith.

3 Wherein the people are to be their own mouths to the Lord.

4 Needless and idle repetitions of the same thing and words after the Popish
manner, as Oh Christ, Oh Lord etc.

5 To patch in prayers amongst the commandments.

Grounds why we may not join in these, and the like.
1 That which the Minister offers from us to God, is ours; he susteyning all
the peoples person.

2 All these are to take Gods name in vain, and men thereby may bring a curse
rather then a blessing, if after knowledge and consideration they should do it.

3 What an horrible thing is it, that there should be such prayers used in the
public worship of God, which men should be abashed in private to offer unto
God, not enduring the light and judgment of the Word.

4 Hereby we shall be able to answer all that is, or can be objected against
any worship of God in the Churches of England.

Otherwise, where no such prayers are used, to join with a set form we hold
not unlawful, being performed by a true Minister.

1 Because this is true prayer, to offer up lawful requests, unto the true God
in the name of Christ.

2 Some things may and ought to be asked, being in all times necessary and for
all persons.

3 Therein the spirit of God may be exercised in us; in being stirred up to join
with him.

4 This is his sin merely that is the Minister, if he do not exercise his
Ministerial gifts ^n prayer besides, as the Lord requires upon the present
occasion.

5 Therein is no evil done, only some good omitted, not all good, but the
perfection and excellency of this good of prayer.

FINIS.

