THE HISTORY OF THE SERRAIL, AND OF THE COURT of the Grand Seigneur, Emperor
of the Turks. WHEREIN IS SEEN the Image of the Othoman Greatness, A Table of
humane passions, and the Examples of the inconstant prosperities of the Court.

Translated out of French by Edward Grimeston Serjant at Arms.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIS WORTHY Kinsman, S. Harbottell Grimeston Knight
and Baronet.
SIR,
IT is the usual manner of Men, whom GOD has blessed with the goods of Fortune,
when Death summons them to leave the world, with all their wealth, they are
then ^ous and careful how to dispose of that which they cannot carry with
them. Then they call for Cou^ to advise them in the drawing of their last Wills
and Testaments, bequeathing large (...) or to their Children, Kinsfolk and
best respected Friends, to remain as a future testimony of their bounties:
But if fares not so with me; I must say with poor Bias, O^nid (...) m^cum
p^rto I am now creeping into my Grave, and am freed from that care, how to
dispose of my worldly estate. But I fear that my disabilitie will leave some
stain of Ingratitude upon me, when I dead; that I have left no testimony of
my thankfulness to so worthy a friend as your self, from whom I have received
so many favors. To make any real satisfaction, I cannot, neither do you need
it. Yet to free my self (in some sort) of this imputation of ingratitude, I
have be (...) you^ (...) Legacy, the last of ^y said ^s. I hope you will give
it acceptance and countenance it for your own, who^e you may at your best
leisure (without any labor, travel, or expenses) enter into the great Turk's
S^raglio or Court, and there ta^ suruay of the life, lusts, revenues, power,
gou^, and tyranny of that great Ottoman. I bequeath it you as a testimony of
my thankfulness when I am gone. If you make it your recreation after more
serious affairs, I hope you will receive some content, to read the State of
the proudest and most powerful Monarch of the World. If it please you, I shall
think my self very happy, having performed this last duty. And will ever
rest,

Your truly affected poor Uncle, Edward Grimeston.

THE GENERAL HISTORY OF THE SERRAIL, and of the Court of the Grand SEIGNEVR,
Emperor of the TVRKES.
The first BOOK.
THe wisest among Men advise us to go unto Kings as unto the fire, neither ^o
near nor too far off: It burns when we approach indifferently, and does
not warm hi^ that stands far off: The glorious luster of Royal Majesty,
cons^ their re^ presumption of those which approach too near, and the bea^ of
their bounty do never warm those savage (...) which rec^e in flying from
them. The true examples which Histories supply, have confirmed the excellency
of this counsel: yet a desire of the public good has enforced me to violate
this respect, and my vows to serve it carries (...) into the danger there is
in ga^ing too near upon Kings. I approach unto the proudest of all other
Princes, and the most severe of Men, yea so near as Id^e into his secrets,
visit his person, discover his most hidden affections, and relate his most
particular loves. If I loose myself, yet I shall give proofs of this verity,
that in the age wherein we live, whosoever imployes himself wholly for the
public, in the end ruins himself: But Man is not borne only for himself,
and the barbarous ingratitude of the times cannot serve for a pretext but unto
idleness. He that will labor, must pass over these obstacles; for he is not
worthy of life, which does not employ it well; and to consume himself for the
public good, it to revive again gloriously out of his ashes, like unto a new
Phoenix. I have conceived, that having given you the History of the Turkish
Empire, from its beginning unto our times, it would not be unprofitable to let
you see what their manners are, their kind of living, their conversation, and
the order of their government, which so powerful and redoubted a Conqueror
does observe. To do safely woe must enter into the Serrail, where the secret
of all these things is carefully shut up. But for that in going thither we must
cross thorough the City of Constantinople, let us speak something of the
situation, antiquity, and beauty, of this pompous City, the fatal abode of
the most powerful Emperors of the Earth.

CHAP. I. Of the City of Constantinople.
THe Grecians consulting with the Oracle of Apollo l'ytheus, what place they
should choose to build a City in Thrace, had for answer that they should lay
the foundations right against the Territory of blind Men; so terming the
Calcidonians, who coming first into that country, could not make choice of the
fertility of a good soil, and were seated upon the other side of the Sea upon
the borders of Asia, in a place which was unpleasing and unfruitful, in old
time called the Town of Calcedonia, but now the Borough Scutar^. Pausanius
Captain of the Spartians had the charge to build it, and Byze General of the
Megarian Floet, gave it his name, and called it Byzance: It has carried it for
many ages with the glory to be esteemed among the Grecians, the most fertile of
their Towns, the Port of Europe, and the Bridge to pass thither from Asia;
until that Great Constantine leaving Italy retired into the East, and carried
with him the most powerful Lords which might trouple that estate: He built
after the Model of Rome, a stately City upon the Antiquities of Byzance where
he erected the Eternity of his Name, and called it Constantinople, or new
Rome. The greatness of the Walls, the safety of the Forts, the beauty of the
Houses, the riches of Columns, which seemed to have drawn into that place all
the Marble, I asper, and Porphyry of the Earth, were the rare wonders of the
Architecture, but above all these things appeared a magnificent Temple, which
the piety of this Prince had consecrated to the Divine Wisdom, under the name
of Saincta Sophia, whose building the riches seemed in some sort to envy the
glory of King Solomon, in the like design; at the least according to the time,
and the power of Constantine. Seven rich Lamps ministered occasion to curious
spirits to observe their rare art, they all received at one instant the
substance which did nourish their flames, and one being extinct all the rest
were quenched. This was in the year of Grace, three hundred and thirty. Since
two tumultuous factions grew in the City, who after they had cast the fire of
an unfortunate Sedition into the spirits of Men, brought the flames into this
goodly Temple and burnt it. For this cause Instinian the Emperor employed in
the restoring thereof, a part of the Treasures which he had greedily gathered
together: He caused it to be re-edified with more state then it had been, and
in seventeen years he employed thirty four Millions of gold, which was the
Reuenew of Egypt for that time: He laid a foundation of eight hundred thousand
Duckers of yearly rent, and caused this holy and reverend place to be served
by nine hundred Priests, Men who had the merit of their beginning from Learning
and Piety. The City being the Queen of the World, within few years after,
saw her restorer triumphing over the King of Persia, and had the grace to keep
in her bosom, the precious treasure of Christianity, a part of the Cross of
the Redeemer of the World, found by the careful piety of the Emperors
Mother: her joy, pomp, and luster, were grown to that height, as it seemed
there could be nothing more added: it is by succession of time the seat of the
greatest Monarchs of the Earth: Senerus and Anthonin his son did envy it,
and ravished from its restorer, the glory to have named it, calling it
Anthonia, by one of their names. But whatsoever has a beginning in this World
must have an end: and the goodliest things pay tribute to change. In the year
1453. on Tuesday the seven and twentieth of May, it was after a long siege made
a prey to the victorious Turk: Mahomet the Second of that name, and the
eleventh Emperor of the Turks entered it by force, spoiled it, and sacked it;
The Emperor Constantine Paliologo lost his life, with a great number of men of
quality, and all the Christian men were subject to the Sword, or to the rigor
of bondage: the women were a sport to the lubricity of the Turks, and their
goods subject to their spoil, in revenge (some say) of the sack and burning
which the Grecians made of Troy, from whom they will have the Turks to be
descended: but rather for a punishment of the impiety of the Grecians, who
blaspheming against Heaven, deny that the Holy Ghost proceeds from Jesus Christ
the second Person in the ineffable Trinity. Mahomet the Second of that name,
was the first that settled the Othoman. Throne there, They changed the name
among them, and called it Stamboll, that is to say, the great, the Royal, and
the abundant. Her goodly places suffer the like inconstancy, and are called
Baestans, the stately Hippodrome, is called the place of Horses. Atmaydan, and
the wonderful Temple of Sainta Sophia, is become the chief Mosquee of
Mahomets superstition.

The scitu^tion of Constantinople, and its form.
This City is situated upon a point of firm Land advanced into the channel
which comes from Pontus Enxinus, or the black Sea, which Geographers call the
Bosphorus of Thrace. It is watered of three parts by the Sea: toward the North
by a Gulf or Arm of the Sea, called the Horn, which the Bosphorus thrusts
into Europe, and make the Haven of Constantinople the goodliest, the deepest,
and the most commodious in Europe: Toward the East it is watered by the
extremity of the channel or Bosphorus; on the South by the waves of the
Propontique Sea; and upon the South it has the firm Land of Thrace. The form
is Triangular, whereof the largest side is that toward the Serrail, which
looks to the Sea toward the seven Towers, and its vast circuit contains
about five leagues: The walls are of an extraordinary height, with two false
Brayes toward the Land, and enclose seven Hills within it. The first serves as
a Theater to the Imperial Palace of the Prince, where it is commodiously and
proudly feated: The last looks upon the extremity of the farthest parts of the
Town opposite to this, and upon the way which leads to Andrinopolis by Land.
But betwixt the third and the fourth, where a Valley does extend it self
called the great, is an Aqucduct of rare structure, which Constantine caused to
be drawn seven leagues from the City, and Solomon the Second advanced it two
Leagues beyond, and increased the current of water in so great abundance, as
they do serve seven hundred and forty Fountains for the public, not
reckoning those which are drawn into diverse parts to furnish the great number
of Bathes which serve for delights, and the Turks superstition.

Upon the last of the seven Hills are yet to be seen the ancient buildings of a
Fort strengthened with seven Towers in the midst of the situation; the Turks
call it Giedicula, that is to say, the Fort of the seven Towers, in the which
the wonders of Art was so great in old time, as what was spoken in the one was
heard in all the rest, not all at one instant, but successively and in order.
Two hundred and fifty Soldiers are in guard, commanded by a Captain who has
the charge, who may not go forth without the leave of the Grand Vo^ir, except
it be on two days in the year, when they celebrate their Feasts of Bayrans,
or Easter. The first Turkish Emperor which possessed Constantinople lodged their
treasure in these Towers: The one was full of Ingots, and coined gold; two of
them contained the silver that was coined and in Ingots: another had diverse
arms and ornaments for Soldiers, and the Caparisons for Horses, enricht with
gold, silver and precious stones: the fifth served for ancient Arms, Medales,
and other precious remaynders of Antiquity: the sixth contained the Engines for
War: and the seventh, the Rols and Records of the Empire; accompanied with a
goodly gallery, in the which were placed the rich spoils which Selym the first
brought from Tauris, when he triumphed over Persia. All these treasures were
carefully kept until the Reign of Selym the Second. But it is in estates as
with private Families. In these some gather together with much toil that which
their heirs waste prodigally; and some Kings heap up treasure which serve as
a subject of prodigality to their Successors. For this Prince base and
effeminate, who it seems, was not borne but for the ruin of his Empire (if
Christians could have embraced the occasions) wasted in the expenses of the
Nauall Army, which the battle of Lepantho made subject to the Christians, and
before in the war of Cyprus, the best part of the immense treasure which his
Father had heaped up in these Towers: the rest served for his lascivious and
disordered passions with his Concubines. Since Amurath his Son changed the
place of the treasures of the Empire, and from the Towers transferred them into
his Serrail: so they draw unto him that which he loves, and seeing that money
does possess the hearts of Men, it is reason they should have a lodging in
their Palace. This alteration has since appointed these places of the
treasure, to be Prisons for the great Men of the Port or Court, whom the
Sultans will not put to death: For the Fortress being of a great extent, such
Captives have the more liberty. They shut up in the Towers of the black Sea,
which is a Castle upon Europe side joining to the Sea, Christian Prisoners of
quality, where in the year 1617. Duke Koreski a Prince of Moldania was lodged.

Constantinople has within the enclosure of the walls above two thousand
Mosquees, or Turkish Temples built by their Emperors: for we will make no
further relation of the rarities of that Imperial City, but such as are at
this day. We may read the wonders of that ancient City in other Authors; and
particularly in the Books which P. Gillius has written. The chief of all
these Mosquees is that which has been erected in the ancient Temple of Sancta
Sophia, called by the Turks Ayasophia; it has six goodly and sumptuous
Forefronts, the walls are of brick, covered in old time both within and
without with white Marble, Porphyry, and other rich stones; they are now of
Lead. The open Porches about it have six doors which augment the beauty; four
doors of the Church open at the entry; the height of the Vault covered with
Lead, shows the magnificence of the work: sixteen great Pillars support it,
four are Jasper of the I Will of Cyprus, four are of white Marble, four of
Porphyry, and four of another stone as rich: forty eight other Pillars of
less bigness, but of the same matter serves to support this great Fabrique,
and a lesser and lower Vault is supported by four and twenty Columns of the
same Marble and Porphyry. The rare Statues and rich Images wherewith
Constantine had adorned it, are no more to be seen: Mahomet the Second had
vowed them to the sack of the City when he took it: only an Image of the
Virgin who bare the Son of God, remaynes whole and untouched in the midst of
the Vault, not without a particular providence of Heaven: Yet the Turks draw a
veil cross to prohibit the sight; but this does not hinder the Christians by
creeping up by ladders to satisfy their devotion, when as at lawful hours
they may enter into the Mosquee: Now the Turks have white-cast the Vault in
diverse parts, to write the Name of God in the Arabique tongue. The breadth and
length of this Church may be well comprehended by the height, the which is
limited by the shot of a Harquebusse: under it is a Vault full of Altars and
Sepulchers, in respect whereof the Turks have caused the doors to be walled
up. In a place near unto it are found ten great Piles full of Oil since the
time of Constantine, which have continued unto this day free (by reason of the
low vault) from the fire which consumed the first beauties of this Temple, the
long continuance at years has made this Oil white like Milk: It now serves
for Physique which the Apothecaries use for the Grand Seigneur.

By these vaulted places they descended into two hollow Caves which go under
the streets of the City, the one leads to the Grand Serraill, and the other
goes far under Constantinople, unprofitable at this day, except the one which
has received light by some breaches which time has made, serves only to wind
silk, and brings unto the Coffers of the Shasna, or Exchequer, three or four
hundred Zequins of yearly rent. But the goodly and ancient buildings which did
adorn this admirable Temple, have been ruined by the Turkish Emperors,
except those which serve for a dwelling to some Congregations of the Priests of
the Alcoran.

Besides this great and admirable Mosquee, there are four others of note, the
durable marks of the magnificence of the Turkish Emperors. The first was
built by Mahomet the Second, after that he had triumphed over Constantinople:
He caused it to be erected after the Model of Sancta Sophia, but much less;
he enricht it with threescore thousand Ducats of Revenue; he caused two
hundred fair Chambers to be built about it covered with Lead, as well to lodge
the Priests which did serve, as to receive all strange Pilgrims of what Nation
or Religion soever they were, where they are entertained for three days:
without the Cloister are also built fifty other Chambers for poor men. The
second Mosque was made by Bajazet the second soon to the said Mahomet. The
third by Selym the first son to this man: and the fourth by Solomon second
son to Selym. These three last Princes are every one buried within the walls
of this Mosquee in stately Tombs, upon the which there are continually a great
number of Lamps burning, and Turkish Priests mumbling of the Alcoran, who pray
after their manner for the souls of these Monarchs. The most stately of these
four Mosquees is that of Solomon the Second, it exceeds in Marble and other
rich stones the pomp of Sancta Sophia, but it yields to the wonders of the
Architecture, whereunto few could yet attain. Selym the Second built his
Mosquee in the City of Andrinopolis: Achmat the last employed excessive sums
of money in the Fabrique of that which he built of late years in
Constantinople: the magnificency of the structure exceeds those which we have
mentioned, the Turks call it the new Mosquee, and their Priests the
Incredulous: for that Achmat caused it to be built against the advice which
they gave him, that such a work would not profit his souls health, seeing
that he had made no conquests to enlarge the Empire of their Predecessors. For
the Law of the state conformable to that Religion, forbids Turkish Princes to
build any Temples, if they have not extended the limits of their Empire in the
Territories of Christians, where they may cause their Alcoran to be preached:
for such works of piety cannot be useful to the health of their souls (the
Mufties say) who are opposite to such designs, if their Emperors would
undertake it.

The Grecians which are Christians, have within Constantinople forty Churches
for their divine Service; the Armenians have four, and the Latins (less
favored than these) have but two: It is true that most of them are lodged at
Galats, now called Pera, which is on the other side of the channel, where they
have nine Churches for their Devotions and holy Mysteries. The Jews have the
credit to be within the City in nine several quarters, and have eight and
thirty Synagogues. They have gotten more liberty and power then they have in
Christendom, for that they observe the formers of the Grand Siguior, and
moreover they have the managing of the Domestique Affairs of great Men and
Officers of the Port, where they are the common giuers of advice. The walls of
this Imperial City are yet firm and entire. They are double upon the firm
Land, except it be toward the Gate of Ayachapeza, that is to say, the holy
Gate, by reason of the great number of Religious bodies which were in a Church
near unto that Gate. Mahomet the Second entered thereby to defile the holiness
of the place: there are nineteen Gates as well upon the firm Land as toward
the Sea, which serve for an entrance into this City. Many great places are
extended for the commodity of the Public, some have preserved the ancient
Pyramides, and the works of Brass erected by Christian Emperors, amongst
others that which they call Petrome, where there are to be seeene whole
Obelisques; and three great Serpents of Marble creeping upward wreathed one
within the other: One of the which has a breach in the throat, for Mahomet the
Second entering into the City, had a conceit that they were the work of some
enchanting Sorcerer, and spurring on his Horse to be satisfied, he made this
breach with his Lance. There is every day a public Market in some one of
these places. One Friday it is in three, and the most famous are of Wednesday,
Thrusday, and Friday, They call them Schibazars, that is to say, Markets of
things necessary for use. About these places are erected above two thousand
shops for Breakers, who sell any thing wherewith to furnish the necessity of
those which desire to repair their want: The sole of this old trash is not so
little but it yields yearly unto the Princes Coffers six Charges of Money,
which is in value eleven thousand Sequins, or four thousand, four hundred
pounds sterling for the Turkish exaction makes profit of every thing. The shops
for Merchants exceed the number of forty eight thousand, they are divided
according to the diversity of trades or Merchandises into diverse places; but
every trade thath his quarter, and in diverse parts for the commodity of the
Public. Only Goldsmiths, Iewellers, and Merchants of cloth of gold are in one
place called Bayst^^, that into say Market, the others ^^zars: This (...) place
is in (...) with wa^ five foot thick; there are four double Gates our before
the other, like unto a little Town, vaulted round above. This rich (...) place
(...) four and twenty Pillars which suppo^^ the (...), under the which there
are many little shops like unto bo^^ in the wall, or in the Pillars, every one
is fine foot broad, and four long* There they show sorth their rich
Merchandises upon little Tables which are before them. Without doubt the gain
must be exceeding great, and the sale ordinary, seeing they paid unto the
Prince yearly five hundred Sequins, or two hundred pounds sterling, to have
leave to sell there. These are only Iewellers and Merchants of cloth of gold:
The Goldsmithes are without about the walls of this place, and every one pays
yearly a hundred Sequins, or forty pounds sterling to the same end.

Besides the Bayston, there is another less environed with a wall, and
supported by sixteen small Pillars; in the enclosure whereof they sell linen
cloth and silks, but without it is the detestable Market where they sell men
and women; on the one side they buy slaves which are already instructed to
serve, or to practice some trade, and on the other those which know not any
thing. These places represent better then the former, the fearful Image of
the Turkish tyranny: It binds them to slavery which the God of the World has
crated free: the Merchants visit such Merchandises, and such as have an intent
to buy, do first see the persons of either sex naked: they handle the parts
of their bodies, to observe if they be sound, and they uncover that which
Nature herself has labored to hide. The women if they be fair are bought at
a dear rate to serve the (...) passions of some ^ous and fearful Moo^e: they
to whom Nature has denied such graces, are taken to empty the close-stooles of
great Turkish Ladies, and to wash with water the parts of their body, which
serve to discharge their bellies, as often as they have (...). We will relate
the rest of the miseries of this servitude in another place, dividing them of
purpose to make them the more supportable. For in truth they are in this work
the most tedious subject of this History. Who could without sighing see an
infinite number of Christians laden with the fetters of a violent slavery by
the barbarism of the Turks? And in a place near unto this the Infidels keep
another Market where they only sell Nurses: and from this unjust traffic the
Princes undertakers draw sixteen thousand Sequins for the toll, of six
thousand four hundred pounds sterling.

Many other places of this starely City yield unto the treasury the Revenues
of many good sums of money. The Tauernes which sell wine publicly to
Christians, and to Jews; but in secret to Turks (being above fifteen hundred
in number) pay thirty six charges of money, and every charge is valued at
sixteen hundred thirty three Sequins. The Sea shore toward Pera, pays for
the toll of fish which it sold there, eighteen hundred charges of silver
yearly. The Market whereas Corn, Meal^ and Pulse is sold, yields yearly
fourteen charges of money. That where the Merchandises which comes from Caira
is ^ted, is worth yearly to the Chasua or the Imperial treasure, twenty
four charges of silver. The great custom which is levied from the Castle of
Gallipoli unto that of the black Sea, upon Spices and other Merchandises which
comes by shipping is worth a hundred and fourscore charges of silver. The
great Shambles of (...) and Muttons; which are without the City, and furnish
it with necessary meat, yield two and thirty charges of money: they are
called Chaanara, two hundred Capsapl^rs, or Butchers, serve them: A Superior
called Capsa^assa commands them, who had a charge they shall furnish f^ (...)
kill an Ox or a Sheep without his permission, (...) it be for the Sacrifices
of the Turks. The (...) from him to furnish their (...) should through
co^etousnesse raise the price of (...) above the ordinary tax which is set
down, and that his corruption shall come to the knowledge of the Gr^ Seign^ur;
there is nothing could free him from the rigor of cruel death: He is to^^^
in ^ces, and cut into four q^, which they send unto the Shambles to be an
example to other: So as f^^re keeping him in awe, (...) before this (...) which
(...) September and October, upon the (...) which (...) from (...) great to be
easily (...) people only and not the (...), you shall (...) of five and twenty
thousand Oxen, and (...) thousand (...) also (...) by the side of Horses,
Ships, Vessels, and (...) hundred of all sorts of Merchandises by Sea, amounts
to great and inestimable sums. The tax of those which imbarque themselves to
travail, which is an Aspre for every head if they be Turks, and two if they
be Christians or Jews, is of no small importance. The Tribute called is Turkey
Charay, which is levied upon the Jews in Constantinople, after the rate of a
Sequin for every male Child, is worth eleven Millions, three hundred Sequins
yearly, although there be many of that Nation which are free from this
Tribute. They do also give a present of three thousand Sequins every year,
for the confirmation of their Privileges, and to have a Rabbin to command
their Synagogues, and twelve hundred Sequins to have leave to bury their Dead.
The Christians, Grecians, within three miles or a league of Constantinople, pay
for every Male a Sequin; which amounts to the sum of above thirty eight
thousand Sequins: They do also give five and twenty thousand yearly for
their privilege to have a Patriarch, and to preserve the number of their
Churches. The privilege of their Burials cost them above three thousand
Sequins. The imposition called of Virgins, helps to fill the Grand Seigneurs
Cofers, or his Tr^ (...) upon Maids which marry (whereof they keep a
Register) if they be Turks, they give two third parts of a Sequin, the Jews
pay a whole one, and the Christians a Sequin and a half. The Christians,
Latins are for the most part freed from the violence and oppression of these
unjust taxes, for they get their dependence from some Kings Ambassador, or
from an inferior Prince. The Albanois, they of Raguse, and the Geneuois, pay
not any thing.

For the payment of so many Tributes wherewith the people is oppressed by the
Tyrant of the Eastern Regions, it is necessary there should be many sorts of
Coin mi^^^. In Constantinople the great Imperial Mint works continually in
Gold and Silver, but no man can be admitted be a Farmer to these precious
(...) if he be not a Grecian borne, by a special privilege of the Grand
Seig^eur, who has conferred this grace upon the Gretian, in consideration that
the Mines of Gold and Silver, are within the (...) of Greece, wherefoure
hundred men labor daily. And the Master of this rich Mine, is to furnish into
the Serraile, the first day of every month in the year, ten thousand Sequins
of Gold, and twenty thousand of Silver (...) coined, the Grand Seigneur having
so appointed, that the money which is employed in the Serrail shall be new.
The said Farmer has power to make Proclamation, that whosoever has any
foreign Coin, he should bring it in within three days and receive the just
price, upon pain of Confiscation. He has likewise power to take the Ingots
from the Mines, so many as shall be needful for his work.

The Mines which furnish most of the Gold and Silver, which is mi^^ed in the
Turkish Empire in Europe, are five in number. The one is dug in Macedonia
under the Roots of a Hill called M^ (...), and this ye^lds Gold: The other
which is of the same substance is opened in Bulgaria, upon the Confines of
Macedonia* The three of Silver are in Greece, rich and very plentiful. Out of
all which they draw that which Nature had wisely hidden, to be conversant among
men: the which does breed (...)* dissolues Friendship, corrupts (...)
Chastity, troubles Estates, obscures M^ wits, rauishes li^e, vnthrones reason
from her seat, and robe^ of himself*

But to return to this great City of Constantinople, the Magnificences of the
Princes which possess it at this day, and the riches of some (...), or great
Men of the Court, have caused above three hundred C^vana serrails to be built:
these are great and vast places to lodge Strangers. The number of this
Hospitals for the poor and (...) to the number of fourscore: (...), the
Turkish Emperors which have built these pound M^squees, have added them unto
their R^bric^s, where they are eternal marks of their Pl^* Moreover, there
are (...) Colleges for the instruction of young (...)* and the (...) of the
Scho^lers, which they call in their (...), that is to say wise Students,
although they be nothing less. (...) of them has a Chamber for his Lodging, a
Carpet for his Table, four loaves by the day, a proportion of Pottage and a
Candle: They give them two suites of clothes yearly and they are paid out of
Revenues of the College, by the Masters and Pr^ceptors which teach them, who
are called Soscha^i; that is for the first year when they enter into the
College: for to the second they add to their entertainment an Aspre by the
day, which is a fifth part more then a penny; afterward they give two, three,
or four Aspres by the day, according to the number of years they have
continued. With this poor pi^^ance these Turks can keep no great ordinary,
unless they receive it from other places: But the gain they make in writing
of Books, (for the Turks use no printing) is not little but does furnish
their necessity abundantly, yea, their Riots: they go also to houses to teach
the children of men of quality. But there is not in all Turkey more dissolute
youths then these Turkey Scholars: there is no kind of villainy but they
commit with all impunitie. The privileges wherewith the Turkish Emperors have
honored them, or rather the abuse of them has drawn them into all sorts of
impudency: no man can apprehend them for any crime, unless their General be
present, to whom only this power is given. It is true that the Princes presence
in Constantin^ple does restrain the insolency of their riots: But the Towns
of Carama^ and Na^ol^ are wonderfully pesteted. Amurath the third desirous (by
reason of some troubles which happened) to know the number of such Gallants;
they were found to be above nine thousand, as well in Greece as Natolia, not
reckoning those which studied in Suria, Caire, Arabia and elsewhere.

Another great place environed with wall, and shut up with good Gates, does
likewise beautify the City of Constantinople, the Turks call it Seracy^^a,
that is to say, the Sellerie, or the place where they make Saddles, and rich
Caparisons for Horses of Service and Pomp. It is an unspeakable pleasure for
those that love Horsemanship, to see four thousand workmen in this place,
laboring in their shops, artificially upon diverse Capari^ons for Horses. Some
(...) great round Pearls upon the Saddle of an Arabian Horse out of the Grand
Vizirs stable: Others fasten a Bitt of Gold to Reins of rich red Leather of
Russia; some do fit stirrup Leathers to stirrops of Gold, enricht with a great
number of Turkishes of the old Rock: Others fasten upon a large Crouper a
great number of precious stones: In another place you shall see a rich Saddle
cast forth a thousand flames, the number of the Diamonds wherewith it is
enricht make it inestimable: The Bitt and stirropes of Gold covered with
Diamonds, the Tassels of Pearls which are at the Reins, and at the Trappers
of the Crouper, and the other beauties of this royal Harness, ravish the eyes
of such as look of it with admiration of their wonders, and some silently
persuade themselves that Fortune adorned with these precious things which
depend on her, means to go in triumph through Constantinople, to let the
Turks see that she dwells amongst them. In the midst of this place there is a
Mosquee built for the devotion of these workmen, and a goodly Fountain in the
same place which powers forth abundance of fresh water for their use.

Two other great places likewise walled about, serve for the Lodgings of the
Ianizaries, which are the best Footmen of the Turkish Armies: the one of these
places is called Eschiodolar, that is to say the old habitations. It is of a
square form, and divided into many small Lodgings, in the which the Corporals
remain, called Ayabass^, which signifies the chief of glory: there are about
a hundred and fifty of this quality, and either of them commands two hundred
Ianizaries, who dare not go out of the place without leave: the Gates are shut
by night, and the keys are kept by the Captain.

The Arsenall is one of the goodliest and rarest things in Constantinople, it
is upon the Sea shore, and contains a hundred and fourscore Arches, under
either of which enters a great Galley, yea, three may be safely lodged. The
Officers which serve in this Arsenall, and receive pay, are commonly forty six
thousand men: But its greatest force is the good order that is observed by the
which there are certain Merchants which have contracted to entertain
fourscore Galleys always furnished with all things necessary, and ready to
put to Sea: the Munition of Powder is kept in diverse Towers in the walls of the
City which look toward Pera: they bring it from Grand Caire, where the
Sultans cause it to be made.

The Garners in the which they keep their provision of Corn and other grain
are built in a corner of the City toward Pera, the walls are very strong and
the Gates of Iron: there is sufficient to serve for many years, but every
third year they renew it: In the time of Amurath the third, there was found a
great quantity of Millet, the which had been preserved sweet and uncorrupted
for the space of four score years.

But this great Imperial City cannot be happily governed without the
execution of Justice, which is the soul of the World, and the order of Reason;
A Sovereign Judge is the chief, the Turks call him Stambolcadisi, that is to
say, the Judge of Constantinople. He takes notice indifferently both of Civil
and Criminal Causes, and no man is put to death in that place, if he has not
condemned him. There are four Lieutenants general, distinguished into the
four principal Quarters of the City, and execute under him the same Justice,
but from their Sentences they appeal unto the Judge. Besides these there is a
great Captain of Justice called Sonbasi, who does execute the greatest
Function of his charge in Prisons, to hear the Causes, and to make report unto
the Grand Vizir: There are also four Lieutenants under him, separated into the
Quarters of the City, by the order of the Policies there (...) and a great
number of inferior Officers, as Sergeants, a^ ^ther base persons which serve
him. The Prisons of Constantinople are divided into two, either of them is
beautified (if there be any beautiful Prisons) with a great Meadow in the midst
and a pleasing Fountain: It has two stories, in that below are lodged
criminal Offenders, in that above are such as are committed for civil causes.
Here the Jews are separated from the Turks, and the Turks from the
Christians, but in the lowest they are altogether, as Persons whom their
Offenses have made common. The Alms deeds and good works which are exercised
there by the Turks, surpass in few days those which are done in our
Countries in many years: The Turkish Charity toward his Neighbor surmounts
ours, and it seems, that for such good deeds, Heaven suffers them in the
Empire of the World; for his equity does recompense the good, in any subject
whatsoever, as well as it does punish the evil. The Turkish Emperors
themselves show great compassion, they many times deliver a great number of
civil Prisoners, paying their debts for them. The other particularities which
concern the Turks Justice, shall be handled in another Tract. In the mean
time seeing we are come near unto the Imperial Palace, which is the
Serrail, let us strive to enter, although the Gates be carefully guarded, and
let us see the rare beauties of this famous place.

CHAP. II. Of the Grand Seigneurs Serrail.
Description of the Serrail in general.
THree Serrails do augment the glory of Constantinople, the one is called
Eschy Saray, that is to say, the old Serrail, which was the first Royal House
built within the City, after that the Turks became Masters: It is situated
almost in the midst of it; the form is square, and the Circle contains an
Italian mile and a half, or half a French League, such as are in Languedoc,
or Prouence. The women which have served the deceased Emperors, their Sisters
if they be not married, and their Childrens Nurses, have it for their L^ing
from whence they may not depart unless they man A Dame whose age and
discretion has purchased merit, has the care and conduct of the rest as
Superior; they call her Cheira Cad^n, that is to say, Great Dame. The Grand
Seigneur in his most solitary humors retires himself sometimes into this
place to seek the consolation which he cannot find elsewhere* The other
Serrail is of a less extent, it is situated at the Hippodrome, and serves at
this day for the solemnizing of Plays, Pompes, and Sports for the Turkish
Princes: and for an Academie to four hundred of the Grand Seigneurs Pages,
which are there instructed in the Turkish tongue, to manage Arms, and other
Exercises fit for them, and they go not forth until they be made Espayn, that
is to say, Men at Arms: they are bred up and taught at their Masters charge:
this place is called Ebrayn Bassa Saray, that is to say, the Serrail of H^
Bassa, who was son in Law to Sultan Solomon the Second, and his Favorite for
a time. He caused it to be built at his own charge. The third is called
Boyu^h Saray, that is, the great Serrail, now the ordinary abode of the Turkish
Emperors: It is of this which we mean to speak.

This great Serrail the Mansion of Turkish Emperors and of their Family, is
pleasantly situated in the same place, where as Byzance was in old time, built
upon a pleasant point of firm Land which looks toward the mouth of the
black Sea: Its form is triangular, two sides thereof are warred by the waves
of the Egaean Sea: the third is supported by the City, it is ^nuironed with
high walls, and fortified with many Towers which does better the defense. It
has three miles in circuse, Many Gates serve for the entry; as well toward
the Sea as Land: one principal near to Sancta Sophia, is usually open, the
others are not; but when it pleases the Grand Seignour. This Gate is guarded
day and night by Companies of Capigis who are Porters; which relieve one
another, and in the night some I am i^ ^ies which are without the Gate in
little Cabins of wood mounted upon wheels are in Sentinel, and when need
requires advertise the Corpse de Guard of Capigis. In the Towers which are upon
the Serrail, certain A^amoglaus, that is to say, Children without experience,
or Rusticks, of those of the Tribute* to see if any one does approach by Land,
or any Vessels by Sea near to this Imperial House: And in that case they
discharge certain Pieces of Artillery, which are ready charged to that
effect, upon a little platform of five ^athomebroad, which is betwixt the wall
of the Serrail and the Sea.

The Chambers and Royal Hals of the Sultans Lodging are disposed according to
the diverse seasons of the year: Those whither he retires in Winter are built
upon plain and eeuen ground: The others where he seeks after the cool and
fresh air during the importune heats of the Summer, are situated upon diverse
natural Hills: Some of them view the agitations of the Sea; and these are
termed Ch^schi, that is to say, Cages, and places of goodly prospect. The
Sultan goes sometimes to these places to take his pleasure alone in this goodly
view, and sometimes he calls his wo^nto mingle with this recreation the soft
deliges of their lascivious conversation. Near unto this goodly place, is that
where the Turkish Emperor gives Audience to Ambassadors; receives or
dismisses those whom he sends to government of remoted Provinces. It is
situated in the plain of a Court upon a little Island, enameled with many
goodly flowers, and watered by some pleasing Fountains, richly imbelished
according to their custom. Within it, is s^^^s a Sophia, that is to say; a
Throne, covered with somerich cloth of Gold, where is also to be seen one of
Crimson Velvet, embroydered with great round Pearls: this Throne is called the
Throne without, to distinguish it from that within the Grand Seigneurs Chamber;
and in this, Os^^^ the Second, did sit, when he could not^y the other which
was within, where his Uncle M^stap^^ was shut up in the year 1617. There the
Turkish Emperors are set in such actions. The walls of his Chamber are lined
with certain white stones which are cast and burnt, and painted in diverse
colors, which yield a pleasant sight. The Chamber which is joining to it has
the walls covered with Plates of Silver, pourfiled with Gold, and the Plancher
is covered with rich Topestrie, after the Persian manner with Gold and Silk.
The Q^^^ter whereas the Women and Virgins are lodged, which are des^^^ted for
the Emperors pleasure, is like unto a great Monastery of Religious Wom^^* But
they do not observe the Vow of Chasti^ie: There are (...), or ^^^ping places,
Refectuaries, ^^ths, Galleries, pleasing G^, and goodly Fountains, in so great
a number, as they abound in all the Allies, and of all sides power (...) the
s^t noise of their charming murmurs. The other Lodgings for the D^^^stiques of
the Serrail, have with the beauty of their structures, the commodities of
their situation. Two great places are joined to these buildings, whereof the
one serves for the Chasna without (for they have another within more retired
from the household) the Mosquees, Bathes, Schools, Kitchins, places to run
Horses, to wrestle, shoot, and to represent any action, augment the wonders of
this Imperial Palace whereof we have spoken in general: Now let us descend
to the particular description of the places thereof, at the least to those
which we could yet see; for no man that lives abroad may enter into the
Serrail unless the Emperor be absent; and yet he must be highly favored
by some person of credit and authority in that place: For the Turks would
imagine they should offend the Majesty of their Prince, to give entrance into
his Quarter of the Serrail, to any one be he stranger or other.

The first wall of the Serrail is near unto the first Mosquee of Sancta
Sophia, with the great and chief Gate of that stately Palace, adorned with a
great Portall painted with letters of Gold, in branches and compartiments after
the manner of Iaua; fifty Capigi^ with their Arms (which are Harquebusses,
Bows, Arrows, and Semiters) keep the Guard: By it they enter into a great
place or Court about threescore paces long, and a hundred paces broad, in the
which upon the right hand is the place for the sick persons of the Serrail,
kept by an Eunuch, who has under him a great number of men employed in the
service of sick persons; on the otherside on the left hand there are seen a
great number of Wagons, with a great quantity of wood for the use of the
House: above it, is built a long Gallerie, in the which they keep ancient
Arms, as Mortions, G^untlets, Coats of Maile, Pikes, and Harquebusses;
wherewith they arm the Officers of the Arsenall, and some other troops to go
out of Constantinople in pomp, when as the Sultan or some other powerful
Bashaw makes his enter. Into this Court the Bashawes and great men of the Port
may entry on horseback; but they must leave their Horses and got on foot into
another great Court, which has near three hundred foot in square, made in
fashion of a Cloister, with a low Gallerie round about it, supported by Pillars
of Marble; it is more richly adorned then the other; the Gate is likewise
guarded by Capigis, armed as the first. They pass on to a third Gate into a
lesser Court, but more delicious; Many goodly Fountains pouring forth
abundance of water, and some Alleyes drawn by a line, and shadowed with a
great number of Cyprus Trees planted upon the sides which beautify the place:
And there are many squares of Meadow diapred with diverse sorts of flowers which
augment the pleasures of the sight: No man passes thorough this Court on
horseback, but the Turkish Emperor, who descends at the third gate: On either
side are many goodly Portals supported by rich Pillars of Marble: without these
Portals are ranged in Battle the Companies of Ianizaries, well apparelled and
better armed, when as they are commanded to show themselves at the entry of
the Serrail, when as some strange Ambassador goes to kiss his Robe.

The Kitchins,
In this Court are the Kitchins of the Serrail, the which are nine in number,
separated in their buildings one from another, with their dependances, and
served by particular Officers: The first is that of the Emperor; The second,
that of the Sultana, which is most esteemed for her graces or for her
fruitfulness: The third, that of the other Sultana's: The fourth, that of the
Capiaga, who is great Master of the Serrail: The fifth, that of the Diuan, which
is the Council, whereas the Prince does administer Justice by the mouth of his
Officers, of the which we will speak hereafter: The sixth, that of the
Aga^^ris, which are the Sultans Familiars, many are Eunuchs, the rest are
untouched: The seventh, is that of the lesser Officers of the Serrail: The
eighth, is for the women which serve the Sultanas: The ninth, is for the
Officers which attend the Diuan, as Guards, Porters, Vshers, and such like.

On the left hand in the same place, are the Sultans stables, to contain only
five and twenty or thirty goodly Horses, which are appointed for his
Exercises with his greatest Familiars in the Serrail: Above these stables are
many Chambers, in the which they keep the Saddles, Bridles, and other
Furniture for these Horses of pleasure: But all so rich and so glistering with
Pearl and stone, as the price is inestimable: There are some which the very
Reins and Crouper, exceed the value of a hundred thousand pounds sterling:
What must the Saddle and the rest of the Furniture amount unto? Along the
banks of that Channel which does water the walls of the Serrail, there are
built seventeen great stables, whereas the Grand Seigneur has a great number
of Horses of rare esteem, whereon he mounts when he goes to the War; or
when to dazzle the eyes of some foreign Ambassador, with the luster of his
greatness, he makes a solemn and stately entry into Constantinople.

A little beyond in the same Court is the Quarter for the public Diuan, Diuan.
where as the Grand Vizir Lieutenant General of the Turkish Empire with a good
number of Officers keeps the Audiences four days in the Week: Near unto it
is the Chamber of the Chasna, or Treasure without, where they lay up the Rents
and Revenues of diverse Provinces, wherewith they pay the Officers: They
likewise furnish the Chamber of Accounts, the rest is carried into the Chasna,
Chasna.
or secret Treasure within, whereof the Grand Seigneur keeps the Keys: The
first is usually sealed by the Grand Vizir. In the same Court on the left hand
is the great Gate which enters into the Sultana's lodging; It is carefully kept
by a troop of black and hideous Eunuchs, to whom the Sultan has entrusted
the Guard. And as he has lodged therein (by the number of goodly Women which
are brought unto him from all parts) the lively Images of Love and the Graces;
so he has set at the Gates those of Hatred and Terror: He himself goes unto
them by another passage near unto his Chamber. The last part of this goodly
Court makes the entry to the Emperors Lodgings, the which is forbidden to any
whatsoever, except the slaves that serve him: If any great Basha pressed with
some important business desires to enter, he must first have leave from the
Princes mouth.

The entry of this Gate leads toward the Hall, whereas the Sultan sits, when
he will give Audience, and suffer any foreign Princes Ambassador to kiss
his Robe. At their entrance they discover the new beauties of this place more
particularly: A goodly Court paued with fine Marble in Mosaike work, serves
for a passage for those which are entered, and the goodly Fountains which
beautify it, will not suffer them to go far, without fixing their eyes upon
their pleasing structure: The Pauillions and stately Chambers which are within
it, seem to have been built and embellished by the hands of delight and
pleasure: For in them the Grand Seigneur eats most commonly, and takes his
Recreations. The Bathes, Hals, and Galleries of this place, surpass in their
Magnificence the force of imagination: We may only say of them, that they are
the buildings of the most powerful and rich Monarchs of the Earth.

The Sultans lodging in Summer.
In another part of the Serrail, upon a little pleasing Hill is built a lodging
for Summer, whither the Sultan retires himself during the Canicular days, to
enjoy the fresh air which is found there, and the pleasures of his Gardens,
upon the which he has one prospect, and the other looks toward the Sea: The
place is exceeding beautiful, but amidst this great diversity there is a Hall
which opens toward the East, supported by rich Pillars of Marble like unto the
ordinary Mansion of pleasure: It is enricht with the goodliest works the
Tenant can afford, and furnished after a royal manner: The windows have
their prospect upon a little Lake of a square form, made with admirable art:
Thirty Fountains divided upon a Platform of fine Marble which does enuiron
it, furnish water to fill it, and pleasingly trouble the silence of the place
by their continual murmurre. The Sultan goes often upon this Lake in a
Brigantine, being followed by some Ieasters, and Mutes, who minister occasion
of delight, some by their pleasant encounters, the other by their ridiculous
faces and gestures, and sometimes tumbling them into the water they give him
occasion of laughter: He himself is pleased to lay ambushe, for them, to make
them fall by the Platform into the Lake. The Grand Seigneurs Chamber.


From this Hall they pass into the Grand Seigneurs Chamber, it is
proportionable in greatness to those of the Royal Palace: The walls are after
their accustomed manner covered with fine stone, in which are graven many
flowers: the Portals are of cloth of Gold, some are of Crimson Velvet
embroidered with Gold and rich Pearl. The Bed is not inferior in riches, the
posts are of massy Silver, upon which are set Lions of Crystal of the Rock:
The Curtains are of green Cloth of Gold, the richest that are made at Bursia
in Asia, without any fringes, but in their place there hangs certain Bells made
of great Oriental Pearl: The work is excellent and the price inestimable.
The Covering hanging to the ground, is also of rich Cloth of Gold, the Cushions
and Pillowes are of the same stuff. This Bed is rather a piece of the Turkish
pomp then for any necessary use: For the Turks do not use these kind of
Beds, but sleep on the ground upon Mattresse: whereof we will speak in the
sixth Chapter. The floor of this royal Chamber is covered with Persian Carpets
of Gold and Silk: The Sopha, that is to say, the places where the Sultan sits,
are about a foot and a half from the ground, and covered with the like
Tapestrie, upon the which are Cushions of Cloth of Gold. Over this seat is a
Cloth of Estate of Wood covered with plates of Gold, enricht with stones, and
supported by four Pillars adorned in the same manner. In the midst of the
floor of this Chamber hangs a rich Candlestick of a mean greatness, and of
a round form, the midst whereof is of exexcellent Crystal; the other parts
are of Silver gilt, set with Turkeyes, Rubies, Emeralds, and Diamonds, whose
diversity give a pleasing luster: In a corner of the said Chamber, upon a
Table of massy Silver, is a little Basin to wash his hands, It is of pure Gold
enricht with many Turkesses and Rubies, with Ewre of the same. Against the
walls are set two Cupboards, whose doors are of Crystal, which through their
transparent light, show about two doozen of Books richly covered, in the which
the Sultan sometimes spends his time, and passes away his cares in reading.
Sometimes one of their Histories, and sometimes the true examples which are
mentioned in the Old Testament. Above these Cupboards there is one less, into
the which the Treasurer of the Serrail does every Wednesday, put three purses
filled: whereof the one is with Gold, and the other two are of Silver, which
the Sultan employes in his almesdeeds, Great Monarchs should have able men
about them, and not Grooms whom they advance, and are entertained by Fools
and Ignorants.
and the gratifications which he gives to the slaves that serve him, and which
are his ordinary Company Doubtless this kind of people do much imbase the
glory of so powerful a Monarch, and the shame to have none about him but base
persons, causes him to be disesteemed. Sovereign Princes should admit none
but the ablest men of their Estates about their Persons. For as God has in
Heaven the Ministry of the Angels, and other intellectual creatures: So
Kings, who are his lively Images, should have about them Men whose virtue and
rare qualities of the mind have raised above others. What entertainment can a
great Prince find, in such abject persons and so ill bred; and what service can
he receive from a man drawn from the Stable, and from the profession of a
Horse-keeper, or a Coachman, from a Huntsman, and the bawling of Hounds? What
contentment from a brutish Faulkoner, whilst that Men of merit are in
contempt? This disorder is sometimes seen in the World, Libraries.
yea, in the Courts of great Princes to their shame, and to the great prejudice
of the public. Near unto this Chamber is a goodly Library, where are many
Books, rich for their stately couerings, and precious for their works, the
immortal marks of the glory of their Authors: This is called the secret
Library; it is the most renowned of all the Serrail. There is another toward
their Quarter which serve the Chamber, and the Grand Seigneurs Pages, filled
with a great number of Books in all Languages, among the which there are to
be seen at this day six score Volumes of the ancient Library of Great
Constantine of an extraordinary bigness: They are above a fathom broad and
two in length: Their leaves are of such thin Parchment, as they seem rather
to be of Silk then Skins; most part written in letters of Gold, especially
those which contain the Old and New Testament; their couerings are of Silver
gilt after the antique manner, set with a great number of precious stones. The
price (without doubt) has preserved them from spoil and ruin, where as the
rest have perished by the barbarousnesse of the Turks, who sacked
Constantinople in the time of Mahomet the Second: The Sultan holds them so
precious as he will not allow any one to handle them.

The number of Gardens in the Serrail are not fewer in number, then are
delightful to look on: The Prince has his the Sultana's theirs, and without
this Imperial House, there are eighteen planted toward the Sea, whereof the
fruits and revenues are by the Law of State employed for the entertainment of
the Princes Table; whereof we will speak elsewhere. He which has the chief
charge is called Bostangibassi, that is to say, great Gardener, and is one of
the most eminent Dignities of the Empire, he is many times much affected by his
Master, and feared by the other Bashaes, to whom he may do good and bad
Offices with the Prince, when he gouernes him alone in his walks, and
entertaines him in affairs of Estate.

Two Mosquees serve in the Serraile, for their Devotion: The one is toward
that Quarter where the Prince and his Officers lodge; and the other is near
the Lodging of the women and their slaves. And although the Turks will not
admit of the use of Bells; yet there are a great number of little Clockes in
the Serrail, which strike the hours both by day and night. The Grand Seigneurs
Pages are instructed to keep them: and most part of the men of quality in the
Serrail, and likewise the women have little Watches, whereof they make use.
This is all that can be written of the Grand Seigneurs Serrail, at the least
that can come unto the knowledge of Christians, to whom the entry (unless it
be upon the days of Diuan) is expressly forbidden, and the inward parts of this
Imperial House, whereof we have spoken, may not be seen by them, unless the
Prince be absent; and yet he must have some particular friendship with the
Officers of the Serrail, and money in his hand, the which does not only open
them the closest Gates in Turkey, but does facilitate the most difficult
affairs, through the avarice of the Turks, to the which all their other
passions seem to yield. Let us come now to the Grand Seigneurs Exercises, to
his manner of living, to the number of his Officers, and other particularities
of his Crown: But let us begin by his Coronation.

CHAP. III. Of the Coronation of the Turkish Emperor.
AFter that death (who strikes with an equal hand, as well the stately Palaces
of Kings, as poor Cottages covered with straw) has taken out of this World
some Turkish Emperor, he of his Children which is destinated to the succession
of his Scepter, parts from the government whither his Father had sent him (the
which most commonly is Magnesia a Province in Asia) and comes secretly to
Constantinople, and into the Serrail by that Port which looks toward the Sea;
for the passage whereof the Bostangibassi, which is the great Gardener, goes to
receive him in the Imperial Galley upon the side of Asia, passes the
straight, conducts him into the Serrail, and leads him into his Fathers Throne,
whither the great men of the Port, that is to say, of the Court (for so they
call it) come to adore him, and to acknowledge him for their Prince. Presently
the Basha which is Governor of Constantinople causes Proclamation to be made
in the City, and then throughout all the Empire: That the Soul of the
invincible Emperor Sultan N. enioyes an immortal Glory, and an eternal
Peace; and that the Empire of Sultan N. may flourish and prosper in all
felicity for many years. The third day after they hold the great Diuan, which
is the general Council, where as all the great Men of the Court and Officers
of the Crown assist, and resolve concerning the affairs of the Estate: The
Emperor does not assist; yet he is in a Chamber near, and sees but is not
se^ne, and hears through a Lattice window what they treat of, and what they
say. At the end of the Diuan all these Officers, go by four and four, or by
six and six into the Chamber where the Sultan is, and there without speaking
any thing make a low reverence, and so pass on, going forth to another door:
They return to the Diuan, where as Dinner attends them. The Sultan dines at
the same time; and after half an hour, (which is all the time he spends at
the Table) he mounts upon a stately Horse, being followed by the chief
Commanders of the War, he shows himself to his people of Constantinople,
and receives from them their cries and acclamations of Joy: which are, Live,
and long may Sultan N. Reign. He goes to some Mosquee where his Predecessors
have been buried; He makes his prayers, which being ended one of the twenty
Preachers of his Court goes into the Pulpit, and by a short discourse gives him
to understand after the Turkish manner the greatness of the charge whereunto
God has called him, exhorts him to have a care of his Estate, and especially
to the maintenance and increase of Mahomets Law. The Sermon being ended, the
same Priest does bless him seven times, and at every time the people answer
Amen. At the same time the Moufti, or high Priest of the Law who is present,
makes him to take the Oath upon the Alcoran; Girds him with the Sword which in
old time Ottoman did wear; and blessing him says these words, God send you
Ottomans Bounty: They do so much honor the virtues of this Prince, who
reigned about three hundred and twenty two years since, as they wish them to
his Successors. I have heard a Prince of the Turkish Emperors house say, That
the Learned in their History report, that Ottoman going thorough the Town of
Prussia, beeng the chief of his Empire, he said aloud unto the people, that
whosoever were an hungry, thirsty, or naked, let them come unto his house, he
had wherewithal to feed and clothe the poor. After the Mufti the people
bless him with their loud cries: Thus charged with all these blessings he
goes to horseback, and carries them back to the Serrail; where he busies
himself to cause his brethren to be strangled in his presence, whom he had
caused to come from the places where they were resident: For it is written in
their custom, One God in Heaven, one Emperor upon Earth: They believe this is
the only means to settle the Estate, and to divert the Civil War which the
plurality of Princes might breed: They have often this Proverb in their
mouths, Nec Regna socium far nec taedae sciunt, Senec.
That a Kingdom and Lo^le, admit no Companion: Their Error makes them believe
that the Princes of their blood are such. This bloody custom has been
rigorously observed for three hundred years and more, until the Reign of
Achmat, who died in the year 1617. who gave life unto his brother Mustapha,
and at his death left him his Scepter: But the Officers of his Crown took it
from him with his liberty, and kept him prisoner in the Serrail, to make Osman
his Nephew Reign in his place, who was afterward miserably massacred by the
people, and the same Mustapha restored to the Throne, where the inconstancy of
his Fortune suffered him but few days, after which the Bashae's shut him up in
his first Prison, and seated in his Throne Amurath the Fourth a young Prince
brother to the unfortunate Osman.

The Sultans bounty at his Coronation.
The Largess which the Sultan makes at his coming to the Crown, is
distributed after this manner. He must give unto the great Mufti two thousand
five hundred Sequins, as much to the Grand Vizir; the other of the Vizir or
Bashae's have either of them two thousand, the Cadilesquers every one two
hundred and fifty Sequins, the Tefterdars every one of them as much; the
Capigibassi every one a hundred; the Aga of the Ianizaries two hundred and
fifty, the Iman Royal has but five and twenty: the most famous Doctors of
the Law receive threescore, the other which are inferior have every one
thirty two Sequins. They give forty to the Basrousnamegi, that is to say
Iournalists, forty to the Carasmaesabegi, or Comptrouler of the Royal
Tribute; twenty to the Mucatagis* which keeps the Books of the Diuan;
sixteen to every Mutaferagas, which are men at Arms; eight to every Spahi,
or light Horseman, and moreover five Aspres by the day in augmentation of their
pay. Every Deputy of the Teftardar, has five and twenty Sequins: The chief
of the Pauillions of the field, called by the Turks Almiectar Bassi, are set
down in the Roll of this Royal distribution every one for five and twenty
Sequins: They that lead the Horses before the King, called Sarrassis, have
either of them eight: The Serchais have as much; The Meirery, which beat the
Drums before the Prince the like sum; the Sardigis, four; the Capigis,
eight; the Casnadaris, eight; and the Snalaris, who carry water to the Grand
Seigneur, the like sum. The Emirs have a better portion, either of them has
a hundred. The Ianizaries by their violence have broken the bounds of the
Monarchs liberality to them, they give them more or less according to the
time and necessity they have of them; their pay is always increased at the
least an Aspre by the day. The Grooms of the Stable and Cooks have equally
eight Sequins a piece; and they which pray unto God after the Turkish manner,
in the Chapels where the Sultans are buried, have no more. This largess and
distribution of Sultanins, or Turkish Sequins, amounts (by reason of the great
number of those which receive the Portions) to great and immense sums of
money.

The fourth day following, he takes his Gallion, and goes by Sea to a Garden
environed with a Park near unto the Arsenall; the Turks call it Ase^i, that
is to say, the house of Pleasure; and there he hunts some hours, and courseth
what Beast he pleases; If he take any thing, the Turkish Superstition teaches
him to hold it for a good sign. From his sport he goes to affairs, he visits
his Arsenall; and having near him the General of the Sea, called Captain
Bassa, he makes him to give an account of the affairs of the Sea, what number
of Vessels there are fit for the war, what Men, what Arms, and what Munition
is in them: being thus informed of his Sea forces, he returns to his Serrail.
The next day which is the fifth after his Coronation, the Grand Vizir, or
according to the Turks, Vizirhazem, that is to say, the Supreme Vizir, goes
unto him, and in few words yields him an account of the general affairs of
his Empire. And as the Turks have Alms in singular recommendation, these
first days of Coronation, after the Prince has given a Largess unto the
people, in casting of money in the streets where he passes, he uses great
Charity to Hospitals and Prisons, in such sort as the charges of the pious
Actions, were found to amount during the Reign of Am^rath, Father to Mahomet
the third, who lived when as Henry the Great made France happy by the
felicities of his Reign; to the sum of one hundred and threescore thousand
pounds sterling, which is in their money four hundred thousand Sequins.
Doubtless, the presages of their Reign cannot be but fortunate, when as they
are accompanied with good Works, and Charity is a powerful support to a
Crown. Gaspard Ze^lick, Chancellor to three Emperors, Optarese dicebat omnes
Reges aliquando priuat^s pauperesque suisse. Neque enim satis miseretur qui
nunquam suit miser. Aeneas Syluius lib. 1. Comment. de reb gest. Alph.
It were to be desired (said a great Man) that Sovereigns had tried the
condition of a private Man oppressed with misery; to learn compassion, for no
Man is sensibly touched with the estate of a miserable Man, but he that ^^th
been so.

After the fifth day, the Ladies of his blood, be they Virgins or married to
some Basha, go to visit him: He receives them very graciously, honors them
with many rich Presents of precious stones, and grants them what favors they
demand, be it for the (...) of their Husbands, or for his bounty ^^ some other
persons. But this (...) Sultan is no sooner sealed in the Imperial Throne of
the Turks, but he does presently imitate the proud arrogancy of his
Predecessors, and takes with the Scepter the vanity of the proud Title,
wherewith they are p^^ up the following Chapter will show it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Titles and Qualities (...)
^ecunda res a^ (...) animos explor^^t; quis misery toleratur, f^ (...) said
it to Plato in Taci^^^, lib 1. ^ist.
THe prosperities of the World are a trial of the force of the mind, ^^ther t^
(...) These are more easy to bear: those do (...) men unto a (...)
insolency. But where are g^ (...) with Princes? (...) they use them soberly,
their m^ (...) H^^uen to the preservation of their Estates, and would force
(...) to cherish their memory. The Turkish Emperors are never crowned with
this me^it; their breeding to the excess of vices rather than to the
continency of virtue, does not make them capable to know themselves, and the
excess of the prosperities of their Empire transports them to pride. So as if
Heaven suffers them to continue in the Monarchy of the East, it is to punish
our disorders. Their actions do not only show their Pride, but their Titles
speak it more plainly: S^lym the First of that Name styled himself Master of
all (...) ^raignes of the World. Behold the Qualities which he did assume.
Sultan Solym, Othoman, King of Kings, Lord of all Lords, Prince of all Princes,
Son and Nephew of God. He caused it to be written under his Portraite, the
which Solomon the Second his Son did (...) keep by his bed side. This man
was no modester then his Father, for if he ^^th not set down in his Titles
that he would be the only Prince of the World, he has often delivered it in
his words; By the Soul of my Father (said he being in Hungary at the siege of
(...)) seeing there is but (...) God G^ (...) reasonable there should be but
one (...) the inferior World The rest which have followed (...) ^uccession of
the Othoman Estate have used the same unto our days. Achmat the First, who
died in the year 1617, treating with the inui^ible Monarch Henry the Great, by
the means of the Seigniour of (...) his Ambassador at Constantinople, causes
to be set down in the beginning of the Articles which were sent into France,
the Titles which follow: In the name of God, a mark of the high Family of the
Othoman Monarchs, with the beauty, greatness, and splendor thereof, so many
Countries are conquered and governed. I, who am by the infinite graces of the
Just, great, and all powerful Creator and by the abundance of Miracles of the
chief of his Prophets, Emperor of (...), Disposer of Crowns to the greatest
Pri^ (...) of two most sacred Towns, Mequa and Medi^^, Protector and Governor
of the holy (...), and Africa; ^^ly (...) by our (...) (...)

them somewhat longer, and his shoes are without buckles, and cut in leaves:
But when he adornes himself to honor with his presence the solemnity of
some great day, at the Circumcision of the Princes his Children, or to make his
entry into Constantinople: his Robes of Cloth of Gold, forwith Pearls and
great Diamonds give the Majesty of his person a glorious luster: This is the
glory of such Princes. Majesty consists in Virtue, and not in the pomp of
Habits. A King should rather show himself a King by his (...) carriage and his
authority, than by his Robes.

The Sultana's differ not much in their Habits from their Sovereign Prince:
They wear breeches like unto his, and under them linings of fine Linen; Their
Robes are of the same stuff, and their shoes in like manner: They steep like
unto him in their Linen lynings, and little Cassocks of Silk pinckt, which
goes little beneath the waste.

The Prince rises with the Day, and the Morning sees him begin his Prayers
after the Turkish manner, wherein he spends half an hour: After this he
writes as much, during the which they bring him some cordial thing, which he
takes presently: Then reading follows for a whole hour, but it is many times
without fruit; for that he entertaines the time with fabulous Books: It is
true that some Sultans have taken delight to read the life of Great Alexander,
and some others have caused Aristotle to be expounded unto them. An ignorant
Prince is a Pilot without Card or Compass. Alphonso King of Arragon, called
such Princes by a Name which I forbear to mention, for the re^nce I owe to
Kings. Having read, if it be a day of D^ or of Counsel, he gives Audience to
the Grand Viz^r, who come to make report of that which has been done, and he
receives the veneration of other Officers. From thence he descends into his
Gardens or walks, contents his eyes with the (...) F^^^es, and pleasing
Alle^e^ and (...) his ears with the (...) and ^r^^lities of his ^e^tres (...)
and (...) which follow him. At his return he falls (...) have any (...) in it,
or to some other (...) for Dinner, the which is speedily served: He never
spends above half an hour at the Table, from the which he goes to his
Prayers at noone, where after his manner he entertaines the Divinity. But how
variable is humane inconst^ncie: from this (...) to the embracings of
humanity, and (...) with his Women for soo^^ hours; until the time of Prayer
at Night does force him to leave them: When (...) another walk into his
Garden, (...) by his (...) and Dwarffs, he entertaines himself with (...). The
last Office calls him to his Chamber, it is that which the Turks say, when as
the day is spent and in the obscurity of the night, where he imployes
himself until Supper time. These are his employment i^ general: Let us now
speak of them in particular.

CHAP. VI. Of the Grand Seig^rs Table of his ^te, and of his sleep.
THe Grand Seign^r eats three or four times a day in Summer, but less in
Winter: He sit^es cross legged after the Turkish manner: Most commonly his
Table is low, made of (...) Silver, with a little bo^der about it two fingers
high, like unto a Table of Accompani^ which ^ll money. There is (...) of pure
Gold enricht with diverse precious (...) in the years: He (...) and another upon
his (...) many leaves made of three (...) whereof the Grain is gathered (...)
for his (...). They (...) thereof they feed a great troop (...) of the
Serrail. His Coo^es are at work (...)* they (...) call (...): The Essay is
taken at the Kitchen in the presence of the Capiaga, or Master of the Household,
and they serve it up in dishes of gold covered: His Agalaris, or Familiars go
and receive it at the hands of the Capiaga without: For there is another of the
same Office within, who goes not into the Kitchen, he carries them to him that
serves at the Table, who is upon his knee: They serve out thirty Dishes, in
the which are thirty forts of meats; the Table is round, and stands upon a
Vise which turns as it pleases the Prince, for no man carues him, neither does
he himself use any Knife; his bread is so tender as it will not endure any, he
breaks it with his fingers without any trouble; so does he his meat prepared
with the like delicacie: They serve no Salt unto him, and whatsoever he eats
is not seasoned with Spices, his Physicians forbidding it in the Kitchen. The
daintiest meat for his royal mouth are roasted Pigeons, whereof they serve a
dozen in a Capson or Platter: Pullets, Lamb, or Mutton, roasted and boiled are
after the Pigeons, which he loves best: He makes a sign (for at his Table no
man speaks any thing) that they should carry of this meat what he pleases to
the Sultana's whom he affects most: Sometimes the dumb men and the Iesters
have a part: His Agallaries or Familiars are highly gratified, when he casts
them one of his L^aues, they kiss it, and give it unto others for a testimony
of a singular favor. In the silence which is strictly observed at his Table,
as well by himself as those which do assist, there is an ordinary
entertainment in a dumb fashion by signs and the gestures of the Mutes, and
the Iesters which are instructed therein, practice the abilities of their wits.
He does usually drink a liquour made of many sorts of fruits mingled with the
juice of Citrons and Sugar: He swallows it in a spoone of wood, although they
serve him with little Cups of Porcelaine and others of Indian Nuts, set upon a
foot of gold enricht with stones. They do not serve any fruit before Dinner,
his last coorse is a Tar^, and if he eats any fruit, it is at his after-meales,
and likewise Parmisant, whereof they make great esteem in Turkey.

In the time of Ramadan, which is the Turks Lent, they do not serve him in
vessels of Gold, but in yellow Porcelaine which is most precious and hard to be
recovered. He fasts from the Sunrising until night, when it is lawful for
him to leave his fast, and to eat what meat he pleases: Fish comes seldom
into the Servant, but when the desire of the Sultans, or the Appetite of the
Agalaries causes it to be brought from the Sea.

The Grand Seigneurs Bed is not made while it is day in the Chamber where he
lodges, they make it only when he goes to his rest: that whereof we have
spoken is only a Bed of State The Grooms of his Chamber lay upon the floor a
Mat, and upon it a fine Turkey Carpet, whereupon they lay a Matteresse and a
Bed of Feathers. The sheets are of fine Linen, and the covering of goodly
Carpets: In Winter they use Couerings of white Wolves or of Sables, which keep
the Prince from cold. After his Bed is thus made, they strain over it many
strings of Silk, upon the which they lay Cloth of Gold, or rich Tapestrie to
make the Tester and Curtains: This Couch being made, the same Gabo^pes of the
Chamber go and fetch the Emperor, and being him to his rest with a little
Turbane on his he^d in stead of a Night cap: Whilst he steepes they watch;
one stands at the door of the Chamber, another at his Beds side, to raise up
the Clothes and to cover him if it be needful: Two others are at the Beds
feet with two Torches, which they never put out until the Sultan be risen.
Their Guard continues three hours, after which they are relieved by their
Companions. Thus he rests which troubles all Europe, disquiets Asia, and
afflicts Afrrica, and the shore of the M^ Sea with his Fleet.

CHAP. VII. Of the gravity of the Grand Seigneur and of the ^be discourses
which are made in the Serrail.
THat Prince of the Jews which made choice rather of the scourge of Pestilence
them the rigor of War, had reason to say that he had rather fall into the
hands of God, than to those of Man, for the one is a plentiful and in
exhaustible Fountain of all Mercy: The others are vnpittifull, although they
be created after his Image. It is lawful, yea, it is commanded to speak unto
God, and to beg those things which are necessary; and in the World it is a
crime to presume to speak unto Men. The true Table of this humane Pride made
be drawn from the Serrail, at this day the principal seat of the Arrogancy
of Princes: for there it is not only forbidden to speak unto the Grand
Seigneur, but he that dares to lift up his eyes to look him in the face, is
guilty of a great crime: so as all the Bashaes of his Court, except the Vizar,
the Mufts, and the Physician, going toward him to reverence him, or rather to
adore him, have their hands joined and their eyes cast down, and in this
posture inclining themselves to the ground, they salute him without seeing him,
although they be before him. When he goes into the City, they which present
any Petitions unto him, to have Justice from him, when they cannot obtain it
from his Officers, lift them up upon the end of a ^^ed, and themselves lie
prostrate on the groundily humiliation, another men which are of his Family,
speak not unto him but by signs, and this dumb language is practiced, and
understood as readily in the Serrail, as a distinct and articulate voice among
^s. For which cause they use the service of as many dumb men as they can find;
who having accustomed others to their signs and gestures make them to learn
their Language. The Sultana's do the like. The gravity of his person, and the
custom of the Empire forbids him to speak to any. The Sultana's his women
practice it, they have many dumb slaves at their Serrail. Sultan Mustapha
Uncle to Os^, who in the end of the year 1617 held the Scepter of the Turkish
Empire, for that he could not accustom himself to this silent gravity, gave
occasion to the Counsel of end to ch^plaine of him; and to say that to (...)
did, (...) more fit for (...) Turkish Merchant, then for the Emperor. They
(...) him, held his freedom and similiaritie unworthy of the Empire. To play
the Sultan its state, h^e must out speak, but by an extraordinary gravity
make men to tremble with the twinkling of his eye: For the frowning arrogancy
of the Turkish Princes is grown to that insolency, (...) lives amongst his
Subjects as some divine thing, adored by the dumb admiration of his slaves.
The Emperor of the Abyss^, In the description of Aethiopia by Don Francisco
Aluarez, printed 1558.
whom they do vulgarly call Prete-Iean, is also blamed for pride, although it
differs from the Turk: He speaks but he suffers none to see him; saying, that
being the Image of God in the Sovereignty of his Empire, he must imitate him
in his answers, wherein God speaks and is not s^ene. When as the Master of the
Ceremonies brings any foreign Ambassadors unto him, it is most commonly by
night: His H^lls and Chamber are full of Torches burning; and he himself i^
hidden in his Musta^a, or Royal Bed, before the which there are five Curtains
drawn, whereof that in the midst is of Cloth of Gold, the rest are of Silk.
The Master of the Ceremonies speaks with a loud voice Hunca, Hialchuchia (...):
that is to say, I bring those unto thee whom thou has commanded me: He
repeat it often, until he hear a voice from within which says, Cafaci^ali,
which signifies enter in: At this voice all they which hear is h^ down and
make a low (...) Then they advance a little making (...) every sin steps,
repeating the same word, and being come (...) unto the C^ they hear the same
voice Ca^ingles: Then they aduances little farther, to hear the words of
Prete-Iean who speak and is not se^^ and answers the demands which they make
unto him. (...) pe^tie Kings of the Indies, Andrew Corsall (...) Florentine
^ices it to Ju^ de Me^hein, in a Let^er from Co^hin a Town of the Indies.
(...), which they will (...) of ^^fti^ (...), who deliver it (...) it comes
unto him. The gravity of a Prince (...) appear in his manners then in his
(...) and his wisdom: should wherein more ^^rable than all (...) fashion
speaking and commanding. If the Prince will (...) living Image, let him know
that there (...) in the divine Majesty, Power, Wisdom, and Bounty. Let them
add unto their Sovereign power of Command, the effects of wisdom, and those
of a Royal bounty. By these they shall reign securely in their Estates, and
shall be more cherished and honored, then by the vain gestures and signs of
their puftvp gravity.

CHAP. VIII. How the Grand SEIGNEVR receives the Ambassadors of Foreign
Princes, and the form of his Oath in an Alliance.
THere are two sorts of Ambassadors which come to the Turkish Court; those of
Kings, and others of inferior Princes: The first who without contradiction
have the precedence, must likewise have it in this History. We will speak of
their Reception, and will take for a President that of the Ambassador of
France, Being arrived at Per^, he passes within few days after to,
Constantinople, sees the M^, visits the Grana Vizir, salutes the B^stang^bas^i,
or great Gardener, uses some complements to the Teftardar, or high Treasurer,
and performs some testimonies of honor and courtesy to the other great men
of the Part, to make them favorable unto him upon occasions. After this they
advertise him of the day, when he shall be received to kiss his hand; It is
usually upon a day of Dinan, when as the Sultan gives audience to his
principal Officers: The Grand Vizir calls the Dinan or assembly of the Council
he sends for all the Chaoux the M^feragat which are those of the light Horse,
(...) Spa^ who are al^o of the Canallerie, the Ianizaries which are Footmen:
All which with their Leaders have commandment to arm and attire themsel^es
with as much state as may be, to be the Ambassador see with the curiosity of
their A^, (...) his great Court. They come (...) (whereof we have formerly
spoken) where all together make a body of stately troops. The Ambassador
advertised of the hour appointed, parts from his lodging at Pera attired upon
his own Clothes with a Robe after the Turkish manner of Cloth of Gold curled,
and furred if the season require it with Sables: His Gentlemen and Secretaries
are attired in the like Robes, but the stuff is not so rich, wearing on their
heads caps of black Velvet like unto the Masters of the Accounts in France: He
has twenty servants attired in Robes of Scarlet, which the Turks call
Ferrages: and upon them other long Robes of the same stuff, and on their heads
caps of black Ta^fatae: The four Dragomans, or the Kings Interpreters are of
the number, the Captains, Masters of Ships, and other Frenchmen do accompany
him. Being thus followed, he passes the Channel of the Sea, which separates
F^ra from Constantinople, being twice as broad, as the River of Seine is at
Paris before the Louver: Being come unto the other shore, he finds many
goodly horses for him and his followers, which the Turks that are friends to
France, send him to carry him to the City. At the entry whereof he finds many
Chambrand Ianizaries which attend him to conduct him to the Serrail: ^wo Choux
Basti one of either side of him, the other Turks go before: In this order he
comes to the Imperial Palace, at the Gate whereof he finds two Capig^ ^asi^
who (...) him, and had him to the Grand Vi^r in the Hill of the (...), (the day
they dispatch little (...) against the Grand Vizir upon a form without (...)
with Cloth of Gold. Therefore a (...) or Dra^, they (...), until that the (...)
has brought: The S^ of the (...), where some other (...) and (...) the Cha^ of
Ac^ (...). There is a Dragoman which (...) (...) in a low Gallerie, where a
Table is prepared in this manner: A great Tapestrie is laid upon the ground,
and somedishes are set very thin and sparingly: Their Meats are Panado made
with Sugar, and some broths with Pullets, two men carrying as in a Scarf a
certain vessel of boiled Leather, like unto a Bagipe, in the which they carry
Cerbet, (the which is a Drink made of the juice of Citrons, water, and Sugar)
They give to every one drink in his turn, in a Cup of Copper tinned, and they
go betwixt the Dishes to serve them more commodiously. The Ambassador and his
people having dined in this manner, he retires to a certain place near unto
the Gate of the Sultans Quarter, where they attend until the Officers of the
Di^an have had Audience of their Master; after which they all retire, except
such Bashaes as remain about his person: Then the Master of the Ceremonies
goes for the Ambassador, and brings him to the Emperors lodging; The Capiaga
assisted by many Eunuchs receives them at the Gate, and conducts them into the
Imperial Chamber, whose walls are within covered with great plates of Gold and
Silver, enricht with stones and Pearl: At the entry thereofewer (...) or
Porters take him under the Arms, not to kiss the Emperors hand, but his
Robe. This unworthy custom to lead the Ambassadors of foreign Princes by the
Arms, grows from the treachery of the Turks themselves. Baiazei the Second,
son to him that took Constantinople going one day to a Monastery, he found
in his way a Religious man of his Law of the order of the Deruis: This Monk of
the Alcoran seeing the Emperor, ran toward him to execute his detestable
design: coming near unto him he demands an Alms: and in saying his
A^labithi, that is to say in the Name of God, he drew a Semiter from under his
^obe of Felt, with the which Bajazet had been murdered, if his Horse in
bounding had not received the greatest violence of the blow; yet he was hurt,
and this wretched Parricide had already lifted up his arm to double the blow,
if Bassa Scheuder had not suddenly beaten him down with his Bus^gutu, or
Poll^. After which it was ordained, that whosoever should come to salute the
Grand Seigneur, should be led under the Arms by Capigis; And this custom has
he carefully observed. We do not read that there was ever any stranger but
suffered this Rigor, except an Ambassador of France, named Monsieur Nouailles
Bishop of Aix, who was sent to Selim the Second, by King Charles the Ninth, to
mediate some accommodation for the Venetians affairs: coming into the
Chamber, when as the Capigis had laid hold of his Arm he scattered them with
his Elbowes, and spoke aloud, that the liberty of a Frenchman, and the
dignity of a Bishop could not endure to be led like a slave: And so leaving
the Sultan and those that were in the Chamber amazed, he went freely to his
Reverence, and would not cast himself at his feet, as others do, but inclined
a little to kiss his Robe.

When the Ambassador had kissed the Sultans Robe, who sits upon Cushions of
Cloth of Gold curled, he retires backward with his face always toward the
Prince, and plants himself against the wall of the Chamber, to give way to the
Gentlemen of his Train, who go likewise to kiss his Robe: And then he
presents the Letter which the King sends written in the Turkish Tongue. The
Grand Seigneur answers nothing for the present; his Grand Vizir does only
speak some words to dismiss the Ambassador, who goes out of the Chamber
having made a Reverence in bending down his head, but does not uncover it. But
you must observe that no man comes to kiss his Robe, unless he be attired in
Robes after the Turkish manner, given him by the Sultan, the which is the
Present of a Sovereign to a subject or slave: For this cause the Grand Vizir
forgets not to send unto the Ambassador such Robes as are set down by the
Ordinance of the Custom of the Empire, that is to say, two that are rich for
the Ambassadors person, and one for either of his followers. Moreover every
Ambassador must have a Present for the Grand Seigneur, the which he sees first
before him through a Lattice window, whither he is carried by Capigis: There he
busies himself to look on it, whilst the Ambassador and his Gentlemen do
their Reverence; so as they can see but half his face. To this purpose a
generous action performed by the said Monsieur Nouailles Ambassador to Charles
the Ninth is worthy to be related. Mahomet Grand Vizir to Selim the Second
pressed him much not to forget a stately Present for his Sultan, and sent him
word that if he had none ready he would furnish him. This Ambassador went,
of purpose, to kiss his Robe without any Present. The Basha reproacht him, and
imputed it to contempt that he had not given any. The Seigneur of Nouailles
made answer that the King his Master, who was the first and greatest Monarch
of Christendom, hearing that Selim demanded it as a Tribute, had forbidden him
to present any. Thus in giving none, he served his Master profitably and
honorably; leaving among the Turks a great admiration of his generous
dxteritie, and carried back into France the glory which those Ambassadors
deserve, whom virtue and not favor have advanced to such Charges.

Other Ambassadors of inferior Quality to a Royalty, receive Robes in like
manner to go and salute him: But they enter not into the Serrail with so much
Pomp, neither are they feasted, nor have so much familiarity with the Grand
Vizir, yea, there are some which sit not in his presence. Thus the Turks can
measure the honor which they do unto men, according to the Quality of the
Princes which send them, whose persons the Ambassadors represent. They have
long hands and portatiue eyes, to see into the Realms that are most remote to
their Estates:

The form which the Turkish Monarchs use to swear a League or Alliance with
any Foreign Prince, is no less specious than fraudulent; for most commonly
they hold nothing that they promise, and their Oaths are as false as those of
Lovers; thus they Court all the Estates of Europe. When as Marin Cabalus a Man
doubly famous as well for the luster of his Birth as for knowledge, was at
Constantinople Ambassador for the Venetian to renew the League with the Turk,
Selim swear it in this manner: I swear and promise by the great God which has
created Heaven and Earth, by the souls of seventy Prophets, by mine own, and
by that of my Ancestors, to observe with the Seigneurie of Venice, all the
points and rights of the League and Friendship which has been entertained to
this day, and to hold them for sacred and inviolable, as they are declared by
my Signature But he brake it suddenly; for Iean Mique a Spanish Jew, chased
out of Spain by King Ferdinand, as a dangerous Spy, to Europe, who had run
through all the Provinces, having related unto him that the Arsenall of Venice
had been burnt, and that there was want of victuals in that State and
Seigneurie, he persuaded him to the war of Cyprus, which he said did belong
unto him as Sultan of Egypt, and King of Palestina, whereon Cyprus as well as
Rhodes depended, as Homagers. Selim undertook it without any other subject,
and made himself Master thereof in short time, taking this Realm from the
Venetians, who had kept it long: So to be a Turk and to keep his faith, are
incompatible things.

CHAP. IX. Of some Manual Works of the Turkish Emperors, and of the
Religious custom which they observe, to live of the labor of their hands.
THe Author of the Alcoran, has decked the deformities of his Law, and covered
the falsehoods thereof with some luster of truth, to make them pass the better
amongst his followers: Among the many Rules which he prescribes them, he
enioynes them to labor and does assure them that he is not worthy to live,
that does not labor with his hands* The people do not only observe it, but
the respect of this precept is crept into the Imperial Throne of the Turks;
The Sultans embrace it, and of twenty Emperors which have swayed the Othoman
Scepter, ye shall hardly find one which has not labored for his living.
Mahomet the Second manured his Gardens, and of the reuenew of the Fruits which
were sold, he caused meat to be bought for his mouth. But as the actions of
such men, how religious soever they be, have not true Charity for their Guide,
they do easily incline to vice. This Prince added to his Manual labor so
horrible a cruelty, as it was to be wished his hands had been idle. We have
written in the History of his Empire, that visiting one day, (being followed
by his Pages) the Squares of hi. Gardens which he did manure himself; one of
the young Boys seeing hasty Cowcumbers, gathered one and eat it: Mahomet
returning that way found it wanting, his choler enflamed him to cruelty, he
saw by the stalk that it was newly gathered, and he knew that he had no
company but his Pages, and therefore some one of them had done the deed, the
which he would know at what price soever: He calls the Bastangies or
Gardiners, puts sharp Knives into their hands, and commands them to open the
stomachs of his Pages: They take them one by one and open fourteen, finding
the Cowcumber not yet disgested in the stomach of the fourteenth: Such was the
rigor of this Prince, who for a light offense, caused fourteen of the
goodliest young Boys (the flower and choice of all the youth of his Serrail)
to be murdered. Solomon the Second, he which took Rhodes, spent his idle
hours in making of Shoes, the which he sent to the Bazar or Market to sell,
and with the money he caused victuals to be bought for his Table. Selim the
Second who lost the battle of Lepantho, made little Crescents or half
Moons, which the Turkish Pilgrims carry upon their staves, when they goethe
Voyage to Meque. Amurath his Son made Arrows, and others made little Knives,
all which is sold at a dear rate, in regard of the grossness of the work:
He thinks himself happy that can recover any for money. They ground this
Custom of laboring for their living, not only upon the rules of their
Alcoran, but also upon that passage of Genesis: In sudore vultus tui vosceris
panem donec revertaris in terram de qua sumptu^es, quia puluises, and in
pulu^em reuert^s, Genesis 3.19
Their Schoolmasters make them learn it by heart: In the sweat of thy brows
thou shall eat thy bread, until thou return to earth, whereon thou were made.
It is only in the time of peace; for in the time of war the Prince must live
upon the charges of the people, for whose defense and increase he takes Arms.
But in another season if the Sultan should employ the Money which he leuies of
his people in his delights, the Law and the custom of the Empire would hold it
a crime. They call their Tax and Subsidy, Aaram Agemini Cani, that is to say,
The prohibited blood of the people: And for that the labor of their hands
cannot furnish the expenses of their diet to keep a Table worthy of their
Quality, they add unto it the revenues of their Gardens, which in truth is
great, and almost incredible. I have learned from some Turks, that they yield
two hundred thousand Crowns a year rent: some others say a hundred thousand
pounds sterling. Besides those which he has in the Serrail, he has along the
Sea side, and toward the Arsenall, great Gardens which are very fruitful.
Four Leagues from Constantinople, and further at Andrinopolis, and upon the
side of Asia, at Scutary (where the City of Chalcedonia did sometimes stand)
there are the goodliest Gardens in the East. The fruits which are gathered are
sold at Constantinople, and elsewhere in so great abundance, as they furnish
all the Country. The Bostangihassi or great Gardener, who is an Officer of the
Crown: has a care of this Reuenew, causes it to be brought to the Serrail,
and the Sultans hold it for their true Patrimony and Demesnes, wherewith they
may feed themselves without any oppression.

To these Manual works of the Turkish Emperors, we must add their
Religious custom to plough the Land, when as they come from their Government
to Constantinople to take possession of the Empire, they are bound to hold the
Plough and to make some furrows. Amurath the Third Grandfather to Achmat
observed it, after the decease of Se^^ his Father, when as coming from
Magnesia (where he was Governor) to go and take possession of his Scepter, he
met with an Husband man in the fields, where lighting from his horse he laid
hold on the Plough, and made three or four furrows: After which he drew a
handful of Gold out of his pocket, and gave it in charity to this Labourer:
and withal he put off his Robe, which was of rich Cloth of Gold, furred with
Sables, and gave it him. The Law which makes him to observe this Ceremony is
mentioned in the Glosses of the Alcoran, in these terms: That the Emperor
coming to the Empire and going to the Imperial City to take possession, he
must manure the Land to banish sterrilitie from his Country, and to make it
fruitful. It is nothing the more for all this: For the Prince employing so
great a number of his Subjects in his wars, much good Land lies waste, for
want of men to till it. Thus do the Turkish Sultans employ themselves, and yet
they do not fly idleness, to the which they many times abandon themselves:
We shall see something in the following Chapter.

CHAP. X. Of the Grand Seigneurs Loves.
AMong all the passions which rule the affections of Princes, Love (as the most
powerful) triumphs more over great men, then all the rest together, for they
obtain no victories, but to increase its glory: Covetousness heaps up to
furnish the charges, Ambition aspires to make it great. So we see the most
powerful Princes after they had subdued all other passions, were vanquished by
Love. Alexander laid the honor of so many victories in Persia at the feet of
his Captive Roxana. Coesar being in Alexandria, submitted all his triumphs to
the beauty of Cleopatra, who afterward was friend to Anthony. And the Turkish
Monarchs make subject unto the allurements of their Sultana's, the glory and
luster of that Sovereign power, whereby they are Masters of the best parts of
the World. But behold how these singular beauties enter into their Serrail, and
the bonds where with Love does captiuate their wills.

After that the Rights of birth have brought a Turkish Prince to the Imperial
Throne of his Ancestors, the women which his Predecessor did honor in the
Serrail, are put forth, and conducted to a place called in their Language Eschy
Saray, that is to say the old Serrail, as a man would say the old place: for
Saray in the Persian Tongue, signifies a place or Hostell: There they are shut
up, until they be married to some great Men of the Port. In the mean time
others must supply their room, to be new subjects of Love to the new
Emperor. Then the Bashaes which are at the Port, and others which represent
the Sovereignty of their Master in remote Provinces, employ all their care to
find out Virgins in the Leuant or elsewhere, the rarest in beauty, and of the
sweetest perfections of their sex; whether that the greatness ^f their
treasurs force the necessity of miserable Mothers to deliver them for money,
or that the chance of war has made them Captives at the taking of some
Town, and so fall into their hands: They cause them to be instructed after
the Turkish manner in all gentile Qualities fit for their sex (if they be not
already:) they learn to sing, to play of the Lute, and the Gittern, and to
dance, and having had a special care for the keeping of their Virginity, they
bring them to the Sultan, and present them unto him: The Princes Mother, and
his Sisters which are married labor in the same design, and make him the like
presents: for the law of Poligamy or plurality of women, allowed by the
Alcoran and received in Turkey, gives them leave to keep as many as they will,
so as they be able to feed them. The Sultan does recompense their care that
bring them such gifts, with some rich present to buy (says he) these Virgins
which they bring, that they may be his slaves: But he will be soon fettered
in their beauty. The Serrail of women being thus furnished, he passes
thither when he pleases, and is not seen by any man, by a door right against
his Chamber, whereof he has one Key, and the Chissar Aga or great Eunuch of
the Sultana's another: He does advertise the Cheyachadun, which is an ancient
woman their Gouernesse, to rank them in a Gallerie, in the which he passes
and repasseth often, beholding their allurements or else he causes them to
dance in a round, in a goodly Hall, where he does assist and place himself in
the midst, like unto a Butterfly in the midst of many glistering fires, where
heloseth himself: For feeling his heart suddenly enflamed by the eyes of some
one of them, which pleases him best he casts her his handkercher, for a sign
that he is vanquished: she receives it with great demonstrations of humility,
kisses it and lays it on her head; presently the Cheyachadun or Mother of the
Maids, takes this fair slave, which comes to triumph over her Masters
liberty, she leads her into a Chamber appointed for the sports of love, decks
her with the goodliest Ornaments she can devise, perfumes her, and adds to her
natural beauty the cunning of her Art: This is while the Sun shines; for
imitating his course as well as his luster, this fair Creature lies down as
soon as this Planet sets: The Chadun conducts her into the same Chamber where
the Sultan is lodged, lays her in the same Bed, where she enters by the feet
for the greater reverence, and during the night season many old Moorish women
watch and stand sentinel, one at the Beds feet, another in the midst of the
Chamber, and a third at the door: They are reliued every third hour by others
of the same hue, until it be day: There is one stands at the Beds head, with
two Torches burning, and does carefully observe on what side the Prince does
turn least the light should offend his eyes. I have learned from a Jew, a
learned Physician which had served the Grand Seigneur, that the Chadun watches
at the Beds feet, and does sometimes speak some words to encourage they young
Maid, giving her to understand that night would be the cause of her good
fortune, and that she would attain to the dignity of a Princess. It is the
custom in Turkey that on the Marriage night, an old woman does assist in the
Chamber of the married couple, and imployes the experience of her time past, to
encourage the (...) and her Pension is (...) sixteen Charges of Money.

The rest of the Serrail which are yet Virgins, or have had the Princes company
but once, employ all their allurements to please him, and finding their cunning
devices too feeble, they add the help of Charms and Sorcerie, which they
purchase at any (...) whatsoever. But if any one of these women be delivered
first of a Son, which is to succeed in the Empire, she is called Queen, the
Grand Seigneur honors her with a Crown of precious stones; he causes a
cloth of Estate to be carried into her Chamber of Presence, inlargeth her
Lodging, and gives her a Family sin for a Queen, on Empress of Turkey: She
has a sufficient Reuenew to supply her necessities and her bounties. If she
be delivered of a Daughter, they send her a Nurse, three thousand Sequins and
Slaves to serve her, the honor is the less; but the joy which she concerns
(if there be Male Children formerly borne) is incomparable, for she is assured
that the young Princess shall be bred up with her, and that she shall be one
day married to a Grand Vizir, or to some other Basha of the most powerful in
the Empire, who will (...), and fill her old age (...) if she had been
delivered of a younger Son, he should be taken from her at the age of twelve
years or thereabouts, and put into the hands of Schoolemasters to instruct
him, where she might not se^ (...) four times in the year^, and in the end
he should be (...) ^o the saf^ of (...) elder Brothers Reign, and soon
strangled by M^. This is that which makes them desires have Daughters, w^ is
already a Son (...).

All these woman although they (...) the true Successors of the (...), yet
they are but the Emperour^ Concubities; he (...) marries any, unless be
wonderfully surprised with (...), which has first brought him a (...), then be
follows the blind motions of his passion. And doubelesse when as love makes
him to feel in this sort the r^our of his (...) Tyr^^t should (...) for if the
one does captives that (...), the other torments (...) one to the succession of
the Empire, brings him to ruin, and makes him to end his days miserably by
the Sword. Solomon has been the only Prince since (...) the First unto this
day, whereof there has been fifteen Emperors, and twenty in all, by a
direct succession from Father to Son, which has married a Wife, Amurath the
Third his Grandchild being charmed with the beauty of Asachi, being informed of
the practices of Rouilana in the Serrail by the power of her infranchisement,
and the authority of the Princes Wife, refused the Letters of Sabyn although
he had had fourteen children by her, and loved her above all his Women. Yet
they say that Osman which died last, had married the Daughter of the Muftie of
Constantinople.

But the History of the extraordinary Marriage of the Turkish Prince, has made
us abandon the relation of his loves with his Concubines: But let us return
and follow him into his Garden, where he is in the midst of his (...) love
imbracements. It is dangerous to see him: but no fear of danger should deter
us from serving of the public. He goes (...) out of his (...) go and daily
with his women in (...) Eunuchs which (...) the Women, are the only (...)
which accompany him, all the (...) they ca^. The (...) to worth the Sea, (...)
Master. For if there should (...) Serrail, that should (...) when they walk
with the (...) Thus the (...). Thus the (...) that they (...) is (...) which he
observes against those which would see him, forbids to reveal the secret: Only
we know that in the effeminate delights wherewith the women charm him, he is
pleased with the ridiculous encounters of his Iesters and Dwarffes, and shows
that Love is an entertainment of Men that are Birds. Diogenes speaks it in
Laertius, lib. 6.


A curious person which has had authority in the Leuant, informed me that in
these places there many times happens light riots of Love betwixt the Sultan
and his Women: He understood it from a black Eunuch of the women's Serrail:
and he told him that if the jealousy of these fair creatures did raise them,
they were suppressed by the discretion of the Chadun, Amantiumirae amor^
redi^tegratio est, Terent.

Que modo pugnarunt iungunt suar^stra culumbae; Quarum blandittas, verbaque,
murmur habes, Ovid. 2. de Art.


which is their old Gouernesse, and by her humility which is interessed in the
Quarrel. Thus the giddie Quarrels of Lovers, are the winds which kindle and
inflame their foolish passion. And the Pigeons bills, which were the arms of
their choler, are the sweet instruments of their love.

That which we have formerly written of the entertainment of the Turkish Prince
with his women, is not the most blameable of his affections. The greatness of
his power, which makes all men's wills obey him, and the contagious example of
his Courtiers, carries him to the detestable excess of an unnatural passion.
He burns many times for the love of men, and the youngest Boys which are in
the Leuant, the flower of beauty and the allurement of graces, are destinated
to the filthiness of his abominable pleasures. The Bashaes bring them from
remote Provinces, and present them unto him. This disorder is so inueterate in
the Serrail, as of twenty Emperors which have carried the Turkish Scepter, you
shall hardly find two that were free from this vice. Achmat the last which
died, abandoned it a little before his death, by the wise advice of the M^f^,
and his Son Amurath the Fourth who reigns at this present 1626. is yet so
young, as be may be easily diuerted from this excess, and framed to virtue,
eschewing the Rocks, where his Predecessors have suffered shipwreck. What
does it avail such great and redoubted Monarchs to be the glorious vanquishers
of so many Nations if they themselves be captives to vices? Terrena potest^^
vult esse victrix gentium, cum sit captiua vitiorum, D. Aug. lib. 15. de ciuit.
Dei, c. 8.

Sidelect amini in sedibus and sceptris, ^ Rege^ populi, diligite sapientiam,
Salom. sap. 6.


The Prince is the Physicion of the State; but how can he cure it if he
himself be sick? He is the heart; but what means is there to give it life,
if it has weakness and faintings: He is the eye, and how can he see and lead
others, if it be troubled and darkened with passions? Every Prince that loves
his Throne, his Scepter, and his Estate, must fly vice and cherish wisdom:
For a wise Prince is the assurance of those, and the support of his people.

CHAP. XI. Of the Grand Seigneurs Women, of their Lodging, their Lives, their
Government, and their Fortune.
THe precedent Chapter has related the fire of the Grand Seigneurs Loves, this
will show you in particular the manners and life of all those which cause it.
Fair women are to unstaid spirits, flames which burn a far off. Those of
the Serrail which make the greatest show by the lustee of their graces are most
commonly strangers taken in the war, or ravished by force: But bred up with
an incredible care, to make them learn Civility, to play of some Instruments
of Music, to Sing, and to work with their Needles, most decent for Maids of
Quality: These good parts added to their natural perfection, make them the
more commendable: They are for the most part Christians; but their disaster
causing the beauty of their bodies to serve the dishonest pleasures of Turks,
prostitute their souls to the false worship of their Law. They are no sooner
come into the Serrail, whither some Basha sends them as a Present to the
Sultan, and sometimes the great Cham of Tartaria, but they cause them to make
profession of the Turkish Faith, by lifting up the second finger of the hand,
in sign that they believe but one God only in one only Person, and they speak
this word Mehemet: There are old women which have the charge to instruct them
in the rest of the Turkish belief: And thus the Princes Serrail is furnished
with women.

They are of two sorts, the one have had his company and are women, and the
others are yet Virgins. The women lodge a part and more a^ large, they are
better served, and have greater liberty in the royal Palace. The Virgins
eat by troops in the common resectory, they retire by day into Chambers,
under the guard and government of old women, who govern them by tens, to
labor in some works; and in the night they lie like religious women (but not
very chaste) in long Dorters, where their Beds are made of soft Mattresses and
Couerings (for the Women in Turkey as well as the Men lie clothed) and are
ranckt of either side; there is a passage in the midst and many Lamps burning
in the night time: And every ten Maids have one of the Governesses lie by them.
They which know not the Turkish Tongue, go to learn it in Schools appointed
to that end in the same Serrail. These see not the Prince but when they first
arrive, and converse not with him, but when he will make use of them. They are
furnished with all things necessary for their Entertainment with that abundance
which is found continually in the Sultans Serrail.

The Eunuchs which bring them their meat observe the same order which we
have described in the Sultans service. But the Queen (who is Mother to the
Prince, Successor to the Empire, is served in her Quarter (where she is
stately lodged) by her own Officers: Her vessel is not of Gold like the
Emperors, but of excellent porcelane artificially wrought: In her Lodging are
the most sumptous Feasts of the Women's Serrail, where as many Sultana's meet,
to show themselves (...) the Emperor, who is of the Party, to giu^ the
disordered appetites of all his senses in their company. There he^ makes a
dangerous trial, that Beauty wounds deeper then a Dare, and the respect which
all these women yield him, carrying themselves toward him with a singular
Modesty, Secundus Philosophus interrogatus, Quid esset mulier malae, respondit,
viri naufragium, demus tempestas, quietis impedimentum, vitae captiuitas,
quetidianum malum, voluntaria pugna, sumptuosum bellum, bellua conuiua leana
complectens, exornata scylla, animal malitiesum, malum necessarium, Max.
Seuerus.
and a sweet pleasing, exempts him from making that troublesome experience:
that a bad Wife is the shipwreck of her Husband, the tempest of the House, a
trouble-rest, a slavery of Life, a Quotidian Evil, a voluntary Combat, a
Chargeable war, a Savage Beast which we nourish, a Lioness we embrace, a
Rock adorned, a malicious Beast, and finally necessary Evil.

The Ladies, the Subjects of the Sultans delights, live deliciously near unto
him: Their Serrail contains so great a space, as there are within it four and
twenty great Courts, most of them paued with polished Marble, beautified with
their Fountains, environed with stones and baths, very commodiously, where
these Nymphs wash themselves, and plunge their fires, but do not quench them.
A stately Mosquee serves in the same place for the exercise of their devotion.
The number of the Chambers and goodly Halls are fourscore, adorned with
precious moueables, the Planchers are gilt, the walls are painted in flowers of
rare Art: The floor is covered with rich Persian Carpets of Gold and Silk,
with a great number of Cushions of Tinsell, the Bedsteeds are of Iuory, or of
Aloes wood, and of great pieces of Coral, whereof one of them cost in the time
of Amurath the Second nintie thousand Sultanins, 36. thousand pounds sterling.
or three hundred and sixty thousand Livers; They are garnished with rich
stuffes of Cloth of Gold. The Gardens in great number are the places where as
Nature assisted by Art, sets forth the beauties of the Spring: The Bird-cages
and Fountains adorn them, and the Alleys by their shadows defends the
beauties of the Sultana's from the heat of the Sun. Seeing that in this
stately Palace the most powerful Monarchs of the Earth serve the beauties of
these Sultana's, it is fitting that others should serve their persons: So they
have many women that do that office: Some are Moors, others are white. But
the Men that serve them are black Eunuchs, from whom they have taken all:
They were only mutilated of the inferior parts which serve for generation. But
Solomon the Second, who ended his Reign, when as Charles the Ninth governed
France, seeing a Gelding leap upon a Mare, he judged thereby that the Eunuchs
which kept his women might busy their lascivious passions, and then he caused
all to be cut off; the which has continued ever since. These Eunuchs are all
black, to distinguish them from those of the Sultans Serrail: and their
perfection consists in their deformity, for the most hideous are the fairest:
For being near unto those beauties so perfectly accomplished, they serve for a
luster. They bring them from the Grand Cairo, the chief City of Egypt,
instructed to serve in this Court, by the care of the Basha who is Viceroy
there: If they be not, there are Men in the Serrail appointed to teach them
what they should know: From this School they pass unto the Ladies, they give
them names fitter for their handsomeness than for their Moorish deformity. For
to some Boys which have flat Noses, wide Mouths, thick Lips, Eyes almost out
of their heads, great Ears, their Hair curled like Wool, and their Face
fearfully black, so as there is no white to be seen but their Eyes, and
Teeth: They call them Hycinthe, Narcissus, Rose and Gilliflowre. Doubtless
such flowers are soon withered and unable to fructify. They assign them a
hundred Aspres by the day (an Aspre is about a penny of our sterling Money) two
Robes of Silk, a piece of linen cloth, and some other thing for their meaner
necessities: They are under the obedience of an old wretched Eunuch, black
like themselves, who is their Commander, called Chissar Agassi, that is to say,
the chief of the Virgins: He is, as it were, the Chief and Superintendent of
this Palace of Women, speaks when he pleases to the Emperors, and has
most commonly a share in the favors of the Court: For the Prince being
inclined to Women, he is the Mercury of his affections: the other inferior
black Eunuchs pass many times to the Grand Seignours Serrail, to carry the
secrets of the Sultana's in some note to the Capiaga, who presents it to the
Emperor: Their Office honors them with this privilege, above the white
Eunuchs which serve the Prince, who never enter into the Woman's lodging,
neither do they see them. The black go not out of the Serrail, without the
leave of the Sultana Queen, Mother to the eldest of the Sultans Children In
other places they would make some difficulty to give unto Queens, yea, to
women of an inferior condition, Moors to serve them, for fear that coming to
conceive, their imagination should make an impression in their Children, of the
complexion and form of such Grooms: But the Turks do not insist upon that.
And I have never heard that any Sultana has been delivered of a Moore,
although I know this may be done: Histories furnish us with examples of such
accidents, women have borne children like unto the pictures which were in their
chambers. There are five hundred of these black Men, from the age of twelve
years to five and twenty, and at the most thirty, The women are usually three
hundred or thereabouts, as well of the Sultana's as of those that serve them: To
tell the number of the Sultana's directly, it is difficult: For they daily
present Maidens unto the Grand Seigneur, who seeing his Palace sufficiently
furnished, sends them to the old Serrail. The women slaves which serve them
have five or six Aspres by day, two Robes of Searge, and one of Silk yearly,
a piece of fine Cloth of twenty Else or more, and many gifts from the Sultana's
their Mistresses, who reward their fidelity and diligence with many Presents
of Money and other things: For they abound in all sorts of Presents, as Bedkins
se^ with precious Stones, Earings, Jewels, Plumes of Feathers, Cloth of Gold,
rich Furtes, and other Moueables which the King sends the more willingly for
that they cost him nothing. The Bashaes at the return from their governments
present him. The Ambassadors of the Prince of Tartary, and other Sovereigns
in Asia, bring unto him and fill his Wardrobe with rich diversity of Presents.
But above all things these Ladies love to make provision of Money; for their
beauty does not hinder them to participants with the defects of their Sex,
Mulierum genus est auarum, Cic. Rhet. li. 1.
which is subect to Avarice.

This is the cause why they draw into their Serrail, some cunning female Jew,
with the Emperors permission, whom they give to understand that it is to teach
them new works with the Needle, or to make trial of some excellent Receipts
in Physic for the cure of their infirmities, or the preservation of their
healths: Thus the Jew being entered into the Serrail, she gains affection of
the Eunuch which commands at the Gate, in giving him Money and other rich
Commodities, and in a short time she goes the love of the Sultana's; yea, she
has a transcendent power over their wills, bringing unto them from abroad
whatsoever they desire to buy, and receiving from them what they are willing to
sell. This trade is kept secret; for the Sultan would not take it well that
they should sell that which he gives them. But these women desirous to make
provision of Money, which has always been the most precious of their
Moueables, to the end that if their Sovereign dye^, being conducted to the old
Serrail, they may get forth in being married to some great men of the Port: The
which is easy to effect in gaining the friendship of the Chadun their
Gouernesse by great gifts: They give unto this Jew rich Diamonds, great round
Pearls, great Turquoises, and most precious Jewels for a base price: For they
which have no conversation out of the Serrail, know not the worth of things,
and part with them as it pleases the Jew: she sels them to strangers, and
buys such things as she brings unto the Ladies at a dear rate: So as the
great wealth which they enjoy in a short time, Mase parta, mase dilabuntur,
vetus poeta.
does show that they frequent the Serrail of women: But goods evil gotten are
many times wasted in the same manner. The Jew is sometimes stripped, and for a
punishment of her frauds, leaves her life coming out of the Serrail. The
Bashaes advertised of this deceitful trade, caused it to cease, and the
Tefterdars or Treasurers, when their Cofers are empty, seek to fill them with
the gain of these Brokers.

If the Emperor be a child, and that his Mother has any part in the
administration of affairs, the traffic of these Jewish women mounts higher,
and from precious Stones they pass to the Offices of State: They which affect
them rather by the power of their purse, then by the merit of their virtue
address themselves unto them, and their affections being bought they do
easily purchase the favor of the Sultana Mother: we have observed a famous
example in the seventeenth Book of our Turkish History which will not be
unfitting to make a brief description, for the commodity of such as have not
that first Volume.

Cheira Chaduna Jewish woman being crept into the Serrail of women, by the
means which we have mentioned, enjoyed the friendship of the Sultana Queen by
the cunning of her indusirious trade, and the sweetness of her pleasing
humor: Soon after Mahomet the Third left his life in his Serrail, and his
Scepter to Achmat his eldest Son, being about fourteen or firteene years
old: The Sultana Vulida or the Sultan Mother, if called by her Son to assist
in the Government of the State. Cheira was in favor with this Princess, who in
short time purchased him that of the Emperor: For this Prince falling sick of
the small Poxs, the Jew did visit him with his Mother, attended him in his Bed,
is she was cunning and endued with a good wit, she did ease the importunities
of his Fever by telling of pleasant tales, and sometimes repaired his forces
with a little wine, which shoe brought out of the City, and made him to drink
contrary to the prohibition of his Law: The Sultan recovered his health; he
remembers the Jews good services, and gives her no less share in his
affection, than she had in his Mothers: Thus she grows doubly powerful, and
she deals no more in selling the goodly trash of the women's Serrail: The most
eminent dignities of the Empire are her Traffic. The great Vizar buys the
Scales at her hands, and the Dignity of Lieutenant General of the Turkish
Empire. The Mufti mounts to that supreme Ecclesiastical Dignity by her
means; and the other great Men of Port follow in the current of their Portunes
the wind of her desires: Money and the Jew do call things in Constantinople:
And he which before durst not think of Offers in (...) to admire them, does
now enjoy them by these two means: Avarice calls all disorders into the State,
and leaves valor, and the rare virtues of Men of merit to contempt, if they
were not furnished with Money: And the Prince did not only suffer them, but
commanded it. for that the Jew said it must be so. This must not continue
long, and the Qualities of Cheira being of the Nature of those of the Court are
found passable and perishable. The Ianizaries who are the force of
Constantinople, and many times the violent reformers of the Turkish State,
deal in it, and to this insupportable mischief they bring the rigor of their
remidie: They go to the Serrail in arms, demand the Jew, and they refuse her,
they threaten to break the Gates, and to dragge her, with many others, into
the midst of the place, to revenge upon them the disorders of the State: They
were ready to execute their words by effect, when as of many Mischiefs they
made choice of the least, and thrust the Jew out of the Serrail, to the mercy
of their rage: There were none grieved in the Serrail, Novelties are pleasing,
when they happen they love them, and Envy swimmes in joy and pleasure when as
they see any Favorite fall. And what could they do in this case? What meines
were there to calm the spirits of Men that are armed, and the force of the
Empire, who at that time did not acknowledge any other Master but their
passion? Moreover, the people followed their motion, and demanded Justice of
this Horseleeth who sucked all, swallowed all, and ledt other to suffer: Thus
they abandoned her to force and to the rigor of the Sword. An example which
tells us that the favor of the Court which does not advance any to dignity but
such as are incapable, which contemnes virtuous Men, and builds the continuance
of his fortune in the heaping up of perishing wealth, runs headlong to his own
ruin, and makes himself fat to be an oblation which they will offer up upon
the first sedition. The Ianizaries take Chiera, they strip her, whip her, and
put a burning Candle into her privy (...), and so drag, her laid all along
thorew the City of Constantinople, to serve for a spectable unto the people:
In the end they tear her in pieces, and nail the principal parts of her
body, to the Gates of the greatest Officers of the Empire: That of the Mustice
High Priest of their Law, had the head with this writing. Behold the hand which
has sold thee thy Office, and the favors of the Port: The Head was set upon
the Grand Vizirs Gate, and these words underneath it. This is the head which
has given thee counsel to the prejudice of the State. They did hand her
Tongue at the House of the Cadi or chief Judge of Constantinople, with this
reproach in writing: Receive the tongue which has taught thee injustice. Thus
in the year 1604. ended the Jew which practiced in the Serrail of women: and
the rest have as bad an end: if not so exemplary, which is for that they attain
not to the like favor.

This is the success of the Jews covetousness which frequent the Sultanes
Serrail: But none of them enter, The exact guard of the women.
before the Eunuch of the Gate vnuailes her, and sees what she is; lest that
some man under the habit and trade of such Brokers, should enter into this
Palace, to make traffic of his amorous passion. The order which they observe
in guarding these fair creatures is exact: They do not only search the women
which enter, and the Eunuchs at their return from the City: But moreover
they have a care of beasts: They will not allow the Sultanaes to keep any
Apes, nor Dogs of any stature. Fruits are sent unto them with Circumspection:
If their Appetites demand any Pompeons which are somewhat long, or Cowcumbers,
and such other fruits they cut them at the Gate in slices, not suffering to
pass among them any slight occasion of doing evil. so bad an opinion they
have of their continency. It is (without doubt) a sign of the Turks violent
jealousy: for who can in the like case hinder a vicious woman from doing
evil? She is too industrious in her Designs; and he which had his body
covered with eyes always watching was deceived. In the meanetime if any woman
in the Serrail be discovered in the effects of her lasciviousness, the Law
long since established for them by the Sultan, condemns her to die, Their
punishment.
the wh^ executed without remission: she is put into a Sack, and in the night
cast into the Sea, where she does quench her flames with her life. This severe
punishment does follow the enormitie of their Crimes: for less faults they
suffer lighter correction: Their Superiors beat them, and if they continue
obstinate, the Sultan causes them to be put out of his Palace, and sends them
to the old Serrail. At their departure the Cheira Chadun strips them of their
goodliest commodities, and adds to their misfortune the loss of their most
precious things, and most necessary for the comfort of their lives in that sad
and troublesome abode.

The others which enjoy a better fortune in the Royal Palace, Their diseases.
Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque acce^t ad annos, Fit minor and spacie
carpitur illa suo, Ovid. de Art. lib. 2.
do sometimes try that beauty is a frail good; The violence of an infirmity,
and the burning of a Fever makes the Roses which adorn their Cheeks to vade,
and the Lillies of their countenances to wither. When there is question to
seek for remedy for their diseases, they labor after an extraordinary
manner. If the sick person be none of the Sultana's, whom the Emperor does
most affect, the old women which govern them, go down unto the Apothecaries
shop without the inner Gate of the Serrail, and showing the Physician her
Urine, she relates the estate of the sick person. He prescribes without seeing
her, upon the report that is made, so as many die for want of help. But if the
Queen who has given a Successor to the Empire, or some other whom the Sultan
loves with passion, falls sick, they advertise the Lachin Bassi, which is the
chief Physician, who having obtained leave from the Prince to go and visit
her, he enters into the women's Serrail, where the Eunuchs receive him, for
all the women retire at his coming. They lead him into the Chamber of the
sick party, who has her face covered with her couerings, for they use no
Linen, to the end the Physician should not see her; she has her arm only
out of the Bed, covered with fine Cypress, upon the which he feels her
pulse, and knows the Quality of the Fever, but it is not lawful for him to
speak, whilst he is before the sick person. After this he retires ^ard for
that he may not turn his back toward her: ^medies which he does prescribe
are most commonly so^us potions, all other Physique is in a manner neglected in
that Court: For the Turks believe that from the day of their birth, the time
and continuance of their lives is written upon their foreheads, by an
inevitable destiny, which no kind of Physic can change.

If it were neccessary for the sick person to change the air, Theit going out
of the Serrail.
this remedy would be very difficult. For the women never go out of the
Serrail, but in the Sultans company, and they go to no other places but to the
old Serrail, and to his houses of pleasure, and are not seen by any Man: The
black Eunuchs which guard them, help them into their Coaches, which they shut
up close before they go out of the Serrail: The streets of Constantinople by
the which they are to pass, are made clean and hanged with cloth, to the end
that no man should violate by his looks the absolute content which the Prince
has of these goodly creatures: who seem to be only borne for him: He alone
does see them, he alone does converse with them, and he only does enjoy them.
But seeing the relation of the life of the women of this great Serrail, has
brought us to the Gates of the old Serrail, let us enter into it, and finish
the History of their Fortune.

This Imperial Palace was sometimes the stately design of Sultan Mahomet the
Second, The old Serrail
whom the Turks call Conqueror, who after he had taken Constantinople, caused
it to be built for his Mansion, in that part of the City, which his Architects
did hold to be the most beautiful and the most commodious. It is spacious
enough to lodge a great Prince, with all the Officers of his House. Its circuit
contains above half a French League or a good English mile, the walls are
high and strong, there is but one Gate guarded by a Company of white Eunuchs,
by the which no man enters but the Emperor: If the necessity of his house
draws him thither, they cause the women to retire into a private place until
that he be gone. It has as well as other Royal houses beautifyings and
commodities; delightful Gardens, pleasing Fountains, commodious Bathes, and a
Moschee for their devotions. The three strange Harbingers, but all three
allied, have lodged many fair women in it, that it to say, Death, Inconstancy,
and Contempt: Death has sent a great number thither, when she has taken away
the Prince, which cherish their beauties; and amongst those are the Sultana's.
Mothers to the Princes Children, his Daughters and his Sisters, and the
Monarchs Aunts which is newly seated in the Throne of his Predecessor.
Inconstancy; when as the Sultan wearied with the lascivious imbracements of
the women which have been the Idol of his affections suffered himself to be
persuaded to a new Love, that they have abused his favors, and that they have
made themselves unworthy to continue in his Palace. Contempt, when as some of
these Virgins which are presented unto him, have not in his judgment,
allurements sufficient to captiuate him: Or when as years (an Enemy to beauty)
does blemish them with wrinckles, and does ravish the honor of their delicate
complexions, and the glory of their countenances. These unfortunate Ladies
which have been that which they are no more, have no other consolation, in
this kind of exile but the hope to be married to some Basha, or some other
great Man of the Port, at the least such as had no children by the Sultan: For
the condition of others which are Mothers binds them to a perpetual
widdowhood, yet they may easily attain unto it if the Sultan gives way, if the
Chadun or Gouernesse be pleased, and if they have money: Of this last the other
two depends, by it they gain the Chadun, and she persuades the Prince that
they are worthy: Thus Gold may do any thing in all places, and the dares which
love imployes in such places, have golden heads. This is the reason why they
gather together all the Money they can, partly by the sparing of their
Pensions, and partly by the sale of their most rich Commodities brought from
the other Serrail in secret, and without the priuitie of the Gouernesse, who
strips them at their going forth (but unjustly) of the pearls, precious stones
and other rich gifts, which their graces have in their season deserved from the
Princes bounty: This feuere old woman restores them to the Sultan, but most
commonly she keeps a share to herself. A strange alteration of humane things,
they which formerly had possessed the Empire in Mastering its Monarchs, suffer
the disgrace to be shut out of his Palace, and to lose their moueables: They
which are more politic, which have foreseen their putting out, and have
secretly conveyed their richest stuff, they have the advantage to be rich:
They win the Lady which commands them, and by Eunuchs let the Bashaes,
understand the number of their Sultanins and wealth: These without any further
bruit demand them in Marriage, and promise the Prince to make them a rich
Dowry. Others which by their fruitfulness are deprived of this search, live
in stately Lodgings in this Palace, with abundance of all sorts of commodity
for life, with the which they enjoy the Qualities of Sultanaes and Queens: But
those which have had Fortune adverse unto them, which has deprived them both
of the favor of the Court and of their goods, live in care with a small
allowance in this Serrail, and if they can make any delicate Works, they have
the gain by the Traffic of the Jews which visit them, and therewith they
do in some sort case their discommodities.

In this old Serrail there is a quarter where as no body lodges, royally
furnished, and reserved for the Prince when he goes to visit his Kinswomen, or
practizeth the commerce of his Loves. Carrying with him close Coaches full of
his fair Sultana's, as we have said elsewhere, with whom he spends the best
of his days, and abandons all noble exercises, more worthy of a Prince, to
enjoy their charming company. Thus these women detain him, possess him, and
divert him from virtue. In this sense an Ancient had reason to say, Cato
Vticens^s in Plutarch.
That if the World were without Women, Men should converse with the Gods. This
must be understood of vicious women, and not of those that love virtue, the
which is to be esteemed and embraced in what subject soever it be found.

Chap. XII. Of the Grand Seigneurs Sisters, and his other Kinswomen, and of the
Marriages of his Daughters.
THe Turkish Emperors Sisters lodge and live in the old Serrail; their
Quarters are distinct from the other women, furnished according to their
Qualities: Pleasures and continual delights, are their ordinary entertainment:
In the which they attend until the Sultan gives them in Marriage to some of
his great Bashaes. When that happens they go out of that place with their rich
Stuff, their Coffers full of Jewels, and their slaves to serve them, to the
number of fifty or threescore, besides those which their Husbands add unto
them, who are bound to furnish them with a train fit for their Qualities, Two
hundred thousand pounds sterling.
and to make them a rich Dowry (according to the custom of the Turks where
the Men endow their Wives) at the least with five hundred thousand Sultanins,
which are two Millions of Livers, with the great expenses he makes in presents
of precious stones. The Prince their Brother continues the same pensions they
formerly had, and augments them thirty six charges of money yearly, to buy
them Pattins (says the custom of the Empire) the Husbands which marry such
wives, verify this truth to their loss, that a great inequality in Marriage
does many times breed a contempt; the authority of the House falls then unto
the Distaffe; they command them, they call them their slaves, they do them
good or harm, according to the satisfaction they received from them, and when
the (...) gives way, they repudiate them to take others better to their liking,
and many times make them to lose their lives: So for a sign of the insolency
of their power over their Husbands, they wear at their sides a Cartar, which
is a little Poniard inricht with precious stones. If the Marriage continue
equally to the death of the one or the other; the husband must arm his spirit
with an extraordinary patience, to endure the imperfections of a wife, who
knows that all things are lawful for her, and who is not restrained by the
love of any virtue, within the bounds of a commandable Modesty. The Bashaes
avoid as much as they can the vexations of this Royal Alliance, which is
bought by their servitude, entertained with great charges, and many times ends
with their blood: They seldom embrace it if the Princes commandment do not
force them. Such women have liberty by the favor of the Sultan their brother,
to go when they please unto the Serrail of Sultanan's, and to visit him in like
manner.

The Grand Seigneurs Aunts and his other Kinswomen live also in the old
Serrail, with a train fit for their conditions: The Princes Mother is in like
manner lodged there, she is often visited by her Son, he honors her, and
supplies her with all the things she can desire: she has leave to go to the
Imperial Serrail to see him when she pleases; and if he falls sick, she parts
not from his Beds side, where as natural love makes her employ all her care
for the recovery of his health. The Princesses, Daughters to the Sultan are
bred up near their Mothers, until they be married to such great Men of his
Court as shall please him, so as he be a Renegado, or taken out of the Children
of the Tribute which they leuy upon the Christians, or some other which has
abandoned the Law of Jesus Christ to follow that of Mahomet. These Marriages
are made when as these Royal Daughters have attained the age of eighteen
years, with a magnificence and pomp worthy of the Orthoman House. The
thirtieth of June 1612, was famous for the like Solemnity, when as the
Emperor Achmat gave his eldest Daughter to Mahomet Bassa Captain of the Sea:
It is here briefly described according unto the order which was then in
Constantinople.

The day before the Consummation of this Marriage, the Moueables and Jewels of
the Spouse (which we call the trusse or bundle) were carried from the Serrail
to the Bridegroomes Lodging: Before it, marched five hundred Ianizaries on foot,
of the Gallantest Men in all their Regiment. The high Provost of
Constantinople, and the Grand Vizir follow on horsebace, in rich Robes of Cloth
of Gold. The Aga or Colonel of the Ianizaries came alone after them upon a
Turkish Horse of great price: Two hundred Men of Quality mounted and stately
attired, followed with a gentle pace; the Talismans, Alfaquis, Santons, Emirs,
Seriphes, and other men of Mahomets Clergy marched after with the puffed up
gravity of their condition. About five and twenty paces off, came Ameth Bassa
Taftardar, or high Treasurer, chosen by the Emperor to be Sag^, or Father to
the Bride, in rich Robes mounted upon a Horse with a royal Caparison, having
about him twelve Foot men, he conducted these precious Moueables, or this
Royal bundle, which had in the head of it Music on horseback of Hobbies and
Drums after the Turkish manner: It was distinguished into seven and twenty
Presents, diversely carried by seven and twenty Men.

The first was a little Hatte of Massiue Gold covered with rich stones. The
second was a pair of Pattins after the Turkish manner also of pure Gold,
enricht with Turquoises and Rubies. The third a Book of Mahomets Law, the
covering whereof was of massiue Gold set with Diamonds. The fourth unto the
sixth was three pair of Bracelets of Gold and precious stones. The seventh and
eighth two great Bodkins of Diamonds. The ninth a little Cofer of Crystal of
the Rock, with the corners of Gold half a yard high, and half as broad,
Fourscore thousand pounds sterling.
in the which were seen great Diamonds, and huge Pearls of the value of eight
hundred thousand Livers. The tenth unto the fifteenth, were six Smocks
imbroydered with Gold and stones. The sixteenth to the one and twentieth, were
six head-bands for her forehead of the same stuff and as rich The two and
twentieth unto the seven and twentieth, were six stately Robes of Cloth of
Gold, richly set with Pearls and Diamonds.

After these Presents followed eleven Chariots full of young Virgins slaves to
serve the Bride; they were covered and close, and either of them accompanied or
rather guarded by two black Eunuchs: Twenty other Virgins slaves followed on
horseback, and so many black Eunuchs richly attired and mounted in like
manner accompanied them. After all this marched a hundred and forty Moyles
laden with Tapestrie hangings of Cloth of Gold, of Satin, of Velvet, with the
ground of Gold, and a great number of Cushions of Velvet and of Cloth of Gold,
which are the Chaires of the Turkish Ladies, with great store of other rich and
sumptuous Moueables. All these things made the Spouses Bundle, given by the
Emperor her Father: Not comprehending the Presents and Moueables which the
Bridegroom gave her.

The next day which was the day of the marriage, this Princess was conducted
to her husbands lodging, with no less pomp and state then her moueables. The
Iannizaries made the front of this royal Conuoie: The great Preuost and the
great Surueyor followed as before. The Emirs or Cerafes, which are the cursed
remainders of the race of Mahomet the Impostor, and only carry among the Turks
a (...) Turbant (the mark of their sottishness, and of the (...) of their
predecessor) came after with a grave march of their vain holiness; The
Priests, Santons, Talismans, and about two hundred scholars in the Alcoran
divinity, came after. The Vizirs or chief Judges of Turkey, showed themselves
in this pomp, and before the Grand Vizir who came in his rank, having on his
left hand (which is the most honor a (...) Turkey) the Mufti, or high Priests
of the Law, thirty men on horseback with Drums and hobois made the music
after the Turkish manner; seven or eight Egyptians showing of a pish tricks
following them, made it known that foolery had a rank in the greatness of
the World: forty Musicians marched two and two playing on Lutes, Harpes, and
Gitterns; A fool mufled with a Cap and a Cloak covered with sheep bones,
and held for a Saint by the Turks (for folly is esteemed in the Court and is
reverenced for holy) danced alone, and showed tricks. Fifty of the principal
Officer of the Arsenall well attired did honor this Solemnity, or rather were
honored. Thirty men followed them with Hammers and other instruments to
break down the houses which advanced too far upon the street and might
hinder the passage of two great trees of a wonderful height, laden with diverse
sorts of fruits, wherein Art did imitate nature; They were carried by many men,
and supported in the midst by many Ropes; under the shadow of these trees
marched twenty Officers of the Testarder or Treasurer A^^^ Bassa Sagon of Father
to the Bride; He himself came after richly attired and royally mourned. Two
great touches light carried by many slauen followed him A^her Torch of a
wonderful great proportion, burning likewise was carried a part; It was
covered with places of Gould. A man would say in seeing it, that this precious
Metal had been molded into a Torch, and kindled by a new stone, to give light
in this Celebritis as well to the eyes of the body, as it did deele, yea, blind
those of the mind. Moreover, this Torch was more glistering with precious
stones, then with the flame which burn it. The Raisser Ag^ with ^^tie of the
Princesses Officers followed these stately Light^. After these, there was
carried a great Canopie of Cri^^^n Velvet, where no man was, covered. Another
came after richer than the first, all covered with plates of pure gold, with
great Curtains like unto a bad hanging down to the ground, and close of all
sides: Under it the young Princess was on her back, being the only subject of
this joy: Some of her black Eunuchs were about her: her Coach covered with
Cloth of Gold, drawn by four goodly white horses followed (...): Eight other
Caroaches came after this, in ^he which were set among the black Eunuchs many
fair Virgins belonging to the Bride, as glistering stars amidst dark and
black Clouds: In the number of these Gentlewomen slaves they had made choist
of five and twenty of those whose bounty seemed most accomplished: They were
on horseback richly at^^^ed, their hair confusedly dispersed waued with the
motion of the Western wind, like waves of Gold in a Sea of Love upon their
delicate shoulders: They made the pleasing end o^ this pompous show, it may be
artificially, but it was cunningly enough for Turks, to the end the spectorom
of this Royal (...), should for the last objects of their eyes for ^he (...) of
b^^ut^e, which might (...) in their imagination (...) Marks of pleasure, and of
the greatness of this po^pe.

Yet it does not (...) the Children that shall be borne of this Marriage, a
fortune equal to the Quality of the Emperors Grandchildren: the fundamental
Laws of the Turks Estate, (which supports it by all the means they can, and
sometimes (...) it with blood (...) them ever to have any charge, or government
which may make them eminent in the Court: The highest degree they can attain
unto, is to be a Saniac; which is the Governor of a Borough or little Town; or
to have the charge of Capigibassi, which is the chief of the Porters of the
Serrail, as in France the Captain of the Port at the Louver. Thus they keep
them under to the end they may never trouble the Estate by their authority, and
Birth, which makes them Kinsmen to the Crown. Contrariwise, if the Bassa their
Father has children borne of his slaves before the Marriage, these shall
precede them, and without contradiction may attain, if they deserve it, or be
favored, to the greatest Offices of the Empire.

The Sultans Uncles by his Wives and his other Kinsmen, have not in regard of
this proximitie of blood, any ^re^t access into his Palace, and near unto
his person, then that which their places give them. They carry themselves
toward him with the same baseness and submission as others do^, with the
which they are equally his slaves. The reason hereof is, that the Turks make
no great esteem of women, and they do not believe that they giving them to
base slaves* or to great Bas^^s do dishonor or honor their Family: The
Alliance which comes by their means is little regarded: Moreover the
preservation of Majesty is so recommended unto them, as fort his reason they
keep in subjection all the men of their Empire, and in like manner those which
might advance themselves by the rights of their birth, the which makes them
allied to the Prince*

CHAP. XIII. Of the Grand Seigneurs Male Children, of their Education, and of
the solemn Pomp at their Circumcision.
THe Sultans Male Children are after their birth, lodged and bred up together
in the Serrail, if they be borne of one woman, but if they have diverse Mothers
they are separated have (...) lodgings. Their Mothers see them bred up to the
(...) years, with the jealousy and envy which (...) proudly among the women
of diverse beds. After this time ^he (...) causes the Nurses to be
recompensed, and sends them to the old Serrail, if they be not married nor have
any houses in Constantinople. These young Princes from the age of five years
unto eleven or thirteen which they are with the wom^n, ^e their Schoolemasters
called Cozas, whom the Father gives them: Th^se enter daily into the Serrail of
wom^n, and are led by black Eunuchs without seeing any of the Ladies, into a
Chamber where these young Princes remain: They instruct them in the presence
of two old (...) as it i^ allowed them to continue, after which they return
with the same guides, who bring them to the Gate of the Serrail. This exercise
is continued until the Prince comes to the age of thirteen years, which is
the ordinary ^earme of the Turks Circumcision, after the imitation of Ismael,
from whom they glory to be descended, who was circumcised at the same age.
Sometimes the Father seeing him grow great and near him, stays not so long.
He causes him to be out at eleven years, to send him out of the Serrail, and
to re^ him from him into some Government of Asia. The Ceremony of the
Circumcision is in Turkey the most famous of their Pomp, they call it
Marriage, but a Marriage of the Soul: And for that the Soul is more excellent
then the Body, so the solemnity of these Marriages do far exceed those of
Corporal Marriage. We will succinctly describe the particularities, and will
take for a Table of this royal Magnificence, the Prefines, Plays, Feasts, and
gallant Shows, which were made at the Circumcision of Maho^ the Third.
Grandfather to him that now reigns: Some days before (...): For the
Circumcision follows the Feast; which was (...) upon his occasion.

The place of pompes and sh^e.
The Hippodrome is a great place in Constantinople, about fourscore fanthome
long and sortie broud, artificially built upon a great number of Pillars and
Bashaes which suppose it strongly, and keep it from drowning by the waters of
the Sea, which run under it, by certain Channels which give it entry: It was
the ancient manage and course for Horses as the word does signify, where the
Greek Emperors caused their Horses to be ridden, and gave unto the eyes of
the people which beheld them from a goodly Theater built at the end, the
pleasure of their stately courses. The Theater is now ruined, and the goodly
stones wherewith it was built have served for the proud Palaces of Bashaes,
which they have raised thereabouts: This place is called at this day Atmeiden,
that is to say Manage; There the Magnificences of the Circumcision of the
Turkish Princes are performed.

The day being come when they are to begin the Feast, In what Equipage the
Turkish Princes go to the Hippodrome.
the Emperor goes on horseback from the Serrail, to come to the Hippodrome;
the young Prince his Son is on the right hand, (which is the less honorable
among them) attired in a rich Robe of Cloth of Gold, covered with an infinite
number of Diamonds, and great round Pearls of inestimable value: The point of
his Turbant glistered with precious stones: He was mounted upon a goodly Horse,
with the richest Caparison that could be found in the Sultans Serrail: The Bitt
was of massiue Gold set with many Diamonds, the Stirrops of the same metal
covered with Turquoises, the Buckles were also of Gold enricht with Rubies, and
the rest of the stately Furniture accordingly: The Grand Vizir, the Begtierbeys
of Asia, and Europe, with other Basha's of the Port follow their Lords, the
Ianizaries, Solaquis, Spahis, Capigis, and the other Guards and Officers of the
Court accompany them, all of them attired with so great luster and pomp, as it
seemed that all the wealth not only of the East, but of the whole World had
been transported to Constantinople, to adorn the Men which showed themselves
in this Solemnity. Being come to the Hippodrome, they were received with a
double harmony: The first consisted of Hob^yes, Fifes, Drums, and Trumpets,
with such a noise as the Air and Earth ecchoed again: The second, the
acclamations of the the people, who cried with a loud voice, Live Sultan
Amurath, and live Sultan Mahomet his Son. He to let the people know, how
much he did cherish their affection, gave them a Largess, and cast many great
handfuls of Gold and Silver amongst them. Whilst the Princes cross the place,
they caused to march before them five great Tapers of wax kindled and enricht
with Chugnant, and beautified with all sorts of flowers: They we^^ for their
proportion of bigness and height rather like unto great Oaks than Torches:
They carried forty foot in height.

The places for the Sultans.
The Sultans having crossed the place entered the Palace of Hibraim Bassa, where
the pauement of the Court was all covered with Cloth of Gold, whereon they
marched, and went to take their Places, to be the Subjects and Spectators of
this Royal Pomp. The Father entered into a Pauillion which was prepared for
him, having a Portall adjoined beautified with rich pictures of Arabia, which
looked toward the place: The Son went into a Chamber upon the left hand,
where his seat was prepared. The place of the Sultana's.
The Sultan^es place was joining to the Pauillion; In the which were only the
Mother of the young Prince and Wife to the Emperor, his Sister the young
Princess, and the woman of their Ta^ine: Their Robes and glorious luster of
pearls and precious stones which they carried were worthy of the wife and
Daughter of the most powerful and rich Monarch of the Earth. All the Agaes and
Captains of the Port were in a Gallery near unto them: At the end of the same
lodging were other Galleries erected of three stories: They had divided them
into little Lodgings like unto Cabinets; Those of the ^^^haes.
In the first and highest was the Grand Vizir, and the other Vizirs, with the
Begliar^ey^ of Asia and Europe were placed next, and the Bassa Oachiali
Captain of the Sea, or General of the Galley, and of all the Fleets of the
Empire, whom Fortune had d^ from the Trade of a base Fisherman of Calabria, and
advanced to that degree. In the second story were many Lords and Courtiers of
the Port. In the third and lowest they had made places for the Ambassadors of
Kings and Christian Princes: Those of the Christian Ambassador.
That of the French Ambassador was in the first Rank, the Emperors had the
second, the Polonians the third, the B^iliffe of Venice the fourth, and he of
Raguse the first: They were all in Cloth of Gold, and their Gentlemen in like
manner. He of France did not assist, holding it unseemly for the Ambassador
of a most Christian King and eldest Son of the Church to be spectator of a
superstition, contrary to the Law of his Religion, yet his lodgings were kept
void, above those of the Imperial Ambassador, and no man held it during the
Feast.

On the other side of the place there were Theaters and Lodgings erected for
the Ambassadors of Mohammedan Princes, Those of the Mohammedan Ambassadors.
who would not have their places near unto the Christians. The first place was
given to him of Persia; who was stately attired in those goodly Robes of Cloth
of Gold after the Persian manner, buttoned about him band^ it ^wise; The
Gentlemen of his Train did equal in pomp and gallantnesse any other of their
condition whatsoeutoer. The top of their Turbants covered with goodly
Turquoises, whereof their Country abounds, made a goodly show: They had brought
their wines with them, who were wonderful fair, and attired with great
advantage to (...): They cover their heads with many (...) Gold wretched with
their hair which they suffer to hang down unto their girdles and they
artificially make two little horns of ha^re enricht with Pearl and precious
stones, the which fall upon their fair fore-heade: They made the B^itana's to
envy them, who beheld them and admired their grace through their ^a^tice
windows. Persia has always had the glory to have had the fairest women in
the World. The Daughters of Cyrus, and the Wife of King Darius, had so many
^r^ment^ in their beautiful countenances as Alexander durst not look on them,
fearing to be vanquished, and Roxan^ although of ^ase condition, was found so
beautiful, as she deserved the honor to be wise unto the great Prince. The
Turkish women enter not into comparison with the Persians for beauty, to whom
they yield it; and they say that their Prophet Mahomet would never got into
Persia; and when they demanded the reason, his answers was that the women (...)
so beautiful (...) courtesy and friendship, that which the others brought for
tribute: He gave hi^ (...) f^ly Clock of (...) which struck the hours
melodiously in Music, by length and twenty Bells of silver; and with it
thirty p^ks of Sca^her. The Bailiffe of Venice prose^d^ Cupboard of silver
pla^e, the one h^ fragile, and the other white, six great Bay^es of silver to
draw water, ten pieces of Cloth of Gold; ten of Silk, Satin, and Velvet, and
twenty of Scarlet. The Polonian brought (...) ^ter, whose (...) and scabba^
was all covered with precious flower. He of Ragusa give fifte^ne goodly Cups of
silver, many Tapet^ of white Wa^^, which the Turks esteem, and some piece of
Scarlet. The Persian presented two ^o^an^, and some other Books of Muham^a
Larv^, covered without (...) Gold, many Persian (...) silk^, and a good i^ ^her
of gr^^t (...): The Ambassador of T^rt^ gave many skins of Sa^es and other
exquisite P^ of great price. All the rest the their Presents according to the
order and rank of the Princes (...) M^^^th^^.

They (...) that (...) of (...) love, Feasts of the Sultanaes that were shut up.
and the rigours of (...) ^dered this (...), yet they did celebrate the First,
in those goodly places (...) they are (...): For the (...) the Grand ^g^s
C^^bl^c^ made Pi^y to (...) Serrail, where the (...) rich Presents, and ga^
another time unto the S^ As^^hi, that is to say crowned, whom we have lodged
(...) him in the P^l^ of (...) Bassa, a Crown of (...) of the (...) of (...)
brought (...) all made of Sugar presented to the life, of the (...) proportion
they ought to be of, as Camels, Lions, Elephants, Tigers, and many (...). The
Ambassadors had their p^ (...) were (...) of (...). This was (...) (...).

Mahomets Clergy.
The Mufti who is the high Priest of the Turkish Law, opened the beginning; he
appeared first in the place, being Maiestically set in a Tabernacle carried
upon a Camels back: He had a Book in his hands which he turned always over:
About him were on foot a great number of Priests, and religious Mahometans, who
held Books in like manner. But their fantastic attire did show plainly the
humors of their brutish spirits: Some had their heads covered with hoods,
others with Mitres, some with Crowns, Many had Robes of beasts skins. They
were no sooner come unto the place, but they made show of their Religious
modesty, in whistling, howling, beating upon Pans and Basins, ringing of
little bells which they carried in their hands, as a man would say that these
testimonies of their zealous devotion, were an insolent jangling, at the sound
whereof they did leap and friske without ceasing. In this posture they made
three turns about the place, after which they stayed before the Grand
Seigneurs window, who looked upon their fooleries. There they made their
prayers, during the which some religious Men of the troop drew out great
Knives, and cut their flesh in diverse parts of their bodies, for the leave of
the Prophet, and of their Sultan. The Mufti descended from his Tabernacle,
entered into the Palace, and made his Presents, which consisted in some Books
of the Law. After which he retired with the brutish company of this monstrous
Clergy.

The Patriarchs of the Christians.
And for that this first troop was ridiculous, that which followed was
lamentable: They were the two Christian Patriarchs, the one of the Grecians,
the other of the Armenians, attired in long black Copes, which are their
Patriarchall Robes, the true colors of their servitude and heaviness: They
were followed by some Christian Priests: Their Gate was pitiful, having their
heads hanging down, in such sort, as the Christians that were come thither to
laugh, found a worthy subject of weeping, seeing the Church captivated to the
cruelty of Turks, and the Reverend Pastors thereof forced to go and humble
themselves at the feet of their Tyrant, and Enemy of their Law, in a
superstitious Ceremony, and contrary to their Religion: to life their sacred
hands upon him, and prostitute upon his person the grace of their blessings:
This is the estate whereunto the Division of Christians has reduced them. When
they came before the Sultan, they prayed unto God with a loud voice to bless
him, they presented him with a great Basin of silver full of pieces of Gold,
and so returned poorer than they came.

The Merchants followed, The Merchants.
to vent without profit the most precious of their Merchandise: They were a
thousand in a troop, Turks, Christians, or Jews, all attired in Robes of
Gold, and followed by a pleasing band of young men attired like maidens, having
Bows in their hands, and Quiuers at their backs full of golden Arrows. A
childish troop of dainty young Boys like so many Cupids crowned with
flowers, and holding Darts in their hands, drew without any difficulty a
Chariot which followed them, whereon was set and opened a shop full of Cloth or
Gold and Silk, with Tapestries of all sorts, which they presented to the
Sultan, and cried; Live Sultan Amurath.

The Goldsmiths followed after; The Goldsmiths.
their decking did show that they traded in precious Wares: They were all
covered with precious stones: Some of their number drew a rich shop full of
Vessels of Gold and Silver which they gave unto the Grand Seigneur. A small
troop of other Goldsmiths made a band a part: They were those of Baiestan,
whereof we have spoken before, stately attired: The stones and pearls which
were upon their Garments, were valued at a Million of gold: The Presents which
they made were great and rich.

All the other Tradsmen came in their order, Tradesmen of diverse sorts.
and all labored in their profession. The makers of cloth of gold and silk,
to the number of five hundred men well attired, caused two Loomes to march with
them, whereon they made a piece of cloth of gold, and another of silk before
they had gone thrice about the place. The Lace-makers did the like in their
kind: They were in the midst of many sorts of beasts made of silk, which
marched with them by Art: The Linen Weauers, Tapestric men, and Cotton makers,
labored also in their Vocation. The Feather-makers fed the curiosity of the
spectators with Feathers and wind: They made many artificial Birds, which did
fly in the Air, as if they had been natural. Tailors made Garments in
passing upon the place; Smiths did work in Iron, Potters made Pots, Cutlers
made Knives, and Sadlers Saddles, Masons did build, and Glasse-makers did blow
their Glasses, Bakers did bake; and that which was not pleasing, the sluttish
Butchers did kill and slay Beasts, and gave the flesh to the people. The
Gardiners were there laden with Flowers, the Ploughmen with their Ploughes
tilled the Sand: The Shepherds with their fat troops made their three turns:
The Keepers of Moiles, Asses, and Carters, brought their Moiles, their Horses,
and their Asses: Their gross speeches did not greatly tickle the Sultans
cares: Nor their Presents did not draw his eyes to the contemplation of their
beauty: He had nothing but Wood, Stone, and Water: and that which he did, as I
conceive, suffering their foolery to entertain his leisure, was only to
represent unto his ambition the fabric of the World, to the government
whereof he aspires, in receiving such homages as th^se men could yield. The
Jews were the last which gave Presents: They were three hundred young men
separated into three bands, disguised in diverse Nations: The one was attired
and armed like French, the other represented Spaniards, and the third seemed to
be Swissers with their great Cod-peeces; They had for their train an infinite
number of Dragons, Sirens, and Tortoyses of the Sea, which marched
artificially: And with this, pleasant Antiques, as women which had resigned
their Distasses unto their husbands, and made them to spin: They were gotten
upon their shoulders to show their Empire, and to let them see the miseries of
these Coxcombes, charged with such importune burdens.

Artificial Combats.
These Homages and Presents being thus ended, the Combats of war, did show the
force of their art, and the sports the pleasure of their bravery: The Grand
Vizir would have the honor to expose unto his Masters eyes, the representation
of his victories against the Christians. He caused to be drawn into the place
two great Castles of Wood, diversely painted, mounted upon Wheels, garnished
with Towers, fortified with Rampires, and furnished with Artillery: The one
was kept by Turks, who had planted upon their Tower, many Red, White, and
Green Ensigns: The other was defended by Men, attired and armed after the
French manner, who seemed Christians: Their Ensigns carried white Crosses;
without doubt they had been taken in some encounter, or at the sack of some
Town of the Christians: either of these Castles had thirty Horse, which made
diverse sollies: The Turks forced the others to make their last retreat into
their Fort, where they shut them up, besieged them, battered their walls, made
a breach, sent to discover it, and marched to the assault with their usual
cries and howlings: The little resistance they found made them soon Masters
and vanquishe is, although they were themselves vanquished, for they fought
against themselves: If they had had to deal with Christians, they had not
prevailed so easily. As soon as they were entered, they abandoned the place to
their cruelty, put all to the sword, cutting off the heads of the principal,
and lifting counterfeit heads above the walls. The contempt which they make of
us ended the triumh; They let slip into the place about thirty Hogs which they
had shut into a Fort, and ran after them crying and howling in mockery: Thus
the Turks do not sport but in contemning the Christians, nor labor seriously
but in ruining them: And they by a fatal division prepare their victories, and
dispose the triumphs which they obtain of them with great facility.

Occhiali Bassa great Admiral of the Sea, A representation of the taking of
Cypres.
exceeded by his industry, the Vizirs invention. He caused to come rolling
into the place, a great Island, admirably well made of boords and pastboord,
which represented Cypres: Two powerful Armies held it besieged, the one by Sea
and the other by. Land: There was artificially seen their descent into the
Island, the siege of Famagouste, the sallies, skirmishes, batteries,
counter-batteries, mines, counter-mines, breaches, assaults upon assault,
fire-workes, and whatsoever the fury of War could invent. Sometimes the
Turks were Masters of the Walls, and suddenly the generositie of the Cypriots
repulsed them: But time, force, and the want of succors made them receive the
composition which they offered them; yet the disloyalty of the Turks did not
observe it, for some they made slaves, and the rest they put to the Sword: All
this was seen in the place: When as the sound of Trumpets, the noise of Drums,
the howling of Turks and the thundering of the Canons seemed to be at the
taking of another Island at Cypres. The wonder of this artificial
representation did much please the Sultan, rejoiced the people, and revived in
the Christians minds the grief of their loss: Heaven would have it so to
punish their great curiosity, for assisting with these infamous Mathometans,
and to be spectators with them at the Pompes of their Superstition. But he did
not suffer their insolency to be unpunished; He made it known that if his
Justice suffers them to be ascourge to the Christians, yet he does not
always suffer them, to have them in derision: The Cannonadoes, where there was
nothing but Powder, slew many of these takers of the Island in Picture upon the
place, and wounded a great number.

Artificial Castles.
Some other artificial Castles appeared after, showing the like thing to that
of the Grand Vizir: One among the rest, the least of all, carried two Towers,
in the which there were two men armed, which fought on against the other with
their Semiters, they did manage green Ensigns, and Battleaxes of glass
without breaking them. The Romeliens and Albanois, whom the Turks hold for the
best men at Arms, came after with their Lances and their Targets upon the
left arm, That is to say, Italians, French Spanish, etc.
they have no Rest to bear it, like unto the Franques, it is only tied to
their Saddles by a leather thong, for they carry no Cuyrasses: Many of their
Horses were slain there in combating. After the Encounter, they did run at
the Ring after their manner, which is to set a little rod of Iron on the
ground, on the end whereof they put a Ring somewhat bigger than those which
they use in France. They which took it, carrying the Ring on the end of their
Lance being on foot, went to present it unto the Sultan before his window, who
threw him out a Ring of Gold in recompense; the manner of receiving it was not
without a Mystery: In raising it from the ground, the Cauallier kissed it, laid
it upon his head, and bending down very low made a Reverence and so retired.
When these men had voided the place, they brought in thirty Christian
Soldiers, lately taken in the Wars of Hungary: They followed with their Irons
the triumph of certain Turkish Captains which had taken them; some Ensigns
and Drums of their Companies made up the Trophie of these Barbarians.

A goodly troop of Archers on horseback arrived soon after with a more
general joy; Archers on horseback and their dexterity.
They Actiuities which they showed are admirable. After they had finished their
courses, with a Target in the left hand, and a long Dart or half Pike in the
right, sometimes ranged in battle, sometimes disbanded, casting them one at
another, and taking them up from the ground in running: They ran their Horses
with their full speed, and in the swiftness of their course, drew their
Semiters thrice out of their Scabbords, and put them up as often without any
stay: In like manner they shot thrice with their Bows, with the first they hit
an Iron on the hinder part of the horse; with the second they struck an Apple
of Gold, which was upon the top of a great Mast of a Ship set up in the midst
of the place: with the last they hit the Ring at which the Albanois had run:
Then standing upright in their Saddles, they did run their Horses with full
speed, and did manage their Arms as before. Some of their Troop did things
which were admirable: There was one who took the Saddle from his horseback,
laid it upon his neck, and set it in its place again all with running. The
same m^n set an Orange upon the Turbant of his slave, and in running pierced it
diverse times with his Arrows, and never hurt his slave; He pierced a great
brazen Mortar with an Arrow; Moreover, he tied two Horses together, set a foot
upon either of them, and standing upright, supported a young Boy who shot with
his Bow as the Horses galloped. Another of the same Archers ran with all speed
his head in the Saddle, and his feet upwards betwixt four Semiters, which had
their points set against him: Two men of their troop put themselves into one
Saddle, and vaulted before and behind while the horse did run, lighting and
remounting again without stay. An Arabian which was amongst them added the
force of his jaws to their dexterity: He did set a pack Saddle on a horse
with his teeth, having his hands bound, he put on the panniers, and then set
on his Boy to load it, he did also saddle his horse after the same manner, and
leapt upon him; doubtless the biting of such a Gallant would be dangerous.

This day (for all these wonders were not one days work) ended by some
actions of piety after the Turkish manner, which the Sultan caused to be
performed at the Gate, by the which they got to Andrinopolis: Thither he went
going from the place with the young Prince Mahomet his Son, and all the great
Men of his Court, where being arrived he caused four thousand sheep to be
sacrificed, and a great number of Beeues which he caused to be roasted whole, in
either of which they put a whole sheep, and in the sheep a heu, and in the
hen eggs, and caused all to be distributed to the poor. He then received
news of the defeat of his Army in Persia; for the pleasure of humane Pomp is
never so absolute, but it is accompanied with some cares and crosses: The
feeling of this Rout fell upon the Ambassador of Persia. The Turk offers
violence to his person, and commits him to Prison, and in the open day, and in
the view of the people, and of other Ambassadors, caused his Lodging to be
sacked and spoiled.

But this was no hinderance, but the day following the Feast was continued. A
troop of excellent Tumblers and Mountebankes (whereof Turkey abounds above all
the Regions of the Earth) did to the common amazement of all the Spectators
these things which follow. The first which showed himself in the place, shut a
young Boy naked into a Hogshead, with five and twenty or thirty great Serpents,
and rolled it about the place, and then drew out the Boy whole and sound: The
same Serpents stinging and biting others which came near them. After this they
buried a young Boy deep in a Ditch, and covered him with Earth as if he had
been dead, and yet he answered as distinctly and intelligibly to that which
they demanded of him, as if he had been out of the ground. Another presented
himself naked without shame, but not without more than humane force, he laid
himself flat on his back upon the edge of two Semiters; being in this
posture, they laid upon his Belly a great Anuile of Iron, whereon four men did
beat with great Hammers; and moreover they did riue many great pieces of wood
without any offense to him. When this man was retired, a troop of other naked
men exposed themselves to the view of the World all covered with wounds, their
bodies being yet larded with the same arms which had made them, some with
Arrows, others with Knives and Swords; But before these mad men had gone
thrice about the place, two of the troop fell down dead, which showed that
their wounds were rather marks of their folly than enchantments. Another
showed the force of his jaws, and his hands: he held a horseshooe betwixt his
teeth, and pulled it in pieces with his hands; He brake a Plough-share, with
three blows with his fist; and he caused a piece of Iron to be made red hot,
the which he took in his hand licked it with his tongue, rubbed it on his
face, and yet was not burnt: Afterward he caused a Goat to dance pleasantly
upon his shoulders, and never touched it, causing it to pass from one shoulder
to the other without moving. A headie-brain'd fellow followed this man, upon
whose head they did break with Hammers a great stone, which a man could hardly
lift from the ground. He caused them to cover him with so great a heap of
stones as he could not beseene, and yet for all this he felt no discommoditie.
Another b^d came after, whose ^eet were so hardened, as they went bare upon a
Harrow full of sharp Pikes and cutting K^ines: There was one followed them,
who with a cord, tied to his hair without the help of his hands, did lift up
a stone of a hundred and fifty pound weight. Many Beasts instructed in this Art
of tumbling augmented the pleasure of the Assistants: little Birds, went to
fetch a piece of silver as far as they divided them, and brought it to their
Masters, Asses danced, Dogs and Apes showed a thousand pleasant trick. The
Grand Seigneurs Wrestlers, came to show their force and actiuitie, (...) and
greased to avoid the surprise of their Enemies* These are the most continent
men in Turkey, they keep their Virginity pure and untouched, and say with
reason that it does e^^it^e and preserve the force of their bodies. The
Speech^, which are the Sultans Footmen, would also be of the p^^ti^, they came
unto the place with their feets^oe, running and leaping with admirable
swiftness and disposition. These men have ^e ^kin of their feet so hard as a
Smithton hardly make a (...) to enter; they do harden them see pleasure. The
Dancers upon Ropes showed strange Form of Actiuity* In those places they exceed
all others what (...) for their A^i^i^y.

Elephants and Giraffe.
Two Elephants, and a Giraffe, were brought into the Hippodrome, to augment the
Sultan delight by this nouelty. The Elephants differed in form: One was grant
and the other li^e. The great one was thri^ one high, and bigger than a Buffle,
or small Socere, heads that upon his (...) a little Castle of light wood, in
the which might (...) six soldiers without crowling: The (...) in comparison
of the rest of the body (...): Look Lips^ Epist. in his Centuries where he
speaks of this Beast.
From the end of the upper part of the Muscle, then did (...), whereof this
beast on (...) use as readily as a (...) does his (...), takes what his (...)
(...) him, carries his entire to his (...), use (...) for a (...) with
incomparable force, (...) are small (...) to those of a Bore, his another chap
is (...) unto the (...) Her has two great (...), about (...) round and great,
lying upon his back, he sometimes raises them up: his legs are even like unto
pillars, in the which there appears no joints, yet this Beast has some; he
does but half bend them, and therefore he suffers himself to fall upon his
side this feet are round, and have five nails* his skin is black; and has
little hair. The Naturalists observe, and experience does confirm, that this
beast has so powerful an instinct, as it seems, he is endowed with
judgment: Examples are familiar in Histories: This beast being brought before
the Grand Seigneurs window, lifted up his head to look on him, then he bowed
it down very low in sign of reverence. They cast upon the ground a handful
of Aspres, which is a little Coin like unto the French Carolus; the which he
gathered up with his heavy trumpe^s handsomely as any man could have done with
his hands* Eight strong Turks held a long Pole in their hands, and gave him
the end; as soon as he had seized on it with his trumpe, he made them to
turn about as easily as if they had been feathers: Afterward he lifted up
the Pole, and struck it so hard against the ground, as those men were fore
(...) abandon it: ^ing Master of it, he did flourish with it like at two hand^
sword with admirable dexterity. Wherefore the Indians have reason in their
wars to make use of the force and address of these beasts: They carry many
men, and when they tie a Semiter to the trumpe, one of them kills more than a
company of Foot could do?

The Giraffe.The Giraffe, whereof the portraite is here represent to was at the
same time brought into the Hippodrome. This beast for that it is little known
in Europe was much admired. It is not only beautiful of it self, but it is
also gentle and very tractable: It has a head like a Stagge, armed with two
little harms half a foot long, covered with (...); the ears; the feet and
the talle are like (...) a Cow: It has a neck (...) into a Camel, it has
hard knees upon the ha^s, and breast; The (...) speckled like unto a Leopard,
and some believe that it is that Ca^par^ of the ^^dear; his (...) before are
four or five times longer then those behind, so as his natural posture
represents a Goat standing upright against a Tree to b^ou^e the buds: The which
makes him to feed with discom^^^ic: for in this action but is forced as open
his legs to make passage for his hand. If we had not undoubted proofs of the
wisdom of Nature in the wonders of her works, we might say that this beast
always standing upright is one of her fantastic Creatures. Being led above
the place, they were carried back, passing thorough the City, the Giraffe had
such advantage in the foreport, as his head looked into the windows of their
houses.

Such were the pomp of the day, the night wanted not here, if there were any
eight during the solemnity of this royal Circumcision: For at such time as the
Sun did not shine in their Hemispheare, they had raised a ship Must in the
Hippodrome, whereon there was a great Circle like a Crown furnished with
burning Lamps: and near unto the Obelisque which is the ancient ornament of
this place, there was a long wheel set up, the which did time continually,
and made twelve other smaller to move, all which were inuolued with lights,
which remaining some, (...) notwithstanding to follow the motion of the
wheels, not without a wonderful content to the eyes of those which beheld
them: Besides this there were many ship Masts with their (...) and ta^lings,
all covered with lamps, which gave so clear a light, as in the dark night they
made an artificial day; by the favor of which light, most of those goodly
things which had appeared in the day, come after Supper to give (...) to the
company by their (...). After this, (...) Fire-workes, some drowe by (...),
^hers by (...) which did vo^ie for all ^ames, filled the air (...) agreeable
(...), and pleasant thunderings, and the (...) of the spectatours with
^^^^ment: But their (...), their thundering (...) and their (...) to those
which did behold (...) those^^ and smoke of powers, (...) ^heth (If they (...)
comprehend it) that humans (...), and the shewe^ of (...) greatness of the
World, dissolve in the end into wind and smoke. The most stately of these
nocturnall sports was the representation of a nauall fight so artificially
expressed, as it made the Christians that were present see, that the recompense
of labor, and the reward of merit, having drawn into Turkey the goodliest
inventions of men, have made them to lose the name of barbarous to send it unto
us, where as virtue is not acknowledged. There they saw many Ships and
Galleys under sail, furnished with Artillery, adorned with their flags, the
Trumpets sounding, fight, inuest, leap from one beak-head to another, kill,
cast into the Sea, burn, and sink the Enemies Vessels, with admirable
dexterity. The battles at Land, Sieges, and taking of Towns, were
represented with no less art.

But if the description of this Royal Feast has been a pleasing diuersion
unto us in the toil of this History, let us end it according to the natural
course of pleasure, by the grief which follows. Doubtless it will be great
enough to impart it to those which shall read the issue of this Chapter, where
we observe than during the spectacles of this solemnity, the wretched Grecian
^y ^roupes in this place to make themselves Mahom^tans: Some abandoned
Christianity to avoid the oppression of the Turks, others for the hope of
private profit: The youngest and most beautiful were sent into the Serrail,
with the Ichi^glans, and the rest among the Azamoglans: This hope of better
fortune drew the Idleness of many young men, so as they could hardly find
Masters enough to cut them: This detestable troop of Rascals, went to show
themselves before the Grand Seigneur, their Bonnets under their feet, in sign
that they did tread their law and honor under foot: There a Turkish Priest did
cause them to lift up the demonstratiue finger of the right hand, in sign that
they did not believe but one God in one person, and to say with a loud voice,
Laila ey lala alla Mehemer ^asoul alla; Then they led them into c^taine
Pauillions, which were erected expressly at the end of the place where they were
circumcised: he The number of these cast awayes was found to be above four
thousand soul^.

These sports and triumphs being thus miserably ended, the young Prince for
whom they had been made, was brought into his Fathers Chamber, where he was
circumcised by one of the great Men of the (...) the p^s^re of all the Basha's.
His wound being cured within few days, he goes to take his lost leave of the
Sultans his Mother, whom she shall see no more until he comes to take
possession of the Empire, after the death of his Father, if he be the oldest,
or to end his life with a halter if he be a younger brother, when his ^der
shall Reign. She gives him presents: and the other Sultana's do the like: All
the Basha's present him, and the Emperor his Father appoints his Family, gives
him a Pra^r, an Eunuch for Governor, with many other men to serve him, and
sends him into As^a, Sa^qua only of the City of the Magnesia, the chief of
Alysia, as Lieutenant in that Region under the authority of a Basha who is
Governor whilst he carries the Title, he must govern his Actions with
prudence and modesty; for if he should have any designs of innovation by the
Counsels of some dis^ed seditious persons, he should work his own mi^ by
his own hanes. The Eunuch which is the most ^pp^ about him, he is bound to
advertise the Sultan his Father, and the principal Basha'es, of all his
carriage.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Presents they make unto the Grand Seigneur, and of that
which he himself gives.
THe custom to give Present unto the Prince (...) been so practiced in the
Turkish M^thio, (...) Law of State, so as it is written in the (...) Empire,
that all the Basha's and great men of the Port shall at certain seasons of the
year, and at the Circumcision of the Emperors Children, give him Presents,
and likewise when they return from the Government of Provinces, where they
have continued some years in the administration of their Charges of Viceroy.
The Generals of Armies at the return from their victories, are bound to
present gifts to the Sultan: They do it usually in a great quantity of Vessels
of gold and silver, Swords and Daggers enricht with precious stones, and bows
of the like manner, Plumes of Feathers with precious Jewels, rich Girdles,
exquisite Furs, and sometimes pieces of cloth of gold, with Tapestries of
silk and gold: whereof the Princes Wardrobe is commonly well stored, to supply
his bounty to his Sultana's and slaves, and to send to foreign Princes: All
these men being slaves to their Master, and as it were forced to these
liberalities, cannot when they please follow their good advice which say, Et
vna noble necedad dar a los Regez, perque creen hazer merced. quando reciben,
Antha Perez en las cartas segund^.
that It is a noble folly to give unto great Men, for they believe they oblige
a man much when they receive that which he presents. The Basha's which return
from the government of Egypt, parting from Cair^, dispose the value of the
Presents into ready money, and ariuing at the Serrail, they sometimes present
unto the Sultan four or five Millions of Livers, which is four or five
hundred thousand Pounds sterling. The Generals of Armies do many times
practice the same liberality, they are the better received by their Master, and
the glory of their magnificence flies into the mouth of the people, and they
find by their great gifts, that the offering of Presents, pacify both Men and
Gods, Munera cre^^ mihi pla^ant hominesque Deisque, Placatur d^nis Jupiter ipse
datis, Ouid^ de Art.
(as they said in old time) These notable sums over (...) the inward Chasna,
which is the Princes secret treasure. The Christian Patriarch gives unto the
Sultan newly crowned an honorable present, which the Greeks call Pesquesian,
or when the Patriarch co^ers into his charge, by the death or deposition of
another. Besides this the Turks give unto the Eunuchs which are familiar to
the Prince many rich Presents, to make them speak from them upon all necessary
occasions: for the balance does always decline on that side which is
heauiest, and the only means to gain the affection of these gelded men, is to
glut their avarice, which is no small labor. Nassuf Bassa, who ended his
fortune and his life in the year 1614, did often say that the Eunuchs of the
Serrail were insatiable: They do also hold, and they practice this Maxim in
the Turkish Court, the which is generally received by all men, Omnium est
dulcissimum etcipere, Senec.
that The sweetest action of men is, To take, although in truth it be more
generous to give, for him that is able.

As pleasure and grief are naturally joined together, have one Temple, and
their Offerings are upon the same Altar: The Othoman Monarch who takes a great
delight to see himself glutted with Presents; not only by his own subjects,
but also by strangers, yet he sometimes finds a distaste in it: As it happened
to Sely^n the First, whose example shall suffice in this Chapter, that by its
breuity we may ease the long descriptions of the former. This Prince having
taken the Othoman Scepter, his hands being yet bloody by the death of his
Brethren and Nephews, and the chief of his Basha^s; thinking to be honored
according to the ordinary custom of his Predecessors, with Presents which
foreign Princes make, he saw his cruelty taxed, by that which the Persian
Ambassador presented unto him, who gave him in his Masters name, a great
furious Lion, inaccessible, always fo^ing for rage, and never made tame by any
Man. This present being brought, Sely^n fell into a rage, stamps with his
foot, complained that he was wronged, and swear that he would be revenged,
and demanded satisfaction from the Ambassador; who being advised and cunning,
covered the part which he had played with many goodly word* Herald, Sely^n
that this Lion did rather represent the (...) of his courage, and that of his
generosity rather than any other thing; but this did not pacify him, he ch^sed
him out of his Territories, and gave him to present unto his Master many great
Dogs with bloody mussels, as if he would say, they had (...) his Lion in
pieces, and that in the assaults of War he would entreat him in like manner.

Seeing then the Turkish Prince does continually receive Presents from others,
it is string he should likewise give: For it is more seemly for a King to give
then to take, so his Wardrobe is usually open to give. The Sultana's are
enricht by his Presents; The Mufti and his Praceptor are honored, and the
Bashaes receive: and all this consists in precious stones, Purses full of gold
coined, Robes of cloth of Gold, Plumes of Feathers, Jewels, rich Arms, and
other things of value. The Chasnadar Bassi, who is the high Treasurer, has the
charge to buy what is needful for Presents, he imployes yearly in cloth of
gold, for Robes which they give, Four hundred thousand pounds sterling.
the which is made at Bursia in Asia, four Millions of Livers, besides that
which comes into the royal Wardrobe, by the Presents of Basha's and other
great Men: but as all Rivers come from the Sea and return unto it, so all the
Grand Seigneurs Presents return back in the end to his own Cosets: The
Sultana's die, and their goodly stuff comes to him; The Bashaes end their
lives, he takes all as the Master does of his slaves: Sometimes he leaves a
part for the execution of the Will which he has made. So as he does not give
but lends for a time, seeing that the fundamental Law of his Estate, which
makes all men his slaves, restores that unto him which he had given, and
moreover, all the wealth of his Subjects.

But all the Presents of the Turkish Emperor are not pleasing to them which
receive them, they are sometimes fatal fore tellings of death to him to whom
he gives them; For when he sends for any great Men of the Port into the
Serrail, to feast him, or to speak with him, after the Feast or at the end of
his discourse, meaning to take away his life in his presence, he gives him a
black Robe wrought with gold and silk: as Basa^et the Second did to Bassa
Achomat, who had supt in the Serrail with the other Bashaes at his Masters
Table, amidst the delights and pleasures of a royal Feast, whereas Wine
forbidden by the Law of their Religion, was poured forth as plentifully, as in
any part of the World, Supper being ended and the Table taken away, the Bashaes
humble themselves before their Prince, some kiss the ground in his presence to
obtain pardon for that they had drunk Wine, and so returned to their houses.
The Sultan stayed Achomat, with their sweet Words, Milalah (that is to say my
Protector) tarrit here with me. When the others were gone, he caused a rich
Robe of black silk wrought with Gold to be brought unto him, ^t the fight
hereof Acha^at entered into fur^e, he knew well what it meant, and assured
himself of his ruin, he accuses Baiazeth of injustice and cruelty, and
tells him in his rage. Why did thou Son of a Whore suffer me to drink
wine against the holy constitutions of any Law, if their wilt presently put me
to death? He ended his rage with the rest of the discourse which his passion
had dictated. But his life was freed from the present danger: his Son seeing
him not return with the other Bash^^s, informed himself from them what was
become of his Father. They tell him in what a pitiful estate he was,
whereupon he flies to the Serail, moves the Ianizaries to compassion, who
loved Achomat for his valor, as he whom they had followed in the Wars, in
Battles, and assaults of Towns, they filled the Serrail with the honor of
their cries, Br'e, Br'e, that is to say str^ (...). They beat at the Gate of
the Emperors lodging, threaten him, ra^^e on him, called him drunkard, and
force him to restore Achomat who was pale and warn ha^ling the ^alter about
his neck, with the which the Princes made ^sed were ready to strangle him. In
this manner force hindered the effect of this fatal Present of a black G^ne
wrought with Gold. But besides these accidents he that receive it must aspect
his infallible Ruin. This Present is the (...) by the Othoman Monarch to any
but to (...), but he sometimes sends others, which show the contempt which he
makes of foreign Princes, as when he sends a Robe how r^^h soeue^ unto a
sovereign p^, for a Robe is the Present of a superior to his inf^. So (...)
the first (...) The^^r, or T^mberlan, Emperor of the (...), when he sent him
a Robe in disgrace to contemn him. The was much offended, and answered those
which brought the Present from the Turk, that he should not (...) those of his
s^^t (...) that manner: but he soon had his revenge. He entered Baiazets
Country in Asia, (Constantinople was then held by the Christians) and with
eight hundred thousand fighting men, took Sebaste the S^ate of his Empire,
slew his Son Orthogules, defeated his Army in Battle, took himself
Prisoner, revenged this contempt by many others, and afflicted him so in
following him, as he died of grief, sorrow, and pain: to be an example to
Princes, not to contemn those which are Sovereigns like themselves, and
therein Images of the Sovereign God. But thus they give Presents of Death and
contempt in Turkey, Hostium ^era non (...), Hom.
the one is of cruelty, and the other of offenses and not Presents, for the
Presents of Enemies are no Presents.

The Sultana Queen that is crowned, and Mother to the young Prince Successor
of the Empire, gives many Presents a She receives daily from the Great Men of
the Port which send unto her, and therefore she is bound to give; to this end
the Emperor does furnish her with much goodly stuff, and pieces of price
which are given unto him, and with great sums of money to buy others. The
Grand Vizir does also give many Presents both within Constantinople and
without: He sends many Roabes of Cloth of Gold and Silk, to Ambassadors
which arrive at the Port: and when he is in the Army, performing the the
Change of Lieutenant General to the Sultan, he gives to draw strangers unto
him that may be useful, or to recompense the generositie of some valiant
Captain. And for that all these Presents are given in the Sultans name, he
does furnish those things which he gives. And to this end the Teftardar
delivers him Money, pieces of Cloth of Gold, of Silk and many other Stuffes.
This is all that can be spoken of the Sultans Presents.

CHAP. XV. Of the Treasures of the Serrail.
Julius Caesar pote ^^iam diua^^^ rebus, pecunia scilicet, and mi^ibus p^^^ri,
conseruari augeri di^^e sa^bat, Ciphili^us in Caesario
THe Och^mas Monarch has his Treasures: what Sovereign Prince can preserve and
^ine his power and estate without their force: It is gotten by Arms and Money,
preserved and underlined by the same means. He does lodge it in his Serrail,
one part in the Co^he which is without his Quarter: and the other within it: In
the Treasury without it laid the money for the ordinary and extraordinary
expenses, which is buried upon all the Revenues of the Empire. The Grand Vizir
and the great Teftardar, or Superintendent of the Treasure keep the Keys, But
it is sealed only by the Grand Vizir. The other place for the Treasure is more
important: it is within the Quarter of the Sultans lodging, or most commonly
under the Chamber where he sleep, taking his rest upon the subject of his
disquiet. This is under the change and care of the (...), who is a white
Eunuch, and a Favorite as the Prince; he has one key and the Emperor
another: The Treasure which is said to yearly there, is that which he sp^ out
of the Revenues of Egypt: When they have paid the (...) of Ca^re, their
Commanders, and others which are the force and defense of that rich Kingdom
there (...) usually (...) thousand Sultanians, Two hundred and forty thousand
pounds sterling.
which makes two (...) four hundred thousand Livers of French money. Besides
this Treasure the jealousy of Turkish Emperor (...) ^other in the Serrail of
the Sultana's, in (...) where as the Sultanas Queen does lodge, (...) of his
Serrail should enter into it: The doors are (...) Iron, and they will is up as
often as they put any Treasure into it, and they which carry it are Mutes, to
whose silence the Sultanas ^sides the ^^cret: They carry it in great s^^he of
Leather like unto Purses, and let it down into ^mes, which are made of purpose
to keep it: Thus the Money which (...) with gain, is kept with fear, and if
it be lost it is with grief. The Prince which does waste it by his
prodigalities, weakens his Estate, and exposes himself to the dangers of many
violent necessities. That Turkish Monarch which first made the place for the
secret Treasure in the Sultanaes Serrail, was Selym the First, who having
drawn together all the coined Gold which he received of the Revenues of
Caire and other places, he caused it to be moulten, and made a great Ball,
which his dumb Men did roll to put into the Cisternes of this Treasury.
Doubtless, it must needs be very painful to roll it, seeing the weight of
this precious metal is so cumbersome, as it ^^rawes all the World after it.
He himself had the Key of this secret place, making use of his dumb Men, to
the end they should not reveal the rich treasure which he had drawn together.
Amurath the Third did afterward seek a more secret place, under the Chamber
of the Sultana Asachi, (that is to say the crowned) where he caused Cisternes
to be dug to that end: He entered into it four times in the year, and at
every time he put into it above two Millions of Gold: This Prince drew together
more Treasure than any of the rest, having in few years filled those Cisternes
with coined Gold. Wherefore we must not wonder if the Turks Armies be so
strong, seeing they furnish them with so many sinews; if they vanquish and
triumph, seeing they have both Men and Money in abundance: But rather we have
cause to wonder that they do not get all the rest of the World: Iugurtha Roma
egressus, came saepe tacitus respicicus, postrem^grave; ^risse sertur; vrbem
^^nal^^, and mature perituram, s^emptorem inueneris, S^ hist. de bello Iugurth.
For what is there in it that is not to be sold for Money? The King of the
Numidians had reason to say in beholding that City which was the seat of the
most powerful Monarchy of the Earth: A City that is to be sold, is nere its
ruin, if it find a buyer. Men have given the Turkish Emperors that fearful
greatness which they enjoy, but Money has bought the men.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Revenues of the Turkish Emperor in general and in
particular, and of the extent thereof*
THe greatness of Monarchies consists chiefly in three things, in the number
of men, in the extent of Countries, and in the abundance of his annual
Revenues. Which three things are found in Eminency, above all other Estates
of the World, in the Turks Empire: His Armies are many times 400000. fighting
men or more; the Towns and Champion Country are inhabited and abundantly
peopled, by the Law of their Religion and State, which forces Men to marry
being five and twenty years old, and they have liberty to keep as many
Concubines as they are able to feed. The yearly Reuenew is proportionable in
this abundance: We may comprehend it in two sorts* In the ordinary Reuenew
which is always equal, and does not alter; and in the extraordinary and
casual. The ordinary amounts yearly to twenty Millions of Gold; the
extraordinary is not less, but more uncertain, for it is not raised but upon
Escheates and casual things; as when the Turks die without Heirs, all their
goods come unto the Prince; If they leave any Children, he takes only ten in
the hundred* most of the rich Bashaes, and wealthy men of the Court, leave the
best of their Estates to their Prince, although they have Children: For being
all slaves by the fundamental Law of the S^^^e, the Sultan seizes upon their
Palaces of their most precious moueables, and does not suffer that the great
summers of Money which they leave should be otherwise employed, but to fill the
Cofers of his Chasna, or Treasury. Besides all this he is the first and chief
principal Steward of the Benefices of his Empire: For if any pious person
according to his Religion, leaves any great Legacies to the Priests of his Law,
to read the Alc^r^, or to perform some other devotion after their manner, he
looks what is necessary for the nourishment and entertainment of a number of
Priests, which are appointed, not according to the Laws of Excess, but in
terms of modesty and Ecclesiastical Sobriety: He causes it be delivered
unto them, and puts the rest into his Cofers. So as he that could justly
calculate the Revenewes of the Turkish Empire, without doubt he should find it
to exceed forty Millions yearly, as well the Ordinary as the Casual: whereunto
no Monarch of the Earth does come near.

They which have seen the Turks Court, dwelt in Constantinople, and conuerst
with the natural Citizens thereof, understand the greatness of the Annual
Revenues of this spacious Empire. And others who have not traveled so far,
to attain unto this particular knowledge, will not call this truth in
question, if they consider the vast extent of the Othuman Empire; for the
Sovereign Princes thereof are Lords of Afric; they possess a part of
Barbary, they rule beyond Thu^^ and Argier; they draw Tributes from the Crowns
of Fesse and Morocco. They are Kings of high and low Egypt: they force
obedience in Asia: The three Arabiaes, that is to say, the Stony, the Desert,
and the Happy, acknowledge no other Lord: The Holy Land suffers the rigor of
their command, which is absolute in Syria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldaea, a part of
Persia does acknowledge them: Media and Assiria are theirs: Armenia the less
bows under their Laws, and a part of the greater, with the Country of
Mongrelia: All Asia the lesser obey them, and in it the Provinces of Caramania,
Calicia, Cappad^cia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Gallacia, Phrygia, Bichynia,
Lydia, Caria, and Magnesia: The Emperor of Trebisonde acknowledges them for
Masters: Their power is not less in Europe, which is the goodliest, the most
flourishing and the ciuillest part in the World: All Greece, as Thr^^;
Macedonia, Bulgaria, Polopos^ now called Mor^a, B^sina, and Ser^ia, do what
they command: Sla^ia is subject unto them: A part of Sa^, Dasia, Hungaria, and
Valachia are peopled by them: The Provinces which lie upon the black Sea and
the Archipelagus, belong wholly unto the Turkes^ and the Islands of the
Mediterran^an Sea, which make the greatest number yield unto their (...). They
have (...) from the Venetians the Crowns of G^ and Jerusalem that goodly Island
of Rhodas, leaving (...) in that Sea under the obedience of the Christians, but
Candoe, Sicely, Corfon and Malta. Thus the (...) of the great and redoubted
Turkish Empire, (...) North at the River Tanais, the most famous bounds (...)
E^rope: Toward the South it joins with the Countries of Preste-Iean, or the
greater Neg^ of ^thi^pia Toward the East it extends its limits to the Persian
Gulf, yea, it passes beyond ^als^t^* and in the wa^ they are (...) Neighbors
to Ragousa a (...). And if God did not restrain the course of their great
prosperities, they would add unto their Monarchy many other Provinces of
Christendom, which the dis^ of Christian Prin^ces, and the careless neglect
of their subjects seen to expose to their Ambition: For if the Sult^ do what
they can to enlarge their Estates, these furnish them occasion by their
divisions.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Grand Seigneurs going forth of Constantinople by Land, and
his return i^ Pomp where ^e displayes to the view of strangers, the
greatness of his (...).
THe Otheman Emperor (...), month at the (...) unto his Subjects, (...) which
they might conceive of him, and (...) dangerous effects of any (...) the Friday
(which is with the Turks (...) to go unto the Mosquee to perform his
devotion, and to sheare himself in public. When he goes forth in this manner
it is usually by the great Gate of his Serrail: He is always on Horseback,
simply attired, and in the same manner as he is in his Palace. His head is
covered with a little Turbant, to be more at his ease: Few Ba^^u's accompany
him, the most part of his train are the men of his Family. The Sonbasse, who
is Captain of the Justice, or as the Knight of the Wa^ch at ps, goes a little
before with fifty Soldiers of his (...), to free the streets from all
encumbrances, which might hinder the Princes passage, and to keep every man in
awe while he passes. His most familiars accompany him, the Eunuchs of his
Chamber; his Pages and therest which attend his person follow him: The Captain
of the Pages, he of the Capigis, and the four Captains of the (...) of his
guard go before him well mounted, and at his horse head there march four
Capigis on foot, and four Solarbis at his sti^ope; These men most commonly are
very tall, (...) being on foot, and the Prince on horse back, their hands must
be equal with his (...)* They have (...) instructious and petitions, which
are preserved on the (...) the which contain complaints of the insolences of
Basha's, the injustices of Cadis or Judges; the theft of T^ftardar^ or
Treasurers, and the other bad behavior of his Officers. The Sultan has in
special care to have these papers collected, which many times poor miserable
men, lying flat on their bellies in sign of humility, and lifting up their
hands offer unto him, the which they present upon the (...) of a Reed: Being
returned unto his Serrail, he (...) them to ^etread, and finds that which
flattery had concealed from him, and learnes these things which (...) of the
most sincere men durst not (...) Presently has gives order, and loses no time
in the search of (...) the wicked to (...) and slip away (...) the power of
their (...) (...) Presently they (...) (...) Royal (...) Many Officers are
^wovel. from their places, which they (...) to (...) Mans^d^, and some others
are put to death: Such is the virtue of these flying Notes and Peti^ions; yet
they use prudence and discretion, and cause the crime to be well ^rred before
they punish: For this cause the Basha's and other great (...) of the Port, who
are i^ssed in th^se (...), are not well pleased when they see their Prince go
forth in public; seeming that the news of their unjust actions should come
unto his ears. In these issues the people bless him with their accla^ai^n^,
and he sal^es (...) by nodding of his (...) ^times, to bind their affections
more unto him, (...) forth handfuls of gold and silver and casts it amongst
them. Two of those (...) which are of either (...) of him, carry in two purses
of V^l^, two little fla^ of gold enrich^ with precious stones, which are full
of boiled water, C^diall and delightful to drink. The Sultan makes use of it,
when he is dry. The rest of his t^i^e come after: The Dwarffes and Iesters make
a part, as the Apes of the Court, which never goes without them, to pre^ (...)
have always something ridiculous (...) all (...) of about (...) hundred.

The Sultans carry in pomp.
These are his issues when he goes from his Serrail ^to Constantinople. But when
he goes out of the (...) the fields to make a glorious return in (...)
followed, and adorned in (...) some foreign Ambassador, and (...) to him of
^^rsia the magnifi^ (...) report to his Master (...) ^ee that has (...) yea
looked upon (...) Envy. He take occasion to (...) of (...), (...) ^sed it
(...) built two (...). The (...) does advertise hi^ (...) to the City, and to
(...) (...) for the way and (...) send from his Country (...) his great men of
the Port, and all his (...) as is fitting at so Royal an entry. Achmat the
First in the year 1612. gives us a president.

A troop of above two thousand men at arms (...) first they were armed and
mou^d as was fitting for (...). A sharely Regiment of Turkish foot, exceeding
(...) followed them: After these came the Cadis or Judges of Constantinople,
with all the Body of Justice, which were many in number: The Talismans and
other Doctoral and Priests of the Al^an in the order of their puft-up gravity,
ma^ched after these Judges, which is the only way of the Justice which they
hold in their life. The Grand Vizir, accompanied with all the other Vizirs, and
the Bashaes and Beglierbyes of the Empire, made so sta^y a Body, as in seeing
them, a man might say they were so (...) things, who (...) by an extraordinary
miracle drawn themselves together, much less to have taken them for the
slaves of the Othoman (...): When these were past; there followed the ^en of
the Serrail, or the officers of the (...) with the to^ of their (...) The first
(...) then on foot, who fed ten goodly (...) other Turks, with royal (...),
whereof the (...) the Dirt and ^word of (...) Gold, (...) with precious stones:
the Saddle was (...) and glistering with Diamonds: The S^^s (...) with strings
of gold, at the (...) did (...) ground two great men of rich Oriental Persian
upon the Saddle they had cast a long Horse cloth, of rich Cloth of Gold, (...)
ordered so thick with (...)* as they (...) (...) follower so like order, (...)
(...) either of the^ (...) (...) presented by the French (...) negligent care
of the (...) from hunting. The (...) well (...) (...) goodly entry, with a band
of young men simply attired, entertained for their Services, with all the other
Pages of the Serrail. The Ambassador of Persia, the chief subject of this
magnificence, caused to be cast before his Lodging when the Sultan past, a
hundred clothes of Silk: the Archers of his Guard took them up and kept them
for themselves.

This Pomp is made when as the Turk is in good terms with the Persian: But
when as they differ, and that matters are disposed to war, the estate of
things change. The Turk (...) show in his entry before the Ambassador of
Persia, of such Soldiers which he has in Constantinople and thereabouts: and
entering into the City, from his Country Palace of Da^ Basha, he marches
about the streets with above a hundred and fifty thousand fighting men well
armed; as Amarath the Third did a li^ before he sent his Army into Persia,
where he defeared his Enemies, and get in a short time twelve rich Provinces
from the Persian. When as this Prince had made show of so many war like tro^pe
to the Ambassador of Persia, who was to (...) wi^h admiral of (...) some
tribute which had (...) he sent him (...) by one of his Bashaes then all the
(...) and (...) which he had s^ene in Constantinople, were but the (...) which
be kept in (...), and that he should (...) of the great ^mber which he had in
field; the which being led into his Masters Country, they would (...)
Commanding him in the (...) of Constantinople within three days, (...) go
into Persia, there to attend his slaves which would (...) Turkish (...) and
(...) place.

CHAP. XVIII. The Grand Seigneurs going to Sea, to (...) himself.
SEeing that the Othoman Monarch domin^es over the best parts of the Earth, and
extends the power of his Empire upon the waves of the Sea, it is fit and
reasonable he should take his recreation and pleasure upon either (...). The
precedent Chapter has (...) going ^ by land: This shall describe him taking
his pleasure at Sea, where we may follow him without danger; for (...) never
imbarques himself but the wind^ are still, the (...) are calm, and the
superficies of the water p^ and (...). He goes out of his Serrail by one of the
Gates of his goodly Gardens, which have a prospectes the Sea, whose (...) with
many Pillars of P^phyry: Her into his (...) called in the Turkish Language
(...), having above (...) ^anks and (...) to a Bank* He (...) his self (...)
the Po^pe, the which is gorgeously (...) with Vel^t and such like stuff,
imbroidered with gold. He (...) Cushions of Crimson Vel^* which serue^ him for
seats (...) the Turkish (...) His (...) Familiars, Eunuchs of his Serrail
(...) him: Only the B^stangi^assi, which is his great G^rdin* and his Pilot in
his recreation, may sst in his (...) more commodiously, whereof (...). A troop
of young (...) with such (...) th^rough (...). They (...) and have Caps of the
same (...) Oar with such care, as they employ themselves without failing:
four other Caques go some little space before, to aduertize all other Vessels
to pass out of the way, or to stay, and not to pester by their encounter the
way of this redoubted Sultan: they do it speedily (what is there in the Lou^
which does not obey him?) and seeing him far off salute his greatness and by
the acclamations of their joy, wish him all happiness: Some other Caiques
follow his, in the which are those of his family, to whom he would give leave,
to be partakers of these pleasures. During this, he has a wise lesson of the
vanity of greatness, by the consideration of the inconstancy of the Element
which bears him, if he would apply his mind unto it: But he passeeh that time
in the ordinary trade of Kings, which is to raise up, and overthrow the
fortunes of men by the effects of their love or hatred. For the Bostangi^assi,
who is at his back, with the helm in his hand, and who alone has leave to
speak then unto him, informs him as he pleases of the affairs of his
estate, of the carriage of the Officers of his Crown, of the designs of his
Basha's, and of the insolency of such as he favor above the rest. Sometimes
he delivers the truth nakedly and plain unto him, and sometimes he does
disguise and dissemble it as his passion does advise him, and does cunningly
practice the ruin of those which think themselves assured, and are many times
without crime. A president to ^ch^ (...) ^uch it does imp^r^ them to know the
estate of by themselves* and not by others, and to learn in seeing the
carriage of their subjects, and to do in their Monarchy, as shepherds do in
their troops, have a care of them, for the eye is not circumuented so soon as
the ear, and truth enters seldom or disguised into their Palaces, if they
themselves (...) di^t by the hand. The greatest liars among men remain in
Court, and there do easily vent out their fabulous inventions: Private
interest is the (...) Divinity which they adore to the which they refer the
ambition of their thoughts, the flattery of their disco^rse^ and the malice of
their actions. The Bostangibassi finding his Mastermind be (...) had from all
knowledge of affairs (...) unto a plain Table, he paints thereon what he
pleases, friendship for (...) and hatred for others: He makes the guilty
innocent and the innocent guilty: He raises and ruins according to his humor*
So at the (...) from this (...) walk, the Bas^a's have sometimes felt the
storms of a new disaster in the change of their fortunes: Doubtless the
favors of the Court are very frail and inconstant, seeing that a puff of
wind, a word may overthrow them: And as wind disperseth smoke, so the great
Gardiners discourse does cause the greatness of the Bassa's of the Port to
wither and fade. The which should teach the Favorites of Princes, seeing their
fortunes are transitory and fading, to employ their credit in virtuous actions,
which may serve them for a solid support, honor their lives, eternize their
memory with posterity, and preserve them from ruin. But to speak these thing*
to most part of those of that condition, were to sing unto the deaf, and to
show colors to the blind: for the great prosperities of the Court blind the
mind, and dull the judgments.

When as the Sultan has glutted his desires, with the delights of this Marine
walk, and filled his ears with the Bostangibassi's tales, he returns to the
Serrail, where being landed, the Azamoglans draw the Caiques out of the water,
and lodge them in Vaults made for the purpose, which are within the walls of
this Palace: The which they do, and put them to Sea again commodiously and
with great facility.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Grand SEIGNEVRS Physicians, Chyrurgians and Apothecaries.
GReat Princes in the midst of their humane felicities are not freed from the
crosses and discommodities of life, and much less from the infirmities that
afflict them, to the end their pride might be humbled, and they should
acknowledge themselves to be men. The Sultan Emperor of the Turks seeks ease
for his griefs as well as other Monarchs: He entertaines usually for he
service of his person, ten Physicians of the most skillful of the East: Most
part are Jews, for the men of that Nation study carefully in Physic, and
prosper well. And seeing that the Turks neglecting Learning do not attain to
those Sciences which are necessary to make a good Physician. Amidst this number
there is one superior to the rest, called in their Language Lecchin Bassi, or
the first Physician: Their entertainments are great, and the Presents they
receive make them rich: The first of them is reverenced in the Serrail, they
serve him with the same bread they give unto the Sultan, which is a dainty kind
of bread made of the Grain which is gathered at Bursia in Natolia, reserved
for the Princes mouth: He has what favor he can desire in Court, and his
Master honors him extraordinarily: Necessity is a powerful Demon, and his
virtue makes him also to be honored. But the merit of Physic has made it so
commendable in the World, and in Court, that many Kings have crowned it with
their own Diadems: See what Marcilius Ficinus a learned Florentine does write
in the first Book in the Epistle to Thomas Valerius a Physician.
Sabor and Gyges have practiced it in their estates of Media: Sabid married it
to his Scepter of Arabia: Methridatus to that of Pontus: and Hermes held it as
great a glory to be a Physician in Egypt as to be a Sovereign King.

When the Sultan is sick, his Physicians are called to visit him; if they hold
his infirmity to be of continuance, they are presently lodged in the secret
Serrail which is the Princes quarter, in Chambers near unto him: They give
them two servants to attend them; and they may not go out of the Palace, what
necessity soever does press them, until the Sultan be recovered or dead. But
when he is in health, they are only bound to go three of them every morning,
into the Apothecaries shop in the Serrail, and there to attend until noone, if
there be any need of their help.

The Sultans Chyrurgions and Barbers have less liberty: They may not go out
of the Serrail where they lodge, but on the day of Bairam, which is the Turks
Easter, unless it be by the Princes permission: The youngest of this
profession serve him as Pages, some others are Eunuchs, which attend the
service of his Chamber: These shave him when he desires, and wash him in his
Bathes, when he goes to temper the heat which troubles him, or to satisfy
the commandment of his Law.

The Apothecaries are also lodged in the Serrail, their number exceeds both the
others: So their Service is more ordinary. There are eighteen Masters which
work, and three hundred Boys which serve them, most of which go once a year
to search for Simples on the Mountains and Valleys for the composing of their
Physic: Four Masters most expert in their Art are Superior to all those:
They call them the Priors. The shop of these Apothecaries deserves so many men
as serves this great Prince, it is above fifty fathom long, and half in
breadth: The great Vessels which do beautify it, furnish it abundantly with
all sorts of Oiles, Sirrops, Ointments, Waters, and other liquors proper for
Physic: On the side of it are four goodly Chambers full of diverse sorts of
Drugs. Besides these there are two others situate toward the Gardens, where
during the Spring which does enamile the Earth with flowers, and the Summer
which does crown it with Fruits, they draw the essences, and distill the
Waters which are fit for Physic. But in all these Vessels, amidst these Drugs
and diverse Quintessences, they find not any remedy which can mortify the
amorous Passions of the Prince, wherewith he is continually afflicted: They
devour his leisure, Null^ emor est medica^ilu herbis. Quid. Metamor^l. 1. fab.
9
interrupt the exercises which are more worthy of his person; and ^eiect him
under that which he is, and make him a slave to his slaves: for loving them
desperately, he lives more in them then in himself.

The end of the first Book.
THE GENERAL HISTORY OF THE Serrail, and of the Grand SEIGNEVRS Court. The
second BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the public Diuan in the Serrail, where they dispatch and judge
all Affairs.
IN the second Court of the Serrail, where as a goodly Fountain, covered with
the shadow of many pleasing Cypress trees which enuiron it, powers forth a
clear stream, as if it were liquid Christ all, is built upon the left hand,
at the end of a long Gallery, a great Hall, where as the Sultan causes the
Diuan to be kept four days in the Week; that is to say, on Saturday, Sunday,
Monday and Tuesday. This word Diuan signifies a College, whither many men
repair: whereas they distribute Justice equally to any that demand it, Let
this be spoken without violating the respect, which low unto such persons
which relleue the public by their care in Suits, of whom I have no intent to
speak in this place.
for what cause soever: And the greatest benefit they find, is that the parties
are admitted to deliver their own causes, having no necessity to consume
their goods and their time, (whereof the loss is irreparable) among wrangling
Pettifoggers, who enrich themselves by other men's follies. The Turks policy
gives this case unto the people, that they will not allow of any: Whosoever
has an action against any other, he brings him to the Diuan by the fist, and
the other dares not refuse: there by the Justification of their Acts, if they
leave any, or by a summary and verbal deposition of two Witnesses, the cause
is judged with great facility, and the execution is not difficult: Or if the
judgment be refered after the audience, and committed to some one of the
Judges, the importune delays, and the horror of wrangling which is practiced
in France, being not admitted among the Turks, hinder not a speedy dispatch.

The Officers which assist at this Diuan are the Basha or Grand Vizir,
Lieutenant General of the whole Empire, who precides: The other Vizirs or
Basha's accompany him, the two Beglierbeys, the one of Nat^lia, and the other
of Romania, two of the prime Dignities of the Crown, after the Grand Vizir:
The two Cadilesquers or great Judges of Armies Superior to all the Cadis or
Judges of the Empire: The three Teftardars, or general Treasurers for the
ordinary and extraordinary treasure, who keep the Sultans Cofers, and receive
that great Reuenew which is levied in his Estates: The Nassans Bassa or high
Chancellor: The Netangi, who is as the Secretary of Estate with us, which
serves mo^ethly, who signs the Commandments, and dispatches with the Royal
Signature: The Bassa's Secretary with a great number of Iafitschi or Notaries,
which are as Regist^s: The Cha^ux Bassi who is chief of all the Cha^ux of the
(...), which carries the Sultans Commandments both within and without the
Estate, they go in Embassies, although they be but vild and base Messengers,
and execute the Decrees of the Basha's; is at the doo^e of this Dauan with a
great member of his company, to execute that which the Grand Vizir shall
command: He carries a Staff of silver in his hand for the mark of his
authority. And all these men as well Basha's as others of inferior quality,
come into this Hall of the Diuan by four of the clock in the morning, with a
commendable diligence, to discharge their duties in the administration of
justice, until twelve.

The places and ranks are observed according to the eminency of their
Offices: The Grand Vizir sits first in the midst of two long forms fastened to
the walls, which look toward the door, like unto the Seats of Audience for
justice in France: On his right hand (which is the less honorable in Turkey)
the Bassa's seat themselves: The two Cadilesquers are on the left; He of
Romania or Greece, as the most noble Province, precedes him of Natolia: At the
entry of the Diuan on the left hand, are set upon a form by themselves the
three Teftardars: They have at their backs all the Notaries or Registers,
sitting on the ground with paper and pens in hand, to write what shall be
commanded. On the otherside of the Hall opposite to the Teftardars, is another
form set apart, where the Netangi has also a pen in his hand, being environed
with his Clerks and Deputies. The parties which demand justice, being many in
number, are placed in the midst of the Diuan, with so great a respect and
silence as they dare not spit. This public Council is like unto that of the
parties in the Louver, with this difference, that in the Diuan every man is
admitted for any cause whatsoever, All these Officers being thus placed, the
parties plead their own Causes, and they direct their speech to the Grand
Vizir, who precides in this Council: The other Bassa's never speak: If he
does judge that the business propounded ought to be presently dispatched, he
then decides the controversies betwixt the parties: If it require a longer
inquisition, he referres the judgment to one of the Cadilesquers, if the
matter belong to the Civil Law: If it concern the Treasure or Accounts, a
Teftardar is committed: and when there is Question of any falsehood, or the
verification of a hand or writing, he deputes a Netangi. The affairs of
greater importance, or differences of consequence, which concern strangers,
he reserues them to his own judgment.

These employments detain them from the break of day until noone: When that
comes, one of the Stewards of the Serrail appointed for the Diuan, presents
himself in the midst of it, to whom the Grand Vizar makes a sign to bring
Dinner: Then the parties retire, and the Diuan is free for the Rasha's; the
service is made with that frugality that is fitting for Judges: For a Table,
they bring before the Grand Vizir a plain stool of wood, where on they set a
silver Basin, and sometimes of Copper blancht, round in form, and as big as
the bottom of a pipe, upon the brims thereof they set many lo^ues, in the
midst the meat, which they serve one dish after another; One or two of the
Rassa's are called to eat with the chief of the Council; they bring to every
one a Napkin, wherewith they cover their knees: Their meats are Mutton, wild
Foul, Pigeons, and sometimes Pullets; the drink is of Sorbet after their
manner, made of water, the juice of Citrons, and of Sugar, for the Grand Vizir
alone; the rest quench their thirst with fall water: Their fruit is a Tart or
some Cake, wherewith they end their Dinner, which does not continue above half
an hour: The like is ordained for the Cadilosquers, ^eftariturs, and all the
rest of the Diuan: Their slaves dine at the same time. The Bassa Captain of
the Sea, is also of the number of those which assist in the Diuan, he takes his
place in the last rank of all the other Bassa's if he be not a Bassa Vizir;
in that case he mounts higher toward the Grand Vizir in the order of his
inception.

Dinner being thus ended without pomp, without excess, and without
dissolution, the Grand Vizir disposes of the most notable resolutions which
have been taken in the Diuan, and prepares himself to god and make report
thereof to the Grand Seigneur; On Sunday and Tuesday, which are the days of
Diuan for public affairs, and the Council of Estate. This Prince descends
to that effect into a Chamber which is near unto it: being arrived, he calls
his Officers unto to him one after another. The Capigilar Agassi carries this
command. He holds in his hand a long staff of silver, like unto a Beadles
Mace: First of all they call the Cadilesques, they rise up, make a low
reverence to the Grand Vizir, and follow this Mace-bearer and the Chaoux Bassi,
who is joined unto him with his other staff of silver: Under their conduct
they go before the Grand Seigneur into his Chamber, they reverence him and in
a manner adore him: For there is not any Sovereign Prince upon the earth,
whose subjects stand in more fear, nor yield him so much reverence. After this
they yield him an account of their places, then they retire backwards like men
that had consulted with some great Divinity, and so go to their houses. The
Mace-bearers go to fetch the Teftardars, these yield the like salutation to
the Grand Vizir that the others had done; they go before the Grand Seigneur,
they speak unto him of his treasure and of the affairs of their charge; and
having satisfied him, they retire like the rest, with their heels first. This
custom always to turn their face in retiring is not only practiced with the
Prince, but also observed with the Bassa's, who according to the Laws of
Turkish Ciuility, would hold it a contempt, if in parting from them they should
turn the back. After the Teftardars, the Captain of the Sea if he had been in
the Diuan, goes to relate unto the Grand Seigneur, the estate of his Vessels of
War, with that of Arms and Munition which are in his Arsenall. The Aga or
Colonel General of the Ianizaries, which are the Turkish foot* enters not
into the Diuan, he remains in the second gate of the Serrail, being set under
a Gallery assisted by the Soldiers: He goes first of all to audience to his
Master; and returns to his seat, until all the rest be retired; for he goes
last out of the Serrail: The Vizirs go one after one unto the Sultan, and
being come into his presence they frame themselves to an incomparable respect:
They join their hands, and bend down their heads and eyes to the ground, and
stand silent: For amongst them only the Grand Vizar may speak unto the Prince;
He comes last with a grave pace, as the party that bears the burden of all
the affairs which have been treated in the Diuan; he yields an account unto
his Master, who confirms the judgments, or disanuls them, as he thinks good.
Moreover, he leaves him instructions in writing, in a Purse of Crimson raised
Velvet, the which he laye^ before him with unspeakable reverence and
humility; then he retires like the rest, unless the Emperor stays him
longer to inform himself of the estate of his most important affairs.

Thus the Turks do justice to men, whereof the quick expedition might
repair the defects which they meet with, and yet in that place particularly
they are reasonably exact to yield unto every man that which is due unto him:
The fear of their own ruin if they had no virtue, were sufficient to make
the balance eeuen and straight. For the Turkish Princes are accustomed to go
by one of their Chambers unto a Window, only shut up with a Lattice, the which
looks into the Diuan directly over the head of the Grand Vizir: From thence he
hears what is spoken, and treated; with the complaints of parties, and the
Decrees of Judges; if iniquity do sway the minds and mouths of those, to deny
unto the weakest the relief which justice does owe them, against the violent
oppressions of the Mighty, the punishment which he takes is very exemplary.
Doubtless, as the foundations uphold a house, so justice is a strong support
unto an Empire, without the which it cannot long subsist. Kings, whose
principal office is to yield it unto men, ought to cherish it above all
things; It does advance them above other men, and makes them to reign happily;
and without it violence draws all disorders in their Estates, troubles them,
and ruins them in the end: They themselves without justice, are like unto
those bodies which are troubled with the falling sickness, whom weakness and
pain afflicts: This divine virtue should not only be the soul of their
Decree, but the soul of their soul: In justice they shall possess all the
other virtues, for it contains them all.

CHAP. II. Of the Azamoglans, or Children of the Tribute of base condition
which serve in the Serrail, and elsewhere.
THe Christians labor so profitably to enlarge the Turks Empire, as they not
only furnish them with occasions, by their wretched division, but they also
breed them up men, which in time are the most generous of their troops, the
greatest in their Court, and the most triumphant in Towns and Christian
Provinces: But in this last, force and the constraint which these Barbarians
use toward them, makes them more excusable, than when they abandon the reason
and the interests of Christianity, to the blind passions of a fatal discord:
For they see come into their houses, thoroughout all Greece or Morea, and in
the Country of Albania, a troop of the Grand Seigneurs Capigis, deputed to
make the exaction of the richest, and the most exquisite Tribute, that can be
levied in a Country, the which is of men, the best proportioned, and enricht
with the gifts of Nature. There they choose the soundest, the goodliest, and
the most active of all their Children, out of every three one, the which they
do every third year; and having drawn together above two thousand, they lead
them to Constantinople. At their arrival, they attire them all in Robes of
Cloth of diverse colors; they give unto every one a yellow Cap of Felt, like
unto a Sugar-loafe. In this Equipage they are led before the Grand Vizir, who
being accompanied with all the other Bassa's and Ministers of the Serrail, he
makes choice of those that are most active for the war: These young men are set
apart, and conducted into the Serrail by the Bostangibassi, or chief of the
Gardiners, and a part of them distributed where they wanted. Then they
circumcise them: being children of Christians they become young Turks, and for
an inconstant fortune of the World and of the Court, they lose the eternal
happiness of Heaven, in the way whereof their first belief had directed them.
They cause them to learn the Turkish Tongue, and if their spirits be capable
of more, to read and write. But all indifferently are instructed to wrestle,
run, leap, shoot, dart an Azegaye, and in all other Exercises, which are fit
for them which will make profession of Arms.

The rest of this goodly choice of the young Children of the Tribute is in the
power of the Grand Vizir; He does lodge them, and distribute them diversely;
some are sent into the Sultans Gardens and Houses of Pleasure; others are put
into the Gallions and Vessels at Sea, which make Voyages for the Sultana's; The
Patrons charge themselves, and are bound to restore them when they are
demanded. They place a good number in Artificers shops to learn diverse trades,
whereof they may serve for a Squadron when they shall be Ianizaries and
especially in the time of War. The Basha's and all the great Men of the Court
have their part; They are delivered unto them by their Names, Countries, Marks
of their face or elsewhere, and by the color of their hair; they bind
themselves in writing, which is contained in a Book for that purpose, to the
end that if the necessity of the War should force the Captains to fill up
their companies, in the place of those that are dead, they may take these to
that effect. But most commonly they give the rudest and grossest to these
Basha's; and they employ them in their Stables, Kitchins, and other base
Offices of their Houses. They which remain of these Azamoglans, are sent into
diverse Seminaries, under the conduct of diverse Eunuchs which have the charge,
and take the care to breed them up, to be one day capable to bear Arms, and
to serve in the War in quality of Ianizaries. These Children thus placed the
Grand Vizir represents them in a Book to the Grand Seigneur. This Prince
assigns them an entertainment according to his pleasure, and augments the pay
which the great custom does allow them, which is of four or five A^pres by
the day besides their nourishment and apparel: He assigns the assignation
with his own hand, and sends it by the Vizar to the Testardar, to the end he
may be careful to pay it according to the order: He sees them every three
Months, and visits them one after another, calling them by their names, to
know the number of those which are dead, and to see how they be fed and
governed.

But the Azamoglans appointed for the service of the Serrail, are employed
about base and vile things as the meanest of all those which are of the Royal
Family: They serve for Laborers in their buildings, they employ them in their
Stables, Kitchins, Gardens, to cut wood, and to carry it, to lead Dogs to the
field as their Servants, and to do whatsoever their Superiors command them,
whereof some have charge of tens, others of hundreds, and these are also under
the authority of the Chicaia, or Steward of the Bostangibassi; the toil they
undergo, the pains they take, and the miseries which they endure make them
the most patient men in the World, and their Masters instruct them to
mortification by most rigorous courses: the least fault is rewarded with fifty
blows with a Cudgel, the which are soundly set on. But their baseness is not
without honor nor recompense: There are charges and eminent Offices among them
to the which they succeed by the order of their antiquity, and their patience
may make them hope and aspire to the place of a steward, yea of Bostangibassi,
to show that there is nothing so base but long labor and invincible
sufferance, may advance in time. For to come unto the dignity of Bostangibassi,
is to be familiar with the Prince, to be great in Court, to speak unto him
when he walks, to conduct him at Sea, and to govern his Brigandine, and to
have an honorable privilege to wear a Turbant in the Serrail, which is no
less than among the great Men of Spain to speak unto the King with their
heads covered.

The Gates of the Serrail are the limits of their courses, they never go forth
upon any occasion unless the Bostangibassi leads them with him when he goes
out of the Palace to execute the Princes commandments, and to ruin the
fortune of some great Man of the Court, as he did in the year 1614. That of
Bassa Nassuf, whom he caused to be strangled in his Bed, for these secret
Commissions are most commonly put into his hands: When he takes what number of
Azamoglans shall be needful, he slips in amongst these, the children of
natural Turks at the entreaty of his friends, yet with the consent of the
Sultan, and places them where they may be advanced, their Lodgings and abode
are about the walls of the Serrail toward the Sea, where they dwell in
Chambers, they have their Bathes, their Stoues, and their Kitchins, and live at
their own will; for they have their allowance apart: when they have leisure,
they employ it in fishing, they sell what they take, and reserve the gains to
themselves: They never see the Sultan but when he comes to walk in his
Gardens, or goes a hunting, then they follow him, and Quest in the fields like
Spaniels. They do not supply the companies of foot, when there is any want of
Ianizaries, out of this number: If they go out of the Serrail, it is to be
better bred in other Seminaries, whilst they are young: or when they are of
riper age, the Grand Seigneur gives some of them to his Favorites, whom he
sends out of the Serrail, as Bassa's of Caire, Damas, or some other Governments
of his Empire; they make use of these Azamoglans for their Stewards, Quirries,
Treasurers; and such like Offices in their Family: Moreover, when the Prince
goes a Voyage, or to the Wars, he leads a great number with him to pitch his
Tents, unlade his stuff, and to do other manual works.

CHAP. III. Of the Azamoglans, of better breeding and condition, who in time
attain unto the Lignities of the Turkish Empire.
Virtue has this proper to her natural beauty, to make her self to be
generally esteemed, and acknowledged even by most barbarous Nations: she does
not only make those admirable which do possess it, but does also give the
Title of their Nobility to their Posterity, and makes them commendable. The
children that are well borne taken for Tribute from the Christians, make trial
thereof in Turkey, whereas the Turks honor their Birth, and separate them
from the rest, to be better bred and instructed in Exercises which make them
worthy of the greatest Officers of the Empire: They teach them the Texts of
Mahomets Law, the ornament of the Turkish Learning, they instruct them in
arms, and in all things which may add perfection to men, which are to attend
continually near unto a great Monarch. They are all Christian slaves; but we
shall see in the course of their fortune, that their slavery is a way, by the
which patience does lead them to the liberty to command Provinces, or whole
Realms: and their condition does teach us, that it is a happy infelicitie, and
an unfortunate happiness.

The Capinga or great Chamberlain of the Serrail, brings some into their
number, borne of natural Turks, commendable for their good dispositions, yet
seldom and with the Princes leave. For the custom of the Empire in its most
ancient Constitutions requires that such Children should be Christians
Renegadoes, the noblest and most civil that can be found. So when the
advantages of the War, give unto the Turkish Armies victories against
Christians, or the taking of their Towns, and they find therein young children
to the age of twelve or thirteen years, the Bassa's reserve them for the
service of the Grand Seigneur. For the Turks hold an opinion, that the
Nobility of blood makes spirits generous and inclinable to virtue; especially
when the care of a good education does polish and make perfect the gifts of
Birth, as they do in the Serrail with these young men. The Discipline, which
they cause to observe is, so rigorous, as whosoever performs it in all points,
becomes the most modest, the most patient, and the most mortified man living.
The Masters which have charge of their persons, are white Eunuchs, severe,
froward, fantastique, and suspicious, as most of your gelded men be. They never
speak unto them but in choler, and spare not their Bastinadoes, whereof they
are very charitable; they make them watch and endure all pains; so as many of
these young men, when they come to the age of twenty years, they seek all
means to fly this severity: And although they know that they are in the
course of a great fortune; yet they had rather get out of the Serrail, with the
simple quality of Spain or Mutaferaga, which is like unto our Men at Arms or
light house, than to suffer any longer the rigours of this Discipline. Their
number is not certain, the Serrail receives as many as they send; but usually
they are about three hundred. The order and method wherewith they breed them
up, does testify that the Turks have retained nothing of barbarous but the
name, and have sent us the effect.

1. Oda.
They call the forms where they instruct them Oda; this word signifies a
Chamber: They ordain four, by the which these young men must pass, before
they attain to Offices, whereunto the capacity which they learn does advance
them. In the first are placed all those of this condition, which enter into the
Serrail at a childish age: There they circumcise them if they were not before;
being made Turks, they teach for their first Lesson Silence, and the
Countenance they must carry for a mark of their Servitude, and withal a
singular Reverence toward the Sultan, which is when they are near him to hold
down their Head and Eyes, and to have their Hands joined, or their Arms
crossed. For most of those which s^rue the person of the Oth^man Prince, never
speak unto him, nor look him in the face. At their coming into the Serrail
the Prince sees them, causes them to be enrolled in a Register, by their names
and Countries, and commands the ^^^^ardar to be exact in the present payment of
the Money which is appointed for their entertainment. A white Eunuch ouer-seer
of all the other Eunuchs which teach them, as it were the Principal of a
College, takes also care to see them well instructed. After the first Precepts
they teach them to read and write, and above all to pray after the Turkish
manner, and the worship of their Religion, with an incredible care, (...) the
space of six or seven years, which is the time they remain in this Oda.

After this long term they pass unto the second Oda, 2. Oda.
where more understanding Masters than the first, teach them the Persian,
Arabian, and Tartar Languages, and practice them in reading all sorts of
written Books (for the Turks use no other.) Moreover to speak Turkish
elegantly, the which they may do by the knowledge of those three Tongues,
whereof the Turkish Language seems to be composed. For to hear them speak
they do easily discern the difference there is betwixt them and those which
are not bred up in like manner. They add to these exercises of the mind, those
of the Body: In this Oda they teach them to handle the Sword or Semiter, to
shoot, to cast a Battle-axe, to dart a Ia^ehn or Azagaye, and to run lightly;
all this is done in places separated from the Oda, at certain hours appointed
with great attention, where the Eunuchs spare not their Cudgels, but beat them
soundly for the least fault. They continue six years in these Exercises, after
which they are Men and sit for all pain and labor.

Then they come unto the third Oda, 3. Oda.
where they do not forget what they had learned before, but practice it still;
and moreover they learn to be good Horsemen, and to vault with disposition, to
be the morefit and active for the War: Every one according to his inclination
does likewise learn an occupation, to serve the Princes person; one to make
Turbants, another to shave Hair, to cut his Nails, to wash him in the Bath,
to make clean and fold his Clothes handsomely; some to lead Dogs to the Wood,
others to be skillful in Hawks and Hawking, to serve for Stewards or Queries,
to be employed in the Chamber, and to other Offices necessary for the service
of great Princes, wherein they grow to that perfection in the space of five
years as they are able to instruct others: Whilst they are in this third Oda,
they may not see any one abroad but with great difficulty, and in the presence
of an Eunuch; all conversation with others is prohibited, but with those of
their Oda: But they must do it with all modesty and honesty: For if the Eunuch
who is their Superior, shall enter into the least suspicion of the contrary,
they shall be assured to be soundly beaten, either upon the soles of their feet
or upon the back after the Turkish manner, so as many times they leave them
for dead. They sleep in long Rooms which may contain fifty little Beds made
only of Matteresse: They lie in their clothes, in the night time they have many
lights burning, their Eunuchs sleep among them, betwixt every ten Beds lies
an Eunuch, to keep them in awe: Day and night their Masters examine them, to
see if they be firm and constant in the belief of the Alcoran: For being
ready to pass to the fourth Oda, and from thence to the greatest Offices of
the Empire; if they had in their souls any love of their first belief, they
might procure some great prejudice to the Turks estate. Having employed all
care, and finding them truly Mahometans, they conduct them to the fourth Oda.

4. Oda.
At their entry into it, they enter their names and Countries again into another
Book, for all pass not into this last place of their continual travels: But
those only which have finished their time in the other form, and by their
diligence have made themselves capable to serve the Prince and State
profitably: As labor and rest touch one another, so the end of one is the
sweet beginning of the other; These men find it in this Oda, their Pension is
augmented; instead of cloth wherewith they were formerly attired, the Sultan
gives them Robes of Silk and Cloth of Gold: They have liberty to converse,
with the greatest men of the Serrail and with the Bassa's, who seeing them
entering into great places, adore the Sun rising of their Fortunes, make them
great Presents, and seek to win their friendship by rich gifts. Besides
these pleasing signs of a new happiness, whereas they were before all shaven,
they suffer their hair to grow upon their Temples, to cover their Ears, an
assured sign, that they shall be speedily of the Royal Chamber, they follow
the Grand Seigneur in all his walks (where he is without women) and out of
their number he takes the most familiar Officers of his person, and of his
Favorites.

As the Sechletar Aga, who carries his Sword.

The Chioda Aga, which is he that carries the Royal Robe, called C^am^e^.

The Rechioptar, or Rakduntar, he which goes at his Stirrup, when he is on
horseback, or his chief Footman.

The Materagi Aga, he which carries a Vessel of Gold full of water when the
Sultan marches.

The Tubenter Aga, he which does garnish and carry his Turbant.

The Chiamaci Aga, he that does wash his Linen, or his chief Landrer.

The Camedir Bassi, or great Master.

The Chilargi Bassi, or chief Butler.

The Dagangi Bassi, or Master Faulconer.

The Sarrigi Bassi, or chief Cutler.

The Nunasinugi Bassi, or chief Comptroller of the Treasure.

The Turmachi Bassi, or Firnaagi Aga, he that pares his Nails.

The Berber Bassi, or chief Barber.

The Amangi Bassi, he that washes him in the Bath.

The Teskelegi Bassi, the great Secretary, or first Secretary of State.

All which are the most ancient of the fourth Oda, and stand before the Prince
when he comes out of his Chamber, with that respect and reverence which they
learned in their youth in the first Oda; which is to be silent, to hold their
heads down, and with their eyes fixed upon the ground, for they never speak,
nor look their Master in the face; If he commands them any thing, it is by
signs after the manner of dumb men, and they do execute it speedily, they
carry his meat, which they receive at the Court gate from the Stewards hands
who is without, and they deliver it from one to another, until it comes to the
Grand Master, who sets it before the Grand Seigneur. This Prince is much
pleased with the mute conversation of such men, who dare not entertain him but
by signs: he causes them to ride, and to practice running and leaping, he
causes them many times to cast a bar of Iron, and to make such like proofs
of their force and actiuity. He favors them with many Presents, as Robes of
Cloth of Gold, Swords enricht with precious stones, Purses full of Sultanins,
and many other things of value. Moreover to the end that his Agalaris may
gather the more money, to supply the expenses of their Equipage, when they
shall go out of the Serrail with the Titles of Governors of Provinces, he
gives them dispatches for Embassies: These men sell them to the Chaoux, or
bargain with them for a Moietie or more, of the present which they shall
receive from the Prince, to whom they are sent, the which is of no small
importance: For the Princes which hold and depend of the Othoman, when he
confirms them in their Dignities, and sends them the marks thereof, by a gilt
Staff, a Throne, or a Crown, they are bound to give to him that is sent a
Present of that value which is set down in the great custom of the Empire,
the which does tax every one to a certain sum: And of this number is the
Vallachian, the Moldanian, the Transiluanian, the Tartar, and many other
Vassalls, and Tributaries of the Othoman Crown. This Present is divided
betwixt the Chaoux, who receives it, and the Agalari who gave him, or rather
sold him the Commission: Thus they enrich themselves, and make a stock to
furnish themselves upon the first occasion, the which presenting it self by
the death of some Bassa, they are made either Captain of the Sea, or Bassa of
Caire or Damas, or elsewhere. Besides these great and glorious Dignities, the
Grand Seigneur does honor them sometimes with the quality of Musaip, that is
to say, he that may speak unto the Prince, and go to him in private: The
which the Turks esteem above any thing in the Empire, the which the Othoman
Monarchs do for a double intent, both to gratify those whom they love, and
to have men among the greatest of the Court, to inform him of the Bassa's
actions, and to discover their Enterprises against the good of the Estate and
the Princes person. But all the Agalaris are not so bountifully advanced. Those
whom the Sultan will send out of his Serrail, with meaner dignities, he makes
them Aga of the Ianizaries, Spacular Agassi who is Captain of the Spahis, or
at the least Cap^igi Bassi who is chief of the Porters.

When they go out of the Royal Palace, by any great or mean dignity, they
carry with them all the wealth they have gathered together. Many young men whom
a desire of liberty, and a curiosity to see the World, rather than any care
to advance themselves, has made them abandon the exercises of the Oda, and
their importunities have forced the Prince to dismiss them, go forth with the
rest without any quality or office, and with little entertainment by the day:
But when as he that is advanced to the quality of a Bassa, and Governor of
some remote Province, is ready to go out of the Serrail, the Grand Vizir sends
to receive him at the Gate, by his Chicaia, who is a Steward or Ouer-seer of
his house, with a troup of Horse to do him honor, and causes him to be
conducted to his Palace, receives him with all courtesy, gives him many
Presents, and does accommodate him with lodgings for three or four days,
until his own be provided in the City: After that he has given order, he
settles his Family, and gives the chief places, to such as came out of the
Serrail with him, he stays sometime in Constantinople, until his hair be
grown, for he was shaven at his coming forth, and likewise to receive the
Presents which the Sultana's send him, as goodly Linen and rich Works: And
those which the Bassa's present him, as Tapestries, Horses, Robes of Cloth of
Gold, and all sorts of moueables necessary for a man of his condition: He may
be at that time about forty years old, having consumed the best of his days,
in the expectance of this fortune. They of the other Oda's succeed him by the
order of their reception, the which is exactly observed in the Serrail, and
favor cannot deprive any man, if he has not committed some notable fault in
the royal Palace: so as they of the third Oda do partly know by the
succession what shall become of them, and wish daily, that it would please the
Sultan, to send some of his Agalaris to Offices abroad, to the end they may
make place for them.

This new Governor parts not from the Court to go unto his charge, before he
has given thanks to the Capiaga for the care which he has contributed to
his advancement, terming himself obliges unto him, and that he would depend
of him for a perpetual acknowledgement of his favors, entreating him to hold
him in his protection, near unto the Princes person, upon all accidents that
might happen. He makes this Complement in the Serrail, without the Gate of the
Sultan's Quarter; for being once forth he enters no more, unless the Prince
calls for him, to treat with him, concerning the affairs of his charge. Such
is their fortune, which have suffered their actions to be governed by patience,
and have labored to make themselves capable to serve. But such in the choice
which the Othoman Monarch makes of men, bred and severely instructed in their
profession about their persons, to be in time the greatest Officers of their
Empire, where they never advance to such Dignities incapable men, who in the
whole course of their lives, have not learned any thing but to play as Tennice,
to cast the Dice, to speak brutishly, and to practice all sorts of vices.
Wherefore we must not wonder if the Turks Estate prospers, seeing that amidsts
great number of young men, they (...) the choice of the best Wits, to be (...)
up with care under good Discipline, which makes them honest men, and (...) to
the gifts of a happy birth the perfections of (...) must of necessity serve
for the (...) great Man, He that is borne a (...) will (...) them make choice
of the best Wits to supply their Religious House (...) they have always
amongst them most Learned and most rare Men, and as long as they shall follow
this course, they shall make themselves (...), and admirable: Without a
natural disposition, they may well sow, but they shall never reap, and no
man ever made a good Sparrow-hawke of a Buzzard.

CHAP. IV. Of the four White Eunuchs, the chief Men of the Serrail, and of
some other Eunuchs.
WE have said elsewhere that the women's Serrail has no other Guard but black
Eunuchs, which are sent young to the Court by the Basha's of Caire, to be bred
up to that place. The Sultans Serrail receives none but white, the which are
chosen in their infancy, out of that pleasing troop of children well borne,
which are taken for Tribute from the Christians, whose fortune the precedent
Chapter does describe. They are cut or mutilated with their own consent, and
not by force, the which would in danger their lives: The promises of the
greatest Offices in Court, and the hope one day to enjoy Dignities whereunto
they see such men advanced, ouer-swayes their will, to suffer themselves to be
cut, the promise are true, for in time they attain to the greatness of
Turkey, But the principal of these Eunuchs, and the most ancient among them,
which are about the Princes person, the first and most powerful Heads of the
Serrail, are the four which follow.

The first is the Capiaga great Chamberlain of the Empire, in most authority
in the Serrail; as he who may speak unto the Grand Seigneur, when he thinks
good; he does always assist near unto his person, wheresoever he goes,
whether he go out of his Royal Palace, or enters into that of his women, he
follows him unto the door, where he leaves men to advertise him in his
Chamber, when the Sultan retires. Embassies, Packets of Importance,
Instructions of Estate, and all great Affairs pass thorough his hands* to
come unto the (...) which make him necessary to all others, and gets him as
many rich Presents, and as much money as he can well desire. This without
comparison is more beneficial unto him, than the entertainment he has in the
Serrail, the which is regulated at ten Sultanins by the day, which make four
pounds of our sterling Money, many Robes of Silk and Cloth of Gold, with such
moueables as he desires. Moreover, his Table is furnished at his Masters
charge, and at the same time that his is. He carries a Turbant in the Serrail,
and goes on horseback where he pleases.

The second is the Chasuadar Bassi, or the Treasurer of the Princes secret
treasure; he has one key and the Grand Seigneur another, who does also set
his Scale unto it. He has care to lay up the gold and silver which comes from
Egypt, keeps an account of it, and enters alone into this Treasure with the
Sultan, he advises him for the gathering together of money, and entertaines
him with a subject which was never displeasing to Prince: The importance and
necessity of his charge, make him to be much esteemed: For gold being the
delights of men, whosoever has the ouer-sight, makes himself both powerful
and necessary among them: Moreover, he has the keeping of all the Jewels of
the Crown, and likewise of those which they present daily unto the Sultan; he
gluts his eyes with the luster of the goodliest Pearls, and the richest
Diamonds that the East does produce: Those which his Master gives, and
wherewith he does adorn himself on a day of pomp, pass thorough his hands.
He lives in the midst of the Treasures of the Serrail, with hope to succeed to
the place of Capiaga, if death forces the other to abandon it.

The third has the charge of Chilergi Bassi, that is to say, great Dispencer.
He is, as with us, the Master of the Kings Wardrobe; by his place he has a
care of the Sultans Apparel, and of other things which belong unto his person.
Moreover, the pieces of Cloth of Gold, which they send for Presents, the
exquisite Furs, the rich Swords, the Plumes of Feathers, and such like which
they give unto the Prince, and those which he himself gives, are under his
custody. He keeps a particular (...), to the end they may see the price of
that, which enters into this sturdy Wardrobe for Princes, and the value of that
which goes forth in the same qualities: This exercise keeps him always in
breath; for the custom of Turkey, (well practiced in the Serrail) being to
give and to receive, does furnish him with employment enough to pass the
hours of the day far from idleness. He has under him to assist him in this
painful labor a great number of Eunuchs. The diligence which he must show
herein, binds him to remain in a manner continually within the Serrail, his
entertainments are his Table, many Robes of Cloth of Gold, a thousand Aspres by
the day, or eight Sultanins, with many rich Presents. But the favor wherewith
his Master does honor him, makes the greatest article of his Reuenew: he hopes
by the means hereof to enter into the place of Chas^adar Bassi, when it shall
be void. He carries (for a mark of the honor which he enjoyes) a Turbant in
the Serrail, and rides within it, as well as the two former, and he that
follows; for these four Eunuchs have this prerogative above the other
Officers of the Othoman Monarch, residing in the Serrail.

The fourth is also an old pale withered Eunuch, as well by the course of his
years, as the want of that which they have cut away, who enjoyes the Office of
Sarai Agassi, which in Turkey is like unto the Captain of the Castle of the
Louver in France, but with more luster and authority, and so he has more
labor and care: For being to look unto the whole Serrail, the ordinary Mansion
of the Othoman Monarchs, he must perform his charge so exactly, as such
Princes will be served; he does often visit all the Quarters and Chambers of
this stately Palace, to see in what estate they are, and has a care to see
the meanest Officers do their duties, (which is more then with us, to add
unto the charge of the Royal Palace the Office of a Master of the Household)
that the Serrail be furnished with all things that are usually needful, he
remains within it in the Sultans absence, to maintain order, and to see that
this royal Lodging be always in good estate. He has the same entertainment
with the Chil^rgi Bassi, and hope if his years de^^iue him not, to succeed in
his place: For the order of the Serrail, does not suffer suffer them to fly
unto great Officer, but it will have them mount by degrees. You shall not see
men there, grow up in one night like unto Mushrums or Toad-stooles; long
attendance, and long services advance them to the places which they deserve.
Thus the Shasnadar Bassi aspires to that of Capiaga, the Ch^lergi Bassi to that
of Shasnadar Bassi, and this last to his. These four Eunuchs attend usually
in the Princes presence, only the Capiaga may speak unto him, and not the
rest, unless the Prince does question them about their Offices. Besides these
Honors and Offices of the Serrail, the Prince does sometimes honor them with
the quality of Bassa, and Governor of a Realm, as of Egypt, Damas, or
elsewhere: They also attain unto the place of Grand Vizir, which is the first
of the Empire, and by the authority thereof lead Armies into Provinces, where
they go to make war. The which gave occasion to a generous Governor of a
place belonging to the Christian in Hungary, to answer an Eunuch, General of
an Army, who had summond him to yield, that the practice of women was to sewe
and spinne, and not to take Towns. The Grand Seigneur aduanceth them in this
manner to great places without the Serrail to a double end; the one to
acknowledge their long services, the other to have their places, wherewith to
advance other Eunuchs, who during their long services have attended, that they
should either die or be sent Basha's into some remote Provinces. For the
Serrail does nourish many Eunuchs under the sweetness of these hopes: They
may be about two hundred of all Ages.

Such as cannot be advanced by order of antiquity to these eminent places in
the Royal Palace, are notwithstanding employed in things of less quality;
some keep in distinct places, as Closets or Cabinets, those exquisite things
that are given as Presents to the Prince, as great places of Ambergreece which
the Bas^a of (...) in his Government, and sends to the (...) Gods of Masque,
gives Vessels full of excellent (...) of (...) thridate, Balm of Cairo, Terra
Sigilat^, (...) Bezar-stones, Vessels of Agath, Turquoises, (...) Crystal,
and other things of price, which they (...) and neatly for the Princes person,
others have a care of rare Furs, the use whereof serves for his health, with
a thousand other Rarities which they bring from the Indies. Besides all this
there is employment in the Serrail for many other Eunuchs, which keep one
place, whither they carry all the rich moueables confiseated, of the great men
of the Court, who have been executed for the enormity of their crimes, or by
the sinister inventions of Envy; and likewise of other persons which die rich,
for being all slaves their goods belong unto the Prince. Those Eunuchs receive
these goodly moueables, and give advice unto the Sultan who goes to see them;
and makes choice of what does like him: the rest is set to sale in the Serrail,
only to the Officers thereof, and if there remain any thing unbought, it is
sent to the public Market of the City, and sold to them that will: The Money
that is raised is delivered into the hands of the Chasnadar Bassi, who puts it
into the secret Treasure. Some other Eunuchs have for their employment the
charge of other Serrails and Seminaries, where the Prince does cause the youth
to be instructed at his Charge, as in royal Colleges, both at Constantinople,
Andrinopolis, Bursia and elsewhere. Thus by the wise Policy of the Serrail they
which serve are advanced, for an example to the younger sort to fly idleness,
and assurance that their continual labor, shall be one day crowned with an
honorable and profitable recompense.

CHAP. V. Of many other Officers serving in the Serrail, and the Sultans
Person, and of the number of Men which serve in this Palace.
BEsides these Eunuchs advanced to great Offices, and those which are under
them, there is a certain number of other men, which do usually serve the
Sultans person: Some are Grooms of his Chamber, others in a more eminent
Dignity: all ordered by thirties, as thirty for his Shirt, thirty for his
Wastcoat, thirty for his little Cassocke, which the Turks wear under their
Robes, thirty for his Furs, thirty for his Turbant, thirty for his Girdle,
thirty for his Breeches, thirty for his Stockings, thirty for his Shoes,
thirty to make his Bed, thirty to dress up his Chamber, and thirty to order
and dispose of the Moueables, thirty for his Arms, as his Bow, Arrows, and
Semiter, thirty for his Scepter, thirty for his Imperial Crown, thirty for
his rich Hangings, and as many for his Cushions; not that they serve all at one
instant, but by order from time to time.

They which serve for his Mouth, are many in number, governed by four
principal Officers subordinate one unto another: The first is the Argihassi,
who has a care that every man do his duty. The second is the Mimmute Pag^,
who does furnish the money daily, that is necessary for the expenses. His place
does give him a privilege to speak often unto the Prince, to learn from him
what he desires to eat. He has like unto the former four Sultanins by the
day, his Table and two Robes yearly, the one of Silk, the other of Cloth of
Gold. The third is the Checaya, an Office like unto the Comptroller General of
the Kings House in France, he is in a manner equal in authority to the Master
of the Household, he reconciles the Quarrels, which Envy or Pride do breed among
the Officers. He has four Sultanins a day, and yearly two Robes of Silk and
Cloth of Gold. The fourth is the Mutpariazigi, which is as a Clarke of the
Office; All these men employ their cares, and the authority of their places in
the Princes Kitchen. Without there serve many Sahangylers, as Stewards, or
rather Gentlemen servants, which carry the meat; They are near fifteen
hundred men, which serve at diverse times in diverse troops.

The number of other inferior Officers in the Serrail shows that this stately
Palace is of great expenses, and that the Prince which lives there is
powerful and magnificent. The Baltagis which fetch wood for the Bake-house and
for other fiting, are above two hundred; The Bostangies or Gardiners, are eight
or nine hundred, so vast and of great entertainment, are the Gardens where this
great Monarch does walk. The Purueyours only for wild Foul or Poulterie, are
five hundred, the Grooms of the Stable eight hundred, and the other men of the
like condition increase the number of the inferior Officers of the Turkish
Emperors house: So as they do number within the Serrail, thirteen or
fourteen thousand Mouths, which are daily fed at the Sultans charge,
comprehending the Quarter of the Women.

CHAP. VI. Of the ordinary Victuals of the Serrail, and of the Provisions
thereof for the nourishment of the Prince, and of those which serve there.
AN order being so judiciously established in the Serrail, and so exactly
observed, it has not forgotten the necessary provision of victuals: They are
brought and preserved with admirable husbandry, contrary to the ordinary
confusion of Princes Houses. First, the Corn is gathered for the Sultans
mouth, for the Sultana's, the great Bassa's and the Mufti, (for all of them
have their part) in the Territory of Bursia, a Town in Bithynia, where retain
for the purest and best of all the Eastern parts: They retain for the Serrail
eight or nine thousand Quilots, every Quilot is two Bushels of Paris measure:
The Mils erected to that end in Constantinople grind it, the great Ouens of the
Serrail bake it into bread, and this goodly order distributes it by rule, as to
the Sultana's twenty Loaves a day, to the Bassa's ten, to the Mufti eight, and
to other inferior persons much less, and to some but one. This distribution
is contained in a Book, which the chief Baker keeps, to cause it to be
observed. The Corn which is appointed for the great number of men, which serve
in the Serrail, is gathered in Gracia, and brought to Constantinople, to the
quantity of forty thousand Quilots, and distributed with the like order to
those for whom it is ordained. For there they feed men with necessary
sobriety, to make them labor seriously in any business whatsoever.

The Victuals, be it for the Annual provisions, or for the ordinary of the
day, are brought and distributed with the like order: About the end of Autumn,
the Grand Vizir appoints certain days to see the Pastromanis made, for the
Kitchins of the Sultan, and of the Sultana's; They are made with the flesh of
Cowes that are with Calfe, that they may be the more tender, they salt them as
they do Stags or Hogs in Christendom; about that time they kill to the number
of four thousand. The Serrail esteems this kind of meat, among the delicacies
of their Feasts, and the Turkish Families if they have any convenient means
make likewise their provision; this great store of flesh is for the whole
year. But the Purueyours do furnish the Serrail daily with two hundred
Sheep, a hundred Lambs, or a hundred Kids, in their season, forty Calves,
forty Geese, or Goslings, a hundred couple of Wild-fowle, a hundred couple of
Hens, a hundred pair of Pigeons, with some other small Birds which the
Poulterers bring. There comes no fish into the Serrail, but to please the
appetite of some of the Agalaris who desire to eat it; then they cause it to
be taken on that side of the Palace which looks toward the Sea, the which
does abundantly furnish all sorts of fish.

The excellent Oiles which the Sultans Kitchen does use, comes most commonly
from Coron and Modon, in Grecia, a plentiful soil for Oliue-trees. Candi^
only does furnish that which is employed for the Princes service: for besides
the delicate bounty of this liquour, it is without any ill sent, the which
growing old in others makes them unpleasing. They have great provision of
Butter in the Serrail, the which is brought from M^ldouia, and other places
thereabouts; It comes down by the black Sea in great quantity but salted,
the Turks do not seek after fresh Butter; either for that they know not the
quality, or neglect it: Milk is little in use among them; that which is
brought to Constantinople, is only bought by the Christians or Jews; If the
Turks make use of it, it is after it is sour, for then they say it does
quench their thirst.

Other provisions of Victuals are drawn from those Provinces where they most
abound, and are best. The Gallions make two Voyages yearly to Alexandria, to
fraught themselves with Pulses, Sugars, and Spices, as much as shall be
needful for the Serrail, and the chief Bassa's of the Port; yet the Turks
use not much Spices, lest it should provoke them to drink wine, so expressly
defended by their Law. Egypt does furnish Dates, and the best Prunes that come
into the Serrail. Apples which are the chief delights in their Turkish Feasts,
and whereof they make a plentiful provision, are gathered in Vallachia,
Transiluania, and M^ldauia, and brought unto the Serrail in great abundance:
those which they serve unto the Sultan, are for their delicate sweetness
bought in Candy. Italy does also contribute to the Provisions of this great
Serrail; the Bailiffe of Venice, residing at the Port, causes a great quantity
of Parmasant Cheese to be brought for the Grand Seigneur, his Sultana's and
Basha's: they are pleased in the taste, and the Feast would not be acceptable
if this meat were wanting.

All these things concern the food, for their drink they make a liquour in
the Serrail, called Sorbet, composed of the juice of Citrons, Sugar, and Water,
and sometimes they add Ambergreece, most excellent to drink; so it is only
reserved for the Sultan and his women: The greatest men of this Imperial
Palace make for themselves, as the four principal Eunuchs, of whom we have
spoken, and some few others: The Ice refreshing it in Summer makes it more
delightful; They make their provision of Ice from the Mountains about
Constantinople, they bring such great store, as the charges (before it be put
into those places where they keep it) comes to twenty thousand Sultanins, or
eight thousand pounds sterling. The rest of the Royal Family quench their
thirst at those goodly Fountains, which power forth delicate water abundantly
for the whole Serrail: Wine enters not into it without violating the Law of the
Alcoran, which has so severely forbidden it; and whereof the wisest of the
Turks detest the use; they call it the Spur of Sensuality, and the Tomb of
Reason.

The Wood which serves for their Kitchen, is supplied with the like abundance;
they measure the quantity by the weight, for so they sell it in Constantinople,
as well as in some Provinces of France, and particularly in Landguedoc: They cut
it in the Grand Seigneurs Forests, and this provision costs him least of all
those that enter into his Palace. Thirty great Caramonsailes, chosen among an
infinite number of his Shins take it in, and sailing by the channel of the
black Sea, deliver it into the Serrail; his slaves have cut it down, sparing
good summer of money to the Chasus or Treasure without, whereunto the charges
would amount, both for the cutting and carriage.

But if the victuals of the Serrail be furnished in abundance and excellency,
the Kitchins which employ them are supplied with the goodliest Implements,
which can be seen in a Sovereign Princes house. Most part of the greater
Vessels are of Brass, kept so neat and clean, as the very sight of them will
give content and amazement (...) other Implements which are of Copper blanch,
are so great in (...) they cannot well be numbered. The loss which happens many
times is not small; the four days of Diuan, many strangers eat in the
Serrail, and they which have learned to ^^nish themselves at another cost,
take occasion to practice their Trade, and to take it where they can find it,
and (...) a quantity of Vessels, as the great (...) has sometimes been of
opinion (to avoid this great loss) (...) of Silver; and to commit the (...)
who might answer for them* (...) the great charge and the fear of an (...)
might befall (...) has always diu^r^ed him.

Such are the victuals and other punishment (...) ^^nish the Palace of the
(...) ^^der find the relation of the (...) the subject of these lines, let him
consider that without this Chapter, the others which compose this History could
not be: For this wanting victuals to supply the Othoman Count, the glory and
lusts of his great Serrail could not be without them, nor be able to furnish
matter for this work. The members of man's Body (says the Fable) did one day
mutine against the Belly, who they thought slept in perpetual idleness: The
rougue speaking for all the rest showed, that whilst the eye see, the ears
heard, the hands labored, and the feet walked, only the belly was idle and at
rest, that it was fitting, that in his turn he should discharge some one of
their Officer: They so resolved, they employed it, but nourishment failing
them, for the want of the natural exercise of the belly, they gr^w cold; pale,
and without motion. The truth of this take reaches us, that by labor we must
live, food maintains life in its natural functions, and this Chapter
furnishing this stately Court wherewith to subsist, gives this History the
subject of his employment.

CHAP. VII. Of the sick Men, and of such as die in the Serrail.
THe infirmities of the body, do most commonly follow the dispositions of the
mind, and dissolution does sooner cause them than any other thing; Courtiers
feel the inconveniences of their (...). Where they of the Serrail fall (...),
they put them into a clost Wagon, in the which they are drawn by men, and
con^^cted to the Hospital, whereas the order of this (...) house, and the
Turkish Charity, do what they (...) them, the one gives care to the ordinary
Physicians, (...) the other (which as we have said is very great) forgets (...)
to assist them: They are so exactly guarded, as no stranger may speak unto
them, until they have recovered their health, after which they are restored to
their first Lodgings, and the exercise of their places. But if they die, the
Law of the Court enjoynes, that they of the Chamber or Oda, whereof the dead
man was, shall be his heirs, and share the goods which he has left, except it
be some one of the four chief Eunuchs, before mentioned, or the Chistar Aga
of the Sultana's, who is black; for then the Prince is sole heir of his
precious moueables, and of the abundance of money which this wretched man had
so greedily gathered together, by the sinister means, which follows the
ambitions of the Court; having lived poor in his servitude, to die rich in the
same, and to restore to the Sultans Cofers, that which his avarice had drawn
away. Such Eunuchs do usually leave great wealth in Moueables (for the Turks
have no Lands) and particularly when their long services have advanced them to
the Dignities of Governors of Provinces, then they have liberty to dispose of
a third part of their estates, to make a Will, in the which the Sultan is
always Executor, he gives shares to the Legataries, and many times takes all
for himself, by the right of his Prerogative, and that of Master, not only of
the goods, but also of the persons of his Empire: for all men being his slaves,
he is their first and lawful heir.

Chap. VIII. Of the Grand SEIGNEVRS hunting.
MOst of the Turkish Emperors, in the effeminacie of their Idleness, where
they wallow wretchedly in the bosoms of their Concubines, have taken hunting
for a pleasing diuersion: But some finding it more pleasing than others, have
loved it with more passion. Bajazet the first of that name, (who reigned in
Turkey when as the weakness of Charles the sixth, suffered the disorders in
France, which had like to have ruined it) was so transported with this
exercise, as he therein spent the best of his days: his Court was fuller of
Huntsmen than any other; whosoever went to advance his fortune, must go with a
Hawke on his fist or a lease of Greyhounds in his hand; for the best course to
rise in Court, is to follow the inclinations of the Prince, how brutish soever
they be: Then a Faulconer grew great, and a Rider got an Office, but a virtuous
man was rejected and grew poor. What private men did, to merit this Monarchs
favor, foreign Princes did imitate to win his love. John Earl of Neuers
son to Philip the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, accompanied by the Lords of
Tremoulle, La March, Couey, Philip of Artois, Earl of Eu, Constable of
France, Vienna, Admiral of France, Boucicault, Marshall of France, the Lords
of Breze', Montrell, Helly, and many others, led to succor Sigismond King of
Hungary, a generous army of French, against the Turks which were in N^copolie:
Bad intelligence and rashness ruined them, their troops were defeated by the
succors of Bajazet, the men were put to the sword, the Earl of Neuers taken
Prisoner, with the chief of the French Nobility: The Turks Prison is rough,
and a Prince how great soever must suffer. Philip the Hardy to mollify the
savage humor of the Turk, and to bind him to better usage of his Son, sent
him Presents, and particularly many white Ger-faulcons, whereof he made great
account: and to testify the pleasure which he received, he enlarged the
Prison of this young Prince, and led him often a hunting. Therein the French
observed the brutish passion of Bajazet: His Faulconers had cast off a
Ger-faulcon after a foul vnsetsonably, he grew into a fury, and would
presently have put two thousand of those men which followed him to death with
their Hawks upon their fists, if the earnest iutreaty of the Earl of Neuers
had not diuerted him: Then he vented out his choler in words, and told the
Busgonian, that he did more esteem a good Hawke or a good Dog than any of
his men and (adding this brutish speech) he said he could have as many men as
he pleased, but for good Hawks, or good Dogs he could hardly find them.

In his hunting whosoever did hurt a Dog unadvisedly, he was guilty of
Treason, and was punished in like manner: But He, who with his powerful Hand
controules the pride of Princes, measured him in the like manner. Tamberlaine
King of the Tartars defeated him soon after in battle, took him with his
Wife, and made less account of his person than of a Dog or a Hawke: When he
dined he caused him to be set under his Table in a Cage of Iron, and cast him
bones to gnaw: Ministering matter to History, to write this example to
Posterity, to the end that Princes that love hunting, may not suffer their
reason to be surmounted with the fury and brutish impatiencies of this
exercise. The hunting train of this Prince was so great, as for hawking only
he had seven thousand Faulconers, which were entertained until the reign of
Mahomet the Second, who coming to the Empire, looked upon this fearful troop
of Faulconers with amazement; and as he had no inclination to hunting he
casheer'd them all, and answered the entreaties of great Men, who spoke to have
them restored, with these words: God forbid, that I should give my bread to
such unprofitable persons, ordained for so vain a pleasure. Hunting is an
honest recreation, eases the mind, exercises the body, and he that loves it,
shows the quickness of his spirit, and the agilitie and disposition of his
person: But the time which he imployes must be measured, free, and not stolen
by violence from more serious employments, the which ought always to be
preferred before this commendable pleasure. Hunting must be generous, and they
must take that by force which they pursue, and not by cunning and policy,
Plato amongst others in his book, de le g^b. d^cl. 7.
as to set Nets and Toiles for beasts, then it is base, idle, and forbidden by
the wise, who have labored to settle flourishing Commonweals under the
government of good Laws.

Solomon the Second, he which took Rhodes, and erected the Turkish Crescent in
the best Towns of Hungary, did often spend his time in hunting; during his
Reign, he employed a whole year, which was in the year 1531, when as Italy
apprehended that the great preparation of a fearful Nauall Army, had been
made for their ruin, and the Venetians pressed with jelousie, that it should
cause some dangerous tempest in their Gulf, under pretext of seeking the
Pirates of Malta, which did annoy the Turkish Merchants. they sent unto the
Kings of Hungary and Polonia, to the end they would entreat Solomon not to
trouble himself to send his Army into their Seas, and that they would promise
and undertake, to keep the Leuant Seas free from all Pirates: It succeeded
according to their desire, Solomon being retired to Andrinopolis, spent the
whole year (as we have said) in the pleasure of hunting.

The Turkish Emperors which have succeeded him loved this exercise. Osman the
last dead, entertained a great number of Huntsmen and Faulconers. These Princes
hold it a glory to make a show of them in their stately entries into
Constantinople, as we have formerly observed, where among the troops of
Huntsmen, we see Faulconers with their Hawks on their fist, have a Leopard at
their Saddle pomell covered with Cloth of Gold; they hunt the Hare or the Stag
many times with some content; they pursue the Boar, although the use of it be
forbidden by their Law: If they take any, they give the flesh to Christians, or
cast it away, and reserve the skin to cover Books for the which it is very
good, and preserues their Volumes long: Those which have come into my hands
bound at Constantinople, are excellently well covered with Boares skins,
although they be not artificially done as with us at Paris.

But Superstition the Sovereign Mistress of Turkish Spirits, has a share in
this pleasing exercise, when they hunt upon the day of their Coronation, or
when as they conceive the designs of an important war, they hold it for a
good presage if they take the first beast that is put up; but this pleasure of
hunting does not so possess them, as it makes them forget the care of serious
affairs. The Turkish Emperors have been accustomed in these sports to take
the advice of their Bassa's, of the occurrents which concern the estate; they
call them unto them in the field, they speak unto them, and command them to
deliver their opinions: In Court they call this manner of consulting, The
Council on horseback: whereby we may learn that this Nation is not so
barbarous as men conceive, and that if they reign so powerfully over so many
Provinces and Realms, it is not accidentally and by chance; their care and
judicious Council give unto their Empire a wise Government.

CHAP. IX. Of the train which follows the Grand Seigneurs Court.
THe number of men lodged and fed in the Serrail, which amounts to fourteen
thousand mouths, would make those imagine, which know not the power of the
Turkish Emperors, that many Sovereign Monarchs, lodged together, had drawn
all the Officers of their houses into one Palace. And truly he whom they serve
having vanquished and ruined many Kings has made an union of their Crowns:
His Serrail, when he lodges there, contains in him alone the Emperor of
Constantinople, him of Trebisonde, the Kings of Jerusalem, Babylon, Damas,
Egypt, Cypress, Thunis, Algier, Fez, and Morocco, with an infinite number of
other smaller Sovereigns, whose Empires, Realms and Principalities he does
possess: So as so many Officers as are in his Palace, serving his greatness,
serve many Crowns. But when he goes out of his Serrail, to undertake a Voyage
into some remote Province, the train and followers which increase his Court is
wonderful. Thirty six thousand Iamzaries, make the number of his ordinary
Guard on foot, forty four thousand Spabi, which areas light Horsemen, make
the Cauallery; two thousand Capigas or Archers of the Port follow him: These
beside their ordinary Guard, execute the Office of the Ministers of Justice,
with men of meaner condition that are under them: Two thousand Solachis, which
are Guards on foot about the Sultans person, are of his train: Four thousand
Chaoux, Men employed in Embassies, and in the executions of Justice march after
him. There are also fifteen hundred Sahangylers, or Gentlemen Servants, which
carry his meat unto the chamber door, where the Pages receive it and deliver
it to the Capiaga, who sets it upon his Table. The number of men for baser uses
is not less, if we consider wherein they are employed, there are three
thousand Grooms of the Stable, and a thousand Riders for hunting; the
Balthagis which cut the wood, and bring it to the Kitchen are eight thousand:
There are a thousand Thauegys, which are Purueyours, or Victualers: two
thousand five hundred Therezi, or Tailors to the Court, six hundred Bakers.
And if the Voyage be made for the war, the Officers of the Arsenall, which
are Commissaries of the Artillery and others, make forty six thousand men: The
Gebegys which make Arms, and repair and keep clean those which are already
made, are fourteen thousand: seven thousand Tufechgys or Gun-makers, follow
with their Tools and ambulatory shops: eight thousand Topeys, which are the
Cannoneers, increase the train of this monstrous Court. I omit a number of
petty Officers, for that I have not their names.

The beasts of burden are usually twenty thousand, that is to say, ten
thousand Camels, and ten thousand Moiles, which is the ordinary for the Sultans
house, not reckoning the troine of the Bassa's which follow, the which is not
so small but in seeing them march apart, you would take it for the train of a
Sovereign Prince; for the Turks carry in their Voyages all sorts of
Commodities, to the end they may be accommodated as well in Field, as in the
Towns of their abode. The supputation of the number of men that follow this
Court, amounts to a hundred five thousand, six hundred, when the Sultan
travels in a time of peace; but if he go to the war, his Court is composed
of a hundred and fourscore thousand men, beside the Soldiers. So as who is
he, that seeing this fearful Court to march, would not believe that it is a
whole Nation, who having abandoned their own houses, go to conquer new
habitations. Certainly, that which History relates of the Descent of the
Northern Nations, as Cimbrians, Sicambrians, Goths, Vandals, Burgonians,
Normans and others, is plainly seen there by the number of men; but with this
difference, that those did but pass, and these remain still, and add to the
continuance of their tedious Reign, the Rule and power over many other
Nations, near and afar off, from the principal seat of their Empire.

CHAP. X. Of the greatness of the Turkish Bassa's.
THe brightness of the Sun does not only show it self in the body of its
Sphere, but it does also shine in the greatest Starre^. And Kings who are in
their Estates what the Sun is in Heaven, do not only show in themselves the
luster of their magnificence, but it does also shine in the wealth of the great
Men of their Court. This is seen more visibly in Turkey than in any other
place of the World, where the Turkish Bassa's display in the pomp of their
great riches, the proud power of the Emperor, from whom they have received it.
Machmut Bassa, Beglierbey of Europe enjoyed so great treasures during the
Reign of Mahomet the Second, as the annual Revenues thereof, would have
defraied a powerful Turkish Army. This example would put them to silence,
which brag so much of the treasure of old Crass^as, the yearly rent whereof,
they say was able, to entertain a Roman Army. The least of the Turks Armies
would contain many of theirs. As this Bassa had been the most powerful, and
the most sumptuous, that ever the Othoman Court had advanced to the height of
an extraordinary fortune, it shall not be unfitting to deliver briefly by what
means he came unto that greatness. He was by Nation a Grecian, and in his
infancy his Mother who was a Bulgarian, led him one day with her, from the
Town of Nebopride, to that of Sendero^^a* she met casually with the Turkish
horse, some of them seeing this young child wonderful beautiful, took him
away by force, and carried him as a Present to the Sultan their Master: The
Prince loved him, and in a short time made the greatest of his Court know, that
beauty is many times a powerful motive to a great fortune, he was placed
among the best respected Pages of his Chamber, where he spent his younger
years in the midst of the delights of the Serrail, after which he had the
charge of Aga, or Colonel General of the Ianizaries; afterward he was
honored with the quality of Bassa, then he became Vizir, and mounting daily
higher, Romelia or Europe had him for their Beglierbey: The magnificences which
he showed, during the possession of so much wealth, would be tedious to relate.
One only example shall suffice for all. Mahomet the Second, caused the eldest
of his children to be Circumcised; the custom of the Court will have great Men
to give him Presents, as we have formerly spoken: all performed it; but that
of Machmut, mounted near to a hundred thousand Sequins, which would make
forty thousand pounds sterling. The Ocean must be vast and great, which does
breed such great Whales, living and walking Mountains: And the Othoman Court
must be stately, seeing the Bassa's encounter with such fortunes.

But it may be that of Machmut will seem stale, for that it happened an age
before ours: to satisfy those which love new things, and to augment the
proofs of this verity, that the Turkish Bassa's are great, we will add an
example which many have seen of late years. It appeared in the Leuant in the
year 1614, and in the person of Nassuf Bassa Grand Vizir of the Empire, whose
treasures were so great, as they found in his Cofers at the time of his death a
Million of Gold in Sequins, and in silver Coin eight hundred thousand Crowns,
three bushels of precious Stones not wrought, a bushel of Diamonds not set in
gold, and two bushels of great round Pearls of inestimable value: His other
furniture was equal to his treasure; he had a thousand goodly Horses in his
stable, whereof the least was valued at a thousand Crowns: Moreover, he had
four hundred Mares of Arabian, Egypt, the goodliest that could be found in
those Countries, with many thousand of Camels and Moyles. His Armory was full
of the richest Swords that could be found in the Leuant, and elsewhere: The
least had the hilts of silver: One was so enricht with Diamonds upon the hilt,
as it was valued at five thousand pounds sterling. The rest of his moueables
were no less precious, his Persian Carpets wrought of Gold and Silk. The
great quantity of Cloth of Gold and of Silk of most excellent works; the rich
beds, and all, that excess of a monstrous fortune can draw into the Palace of
a Favorite, exceeds the imagination of men, and gives occasion to say, that
with the spoil of such men, they might not only enrich many houses, but many
Cities.

Such rich and sumptuous Courtiers go with no small trains: when they march in
field, and undertake a Voyage, be it for their own particulars, or to receive
the possession of the Government of Provinces, wherewith the Sultan does honor
them, the baggage which goes before, and the great number of men which follow
them, does equal, yea, exceed the attendants of the Sovereign Princes of
Europe: Such a train may busy the eyes of those that see them pass, for a
whole day, for so much time is necessary for the least entry into a Town, and
yet many times they supply the want of day by Torch-light: It is the care of
such Bassa's to show themselue, great to the eyes of the World: which makes
them prodigal in their expenses, to be attended by many thousands of household
servants, (if they be not ill served being a difficult thing, but such a
number and troop should be importune and troublesome) to whom they give many
Enunches to command them. They take a delight to be well mounted, and withal
to have as many horses, as would serve for diverse Regiments. They will have
their Baggage, to seem the more stately, to be carried by twelve or fifteen
hundred Moiles, and as many Can^elis. The number of the Concubins which they
entertain in imitation of the Prince their Master, imployes the care and
watchful diligence of many black Eunuchs, which they appoint to keep them,
and consume their great wealth. Their Lodgings are stately Serrails, which they
have built with incredible expenses; as we may see in the Hippodrome of
Constantinople, by the Serrail of Hibraime Bassa, whereof the Turkish Emperors
have been heirs, the which is capable to lodge a great King. Their Moueables
and Ornaments of their Hals, are equal to their greatness, wherein they spare
no cost, as the only acquisitions which the Law of their servitude does allow
them: for being all slaves, they can purchase no lands nor possessions, the
which does generally belong to the Sultan their Sovereign. But if of Caitiue
slaves they be so great and so proud in their wealth, what must the Master be
who has made them such?

CHAP. XI. Of the affronts which the Turkish Bassa's are forced to pocket up in
Court, and the disgraceful Chastisements which they suffer.
THe honors and greatness of the World have their counterpoise; shame and
contempt follows them at the heels: All that clime up may descend, yea fall.
Thus the divine Providence has wisely ordained, to teach man not to build his
assurances thereon; and to bind him to seek them in that which is constant
and eternal. The Court is the Theater, wherein the Tragical Scene of change,
shows it self; grief goes hand in hand with pleasure, and is an inseparable
Companion; he cannot belong a Courtier that has not tried it. That of the
Turks does many times make it sensible to the greatest Bassa's; in the midst
of the glorious dignities of the Empire, they feel the displeasure, to see
themselves shamefully entreated by the commandment of their Sovereign. For
when he has an intent to blemish their Names with eternal infamy, he causes
the crouper of their Horses to be cut, whilst they are upon them; an affront
held in Turkey, the greatest that a man of their condition can receive. So was
Mu^ (...) in the (...) of Sely the first, Father to great S^ly^. This Prince
having vanquished the Sophy of (...), at triumphed in Tuaris, the chief City
of that Repl^, was forced to lead it, when as he saw his soldiers into (...),
saying plainly that they had rather lose all, when to spend the W^ter in
Persia. This (...) was very sensible, the thought to be revenged on those whom
he should find to be the Motives: they persuade him that Mu^ap^a Bassa, who
had credit among the ^ootmen, had induced them to (...) hangs his (...) upon
him, and seeing him on (...) by a Iester which followed him: The Bassa
perceived it, and the disgrace which he received, made him to end his days in
the midst of the cares and grief, which a man of his quality does feel, when
he thinks he has (...) the reputation, which made him to live gloriously in
the World and Court.

The infamy of this affront comes not alone; it has for a companion, the (...)
of a shameful punishment, which the great men of the (...) ^ue, when he holds
him guilty of some small crime: When he has caused the Crouper of some of
their (...) be cut, he does likewise ^au^ others to be (...) by his (...)* as
it happened in the (...) the (...) Co^ell of the (...) who (...) co^ed to have
(...) the (...) the Emperor caused him to be taken and (...). But (...) is not
so (...) ^ble unto the^, is the (...) the Crouper, Mimio ^i ing^i^, nature
^firma, and m^^iri^, ipia (...) i^i^ria, ins^i^entia, (...), quo^ part (...)
interp^t^ti^, Senec. lib. In sapientem vi^ (...) cade^ (...).
as if the Leather of the (...) of (...) horse were more (...) them (...)* so
much (...) which (...) things which (...) (...) ^d Croupers to be cut, tha^
(...) whip upon the body. But (...) which follow the greatness of the (...) of
their Basha's.

CHAP. XII. In what ^i^e the Grand SEIGNEVE (...) unto his Bassa's.
The greatest dignities of the World are not the most happy, (said an Ancient)
and the condition of (...) Monarchs has secured miserable to some (...) had,
little to desire and much (...) fear* for being (...) height of humane
greatness they cannot desire (...), but continuing in the languishing of their
spirit, they sometimes conceive jealousies and imaginary, terrors, and many
times such as are true the which troubles, their (...) their lives, and fills
them with tedious conceit. So says the Master of Princes in the holy Writ in
these true words delivered by a Prince, The heart of Kings is inscrutable. Cor
Regum inscrutabile, Prou. 25.3.
Certainly truth does teach us, that if Crowns and Scep^ be weighty, as charge
of ^re and trouble, the Office of Kings is painful; for there is nothing so
difficult to man, (...) well, whereon depend^ the knowledge of (...). The
Prince which commands must observe three things, Experiendo di^ticisse quam
arduum quam subiectum fortuna, regendi cun^ta onus, Tacitus lib. ^. Annal.
that what he desires may be just, for the public good, and concern his own
glory. The which is done by word or ^ing. The Othoman Monarchs, as Princes,
retired within their Serrail, and not much communicable; command in (...) not
daily by writing, and the style which they use in writing that which they
command, is particular unto them* We shall hardly find in Histories any one
example of a Monarchi (...) wealth, in the which the Superiour^ have (...) so
imperiously, and has been obeyed secondly; as with the Turks; their letters
breathe nothing but threats; and they speak no other language but that of
cruelties. Behold some examples of those, which the Sultan^ have (...) their
(...) In the (...) third ^ring of the (...) in H^ria, which the Ch^st^ had
recovered, and holding this (...) very great (...) must make this Bridge or
die, he labors, hazards all, and loses many thousand men, yet
notwithstanding this ouerflowing of the water, he finished a Bridge in
sixteen days over the River of Drove, being five thousand five hundred
fathom long, and fourteen broad, supported by Boats tied one to another with
chains of Iron. Solomon past his Army over it, and went to lay his siege to
Segher, where he died. Assa^b^g had good and strong excuses, not to attempt the
making of this Bridge, any other Prince but a Turk would have allowed of them:
But he who was (as the Turks be) a bad husband of men's lives, would have it
done at what rate soever. The threat of those Letters which we have related
are with some condition. But the Turkish Princes many times write absolutely;
as it happened in the year 1614, in the person of Nassuf, Bassa, Grand Vizir
of the Turkish Empire. The Emperor Achmat the first would have his life and
his treasure: He sends unto him being in Constantinople, the Bostangibassi,
with two Letters written by his own hand, whereof this was the tenor of the
first: Fail not presently upon the receipt hereof, in s^nd (...) by the
Bostangibassi the Seals of my Empire. Nass^f obeyed, and delivered them into
the great Gardiners hands; having received them, he drew another of the Sul^ans
Letters out of his pocket to Nassuf, whereof these were the words: After that
thou have sent me my Seals, send me thy Hand by him that shall give thee this
Note. This command was rough, and the style of his Letter troublesome, yet he
must obey, not of force, for Nassuf was in his house with a Family of above two
thousand men, and the Gardener had (...) staff, and was only assisted (...)
Rascals v^med, which were Capigis, or (...) of the Serrail. Nassuf suffered
himself to bestrangled, and the Bostangibassi carried away his hand in the
view of all his g^as Family, whereof the least Scullions might have (...) him
with their (...), with his goodly train. Y^ (...) (...) the people of the
Serrail, and knowing that it was the Princes pleasure, their Arms were their
tears and sorrows. Thus this rough means of writing proves very beneficial
to the Turkish Princes, and they reap many co^ (...) thereby. First, they are
not forced to (...) money to the Governor of a strong place, who is not
faithful or profitable to draw him out of it, and to buy with great sums of
money (as they do in other places), the Towns and Forts of their Estates; the
least of their Letters draws forth a Governor, where they place whom they
please they compass great enterprises, causing that to be done by fear which
love cannot do; they are less betrayed in affairs of importance, and are
generally exactly obeyed.

CHAP. XIII. Of the malicious in^ent (...) and poys^nings which the Turks use
the against another, and ^sse^ tally great Men.
AMbition has brought other Vices into the Cour^, where s^e imployes there, in
her designs: Slander and Treason are the (...) of her ^^estable invention, and
poisoning y^rs them in execution. But this last finds more employment in the
Court of Mabo^an Princes than in any other part of the World^ They resec^ in
al^^mi^able mean to revenge (...), and to content their passions. And after
their ^xample the great Men and Bassa^ employ it: Former ages, and the disorder
of that wherein we live, turnish exampl^. In the year 137^, (...) told King of
Gram^e, a Man Poi^t^, (...) where (...) that (...) King thereof, (...) rich
(...) (...) things, (...). He (...) (...) (...) (...), and (...) with an
infinite number of (...) to Castite; Don Henry (...) pleased with so rates
Present, he does publicly commend the magnificence of the Turkish Prince.
But he does soon learn to his cost, that poison is rather among gold and
precious stones than among poverty. He puts them on the next day, but
presently the poison where with they were infected, lays him in the bed of
death, and depriues him of life: Spain has been always subject to such
accidents whilst the Mahometans commanded there, and the Kings thereof had
cause to fear a double poison: For whilst the Turkish Princes did attempt
their persons by poison, the Alphaquis, and Priests of the Alcoran, poisoned
the souls of their subjects by the contagious impurities of a false and
brutish Doctrine. A little before the death of the King of Castile, he of Leon
called Don Sancho, was poisoned by the invention of a Turk, who taught
Gonzales, his Lieutenant at Leon, the detestable means to kill his Master in
giving him an Apple, The Spaniards write it, and Mayerne Turquet in the seventh
Book of the history of Spain.
the which this wretched Lieutenant performed: This was at the same time when
as a Deluge of fire come out of the Ocean, the which carried its flame far
into Spain, burn a great Country, and of many Burro^gh^ and Villages, made
heaps of ashes as far as Z^ora.

These examples show the malice of the Turks against the the Christians; but
they do no less among themselves. A Turkish King of Fe^, not able to endure
the prosperities of him of G^anad^, called Joseph, a Mohammedan like himself,
he resolved to take away his life: He sends to visit him oftnes than he had
accustomed, he makes a greater show of friendship, and after he has received
many effects of his, he sent him for a (...) Cassocke of Cloth of Gold of
great (...), King Joseph receives it, and puts it on, not he had not worn it
a day, but the poison wherewith the Prince of Fe^ had infected i^, (...) upon
him, and gave him such cruel convulsions and (...), as his flesh fell away in
piece, and the Physician^ (...) the true cause of his disease, nor could apply
^hy re^ that he of Granado and by the damnable (...), Moorish King. The like
villainies which were practiced among the ancient Turks, are used at this day
in the Louant, at the Court of Constantinople, and in other places, whither
they send great Men to (...) charges. In our days a Turkish Courtier affected
by all means possible the dignity of Bassa of Al^ppo; the beauty of the
place, the luster of this dignity, but rather the great gain which the
Vice-royes make, inflamed his desire to the possession of this Government; to
attain unto it he purchased by great gifts the affections of the Agala^is, or
Fo^i^s of the S^rrail, which are the Eunuchs attending the Princes person:
These men content his ambition, and obtained the government which he desired
from the Sultan; he receives the Letters, takes his leave to go unto his
charge, he arriues and is received with the applause of the people; but he had
scarce begun to enjoy the first honors of this new dignity, but another does
dispossess him by the same means which he had used; he gets the friendship
of the Eunuchs, and gl^ts their a^arke with greater gifts obtaining Letters
for this place. He was aduertized hereof; the displeasure which he conceived to
see himself deceived by the Courtiers of the S^rrail, to whom he had given
much more money than he had gotten in so short a time, that he had (...) Bassa
of Al^pp^, made him to draw his dearest friends about him, to resolve with them
how he should govern himself in this important business. Many were of
opinion that he should (...) the entry i^ the Town to this new Bassa who was
upon the way, until he informed the Sultan, the M^f^, and the Grand Vizir of
the covetous disloyalty of the Agala^ie; and this Counsel was conformable to
his apprehension. But one of (...) him aside, told him, The (...) him, brought
a (...), wherein i^ was dangerous to use (...) was the safest way in such (...)
him a (...) make the (...) than his had been, that (...) the Bassa which came,
and (...) him a (...), and all love and friendship to him, and (...) him out of
the World by the (...) of (...) Persons. They resolved it, and labored in
their design. In the mean time the new Bassa arriues, the other receives him,
and yields him the place. It is the custom of the great men in Turkey, to give
Presents to the new Governor when they enter in charge, some to testify that
they are welcome, and others to gain their affections. This discontented Bassa,
who left his charge before the ordinary time, would not be the last to present
this new commer. He gives him a poisoned Handkercher, imbroydered with Gold and
great round Pearls, the price thereof could not be easily valued: The new
Governor receives it with unspeakable joy; for great men hold nothing so sweet
in their places, as to take whencesoeuer it comes; but God does many times
suffer that such greedy Takers, are taken in taking, as it happened to this
Bassa of Aleppo: The Handkercher of price, which was the price of his life,
contents him: He admires the work, looks upon the great Pearls, and his
hands do not abandon it, until the poison forced him, the which exhaling and
infecting the Bassa, they grew weak and make him to leave it; whereupon he
died and left the government which he had not enjoyed: The other Bassa flies
speedily to Constantinople, redemands the government, whereof he had been
dispossessed, and grounds his reason upon his speedy obedience, and forces the
iniquity of the Favorites to consent that he should enjoy it. Thus
covetousness had deprived him of a Dignity where it had first placed him, and
poisoning restores him: Whereby we may Judge what these Governors can be that
are settled by such means. It is certain that the like offenses are committed
daily in the Turks Court by the Bassa's thereof, who employ their greatest
care, to find out the most subtillest poisons, and how to employ them cunningly
one against another. The most ordinary which they use is drawn from Toads:
They cause a Toade to suck the Milk of a woman that has an extraordinary red
hair. When it is full they beat it gently with a little wand, they put it
into choler, its poison mingles with this Milk, and it bursts in its rage;
this poison is so violent and strong, that in rubbing only the stirrup of his
horse whom they mean to poison, it is an assured death. Thus corruption is
absolute in Turkey; for if their Prophet has poisoned their souls with filthy
Doctrine, they poison their bodies with all sorts of venom.

CHAP. XIV. Of the filthy and unnatural lust of the Bassa's and of the great
Men of the Court.
THe great fortunes which are found in the Courts of great Monarchs, produce
great riches: and these furnish Courtiers with delights, in the which they glut
their sensual and brutish appetites. The Bassa's of the Court, great in
dignities and abounding in riches, plunge themselves in all sorts of
voluptuousness, and their spirits mollified in the mire of filthy pleasures,
they seek them by a contrary course, and demand that of nature which she has
not: Being many times tired with the love of women, they abandon their
affections to young Boys, and desperately follow the allurements of their
beauties: They embrace them, and use them in the place of women. This
abominable vice is so ordinary in the Turks Court, as ye shall hardly find
one Bassa that is not miserably inclined unto it: It serves for an ordinary
subject of entertainment among the greatest when they are together; they speak
not but of the perfections of their Ganimodes: One says, they have brought me
from Hangarie the most beautiful and accomplished Mi^i^a, that over was borne
among men: he is the height of my felicity, and the only object that my
thoughts adore. Another says, I have lately bought a young Infant of Bassa,
who has not his like in all the East, and I dare assure you his (...) is not
humane, but that of an Angel: Some So^ of the company entreats him earnestly
to have a fight, and that he may be satisfied by his eyes. These are the
discourses of those lustful ^ts. The care they have to keep neatly, and to
attire richly those poor ^tures, destinated to so damnable an use is not
small: the Eunuchs which have them in guard are always near them, to
beautify them outwardly, they plaite their hair with Gold, and sometimes with
Pearls, they perfume them, they attire them in Robes of Cloth of Gold, and
add to their natural beauty whatsoever Art can invent: what virtue, what
wisdom, what piety can be found in a Court composed of such men? He that is
the Head and commands them, does furnish this pernicious example; for the
Sultans Serrail is full of such Boys, chosen out of the most beautiful of the
East, and vowed to his unnatural pleasures: This does countenance this
disorder and corruption in the Othoman Court: Such as the Prince is, such are
most commonly the Courtiers which follow him: the principal Maxim which they
give for a precept to their fortune, is to follow the humors and manners of
the Prince, whatsoever they be, yea, many times they incite the Prince to these
disorders. The miseries and diasters which happen daily in Turkey, are too many
to be coucht in this History. The great Men kill or poison one another for
such subjects, Families are in combustion, Wives make away their Husbands, and
Husbands their Wives. Mabemet the second Emperor of the Turks, was ^abde in
the thigh, and if any misfortune seem monstrous among them, this vice which is
so monstrous does produce it: Men well bred abhor it, Heaven detests it:
Sodomia and idololatria simul inceperantsimul creuerant, D. Tho. 4 sent. did.
1. q. 2.^. t. 1
When it was borne upon the Earth, Idolatry was her sister Twinne. So being the
auersion of Nature and the contempt of the Author thereof, Heaven does punish
it, and casts forth the fire of his wrath upon those which are polluted
therewith; whole Towns have been consumed, men eternally lost, and the memory
of the one and the other in execration upon the Earth. The Turks do not
punish it; they allege, as we have observed in the History of their Religion,
that God has reserved the chastisement to himself, and they bring an example
of a miserable wretch who had abused a young Boy which stabbed him. This
Sodomite being thus slain, Mahomet their Prophet sent his Kinsmen to open his
Tomb, and see how many wounds he had; they came and saw no body, but found in
the place a black and smoakie stock. Hence they say, that seeing the divine
Justice does punish those that are culpable of this offense, they must leave
the execu^ him, and in the mean time suffer this unnatural ex^. The Turkish
Ladies detesting these damnable affections of their husbands, have also
abandoned themselves by their example or for revenge, to another disorder: the
following Chapter will show it. For the husbands are many times the cause of
the loss of their wives; and the contagious example of their vices, gives them
occasion to ill, and to fail in their faith to him, who had first broken it.

CHAP. XV. Of the Loves of the great Ladies of the Turks Court, and of their
violent affections among themselves.
THe prouocations of a hot Climate, the servitude of women restrained, and the
bad example of loose and luxurious husbands, are the principal Motions of the
loves, whereunto the Turkish Ladies abandon themselves. Some to have free
exercise, take occasion to see their Lovers, when as they are allowed to go to
the Bath, to receive the Purifications which their Law does enjoyne them:
others better qualified, from whom the commodity of Waters and Scoues which
are in their houses, has taken away this pretext, make use of other man.
Sometimes they borrow the habit of their slaves, and thus disguised go to find
them they love: When this course is difficult, by the encounter of some great
obstacle, they employ man and woman (whom they reward) to find them subjects
which may please their eyes, and content their passions; but this last means
is more apparent and better known in Constantinople: for such Messengers of
(...) discovering themselves to some that refuse them, they di^ their secret.
They address themselves usually to Christian strangers of the West, and if
they can find Frenchmen, the service they do unto their Mistresses is the
more pleasing: The disposition of their humors, the grace of their bodies (say
they) and the ordinary courtesy of their Nation, makes them more desired. But
it is dangerous to serve the passions of such Lovers, where the recompense and
the reward or a painful love, is a Dagger or a Glass of poison: For these
cruel women, when they have kept some young stranger three or four days
hidden in their Chambers, and have made use of him until he be so tired and
weary with their lasciviousness, as he is no longer profitable, they stab him
or poison him, and cast his body into some Privy: Whether it be that they
fear their affections should be discovered, or that their light and inconstant
humors, does always demand new subjects, or that it is the nature of their
lascivious love, to change into Rage and Fury tragically cruel. They which are
advertised at Constantinople, avoid this danger, and reward their pains which
speak unto them with a flat denial, but not without danger: For such
Messengers as well as the great ones that employ them are Witches, and revenge a
denial upon the person of him that made it, as it happened of late years to a
French Gentleman, which was at Constantinople, when as the Baron Sausy did
serve the King there as his Ambassador: This Gentleman going to the Diuan,
which is the public Audience of the Serrail, was encountered by a woman, whose
age, habit and discourse did show plainly that she did pleasures for the
Turkish Ladies: She came unto him and used these words: Have thou the courage
to see a fair Lady, which is in love with thee? He who knew well with what
Mertils such Ladies are accustomed to crown their Lovers which have served
them, excuses himself for that time, pretending some important business
which drew him to the Serrail: But he promises at his return to content her
desires, imtearing her to attend at the passage. In the mean time he goes to
the Serrail, follows his business, and having dispatched in, ro^es to his
Lodging another way, and leaving the woman in the impatiencie of a deceitful
attendance, she saw herself in the end deceived by this Frenchman: who to
revenge this affront, had recourse to her Witchcrafts, and imployes them
against him: They work their effect, and this Frenchman found himself
suddenly seized with a kind of Palsy: The sick man took his bed, and was
continually afflicted with sensible pains and convulsions. The Physicians were
called to his help, but all their lerning could not find out the cause of his
infirmity, nor prescribe a remedy: Some days past in these extremities,
after which an old Turkish woman offers to cure him; she visits him, and having
looked upon him she told him in her gibbridge: I will soon cure you: But tell
the truth, have you not refused some Lady that sought your love? By her Charms
she expelled those which tormented him, and restored him to health: After
which, this man going in Constantinople, he encountered a woman which told him
in his ear; Remember another time not to abuse the courtesy of Women which
affect you, and deceive them no more by your vain promises.

All the women of Turkey, and especially those of Constantinople, do not tie
their affections to men only, they grow passionately in love one with another,
and give themselves to false and unlawful love, especially the wives of men of
quality, who live coopt up in Serrails, under the guard of Eunuchs. This
vicious appetite does domincere over them so tyrannously, as it smothers in
them the desires of a natural and lawful love, and many times causes them to
loathe their husbands. This disorder may grow for that their affection wanting
a lawful prize, they tie it to a strange object: Moreover, the revenge of the
unnatural love to their husbands, carries them unto it; for most men of those
Eastern parts, and the greatest are given to that beastly and brutish
lasciviousness. These Ladies love one another most ardently, and come to the
effects of their foolish loves, they embrace one another, and do other actions
which love seeks, and modesty forbids to write. They whom this strange love
makes slaves to others, go to find them in the B^th to see them naked, and
entertayning them upon the subject whereof they languish, make such like
discourses in their Language: They had reason to say that the Sun did plunge it
self in the waves, seeing that you are in this water, the which by Nature
should quench the fire, but it kindles my flames when you are in it. Is it
possible that you should receive to the enjoying of so rare a beauty, other
persons than those of your own sex, which are like your self? Fly the
imbracings of Men, which contemn us; and have no love but for their like, and
enjoy with us the Contentments which they deserve not. When as a foolish
womanish Lover, has made such like discourses, she goes into the Bath, and
burns with a flame which it is not able to quench, she embraces her Lover,
kisseth her, and attempts to do that (although in vain) which I must here
conceal: And these loves of woman to woman are so frequent in the Leuant, as
when any Turks are resolved to marry, the chief thing which they inquire of,
is whether the party whom they affect be not subject to some woman whom they
love, or is beloved. Thus these people live far from the light of true Faith,
in the darkness of Mohammedan ignorance, which have carried them to the excess
of all sorts of vices.

CHAP. XVI. Of the four principal Bassa's of the Port.
THe four chief Bassa's of the Port, and the four prime Wheels, which move
this vast and powerful Turkish Empire are the Vizir Azem or the Grand Vizir,
the Captain of the Sea, the Aga of the Ianizaries, and the Captain of
Constantinople, called the Captain Bassa: Their places are the chief of the
Empire, and the glory there of gives them respect with the Prince, to be
honored by great Men, and feared by the people. The Vizir Azem, or Grand Vizir
holds the first place next unto his Master, he is Lieutenant General of the
Empire, and Armies, high Chancellor and chief of the Diuan, which is the
Council where Justice is administered; the Captain of the Sea is high
Admiral, and General of Nauall Armies. The Aga of the Ianizaries commands all
the Turkish foot, as sole Colonel thereof. And the Captain of Constantinople
gouernes the City, and takes knowledge of the chief affairs which pass.
These four Bassa's differing in Offices and Honors are notwithstanding
powerful in authority, the which is of such weight, as they give and take the
Crown from their Sovereign Prince when they think good. We have seen the
experience of late years, in the persons of Sultan Mustapha, and Osman: Achmat
ended his life and Reign in the year 1617, he left two young sons; Osman
and Amurath: He knew by experience that the weight of such a Crown could not
be borne by a Child, and that the absolute government of the Turkish Monarchy
required a man: He called to the succession of his Scepter, his brother
Mustapha who had been fourteen years a Prisoner in his Serrail, and made him
to taste this sweet change, to come from a Dungeon to a Throne, and from the
fetters of a tedious captivity, to that power to command the greatest I state
upon the Earth. But the great rigor of his command, and the extrauagances of
his inconstant humor, made him odious to the Captain Bassa; he gained the
other three, who drew the Soldiers and some great men unto their party, they
vnthroned him, put him into his Prison, and set up Osman son to his brother
Achmat. This example was in our daye^: but that which follows is so fresh, as
the news hereof came when I was laboring about this work. Osman not well
satisfied with the affection of the Ianizaries, (who are the sinews of his
Estate) and disliking some of the four Bassa's, had an intent to change the
Seat of his Empire to Caire, and to abandon Constantinople; he prepares
himself, gathers together as much Treasure as he could, and couers his
design, with the pretext of a Pilgrimage to Meque, where he said his intent
was to accomplish a vow, and to make as great a gift as ever Prince made unto a
Temple of what Religion soever. When as he had managed his enterprise unto the
day of his departure, when as his Galleyes were ready, and the Bassa of Caire
come with an Army to receive him; the Ianizaries were advertised, they run
to the Serrail with the consent of the Aga, the people are moved, the Captain
Bassa stirs them up, they take the Sultan in his Chamber, kill some great Men
in his presence, dragge him into a prison, and there make him to suffer a
shameful death by the hands of an Executioner, having drawn Mustapha his
Uncle out of Prison again, and crowned him the second time Sovereign Sultan of
the Turkish Empire. That which is here set down for true proofs of the
authority and power of these four great Bassa's. They are not alone in
greatness, although that no man does equal them in all the Othoman Court;
There are two Beglierbeys (that is to say Lord of Lords) the one of Romania or
Greece, the other of Natolia or Asia the less. The Nissanzi Bassa or ordinary
Chancellor, who signs all the Dispatches of the Court; three Teftardars which
are the high Treasurers, thorough whose hands the Revenues of the Empire does
pass. The Raise Kintap, whose charge is to keep the Books, Papers and Records
of the Empire. Besides these there are many others of less consideration.
Doubtless, as Whales are in the vast and deep Seas; so great and eminent
Dignities are in great Empires, and those of Turkey make those which enjoy them
to seem like so many petty Kings about the person of a great Monarch.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Tymar, Tymarriots and Pensioners of the Port.
THe Turks give two sorts of pay to their Soldiers, the one is called in
their Language Vlefe', which is paid daily by the Treasurers of the war and
is the entertainment of ordinary Soldiers: The other is called Tymar, or
pension assigned upon Houses, Lands, or whole Burroughes; this is not given but
to men, who by their valor have done some notable service to the Prince, and
deserved well of the public: These Pensions are honorable, the recompense of
their virtue, and the mark of their merit. It seems that the Turks have
borrowed the name of this recompense from the Gracians, who called it Tymarion,
and (...), which signifies Honor. Such Pensioners are called Tymariots, they
are most commonly Spahis and Horsemen, who enjoy the honor and profit of such
Pensions taken out of the Lands in Turkey which belonging all unto the Prince,
by the right of Sovereign Master of the persons of all his Subjects, who are
his slaves, he gives them to such as have made themselves worthy by their good
Service; as they do with us the Commanders of Military Order, or the Fees or
Lands which the Princes have instituted in our Countries to honor Gentlemen of
merit, and to bind them to serve them upon all occasions. It is true that the
continuance of such fees, does far exceed that of the Tymar, for they pass
unto their Successors, and this is temporal, and no man is suffered to enjoy
it any longer than it shall please the giver. If the Spahi be not in his
Equipage fit for a Soldier, if he does not serve with that care and diligence
as he ought, the Judges which the Sultan appoints to visit the Tymar, deprive
him, and recompense another that may serve better, so that Tymariots, or
Pensioners of the Turks Court, are not unprofitable mouths, as in other
places; there the credit of an insolent Favorite, cannot take them from
virtue, to give them to the idleness of some one of those which follow him,
and idolatrize the greatness of his fortune.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Grand SEIGNEVRS Favorites advanced to the greatness of
the Empire, and of their fall.
FEw Kings have been without Favorites; and what reason were it to (...) the
most eminent among men from that which is allowed to the most object, that is
to love one man above all others, and to honor him with the effects of their
friendship, by honors and greatness, whereof they are the Masters and
absolute Disposers? Jesus Christ had Saint John the Evangelist for his
Favorite.
Doubtless the Sovereign of Kings, who came into the World to teach both Men
and Kings perfection, has not denied them this liberty, when as he himself
gave them an example, loving and favoring above the small number of men which
were in his Ordinary Court, him whom he thought most worthy of his favors.
But few Favorites have been without insolency, whether it be that most
Princes are not much careful to make choice of men, whose virtues have made
them worthy of their friendship; or that the nature of favor and honor which
follow them, be such, as it blinds their understanding, and puffes up their
spirits with pride. This History having taken for its principal Subject, the
Court of the Othoman Monarchs, it shall seek no farther for examples of this
truth.

Hibraim Bassa Favorite to Solomon the Second, Hibraim favorite to Solomon
had attained to the height of greatness which he enjoyed by such degrees. He
was a Christian, borne of a very base extraction; at the age of seven or eight
years, they which exact the tribute of Christians Children, took him from his
Fathers house, and conducted him with a troop of other young slaves to
Constantinople: At his arrival he was given unto a Bassa, who caused him to be
bred up carefully, and soon after presented him to Solomon; This Prince to
whom Hibraim was equal in age, took him into his affection, his service was
always more pleasing unto him, than that of the other slaves: He honored him
with the charge of Capiaga, who is Captain of the Gate of the inner Serrail:
From this place he came to that of Aga or Colonel of the Ianizaries: Then the
example of some great Men of the Othoman Court, ruined by the inconstancy of
Fortune, gave unto his spirit the first apprehensions which the great Dignities
of the Court gives unto Favorites which enjoy them, and served as a bridle to
restraint his passion: he besought Solomon not to advance his fortune so high
as he might full with the greater ruin: He showed him that a mean
prosperity, was more safe than all the greatness, wherewith he would honor
him: That his services should be sufficiently rewarded, if he gave him
wherewith to spend his days in rest, far from the necessities of life.
Solomon commended his modesty, and meaning to advance him to the chief
Dignities of his Empire, he swear unto him never to put him to death whilst he
lived, what change soever should happen in his Court. But the condition of
King, which is humane, and subject to change, and that of Favorites which is
proud, and unthankful, shall cause Solomon to fail of his promise, and
Hibraim of his faith and loyalty, as we shall see. In the mean time this
Favorite becomes a Bassa, and soon after Grand Vizir, and Lieuetenant
General of his Masters Empire; his credit, his train, his wealth, and the
pomp of his greatness, teach every man that he is the Arbitrator of Turkey.
But his fortune is too great to be without Envy; Vel^t arbitrum ragni agebat
serebatur^ digre^ to, magna profiquentium (...) it u^, says Tachtus in the 15.
Book of Annals, speaking of P^lta^ a freed Man to Clo^tius and his Favorite.
and it seems unreasonable, that the highest trees which are on the tops of
the highest Mountains, should be free from the violence of the winds. The
Princess Mother to Solomon, and Roxillana his wife, the best beloved of his
Sultana's, envy the credit of Hibraim, and his unlimited authority is
insupportable unto them: They practice his ruin, and employ all their power
both within and without the Serrail, to dispossess him: he finds it, and
judging that the affections of a Mother and a Son are so natural, and the
love of a Wife and a Husband so strong, as there is not any fortune nor favor
in Court, which should not fear the encounter, he resolves to draw his Master
out of Constantinople, and to remove him from the imbracings of the one and
the conversation of the other, and from the persuasions of them both. To effect
is with the more pretext, he propounds the design of the War of Persia, and
being in Counsel with three or four Bassa's, he persuades Solomon in this
manner. Sir, Great Kings must have great (...) Their principal office is not
only to preserve the (...) their Ancestors have left them, but also to enlarge
is (...) ^tand the limits; the Sword wherewith the M^s^ (...) your Greatness,
on the day of your Coronation, is not so much a sign of your Sovereign power,
as that you are bound to maintain and defend the truth of our Alcoran, and to
publish its belief far: The Persian has always been an Enemy to your
Estate and Religion, and their Kings have not had any stronger passion, then to
see the ruins of the one and the other: The History of the Wars which our
Predecessors have had against them does furnish many examples; now you may be
revenged of their insolency, and lay at your feet these ancient Enemies of
Turkey. Tachmas who is their King, is a man without valor and experience, his
people are yet in necessity, being the remainders of the wars past: Your
Empire is flourishing you are borne to great matters, and to you alone the
destinies have reserved the glory of an absolute triumph over the Persians^
Heaven does promise it, Honor binds you, the weakness of your Enemy inuites
you, your Treasures and a great number of fighting men, which attend your
Commandments in Arms, furnish you with means. Go, go, then great Prince,
add unto your Crowns that of the Realm of Persia, and to the Bays which
your valor has gathered in Hungary and at Rhode^, the Palm to have subdued
Persia, and to have tamed the most troublesome of all your Enemies. To these
persuasions he added a trick of his Trade. In Damus the chief C^tie of the
East, there lived an excellent Magician, called Mule Aral, he draws him to
Constantinople, and makes use of his Predictions to further his designs; he
speaks with him, and having caught him what to say, he brings him to Solomon.
This Sorcerer foretold the Sultan, that he should take the principal Places
of Persia, and should be crowned King of that Realm: All this makes him
resolve to go to horseback, and the war was concluded: The tears of the
Mother, nor the sweet kisses of the Wife, could not frustrate this design:
These poor Sultan's see the order of the Estate overthrown by a Favorite,
and their persons contemned by Hibraim, who carried him from them, and drew him
far from their just jealousies; but the mine, into the which insolency
dragges it self, is in^itable Hibraim by this retiring, deferrs his loss, but
does not avoid it; he shall return from the war of Persia to dye in
Constantinople strangled with a Haker: The sequel of the history will tell
us. In the mean time Solomon departs, with above six hundred thousand men,
most Soldiers: Hibraim goes before to make the way with a powerful Army, he
passes at Aleppe, and fortifies it: From thence he goes to Carahomide a Town
upon the Frontiers of Mesopotamia or Dierbetch, built upon a strong situation:
Vlama a great Nobleman of Persia commanded therein: his quality and valor
had bound Solomon to make him governor; he had formerly married the Sister of
Scach Tach^as, son to Ismaell Sophi, and then King of Persia, who
discontented for some disgrace in Court left Persia, and came to serve the
Turk. Hibraim gave him thirty thousand men, and sent him before to discover
the Enemies country. Vlama who know the language and the country, approached
near unto Tauris, whereas Sultan Musa a near kinsman to the King commanded:
Being advertised of the approach of the Turkish Troops, and finding himself
too weak to attend them, abandons the City: Vlama enters and takes it:
Hibraim who followed him near came speedily, fortifies it, and in a new
citadell which he caused to be made, he placed three hundred and fifty pecces
of Ordinance, and sent to advertise Solomon of this good success. Never
favorite held himself so happy, nor so powerful over the envy of his
Enemies: But he shall find his misreckoning. Solomon aduanceth, comes to
Tauris, and stays three weeks, to see if Tachmas had any will to come and
encounter him. But he had neither power nor will. He was retired into the
Mountains, expecting greater forces than his own, that (...) say, that (...)
and the necessity of all things, with the (...) of (...), might force his
Enemy to retire: They followed (...) after the Northern winds, the Snow,
Frost, and went of victuals forced Solomon to take his way to Curd^stan, which
is Assyria, having left thirty two thousand men in Garrison within Tauris,
under the command of Vlama, of I^digiarberg and Serum Ogly. Fa^ (...) was
watchful seeing the Turkish Army far from Tauris, approaches with ten
thousand men: The Garrison go forth to encounter him and charge him; but
Iadigiarberg a notable Coward, growing amazed fled, and put all the rest in
disorder, and gave the advantage to Tachmas, who recovered Tauris, and brought
a notable change, causing the three hundred and fifty Cannons which were in the
Citadell to be moulten, whereof he made Manguris, which is a Coin of Persia,
and so that which was the terror of his people, became the delights of their
affections: Solomon in the mean time conquered Curdistan, and Baggadet; he
took Babylon, where he was crowned King of Assyria by the Caliphe, but not of
Persia, as the Magitian had promised him. Winter was now spent, and the Spring
approached: Vlama and Hibraim persuaded Solomon to return to Tauris, to punish
the rashness of Tachinas: He returns with his Army, and being within few
days march, Tachmas abandons the City and retires, burning and razing
whatsoever he found in the way, to stay his Enemy from following: The Turks
re-enter Tauris and their rage puts all they find to fire and sword, not
sparing senseless things; the stately Palaces became the subject of their
fury, and the City was the pitiful remainder of a sack and a cruel
spoil. Solomon retires, giving order that his chief forces should be in the
Rear, lest the enemy should follow and charge them behind. Tachmas was
wonderfully discontented, to see this fearful spoil in his Country, and in
the Capital City of his Realm, and could have no revenge; when as one of his
Satrapes, or Governors, a Caramanian by Nation and the most resolute man in
his Court, surnamed Delimeus, for his courage, (that is to say Fool) offered
himself, and promises (so as he would give him troops) to follow the Enemy
and to overtake him, and when he should think least of it, to make him pay
for the spoil which he had made in Persia. Tachmas grants which demands;
Delimeus goes his way, he runs or rather flies toward the place where the
Enemy was: His Spies being him word, that the Turks were camped near unto
Bathlis, ^yrod with long marches, and with the toil of a troublesome way; that
they slept without Guards, without watch, and without any Sentinels, so as it
would be easy for him to surprise them, if he would make his troops to double
their pace: Deliment makes more speed than they requi^ed, he draws near unto
the Turks at the shutting up of the day, and in the night goes to surprise
them, inuirons them, charge them, beats them, kills the greatest part, and
takes the rest prisoners, few escaping by flight. Solomon understood the next
day of the loss of his men, and seeing the small troops he had remaining,
finds four hundred thousand men wanting, of those which followed him from
Constantinople, the which were dead in Persia, either slain by the Sword, or
famished with hunger, or frozen with cold, the which made him return toward
his Serrail. He comes to Aleppo, and soon after to Constantinople, and detests
in his soul, the Counselor of this Voyage and the War of Persia. The
Sultana's find at his return, a ample subject to ruin Hebraims fortune, and
to be revenged of the presumption he had used against them. They observe the
murmuring of the people against this Favorite, and what the great mens^e of
him, and make it known to Solomon. Moreover, as they were busy to ruin his
greatness, they discover that this Bassa favored the House of Austria, and
that he had secret intelligence with the Emperor Charies the Fifth, an Enemy to
his Master: This treachery being auerred, it did wholly overthrow that which the
Sultana's had already shaken. Solomon to whom they had made known the truth of
all this, concludes his death; but the promise and oath which he had made unto
him not to put him to death whilst he were alive, suspends the execution
until he might find a Dispensation by the advice and ^ritie of the chief
Priests of his Law; (...) of the most Learned; one of the number gives him a
pleasant (...), to free himself of the Bassa, and yet to keep his Word. You
have sword, Sir, says he, not to put him to death, whilst you are living;
(...) him up be strangled when you are asleep: Life consist (...) ^gilam
action, and he the sleeps does not truly (...) to you may punish his
disloyalty, and not violate your oath. Doubtless if Solomon were dead when
he slept, according to the saying of this Talisman, he has revived many
times whilst he lived. This Prince seeks noe more, he contents himself, to
have found a Clergy man which absolues him for this deed: He sends for Hibraim
Bassa to the Serrail, he causes him to supp with him, and supper being ended
he letts him see his crimes by his own letters written to Charles the fifth,
and Ferdinand his brother; he reproaches his ingratitude and commands his
dumb men to strangle him whilst he slept, and thereupon went to Bed. Thus
ended the life and greatness of Hibraim Bassa favorite to Solomon: For an
example, that if the fortunes of the Court shine like gold, they break like
glass. His Maistes had advanced him more then he desired, fearing a fall in
the beginning of his fortune, into the which he did precipitate himself by his
disloyalty: he supported the continuance of his greatness upon his Princes
Oath: Cuncta mortalium incarta; quanto pl^ adeptus forot tant^ se magis in
lubrico dissitants Tacit. li. 1. Annal. speaking of Tiberius who discoursed in
in this manner to the Senate.
But they were humane, and their nature is to have no other stay, but the
declining where they slide. A Courtiers favor is never durable, if it has not
Justice and Pity for Companions, which makes them zealous toward God, and
well deserving of men: If these parts be found in a Favorite, they make envy
to yield, and impose silence to the bitterest slanders Hibraim Bassa had not
these good qualities: his forms services had deserved some share in his
Masters affection; but his pride against the Sultana's, and his treachery
against Solomon made him unworthy of that which he enjoyed. So the Lion of
Lybia wipes out with her long tail the steps of her feet: the insolency which
followed, defaced all the good which went before. To enjoy the favor of the
Court, they must have so strong and generous a spirit, as they must never
suffer themselves to be transported with pride, nor dejected with amazement but
remaining in a commendable equality, continue courageously in doing well.

The example of the fortune and disaster of Hibraim Bassa shall be followed in
this History with that of the great credit, Deruier F^rites to At^
prosperities and disgraces of Bassa Derueir, a Favorite to Achmat the first,
Brother to Sultan Mustapha, who reigned of late years. This man of a base
condition labored in the Gardens of the Serrail, when as he began to enter
into favor: Achmat in his Garden-walkes, seeing his jouiall humor, took many
times delight in his tales, stayed to see him work, and in the end so affected
him, as without knowledge of any other merit, he made him Bostangibassi, or
great Gardener; This charge (as we have said) is one of the goodliest of the
Turkish Empire, being then void by his death who had enjoyed it: Therein
Deruier served with so great care, and made himself so pleasing to his Master,
as he bound him to make him greater. The General of the Sea dies, and Achmat
gives him the place: he does it with that luster and pomp which follows this
dignity; he causes the Galleyes to be armed, goes to Sea, takes all he meces
with, and sails so happily as the inconstant winds seemed to favor him, and
the most inconstant Elements seem to joy in the happiness of this new
Favorite; his courses are fortunate, and his return glorious: But the Sea of
the Court more stormy than the Sea it self will one day teach him that it
does amaze the best Pilots, and will make him feel to his disgrace, a more
troublesome shipwreck, than he could have found upon the waves of the Louant
Seas. The reception which he found at his return, and the triumph wherewith
he is honored after the taking of many Christian Vessels, are felicities
which flatter, Nibil esse tam e^elsum, quod non virtutes isla, tuusque (...)
^^ntur, Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. Tiberius spoke so to Sci^ his Favorite, who
demanded Lanis in Marriage.
and deceiving him, make him imagine that happiness it self did him homage.
Achmat cherished him more than himself, and had no rest, until he had
advanced him to the height of the prosperities of the Court: That is to say, to
the Dignity of Grand Vizir, Lieutenant General of his Empire: Soon after it
fell void, and he bestowed it on him, with these words of affection: There is
not any thing in my Estate, how great soever it be, which thy virtues, and the
affection thou bear to my service, has not well deserved. Thus De^r became
the first man of the Turks Court, and his Master was sorry, that he could not
make him the prime Man of the World. In this charge he restored many good
Laws, which disorder had overthrown; he reduced every man to his duty,
struck terror into the Magistrates: and let the Soldiers know that they were
unworthy to make their Musters, and to receive the pay, if they be not in case
to serve. These things doubtless had crowned his name with new glory, if
violence and cruelty had not blemished him: He caused more men to be executed
in one day, than his Predecessors had done in a whole year: The least
suspicion of a Crime was culpable of punishment, and this Favorite made less
account of the life of men, than of the Coleworts which he had sometimes
planted in the Gardens of the Serrail. But violence is never durable, and that
Favorite which follows it suffers himself to be led to his own ruin. He
that kills, shall be killed (sai^ God) he that loves blood shall perish in
blood. Doubtless, it is a miserable thing in Princes Courts, and prejudicial
to a whole Estate, that a base fellow, and a man of nothing, without virtue or
merit should be advanced to the quality of a Favorite; master the affections
of his Sovereign, and enjoy the prime Dignities of an Empire: For such persons
are most commonly cruel; contemn the Nobility, and make no account of
virtue, as being ignorant of the one and the other. Derueir in all these
Offices had gathered together great treasures, the which with his extraordinary
severity, furnish matter of Envy to the other Bassa's, who all jointly
undertake his ruin, and labor so carefully therein, as they find means to
entertain Sultan Achmat, with the insolences of his carriage: he hears them,
belieues part of that which they tell him, and grows so violently jealous of
the credit and authority of Deruier, that he resolves to free himself of him;
he concludes his death, and commands the execution to a troop of the Capigis
of his Serrail, who received commandment to strangle him, as soon as he
should come: But he will trouble them to perform it, they shall not find in
him a delicate favorite, bred up from his youth in the softness of the Court,
he will defend his life courageously, and let them see that a man, which has
long time handled a Spade and a Mattocke, is not so easily mastered. Achmat
sends for Deruier to the Serrail; he comes and is scarce entered when he
suspects the party which was made against him; he goes into the Grand Sigueurs
quarter, being there, this troop of Capigis fall upon him to seize on him, and
to put the Halter about his neck; he frees himself from them, and stands upon
his defense although he had nothing in his hands, and with his fists scatters
them bravely; he beats one of their Noses flat, puts out the eye of another,
and strikes out his teeth that held the Halter, and puts him out of breath
which had taken hold of his Arm, and remains free in the midst of al them
which did i^biron him, and durst not take him: The fear of punishment which
does attend those which do not speecily execute the will of the Sultan in such
affairs, and the shame that one man alone disarmed should slay them all,
^uised one of the troop to fetch a Leauer, wherewith approaching to Deruier,
he gave him so great a blow as he brake his thigh, and overthrew him; then
they put the cord about his neck and strangled him. Thus he ended his life,
which governed the whole Turkish Empire, and struck a terror into the
greatest: The iouiall humors and the humble discourses of the Gardener, had
raised him to the greatest fortune that a Courtier could find in all the world;
and the insolency and pride of the Grand Vizir had humbled him, and delivered
him to the mercy of a dozen Rascals which strangle him: For a new example,
that favor is not durable, if it has not moderation for its companion, and
Justice and Piety to support it. His body is buried without pomp or honor,
his treasure came unto the Sultan, and his name was so forgotten, as in three
days they did not know in Court if there had been any such man. The which may
serve for a lesson to great Men, which possess their Princes, that the course
of a boundless and proud favor in Court is like the flight of a Bird in the
Air, the passage of a Ship at Sea, or the gliding of a Serpent upon the
stones, where there remains no show.

Nassuf Favorite to Achmas
This thing happened at Constantinople in the year 1606. But of a later date in
the year 1614. Nassaf Bassa, of whom we have formerly shade mention, Grand
Vezir of the Turkish Empire and favorite to the same Sultan Achmat, gave (by
the fall of his fortune) as much amazement to the East, as his prosperities had
given admiration his riches were greater and his credit more absolute then the
two former favorites; but his extraction and Birth as base as theirs, and his
pride equal. He was Son to a Greek Priest, borne in a little Hamblet near
to Salonica. The Collectors of the tribute took him from his Fathers house in
his infancy, and led him to Constantinople, where he was sold for three
Sultanins, (which is four and twenty shillings of our sterling money) to an
Eunuch of the Serraeil, who bred him up unto the age of twenty years. Then
he sold him to a steward of the Sultana Mother to Achmat, to serve him in his
charge. This Man soon found in his slave the eminent gifts of a free spirit,
which is enlightened with dexterity: and holding him fit for greater affairs
then those of the household, wherein he employed him, he gave him the
ouer-sight of the building of a rich and stately Mosquee, which the Sultana
Mother caused to be built at her charge, to be an immortal mark of her
pictio and magnificence. He prospered so well in this charge, and gave so good
proefes of his Judgment, as he gave good content unto the Sultana, and hard
such part in her liking and affection, as she made him Superintendant of her
house. In thi^ Dignity he let the whole Serrail See, what an able and
sufficient Man may do when he is employed in affairs; his merit came unto
the knowledge of Sultan Achmat, who would have him to his service. Thus he
changed Master, and mounted to a new Dignity. Achmat gave him the place of
Capigibassi, soon after he made him Bassa of Alepp^, where having finished the
time, which they give to such Governors, they honored him with the Dignity of
Governor General of Messopotamia: he parted from Constantinople, having the
train, attendance and pomp, of a Turkish Viceroy. The commodity of this
Province, Frontier to Persia, filled his Cofers with treasure, and his Spirit
with ambition. He knew that he was very necessary for his Master, he saw
that the Neighborhood of the Persian, might by secret intelligences with him
bring him great wealth. This imagination flatters him, and his avarice follows
him: he abandons his fidelity to the offers which the Persian King made him,
and practices in secret with his Ministers, and favors what he can, the
Enemy of his Sovereign Prince. Achmat is advertised, and loving him still with
passion, dissembles his crime and resolves to gain him to himself, to
dis-ingage him from the Persian, and to content his ambition with any thing he
could desire in his Empire. To this end he sends for him to Constantinople,
and at his ariuall gave him the place of Grand Vizir, which Serdar had newly
left, and with it the best and richest of this Bassa's spoils. Moreover he
promised to give him the Sultana his Daughter in Marriage. All these things are
signs of the great bounty of Achmat, thus to honor a Traitor, who deserved
rather a shameful death, then the first dignity of the Turkish Empire; they
will in like sort be a testimony of the ingratitude of the favorite, who will
abuse them. For an example that too indulgent a Prince to a notable Traitor,
does furnish him with means to do worse. Nassuf being now Grand Vizir and with
assurance to be Son in law to his Master, goes to horseback, and in
quality of General of an Army, leads the forces of Turkey against the
Persian, enters with them into his Country, makes a general spoil, and
forces Ka Abbas, who is King at this Day, to demand a peace, and in the mean
time grants him a truce for six Months. He parts from Persia, leading with
him the Ambassador of Ka Abbas, he comes to Constantinople, enters in pomp,
he is received not only as the vanquisher of Persia, but as the restorer of
the Othoman esta^e. The custom of Turkey binds the Bassa's when they return
from their governments, and the Generals of Armies from the War, to make a
present unto the Sultan. Nassuf at his coming exceedes the magnificence of all
the Presents that ever entered into the Serrail, since the Turks estate was
settled, for besides a thousand rarities which he brought from Persia, to the
Sultan his Master; he presented him with a Million of Gold coined, and within
few days after married his Daughter. This is the ascent and height of his
fortune: Behold the descent. Achmat saw that Nassuf exceeded the ordinary of
all the other Vizirs which had served him, that his treasure did equal his, if
not exceed it: Auri vim atque op^s principibus insensas esse, said Sosibius
Governor to Britannicus in Tacit lib. 11. Annal.
He conceived a jealousy (abundance of riches is many times criminal and
offensive to Princes) and grows into distrust of his actions. The Bassa's
having some vent thereof by some of the Agalarie, Eunuchs of the Chamber,
labor to inform him of the carriage of Nassuf. The Bassa of Babylon knew more
than any Man, they cause him to come to Constantinople, and obtained secret
audience for him: This Man did plainly discover unto the Sultan, that the Bassa
Nassuf betrayed him, for the which he drew great Pensions from the Persian, to
whom he wrote the secrets of his most important affairs. Achmat well informed
of the disloyalties of his Favorite, resolves not to leave them unpunished,
and presently concludes his death: He gives the charge to the Bostangibassi,
which is the great Gardener: Nassuf is aduertized by the Sultana, which was
most favored, being his Pensioner, that Achmat was much discontented with him:
This amazeth him, he faines himself sick, and keeps his bed; the
Bostangibassi comes to his Lodging, and demands to speak with him in the
Sultans name, he excused himself upon the discommoditie of a violent
purgation which troubled him: The Bostangibassi presses it, and tells him that
he would not return until he had spoken with him; that the Sultan had
commanded him to see him, in what estate he was, and to learn from himself the
news of his health. Then Nassuf commanded they should suffer him to come:
There the Bostangibassi complements with him concerning his indispostion, and
assured him that he should be soon cured: he might boldly speak it, seeing
he carried the remedy in his pocket. After such like discourses of courtesy,
he drew out of his pocket a commandment from the Sultan written to Nassuf, to
send him the Seals of his Empire. Nassuf obeys, causes them to be brought
unto his bed, wraps them in his Handkercher, seals them with his own Seal,
and giving them to the Bostangibassi kisses them, and entreats him to assure
his Master, that he had kept them faithfully, and had never sealed any thing
which was against his service: Then he thought that the coffeehouse whereof
the Sultana aduertized him, would have no other sequel but to deprive him of
his charge, which they call in this Court to be made Mansul, and that by the
help of his friends and the force of money, he might be restored in a short
time. His misreckoning was not far off; the Bostangibassi, being now in
possession of the Seals of the Empire, drew forth another Commandment to
Nassuf from the same Sultan, to send him his head: Then Nassuf cried out,
calling Heaven and Earth to witness of his innocence; he desired to speak
with the Sultan, and entreats the Bostangibassi to conduct him; he excuses
himself, that he had no other charge but to see him strangled by ten or twelve
Capigis which attended him: Upon this refusal he contested long; but seeing to
defer his end, was but to prolong his distemperature and grief, he resolves
to die, only he demands of the great Gardener to suffer him to go and wash
himself in a Chamber near by, to depart this World in the estate of purity,
according to the Turks belief, which hold the washing of the body for the
purification of the souls: This grace also was denied him. Then he abandons
his life to the Capigis who were about his bed: they put a cord about his
neck, and not able to strangle him so speedily as they desired by reason of
his extraordinary fatness, one of them drew a Knife out of his pocket, Tacitus
in the ^ourth Book of his Annals, speaks as much of Suilius in these words,
Quem vidit sequeatatas prapotentem venalem and Claudij Pri^cipus amiciti^ as a
propere, nunquam been (...).
and cut his throat. Achmat would see him dead, to be the better assured; and
then appointed his burial among the common people without any honor. Such was
the fortune of Bassa Nassuf and such his fall: His good wit had raised him to
these great Dignities of his Empire, and his pride cast him down, having long
enjoyed the favor of his Master, and made no good use of it: His riches equal
to his fortune were extraordinary; the Officers of the treasure, which were
employed to take an Inuentory of his goods, found in his Cosers in Sultanin^,
(which is a Coin of Gold) five hundred thousand pounds sterling, in Silver
coined three hundred and eight thousand pounds sterling, the quantity of three
bushels of precious Stones not yet wrought, a bushel of Diamonds not set, and
two bushels of goodly round Pearls. His Armory was furnished with above a
thousand rich Swords, whereof the least had the Hilt and Pomell of silver, and
amidst this number there was one all set with Diamonds, valued at twenty
thousand pounds sterling money: The Chambers of his Lodging and his Wardrobe,
were richly hanged with Tapestry of Persia and Caire: Many rich stuffes of
silk and gold excellently wrought, did augment the quantity of his precious
Moueables: In his Stables were found above a thousand great Horses of price,
four hundred and forty Mares of Arabia and Egypt, as beautiful as any Painter
could represent, with this there were many thousand Camels and Moiles for his
Baggage when he traveled: In his base Courts they numbered a hundred thousand
Oxen, Kine and Sheep: the number of his slaves exceeded four thousand. With
this great wealth he might have done great good, if he had had a friend to give
him good counsel (but great prosperities have not any) who might have contained
him by wise advice, within the limits of his duty. Thus the favors and pomps
of the Court pass away. Those of Turkey, culpable of the least crimes, yea
those which are innocent are of no longer continuance. For if the Court in what
place soever, be a Sea full of waves, that of the Othoman is always beaten
with storms, and tossed with Tempests: The winds of the Sultana's passions,
which are most cherished by the Prince, the covetous desires of the Enuches
which serve him, and are his familiars, banish the calm, and are the cause of
such like shipwrackes, if they do not pacify the greediness of the one, in
glutting them with presents, and the avarice of the other by great pensions.
And although they take this course most commonly, yet notwithstanding they are
oftentimes allarmed, suffer troublesome apprehensions, and live always in
fear and disquietnesse. To teach men, which admire and adore the luster of
such fortunes that their perfectest joys are fruitful in sorrows: And when
they think to make their Paradise in this World, then they carry their Hell
with them.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Grand Seigneurs Arms and Seals.
THe Turks who esteem virtue by its price have no Arms, nor Sirnames: The
Laws established and severely observed among them, which have made them so
powerful upon earth, would thus banish out of Turkey (although somewhat
preposterously) this subject of vanity in Families, and force men rather to
support their glory upon their own merit, than in the virtue of their
Ancestors which is not theirs: For this cause in their Monarchy, the son of a
great Bassa, is less esteemed than he of a Waterman, if he has less virtue:
All the advantage he can challenge, to be borne of virtuous Parents, is to
term himself their son. As for example, Mustapha the son of Siruan shall
be called Siruanogli, that is to say, the son of Siruan: The rest of his
glory must be supplied by himself, and not borrowed from his Father. Their
Emperors have no Arms, and the Family of the Othomans never bear any. They
defaced in the siege of the Gracian Empire, those of the most Illustrious
Family of the Paliologus, who were the Sovereign Monarchs, who carried
gloriously the Titles of their triumphant prosperities, by four Letters
separated distinctly, which the Greeks call Vita, and not Fusils, as some have
dreamed, these Letters signified in the same Language, (...), that is to say,
King of Kings, reigning over them that reign. It is true the Turkish Princes,
have some kind of Mark or Ensign, rather of their Empire than of their
Family: for when as they represent it, they paint the Globe of the World, with
a Crescent or half Moon on the top; and in their Armies, their Ensigns have
no other device but the same Crescent: their Towers and Steeples carry it, yea
the Pilgrims which go to Mequa, carry it on the top of their slaves: the
which shows that this Crescent is rather a mark of their Religion, then of
the Imperial Race. We have observed in our History of their Religion, the
Miracle which Mahomet their Prophet brags he had done, when as he repaired the
Moon which was torn, and all in pieces, after he had drawn it from Heaven
and put it into his sleeue: The Turks which count their Months by Moons,
show the verity hereof, when as they prostrate themselves in the beginning
thereof, before the Moon, and lifting up their eyes to his brightness, they
pray unto God that he will grant them the grace to begin happily, to continue
in like manner, and to end with good success the course of this Star.

The Imperial Seal of the Grand Seigneurs of Turkey, has no other figure,
but certain Arabian Characters, which express their name, that of their
Father, and note the pride of the felicity whereof they brag. Achmat the
Emperor, who died in the year 1617, had caused these words to be graven in
the Seal, wherewith his Patents were sealed: Achmet ibni Mehemet Cham Sadet:
that is to say; Achmet son to Mehemet, Emperor always victorious. The other
Othoman Monarchs, have in a manner the same device, the names only changed: It
is true that the Arabique Letters are so interlaced one with another (in a
manner like the Ciphers, wherewith they express their names in France) as few
men in his Estate, can expound them: only the Vizir, or he which scales has
the perfect knowledge. This manner of grauing their Seals only with Letters,
has been imitated only from their Prophet: For the Turkish Monarchy, and all
that depends thereof, hold it a glory to have for their principal support, the
Religion which he professes, and to have no other interest but his: Mahomet
the Author of the Alcoran, caused words only to be graven in his Seal, and
words without truth; which were these, Mahomet the Messenger of God. This
Seal was made seven hundred and five or six years before that Othoman the
first Prince of that Family, which reigns at this day in the East, had settled
the Turkish Monarchy: and since, we do not read that any Turkish Emperor has
had any other Arms for their Seals than the Characters and Arabique words:
Thus these men by words not cast into the wind, as many other Princes do, but
graven, have by the esteem which they have made of the virtue of men which
have served them, subdued the Emperor of Constantinople, ravished that of
Trebifonde, seized upon Egypt, Palestina, Damas, Pamphylia, Cilicia, Caramania,
and all Natolia, vanquished Rhodes and Cyprus, triumphed over Graecia, Albania,
Illyria, and the Triballieus, and likewise does by his Arms possess the best
parts of Moldania, Transilnania, and Hungary, and without doubt, their
Conquests had extended farther into the Provinces of Christendom, if Heaven
had not given them bounds, and stayed their courses, by the troubles of the
Othoman House, and the death of its Princes.

CHAP. XX. Of the Death, Mourning, Funeral, and Burying, of the Grand
SEIGNEVAS, Emperors of Turkey.
THe Kings which receive tribute from so many Nations pay it unto death, and
the condition of their perishing life, makes them to suffer this equality with
other men, to return unto dust the common beginning of all even living: the
which should incite them the (...) to forget the glory of their Name, and to
repair by their goodly and royal actions, the shortness of their days,
(...) they may past from the disquietnesse of an (...) Religion, (...) eternal
rest of a heavenly command, and change their Crowns which are not durable, to
the Diadem of an Empire which has no end. The Turkish Sultans spend their
days far from those wise thoughts in the (...) of their (...), in the midst
of pleasures, with their Sultan's; the (...) of (...), does blemish their
glory, and (...) their (...) the humors of their Bodies, and shortens their
(...). For delights kill more men than the sword. When they can sick, (...) ni
Bassa, who is the chief of the Physicians, assembles the rest within the
Serrail, and shuts himself up with them, where they labor for the cure of
their Master, with that care which we have formerly mentioned. Remedies are
but for helps, they draw them not from the Bed, whereas their life and pride
must have an end: They die, and leaving their Scepters and Crowns, with all
that which the World adores, they carry nothing with them but the good they
have done living, yet unprofitable to their souls health, seeing they have not
Truth for their Guide. The Prince which is to succeed puts on Mourning, and
attires himself in black for a short time, he couers his head with a little
Turbant, and does testify by his exterior show, the grief he has for the
loss of his Predecessor, although that in his soul, he feels the most
sensible joy that ever he had. Thus Selym the Third showed himself before the
Body of Selyman the Second, his Father, who dyed in Hungary at the siege of
Sighet: All the Bassa's wear little Turbants in sign of Mourning: And if the
Emperor dies in the War as Solomon did, all the Ensigns and the Standard
Royal, are turned downward toward the ground, until the now Sultan takes his
Royal Robes, and puts on a great white Turbane, the which is done soon after:
Then they cry as we have formerly related; That the soul of the Invincible
Emperor Sultan N. enjoyes the immortal glory and eternal peace: That the
Empire of Sultan N may prosper withal felicity. But they interre them all in
Constantinople, since they settled the Seat of their Empire in that place:
Before, their Tombs were erected at Prussia in Asia, the place of their first
Domination: their (...) in this manner.

The Emperors Body is carried in a Cossin covered with Linen very rich, or of
Velvet: His Turbant is set before it, with a Plume of He^ Feathers: The
Talismans, San^, Alpha^uis, Der^, and the like rabble of the Alcoran, carry in
their hands T^pers lighted, to show that their Prophet is the Ape of
Christianity; go before singing in their Language such Verses, A^a rahmmani
arh^ Alla, illa Alla, Alla (...) Alla, that is to say, Merciful God bane
pity on him, there is no God but God, God is God. They also say these words:
Iabilac ^illata Mehemet ressultaha tungari bir berem berac; which signifies,
God is God, and there is no other God, Mahomet is his Counselor, and his true
Prophet. Before the Corpse does march the Mutaferaga, who carries the Emperors
Turbant upon a Lance, with the tail of a Horse tied near unto it: The
Ianizaries, the Solachi, and the rest of the Imperial Guard follow the Hearse:
After these the Officers of the Sultans house march in order under the conduct
of Casuegirhassi, or Master of the Household: The Malundarb bedith mandura,
carries the deceased Grand Seigueurs Arms, and the Royal Standard dragging
upon the ground: The Bassa's and all the great Men of the Port, yielding their
last duty unto their Master, assist at their Funeral pleasantly attired in
mourning: They have a piece of Grey-cloth hangs before and behind from the head
to the foot, like unto the Fro^k which the Brethren of the Hospital, of the
Charity, in the Suburbs of Saint Germain at Paris do wear: some of them for
that they will not seem too sorrowful; tie only a long piece of Linen cloth,
to the end of their Turbants, which h^ng down unto their heels. In this great
Mourning the most (...) in the (...) Count, hold their Rancks in this Funeral
Pomp, whereas the Men make but a part of the Convoy, (...) supply the rest,
with less grief and more ^cares: For all the Sultans great Horses are at his
Interment; they carry their Saddles turned upward, and better covered than the
Bassa's in their Gray Froches, they have black Velvet hanging unto the ground:
They weep and sigh without (...): They put Assagoth or Tobacco into their
(...), and into their eyes to draw forth (...) is the (...) pomp of the
Turkish Sultans, who being (...) men to weep f^ their loss, constrain (...)
to (...): In this (...) they conduct the body (the hard first after the Turkish
manner) to the Tomb where they will enclose (...) is usually (...) to the
Mosqu^e, which the deceased Sultan has cause built, in a Chapel apart: the
Sepulcher is covered with black Velvet. If the Prince died in the War, they
lay his Scmiter upon it; if not, his Turbant is advanced, and set against the
wall near unto the Tomb, with rich Plumes of Herons feathers for an Ornament;
two Candlestickes which carry great Tapers gilt, are at the foot of the
Sepulcher: Some Turkish Priests which are instituted to that end, repeat
continually the Azoares of the Alcoran in their turns, and one after another
says the Turks Chapelet; whereof we have spoken in the History of their
Religion, and pray continually for the soul of the deceased. On Fridayes these
Imperial Tombs, are adorned with new Couerings, and strewed with flowers:
They which come on such days pray for the dead, or power forth theirteares,
and take a Nosegay when they return. Sometimes they do also set much meat, to
give Alms unto the poor, and they call to these Funeral Feasts, not only
poor Beggars, but also Beasts, as Dogs, Cats, and Bi^s, the which are
honorably received, and feasted with as much liberty and safety as the Men,
who seeing the paws of Cats in pottage with their hands, dare not chase them
away: But contrariwise they owe them respect and succor, as those whom misery
has made their equals, and therefore capable to receive the effects of the
Turkish Charity: For the Mahomets hold opinion, that to give Alms unto Beasts
is a work no less meritorious before God, than to give unto Men: for that,
say they, these poor animals possess nothing in this World, where they are
destitute of all temporal goods, necessary for the maintenance of life. Thus
they shut him up in six foot of ground whom all the World could not contain,
and whose unrestrained ambition aspired to more Empire than the Earth
contains: And after that he had bin a terror to Men, and the cruel scourge
of many Nations, he is made the subject of Worms, and their ordinary food. In
this manner passes, and ends the glory of the World.

FINIS.

