THE NEW ARIVAL OF the three Gracis, into Anglia.
Lamenting the abusis of this present Age.



Esaias. 58.34.24. Cry now, as loud as thou can, leave not of, list up thy
voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their offencis, and the house of Jacob
their sins.

To his most Loving and friendly
Father: (V. Villiam Beeston Brewer) S.B. wishes continual health, with
end-lesse felicity.

WHen, and at such time, beloved Father, I had called to my remembrance, the
great good will, and wished benefits proceeding from you, toward me: and on
my part very slenderly deserved in comparison, the acquiting of such courtesy:
After many inventions had, by what means to show forth some such occasion,
how to gratify you, as a sure show of obedience, thereby to occasion no
less good will to follow, then formally by you was begone. And calling to
ininde one of the grave sentences of Seneca, which says, That the remembrance
of benefits ought not to be forgotten, and that a small thing given willingly,
is more acceptable then great riches with evil will: And that the will of the
geuer, and not the value of the gift, is to be regarded: rhese documentes and
such like, urged me to devise some thing, whereby you might perceive in me, not
only my obedience to fatherly parentage, but also to prove such a son (good
will being first preferred) to be more worthy a benefit, Diogines
then to have given, which benefit that I look for, is your continual
societye and fatherly affection, to abide with no less good will, then
hitherto it has been: To that end therefore, I have taken upon me to write this
work following for you to look upon: And although it seem barren for lack of
a more furniture, and altogether pore, like unto the writer: Nevertheless, I
hope you will except it with no les good will, in comparison of mortal fieshe,
then Jesus the savior of mankind, who excepted the two mites put into the
treasury by a pore widow, Luke. 21.
being all the substance that she had: so this small work of mine, being all
the substance that I possess (as touching good will) have with no les imparted
the same unto you, which work bears the name of the three graces,
Thankfulness, Plenteousnes, and Liberality: which if you peruse thoroughly, I
doubt not, but it will content your mind so, as occasion may serve to further
remembrance, considering that to attain virtues, we have good desire, Marcus
but to obtain vices, we put to all our works: such is our corruption, Aur.
for the which cause, every desiring mind to obtain knowledge, ought to take
heed where virtue is to be learned: Socrates
for the les time man has to live, which may be perceived from the day of
birth to the hour of death, with what speed it hasteneth, and the time stays
for none: to be ready prepared to the haven of peace, to the end our mortal
enemy reign not over us, the more earnestly ought man, in virtues study to be
proceeding in: my loving Father (therefore ler this my work be so accepted, as
good will in his continuance, may further a greater: And as concerning this
already finished, there can nothing be amended or rightly corrected, but by
that, which surmou^teth, and is better then it, Plato.
as vice by virtue, falshode by truth: wrong by justice: folly by wisdom:
ignorance by learning, and such like. For the which cause every particular
being considered, I doubt not but that you will as favorably receive this my
travail with no les good will, then I in presuming to dedicate the same unto
you, whom I account most worthiest: not for affection but for your godly life
and christian religion: in the which, the almighty father, son, and holy
ghost strengthen with continuance, that both father, and son, by the holy
ghost: with father, son and holy ghost, may praise the almight in the
celestial heavens, world without end. Amen.

Your obedient son, Steven Batman.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
WHen and at such time, (belouid) as the miserable state, and manners of men
were espied: the untruths, the crafty imaginacions and wicked practices, of
peruersse, and froward persons: The^ by divine suffera^ce diverse learned and
ancient Fathers began, no sooner the evils perceived, to set forth against
such (their abusis) with the threatenings of gods vengance for ye same, diverse
and sundry ensamples, to the withdrawinge of such, as much as in them lay, from
the infernal pit, prepared for offense: to that end, that as careful
Parents, perceuing their children to wander from the line of obedience, might
in time, by mesurid correction, bring the^ from such their disorder, to a
better pass. In which so doing, although some children, by overmuch
sufferance, in the beginning of their entrance, through induranci, and
hardness of heart, not only neglect their times from such obedience, but also
as froward Imps continue in their ungodliness, shall for their so doing reap
no less infamy then the Zodomits did, Example Genesis 1 Exodus 2.
who refusing the entreaty of that ancient Father Lot, were consumid with
Fire: or as when Moses, rebuked him that wrongid ye Hebrwe, very charitably,
but he took it ill, and spoke iniuriustye, saying, bout thou kill me, as thou
dyddest the Egiptian, etc. Not far unlike, are the aunswers of sundry
Scctarians, in these days, who for brotherly repprehensions gives the like
answers, Note h^w discreetly Nathan ye prophet rebuked David, after he had
committed adoultery and murder, 2. Re. 2.
he said not angerly, thou have don wickedly, but with an apt ^ meet
^militude, he intrappid him by the wordz of his own mouth, Steven being with
the Jews in cou^sail, did boldly reprehende them, saying among other things:
Dye stiffenecked, and of vnu^^^umcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy ghost, as your forefathers did, so do ye, a worthy note to
such as will enter into judgment in matters of religion, before they know what
it means: and although that among many, some may have judgment, yet after the
manner of me^, it is not justice, therefore most metest to be reformed, when the
Thessalonians walked unquietly, ye Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
with brotherly reprehension said unto them: why walk ye in ordina^ly working
not at all, but being curious, and busibodies: and therefore he rebuked them.
Many diuerz and sundry ensamples there are, which moves brotherly affection, to
consider such substance, for the which cause, after many auctorities vewid,
and diverse historis redd, and being mo^id, not with a few griefs, to see this
present time so alterid from kind, devised this slender, and unfurnished
woork, to the profit of my Country: and yet not altogether so unfurnished, but
that by diligent perusing, some good thing may be found. It was good will,
that forced me to write according to my skill: yet considering with my self how
far unable I was to frame that which affection monid, after good will had
inforcid: In remembering the Be, with the same affection, went forward: For
among the Bees, such order is, that when the young begins to fly, Bartho.
de pro^^.
and that he apply him self with carrying: first he learneth by the greater to
gather war, then to frame the work, which being don, the^ to gathering the
honey, that those neat wrought selles, may be filled, and in such time, as the
season ferneth, that or ever the frosts appear, Gesnerus
each Be, may have sufficient to preserve him from the baraine Winter or
cold, so as a poor Be, the Wax being gatherid, from the substance of many
flowers and by means of the sweet smelling blues, huny is increasid, wherewith
to suffice each Be in the extremity of could, the war to keep safe from
cold, the honey to preserve life, and to comfort such young as in the mean
time is increased. And as the wax is profitable, Isidorus Aristotle
in the dark to yield by art his light, to the great comfort of the beholder,
so is the hunney for the inward parts of men, being moderately taken, to keep
the body from putrified humors: by the Be, the wax, and the hunney, I
considered the diligent painful Christian, the profet of actorites, the gift
of the holy ghost: these three, moved me, to this my sely labor, far unfit to
come among the master Bees, but for as much as the smaller or feebeler sort,
are defended by the great, by the means of indeuer: so hope I to be, because
good will has presumed in stead of learning, to frame that which may do good
to the most, and harm with the least. Thus gentill Reader use my labor, with
such brotherly affection, as by my work, thou may perceue my meaning. In
which so doing, I commit thee unto the tuicion (by prayer) of the almighty God
for ever and ever AMEN.

By Stephan Batman Minister.
SOMNIVM.
WHen that Saturno, Planiet he, in midst of Libra spread, I F

and Hyems, force, began to hie, with dolers in my bed
A thousand woes, began me oppress, to see ye world such
as each creature, in his kind, the one, at other grutch.
Dismayed in mind, to se such chance, to happi^ cou^tri the^
Oblivion, she that grace forgot, alew^ring many men,
To follow fancis lore, without remorse of pain,
and Gospels predication, to hold as thing but vain.
For to bewail so ill a chance, it dentyd so my mind, I H

when vewid was mine own deserts, against Christ my god so kind
Then to devise some theme at large, whereby the rest to warn, T M

sweet Charites, her self applied, to keep me ay from harm.
She gave me charge, my quiuering hand, the Pen to held full fast,
with speed to write what she me bad, though long, yet at the last
Then settling so both hand and pen, as pleasid her to devise,
whose words in order followed so: few wisemen will despise.
From Eanus, he the god of Eyer, the whole earth now does view,
not sparing one, but each degree, by what means to pursew
If victory, were shure to get, then look for present doom,
that restless rage, of his so toils, just friendship to consume.
These three, to further thine intent, so guyded shall by me, W S

who hiet Aglaia, thankfulness, to virtue does agree
Then, Thalia, the most plentius, to yield each days increace,
Euphrosine, that liberal dame, which scarcite does seace.
These three to gyde thy pen aright, shall daily thee attend,
against that huge, Enceladus, though, Terra, Enc^lad^s huge mo^ster which
signifies contempt of al good orders. ^ous an i will between Sardina and Africa,
where n^ venemus thing may live.
him defend
By force of valiant Tonos, he, to Etnas, fiery flame,
that Jupiter, which rules on hie, such furious rage to tame.
If Albion she, except thee not, I will the straight convey,
to Ebosus, Sardina, eyle, where thou shall bear such sway
As Gargites, old Gereons, dog, although he seem to byte,
shall sterue for meat, and pine away, though it apere in sight
In these my words conceue a show, such frindship so to frame
as Jove, the just may be obaid, with lasting praise to name
Then Charites so do me call, a frind to Troyan eyle,
who wishes shure no small renoume, to such so happy soil,
(And why) for that the welthy is, or that of strength has store,
(no no), but for because that Jove the just, as yet does favor more,
Her state, her peace, and her renoume, to try her trusty love,
which being found, W W
ungrateful then, full soon, will her remove,
Poor Cynon he, for lands defense, the Troyans, did forewarne
was for his labor naught except, till they had felt the harm,
But then to late, or Cacus. Gesnerus Preterit^. Bartholome Anglicus.
so now foresee, left Gallia, a Calchas breeds
and so in stead of holsom herbs, may light on poysonid weeds.
The Panter, he example geues, when so disposid to spoil,
by hyding of his head from beasts, as though he meant no goile:
By savor sweet, they follow still, and he them both alure,
till place convenient so him please, their death he does procure.
To read, to write, or to indite, for cuntries thine defense,
seace not, but do thy self employ, look for no recompense
But at the hands of Charites, even I reward will thee,
when vital breath, is spent and gone, with Christ thy Lord to be,
O Anglia, Chius an esse by greece in the sea ^e geu^ which as Sirab^ writith
that it cannot be re^^embrid, (...) ^rith in y^ country was any adoulteri among
the^ selves committed.
thou of Chius, learn thy god and prince to fear,

where none a^oultry there was found, or one that would vpreare
Him self against his Prince or king, each other sought to save,
as lasting praise re^ounes thereof, all vicis did deprave.
Sense time that Engist thee possessed, as fleeting have thou been,
as Chemmis, the whole weighty payse, most strange is to be seen
Herodotus, so does express, huge woods, and trees there be,
with hills and dales, in wondrus sort, as daily such may see.
As into Egypt, will resort, this strange s^ight to peruse,
a land, to swem, there to be seen, on this some hap may muse
But what for this it seems a toye, if naught but so ye mean,
some better grain I wish to seek, a broad in felds to gleane.
By figured show some thing is meant, if so you please to mark
if not by this, then now give ear, to more effect do hark
When that Camillus, Aspiracis^. hae.
did beseedge, Hetruria, coast and soil,
and that the Trurians did perseue, ere long to have the foil.
Among the ancient, Falisi, a skoolemaster there was
which did devise by treason so, that he might bring to pass,
For to betray such Romans young, which he had there to gyde,
^y trained craft, so gat them forth, till foes they had espied,
And then by gyle, surrendrid them, into Camillus guard,
where he for traitors fact so don, receued a just reward,
Which was all naked, to be beat, with those his scollers shure,
unto the place, from whence he came, thus justice did procure,
For this untruth, of traitor fell, that such his countries spoil,
a guerd^n had, for vicious fact, a just reward for goyle,
He thought great riches to have had, the wicked thus pretend,
god grant all those whose minds are such, even so to make an end
If flattering, Parasite, were not, then none, would shure be found
where now not one, or two there is, thee daily do abound:
But who that sees, and yet is blind, a dimnid sight has shure,
his woes with other, eake also, there sorrows do procure.
If every one which seeks by gain, the commons to oppress,
by cullered license for the time, might have the like redress:
Then such procurers would shure cease, and plenty would bear sway
which if not seen unto in time, in stead of wealth decay.
Let this suffice, in proose do write, in hope that country thine
will thee regard like faithful friend, as virtues laws assign.
When hatrid, and necligence: expellith love, and diligence,
power, and authority, regards not minority,
Self love, with Ipochrisy, are frindes unto cruelty:
when all these gestes in some place reigns,
Ere long, will fall some sudden chainge.
OR ever, the fundacio^ of the world was laid, Exodus. 3 The many names
grows to no var^etie: ye substance is of one equality. The Lord Jehovah, the
Jews did o^^^, naming it Nome^ in effabile, a name not to be spoken: because it
co^(...) ye (...) of GOD.
the great Elohim, (Jehovah) Adonai, Gubernator, Deus, or omni ^otent God. When
Moses demanded saying: who shall I say has sent me, was answered, ego sum,
qui sum, I am that I am, has sent thee, even that most triumpha^t king of
kings, who before al worlds, saw what should insew from time to time, did
pronosticate, by diverse and fundry his servant. Some Patriarks, Prophets, and
Apostels, with sundry other people, out of every nation under heaven:
aforewarning to ye rest common or vulgar people, some by proficy or prophisy,
some by reuelacion, some by interpretacion, some by dreams, some by wonderful
Prodigius and most miraculus sightes, (to the end) that over what dominion,
Realm or country so ever any of these appeared, either by sight in act, or show
by word, the people in any such dominion, what soever might know, by such for
warning to eschew, those dau^ger^: y^ else might insew. Dame Charities, being
framed from out of ye mighty Elohim, so wrought, as soon as she had
auctorite, which was not, till man was framid in lively substance. And the^
began she to show forth the substance of her fundacion, which was, is and
shall be, among the obedient unto the end. And those here associate were, Aglaia,
Thalia, and Euphrosine, thankfulness, plenteousnes and lyberalite, whereby these
being settelid in man, should yield forth some such fruit as it had recsued, to
the honor praise, and immortal fame, of such a most merciful and heavenly
father, Lord and king: in as much therefore, Genesis 4.
as in the time of our forefathers (long time passid) there fell upon the
earth such fluds of waters, whereby the whole world was ouerspred, and that al
flesh died, by the rage of the same, saving Noah, and his famely viii, sowles.
And wherefore, because they regarded not, neither believed the same to insew,
till they saw the extremite of the flud, so speedily to ouerwhelme them, all
hope then frustrate, and past remedy: The preparinge of the Arc, made them not
a frayed, neither the entrance of the flud, for so long as any land,
mountain, or hill, was to be gotten unto, so long hoped they of safety (such
vain hope deceived them) wherefore they peryshed, such was the incredulite, at
that time, and much worse, notwithstanding former insamples, in these our
present times: from after the said, Deluuium, or flud, no sooner being retornid
to their former, or preordayned course. And that the Sun, Moon, and Stars
appeard in their pulcritude and kind, then, even in the very presence of the
late slain carcasis, such showed Oblivion, in the breast of Noah, that after a
few grapes eaten, became so infebelid in the head, that most disorderly lay,
to the great sorrow of his two sons, Genesis 9
Sem and Iaphet, although, Cham, being also one of their brethren, did most
irreverently laughe at his fathers nakidnes, for the which he was a curssud.
Gene. ^9
When ( Lot) through wine, forgot him self, his offense was such as mouid a
parpetual remembrance (to be ware) Zodoma, Gomorra, Adama, Zeboim, and Zoar, or
ever they were destroyed, they had warning their of, by there forefathers, that
perished through the flud, and also by the coming of the messengers unto (
Lot). The children, of Israel, had warning also before they fell into captivity,
Exodus 1
for as long as Joseph, gydid or governed Egypt, under Pharao, so long they
continuid in peace, and tranquillity. But there rose up a new king in Egypt,
Out of this said chapter of (...) is (...) note or warning: not to trust y^
(...) words of aliante.
which knew not Joseph. And he said unto his folk, behold the people of the
children of Israel are great and myghtier then we, come and let us play wiesly
with them, least they multiply. And lest it happen, that if there chance any
war, they join themselves unto our enemies, and fight against us. And so get
them out of the land: so the children of Israel were by the Egyptians, held
in bondage, without mercy. Behold the skill of the Egiptians, they being in
doubt of such great increase, would not suffer the Israelites, no more among
the^. etc. And yet for all that, reasid not to oppress them in such sort, as
this second book of Moses makes relacion. Be it known unto thee, thou now
flourishing Anglia, whom God so gyde with continuance, that sense thy first a
ryuall by that noble ( Brutus) thou have sufferid many grievous attempes, And
also ben subuertid by foreign power, if thou will know by whom, read
Robertus de Auesbury, Rogerus Houenden, Iohu G^wer. John bale John slow
Forsard, Harding, Mathae Paris, Mathaei VVestomasteriensis Policronicon,
Supplementi Chronicarum. Polidory Virgilij cum alijs. The first subuercion of
this eyle was by the Britans, (called Gigantes) as of Corineus, which inhabited
Cornewal and such like, of whom came our original, by successiue live from
Brute. But the second overthrow was by Julius Ceasar and his Romans who about
five hundred years gouernid this land, This ^e^ gist after the opinion of some
author^, (...) by (...) y^ name of English men came first callid Hengist men,
then in pre^ces of time English me^: which said name continues to this present.
but as touching the origynall from Brute. Julius Ceaser, was the first that
brought the Britans in subjection, and after the end of the said years the
Romans left both tribut and cuntry, rather then to defend it against the
Scots, and Pysts. The Britons were afterward conquerid by Hengist king of the
Sarons, unto whom the Bretons unadvisedly, had before given to much entry,
which Sarons, were afterward co^querid by Svvane, and other the Danes, and
these Danes with the Sarons, and Britans remaining were all conquerid by
William bastard Duke of Normandy. And since that time continued most
victorius, to the perpetual fame of English men, and long time may if greedy
desire be not the cause of her overthrow. This being dewly considerid in these
our present days, would give occasion, to foresee a great mischief which
else ere tongue will inshew. The cause is, the people of foraine nations, so
fast do increase, and the commodites of this our native soil does so fast
decrease, that it cannot be, but that within short space. Except the prudency
of some foreseight, al to be tra^sformid vp^down. The gracis mouid me (as in a
dream) this farforth to speak where in is (or ought) both thankfulness to God,
^ale. y^ un^ig^ of both churches.
for such warning with thankfulness to God, for so happy a prince called
Elizabeth, of the Debrues called Elischabeh, as much to say, as ye rest of my
God, ^^^aris.
which when the ancient City Niniue was warned by Jonas, the Lords Prophet,
they repentid so, that they were pardonid of all their sins, Ierico, for
resisting, (the Lord miraculusly overthrew) as also Jerusalem, the often
overthrow of kingdoms and Cities was for disobedience of the law, contempt of
the word, ne^ligence in not looking to the same in time, Luke 6. Number 22.
is so great an ensample before our eyes, Caecus caecum ducit, ambo in foueam
cadunt, which if self will, with laciuius lust, do so blind that it cannot be
espied, the^, Asina Balaam admonet, if their remayn so much fear of gods
v^ngans for oppression among such as pr^fesse Christ, and as yet deny the works
thereof, as remained in Balaams Ass, who for fear of the Angel, shronke under
his master, the^ I doubt not, but every such Christian which shall happen
upon this my travail, shall find no small commodity, and thereby so
occasionid to pray unto God, for amendiment whereof, that ere long all evil
actions may be amendid, Mat. 5. Mar. 9.
which being don. Vos estis sal terrae, lux mundi, then shall Angliae flourish,
which God grant, to the overthrow of Antechrist, to the setting home of those
Strangers, whose coming is neither for the love of the Gospel, nor obedient
of Laws, but such as have co^mittid murder, hourdome and theft and obstinate
Papists, as diverse honest and godly persons of their own native counteris have
testified: not with rigor, but by favor, not of pretendid force, but by
princly auctorite. Ex fructu arbor cognoscitur. So God grant in time an
effect. La^brymae Croc^dil, (caucto.)

In these three principal virtues, are contained the liberality of a
Christian, thankfulness, plentiousnes, and liberality.
FRom Jove the just I Aglaia, Aglaya.
am, a grace of lively hew
which being placed in mortal wight, such sight may not me view,
As carnal man, by shows of love, in arms them embrace,
no such am I, of substance sure, but aye a lively grace.
Not seen, nor felt, so pure am I, I let you understand
a thousand bodies I possess, in every soil and land
With thousand thousands, to the same: as proof full well does show,
in every wight, which seeks by right, all evils to forgo:
Aglaia she, does doceate, when good of frindes they gain,
with thankfulness to yield dew praise and to acquit with (...)*
How to devise by mindfulnesse, to make dew recompense,
against such as they offendid have, and that with diligence.
And those to whom, we have done ill, is sure the persons three,
Father, Son, and holighost, one perfect god we see:
By whose great prudency and skill, the world framid so
with every vital thing there in, the Heart the Hynd and To
The byrds which suore in ayery sky, twixt cloud and earth so green,
a lively show to earthy wight, most comely to be seen:
The creping worm, the beasts likewise, some savage ferce and tame,
not one of these that lives one earth, but Adam gave a name.
By means whereof they known are now, Genesis 15.2 Adam, terra, Earth.
their force their might and strength
and so by man in these our days, are brought to thral at length:
The hugy Whale, with mighty fish in showles after their kind,
subdewed are by man's devise, thus natures are assinde
The Drago^s ferce, ye Serpent strong, with tongue and teeth does sting,
by means of herb ye grows one earth, which virtue forth does bring:
To cure such sore, to seace the pain, again to bring to ease,
those persons as infectie are, I plenty do apease,
What had bin growing on the earth, or where had earth now been
if plenty had not so possessed, why nothing had bin seen:
Ere that the world framed was, a nothing did remain
then naught at all of truth appeard this proves very plain.
Till mighty Jove, by word so willed, an earth straight to apeere,
that being done, with splendent shine, of air substance clear:
With Sun and Moon, with glitering stars, the heavens to adorn,
divisions then twixt day and tide, the Moon the night, the morn.
Then Ver, the spring appearid so, by help of Titans grace
whose gliding beams, by moisterid heat, grene herbs brought forth a pace
Which being done dame Aestas she, to hasten the effect
the dearling ^eare of Aglaia still, no time did not neglect, A waiting nimphe
or one of the somer seasons.

But laborid so, till that she had, her Messis lover true
among the Siluan shrudes him found, the ripenid fruits to view
Thereby to save each grown increase, ere Hyems did appear,
commanding Autum to make haste, as time does so require.
That plenty grow may on the earth, as god has so decreed
(and why) because that man on earth, thereon may daily feed
To learn likewise of Copia she, where abundance is of store
two feebler sort of brethren ours, we do augment the more.
The Sotherne wind Libbes.
For as the winters force is such, when Libbes, his strength extends
to overthrow that former grew, and stiffenid trees then bends,
So will the lord our god in deed, cut of such cankered weeds,
as will and do refuse to help, the poor with friendly deeds.
Glacie y^ frosen e^se o^cice. Exodus 10.
And as by force of sharpenid winds, dame Glacie, bears sway,
yet heat of Sun does force to yield, and so consume a way:
So shall those greedy grashops they, that Egypt did possess,
be forcte again from thence to fly, perhaps with out redress.
If that they do not so relent, as christian laws requier
with Pluto be in fernall hell sure paid shall be their hyre:
Ulysses he has sailed so long, Virgil. Ovid me. Vlissis soc^ in fues.
in vain delight and lust,
that all his men transformid are, to beastly shape unjust.
Some to Wolves, which do devour, and some to Vipers kind,
which does consume each other so, that small is left behind:
Some to swyne, which daily swelles, one delicates so fine,
and like the master Dog does byte, when other feign would dine.
To gredy dogs, some likened are, which keeps the Neat from hay,
and yet them selves reaps small increase, as gredy guts bears sway
Like foxes other some there be, which through craft and goyle,
by vsery in watching steps, their brother seeks to spoil.
Devising how by cautall such, so lurking in their den,
to dispossess the sely sort, Foxes false, no men
Among the rest great Apes I saw, which pleased Ulysses best,
with frisking gamboles twixt the roopes, daily so were pressed.
Who Cimia, hight with voice did speak, which when I did perceue
I ceased not till that I had withdrawn him by leave
To know why those transformid were, Daniel the 1. Nabuchodonosor the 4. king
of the babilonians Virg. li. 6 Aenei^os.
and do continue still,
whose answer was* by Jove the just, his promise to fulfill.
Bereft from shape, through vile delight, as now you may behold,
like to that Babilonion king, as scriptures do unfold
And we as Apes among the rest, such flatering mates were when,
in royal courts, and noble place, we ruled as did men.
By means of false Ipocrisy, each other do deride,
like Gorgons, transformed were, and thus like Apes we bide
Briarens he our gidon is, by power we rule and reign,
Discordia she, in Plutos cell, does threaten lasting pain.
To those which plenty had on earth, and yet for scarcity sought,
their furious rage, with Chimera, a lasting place has bought
And for as much as we do doubt, of joys for to inshew
we will conitinue as we are, lo this is certain true
Not leaving now, our wontid lore, each one of us in kind
proceading so as we began, in this you know our mind.
When goods we have, all men us love, as kings among the rest
if naught at all, then Beggar like, in rags must be adrest
For Gospels predicacion, preach still who that will
we see therein none other grace, we will not come their till. The sayng of the
wicked.

For who that will the Scriptures fear, shall ever be in doubt
when Sky does fall then Larks shall have a place to sore about,
Thou Hidra fell, deuoyd of grace, reforne and that with speed
else lasting pain shall be thy gayn, the Law has so decreed.
Thalia, Plenteusnes.
Plentiful are the works of the Lord, Psalm. 130.
in wisdom has he made the^ all, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with
him is plenteouse redemption, for as by the plentiful gracis proceading from
God, the children of Israel were delivered, so shall every such nation
likewise, that seeks by obedience, obtayn the like: have due consideracion
then, of the plentiful gracis proceading from God, here on earth, to feed
not only our corporal bodies, with the fruits growing on the same, for the
term of our natural lives, but also, the unspeakable virtues, which do as
mighty rivers so plentifully ouerwhelme, in manner the whole face of the earth,
that scharcely or not at all, any one is able to say, he never have passid by,
or through them, or being at one time or other, mould so, that not one of the
seeds of mankind is able to excuse him self for the not knowing of so
plentiful gracis, proceeding from so merciful and heavenly father: in what
damnable state, case, or being, are those me^, who lasciuiously living in this
vate of misery, do seek to escape from that, which seeks to save them,
Tantulus a gredy tyra^t being in the water can not dri^, having food in seyght
^ cannot feed.
and to embrace that which utterly (if continuance remain in ill) to consume
and destroy the^, Polidori Virgil^ vrbanitas aedagi orum li.
Tantaleum, poculum libernus, the very heathen Philosophers has not ceasid, to
depict out diverse and sundry warnings, and all to that end, that virtues might
be embraced, and vice subuertid and overthrown, because, that like as some
festcrid ulcer being once rootyd in the flesh and touches the bone, seaceth
not by littel and little, till it have by such infection, masterid the whole
body, and brought it to subjection, forcing it, to give place unto death, the
first end of corporal life. Therefore, For that there are ii. deaths the
first death is y^ end of the body, the second of soul.
as corrupt infections be the cause of the bodyly death, so the wicked thoughts
ingendering contempt of godliness, hastens the souls destruction: who would not
therefore, seeing so great dangers to inshew, by means of disobedience, seek
to please so excellent a Lord and protector, that so mercifully and so
plentifully powrith forth before us, so many several gracis, thereby to pluc^
us, (yea) as it were by force, from so many evils, which for sin is left to
possess us: for as gold is tried in the furnace, so that good men be tried in
time of aduercite, which aduercite is the daily resisting, of the flesh against
the spirit. The awayting of our adversary, Leo rugens, to none other end is,
but to destroy, not the bodies of men only, but also their souls. And in
getting inordinat goods through the desire thereof, makes such most miserable
Beggars, from the knowledge of God. And the vain hope in this life makes them
think to be free from such sin, when in very deed they are most bond imppes
of that infernal fuery. Ecce appropinquat hora. Mat. 26.
Such is the sufferance of our just Judge, when he sees whereunto man is
inclined and in that his felicite is wholly set on those things which his fleshy
eyes beholds, regarding it more better assurance, then the promised place to
come, what follows but a flat distrust of gods promises, to this end
therefore is Satan, sufferid to be among the sons of men, to styre up strife,
to vere and molest them, for which disobedience, first of all the great Dragon
that old Serpent was cast out, no more to be among the Just, for envy whereof,
as a roaring ^io^, he seeks to devour the whole race and posterite of mankind,
notwithstanding his power recheth no further then the Lord permits, as
manifestly apperith by that pacient Job, Job. 2.
whom the Lord of Ostes sufferid for a time to be molestid, saying unto Satan:
all that he has, be it in thy power, only see that thou spare his life, the
constancy of that just moves every true Christian to hope, that after dark and
stormy tempest of tribulacions in this life, for the haven of felici^e or
triumphant glory, (not by due desert, but by grace) only in Christ, and none
but he, a sufficient warning, is this, to those that have ^yes to see, mouths
to speak, ears to hear, hearts to conceue with a continual wisshing, for the
coming of our only Lord and savior Christ Jesu. But to those that have eyes,
and see not, ears and hear not, because they love not, mouth to speak, and
do not, hearts to conceive, and regard not, Romans 1.
in such the Gospel abides not. Because God has given them over to uncleanness,
through the lusts of their own herts, to defile their own bodies, among them
selves, which changed his truth, for a lie, and worshipped and seruid the
things that be made, more then him that made them, which is to be praised for
ever and ever Amen. And as they regardid not to know God, even so God delivered
them up unto a lewd mind, that they should do those things that were not comely
being full of all unrighteousness, fornicacion wickedness, couitousnes,
maliciousnes, full of envy, murder, debate, dicept, evil conditioned,
whisperers, bakebiter^, haters of God, disdaynfull, proud, bosters, bringers up
of evil things, disobedient to father and mother, without understanding,
covenant breakers, unloving, trucebreakers, unmerciful, which men though they
knew the righteusnesse of God, consider not how, that they which commit such
things, are worthy of death, not only they that do ye same, but also they which
have pleasure in them, that do them. What plentiousnes can be more then this,
where such store of ensamples are, to bring us from vice to virtue, from being
in bondage, to perfect freedom, from sorrow to joy, from poverty to riches,
from werines to ease, from sickness to health, from corruptible thoughts to
selestial mocions, praising and lawding God, for his so plentious gracis
(worthy deserving thanks) to him which lives for ever and ever. The obstinate
for all this will not be reclaymed, and therefore void of all hope by this my
warning, without the greater grace and mercy of God, in Christ Jesus. The very
heathen are to be preferrid, before such, whose words remain, to the utter
ruen of all unthankful Christians.

When a reasonable soul, from virtue flies, Pitagoras

it waxes beastlike, and naturally dies,
For as the soul geuith life to the corsse
so justice (in the soul) is cause of lively force.
NIchil cum fidibus graculo, nihil cum amaracino sui, Gellius.

What Music does dame Graco yeald,
that prattling Iaye bedect,
Though fair as Fezand fresh in feeld,
her corpse is still infect
What both avail the smarting wound
with foysterid ointment ill,
No more then Porcus granting sound
when pearels are found in swill.
SO it may happen for this my toil, to have a small reward,
of such as nothing less does mean, each virtues to regard
For such reward who looks forgayn, as wordlings do desire,
shall miss of virtues just report, small guerdon for their heyr.
And those which gapes for future ioys, aspiering kings to be, Gratefulness.
Cacus, was a privy conuair away of cattall.

not being caulid shall shure fall, these Gracis so agree
Since plentiful Saturitas, by soferaygne Queen we have,
to pray I wish, each wight with speed, that God her state may save.
And so to raygne in quietness in Secures safety still
that crafty Cacus may be spied, and shortnid of his will.
Euphrosine, Liberalitas.
Unto liberalite belongs mercy, and largnes, which has had her proceading
sense the first creating of all things, a virtue no less worthy then either of
the rest, through mercy, compassion has been over all, which is the principal
cause of our continuance, by mercy we are sauid, by obedience redemid, by
liberalite sanctified, who is able to acquit such kindness, which provoke
through plenty, in manyfould forewarnings, dew thankfulness, for as those
things worldly seems unfit, neither is convenient to be red, being vntermixed
with contrary matter, so ensamples divine, requier to be joined with none
other, then auctorite advised will allow as fit examples to the same: what
greater liberalite was there, ever, then this, which when the eternal God
plasmator of all things had made the round world so sure that it may not be
remouid. Gene. 2.
The Sun to rule the day, the Moon to govern the neyght, the green herbs
for all living beasts of the field, the Seas, fluds and waters, not only for
every kind of fish, but also for ships to flote upon the same, whereby man may
see the great works of God, and out of the substance of earth, trees of diverse
fruits growing from out of the same, with sundry sorts of herbs, as well for
beasts, of all kynds, of Serpents, Byrds worms as man, in bestowing the same,
what greater liberalite could be showed. But above al these things, so liberal
was our everliving God, that he provided a continual mancion, for all obedient
and believing souls, in the heavens there to dwell and abide, after this our
passid pilgrimage, never more to be molestid and troubled, these and diverse
other liberalites gives occasions to every carnal creature, to consider so
great a liberalite. Rebecca, Gene. 24.
Batuels daughter did most liberally answer Abraham's servants sayng, drink my
Lord. Moses in defending Iethros daughter Exo. 2.
from the sheperds that would not suffer them to water their sheep. The
children of Israel with most prompt and devout minds did give to the work of
the tabernacle, Idem. 36.
and the holy vestments all thing that was necessary: and the artificers were
enforcid to say unto Moses, the people bring to much and more then enough. In
which so doing behold the large lyberalite of the Israelites, but in these our
days, it is grown to the contrary: as conserning temples, there needs no new
erecting, thanks be to God, there are sufficient and more then are well ocupied,
in stead of liberalite, covetous desire has brought two parishes to one, and
the living of both, to half of one, and yet out of that half, (a third) by
inordinat oppression, and although the word of God continue liberal, to the
provoking of each liberalite in his kind, yet is it not so among the sons of
me^, for the which it is to be feared (not long to be among us.) A hungry man
being used to some slender apetite, and when of that little, day by day, Simule.
he be abrydged and lessenid of that little, must needs in the end consume his
corrupt carcass: so like wise spiritual livings being already so near sifted,
that the doner of many such livings knows before he gives it (as some of
the^ have reportid) the value thereof, and yet notwithstanding the princis
dewty, which every good subject yeldeth willingly, if he reserve no passel of
y^ same, yet some part of the fleise he will be sure of, besid some brybe, at
the entrance, either in money, or ware. In what state shall that poor minister
live, in consideracion of daily payment, Sequel,
when the living to be in value xx. or xxx. pounds by the ycare, he pay out of
xx. pound x. pound, I will not say, out of xxx. pound xx. pound or out of xv.x.
Such a doner forgiving diserueth no less reward, then, Ahab, for taking of
Nabothes viniard, or Iehezi for taking a brybe of Naaman the Assirian, contrary
to the sayng of Eliza the Prophet, 3. Reg. 21. 4. Reg. 5.
as for such a minister he cannot escape unpunished, if vnlernid (then is it
for need) if learnid then God has seen according to his wisdom thereby to cut
of from the kindom imperial both geuer and receuer. Such gredy doners or
patrons, are glad when they have gotten them indiscreet, First book, fable the
5. what profits a man to win y^ hole world and lose his soul.
I will not say Idiots, considering they would said have somewhat, as Esopes
Dog, de Cane and carne, hoping of better prosperity, found less, being glad of
somewhat, excepting it acommodite, as he or they thinks (for that before they
had nothing) not expecting the charge, but the gayn, not able to gyde him or
them selves, much less the congregation, in the mean space, the sheep starve
for want of food, and what shall be come of such shepperds or sheepherds,
although by authority of man alowid, ye authority will not discharge them,
before god, except they have such consideration of their inability, that they
cease not daily to frequent the counsel of the learned, and so by little and
little through diligent endeavor, come to a better perfection: very few there
are that so bestow their time. I omit such as he carders, dicers, ale knights
fornicators lascivious spenders, cou^terfet christians, disquieters of common
wealth, sedicious persons, quarrellers, studientes in vain and friuolus Arttes.
And turn them over to the Prophet Ieremi as follows. Vae pastoribus qui
disperdunt, Ieremi. 23 Ezec. 34.
and dilacerant gregem pascuae mae. Woe, unto the shepherds that destroy and
scatter my flock says the Lord, wherefore this is the commandment of the lord
God, of Israel, unto the shepherds that feed my people, ye scatter and thrust
out my flock and look not upon them. Consider England if thou have not been
brought home, according to the promise.
Therefore will I visit the wickedness of your imaginacions, says the lord:
and will gather to gither the remnant of my flock, from all lands that I had
driven them unto, I will bring the^ again to their pastures, that they may
grow and increase. I will set sheperds over them, which shall feed them. They
shall no more fear and dread, for there shall none of them be lost, says the
lord: I have seen folly among the Prophets of Samaria, that they preach for
Baal, and deceived my people of Israel. I have seen also among ye prophets of
Jerusalem, I warni^g to such as profess ye Gospel, to beware of shakinge
hands and the enemy.
soul aduoultry and presumtuous lies. They take the most shameful even by the
hand, flattering them, so that they can not return from their wickedness.
All these with their Cities are unto me as Zodoma, and the inhabiters of
Gomorra, etc. Here note the words of the prophets that preach unto you, and
deceive you: truly they preach unto you vanity, for they speak ye meaning of
their own heart, Let every true and faithful man, peruse well this chapter,
not for a time but daily.
and not out of the mouth of the lord. Am I the god that sees the thing which
is neigh at hand, and not that is far of says the lord: may any man hide him
self so, that I shall not see him says the Lord. Behold here am I says the
lord, against those Prophets, that dare prophecy lying dreams, and deceive my
people with their vanities and miracles, whom I never sent nor commanded them.
Whether the papist have thus don (or not) with diverse other sectarians. I leave
it to ye judgment of the Christian reader. Now consider if the charge be so
great against false prophets, idel Persons, and loytering Ministers, what is
there to be said against those greedy Patrons, spoken of before: the prophet
Ezechiel, Eezc. ^^.
in the person of God, speaks as well to ye temporal as spiritual, to the
king, as to ye officer, to the Duke, Carle, lord, Marcus, knight, baron, or
others, none are exceptid, from out of ye charg of gods commandment. Lac
comedebatis, and lauis operiebamini: gregem antem meum no^ pascebatis etc. You
have eaten up the milk, ye have clothed you with the wol: the best fed have ye
slain, but the flock have ye not norished, the weak, have ye not holden up, the
sick have ye not healed, the broken have ye not bound together, the outcastes
have ye not brought again, the lost have ye not sought, but churlis^ly and
cruelly have ye ruled them, was it not enough for you to eat up the good
pasture, but you must tread down the residewe with your feet, thus my sheep
must be feign too eat the things, that ye have trodden down, etc. Know
thou not this: Job. 20.
namely that from the beginning ever sense the creacion of man upon earth, the
gladness of the ungodly has bin short, and that the joy of Ipocrites
continued, but the twinkling of an eye: though he be magnified up to heaven,
so that his head reach unto the clouds, yet at a turn he perishes for ever,
in so much that they which have seen him, shall say where is he: he shall
vanish as a dream, so that he can no more be found: and shall pass away as a
vision in the night, so that the eye which saw him before, shall have no more
sight of him, and his place shall know him no more. His children shall be feign
to agree with yt poor, and his hands shall restore them their goods. A chab the
king of Israel, 3 Reg. 22.
would not here Micheas our Lords prophets, because he prophesied no good unto
him, but evil, yet when Micheas was called, he said unto him: here the word
of the Lord. So here yt which follows, Exempla
to the end that the wickedness of this world may be espied, the better to be
eschuid. A certain man proffered a benefice, of the value as he said of xl.
pounds by the year, and that he would bestow it one some honest learnid man:
which when a sufficient man was presentid after sertaine talk had, his words
were these. Some will not stick to profess and gospel: as though very good
christians
For as much as it is worth xl. pounds (and yet not xx. pounds in the Queens
majesty's books, you shall give me three years value which as he accou^pted
came to vi. score pounds. I would know, what the person of that benefice should
have had for his portion to have lived by, in the mean time. Judge whether
this be liberalitte or no: or whether such a Caterpiller were worthy of a
learned man or no. No maruayle though there be so many simple Persons in the
ministry, (^ yet not so many thanks be given to Go, as has bin,) which some to
serve for eight pounds yearly, must have skill in one faculty or other, as
gardening, graffing and such like, or else to serve for less wagis: in the
mean time, when worldly extremities shall thus hinder divine studdy: I o^it
(...) oportunisse (...) gods aid for the a ^^^ome^t
^ when the shepherds perish for want of knowledge, what shall the sheep do.
As for scruing of two cures, neglecting of sermons, when in some place report
has told in vii^x xiiii. years was never hard past, four in some place^y one,
and none at all. I marvel not much, seeing the Patrons and giuers of such, is
so prodigiously orderid. I will omit likewise the liberality of diverse toward
such as have trauelid in the country (but not Vbique) for then must it needs
perish all to gither. That for their painful labor, have had a si^der
reward, as much as Nihil. But now to return to one more example. A certain
man which proffered a benefice, but not the benefit, to such a one, as he
supposed would have bin glad of his pr^ffer. I have quoth he, a benefice in my
hand, to bestow, and it is worth a hunderid pounds by the year. And if you
know any ^^uett man, y^ would bear the name of person. I would give him xx.
marks, or rather then fail xx. pounds, and discharge him of al duties so that
he should have that quietly to live with all, because the corn, and other
tithes, will be a great stay to my house keeping, wh^ perhaps he keeps worse
house with all that, then his predecessor before him did, with his own
possessions. And as for the great liberality of others, who having y^ gift of
diverse benifices, because they will not be seen to receue money the^ selves,
uses this fetch, as soon as any such living falls into their hands,
forthwith one of his or their servants, shall under a culler have it, so that
when any of the clergy comes, craving master or worship, to bestow it: woe be
to that place where spiritual pro^^^cion, (...) ^ay temporal men's ^^age^: the
ministry brought to beggary, and (...) to ge^tilitie.
the answer is made, with all my heart, you should have had it, but it is now to
late, I have given it already, they y^ suter as void of all hope, takes his
leave, which being no sooner gone, he to whom the benefice was ip^crised, takes
the person, vicar, or such curate by the sleeue, and says, if to pleasure you
with this benefice, (which may be better called a Malifice by that time all be
considered) what will you give a good fellow to obtain your suit, whose answer
if it be nothing, then as short a farwell: if somewhat, according to the desire
of Capax, then he shall have it perhaps as much ag^yne, as the first fruits
comes to, he shall pay for that frindship, and such escape very well, if
nothing be not taken from of the said living, for some yearly reward, such
wicked dealing of men consumes the one and other, as rust does the iron, as
mothes the closh, as sin, does the soul, which is not to be recovered. The
occasion which moved Euphrosine to speak, is because the world should better
understand, the liberality divine, and seeing all things from thence proceadeth
of love: we thereby should so love each other, that the fruits of play^ dealing
(without Ipocrisie) might (...) ^^ode to our mortal fame, and (...) ^elicitie,
which till it be re^^^red, and used in his kind, non^ other thing is to be
lo^ed for, then a subuer^ion general. The great abundant liberalities from
God: should move us to such liberaliti^, as works each salvation, and not
damnation. But for as much as Satan, the enemy of all flesh, has to blinded
the eyes, of the greater noumber, no marvel why the world continues in such
great wickedness, for the which may well be said. Mat. 22.
Multi enim sunt Vocati, pauci Vero electi. For many be called and few are
chosen. If to speak of the liberality of the heathen, read the ancient
Philosophers, whose notes are sufficient to reasonable minds, and although,
far from the knowledge of the true god, yet notwithstanding in their lives,
Theater (...) of the heathen was called Jupiter.
and manners, (more just) for that the one sought not to oppresie nor v^^s the
other, nevertheless confessed one principal God, whom they called Jupiter: y^
which they held as chief, above their other gods, by whose intelligence the
world was made. And that he was the first, before al other creatures. O you
ancient Britons who has bewitched you, to fly from the vengaunce to come,
bring forth therefore the works of repentance, and behold how mightily god has
delivered you: from falling into many vain and supersticious errors, above
those Nations, which for ensample follow: be no more such greedy gatherers, for
y^ which shall perish: but be liberal, with such Christian consideracion, as
may increase a perpetual fame, Aristotle
for where honest and virtuous men be aduancid, and well rewarded, it stireth
the courage, of them y^ have any spark of vertew, to increase therein, with all
their force and endeavor, wherefore next to the helping, and the releeuing of a
commonaltie, ye greater part of liberality is to be employed, on men of
vertew, and good qualities: wherein is to be required, a good election and
judgment, that for hope of reward of favor (under the cl^ke of vertew, be not
hidden the most mortal poison of flattery.) Liberality that is upon flatteres
employed: And upon greedy Caterpillars, which when they know not how to live,
procure advantages of acts, to spoil a common wealth, not sparing temporal,
nor spiritual, though for a time flourish, is not only perished, but also
spoiled and devoured ^e is liberal that delights more in good renoume,
Seneca.
(then in money) for as liberality makes friends of enemies: So pride makes
enemies, of frindes, Socrates.
Paucunius reports ye greatest part of godliness is to knowledge ye greatest
part of gods goodness, toward us, and to give only praises unto him, from whence
all things are yeldid to our purposis: The aunciant Panimes, Pagan gods.
had gods of diverse sorts; how beyt, the chese of all were these, which they
callid, Dijs electi, chosen gods, from heaven, which gods, as they thought
sometime, dycendid from heaven to earth, as Ianus, Saturnus, Jupiter, Geminus,
Marcurius, Apollo, Mars, V Vlcanus, Neptune, Sol, Orcus, Vibar, Tellus, Ceres,
Juno, Minerua, Luna, Diana, Venus, Vesta, with as many strange and several
gods and goddesis esteming some of more dignite then other, as of one Cautius,
a God so namid among the rest, whom they much honoryd, also the goddice Lunica,
who^ they comendid their women quick, and great with child, to send them safe
deliverance: the God, Opes, among the gentiles, was callid, the God of the Babe
newborn, even as Lucina, was goddice of the mother which b^re it, their
custom was, that during the time of ye mothers quickening, she carried the image
of their God Opes, upon her belly, made fast to her girdle or garment, till
the hour of her delivery, so that if the child were well born, the parents that
day made great oblacions to the Idol, if it happenid the child to be dead
born, straight way the parents, of the child, dy^ beat the image to poudre, or
else bourn it, or drown it: The gentiles also had an other God callid Vaginatus,
which God, was hanged, about their childers necks, to keep them that they weept
not, much, for that they supposid, if their children did weep much in their
youth, they should suffer great troubles, in there agee: with diverse other Gods
as Cumius, Victoria. The old Romans likewise had also diverse gods, as
Ruminus, Stellinus, Adeon, Mentallis, whom they called the God of wit, such wit
among the supersticius Romans transformid into ydolatry, as it appearech not
shaken of unto this present. The Jews also had diverse gods, for the which
they were diuersiy plaged, in that they reuoltid from the true and eternal
God, Exo. 32. Number. 21. Judge. 7. 4. Reg. 17. 4. reg. 19. 3. reg. 18. 4. reg. 21.
Daniel. 6
as for ensample the golden Calf, as for Baalim Astaroth among the Israelites,
Rempham, Moloh, Rimmon, a God of the Assirians, Dagon, among the Philistians,
Nefrah, Baal, Bell, the men of Babylon made Socote, Benoth, the men of Cutha
made Nergall, the men of Hamath made Asima, the Auites made Nibbaz, and
Tharthake the Sepharnites, burnt their children in the fire, for Adramalech,
and Anamelech, with a pe^^iferus company, of gods, besid it does appear in the
sacaryd scripturs how and in what manner they were plaged, which ensamples are
left unto us to beware who^ y^ ^nds of the world are come upon, or at y^ least
not far of, it is come to pass in these days among such as are namid
Christians, to have as many gods, ^dealtery, waywardness, a l^c^^rer, one
that tells more the^ all, abstinate persons, (...), ^^atter^^^ with the (...)
whereof (...) all disorder. 1. Cor. 15.
as ever had any other nations before us which seems very strange, which is
the only cause, why the greater n^umber, are drawn, from the fear and
obedience of the mighty God, by whom we have our being. As Maechus, Morosus,
Carnifex, Pantolabus, Pertinax, Rapax, Colax, Philopolemus, Philosarchus,
Pigricia, Inuidia, Luxuria, Auaricia, ^a, Gula, Insolentia, Poliphagus
Inuentus, Mergus cum Asinus, with such ara^lement as were not to be supposid to
dwell in one such, so little eyle, where as so many gods, are raygning and
possessing the bodies of men, no maruayle though their be so littel liberalite,
for ye every such person has not enough to make dew sacrifice to each of their
gods, no maruayle though men's mynds, be thus wandering and daily forgetting of
their dew obedience to God, Prince and cuntry, when they are drownid by carnal
corruption, to be aquainted with so many: no maruayll thought man has been
like^id to the Moon, which seaceth not her changing, for that man continues
not in one stay, nether in mind nor body, and that in the midest of life we are
in death, but then to whom ought every one to flee, not to fancy, not to
carnal friend, but unto God, and seeing that in the midest of life there is
none other help, but in the cross of Christ crucified, by the which we are
dead, unto the world, and living unto God, how much are we bound to thank him
for the same, felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, then all th^se
devouring gods, would soon be overthrown, for as much as the dyuell uses,
in diverse and sundry of his ministers, daily to poscesse and torment the minds
of men, thereby, to with draw them from God, how much are those bound to the al
mighty, which gives them warning in such liberal sort, as in these our days
is most manifestly seen, the ensamples are many, of y^ which I will resit one
Zacheus Luke 19 I contrary insample to the mind of some.
in distributing of his goods, and making of restitucio^ was very large, and
liberal, thus he said unto our Lord, (behold Lord the half of my goods I
give to the poor) if I have don any man wrong I restore four fold, a good
example for these present days, to every such person, whose consience daily
accuses them, for wrong gotten goods, from the poor, from the fatherless and
widow to restore to every one his own, then would God his kingdom increace,
and Sathan^s diminish, consider what a special grace is given to every one
that is torn in the time of Christian law which is the Gospel. And seeing the
innumerable fancis of men, in the which they have seperatid them selves from
(...) now through the bright shi^ning Gospel of Christ all these detestable
fancis are (...) that dares take the name of a Christian, and (...) follow that
which in the e^^erance of this (...), but to God: some (...), that at the time
of his entrance, he had neither (...) reason to perform, the^ may it be
(...), if he never heard the Gospel preachid, thaught, or reed, if he answer
no, then apperith n^^ligence, if yea, then indigent or con^^ptions, b^th are
rewardid with death, the one in that through negligence he did not, the other
in that to follow sensual appetite, he would not, and therefore could not serve
God and Mamon, which Mamon, is the God of worldly delights, as also Esculanus,
the God of mines of gold and silver, Pecunia, of metals, Fessoria, of traualors
and pilgrims, to keep them from weariness, Pelonia, to drive away enemies out
of the land, Esculapius of sick men, Spinensis, to keep corn, from thystels
and such like. Rubigo, the vines, Fortuna, of fortunate success, with Silla,
Marius, Muta, Genoria, Stimula, Murcia, with many others, not worthy the
rehearsal. These people long time past, were not more troubled, in devising
gods, for such their purposis, as the most part in these days are, by daily
practicing, how to begyle each other, so that the craftiest merchant, is
counted the wisest man, the common drunkerd, the best fellow, the riotous
Ruffian, the best companion, the filthy adoulterer, the amorus lover. The
blasphemist swarer, the truest dealer, the most Ipocrit, the perfectest
Christian: etc: the wicked in their generacions are wiser, Psalm. 7 Eccle. 8
Luke. 16
the^ the children of light, nevertheless, they shall perish, the wraught of
the Lord shall consume them, for their delicate fare in the world, they shall
suffer hunger of soul, for their oppression, pain, for their easy lives,
Apoc, 22
most horrible ends, come Lord Jesus, for the daily oppression of the faithful,
is great: and ease them from out of this misery, when and at such time, as thy
Godly wisdom shall apoynt.

Significacions of the later day to be at hand with approuid prophises,
auouching the same, taken out of the holy scripture, by auctorites as follows.
W^ unto thee, Esaias. 29.
O Ariel Ariel, thou City that David dwelt in, go on, from year to year, and
let the Lambs be s^ayne, I will lay seeg^, unto Ariel, so that there shall be
heuy^es and sorrow in it, and it shallbe unto me, eue^ as an altar of
slaughter, I will beseege thee round about, and fight against thee through a
bulwark, and will rear up diches against thee, thou shall be brought down and
shall speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall go low, out of the dust,
thy voice also shall come out of the ground, Ariel, after (...)* Dieron^^
interpr^tacion, (...), y^ (...) mind ^ of the faithful, which is the City of
god, Leo dei mei, which being oppress^^, because of offense, is as a Leo^ that
lost has her young.
like the voice of a witch, and thy talking shall whisper out of the dust, more
over, the noise of thy ^^raing enemies, shallbe like thin dust, and the
multitude of tyrants shallbe as dry straw, that cannot tarry, even suddenly and
in hass, shall there blast go, thou shall be visited of the Lord of Bosts, with
thunder, earthqua^, and with a great noise, with storm and tempest, and with
the flame of a consuming fire: and the multitude of all nations, that fight
against the Ariel, shall be as a dream, even so shall all they be that make war
against it, and strong houldes to overcome it, and that lay any seege to it: in
conclusion, it shall be even as when a hungry man, dreameth that he eating, and
when he awaketh his soul is empty: Or as when a thirsty man dreameth, that he
is drinking, and when he waketh he is yet faint, and his soul has appetit,
even so shall the multitude of all nations, that feyght against Sion: pon^er
these things, once, in your mynds and wonder, blinded are they themselves, Let
the wise learn what is meant, by ye dronke^ and unstable.
and ye blind gyds to other, that are dronk, but not with wine: they are
unstable, but not through strong drink, for the Lord has couerid you with a
^umbering spirit, and has closid your eyes: your Prophets also, and your
rulars, that should see, the^ has he couerid: And the vision of all the
Prophets, is become unto you, as the words of a book, that is sealid up, which
me^ deliver unto one that is learnid, saying: read thou it, and he says I
cannot, for it is sealid: A notable mystery, for this present time, be twixt ^.
stoles, the tail lights on the ground. Admirare. Deuteronomy. 6. So has he from ye
bondaige of papal tyrany. Iocl. 2.
And the book is given unto him that is not learnid, saying: read thou it, and
he says I am not learned. Therefore thus has ye Lord said: for so much as
this people, when they be in trouble, do honor me with their mouths, and with
their lips, but there heart is far from me. And the fear which they have unto
me, proceadeth of a commandiment that is taught of men, therefore will I do
maruayles among the people, even merueylous things, I say and a wonder: and
when thy son asks thee in time to come, sayng what means these witnesses,
ordina^cis and Laws, which the Lord our God, has commandid you. Then thou
shall say unto thy son, we were Pharaos bondme^, in Egypt, and the Lord
brought us out of Egypt, with a mighty hand, and the Lord showed signs and
wonders for the delivery of his people Israel, therefore says the Prophet
Joel: Ye shall well know that I am in the midest of Israel, and that I am the
Lord your God, yea and that there is none other, and my people shall no more be
brought to confusion, after this will I power out my spirit upon all fleesh,
and your sons, and your daughters shall prophisie, your old men shall dream
dreams, and your young men shall see visions: yea in those days I will pour
out my spirit upon servants and maidens: Admirabilis.
I will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth, be neath, blood,
and fire, and the vapor of smook, the Son shall be turnid into darkness, and
the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come: A
liberal and most merciful proffer, to miserable flesh. A principal note, by
the way, of the right use of the Sabbath Exo. 31.
And the time shall come, that whosoever callith on the name of the Lord shall be
sauid. And the Lord said unto Moses, speak unto the children of Israel, and
say: in any wise see that you keep my Sabboths for it is a Sign, between me
and you, in your generacions, for to know, that I the Lord, am he, that does
sanctify you, keep my Sabboths, therefore, for it is holy unto me, he that
de^ileth it, shall be slain, for whosoever works therein, the same soul shall be
rootid out, from among his people: Six days shall men work, and in the seventh
day, is the Sabbath of the holy rest, of the Lord, whosoever does any work on
the Sabbath day, shall dye: Wherefore let the children of Israel keep the
Sabbath that they observe it throughout, their generacions, that it be an
appoyntement, for ever, for it is a Sign, between me, and the children of
Israel for ever. Such wondrous Signs has the Lord showed from time to time,
to the end that every Christian man should have dew regard, to this so holy a
commandment: from Mount Sinai, ye thundering voice, Exo. 20 Exempla Genesis 2
Exo. 16 Exo. 20 Nume. 28 Nume. 15. 2 Esd. 13 1. Match. 2. 2 Match. 15 Mat 12 1.
Reg. 21.
was a sign of force which ought not to be broken, not a rest for man only but
also the whole family and cattaile. The obseruacion of the Sabbath, had his
original, beginning of that that is said, and written, God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it, because that in it, he rested from all his works, the
Isralites gathered the vi. day a double quantity of Manna, because that on the
Sabbath they should rest, to the intent that man should labor to get the true
rest. And on the Sabbath day there were offered two lambs, and upon the other
days but one, except in solom fea^ts. The man that was taken gathering of
sticks, upon the Sabbath day, was by gods commandment stoned to death (of
Nehemias, the Gentiles, Judas, Machabeus Nichanor, with others.) Concerning the
obseruacion of the Sabbath, for farther proof reed the auctorities: The
Pharisees said unto the disciples of Christ, that did pluck and eat the ears of
corn, ye do that which is not lawful to do, on the Sabbath day, but the lord
said unto them, have ye not read, what David did etc. Then follows: Mat. ^^
Luke 6.
the son of man, is also Lord of the Sabbath day, there are diverse insamples
why it was lawful for Christ to heal the diseased on the Sabbath day, for
that being perfect God, Idem 1^. Idem 13 Idem 23. John 19 Act 1^. Luke 14.
and man, he did not only heal the festerid or putrified bodies, but also
their sowles. The Sabbath day, for us Christians, is most apt, and convenient
to hear the word, and law of God, and the Prophets. The which are red every
Sabbath day: Likewise our savior Christ, in fulfilling the law, gave us this
commandment saying, which of you having an Ox, or an Ass, fallen into a
pit, and will not pull him out on ye Sabbath day. Number licet Sabbato sanare, they
to who^ Jesus spoke which, were ye Lawiers and Pharisees. Answered nothing
therefore, as the sabbath ought to be kept, holy from bodily works, so ought
all men to eschew vicious thoughts: and crafty imaginacions. And when any
occasion of doing good, by any manner of way, ought to be showed, that then it
be don, with Christian endeavor, and purity of mind. In which ^o doing, the
sabbath is both reverently, and holily observed. But the crabbed and wayward
natures of this time, present, have so much presumed upon this text and others,
that some has and does, as blind baier^s, not spared to labor and travail,
on the Sabbath day, without any need or occasion at all, aleaging,
notwithstanding, that necessity has no law, so that under the culler of
necessity, they use al days a like. Applying the text of the sacred
scriptures, not to the will and commandment of god, but after their own
carnal fancies: for the which there so great abusing of the reverend Sabbath.
Joel. 3
The Lord will show strange signs from heaven, fire, and brimstone, storm, and
tempest, which shall be the portion for the wicked: The Son, and Moon shall be
darkenid, and the stars shall withdraw their light, the Lord shall rore out
of Sion, and cry out of Jerusalem, that the heavens, and the earth shall quake
with all, but the Lord shall be a defense unto his own people, and a refuge for
the children of Israel: Ieremi. 25
I have risen up early, I have given you warning in season, but you would not
hear. Behold therefore the words of the Lord, that are at hand, to plage us,
as he has plagid others, and that every (obstinate) shall be scatterid as dong,
upon the earth: Pray therefore to God, to bless his preachers, that the
Gospel may flourrish (as it ought) or else we perish.

Prophecis by particular.
When thou art in tribulacion, Deuteronomy. 4 By this word [thou shall) the spirit of
God mou^h men tore penta^ce. Esaias. 2.
and when all these things that be here spoken of, are come to pass, thou
shall return again to the Lord thy God, and be obedient unto his word.

THis is the word that was openid unto Esaie, the son of Amos, upon Judah, and
Jerusalem, it will be also in the last days, that the hill where the house of
the Lord is buldid, shall be the chief among hills, and exaltid above all little
hills: and al nations shall pray unto him, and the multitude of people shall
go, speaking thus, one to an other, let us go to the hill of the Lord, and to
the house of the God of Jacob.

HHare the word of the Lord, O ye children of Israel, for the Lord must punish
them, that dwell in the land. And while there is no truth, there is no mercy,
there is no knowledge of God in the land, Oseas. 4.
but swearing, lyeng, manslaughter, theft, athoultry have gotten the upper
hand, and one blood gyltinesse follows an other. Therefore shall the land ^e in
a miserable case, and all they that dwell therein, shall be rootid out.

IN the later days, it will come to pass, that the hill of the Lords house
shallbe set op higher then any mountayns or hills, yea the people shall prese
unto it, Macheas 4.
and the multitude of the gentiles shall have them thither saying: come let us
go up to the hill of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, that he
may teach us his ways: and that we may walk in his pats, for the Law shall come
ont of Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem, and shall give sentence among
the multitude of the heathen: and reform the people of far countris.

FOr mark the day comes, that shall bourn as an oven, and all the proud, yea,
and all such as do wickedness, shall be as straw: Mala. 4.
and the day that is for to come, shall bou^n them up, says the Lord of
Hosts, so that it shall not leave them, nether root nor branch: But unto you
that fear my name, shall the Son of righteousness arise, and health shall be
under his wings.

Jesus, went out, and departid from the Temple: Bartholome de proprietatibus,
^eru^i^ Lib. de cimo quarto.
And his Disciples came to him, for to show him the bulding of the Temple (in
Jerusalem) and Jesus said unto them, see ye not all these things. Verily, I say
unto you there shall not be left here, one stoue upon an other that shall not be
cast down: And as he sat upon the Mount Olsaete, to in Jury neigh unto
Jerusalem, and so namid because, of the plenty of Olives y^ grow there on, at
the foot of the said mou^tayn runs the brook torrens, Ce^ron, which brook
christ passed over to the garden Gethsemane, ^ousing there to walk. Mathae 24 4
Esdras 13.
mount Oliuet, his Disciples came unto him saying: tell us when these things
shall be, and what sign shallbe of thy coming, and of the end of the world,
and Jesus aunswerid and said unto them: take head that no man deceive you, for
many shall come in my name saying: (I am Christ, and shall deceive many) and ye
shall here of wars, and of the rumors of wars, but see that ye be not
troublid, for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet: For
nation shall rise against nation, and realm against realm, and there shall be
Pestilence, hunger and earthquaks, in certain quarters, all these are the
beginning of sorows. Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kill you,
and ye shall be hated of all nations, for my names sake: and then shall many be
offendid, and shall betraye one an other, and shall hate one an other, and many
false Prophets shall arise, and shall diceyue many: and because iniquite shall
have the upper hand, the love of many shall abate, but he that indureth unto
the end, the same shall be safe.

Moreover when ye see the abhominacion of desolacion, whereof is spoken by
Daniel the Prophet: Stand where it ought not, let him that reads understand,
then let them that be in Iuery, flee to the mountayns, and let him that is on
the house top, not decend down into the house, and let him that is in the
feeld, not tourn back again, unto the things that he left behind him, for to
take his clothes, with him, woe shall be to them that are with child: and to them,
that give luck in those days, but pray that your flight be not in the Winter,
for there shall be in those days, such tribulacion, as was not from the beginning.

BUt before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you,
delivering you up to the Sinagoges, and into prisons, and bring you before
Kings and Rulers for my name sake. etc. Mar. 13 Sinagoge, were huge temples of
ye Pharisees and rebellious Iwes. Luc. 21
Yea ye shall be betrayed of your fathers, and mothers, and of your brethren, and
kinesmen, and friends, and some of you shall they put to death: and hated shall
ye be of all men for my names sake, yet there shall not one hear of your heads
perish, by your paciens possess, your souls, (after these and other things)
there shall be signs, in the Son, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and in
the Earth, the people shallbe in such perplexite, that they shall not tell,
which way to turn them selves, the Sea, and the waters shall rore, and men's
hearts shall fail, them, for fear, and for loking after those things, which
shall come on the earth, for the powers of heaven shall move, and then shall
they see the son of man, come in a cloud, with power and great glory, when
these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up your heads, for
your redempsion draws neygh.

Verily verily, I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see heaven open: John 1
D^phan sew the heavens open being the first Bart^r. Acts 7 John 16
And the Angels of God, ascending and descending unto the son of man: These
things have I said unto you, because you should not be offendid: They shall
excommunicate you, yea the time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will
think that he does God service, and such things will they do unto you,
because they have not known the father, nether yet me, but these things have I
told you, that when that hour is come ye might remember them, that I told you.

THe spirit speaks evidently, that in the later times, Paul 1. Epistle 4.
cap. to Timo.
some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed, unto the spirits of
error, and devilish doctrine of men, which speak false, through Ipochrisi, etc.

THis understand that in the last days, shall come perelous times, Paul 2.
Epistle 3. cap. to Timo.
for me^ shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, bostars, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to father and mother, unthankful, unholy, unkind,
trucebreakers, stobberen, false accusers, riotous, ferce, dispisers of them
which are good, traitors, heady, hie minded, gredy upon volupteousnesse, more
then the lovers of God, having a similitude of godly living, but have denied
the power thereof and such abhore.

THis first understand, that there shall come in the laterdays, mokers, which
will walk after their own lusts and say, where is the promise of his coming,
for since the fathers died, all things continue, in the same estate, where in
they were at the beginning, for this they know not, 2. epistle of S. Peter.
and that willengly how that the heavens a great while a go, were, and the
earth that was in the water, aperid up out of the water, by the word of god, by
the which things, the world that then was perished, ouerflowid with ye water,
but the heauins verily, and the earth which are now, are keept by the same word
in store, and reseruid unto fire against the day of Judgment, and perdicion of
ungodly men.

BEhold the Lord shall come with thowsands of Saints, to give judgment against
al men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly among the^, of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed, Jude epistle.
and of al their cruel speakings which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Unto him that louid us, and wasshid us from sins in his own blood, and made
us kings, and prestes, unto god the father, Revelation.
be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Ane advised prophecy.
In Anno 1041. this picture was found in the temple of the Iacobines in Geneua,
against the wicked government of papal dignite.
This picture was made by Iacobus Iaquiri de C ui tate Taurini 1041.



Iudicabit iudices iudex generalis,
Hic mihi proderit dignitas papalis,
Sieve sit Episcopus sieve Cardinalis,
Reus co^damnabitur, nec dicetur quales.
Hic nibil proderit quinquam allegare,
Neque exciperere neque replicare,
Nec ad apostolicum sedem appellare.
Reus codamnabitur, nec dicetur quare.
Cogitate miseri, qui vel quales estis,
Quid in hoc iudicio, dicere potestis,
Idem e^it dominus, iudex actor testis.
The substance of the Latin h^rce.

THe mighty Jove the judge of all, which fitteth in throne above
Shall judge each Papal dignite, the rabble whole remove
Such as the one the other is, and Cardinals like wise
For their deformid flattery, the Lord will them despise
And judge of al, both quick and dead, when Popes shall boil, in bulls of lead.
AS from the beginning, from the first token, or appeared show unto Noah: the
Rain bow, the fire from heaven, the prophising by the Prophets, the star at
Christ his birth, the prophises sense, the innumerable Co^mets, Hailes,
Thu^derings, Earthquakes, strange deaths, prodigius birthes as well of
creatures as beasts, famins, hungers, sedicions, false religions, sects,
opinions, fantasies, with an innumerable inormities, all these suffiseth not to
be forewarninges to y^ most part of the world, for the which cause, as the end
of these few insamples, so shall be the end of such insolent persons be.

SIbilla Albunea, or Tiburtina, one of the ten Sibelles, Polichro^^con.
Cro^ica^nm
prophised of the ruen of Romae, which came to pass in that time, when Julius
Caesar, came with sword to race the same, the Ancient figures wear these.
R.R.R. F.F.F. which signified. Regna Romae. Ruet.

IN three things, twice told, shows Romes destruction, Prophecy Con^adu^
Licosthenem. Pucerus in libro de diuinatione. Nauclerus. Platina.

Sword, fire, and hunger, concludes the subversion.
THe reign of ye Romans, or this ruinate shall be,
by sword fire and hunger, the gods so decree.
IN Anno. 315. Constantine the great contended against Maxencius: for showing
shameful cruelty against the Christians: about which time was great
persecusion in the church: there appeared in the aier a banner or ^isplaied
ensign, whereon was figured ye figure of Christ on the cross, after which
figure cusued great persecution.

CElestinus same time Pope of Romae, Warning before death. Fasciculus temporum.
Warning by viu^o^.
prophised of Bonifacius the eight, which came to pass accordingly he came to
his Pope^^m, by craft, like a Fox, he reigned by force like a Lion. And for
his cruelty, was put to death like a dog.

IN Anno. 1046. as histories relate. Benedictus, the ninth Pope, after his
burial, he was, or the devil in his likeness, seen in an horrible figure,
Licosthines. Platina Look in Bartholomeus. and Gesnerus for the property of a
Bear The glory of this world is folishnes before go, he must be worshipped in
spirit and v^ritie. Mar. Anno. Warning by v^sion and death
having the body of a Bear, the tail of an Ass, clothed in his pontifical
vesture. And being asked why he was so deformed, should answer, because without
law he governed, and as a cruel tirant used oppression. In this strange
figured apperance, should seem some advised interpretacion: the appering of
the Pope in ye shape of a bear seems contempsious and wilful, and as the
Bear above all things loves honey, so the popes for the most part hates not
money. And where as to such a monstrous body, was joined the tail of an Ass:
by the tail may be signified: the whole rabble of papistical prelates, which as
concerning the true acknowledging of the Gospel are but Asses, for y^ some
knows and will not, others not knowing regards not, the rich and costly
garments or vesture, may signify the golden copes and costly ornaments, where
with such bears are clothed in the church, esteming more such glittering
attier: with ye tradicio^ of men, then a plain or comely garment, with the
gospel of Christ.

IN the year of the foundation of Romae, 720. and in the 42. years of Marcus
Aurelius, the xx. day of August, about the going down of the Sun, in the
realm of Cicil, in the City of Palermo, a pert of ye sea, there chaunsed a
marvelous and terrible tempest no less miraculous, then wonderful. A hideous
Monster sitting, in a caudron fastened to four wheels, like a Chariot or
Wagon, drawn of two Lions and two bears be hind casting out fire, with
horrible stinck, which sight amassed not a few, the fear was so great through
out the City, that women with child were with great danger delivered: and
diverse being fainte hearted died through fear. After this Monster had bin in
the most parts of the City, he came to the Palace or place, where the pirates
were, A good ensample for such as seeks to live by other men's goo^es.
or robbers on the sea, being inhabitants of the said Palerna, who had robbid
certain of the Numidians a people so named, of their substance, staying at the
gate, which being shut did cut of one of the Lions ears and with the blood
thereof wrote as fo^^weth. R.A S.P.I.P. which carectes signified. Redite, Aliena
Si vultis, Propria, in pace, Possidere, render to others that which is theirs,
if you in quiet will possess your own. Although this figure, with diverse
others, did terrefy the people in time past, and their conuersions likewise
from their euiles: an ensample to us of our amendment. Notwithstanding such is
time present, Mat. 4. Vigillate, et Orate.
that neither the Prodigious births, the miracuculus signs, nor dreadful
threatened plagues withdraws the world from contempt, for the which such
careless livers shall be plaged with. F.S.H.P.D.D. Fire, Sword, Hunger, Pestile^se
Death Damnacio^.

A Saxon Monument.
Multi enim sunt vocati pauci Vero electi.

Math. 22.
Witodlice manega zint, gelathode and featha gecorene,
Manega, ga zurete, and halega, featha heothan.
Many be called, but few does speed,
As many be warned, yet few take heed.
More head then wit, more hair than wull,
Makes England thriftles, and young heads dull,
When necks be long, no hoe in the filling,
And pleasures preferred, in lands small tilling.
When diverse fashions in apparel are worn,
And beggars being more pore, so nearely are shorn.
When one won back, is showed diverse countries lore,
A monster must needs be, so told before.
When Glandene will be the whole world it self,
A Spaniarde, Italian, French, Flemmishe and elfe.
All showed in apparel, when this is at prime,
Then some place be heedefull, for sure it is time.
This picture following on the other side of the leaf, was made by Namtab a
Saxon, in Anno 3751. against the abuse of that present time.

Times past has been, as now to be seeene.

Ezechiel. 4. As wise as Serpents. Esaias. 3. As subtle as Deuels. Timothe. 3. As
crafty as Foxes. Amos. 2. As ravening as Wolves.



The long schull betokens Crafty imagination: The pleasant countenance,
Flattery: The long neck, Excess in eating and drinking: The right arm being
shorter then the left, betokens small Devotion: The bag of money
Covetousness: The left arm, Wilfulness: The sword Cruelty: The strange
disguising in apparel, Pride.

The praise and commendacion of holy men, to the end, that such works may
procead, as may grow to the like commendacion of those which be living with a
remembrance of certain wicked ones, which do prognosticat that hole number.

Behold every one of you that profess Christ, (without decimulacion) the
substance of verite, 3. reg. 18.
leave of your halting between two opinions, if God be the true creator follow,
him, if the proud Antechristian, be a deliverer, then follow him, if the
tradicions of men, be, to be, preferrid, before the law and testimony of Jesus
Christ the^ mark ye ensa^ples as they follow: Enoch, Eccle. 44
walked right and acceptable, before the Lord, therefore, was he translatid for
an ensample for a mendement, of the generation.

NOah, was a steadfast and a righteous man, and in the time of wraught, he
became a reconsiling, therefore was he left a remnant unto the earth, when the
flud came, and an everlasting covenant, Genesis 9.
was made with him, that all flesh should perish no more, with the water.

ABraham, was a great father of many nations, Genesis 22.
in glory was there none like unto him, he kept the law of the hiest, and came
into a covenant with him, he set the covenant in his flesh, and when he was
pr^uid, he was found faithful. Likewise of Moses, Aaron, Phinches, Iosue,
Caleb, Samuel, Nathan, David, Salamon, Elyah, Elyzeus, Hezekiah, Esaye, Iosyah,
Jeremy, Ezechyel, Zorobabel, Jesus, Nehemyah, Enoch, Joseph, Simon the son of
Onias, with diverse other Prophets, and kings. These in that they walkid,
according to the commandment of God, have left behind them, a perpetual cause,
of praise and commendacions, and as these in godly life practiced, to please
God, so the wicked, by contempt of the same have left behind them, a
discomendacion of their wicked and most pestilent behavior.

Abimelech, Iud. 9.
the Son of Jeroboam, flew three score and ten of his brethren, to the
intent, he might raygne alone, and yet he ruled not long there, but sustained
great misfortune, and made and evil end.

NOtwithstanding that Ioab, was a valiant man, at arms, yet in as much as he
deceytfully flew two men, all that ever he had done before was counted as
nothing. And so Solomon, causid him to be slain, 3. reg. 2
notwithstanding, he heald the corner of the altar.

IOas, 2. Para. 24.
the king of Judah commandid Zacharias, the son of Ioiada, the Priest, to be
stonid to death, and yet his father restorid him the kingdom, and slew Athalia.

PTholome, 1 Match. 16.
the son of Abobus, made the hie Pressed, and his two Sons a banquet. And
when they were merry, and had drunk well traiterusly he slew them.

It was showed Holofernes, that the children of Israel, preparid themselves, to
make resista^ce against him, Judith 5.
for the which he was exceeding wrough, and at the last in his drunkenness, he
was slain by Judith.

THe cruelty of Antiochus of Nabuchodonosor, of Pharao, of Herod, of Zambrye,
2. reg. 17.
Achab, Achitophel, Benadab, Aman, Balthazar, Alchimus, Ananias and Saphira, 3.
reg. 16.
Herod, Dioclesian Astiages, Maxinilian, Emperor of the Romans, 1 Match 9
Cambices, Tomiris, Tullia, Tarquine, Nero, Iulianus, with an infinet numbers,
Acto. 2
who Satan has not a litlte triumphed at their overthrow, Cronicarum.
I omit to speak of the Sea of Rome who has not sparid to put more to death,
by tyranicall devices, then before their original, was ever heared of, sense
the flud: Milions of thowsands, whose blood requirith no small revenge.

THe very heathen, in their kind, are to be preferrid, before those, and such
like, percecuting tyrants, and in especial the Philosophers, have left behind,
a worthy comendacio^ of their wisdoms, to the great discomendacion of such
tyranny Papal, as Anacharsis, Anaxagoras, Archelaus, Alex, Seuerus, Augustus
Caesar, Chilon, Cicero, Crates, Diogines, Democritus, Demostines, Epimenides,
Hermes, Homer, Horace, Isocrates, Justinius, Licurgus, Marcus Aurelius,
Pitagoras, Pline, Plato, Solon, Socrates, Seneca, Thales, Xenophon, with many
others, whose wise senteuris, and faithful sayings, are to be found, in our
vulgar tongue, by such worthy members, as diserue perpetual fame, for such their
paynfull labors.

THe wise, grave, learnid, and ancient Doctors, of the Church, did not in their
time more paynfu^^y study to keep the Church in purite of doctrine: then the
wicked generacions, of papisticall inuencio^, have laborid to bring all to
ruen, and decay, to this end that such laws as they devised might take place,
and yet in despit of satanicall tyrany, the Lord has reseruid some since the
time of Quintilianus, Timotheus, Victorius, Dionisius, Ignacius, Policarpus,
Hyreneus, Corinthorum.
Origin, Cypranus, Erasmus, Hilarious, Athanasius, Gregorius, Basilius Magnus
Ambrosius, Hilarious, Cyrillus, Hieroimus, Auguistinus, Naziazenus.
that have valiently defendid the Gospel to their perpetual fame, and worthy
comendacion, not by writing only, not by preaching and teaching of the sacarid
word and Gospel, but also with their blood have sea^id the said testimony of
truth: the most part hereof, if not by present death, yet by inprisonment
perceusio^, Romae vniuersalis, inquisitionis.
with diverse strange manners of punishments, as Huldricus Huttenus, Adamas
Sibertus, Albertus Brandeburgen, Alexander Alexis, Andreas Musculus, Andreas
Osiander, Antonius Anglus, Arturus Britanus, Antonij, Reuclim, Bartholomeus,
Bernardi, Bernardus Zieglerus, Bullingerus, Caluinus, Hieronimus, de Prage,
Carolus Molinaeus, Cornelius Agrippa, Conradus, Gesnerus, Gulielmus Tindalus,
Ioannes Frith, Ioannes Fox, Ioannes, Hoperus, Oecolampadius, Ioannes
Oldecastle, Ioannes Bale, Nicolaus, Herford, Nicolaus Ridley, Robertus
Stephanus, Vuolfangus Musculus, Erasmus Rotorodam, Ioannes Iuel, with a number
more, which would requier no small volume, to be nominatid at large: All, and
every of these, with the rest godly professors and martiers, although, their
bod^ly presence be absent, yet their works remayn, to aperpetuall encouraging,
of those which be leuing. The omnipotent God so grant that this my small
enterprise, occasion some that are learnid, to note at large this my short
collectio^, which being done, will deserve dwe commendacion, for as the enemies
of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, have made Books, by the name of an universal
inquisition, and therein have named, not only the names of the Christian sort,
but also their Books, to the end, that their generacions may ye better know
what they allow, and what they hate or dislike, so were it as necesseray, for
these present days, some such Books to be made wherein, the true Christian may
both see and ^now which Books, were to abolished, as well for the maintenance
of christian religion, as the wicked ones have for the glory of theirs which
glory shall be don away. romans 1
The God of peace and love, so bless us, that in all our works, words, and
deeds, Idem. ^.
it may be to his glory, with the preseruacion of this our Deene, and country:
with due obedience in the same, that Satan, may be suppressed: Antichrist
overthrown: and that ye gospel may have clear passage, through the whole
world: And that those which are blind, may thereby be made see, through the
dimned clouds of supersticion the cleers light of Euangelion, the Gospel,
and those which are gone astray, may once find the way home. And that those
which are at home, Luke 15.
may depart in peace, ye after this Pilgrimage here on earth, we may rest with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

A commendacion of such, as desire knowledge, with a wished mind, of the
numbers increase.

Strive by truth, thy fame to win,
take heed betimes, Imaginacio.
ere thou begin
Evermore be sure of this,
perhaps, thou may in time else mis.
Hold by truth, as ancker sure,
euels present, will procure
Nothing better saves life,
then to eschew debate and strife.
Couit only God to please,
provide in time so follow ease
Envy is not now alone,
restles rage does cause to moan.
These notes does prove by gods decree,
where grace is not none saved we see
Then find your name, by letters due,
so shall you know if this be true.
WIthout the true knowledge of God, Emblemata. Boecius Periander.
Marcusaurelius in the Book ti titeled the sayings of the wise or Dialogue of
Dunces.
I doubt good rule to find,
lies highly being magnified, leaves of when time assind,
Imagine then what flesh does gain,
a show by proof of endless pain
Master then corrupted lust,
requiring aid of Jove the just.
Bear this in mind what state thou be,
except degrees as order s^ignes
Evermore think thou do see
thy filthy acts which world blindes.
Seek so for health, that truth thee gide,
taste of her fruit whose verdured sap
Duly will save at every tide,
naught else but this will breed thy hap.
Then see by this such substance just
when name is gone where to we must.
ALexanders, conquest great, could not a God him find, Philosofia.

nor valiant acts might not prolonge, no such life was assind
In midst of wealth, likewise of fame, what country could him hold,
such fatal end, by love the just, was speedely controulde.
Dardanus, entrance nothing sure, by Percian, ost could once procure,
the end of all is death we see, which ends in time our misery
THalestris, Hasdruball, Olimpias, Mago, Agathocles Selencus, Poema^^.

with many thousands mo,
By dent of Sword, were long suppressed, unto their countres woe.
MInerue, Ariadne, Sabina, Creusa Helena, Affra, Lauinia.
their wisdoms, beauty, or renoume, where to now is it come,
In histories old, who will unfold, there is the perfect some.
So live to die, that worldly fame: may after death report thy name.
WIlliam that valiant Duke, a Norman by dicent,
by dent of sword this land inioyed, Ann. 1066. Gauelkind. Historia.
when Harold, did relent
Record thereof in stories are, and ^eeke to Kentes renoume,
a law to hold with freedom theirs, though valiancy did froune.
Use medestie, for such thy hap then lasting praise shall how,
no foraigne power shall thee annoy, of none such be controld
Except this warning friendly then, the Prince defend and keep
relent from sin, to God do trust, that Christ in clouds may meet.
Each name so found, give God the praise,
that live each may beyond all days.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London by Thomas East, for William Norton, and Stephen Bateman.


