A Beautiful Baybush to shroud us from the sharp shovvers of sin.
Containing many notable prayers and meditations, being very profitable for all
true Christians that delight to laud the Lord.

LODON, Printed for Ed. White. 1610.

To the right honorable and virtuous Lady the Lady Frances, Countess of
Hertford, his very good Lady and Mistress.
AS Christian modesty (right virtuous Lady) moved a Gentleman, the first
author hereof, not only to conceal his name, but also to cease from setting
forth any thing in the praise of that, which in duty deserves to be
commended of every one: So Christian justice and equity, which wills us to
give to every thing his due, would not suffer me to let that pass without some
commendation, whereunto I am notable sufficiently to give any. But considering,
that slightly to commend a thing were the next way to disco^ment it, except
with all it were shrouded under the patronage of some great person, and
thinking it unmeet to let that go like an Orphan abroad, which had a father at
home, I presumed to commit unto your honorable patronage not a bare Laurel,
which of it self for the greenesse (when other be withered) may seem to be
accepted, but the same decked and adorned with most spiritual and beautiful
bushes. So that as I cannot think if your L. were presented with a material
Laurel (wherein besides natural greenesse were but this necessary use, that
it could defend you in your garden from the heat of the Sun) but you would
accept, if not of the gift yet of the good will of the giver: So relying my
self on your accustomed favor and clemency, I hope you will afford some
favorable acceptance hereof: For herein is not that greenesse, which
consisting of natural qualities, must then wither when all things have their
ending according to their nature, but the flourishing green promises of the
conuenant of God, which (as God himself) last always immutable and
unchangeable: here are not the beautiful bushes of a material tree, which
delight only the outward sight, but a most familiar view of God himself in
Christ even to the delight of the soul, and the inward comfort of the spirit,
which take pleasure only in heavenly things, withstanding the invasions and
subtle practices of Satan, which daily strives against them, to bring them
to destruction. To conclude, here you are not shrouded from the heat of the
sun, but shall find most cool shade from the parching heat of sin, from
the which, God in this life shield and defend you, and in the life to come
grant you everlasting rest.

Your honors most humble and dutiful servant. John Wolf.

January has xxx. days.
1 A New years day. New years day Otherwise calle^ The Circumcision of
Christ. 2 b Oct. of Stephen. 3 c Oct. of John. 4 d Oct. of Inno. 5 e Titus Paul
dis. 6 f Twelfe day. The tvvelfe day. Otherwise called The Epiphanie. Faires at
Bristow, an^ at Salifburie. 7 g Trans. William. 8 A Felix and Iana 9 b Lucian.
10 c Paul first here. 11 d Ignius mart. 12 e Archademar. 12. The Sun in
Aquarius. 13 f Hillarie mart. 14 g Felix priest. 15 A Isidorie mart. 16 b
Maurice. 23. Term begin. 17 c Dep. of Autho. 18 d Prise martyr. 19 e Wolstan
bishop. The xxv. day, being the conversion of Saint Paul. Faires at Graves end,
at Bristow, at Churchingford at Northalerton in Yorkshire, where is kept a
fair every wednesday, from C^r^stmasse until June next following. 20 f Fabian
and Sc. 21 g Agnes vir. 22 A Vincent martyr. 23 b Emerice. 24 c Timoth. disc.
25 d Conu of Paul. 26 e Policarpe mart. 27 f Chrisosto. doctor. 28 g Theodor.
29 A Valerie bishop. 30 b Bartilde Queen. 31 c Saturnine.

February has xxviii. days.
1 d Briget. Fast. 2 e Puri. of Mary. 3 f Blase martyr. The i. day a fair at
Bromlie. 4 g Gilbert confessor 5 A Agathe virgin The ii. day faires at
Maidstone, at Bathe, at Linne, at Brickelsworth, and at Budworth. 6 b Amandus
bish. 7 c Dorothe virgin 8 d Angule virgin 9 c Paul bishop 10. The sun in
Pisces. 10 f Appoline virgin 11 g Scolastice 12 A Eufrase virgin Term ends. 13
b Wulfrane bishop 14 c Valentine mart. 15 d Faustine bishop 16 e Julian virgin
The xiiii. being S. Valentines day, a fair at Feuetsham. 17 f Policron bishop.
18 g Simeon martyp 19 A Shroue Sunday Upon Ashwednesday Faires at Lichfield at
Ro^sten, at Dunstable, at Exceter, ^t Ciceter, at Tamworth, and at Abington. 20
b Sabin and Julian 21 c Mildred virgin 22 d Policarpe Fast 23 e Matthie apostle
24 f Lxix Martyrs Matthias apostle. Faires at Heuley upon Thames, at
Towkesburie, and at Baldocke. 25 g Peter's chair 26 A Augustine bishop 27 b
Oswald bishop 28 c

March has xxxi. days.
1 d David bishop. 2 e Chadde confess. The iiii. Sunday in Lent at the Mount,
and at Bodmin in Cornwall. 3 f Martine. 4 g Adrian martyr. 5 A Phocas and Eus.
The v. Sunday in Lent at Grantham, at Salisburie, and at Hertford. 6 b Victor
and Victs 7 c Perpetue. 8 d Apoline martyr. 11. The Sun in Aries. 9 e Agapit
virgin. 10 f Gregory bishop. The xii. day at Stamford, and at Cudburie. 11 g
Aggens proph. 12 A Theodo^e mact. 13 b Leo bishop. The xiii. day at Wie. 14 c
Peter martyr. The xx. day a fair at Durham. 15 d Longin martyr. 16 e Quintin
martyr. 17 f Gertrude virg. On the Monday before our Lady day in Lent at
Wisbich, at Kendall, at Denbigh in Wales. 18 g Edward king. 19 A Joseph Ma.
hus. 20 b Cuthbert bishop. 21 c Benedict abbot. 22 d Affrodose bish. The xxv.
at Northampton, at Newcastle, at Malden, at great Chart, and all the Lady days
at Huntington. 23 e Theodore priest. 24 f Init. Reg. Jacob 25 g Annun. of
Marie. 26 A Castor mart. On Midlent Sunday at Saffron Walden. 27 b Ludger
bishop. 28 c Dorothe martyr. 29 d Victorine. On Palmesunday even, at Pomfret.
30 e Sabrine virgin. On Palmesunday at Worcester. 31 g Adelme bishop.

April has xxx. days.
1 g Theodore virgin 2 A Mary Egyptian The v. day at Wallingford. 3 b Richard
bishop 4 c Ambrose bi^^op The vii. at Darby. 5 d Marcian and Mar. The ix. day
Bicklesworth, at Billinsworth. 6 e Se^tus martyr. 7 f Euphemie virgin 8 g
Deuyse mart. The x. day at Euesham in Worcestershire. 9 A Perpetu^^ bishop 10 b
Marcus martyr. 11 c Gathelaake 10. The sun in Taurus. 12 d Apoline mar ty. 13
e Sother mart. On tuesday in Easter week at Nort^fleet, at Rochford, at
Hitchin. 14 f Tyburt martyr 15 g Osmound bishop 16 A Isidore bishop The third
sunday after Easter at Louth. 17 b Anicate bishop 18 c Eleuther bishop The xxii
day at Stabford. 19 d Tyburtius con. Upon Saint Georges day faires at Charing,
at Ipswich, at Tamworth, at Amhill, at Hinningham, at Gilford, at Saint Pombes
in Cornwall. 20 e Hermogenes 21 f Quintine 22 g Clete bishop 23 A George martyr
24 b Wilfride confess. 25. S. Mark Evangelist. At Darbie, at Donmowe in Essex.
25 c Mark Euang. 26 d Anastace bishop 27 e Vitalis martyr The xxvi. day at
Tenderden in Ken. 28 f Peter of Milan 29 g Clete bishop 30 A Dep. of Erken.

May has xxx. days.
1 b Philip and Jacob. 2 c Athanasius bish. Philip and Jacob, at Rippon, at
Perin i^ Cornwall, at Ossestrie in Wales, at Lexfield in Suffolk, at
Leicester, at Brickhill, at Stowe the old, at Reading, at Maidstone in Rent, at
Chenseford in Essex, a^^ Blackborne in Lancashire. 3 d Inn. of the cross. 4 e
Christoper. 5 f Goddardarchbish. 6 g John port latin. 7 A John of Beu^r. 8 b
Appe of Michel. 9 c Tr^n. of Nicho. 10 d Gordaine. 11 e Pancra^e martyr. 12 f
Victorius martyr. The iii. day at Elstow, at Bramyard. at Heningham. 13 g
Sernaeius con. 14 A Boniface mart. 15 b Sophia virgin. 16 c Brandon bishop. The
vii. at Beuerley, at Newton, at Oxford. 17 d Trans. of Bard. 18 e Dioscor.
martyr. 12. The Sun in Gemini. 19 f 20 g Dunstone onfess. On Whitson even, at
Skipton in Crauen. 2 A Barnardine. 22 b Helene Queen. On Ascension day at
Newcastle, at S. Edes at Chappelfrith. 23 c Petronill. 24 d Julian v rgin.
Monday in Whitson week at Agmundsham, at Excester, at Bradford, at Rigate, at
Burton. 25 e Desiderie mart. 26 f Adelme con. 27 g Augustine con. Tuesday in
Whitson week at Roch forth, and at Canterbury. 28 A Gesmaine b sh. 29 b
Nicomede. On Trinity sunday at Kendall, and at Rowell. 30 ^ Corane martyr. 31
d Felix bishop.

Iunne has xxx. days
1 e Nicodeme. 2 f Crasimus The ix. day at Maidstone in Kent. 3 g Basil. 4 A
Mercell martyr 11. The sun in Cancer. 5 b Petrocius confess. 6 c Boniface
bishop The xi. S. Barnabie, the longest da^ in the year, at Okingha^, at
Newboroug^ at Maxffeld, at Holt in Wales. 7 d Medarde and Gill 8 e Trans.
Edmond 9 f Yuan confess. 10 g Trans. Wolstan The xxiii. at Shrewsburie, at
Saint Albons. 11 A Barnab. apost. 12 b 13 c Antonie con. The xxiiii. at
Horsham, at Wakefield, at Colchester, at Reading, at Bedford, at Barntwell, at
Crambrooke, at Gloucester, at Lincoln, at Peterborough at Windsor, at Harslone,
at Lancaster, at Westchester, at Hallisax, at Ashborne. 14 d Basilides con. 15
e Vite modeste 16 e Trans. Richard 17 f Botolph confess. 18 g Exuperie bishop 19
A Gernasiue martyr 20 b Trans. Edward 21 c Walburge virgin 24. S. John Baptist.
At Colchester, at Wakefield. 22 d Albane martyr 23 e Fast. The xxvii. at
Folkstone. 24 f John Baptist. The xxviii. at S. Pombs. 25 g Trans. of Elegy 26
A John and Paul 29. Peter Apost. At Sudburie, at Peterfield, at Woodhurst. 27 b
Crescens martyr 28 c Fast. 29 d Peter and Paul. 30 e Comme Paul.

Iulie has xxxi. days.
1 g Oct. John Bap. 2 A Visita. of Mary. The ii. day at Congreton, at Ashton
vnderline. 3 b Trans. Tho. Apo. 4 c Trans. of Martin. 5 d Oct. of Peter. The
xi. day at Partnie, a horse fair at Lid. 6 e Zoe virg. mart. 7 f Depo.
Grimbal. 12. The Sun in Leo. 8 g Cirill bishop. The xv. at Pinchbacke. 9 A
vii. brethren mar. The xvii. at Winchcombe. 10 b Dog days begin. 11 c Nabor
and Felix. The xx. day at Tetbury, at No^thbridge in Cheshire, at Cheswicke, at
Vxbridge, at Harlbrough, at Winchester, and at Colchester. 12 d Trans. of
Benedi. 13 e Prinata marti. 14 f Transi Osmond 15 g Kenelme king. 16 A
Eustacii. 17 b Arnulph martyr. 18 c Rufine and Iusti. 26. James Apostle. At S.
James beside London, at Dover, at Bristow, at Ipswich at Darby, at Northampton,
at Dudly in Staffordshire, at Reading, at Malmsbury, at Chilham, at Louth, at
Liuerpoole, at Chichester, at Aldergam. 19 d P^arede virgin. 20 e Marget
virgin. 21 f Apolinares virg. 22 g Mary Magdalen. 23 A Christine virgin. 24 b
Fast. 25 c James Apostle. 26 d Anne mo. Mary. 27 e Seven sleepers. The xxvii.
day at Canterbury, at Richmond in the Noth. at Horsham. 28 f Samson bishop. 29
g Felix and his fell. 30 A Abdon and Se n. 31 b German bishop.

August has xxxi. days.
1 c Lammas day On Lammas day at Feuersham, at S. Edes at Excester, at
Dunstable, at Bedford, at Norham Church, at Wisbi h, at York, at Romnie, at
Newton in Lancashire. 2 d Stephen bishop 3 e Finding of Ste. 4 f Iustine priest
5 g Festum niuis 6 A Trans. Christ 7 b Feast of Jesus. 8 c Ciriack and his fell.
The x. day at Waltham, at Blackmore, at Bedford, at Waiton, at Hungerford, at
Cro^ly, at new Brainford, at S. Laurence by Bodwin. 9 d Roman martyr 10 e
Laurence martyr 11 f Tiburte martyr 12 g Clare virgin 13 A Ypolite virgin 14 b
Exalta crucis 15 c Assum. of Mary 16 d Roche martyr 17 e Octa. Laurence 13. The
Sun in Virgo. 18 f Magnus martyr 19 g Barnard confess. The xv. day at Carlisle
at Dunmow in Essex, at Preston, at Wakefield the two Lady days. 20 A Dog days
end 21 b Jews martyr 22 c Octa assump. 23 d Timothy Fast. 20. Dog days end.
24 e Bartholom. apost. 25 f Lews king 24 Bartholomew apost. At London, at
Teuksbury, at Na^twitch, at Beggars bush besides Rye, at Sudburie, at Norwich,
at Northarleton, at Dover, at Rye, at Bromley. 26 g ^euerine 27 A August ne
con. 28 b Ioh^s beheading. 29 c Rusine martyr 30 d Felix and Adacte The xxvii
at Ashford. 31 e Cathberd virgin

September has xxx. days
1 f Giles bishop. 2 g Anthony mart. The i. day in S. Giles in the bush. 3 A
Luper bishop. 4 b Trans. of Cuthert 5 c Bertine abbot. The vii. day at
Wakefield, at Sturbridge, at Southwarke, at Snide, at Reculuer, at Reugh both
the Lady days, a^ Gisborough, at Partnie three Lady days, at Blackborne
Gisborne in Yorkshire, at Chalton. 6 d Eugenie confess. 7 e Enurcius bishop. 8
f Nati. of Mary. 9 g Siluius bishop. 10 A Gorgony mart. 11 b Porthy and Iacint.
12 c Martiman. 13 d Amanti. 14 e Holy Rood. 15 f Lambert. 16 g Edith virgin.
17 A Timotheus. The xiiii. day, being Holy Roode day, at Richmond in Yorkshire,
at Rippon a horse fair, at Waltam abbey, at Chesterfield. 18 b Victor and
Coron. 19 c January mart. 20 d Fast. 21 e Matthew apostle. 22 f Mauricius.
14. The Sun in Libra. 23 g Tecla virgin. 24 A Andochius mart. Matthew apost.
At Marlborough, at Bedford, at Croiden, at Sittingborne, at Dover, at
Shrewsbury. 25 b Firmin bishop, 26 c Cipr^an and Just. 27 d Cosme and Damia.
29. Michael archangel, At Canterbury, at Blackborne, at Westchester, at
Cockermouth, at Leicester. 28 e Ecuperie bishop. 29 f Michael Archan. 30 g
Ierom priest.

October has xxxi. days.
1 A Remigius bishop 2 b ^eodagare mart. The iiii. day at Michel. 3 c Candidie
matyr The vi. day at S. Faiths besides Norwich, at maidestone. 4 d Francis
martyr 5 e Faith virgin The viii. day at Harnord, at Herbrough, and at Bishop
Stapford. 6 f Gerionis 7 g Marcie and Mart. On S. Edward^ day at Graves end, at
Marshfield, at Windsor, at Colthester, at Charing, at Roiston. 8 A Apolonaris
mart. 9 b Pelagi virgin 10 c Linus confessor 11 d Deny^e and his fell. 14. The
Sun in Scorpio. 12 e Nichasins bishop. 18. Luke Euang. At Cely, at Wrickle,
at Vpan, at Thirst at Friswides in Oxford, at Tisdale, at Bridgenorth, at
Scanton. 13 f Wilf^ide bishop 14 g Trans. Ed. king 15 A Ealixt bishop 16 b
Wolfran bishop at Burton upon Trent, at Charlton, at Wigan in lancashire, at
Holt in Wales. 17 c Michael of the mo 18 d Luke Euang. 19 e Etheldrede vir. 20
f Frideswide virgi The xxi. day at Saffron Walden, at New Market, at Hertford,
at Ciceter, at Stokecley. 21 g Austreberte vir. 22 A Xi. M. virgins 23 b Mary
Salome 24 c Roman bishop 25 d Maglory bishop 26 e Crispin and Cres. 27 f
Fast. 28 g Simon and Jude On all Saints even at Wakefield, at Rithen. 29 A
Narcissus bishop 30 b Germane confess. 31 c Fast.

November has xxx. days.
1 d All saints. All Saints. 2 e All Souls. 3 f Menefriede virg. The ii. day
at Blechingly, at Kingstone, and at Maxfield. 4 g Amantius. 5 A Let priest. 6
b Leonard. The vi day, being S. Leonards day, at Salforth, at Stanly, at
Tregnie, at Newportpond. 7 c Wilbroade. 8 d Four crowned. 9 e Theodore. 10 f
Martine. The x. day Lenton. 11 g Martine bishop. The xi. day at Marlborough, at
Dover. 12 A Brise bishop. 13 b Pattern martyr. 13. The sun in sagittarius. 14
c Trans, Orknew. 15 d Macure bishop. 16 e Dep. of Edmond. The xiii. day at S.
Edmonds bury, at Gilford. 17 f Init. regni. Elizab. 18 g Oct. Martine. The
xvii. day at Low, at Hide. 19 A Elizabeth martyr. 20 b Edmond king. The xix.
day at Horsham. 21 c Pres of Mary. The xx. day being S. Edmonds day, at Hytch,
at Ingerstone. 22 d Cicely virg. 23 e Clement martyr. The xxiii. day at
Sandwich. 24 f Grisogon martyr. 25 g Katherine virg. 26 A Line martyr. 30.
Andrew apostle. At Colingborough, at Rochester, at Peterfield, at Maidenhead,
at Bewdly, at Bedford in Yorkshire. 27 b Virales confess. 28 c Rufus martyr. 29
d Saturnini. Fast. 30 e Andrew apostle.

December has xxxi days.
1 f Elegy bishop 2 g Libane martyr The v. day a fair at Plucklie. 3 A Dep.
of Osmond 4 b Barbara virgin The vi day at Spalding, at Arnedale, at Sinook, at
Exceter, at Northwich in Cheshire. 5 c Sabba bishop 6 d Nicolas bishop 7 e
Octa. Andrew 8 f Conc. of Mary The vii. day at Sandhurst. 9 g Cyprian bishop 10
A Enlalie virgin The viii. day, being the conception of the Virgin Mary, at
Clitherall in Lancashire and at Malpas in Cheshire: 11 b Antippe 12 c Damase
confess: 13 d Lucie virgin 14 e Nirasius virgin 15 f Otholie virgin 16 g O
Saplentia 13. The Sun in Capricornus. 17 A Lazarus confess. 18 b Gracian
bishop S. Lucie the shortest day in the year. 19 c Venetia virgin 20 d Fast.
21 e Thomas apost. 22 f XXX. Martyrs 23 g Victor virgin 24 A Fast. 25 b
Christmas day 26 c Stephan martyr 27 d John Evangelist 28 e Innocents day 29 f
The xxix day at Canterbury, at Salisburie. 30 g Trans. of James 31 A Siluester
mart.

A beautiful Baybush.
A prayer for morning.
MOst gracious God and dear Father, we yield unto thee from the bottom of our
hearts most humble thanks, in that it has pleased thee not only to defend and
preserve us this night from all our enemies both ghostly and bodily: but also
of thy fatherly pity to give unto these our ear^hly and languishing bodies
such sufficient sleep and rest, as has satisfied the earnest desire of our
weak and feeble nature. And as thou of thy mercy have safely brought us to
the beginning of this present day, and showed us the light thereof: so we
humbly beseech thee (O God) grant that our souls may be spiritually lightened
with the brightness of thy word and sacred mysteries, whereby we may walk in
the steps of Christianity, and lead a life agreeable to our vocation in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Assist us also with thy grace and holy spirit O God that we may
never shrink from thee for any earthly torments, but dilligently apply our
selves to the performance of thy will, and give our selves wholly thereunto,
having a strong and steadfast faith in the truth of thy promises. Indue us with
wisdom from above, that we may dasly increase in the fullness of our savior
Christ. Behold us with the eye of thy mercy, and vouchsafe to defend us that
commit our selves wholly unto thee both now and evermore. Give unto us a heart
always affected to honor thee, a mind ever meditating of thy righteousness,
and a spirit burning with zeal of thy worship, that we may warily stand upon
our guard, and never yield to the treachery of the adversary: Bless and
prosper our enterprises O Lord, that whatsoever we take in hand, we may by thy
direction bring it to good success, and evermore praise thy holy name for thy
gracious assistance and singular goodness: grant this O father for Jesus Christ
his sake our only savior and redeemer.

An Evening prayer.
GOod God the creator and maker of all mankind, seeing it has pleased thee of
thy divine providence, to ordain the night as a mean to deliver us from the
travails of the day, and to minister ease and gladness to the wearied lims of
our bodies, to the great comfort and refreshing of the same, by the fruition of
quiet sleep and rest, according to humane nature, we beseech thee therefore O
Lord of thy unspeakable goodness and mercy, to be our watchman and defender
this night, that we be not overcome by fantasies, dreams, or other illusions:
but that through thy permission, we may take such quiet rest and voluntary
sleep as nature requires, and though our gross senses are at such times
stopped, yet vouchsafe ever to grant us the assistance of thy grace and holy
spirit, that our souls may respect the coming of thy son our savior Jesus
Christ, that at what time soever he calls, we may be found watchful, and
continually ready to perform his will, that after this life ended, we may
eternally rest in glory: and as the brightness of the sun does in the
morning disperse the dark clouds and thick mistes from the face of the
earth, whereby the same was before covered with darkness: so we humbly
beseech thee vouchsafe to disperse and bury our sins (in the blend and
obedience of thy dear son) which do as it were shadow us from the bright
beams of thy favorable countenance, and evermore assist us with thy gracious
goodness, that our sleep may be so healthful unto us, that we with willing
minds arising in the morning, may utterly shake off al manner of drowsinesse,
and make have to exercise our selves in such Christian labors, as thy divine
providence has ordained us unto, to the advancement and renown of thy holy
name, credit of thy Church, comfort and relief of our Christian brethren, and
our everlasting salvation. In mercy grant this O Lord we beseech thee for
Jesus Christ his sake, our only redeemer and savior, unto whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all power and dominion for ever, Amen.

Twenty and one godly and necessary prayers, gathered out of the Cxix. Psalm,
wherein are contained petitions, craving aid of Gods spirit against Satan and
al wickedness: complaints against the rage of the ungodly: thanksgiving f r
our deliverance and consolation in adversity, for that God both can and will
assist his people.

1. A Prayer for the assistance of Gods holy spirit for to direct our minds
after his holy laws.
Gracious God, so bless me I beseech thee, thy poor servant, that out of the
hidden treasures of thy word, I may gather such fruitful delights that I may
walk uprightly, and lead a blameless life in thy sight, in keeping those
precepts which thou O Lord God have therein appointed. Oh how blessed are those
which observe thy statutes unto the end, seeking thee with a pure heart, and
carefully obeying thy eternal majesty: may it please thee therefore so to
guide my ways, that I quail not in my course, neither bend my self to follow
after unrighteousness, but faithfully persevere in that perfect path which thou
have inclined me unto, out of thy holy word: and thou being a righteous and
everlasting God, do not command me to follow any thing which is not lawful
in thy sight, nor redounding to my salvation. Erect my heart continually to the
contemplation of thy blessed laws, whereby my dealings may be ordered through
thy governance, that I may immitate and carefully keep the same all the days
of my life, with zeal and obedience toward thy divine majesty, then shall
all things according ^o thy will, go well with me, and I shall turn mine eyes
to behold that thing, which is good and laudable in thy fight, yea and
evermore worship thee with an upright mind, in spirit and truth, as becomes
thy child, without all dissimulation and hypocrisy, Lord I am fully purposed
to keep thy statutes even by the direction of thy spirit, for my trust rests
in thee.

2. A prayer to withstand the frailty of flesh, and cleave unto the Lord.
Govern and direct me O Lord, according to thy word, that I may order my
life by the rule thereof, and by the direction of thy holy spirit, dilligently
observe those things which thou have commanded me: I have sought thee O God
with my whole heart, let me not therefore go astray from thee. And though by
frailety of my flesh I have unadvisedly heretofore fallen from thee, yet I
beseech thee of thy endless mercy, slay me that I be not cast down for ever,
and quicken me that I wander not any longer from thy precepts: unite my mind
to thy sacred mysteries, that I may lay up thine everlasting promises in my
heart, least through the vain entisements of my ghostly enemies, I be enforced
to forget and negligently (for want thereof) to offend thy divine majesty: for
except thou O Lord which art altogether mercy, do guide and teach me to
lead my life aright, truly my weakness would not permit me to joy, or
prevail in that which is good: teach me therefore O Lord zealously to keep
thy statutes, that I may boldly speak to the land and praise of thy name, and
openly show forth thy holy word and blessed will, grant that I may take more
delight in the keeping of thy exhortations and commandments, then in all manner
of earthly treasures, and may meditate continually in thy precepts: endue me
with heavenly wisdom that I may understand thy laws aright, and be evermore
occupied therein unto my lives end Amen.

3. A prayer to be guided in all purity and godliness.
Give ear I most humbly beseech thee O Lord, unto the prayers that I offer
here unto thy divine majesty. Continue thy favor toward me, in directing me
with thy holy spirit, that I may overcome that which sauoureth of evil, and
embrace those things which thou have commanded. Abandon from the eyes of my
soul, the vale of darkness, that I may view and behold the true light, and
see the wonderful secrets which evermore shine out of thy heavenly doctrine,
and lead my life in quietness, to thy honor and glory. Thou know that I am
a stranger, and unacquainted on the earth, and that I desire to be brought to
another place, even to thy heavenly habitation: wherefore I beseech thee O God
incline thine ear toward me, hide not from me thy statutes, neither yet take
thy holy spirit from me, that should lead me to embrace thy righteousness. I
am desirous with great care to live acording to thy laws and to keep thine
ordinance, both in prosperity and adversity, wherefore O Lord I beseech thee,
let this zeal consume me. Thou rebukest and destroyest the proud persons and
such as stubbornely strive against thee, and appointest destruction and
bitterness unto those that refuse to keep thy precepts. Though all men envy
me, and have me in despite for the truths sake, yet thou in thy good time
wilt remove them far from me, because I thy humble servant do put my trust in
thee, let my mind and heart be evermore occupied in meditating on thy statutes,
for therein is my delight.

4. A prayer in affliction.
GOod God, of thy infinite mercy, I beseech thee pour upon me the oil of
thy grace, whose soul is grievously tormented with daily afflictions, for I am
like one without life, and fastened to the sepulcher, but my trust is in thee O
my good God, that thou will assist me in my necessity, and restore me thy
poor seouant unto life again, that I may laud and praise thy holy name even
in the midst of the congregation, for ever and ever. Quicken me I say
according to thy word, I will open unto thee my complaints: give ear therefore
unto me, and still encourage me in the way of thy truth, and teach me thy
statutes. Inflame my heart with the love of thy wisdom, and raise me up that
am now fallen, for my soul melts away for very heaviness. Exempt from me
whatsoever may withdraw me from thy laws, and grant that I may continue in
that good way which thou have imprinted in my heart. Give unto me I beseech
thee a willing and zealous mind, to cleave fast unto those things which are
approved by thy testimonies, and that I never shrink from thee, so shall I not
be confounded: draw me out of the straights of sin, into the evident and broad
place of righteousness that I may finish the whole course of my life by the
instinct and direction of thy holy spirit, and this life being ended, I may
forever enjoy thy eternal salvation, through my Lord and savior Christ Jesus.

5. A prayer against the assaults of Satan.
GVide me O Lord in the way of thy statutes, that I may ever order my life
a^cording to the rule thereof by the provident direction of thy holy spirit,
without the which my insufficiency shall not be once able to perform the same
in thy sight: and evermore assist me with the knowledge o^ thy word, that I
may fully with understanding observe and keep the same with my whole heart.
Instruct me daily O God, that am now entered into the way of thy precepts,
quench in my mind the desire of filthy sucre, covetousness and usury, which
would draw me to all sin and iniquity, and incline my heart to those things
that may please thee best, that I embracing the same sincerly, may fructesie in
good works and newness of life, to thy glory. O my good God, keep back
mine eyes that they be not deceived with the enticing shows of lewd vanities,
that would withdraw me from the bright beams of thy incomparable majesty
^leade me O Lord into the true life, that I may zealously follow thee my
guide, confirm me in thy truth as thou have promised turn away reproach and
shame from me, because I fear and love thy judgments, and I desire nothing
more then the increase of thy grace, and the keeping of thy commandments:
save me therefore O Lord, and keep me both now and evermore, that I never have
occasion to sin against thee, but that I may still trust, and evermore depend
upon thy mercies to be defended from all dangers.

6. A prayer for perseverance in the right way of godliness.
GVard me on every side O Lord with thy loving kindness and omnipotent power and
grant me thy salvation, whereby I may be defended from al my enemies, and be
able to answer them in thee my savior, for I do wholly depend upon thy words:
let me not be assaulted with deadly injuries, neither let me in my afflictions
be impatient: let not the truth of thy holy word be taken or estranged from
me, but let my mouth still set forth thy glory: quicken me therefore in thy
law, for I do wait for thy judgments upon the ungodly, and I will keep the
doctrine which thou have given me for ever and ever, and walk at liberty with
a quiet mind, because thou have endued me with a desire to thy commandments,
grant that I never shrink from thy truth, but with all boldenes of spirit
endeavor my self to dispute of those things that concern thy law, even before
the mighty princes of the earth: let my whole delight be in thy precepts O
Lord, which are most dear unto me, and increase my zeal in thy word for I
have loved it with my whole heart above all earthly felicity. I will lift up my
hands unto thee, and before thy face will I present my self, beseeching thee
to endue me with thy grace and holy spirit, that I may walk in thy fight
according to the prescribed rule of thy precepts that thou have showed me, and
fi^e my whole delight and comfort for ever in meditating upon thy statutes, O
God that live for ever.

7. A prayer for pacient abiding Gods good pleasure.
Grant that I by experience may perceive that thou art mindeful O God of those
things which thou have spoken unto me thy servant, and do command me to
trust in: for in all my miseries this is my steadfast comfort, that thou will in
thy good time both help and succor thy servant that trusts in thee, for
though the proud and ungodly person have me in derision for thy names sake, yet
will I ever depend upon thy holy word, for thy promises have quickened me, and
when I think upon the mercies which thou have showed unto me, in punishing them
according to their deserts, I am endued with great comfort: thou know O God
what fear incloseth me, when I hear the wicked bl^spheme thy holy name, and
forsake thy divine precepts, being by thy spirit informed of the evils that
hang over their heads. Let thy statutes Lord be my delight, that during the
time of my weary pilgrimage in this earthly tabernacle, I may never cease to
sound thy praises with zealous harmony, but set my whole care in the
commemoration and calling upon thy holy name, and watchfully think how I may
behave my self to keep thy laws: for at midnight have I erected my mind
unto thee, and have not ceased at all times to pour out my prayers before
thee, the which thy spirit had motioned me unto, because I have always had an
especial care to keep the precepts which thou have appointed me.

8 A consolation that God has helped us, and a prayer for his grace so to
continue.
GOod God, thou art my portion, and the expected land of my inheritance, grant
therefore that I may have thy word to direct me, and when I pour forth my
prayers before thee, with speed I beseech thee give ear unto me, and vouchsafe
to assist me with thy holy spirit, and according to thy promises (vowed unto
thy servants) have mercy upon me: let me not be inclined at any time, to
forget thy goodness, but continually quicken me in thy truth and grant me O
Lord God such an understanding heart, that I never swerve from thy testimonies,
but endeavor my self with all speed to the keeping of thy commandments:
instruct me continually more and more, and defend me from the noisome snares of
the wicked that conspire against me, and intend to suppress in me the good
blessings which thou have lent more. At midnight will I rise to give thanks
unto thee in commemoration of thy great kindness showed unto me, and with true
zeal will I frequent thy temple, to praise thee for thine abundant graces
extended unto me, for thou of thy mercy have blesse^ me in all my doings,
delivered me out of troubles and evermore defended me from mine enemies. Let me
put no trust in the ungodly, but let me join with such as fear thee, and have
a love to thy statutes: the earth O Lord is replenished with thy endless
mercy, O teach me thy laws wherein I ought to walk.

9. An acknowledgement of Gods mercy, and that by affliction man is taught true
wisdom.
Graciously in mercy have thou dealt with me thy poor obedient servant,
according to thy word, yet further I desire thee O Lord, that thou would
teach me that true and sincere knowledge joined with judgment, that I may
discern all things aright, as it were by tasting a sauorie thing: for upon
thy commandments do I depend. Before I was camed by the efficacy of thy
rod, I wandered to and fro, but now am I quickened and have learned thereby to
obey thy commandments: be gracious unto me O Lord, and teach me thy
statutes. The ungodly have ever practiced mischief against me, but have
failed, for that I endeavored myself to keep thy commadem rnts, and they thus
neglecting their callings and being puffed up with the vain estimation of
themselves, are become dull and foolish, but in thy law is my whole delight,
and therein will I meditate all the day long. It was therefore for my commodity
that thou did chasten me, for that I zealously do learn to immitate thy
statutes, for the doctrine and precepts that thou have by thine own mouth
revealed before the face of thy people, and delivered unto me, is of more
estimation then the finest pearl, or greatest heaps of gold. Therefore O
Lord, direct me thy poor servant, with thy holy spirit, that this thy sacred
word may be so firmly and effectually grafted in my heart, that I may cleave
unto thee for ever.

10. A prayer to be strengthened in well doing.
Give unto me that am the work of thy hands, I beseech thee, O God, such
understanding, and so continue thy favorable mercies daily toward thy
servant, that I may learn thy commandments, so shall it come to pass, that
all they which fear thee, shall rejoice at my state, and give due thanks unto
thee that have in mercy vouchsafed to preserve me who have always trusted in
thee: and by experience I find, that thou, O Lord, do nothing unjustly in
visiting my offenses with thy scourges, for thy judgments are upright and
nothing repugnant to thy truth, but let thy mercy be ever ready to comfort me
according to thy promises: let thy endless mercy be ever present, that my
spirit may be revived, and that I never faint under thy fatherly hand, seeing
that thy doctrine does evermore delight me and that therein is my continual
exercise. Let the ungodly be ashamed and altogether frustrate of their intent,
who deal frowardly with thy servant, and pretend the ruin of my zeal, and
let me safely meditate on thy commandments, that all such as fear and love
thee unfeignedly, may be comforted by my example. Wherefore I humbly beseech
thee, O God, increase my knowledge in thy statutes, that I mny keep the same
with a pure and upright heart to my souls health: and grant, O my good God,
that I never be ashamed of thy eternal truth, but that I may persevere therein
unto the end.

11. A lamentable petition for aid in mere distress.
GOne is my strength O Lord, and my soul faints because of thy salvation,
which I daily expect, yet will I still wait for my deliverance, because of thy
promise granted unto me out of thy sacred word: yea, mine eyes do fail me
for the long looking after those things which thou have spoken unto me, and I
do quail under my heavy burden: I am constrained often times to express my
misery in these words: Alas, alas, Why do thou not quickly come and
comfort me? I am like a bottle dried in the smoke, for very heaviness and
anguish of my soul, yet do I not forget thy everlasting promises and
statutes: how long shall my grief endure? And when shall the sorrowful days
of thy servant cease? Shall not thy punishments proceed against them that
persecute me? The enemies of my soul dig pittes and lay snares for me,
contrary to thy law. All thy precepts O Lord, are true, though the wicked in
their fury do persecute me, and go about to seek the decay of my zeal.
Wherefore, O Lord, in thy good time help me that unworthily am oppressed, and
although they have cast me down and almost brought me to naught, yet have I
not forsaken thy precepts: erect and restore me to life, O my good God, even
for the singular love that thou bear unto thy servants, that I may observe
the things that thou have appointed me out of thy holy word, and carefully
keep them for evermore. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ his sake our
only Savior and redeemer. Amen.

12. An extolling of Gods unspeakable goodness, with thanksgiu^ng for his
mercy showed.
GOod God, why should I seem to doubt of the certentie of thy promises, seeing
thou art altogether righteousness, and thy word does endure for ever in
heaven? Yea, thy truth I know assuredly shall never fail in any age, for the
very body of the earth does so abide, as it was established by the mighty hand
of thy power upon her foundation: and all other things, O Lord, do so continue
and evidently stand as they were ordained with thee from the beginning, both in
quality and estate, obeying thee as their Lord. Now therefore O God, give me
an understanding heart, that I may faithfully love and obey thee, for except I
had trusted in thee, and had a delight in thy law, I had been environed with
destruction in my troubles being plunged in the net of calamities. Let me not
therefore, O Lord, forget thy eternal precepts for in observing of them, I am
restored to life. Save me therefore, for I am thine, and make me perfect in thy
statutes, so shall I still meditate in thy precepts, and with zeal seek and
love thy commandments: though the wicked go about to destroy my soul, yet
do I yield my mind to be occupied in thy statutes, for I see that all
things here on earth, be they never so perfect and absolute, are brought to
an end: nevertheless thy precepts and holy word are prolonged without measure,
and endure for ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

13. A worthy meditation and ioyfulnes for receiving true understanding.
GReat is my love unto the sacred words of thy mouth, O Lord, yea I consume
whole days in meditating upon the same, and I do find by experience, that I
have not done this in vain, seeing that by thy precepts I have proved to be
much wiser then all my adversaries, yea and thou O my God, have given me an
understanding heart, in feeling thy goodness toward me, and ever making thy
testimonies thy meditation, yea thou have quickened me and made me more skillful
then the grave men of understanding, because I was bent to know thy precepts,
and incitned to keep them indeed, for I held back my feet from every evil
way, that I might tread the path which thou have now already declared unto me
out of the treasures of thy eternal testament. Strengthen me O Lord, that I
turn not from thy laws, but that I may meditate therein night and day to my
incomparable comfort, whereby through thy direction I may zealously persevere
in the knowledge of thee, and evermore abide constant in thy truth to my
eternal salvation: let me be occupied continually in thy word, for I feel
the same to be an everlasting comfort to my soul, and of more sweetness then
if I had tasted of honey, and by observation of thy precepts have I gotten
wisdom, and therefore I do utterly abhor the entising shows of worldly
vanities, which are nothing but falsehood.

14. A prayer for Zeal and constancy.
Grant I beseech thee, most merciful God, that thy holy word opening and
dispersing the darksome clouds of my mind, may declare such light unto my
footsteps, that all my ways may be safely guided, according to the sincerity
of thy laws: and let this light O Lord, so illuminate my heart and
understanding, that I may by a solemn vow bind myself for ever unto thee,
and obtain ability from thee with all humillitie and quietness of life to
perform the same that I have promised unto thee. Thou see O Lord how sore I
am afflicted and vexed on every side, wherefore save me and quicken me
according to thy eternal verity: accept the prayers and vows of my mouth that
I now offer unto thee, and teach me thy statutes more and more: and extend thy
mercies, O Lord, unto my miseries, for my life is laid open to all troubles and
danger, as though I did carry it in my hand, but let not the same, O God, pull
back my zeal from thy law. The wicked have imagined deceit against me, yet
will I not wander from thy precepts. Bless me I beseech thee O dear Father,
with thy grace, that I make no estimation of worldly things, but that I may
accept thy testimonies as mine inheritance forever, for they are the joy of my
heart: instruct me to apply my mind for ever. even to my last gasp, to
observe thy statutes. Amen.

15. A prayer to fly worldly vanities, and to delight in godliness.
GRant I beseech thee, O God, that I may hate the vain inuentious of such as
wander from thy truth, and account thy doctrine most dear unto my soul Be thou
(most merciful Lord) my refuge and shield whereunto in my grievous distress
and danger I may always fly for succor. Let thy word O God be my trust unto
the end, and banish the wicked out of my company, that I may evermore keep thy
precepts more purely. Establish and quicken me, O Lord, according to thy
promise, that I may be vpholden least I perish: let me not be disappointed of
my expectation, but strengthen me in thy good time, I most entirely beseech
thee, and hold me up with thy merciful hand both now and ever, that I being
safe, may delight continually in thy eternal statutes: let the crafty
practices of them that contemn thy law, be brought to naught, and take away
the wicked that infect the people, even as dross with the pure metal, that
my zeal in thy testimonies may be full. Thy judgments O Lord are of such
power, that they not only teach me obedience, but cause me to fear,
considering mine own weakness, thereby enclining me to repentance and
amendment of life, for the which O Lord, I thy poor servant do render unto
thee most humble and hearty thanks, beseeching thee still to increase my
knowledge in thy sacred mysteries. Amen.

16. A prayer to deal uprightly and not to be put to shame by the ungodly.
GOod God, in thy great mercy teach me thy laws, that I oppress no man with
unrighteous judgment, but that I may deal justly and truly with all men in
thy sight, that I be not slaundered of mine enemies, neither brought to open
shame. Assist me O Lord with thy power, and stand on my side against the
ungodly, that they triumph not over me, for my very eyes do fail me in
waiting for my deliverance, and my strength quaileth in expecting thy promises,
deal not with me thy unworthy servant according to my deserts, but of thy
endless mercy teach me thy statutes, for thou art my eternal Lord, and I am
thy servant, grant therefore that I never swarne from thee, but that I may
know thy will, and faithfully embrace thy testimonies. In thy good time arise,
O Lord, and destroy the wicked that go about to bring thy laws into utter
ruin and decay, and pretend the confusion of my zeal, for I will love and
firmly cleave to thy precepts, above all treasure and fine gold: yea, and my
whole delight shall be therein for ever: For I know that thy commandments are
altogether equity and truth it self, yea and a certain rule for me to trast
unto, therefore do I abhore whatsoever dissenteth from the hidden priuitie of
thy word, beseeching thee, O Father, still to increase in me the desire that I
have unto thy sacred mysteries.

17 A meditation on the excellency of Gods holy word.
Gracious God, thy testimonies contain such high mysteries, and are of such
excellency, that I am moved with admiration and reverence, when I do think
thereupon, and therefore are they so precious unto my soul, that it greatly
desires to embrace and keep them above all earthly treasures: for the
entrance into thy holy word is so unspeakable, that it gives light to them
that are indarknes, and instructs the simple in the knowledge of thy will, it
stirs up quietness, and moves peace in conscience: therefore, O Lord grant
me understanding, and open my mouth, that I may with unfeigned lips evermore
praise thee, and swallow thy precepts even as the thirsty man does earnestly
desire to drink: look on thy servant, O Lord, both now and ever, and be
merciful unto me, as thou use to do unto thy elect and them that love thy
name. Direct my paths, O God, and lead me in the way wherein I ought to walk,
that If all not into the snares that the wicked have laid to entrap me withal,
but zealously persevere in thy commandments, and let not afflictions assault
me above my strength, but deliver and defend me from the baits of my enemies,
that I may serve thee: shine on me with the everlasting light of thy favorable
countenance, and teach me thy statutes: mine eyes gush out with tears, when I
do hear thy enemies, how contemptuously they speak and intend to subvert thy
law, that endures for ever.

18. A prayer to bear the cross of affliction and reproach patiently.
GOod God, thou art altogether just and righteous, and all thy ordinances are
truth and equity: grant that I may observe thy laws dilligently as a most
just and perfect rule of thy truth and sincere religion, for thy words and
sweet promises. O Lord are so joyful unto me that the ^oue thereof does consume
me, because the ungodly do despise thy precepts, yet shall thy truth for
evermore endure and flourish in purity, wherefore extend the same unto me, and
quicken thy servant therein for ever, that I may embrace it with understanding,
and though the wicked therefore have me in no estimation but account me an
abject yet will I not thereby be exempted from the study of thy
commandments, nor neglect my so necessary a calling: for thy righteousness O
God, is an everlasting righteousness, though other ordinances and laws which
man's wisdom has set down are subject to innumerable changes, and at length
come to an end and the zeal of thy word induces such comfort unto my soul,
that in afflictions when troubles and anguish oppress me, I am busily occupied
in repeating the same in my songs: oh how excellent is thy sweetness unto them
that are in misery, yea thou have prepared a blessed and an everlasting
fountain in heaven, for them that love thee. Grant me understanding
therefore, especially in thy truth, that I may live with thee for evermore.

19. A prayer for help in adversity.
Give ear o Lord I beseech thee, unto the cry and lamentable voice of my
sorrowful heart, for I have called upon thee with my whole heart day and
night, grant that I may dilligently observe thy statutes, and in all my
dangers vouchsafe to send me thy aid and assistance whereby I may continually
be stirred up to meditate on thy testimonies, let my prayers prevent the early
light of the morning, and in the night-watches O Lord quicken my mind with the
commemoration of thy goodness, and hearken unto my earnest petitions, acording
to thy loving kindenes extended unto thy children, and as thou have promised,
restore me to the inioying of thy favor, that am without life: thou see how
near they assault me which are continually given to iniquity, and earnestly
bent to destroy thy testimonies, praising thee with their lips, but in heart,
are far from thee. But my trust is only in thee, O Lord, that thou will
cleave unto thy servant, and increase my zeal more and more. Teach me I
beseech thee most merciful God, the assured way of thy commandments, for I
know certainly, that by the observation of thy testimonies I shall never be in
error, neither ye^ frustrate of my hope which I have in thy mercy. For thou
have established the same for ever and ever. Hear me, O Lord God I most humbly
beseech thee, and assist me evermore with thy grace and holy spirit, that I may
rest with thee eternally.

20. A prayer for to be strengthened being weak.
GOod Lord I most humbly beseech thee, regard me that am sore oppressed: and in
thy good time deliver me which do not forget the doctrine that thou have
taught me. I appeal for mercy unto thy sovereign bounty, plead thou my
cause therefore and be my Judge, and in thy good time preserve and defend me:
For salvation is far from the ungodly, because they neither fear thee nor
observe thy statutes. I expect thy mercies, O Lord, and not mine own
righteousness to help me. Quicken me therefore according to thy judgments,
and although they that unjustly persecute me, are many in number, and mighty,
yet do I incline my heart to the observation of thy testimonies, and evermore
delight in thy precepts, yea I have had such a love to thy law, that I never
conceived more grief of any thing then when I did evidently perceive these men
to despise thy words and neglect thy law, but let thy mercy take hold on me,
that have had my felicity in thy commandments, and accounted them most dear
unto me: increase my zeal O Lord, and save me that I perish not, vouchsafe to
assist me with thy perpetual graces, that I may walk uprightly before thy
presence, serving thee continually with fear and reverence, and esteeming the
words of thy mouth to be the ordinary mean to bring me unto salvation, for
they are infallible, and thou have ordained them to stand for ever: therefore
are they the eternal and unchangeable rule of thy justice world without end.

21. A joyful reckoning up what spiritual comfort and how precious we enjoy
by Gods word.
Gracious God, the threatenings and injurious persecutions of the mighty ones
of this world, could not make me once to deny thee, for my heart stood more in
awe of thy most sacred word, then of their indignation; continue still thy
assistance therefore toward me thy poor servant, that by the virtue of thy
holy spirit working in my heart, I may enjoy and take more delight and comfort
in thy sacred word (which quickneth me in all troubles) then in all the
kingdoms and vain treasures in this world, and that I may willingly reject
and abhor all manner of deceit and wickedness, ever embracing thy most
comfortable testimonies: for when I do narrowly see into thy judgments and
sacred mysteries, how excellent they are, I am often and sundry times enforced
to land and praise thy holy name: the love of thy heavenly law brings into
great prosperity all such as retain the same, for they do zealously search
out the secrets thereof, and are in their consciences assured that they please
thee, therefore grant O Lord that I may faithfully believe in thee, and still
depend upon thy salvation: give me ever patience in my troubles, and let me
still observe and keep thy testimonies, and have a continual love thereunto:
grant that I may have no respect unto men, but to set thee always before my
eyes, as the just Judge of all my doings. Amen.

A prayer to be kept under the protection of the most highest.
Give ear, I most humbly beseech thee, O God, unto the complaints of me poor
sinner, and grant me the true understanding of thy divine precepts, oh let
my supplications come before thee, and save me O Lord that put my whole trust
and confidence in thee, according to thy promise, that I may joyfully yield
unto thee incessant praises, and observe thy statutes, (wherein thou have
instructted me) with diligence for eu^r. Let nothing cause me to quail, O God,
but that the words of my tongue may set forth thy upright iuddements and glory,
for thou art my loving God, on whom I evermore depend, and my comfort
consists in thy precepts: erect thy hand to help me poor sinner, for I have
not neglected thy statutes: let my whole life depend upon thee for ever and let
me seek comfort at thine only doctrine, let my life be prolonged and covered
under the shadow of thy wings, that I being delivered by thee, may render
continual thanks unto thee, and zealously embrace thy testimonies: ah alas how
have I gone astray and wandered too and fro like a lost sheep from his
shepherd, being ready to fall into all dangers, and to be devoured of the
enemy, but of thy mercy, O Lord, thou have called me home unto thy sheepefold
and restored me again to the knowledge of thy heavenly doctrine: wherefore O
God, so guide me with thy grace, and instruct me with thy holy spirit, that I
may continue therein for ever.

A prayer that we may only delight in Gods laws.
WIth thy grace and holy spirit assist me, O God, that I walk not in the
steps of the ungodly, neither follow after their wicked and licentious
counsel: Let me not stand in the ways of impudent sinners, neither yet sit or
keep company with such as deride thee and blaspheme thy holy name, but grant,
O God, that my whole delight may be fixed in the keeping of thy sacred laws,
and that my mind may meditate therein night and day. Make me, O God, as a
fruitful tree planted by the water side, that being always refreshed with thy
grace, I may bring forth the fruits of repentance, and daily proceed in
newness of life to thy honor and glory, so that what business or affairs
soever I take in hand, it may prosper: but scatter thou the ungodly like chafe
before the wind, and let them tremble at thy righteous judgments, that they
stand not in the assembly of the just, for thou like a merciful God wilt allow
and maintain the life of thy children, but the evil life of the wicked shall
utterly perish in thy presence, yea, and in the end they shall go to
destruction, therefore will I trust in thee for evermore.

A prayer for boldness and courage in standing to the truth.
Fail me not, most merciful God, for there are many that rise up against me
vexing my soul continually: yea, they assault me with diverse temptations,
saying, there is no help nor victory for him in his God, but yet in thy good
time thou will send nourishment and succor unto thy servant, and defend me on
every side from them that cruelly seek my destruction, yea thou art my glory,
and thou in mercy wilt lift me up when I am fallen, therefore will I still
call upon thee, o Lord, for I know thou will hear me out of thy eternal
tabernacle, and seeing thou art my good God, I will lay me down and rest in
peace, and arise again because thou defendest me: the remembrance of thy
promises and trial thereof have so increased my love and faith to thee, that
though many thousands pretend my utter overthrow, yet will I not be afraid,
for thou art the God of my force: come forth therefore, O Lord, and help me,
and in thy good time beat down my enemies, and strike them upon the jaws
that seek to do me evil: break thou the teeth of the ungodly, and confound
all such as daily go about to slander me without a cause: it is in thee, O
Lord to free me from distress, and to deliver me from the snares of my
oppressors, for thy blessing is upon thy people, and thou will relieve them in
their necessity: wherefore extend thy mercy toward me: and defend me both
now and ever, that I may yield continual praise for ever.

A prayer to be delivered from Gods wrath.
ASsist me, O Lord, with thy grace and holy spirit, and rebuke me not in thine
anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure, but have mercy upon me that am
utterly destitute of strength and relief: heal me O God, for my soul is
grievously vexed because of my sin, and sore shaken through mine iniquities,
my heart sigheth being now touched with the fear of thy judgments, wherefore
incline thee to help me, and save me for thy mercies sake, for they that are
in the grave cannot praise thee: O Lord, in mourning I faint, and in remorse my
sorrow increases, I wear away because of the lewdnes of my adversaries and am
sore vexed by reason of the miseries wherewith I poor sinner am oppressed, but
away from me ye wicked, for the Lord has heard my voice and woeful cry, yea
the Lord has heard my prayer and humble suit, and he in his great mercy will
confound my enemies, and send me relief in my greatest necessity, and will
put to flight all such as work my decay or seek to do me evil. Increase thy
love in me, O Lord, that I may render due thanks unto thee for thy continual
assistance, and praise thy name because of thy loving kindness showed unto
me, in depending wholly upon thy merits for ever and ever.

A prayer not to be overcome of the wicked.
REgard, I most heartily beseech thee, O God, ye humble petitions and prayers
of thy servant, for unto thee alone do I lift up my heart and soul, beseeching
thee to extend thy mercy and pity toward me, that have evermore put my trust
and confidence in thee: let not mine enemies rejoice over me, neither suffer me
thy servant to be put to confusion, because my hope rests only on thy
salvation, but evermore retain me in the faith of thy promises, that I swerne
not on any side, guide my steps in thy truth, and instruct me in the rule of
thy will, for thou art the God from whom I expect and look for my deliverance:
be mindful of thy mercies which thou have often showed unto thy servants, and
of thy manifold benefits which thou from time to time have declared unto all
ages. Remember not the lewdness of my youth, but in thy mercies think upon thy
servant, instruct me in thy laws, and teach me to be humble, be merciful to
mine iniquities, for they are great, and by the direction of thy holy spirit
conduct me in the right way, that my soul may dwell at ease and inherit the
land which thou have prepared for them that serve thee: reveal unto me, O God,
the secrets of thy holy word that I may be endued with understanding: turn thy
face unto me, and extend thy mercy toward me, look upon my afflictions, and
release me of my sins, and deliver Israel out of all his troubles.

A prayer for relief in sickness and anguish of spirit.
HEarken unto my humble suit, O Lord, and in thy mercy give ear unto my
prayers, I do not here plead for my self, neither do I refuse to be reproved
of thee, but beseeching thee not to rebuke and chastise me in the heat of thy
wrath, for thy hand and heavy yoke oppresses me, and the sense of thine ire
worthily kidnled against me, endures so grievous upon me, that my whole body
consumes for the abundance of my wicked offenses, yea my wounded conscience
is ready to putrify through sin, and I dare not but with heavy countenance
lift up mine eyes toward thee: my heart and reins do burn, O Lord, with
intolerable pain, and there is no part of my body free from grief. I wholly
languish and faint for very sorrow of my heart, thou know my desire, O God,
and my sighing is apparent unto thee my heart pants, my strength decays,
and my eyesight now fails me, many there be that seek my destruction, and
there is none to help me but thou alone, wherefore on thee will I wait and
abide thy good time for my succor, help me therefore that now calls upon
thee, lest I be brought into decay: and let not my ghostly enemies triumph over
me, who desire to see my overthrow. In thee O God have I ever trusted, forsake
me not therefore, but of thy gracious goodness send me speedy comfort: O
merciful Lord be not far from me in my distress, but have thee to help me.
Amen.

A thanksgiving for deliverance from sickness and pa^ne.
EXtend thy grace and holy spirit toward thy servant, O Lord, that I may daily
magnify thee, for thou art my deliverer and have not suffered my foes with
pride to triumph over me. I cried unto thee in my troubles, and thou like a
merciful God did deliver me, thou have defended me from dangers of death,
and renewed me always with comfort: therefore shall I sing praises unto thy
divine majesty for ever, thine anger endures but a while, but thy favor to
the end of our life: and though sorrow abides in the evening, yet joy comes
in the morning, and in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved, but so
soon as thou did restrain thy favor from me, I was stricken, then did I
return to thee, O Lord and prayed, what profit is therein my blood when I am
slain? or shall my body made of dust sing praises unto thee, or declare thy
truth and faithful constancy in performing thy promises. O Lord, hear me and
receive me to thy favor, help me good God I beseech thee, and have mercy
upon me, and lo thou have turned my mourning into joy, and removed the sorrow
of my heart to gird me with gladness, yea thou have made thy loving kindness
so joyful unto me, that I do meditate of thy goodness all the day long,
therefore shall my tongue be wholly consecrate both now and ever to set forth
thy praises. O Lord my God, on whose mercy depends my salvation, I will give
thanks to thee for ever and ever.

A prayer that God according to his merciful promise will deliver him from his
enemies.
HEarken I most humbly beseech thee, O God, unto my complaint, and incline thy
ear unto my lamentable sighs, for my soul is now oppressed with troubles, and
grievously wounded through sin, wherefore release my heavy burden, and
mitigate my tormenting pains, for there is none to help me but thou alone,
that art the God of my might, mine eyes cannot rest, nor mine eyeliddes
slumber, because of my heaviness, but so soon as I record thy great
goodness showed unto me of old, how is my soul comforted, and how quiet is my
conscience within me, deliver me therefore according to thy wonted mercies, and
let me never be unmindful of thee, but that my spirit may still rejoice, and
be endued with a steadfast hope of thy promises, and though the wicked seek my
decay, yet let my trust be wholly fixed upon thee: give me understanding and
knowledge from above, that I may faithfully observe thy fatherly precepts: be
not long absent from me O God, neither let thy sweet promises fail me, but in
thy mercy respect me thy servant, and pour on me thy heavenly blessings: grant
me the direction of thy grace and holy spirit, that with all humility and
perfect patience, I may stand fast in the day of my trouble, and after this
wretched life ended, indue me O Lord, with thy eternal rest to dwell with thee
for ever.

A grateful extolling of Gods inestimable benefits.
FRom the very inward part of my heart, O my soul, praise thou the Lord, and
all that rests within me praise his holy name, for all his graces, mercies,
and manifold benefits that he in great mercy has bestowed upon me, for he
has covered the filthiness of my iniquities, altered my natural wilfulness,
and healed my broken heart, and the bloody wounds of my conscience: O my God
thou have redeemed my life from destruction, and of thine infinite mercies
do always satiffie me with good things: thou renuest my soul like the
youth of an Eagle, and have revealed unto me thy way and holy word: thou art
altogether mercy and full of compassion, slow to wrath, and of great
kindness to all such as come unto thee, thou will not always lowre, nor keep
thine anger for ever, neither do thou deal with me after my sins, nor
reward me according to mine iniquicies: for thou in mercy wilt set my sins
so far from me as the East is from the West, and never think upon them any
more: thou show thy self to be a most gracious father in extending thy
bountiful benevolence unto such as honor thee, for thou know that we are
but dust and like the flower of the field, always ready to be carried away
with light blastes of wind to all manner of vanities, but thy mercy (O my
good God) and loving kindness endures for ever. Let thy righteousness hold me
up both now and evermore, that I may fear thee and keep thy commandments in
continual remembrance to do them, that after this life ended I may gain the
fruition of thy kingdom. which for thy elect thou have prepared in heaven, to
sing praises unto thee with thy holy Angels, and to enjoy thy presence O Lord
which raignest and rulest for ever. Amen.

A prayer to be delivered from his adversaries.
REgard my humble petitions and prayers, most gracious God, and in thy mercy
give ear unto my requests, for unto thee alone do I come in the time of my
necessity, accept therefore I beseech thee the cries that I he reoffe^ up
unto thee, rule thou my thoughts, and guide my ways aright, that my heart be
not inclined to evil, and so procure me to run unadvisedly to do the works
of iniquities: but let the just man with discretion reprove me, that I by his
exhortations may discern and know the snares that the wicked have laid to
entrap me withal, and not only shun them my self, but admonish others in
like manner to eschew the same, who seeing the ungodly with grievous torments
to be miserably afflicted, may with humble and penitent hearts return unto
thee O Lord, and acknowledge thee to be their only stay and succor in all
their actions: my life, O God, is exposed to all miseries: nevertheless I most
earnestly beseech thee to be my protector, and though my state be slipperie,
yet let thy right hand support me, and thy loving kindness enclose me about,
and when my hands are erected to call upon thy name (being full of hope) grant
speedy release unto me, least I fall into the net that the wicked have laid
for me, that I being governed and directed by thy mighty power, may for ever
henceforth extol thy glorious name, whilst the wicked are together entangled
in their own malice: grant this O father for thy dear son our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

A prayer to perceive his own frail estate.
TEach me O Lord to ord^r my steps according to the rule of thy holy word,
that the wicked entrap me not in my dealings, Let the number of my days be
known unto me, and make me I beseech thee more and more seriously to consider
how transitory this life is, that I may apply my heart continually to the
contemplation of thy hidden secrets and divine mysteries, for the length of my
years is but as a spanne, and all earthly things are nothing but mere vanity
in thy sight, therefore as the chased Heart desires to be refreshed by the aid
of the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God: therefore let not
thy graces and holy spirit O God, be taken from me, but extend thy hand to
deliver me from all inconveniences, that I become not an open rebuke unto mine
enemies, take those plagues and severe punishments from me that my sins do
deserve, and let thy mercy be an eternal comfort unto me, grant me
understanding and send me knowledge from above, that I may see into the cause
of my afflictions, and never murmr at thy fatherly chastisements: hear my
prayer and in thy mercy take pity and compassion upon me, assuage the great
heat of thine anger toward me, and release the troubles of my heavy heart,
and grant me a space of repentance before the time of thy fatherly calling,
that I may rest with thee for ever.

A prayer for iourneying.
I Commit this my journey and corporal travel, most merciful father, unto thy
heavenly direction to guide and govern me therein as shall seem best to thy
only goodness and godly wisdom: and as this my troublesome and weary life
is nothing else but a pilgrims passage, and only a span from birth to grave,
so grant, that I may always consider of it. And I beseech thee O my God, that
as to Jacob iourneying into the East, and praying reverently for thy gracious
protection, thou did favorably and of thine infinite mercy minister all
things necessary to his safety, so thou will now mercifully behold me, a
member of thy little Israel, and safely keep and preserve me in my journey,
that the same may tend to the honor of thy name, and to the comfort of my
conscience both now and ever, that like as Jacob said thou should be his
God, so we knowing that in all things thou art more good and plentiful unto us
a thousand fold then we can deserve, may for thy heavenly graces and continual
goodness sing laud and praises unto thy holy name; o God, that for ever
live, one in trinity and three in unity, Amen.

A prayer out of the Cxlv. Psalm.
FRom the bottom of my heart, O my God, will I ertoll thy name, and render
thanks unto thee for ever and ever. I will consecrate all the days of my life
to set forth thy glory, and to yield praises unto thee continually, for thou
art great O Lord, and there is no praise sufficient for thee, yea the memorial
of thy name will I cause to endure from one generation to another, neither
shall I alone labor to do this my duty, for verily there will be always
some assembly which will by all means testify the remembrance of my deeds and
peculiar goodness, and openly declare thy undoubted promises, remaining unto all
ages, namely that thou art most merciful and gracious unto such as trust in
thee, and thy loving kindness endures for ever, neither is it manifest
whether thou art either more slow unto wrath, or more prove to pardon, for
thou, O Lord I know art good to all men, and thy mercies are above thy works,
yet is thy name, O God, extolled in thy works, and the praise of thy glory
appears in all thy creatures: thou staiest up every one which else should
fall, and grauntest relief unto such as are already fallen, yea thou give
help continually unto those that love thee, but destroiest the wicked, and
therefore by good right, O Lord, will I sound forth thy praises for ever and
ever.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
Loving Lord and my most merifull father, in wonderful mercy, I acknowledge it
has plesed thee to purge me silly wretch by the death and bloody passion of
thy son, from al my sins and iniquities, to have adopted me thy child, and
given me the earnest of my salvation, touching my heart with an infallible
sense and feeling of thy mercies and settled confidence in thy promises, so that
even now, in the commemoration of thy unspeakable blessings my soul is newly
entered into thy house, to take the wholesome cup of eternal salvation, and to
call upon thy holy name: assist me therefore with thy spirit, O Lord, and give
me a wise and understanding heart, that I may conceive rightly of thy sacred
mysteries and divine precepts, discern them secretly, and receive them
effectually, not with rashness of mind, but with sobriety, in righteousness and
holiness of life, unto the perfect consummation and finishing of that happy
building, which thy worthy goodness in mercy has prouidently begun in me,
yea until I be come to the measure of the eternal age and fullness of my Lord
and savior Jesus Christ Amen.

A godly prayer for such things as be needful both for soul and body.
Extend thy favorable pity toward me, O Lord, and in thy mercy do away my
iniquities, take from me al hardness of heart, and indue me with thy grace and
holy spirit, that my delight may be in thy laws: bless and prosper I beseech
thee, my bodily labors, and send me such necessary relief both for my soul
and body, as shall seem most expedient to thy divine wisdom. O God keep me
under the shadow of thy wings from all the afflictions of this wretched life,
and defend me from the naughty dealing of lying lips and slandering tongues:
let me not do any thing contrary to thy will, O Lord, but keep me in such
good order of life, that I be not defamed of the wicked and ungodly person.
Confirm me in the knowledge of thy law, and send me speedy relief in all my
troubles: give me good God a feeling of my sins with earnest repentance, and
that I may persevere in newness of life, to thy honor and glory: let me avoid
the company of such as be evil, and let my whole delight consist in the
secrets of thy sacred mysteries, that I may openly set forth thy praises, and
yield incessant thanks unto thee: grant that I may escape the net that the
wicked have privily laid to entrap me, for my hope consists in thy salvation,
and when my weary days, O Lord, shall draw to an end in leaving this life and
earthly pilgrimage, grant me a strong and steadfast faith with speech and
memory even to the end, that so departing in peace, I may rest with thee for
ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said in any kind of affliction.
Eternal God and father of all mercies, I humbly beseech thee to bow down
thine ears and hearken unto me poor sinner, whose state is weak and feeble
because of thy heavy displeasure, but I confess and acknowledge, that it is a
just reward for my iniquities committed against thee, respect me nevertheless
in thy mercy, and think not upon my transgressions, deliver my soul, endue
me with all spiritual graces and consolation, and continually keep me in true
faith and humble obedience toward thee, neither let me murmr at thy
chastisements, but with patience endure thy correction: it is in thee to deal
with me at thy pleasure, since thou createdst me of dust and slime of the
earth, and gave me life and breath in my mothers womb. Wherefore, O Lord, I
beseech thee, suffer me not to be tempted above my strength, neither yet to be
holden down with greater afflictions then my weak nature is able to endure,
but rather a^cording to thy tender mercy support and relieve me, that neither
the flesh, the world nor the devil triumph in my weakness, give me a feeling
of thy mercies, that thy graces never depart from me, and when it pleases
thee, O Lord, to bring to an end this miserable life, grant that I may with
humble obedience toward thee, and perfect faith in thy divine promises,
neglect the state of this wretched world, and rest with thee O Lord my God, in
that everlasting kingdom which thou have prepared for thy elect from the
beginning of the world, where I shall continually yield praises unto thee,
together with all the host of heaven for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer of thanksgiving to God for his benefits.
COntinue thy goodness still toward me O Lord, that I may daily have occasion
to extol thy praises, for great cause do I already retain to land thy
glorious name for ever, because thou alone act my joy and salvation, and the
strong city whereunto I always fly for succor, thou have ever been my rock
and tower of defense, open now therefore the gate of righteousness, that I
poor sinner may enter therein as one of thy children, so shall I be preserved
in peace. I have always put my trust in thee, stregthen me therefore I beseech
thee, with thy holy spirit, and as thou art altogether righteous and just, so
vouchsafe to instruct me in the path wherein I ought to walk, for my soul
rejoices in thy truth, and desires thee in the night season, yea and my
spirit shall seek thee in the morning: how mercifully do thou nourish thy
people, and how glorious do thou make thy elect? when I was in distress I
called upon thee, and when thou did chastise me, I poured forth my prayers,
and thou like a loving Lord did show mercy on me according to thy great
kindness. O dear father, my soul now replenished with grief, because of my
sins, desires to be received into thy eternal rest. I was dead and
putrified through my sins, and environed with despair because of my fall,
but thou of thy goodness did yield relief unto me, and made me alive
again, yea thou have elevated my soul out of the darkness of death and
ministered light unto me, that I might regard my footesteps: thou have vpholden
my life from dangers, and preferred me against the envious minds of the
wicked, thou have defended me from such as rose up against m^, and sent me
relief in my greatest necessity, yea thou have plenteously endued me with all
things and given me a taste of thy goodness. Wherefore O most merciful God,
assist me with thy holy spirit, that I never be unmindful of thy mercies, but
may extol thy glorious name for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer to be used before a man does begin to travel or take any journey in
hand.
REspect me thy unworthy servant, O Lord, with the eye of thy mercy, for on
thee depends my salvation, and there is none but thou alone can bring
sufficient relief and succor unto my afflicted spirit. Wherefore, O God be
merciful unto me, and rule my heart in thy faith, fear, and love, with a
careful keeping of thy commandments, guide thou my footesteps, O God, and
govern me with thy mighty hand, that I fall not into the pit of destruction,
assist me with thy grace and holy spirit, that I may both discern and reject
those things that are contrary to thy law, and save me O God, from the cruelty
of such as seek to oppress my soul: send me knowledge from above, that I may
conceive rightly of thy heavenly mysteries, and teach me O Lord so to order my
life, that acording to the precise rule of thy holy word and divine precepts I
may daily proceed in newness of life to the honor and glory of thy name.
Indue me with all spiritual graces to stand against the subtle assaults and
temptatious of my ghostly enemies, that I may never quail by his tirannie, but
give him his final repulse and utter overthrow, be thou my protector and
defender, most loving father, that in all my ways I may be safely directed by
thy mighty providence, for thou art my refuge in all my troubles, and in thy
mercy will I stay my self for ever, and my hope shall still rest in thee, O
God, that live for ever.

A prayer for a man that is beset with adversaries.
I Call and cry to thee, O God with mourning voice, beseeching thee to hearken
unto my groaning sighs, deliver me from my troubles, that oppress me
grievously, for misery is come upon me, and there is none but thou alone can
help me: guide me, O Lord in thy truth and lead me forth in the paths
wherein I ought to walk, thou art the only rokce whereunto I must cleave, and
in thy good time thou will uphold my state against my enemies that enuiron me
about, they have cast snares in the way to entrap me, and by cruelty have
daily sought my decay. Wherefore I beseech thee O God, come quickly and succor
me, put forth thy mighty arm, and deliver me from them that rise up against
me, pretending my utter overthrow. Conduct me in thy truth, that I be not
intrapped in my ways, nor holden in the earke prison of this miserable world,
from the view of thy divine majesty, but that I may be compassed with the
assembly of thy elect to rejoice in thee O my good God, for my deliverance, and
to sing continual praises unto thy holy name for evermore with a cheereful
voice preserve me from destruction; and vouchsafe, O Lord, to forgive me all my
offenses, that I may stand steadfast in thee, and never be put to confusion, but
to rest with thee eternally, Amen.

A prayer to be said at all times.
I Most heartily beseech thee, O thou God of al mercy and power, to make strong
my soul against all the troublesome and most dangerous assaults and
temptations of the world the flesh and the devil: confirm my belief and
faith in thee, and make me, good Lord, one of the number of thy elect, and
grant that all my sins may be cleansed in the blood of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. O dear Father, let thy graces and blessings be continually
poured upon me, and shine on me with the comfortable beauty of thy cheerful
countenance, and grant me in this life the perpetual direction of thy holy
spirit, and in the life to come eternal rest with my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A charitable prayer to be used at any time for the benefit of such as live
amiss.
O Lord thou have ever been our safe haven and habitation, and thy loving
kindness has been plentifully showed unto us and our elders, from one
generation to another: thou art a God that raignest and rulest for ever,
without beginning or ending, yea thou did create us of dust and slime of the
earth, and we being most miserable cretures so soon as thou take thy spirit
from us, are even then immediately dissolved into dust again, for as a watch in
the night, so does our life pass away, and as a tale that is told, so do we
vanish: we grow up like the herb which at the rising of the sun does
flourish, but in the evening is cut down and withers: grant therefore O God
that we neglecting all idle imaginations, may account the days of our earthly
penance how short they are, that our minds by this cogitation being brought
from the troublesome care and vain hope of earthly felicity, as also called
away from all those entisements whereby we wander out of the right path of thy
truth, may aspire to true wisdom, in applying our hearts wholly unto thy
eternal testimonies: be merciful unto us, O Lord, and ^a^e us from all the
assaults and temptations of our ghostly enemies, conduct us with thy mighty
hand, we beseech thee, in all our dealings, that we may walk uprightly in our
estate and vocation without fraud or deceit, grant that after so long and
innumerable troubles as we have sust^ined, thy goodness may shine unto us like
a most pleasant light, that we being satisfied with the comfortable nourishment
thereof may enjoy thy true and eternal consolation, and like as with many
miseries thou have corrected us, so we beseech thee of thy eternal goodness
to comfort us again, and in the midst of all our troubles restore us to joy
and gladness, that from the bottom of our hearts we may yield continual
praises unto thee: accept us amongst the number of thy hea^enly army, and let
the voice of our humble petitions, O God, ascend up unto thee, make us
continually thankful for our election, and let us never forget that thou have
taken us into thy family, to be cared for of thee, yea let this thy glory shine
forth to our posterity, and let thy exceeding goodness beautify and adorn us:
govern thou our counsels from thy sanctuary, and let our enterprises be
acceptable in thy fight, O God, that live for ever. Amen.

A prayer for the assistance of Gods power and holy spirit against our enemies,
and the dangers of this world.
Eternal God, I most humbly beseech thee give ear unto the prayers and
doleful cries which I here pour forth before thee: strengthen me, that I
may walk in thy ways, and carefully avoid the path that the oppressors tread.
Accept the requests, of thy servants, vouchsafe, O Lord in mercy to relieve
them that trust in thee, against such as resist thy doctrine: keep me as the
apple of thy eye, and evermore defend me from my enemies, even under the shadow
of thy wings, for they are full of envy, and their cruelty cannot be satisfied
but with my death, nevertheless my hope depends only upon thy assistance,
that thou will stand on my side, whereby I may utterly vanquish and overthrow
their force, for thou art my fortress and strength in whom is no variety, in
thee will I trust O God of my salvation, yea I will call upon thee and praise
thy name for evermore: preserve me therefore and assist me in the day of my
danger, let not the ungodly man prevail against me, but prevent their wicked
devises that intend my destruction, indue me plentifully with thy graces, that
I may take delight in those things that may please thee, and bestow such good
gifts as thou have lent me, to the use of my Christian brethren that stand in
need thereof: let thy spirit scale the assurance of thy election in my heart,
that I never decline from the true service of thee, but with all constancy
give my self wholly to the love of thy law, and persevere therein unto the end,
for thou art my portion and the lot of mine inheritance, let me not be
oppressed by any earthly penury, least through frailety of my flesh I be
enforced to fall from thee, but teach me continually by secret inspirations
(the right way to attain to the fruition of thy blessings) that I may at all
times sing praises unto thee: be thou always at my right hand, O Lord, that my
course may be directed by thy godly assistance, and deliver me out of all
troublsome dangers, that I may rejoice both in body and soul for thy gracious
protection: show me thy favor, O God, in all things that I take in hand, and
let the success of my travels fail out as my hope expects, to the great
comfort of thine elect, and the exceeding joy of all that put their trust in
thee, let not the cruelty of the enemy prevail against me, least he say that
he has overcome me, and they that oppress me, rejoice in my fall, for my trust
is wholly in the truth of thy promises, neither shall my heart dissent from the
hope of thy mercy and defense in all my enterprises but being at the length
delivered by thee from the dreadful dangers of earthly casualties, I will not
cease to land and praise thy holy name in the midest of the congregation for
ever and ever. Grant this, most merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee, for
Jesus Christ his sake, my only Savior and redeemer. Amen.

A prayer to be said at all times.
WIth the eye of mercy, most loving father, behold my care and inward grief,
and hearken I humbly beseech thee to my complaint and lamentable suit, my soul
cries out to thee for mercy, extend therefore thy loving countenance and
favor unto me that am sore plunged in the gulf of calamities, yet do I
confess and acknowledge that I have and do deserve most extreme punishment
for so grievously offending thee my loving Lord, but if thou shall ever mark
what is amiss in me, how am I able to abide thy frowning countenance? but with
thee is always mercy and redemption, yea thy servants continually do, and will
for thy great goodness fear and love thy holy name, my soul also knowing thy
singular bounty, in that it has ever tasted of thy incompatable sweetenes,
shall still trust in thee, for thou did defend and nourish me when I was
destitute of help, therefore will I wait for thy salvation even from the
morning unto the evening, and from the evening likewise unto the morning
again, for there is no night-watcher that in greater desire longs for the
dawning of the day, then does my soul expect the coming of thee my Lord and
God, for great is thy pity unto all such as with true repentance and hearty
prayers do come unto thee: Go too then O my soul now rejoice, and comfort thy
self in the Lord for ever, serve him with fear and reverence, and be ready
for his coming, since no variety rests in him, but that he is good and
merciful, and has often redeemed and delivered thee from the danger of hell:
have mercy upon me now therefore, O dear father, and forgive me my sins, cast
them from thy presence, and think upon them no more so shall my soul rejoice
and be glad in thee for ever.

A prayer to be used of all men, and at all times.
NOw bewailing my sinful life past, most loving father, I do here in humble
wise desire thy gracious favor: have mercy on me, poor sinner, that cleaves
wholly unto thee, and in the multitude of thy mercies do away the heavy
burden of my iniquities: wash me from my sins, and cleanse me from my
offenses, wash me again and again, O Lord, that all my sins whatsoever
lies hid within me, may be done away at once. O most merciful father, against
thee only have I sinned most grievously and done wickedly in thy sight, yea,
and those things are most justly decreed of thee which thou have pronounced
against me. And I must needs confess, that nothing is faulty amongst thy
judgments, for I was corrupt and guilty in my mothers womb, and repleat with
sin, even from my cradle: what have I to allege for my self (knowing O
Lord, what a wretched case I stand in) or what excuse can I make to thee, O
heavenly judge: wherefore in thy fight do I remain the greatest of all
sinners, purge me with the true Isope (which in thy mercy thou have sent unto
sinners) even the blood of thy dear son my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
that al my filthiness may vanish clean away: restore me, O Lord, unto that
unspeakable joy wherewith they are endued that are shrouded from the bonds of
sin and death, and received into thy favor again, hide thy face away from
my sins, and race out of thy tables all the wickedness that I most
grievously have committed against thee: let thy holy spirit so direct me, that
I may from hencfoorth give my self to thy commandments, then shall I teach
thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee: deliver me
from sin that my soul may praise thee continually: open my mouth, O Lord,
that my tongue in Psalms and Himnes may set forth thy glorious name. For thou
desire not sacrifice, but a sorrowful mind and cont^ite heart, with the
true feeling of sins and inward repentance and unfeigned turning unto thee,
which oblation, O Lord, I now offer unto thee, humbly beseeching thee to accept
thereof, and incline thine ear thereunto for Jesus Christ his sake my only
Savior and redeemer. Amen.

A prayer very godly and necessary to be used at all times.
LOrd grant me the assistance of thy grace and holy spirit, that my soul unto
thee may yield continual praises, let my whole life extol thy great kindness
always showed unto me, for all praise belongs unto thee, thou have endued my
heart with joy, and lifted my soul out of the mix, wherefore I will not seek
to any mortal man, for their state is slippery, and their life consists in
their breath: whereof being bereaved, they are resolved again into dust, but
let my trust be in thee O God, on whose mercy depends my salvation, for thou
O God, art exceeding good and gracious unto all such as come unto thee, great
is thy power, oh how wonderful is thy handie work in thy creatures, thou
bear a great zeal unto thy servants, and keep promise with thine elect,
thou openest the eyes of the blinded soul, and gi^est understanding to the
simple, thou did arm my soul when I fainted in misery, wherefore give me
understanding, that I may diligently search to know thy will; thou did
defend and nourish me when I was destitute of thy help: thou comfortest the
fatherless and widows, but in justice ouerthrowest the wicked. O Lord I see
that all flesh is grass, and the riches of this world are nothing but vanity,
but thy riches are everlasting: wherefore grant that I may be plentiful in
all good works, and lead a life in this world agreeable to thy will, that the
same being ended, I may rest with thee for ever.

A godly prayer unto almighty God against all assaults of Satan.
I Humbly crave and beseech thee, most merciful God, in favor to behold my
troubled heart, and give ear unto my lamentable cries, for unto thee alone do
I offer up my prayers, desiring thee, in mercy to respect thy servant that now
caleth for thy direction: let my paths be guided according to thy will, for
thou art a God most pure, and can abide no iniquity at all to reign in thy
fight, neither the unjust person to stand in thy presence, wherefore, O Lord,
endue me plentifully with thy graces, that have no spark of goodness, in me,
send me knowledge from above, and direct me with thy spirit, that I be not
utterly cast away for ever, but pardon my iniquity, that I may draw near unto
thee, and with reverent fear extol thy glorious name. Let not Satan my
mortal enemy preuail against me, but deliver me from the snares that he daily
lays for me, replenish me, O Lord, with understanding, that I may safely
walk in thy laws, for the enemies of thy truth, and disturbers of my soul
are many, they dissemble in heart, and with their lips they flatter daily,
but my trust is in thee O Lord, that thou will confound their devises, so shall
I rejoice in thee, because thy hand has delivered me, and my tongue shall
never cease to extol thy praises and exceeding goodness, because thou have
defended me with the shield of thy mercy, and redeemed my soul from deadly
danger. Amen.

A prayer to be said in any kind of affliction.
Relieve me G God, I most humbly beseech thee from all the tyrannous invasions
of my ghostly enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil, and behold the
careful heart of him whom thou have stricken and visited according to thy
heavenly will and because man in his own nature is nothing but blindness and
folly before thee, and therefore cannot possibly conceive rightly of the things
above: renew therefore thy spirit in thy servant that the same instructing my
heart daiely in true wisdom and fear of thee, I may come to the feeling of
mine own evils, and know the cause of thy scourge, that so my wound being
apparent to mine eyes, I may with all speed see to the cure thereof, and
deserre no time to seek the salve to heal it. Hear the voice of thy servant,
O God, that cries unto thee, consider my complaint, and weigh my inward woe
conceived through hate of mine own infirmities, and for want of thy knowledge,
for I fly from my self as from an unwalled castle, fearing my footsteps, even
as though I walked on thorns: deal not with me in thy displeasure, neither
let my sins separate thy favor from me, but quicken me in my afflictions,
and make me ware wise by thy punishments: give me such a sense of my
infirmities, and so perfect a perseverance of my rechlesnes in serving of thee,
that I may dispose my self to contrary order, erecting my mind unto thee, and
thereunto so join the increase of thy grace and strenghtning spirit, as that I
may be able thereby to perform my race, and continue in that good way which thy
goodness has moved me to: in the times of my heaviness be near unto me,
and open my eyes of faith to behold thy eternal love, so that I be not too
much shaken by the enemies assaults, but may be replenished with ability,
constancy, and patience, to give him his final repulse and overthrow. Amen.

A prayer for our Sovereign Lord King James.
MOst mighty God of majesty, and heavenly father dear, unto the humble suits
of us thy servants poor give ear: that call on thee still to maintain and
bless with thy great power, our noble King and his offspring, our stay and
governor: who^e thou over thy little flock unto our comforts great, ordained
have to fit upon the high and princely seat: from foreign force of foes
vouchsafe good God to guard his grace: that all their subtle sleights and
snares he doubtless may deface. Lend unto him long life O Lrod, and eke a
royal reign, and grant that he thy graces great for evermore may gain. Thy
blessings bountiful bestow upon him we thee pray, that his delight may be to
love thy lightsome law for aye. And earnestly for to embrace thy Gospel pure
at large, unto the comfort of thy church committed to his charge. Under the
shadow of thy wings Lord keep him to the end, and from conspiracies also
vouchsafe him to defend. Convert or else confound all such as mischief do
devise, against his grace, and to thy truth are utter enemies, God grant him
peace in conscience and health without annoy, that we long time and many years
his presence may enjoy. Amen.

The confession of a Sinner.
RIghteous God, thou that art the father of all mercies, and comforter of all
mankind, even of thy tender love behold me poor sinner that have straied from
thy precepts through ignorance and frailty of my flesh, and most wickedly
erred from thy holy commandments like unto a wandering sheep having no
shepherd. O Lord I do confess I have followed too much the devises and
desires of my unrighteous heart, whereby I have at sundry times grievously
offended thy majesty in breaking and neglecting thy holy laws which thou have
commanded me to keep, and contrary to thy will, followed these ungodly
actions which I ought not to do, leaving undone those good things that thy
sacred word has taught me, so that in me there is no goodness, except thou, O
Lord, do speedily look upon me, and in thy great mercy pardon my heinous
offenses. Forgive me, O dear father, and forget my iniquities, I most entirely
beseech thee, that here with a sorrowful heart confess my faults unto thee,
O God, requesting thee of thy favorable goodness to restore me that am
penitent, and in thy mercy send relief unto thy servant, satisfy my soul
with thy favor again, according to thy promise, which thou have declared unto
an such as come unto thee in the name of thy beloved son Jesus Christ my
savior: wherefore, O my God, I come unto thee with an humble mind, beseeching
thee from the very inwards of my soul, to grant me the assistance of thy
grace and holy spirit, that I may ever hereafter in newnes of life live as
becomes thy servant, uprightly in thy sight, and deal faithfully with all
men, to thy honor and glory and the comfort of my soul. Amen.

Another prayer unto almighty God.
IN mercy, O Lord, vouchsafe to hear my prayers, and let my cries have access
unto to thee: hide not thy face from me, I be seech thee, in the time of my
trouble, but with speed incline thine ears unto me when I call: behold, there
is no certenty in my flesh, for my life consumes as the smoke, and my days
do wast in sorrow, mine enemies lie in wait for me, and they that rage against
me, have conspired my death: wherefore the feeling of thy wrath and heavy
displeasure has quite consumed me, but thou, O Lord, (whose promises I know
endure for ever) continuest all one God in mercy unto such as call upon thee,
therefore do I fly unto thee in my distress, beseeching thee to assist me
with thy grace and holy spirit, that the cause of my mourning and piteous
complaints being taken away, I may daily proceed and go forward in newness of
life, to the honor and glory of thy holy name. Confirm thy good work begun
in me, O God, and let me never want thy assistant aid therein, lest it be
utterly frustrate Let not mine iniquities be any hinderance to thy bountiful
goodness, neither yet my negligences (in serving of thee) move thee to
detract the operation of thy holy spirit in thy servant, but with speed
consider my frailty, and pardon my offenses for Jesus Christ his sake so shall
I declare thy worthiness, and extell thy great kindness showed unto me at
all times. Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me according to thy
eternal promises, make me plentiful in all good works to do thy fatherly
will, and let thy commandments be my whole delight, refresh my heart with the
fruition of thy blessings, and let me not at any time be unmindful of thy
goodness, but yield continual thanks unto thee for thy great benefits extended
toward me, take me not away O God, in the midst of my days, but prolong my
time, and conduct my footsteps, that having viewed at full thy graces
inestimable kindness, I may never cease until the last gasp to sing praises
unto thy holy name for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer to be used when a man is in any kind of trouble.
COnsider, O my God. I beseech thee, the woeful complaints and prayers that I
here offer up to thy divine Majesty, unto thee alone do I sue for help, remit
therefore my iniquities, for the multitude thereof do speedily crave thy aid,
and in thy mercy be favorable unto me, as thou have ever been, for though I
were driven to seek the farthest parts of the earth, yet will I call for thy
direction, yea when I am tormented with cares, I have no other refuge to fly
unto, but only to thee, O my God wherefore in mercy look on me, and in thy
good time take me up into the place of joy prepared for thy elect, where I may
praise thee for ever, for how have thou in great mercy dealt with me, in being
unto me an everlasting tower of defense against mine enemies, and though by
reason of the retchlesnesse and frailty of my corrupt nature, I have eftsoons
swarued from thy holy word, yet I beseech thee, O dear father, deal
favorably with me, and lay not my offenses unto my charge but show thy self a
loving and merciful God toward me, and pour on me thy gifts of grace, that I
may be holy unto thee, and accepted in thy fight, so shall my life be
prolonged, yea and so happy indeed, as it shall never decay, and I shall resort
to thy tabernacle in peace, where I shall be satisfied with the fruition of thy
favor, and be sustained with mercy and truth for ever: direct me continually
with thy holy spirit, and teach me, good Lord, to hate the ways of the wicked,
erect my mind to the contemplation of thy heavenly mysteries, and receive me
both now and ever into thy gracious protection, for my aduocat Jesus Christ his
sake, Amen.

A prayer against the fear of death.
O Eternal God and merciful father, from the depth of my weak heart do I
laud and glorify thee for all the benefits bestowed on me from the beginning
of my life unto this present, especially for the blessings of my election,
redemption, vocation, justification, and sanctification in Christ Jesus. Thou
have delivered me from the cruelty of my adversaries, and made me an inheritour
of thy kingdom, and thy child by adoption, yet thou have given me
(notwithstanding my unthankfulness) the earnest penny of my salvation, and in
mercy have reconciled me in Christ, whilst I was yet a grievous enemy unto
thee, thou tookest me out of the blind dungeon of careless ignorance to
render thanks unto thee, and to call upon thy name, in all which thou have
caused me to proceed and profit unto this day, wherein thy pleasure seems to
incline me toward the greatest benefit that ever I yet tasted, that is, to
free me from the extremities of this life and to bring me to that heavenly
liberty where shall be no bitterness. Now therefore, O dear Father, for Jesus
Christ his sake erect my mind toward thee, and as at all times of my life
hitherto thou have nourished and preserved me, so now in my last need visit and
regard me, O God, that as the enemy will now bend his force against me, so
thou with thy loving protection and holy spirit wilt comfort me, and with thy
presence defend me, that my faith still increasing, with armed patience, I may
despise the fear of this bodies death, knowing that it is the unavoidable way
that thou have appointed to do away my mortality, and to bring my soul to
rest, to yield praises unto thee in joys everlasting, which thy providence
has ordained me unto: so instruct me therefore to number my days, that I may
apply my heart to thy eternal wisdom: teach me, sweet Lord as heretofore to
live, so now to frame my end, that it may redound to thy glory, whereunto with
a fighting heart, I humbly beseech thee, that my understanding may always be
lightened with the feeling of my own infirmity, and that in all perfect
humility I may fly from the mind of all earthly stay, and so not fainting in
my farewell, but cleaning to thy promises, and apprehending thy salvation with
sure hope, I may expect the dissolution, so beholding thee with the eyes of my
faith, I may grow as by degrees weaker in body, so fuller and stronger in
spirit, so that when the last breath is passed, my soul in the bosom of
Abraham may joyfully respire the triumphant odors of an endless life. Amen.

A prayer for Chirurgians.
O Most mer^ifull God and loving father we most earnestly beseech thee let the
eye of thy mercy behold us, and harken to the humble suits of thy poor
servants, that with penitent hearts do appeal before thee, requiring pardon
for our iniquities committed daily against thy divine majesty: vouchsafe, O
Lord, of thy wonted goodness to extend and show thy favorable pity and
compassion toward us, and lay not our sins unto our charge, but put them
quite out of thy memory for Christ his sake thy dearly beloved son our
savior, and grant that we may render unto thee continual thanks for thy
manifold benefits and eternal mercies that thou of thy tender love do daily
bestow upon us. Assist us also with thy grace, that we may never cease to sing
praises unto thee for our election, creation, and redemption: we beesech thee,
O Lord, to give us the true knowledge of that Art whereunto thou have called
us, thereby to maintain our selves and our families from the extremities of
this sinful world and momentaneous life, for we do not only depend upon
thy fatherly providence, but do confess, O Lord, that every good and perfect
gift comes from thee: therefore be mindful we beseech thee of thy servants,
and indue us with thy blessings of wisdom and understanding, fith that thou
alone have elected and ordained us as instruments to minister those thy rich
and plentiful gifts which thou have appointed for the health and relief of
mankind, vouchsafe to give us the gift of heal^ng, that we may frame our selves
to do thy will therein, and be a comfort to such as lie in misery and cruel
pain by occation of bodily sickness and external casualties, and hereunto so
join the increase of thy grace and holy spirit, that all our actions may be
guided according to the rule of thy divine precepts and commandments, that
our consciences be not spotted in thy sight, but may remain pure and holy,
even as thou, O Lord, art holy, always reuoking to memory our duties and
necessary vocation, whereby our hearts may be continually stirred up to call
for thy assistance, remove from us all hateful and evil thoughts, with the
covetous desire of filthy lucre, and incite in us a consideration of the
woeful estate of the poor and needy, that we may relieve their necessity
with such good things as thy fatherly goodness and unspeakable prou dence in
greater measure has blessed us withal. Respect us, O Lord, in thy mercy,
that those things which we go about may prosper with us, and that all our
labors which we shall take in hand, may be blessed and brought to good
success by thy assistance and fatherly protection, to the honor and glory of
thy holy name, credit of thy church, comfort of our Christian brethren and our
own salvation: grant us this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only
Savior and redeemer. Amen.

A prayer for penitent sinners.
MOst mighty, God and eternal king of majesty, how can I hide my self away
from thy presence, or with what pretense might I cover my shame from the
piercing fight of thine eye, since there is nothing in me but a whole heap of
sin, whereby I am almost driven to the door of despair. Erect therefore thy
mighty hand to help me, O Lord, for if thy wisdom provide not for me, I am
always in danger, for unrighteousness in this my cortuptible body reigns
as a king, wherefore when my enemies enuiron me, I wonder that thou do not
destroy me, considering the lewdness of my living and the multitude of my
grievous offenses. But thus thou use to comfort thy children, and my soul
but for this relief, O God had perished long ago, therefore from the bottom
of my heart cry I unto thee, take me not away I beseech thee, O Lord, in my
sins, neither let me reap the portion of the wicked: thou have showed me the
days of comfort, and often delivered my soul from the Lion, and because thou
in great mercy have let me see this goodness, and also made me rejoice
therein, increasing light afterdarkenes, I will never cease to call upon thee
in my afflictions, but continually expect the good hour in my danger, increase
my faith, settle me in the knowledge of thy will, and plentiously bless me
with thy grace and holy spirit both now and ever, for no place is free from the
rage of thy adversaries: assist me in my infirmities, that I may ever gain a
double rejoicing, and that the most subtle assaults of the enemies may always
fall out to be his foulest foil, through Jesus Christ my only Savior. Amen.

The true knowledge of afflictions and tov what end they are sent.
THe Scriptures of God in sundry places do manifestly declare unto us the
healthful effect of afflictions, in calling them a cup, or drinking glass:
for like as the expert Physician giving unto his patient such quantity of
medicine as he thinks good, the patient must of necessity yield the choice of
his fancy to the skillful providence of him that ministers: even so our good
and gracious Lord, knowing far better what is profitable and most expedient
to cure the infirmities and maladies of our souls, tameth our affections with
such cups of afflictions as his wonderful wisdom in mercy foreseeth to be
most behooueable for us. In like manner are they also called in another sense
his artillery, his spears and his swords, wherewith to fight and overthrow
his enemies: and even as these definitions touching their ends are not alike,
but very diverse, so likewise are the afflictions of God sent both to the godly
and ungodly, but to two sundry ends, for by the one sort of affliction, God
exercises the patience of the faithful handling them for the most part more
roughly than he does the wicked The other he uses both to testify unto us,
that iniquity cannot reign unpunishable, as also to hold them inexcusable,
and that is the full end of all afflictions, extended to the infidel or
reprobate. The cups therefore and afflictions of God, as they are not sent to
all men to one end, so do they not work one effect, but for all them the lewd
person remains still ungodly, sick he was before he took the medicine, and
in like manner sick or rather more incurable he goes foreward after it, he
feels himself smitten, but considers not in truth who smote him, so
exceeding far is he from the perfect perusing of his own life, and
oueruiweing of his former days thereby, he imputes his cross to fortune,
rather than smells his own sins or intends to change his life, and if
his cross endure but a little, he chafeth at God and rejects his
corrections, he amendeth not at all but waxes worse and worse: far contrary
is the effect of those afflictions which Gods elect sustain, for his children
so soon as they feel his cross by any means laid upon them, they by and by
without delay bethink themselves of their sins, remembering that the hand of
God is come upon them for the same in which fear with all humility and
reverent trembling casting down every height within them, they throw
themselves flatlong at the footstool of Gods Majesty, reckoning up all their
heinous crimes to their power, acknowledging their faults, and beseeching God
in mercy to give them a feeling of their sins, that he will pierce their
ears, and in such wise open them, that their affliction may turn to the
comfort of their consciences: this case is clean contrary (as is said) to the
fearful punishments of the reprobate, they being hardened like Pharao
thereby, for lack of his second grace, which is the softening of man's heart
and soberness of his nature by the holy Ghost, from the free goodness of our
eternal God. Those being opened in their hearts by such grace and feeling of
Gods chastisements, are speedily taught to mislike of themselves for their
loose life and offenses, to sigh and groan for them, and to fly to the mercy
of God for refuge. Now by these conferences appears a certain rule or
touchstone, (not without an unspeakable comfort) to Gods elect, for in as much
as God punished Pharao, and softened not his heart withal, he intended to
leave him inexcusable to his deserved destruction, but in that he afflicted
Job, he did it to the bettering of his life, mollifying his heart to his
salvation: and hence we gather two points of comfort to be noted and observed:
the one is, that when God makes us to feel his hand, so that we are humbled
under the same, it is a special privilege and sure token of his good will,
and which he never shows to any but to his own children: and the other is,
since we are punished but to the amendment of our lives and drawing us back
from our sinful ways, we live therefore in happy case, for that it declares
unto us that the Lord will not be angry with us for ever, but does as it were
hedge in both the sides of our race, even because he loves us, so that we have
no cause to doubt of Gods favor, but rather to be fully resolved, that when he
punishes us, he holds us not for his enemies, but by t^^t mean procu^eth
our salvation: and thus we see (as S. Paul says) our victory consists in
taking hold of this love of God in Jesus Christ, being evermore thoroughly
persuaded, that God has adopted us to be his children and heirs of his
kingdom, which principle we once having, ought not to be led aside nor
dismayed with any affliction, for seeing that God bears such exceeding love
toward us, we shall never be confounded, and so little in very deed shall our
afflictions hinder our welfare, that they shall turn to our furtherance, and
vndoubtfully prove unto us, that Christ his yoke is sweet and easy, and not
only brings us to the obedience of Gods will, but to eternal happiness. Thus
afflictions are in truth our medicines to drive us to God, to tame the pride of
our nature, to kill our vices, to make us know our selves, loath our sins
unfeignedly, fly from our own ways, seek strength of the Lord, and so from
virtue to virtue ascend to the height of our salvation: Finally, as to the
impatient reprobate they are the fearful comets of their destruction, so to
the number of Gods elect they are the infallibly pledges and sure ensigns of
their continual victory and future triumph in Jesus Christ. The life and
healthful afflictions of Job and David in aboundont manner do testify the
loving end of Gods afflictions, and in them may we find infinite testimonies, to
prove how profitable are the fatherly chastisements of our good God, who by
them does evermore scour us from the rust of our natural disposition, and
fineth us like pure gold in the furnace: briefly, by them he violently
breaks into the heart of old Adam, and there bursting the corrupt ends and
coats of his veins, by his wonderful operation powers a new spirit into his
arteries, which creeping through the senses with a lively moisture, as by a
certain heavenly Analogy or proportion, does in settet sort dispose us to
contemn this vile place of misery, and to eleuate our minds to God, that so
framed us, and so forsaking our sinful ways and hateful affections, endeavor
with all newness to serve and worship him in righteousness and holiness of
life, and with all patience look for the revelation of the elect children of
God, against which new birth and invincible hope before time reserved unto us
by the good purpose of the father in his son Christ, and now undoubtedly
confirmed in our consciences, by the badges of this fatherly handling shall
nothing avail us, for all the darts of affliction in what kind soever
assaulting us, shall be so far from prevailing to overthrow our faith and
liberty (as the enemy would) as that they shall flue-fold redouble the force
thereof with exceeding joy against them, so that the very subtilest engines of
Satan shall make us the more invincible, and his force the more contemptible.
Thus I say, shall Gods fauoureble exercises intermedled with his graces, work
the same effect in our souls, as our meat and drink does to our bodies: And
like as all such nourishment is the right and ordinary mean whereby our
bodies in this earthly tabernacle do daily increase and grow in strengthfull
habit of health: even so by the other, our soul is visited, strengthened, and
increased, and we are brought by the merciful hand of God even as by degrees
and from step to step, till at length we come to the fullness of our redeemer
Christ Jesus, to appear before the Lord in Sion.

A prayer for Saylors.
THou God, that art the Creator and maker of al things, behold us that here
prostrate our selves at the footstool of thy majesty, craving pardon for our
sins, govern us thy people, O Lord, that by thy permission do most
daungerously travel the boisterous seas, according to the office and vocation
whereunto thou have called us, for except thy mighty hand do stay us, we shall
perish, yea, we are always in danger to be overwhelmed with the perilous
waves of the s^a, and to be swall^wed up in the deep gulfes thereof: behold us
therefore, O Lord, in thy mercy, that in these ^ur enterprises we may receive
the fruition of thy blessings: when thou, O God, art angry with us for sin,
thou make the storms to rise, and the seas to rage, in such sort, that they
enforce us to quake and tremble, and when we cease from sin, thou causest
them in like manner to cease, for thou appointest to the sea his course, and
keep it ever in his bounds, yea thou have ordained us to travel thereon, to
see thy marvelous works and excellent greatness, as also to declare thy
wonders amongst the children of men, thou have oftentimes for our disobedience
and inordinate living caused us to feel thy wrath and grievous scourge, the
dangers whereof have almost brought us to our wits end, but when we turn unto
thee with repentance thou will not only bring us to a safe harbor to ease our
weary bodies, but also when our painful days are spent and ended, receive us
into the blessed haven of eternal rest, the which, O Lord, grant us to come
unto for Jesus Christ his sake.

Grace before meat.
TO thee, O Lord God, we render most hearty thanks for these thy blessings of
meat and drink, which thou in mercy do now bestow upon us, beseeching thee
to grant that we do not abuse them immoderately by surfeiting or gluttony,
but only to feed thereon with sobriety, thereby to sustain our feeble flesh
and hungry desire, and so frame our speeches, O God, that thy name therein may
be glorified, and our Christian brethren edified: preserve most loving Lord,
our gracious King, with thy universal Church: grant us, we humbly beseech
thee, the continuance of thy glorious Gospel to be truly and sincerely
preached amongst us, and make us faithful followers thereof in righteousness
and holiness of life: vouchsafe, O dear father, to defend and evermore to
keep our Realm from the invasion of foreign enemies, and send us a
perpetual peace in conscience, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grace after meat.
GRations God and most loving father, we thy poor servants yield unto thee in
humility of heart all praise and thanks, in that it has pleased thee of thy
inestimable goodness at this instant to refresh and relieve the appetite of
our earthly bodies with this food of meat and drink, which thy divine
providence. O Lord, in plentiful measure has bestowed upon us, and as these
thy creatures are by thy permission ordained to nourish our mortal bodies,
even so in mercy vouchsafe to grant that our souls may be fed and comforted
with the divine food of thy glorious Gospel, and that it may so shine in our
hearts and senses, that we by the direction of thy grace and holy spirit, may
proceed in newness of life, to the honor and glory of thy holy name. Call us
not, O dear Father, to account of the vain and idle speeches that we have at
this present, as also at other times of our life, indiscreetly used, but in
favor remit the same, and grant that we with willing minds may remember and
help our needy brethren, who feel the want of that which we have had at full.
In mercy, O Lord, preserve thy Church, our King and Realm, increase the number
of thy servants, and bless us with peace of conscience and health of body,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Earnest and zealous meditations on the seven petitions of the Lords prayer.
O Lord thou art the father of all mercies, and God of all consolation, behold
us that with lowly hearts come unto thee, even as children do to their
natural fathers: our only trust is in thy mercy, for thy goodness exceeds
all earthly fathers, with reverence therefore, and humility of heart, love,
obedience, and faithful dutifulness, as becomes the children of so loving a
father, do we call for thy help and comfortable assistance, for who is like
unto thee, or can bring to effect the thing which thou can do? thy seat is
in heaven where thou raignest in all dignity for evermore, thy power is in
heaven and earth, and in the sea, yea and thy regiment appears in all places,
thou see all things, thou hear all things, and by thy eternity gouernest
all things, and we thy poor children do crave succor of thee only,
beseeching thee, O Lord, to raise our hearts from earthly things, and unite our
minds to the contemplation of heavenly things, and make us ready at all times
with steadfast hope to expect our heavenly inheritance: praised be thy name, O
Lord, which above all other names ought to be had in reverence, for thou art
altogether holy, grant therefore that we may utterly detest and abolish the
names of all feigned gods, and evermore vouchsafe to assist us in mercy with
thy grace and holy spirit, that we may refrain the company of such evil
persons as irreverently blaspheme thy name, neither suffer us by retchlesnes to
dishonor thee our God in any of our actions: moreover, grant we most humbly
beseech thee, O Lord, that thy kingdom may ever remain amongst us, and that
thy truth and holy word never depart from us, but abide in our hearts by thy
inspiration, as a fruitful doctrine daily instructing us, whereby we may with
more earnest zeal walk as Christians in newness of life to the honor and
praise of thy name, that all men seeing the same, may truly turn unto thee, in
hope to attain thy everlasting kingdom. O most gracious God, let thy blessed
will be done in all things with us both now and ever, and as thou art our
heavenly father, so grant that we may not request any thing contrary to thy
will, but accept whatsoever thou sendest with reverent minds, saying with
cheerful hearts, Thy will be done, O Lord, for evermore here on earth, as it
is in thy holy sanctuary of heaven: quicken us, O Lord, that we may learn more
and more to be obedient unto thy heavenly will in all things as becomes thy
dear children, and even as thy holy Angels and blessed company do observe
the same with joy: so direct our inward affections, that we may wholly apply
our selves thereunto, and that our whole felicity in this life may be
altogether employed in meditating on thy sacred Scriptures, which thou in mercy
have sent and left amongst us, to the comfort of our souls and our eternal
salvation: and evermore in mercy, O dear Father, vouchsafe of thy providence
to nourish and comfort us continually with such things as thy only goodness
does know to be most expedient both for our souls and bodies, whereby we may
go foreward with a quieter conscience to serve thee so that we in this life
may be maintained and preserved, whereby we may be helpful unto our Christian
brethren, and not chargeable unto them any ways, especially, good Lord, grant
that we abuse not thy blessings of meat and drink, but vouchsafe that we may
thankefully receive thy fatherly benefits in such modest sort, that thy name
may be glorified, our souls and bodies graciously comforted, and if it shall
please thee at any time to lay thy rod of correction upon us for our
disobedience, and so to afflict us with any kind of penury, yet grant to us
such grace that we may continually with all humility be thankefu l unto thee
without either murmuring or grudging and with armed patience st^ll abide thy
leisure, for thou of thy fatherly goodness have willed us to lay our care upon
thee, who art able in thy good time to relieve our need: but above all things,
O merciful God, grant that our souls may be nourished and spiritually fed
with the lively word of thy glorious Gospel, which gives knowledge unto such
as delight therein, and leads to life everlasting: behold, O Lord, our
weakness, for thou know our frailty, and the wickedness of our youth is
not hi^ from thee: we confess that we were conceived and brought forth in
sin, so that through our corrupt nature we daily and hourly offend thy
divine majesty by Satan's interceptions in breaking thy commandments, and
neglecting our duty toward thee, but, O our good God, we most humbly beseech
thee with sighing hearts to give us a feeling of our infirmities, and stir us
up with all speed in the times of our trial to seek after thee, and to
proceed in repentance and amendment of life, for thou art our merciful Lord,
more ready to forgive than we for to ask, and therefore we come to thee alone,
for none in heaven nor in earth, Saint nor Angel, can forgive sins, but thou
only, through Jesus Christ our redeemer, who has suffered the pain due unto
our sins: and furthermore we crave of thee, O dear father, so to ass^st us
with thy holy spir^t, that we may put out of our hearts all manner of malice,
debate, and thoughts of reuengement, and with Chr stianitie, from the very
inwards of our hearts forgive them that trespass against us, that with
steadfast hope we may crave at thy hands forgiveness for our sins: thou most
mighty God, direct our paths and guide o^r ways, stretch forth thy right
hand to succor us, that we may be ever armed with thy defense against the
violent snares and manifold temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil,
stay us good Lord that we perish not through their cruel invasions, nor turn
from thee to our own destruction, for except thou do still continue a good
father unto us, in protecting and defending us thy children, and blessing us
with thy spiritual graces, we shall suddenly fall into all injuries: wherefore
our hope both now and ever shall wholly depend upon thy mercies, with full
assurance, that thou will in thy good time not only deliver us from all evil,
but also nourish and preserve us in our necessity, and s^ue us from such
cruel and grievous afflictions as are ready to molest us either in body or
mind. Thy kingdom, O dear father, we faithfully confess and acknowledge is
an heavenly and everlasting kingdom, and thy power is exceeding infinite, yea
and thy glory so incomprehensible, that it passes man's reason and the limits
of his understanding to attain to the knowledge, therefore we most entirely
beseech thee grant us these things that we have faithfully asked in humility
of heart, according to thy will, and give unto us, O Lord, such grace, that our
prayers may be always directed in perfect faith unto thy divine majesty,
without wavering or doubting of thy assistance, remembering thy promises, that
so praying unto thee with a steadfast hope, we may expect the speedy approach
of thy everlasting comfort in Christ Jesus, Amen.

A prayer or thanksgiving for Gods benefits bestowed upon us.
COnduct and preserve me, O Lord, for in thee alone do I trust, thou art my
health and the portion of my inheritance, yea, thou have blessed me with
increase, and allotted unto me a fair heritage, grant therefore O Lord, that
with reverence I may render unto thee due thanks for all the blessings which
thou have lent me, and may employ the same to the benefit of thy children: let
thy feate be ever apparent before mine eyes, that I may live uprightly in thy
sight: save me, O God, from the dangerous events of this trou^lesome and
wretched life and hold thy hand continually over me, to defend my cause against
the fury of my adversaries: guide me, O God in all my ways, that my course
may be ruled according to thy word, whereby I may faithfully persevere with all
dutiful obedience in that necessary vocation whereunto thy only goodness
has ordained me: for so long as thy graces have dom^nion over me, I am
altogether steadfast and immouable, wherefore I rejoice both in body and soul
at thy wonderful works established within me, thou quicknest me from the mind
of earthly carfulness, and make me oftentimes to feel thy mercy, and
relieuest my conscience with the revelation of thy word, wherefore with delight
shall I declare thy goodness and praise thy name for ever and ever.

A prayer for aid in the time of afflictions.
COnsider my cry O Lord, and give ear unto me that am oppressed: help me, O
God, and deliver me against them that do injuriously resist me, preserve thy
servant that flies unto thee, and respect me in mercy that am continually
conversant in calling upon thee, refresh my soul which is lifted up unto thee,
for unto thee alone do I call and cry. Thou art verily good and merciful,
and use great clemency unto them that call on thee, give ear Lord unto my
prayer, and hearken unto my meditation, for in the day of my trouble I will
call unto thee, yea all nations shall extol thy name, because of thy wondrous
works: teach me the way of thy righteousness, and I will walk therein, knit my
heart unto thee, that I may fear thy holy name. I will praise thee, O Lord my
God, with all my heart, yea I will always glorify thy name, for great is thy
mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. O
gracious God, the proud are risen against me, and the assembles and injurious
dealings of violent men have sought my soul, to destroy it utterly, and have
not set thee before them, but thou, O Lord God, on whom only I do depend, art
kind and merciful, not hasty unto anger, but full of truth, take care now of
me therefore O Lord and help me for thy mercy sake, grant finally that I may
manifestly know and perceive that thou love me, that my enemies may be
grieved and ashamed of themselves, when they see that thou do yield comfort
and help unto me, so shall I be endued with greater joy to serve thee and to
yield unto thee eternal praise and incessant thanksgiving for ever, Amen.

A prayer craving aid of God against all our enemies.
WIth speed, O Lord come forth to deliver me, make have to help and succor
me, my God, let them be confounded and put to shame that pretend to do me
evil, and let them be turned backward and put to endless confusion that desire
my death: let them turn home with shame as a recompense, disappointed of their
purpose, which have vaunted aagainst me, as though I had been quite confounded,
and grant thou, O Lord, that not I alone, but all they also that have a desire
to worship thee, may with a low voice ascribe all glory unto thee, in
rejoicing, and that they may delight to give solemn and everlasting praises
unto thee, who have in mercy delivered thy servant. In the mean season I
stand here all alone, oppressed with the approach of daily sins, and
destitute of all succor, yea, and continually grieved with the troublesome
assaults of Satan, which keeps the soul in perpetual bondage, wherefore
make have and draw near to help me, O merciful God, for upon thy gracious
aid do I only depend, O God, my deliverer: O Lord. I beseech thee, delay not
longer, but grant me thy heavenly assistance, that I feeling thy great
kindness, may henceforth apply my self wholly to the observation of thy
laws, through Jesus Christ my only Savior, unto whom with thee and the holy
Ghost be all power and dominion for ever.

A prayer to be used of all men and at all times.
WIth the eye of mercy, O God, see into my sorrowful soul, and graciously
behold my inward cogitations: and as thou have oftentimes showed thy self a
most loving and merciful Lord unto thy servants, even so with humble heart I
earnestly beseech thee O God, satisfy my mind with good things, and cover my
sins in the multitude of thy mercies, change the frowardnes of my corrupt
nature, and release thine anger pretended toward me, that I may worth^ly
praise thee, show me thy mercy, O dear father, and grant me thy salvation:
instruct me continually by thy holy spirit in the revelation of thy laws, that
I may thereby perceive thy will in all things, and so lead a life acceptable in
thy sight, and vouchsafe, O Lord, evermore to grant me thy heavenly wisdom,
that I may not be inclined to folly, but knowing whereunto thou have created
me. I may diligently ^roceed in that necessary vocation that thy divine
providence has called me unto, serving thee in righteousness and holiness of
conversation all the days of my life. Grant also, O Lord, that I may
altogether embrace thy true and a heavenly doctrine and eschew all such things
as are contrary to thy will, that so leading a life agreeable to my calling, I
may in the end attain to the joys everlasting.

A prayer and thanksgiving unto God, to be used of every man that has been
either troubled in body or mind.
TO thee O Lord, do I render continual thanks, for thou in mercy have heard
my voice, and inclined thine ear unto the prayers and petitions of my mouth,
and therefore will I call upon thee so long as I live, for when the most cruel
snares of death compasses me, and when the dreadful anguish of the grave held
me, being overcome with the troubles of my sorrowful heart, then I called upon
the Lord, saying: O Lord, I beseech thee, come speedily and deliver my soul,
and thou like a merciful father did send and and relief unto me: verily
thou, O God, art merciful and righteous, full of truth and compassion, for I
wa^ in misery, and thou didddest save me: O my soul enter now therefore into
the place of rest, seeing the Lord has been so beneficial unto thy safety,
for he has delivered my life from death: thou have stayed mine eyes from
breaking out into tears, and thou have established my feet in such a perfect
path, that I may walk now safe and sound amongst the living, for I have
evermore believed the promises of the Lord, and therefore did I speak, even my
aith min^string voice and words to me, being opressed with sorrow, and thou
did overcome the dangerous attemps of my foes, quickening me for thine
infinite mercies sake: what shall I render unto thee therefore for all thy
benefits which thou have bestowed upon me, I will give thee the sacrifice of
praise, and call upon thy name with reverence, yea I w ll pay my vows unto
thee, which I have promised even in the m^dst of thy faithful congregation for
ever and ever, Amen.

A prayer unto God, desiring him to defend us from the malice of our
adversaries.
MOst merciful God, I beseech thee for thy names sake, save me and deliver me
(being an innocent) by thy power, give ear unto the words of my mouth, and
refuse not my prayer that I here present unto thy divine majesty, defend me O
Lord, from the wicked and such as rise up against me, confound their devices,
and let the snares that they have set to imtrap me, be as a sword lighting upon
their own heads, cut them down according to thy promises which thou have made
to thy children that I being delivered by the extended force of thy right hand,
may willingly perform my vow and solemn promise unto thee, and celebrate thy
praises, seeing there is nothing more bountiful nor more excellent than the
worthiness of the power, namely in that thou have saved me from all distress,
and granted me my desire on my enemies: grant this, O father, for Jesus
Christ his sake our only redeemer, Amen.

A prayer for such as intend to enter into the estate of matrimony, made at
the request of M Ed. Fenton.
MOst mighty God and heavenly father, from the bottom of my heart I yield all
honor, land, praise, and thanksgiving unto thy divine majesty, for those thy
riches, blessings, and benefits which thou in mercy have bestowed upon me: O
Lord, that by thy incomprehensible power made Adam out of the dust and slime
of the earth, and createdst him to thine own image, behold me thy servant whom
thy good pleasure has called to the honorable state of matrimony, and as by
thy most excellent providence thou did give unto Adam, Eua to be his
helper, and immutably ordainest them to become one flesh, from whom proceeded
all mankind, so, O my good God, in thy mercy grant that this woman whom thou
have given me, may be unto me a helper, and that we may be a comfort one
toward another, even as Abraham unto Sara, and Isaac to Rebecca, and not to
fulfill our ungodly affections, nor the corrupt and filthy desire of our
fleshly appetites, but to love and live together withal humble obedience and
reverent fear toward thee as becomes thy servants, without strife or
debate, and for the procreation of children, to the increase of thy kingdom:
which if it please thee to bless us withal, grant that we may bring them up
in thy fear and true religion: Lord behold us, that with one heart and voi^e
do most humbly beseech thee so to endue, direct, and sanctify us with thy
holy spirit, that all our actions may stand with thy honor and glory, credit
of thy Church, and our everlasting salvation: and grant that we with all
modesty may live together with continual peace of conscience and health of
body, until we become aged, that we may see our childrens children, and thy
name eternally advanced in the Church and congregation, and when thy goodness,
has finished our days in this life, conduct our souls in safety unto that
spiritual kingdom which thou have ordained for thine elect, to rest with thee
for ever. Grant, O most merciful father, that those things which we have
faithfully asked, according to thy will, may effectually be obtained, that we
thy lowly and obedient children obtaining the perpetual fruition of thy
favor, may for thy gracious assistance and inestimable treasures yield unto
thee eternal praise, power, and dominion, with incessant thanksgiving both now
and ever, thorough our only mediator and advocate Jesus Christ, Amen.

A prayer for a woman that is barren, and desires the fruit of her body.
O Lord my God, most gracious and loving father in Jesus Christ, behold me,
poor wretch, whom thy hand has hitherto humbled as it were in the sight of
all the world, at the length take away my reproach, I acknowledge thy hand to be
upon me: for none in heaven or earth, save thy majesty only, is able to
withstand the particular effect of that thy generell commandment, Bring
forth fruit and multiply Thou only (dear father) can do it, because of
thy almightinesse: and thou also do it even in thy children, according to
the most holy decree of thy unsearchable wisdom: now, because when thou
v^sitest thy children with any wants of outward comforts and blessings, thou
do it not (dear father) for any lack of love to them, or as though the
blessings also of this life pertained not to them, for in Christ Jesus, who is
Lord of all, they are likewise our right, the ungodly being mere usurpers of
them, but thou do it to draw them by some temporal want and short restraint
of their desires to, seek at thy hand some eternal blessings, which they
stand more in need of, that thereby in the end thou might be seen to
multiply thy rich mercies toward them every way. Of which thy wisdom thou
have left us a leagible evidence in the story of thy servant Job: who (after
thou baddest taught him more humility) thou enrichedst also, as his heart
could desire. Now because thy ways are all just, O Lord, and thou walk ever
like thy self, have mercy on me thy servant, I beseech thee give me to
understand that which thou would have me to see in this my affliction, and
since through the darkness of my mind, it is hard for me (O Lord) to espit out
the deformities and wants that are in me, may it please thee to vouchsafe me
the especial guiding of thy holy spirit herein: so as by it I may make a
through visitation of my self both for my outward deeds and for my inward
affections, until I shall find out the thing that may please thee, and may
also be yet further blessed of thee, even in this thing which my heart
defireth, so shall this thy loving return wipe away my reproach, thy bounteous
dealings with thy servant, be joyfully praised among thy Saints, and as for me,
whose head thou have thus lifted up, I will never cease talking of thy
goodness, and informing those who shall in like case of thy liberal kindness
toward all that wait on thee, and thy most wise and righteous judgments which
thou exercisest amongst those also that fear thy holy name, Amen.

A prayer for iourneying.
O Most loving and tender Father, I commit this my journey and corporal
travel unto thy heavenly direction, to guide and govern me as shall seem
most expedient to thy godly wisdom: and as this my troublesome and weary life
is but a pilgrims passage, and a spanne from birth to grave, so grant that I
may always consider of it, and I beseech thee, O my God, that as to Jacob
iourneying into the East, and praying for thy gracious protection, thou did
minister all things necessary to his safety, so thou will mercifully behold
me, a member of thy little Israel, and prosper me so in my journey, that all
things according to thy heavenly will may go well with me, to the honor and
advancement of thy holy name, that like as Jacob said thou should be his
God, so we knowing that in all things thou art more rich and plentiful unto us
(a thousand fold) tha^ we can deserve, may for thy continual goodness sing
land and praise unto thy holy name, O God that for ever live one in trinity,
and three in unity, Amen.

A godly prayer to be used at all times.
O Most merciful father, from thy holy sanctuary look down, I beseech thee,
upon me, and behold me, poor wretch that am oppressed with the burden of
daily sin, and be wrapped in the bonds of mortal misery, prisoned in the
fetters of original wickedness, and having in mine own body the traitorous
affections of concupiscence, always conspiring to betray my soul into the hands
of the adversary: behold me (I say) in the bright beams of thy loving
countenance with thy eye of mercy, see into the troubles of my spirit, and lay
thine ear unto the mournful groans of the same, my soul howleth out unto
thee even from the gulf of deep calamities, pressed with the provision of
temporal things, urged with the spightfull watching of the hateful, pricked
with the presumptuous pride of worldly benefits, and wounded with the venomous
dart of Adams transgression: my battles are full of difficulties, my
victories compassed with treason, and my dwellings in the doors of death. O my
God, what felicity can the poor servant find in this irksome life? Or what
comfort can bring sufficient relief to the afflicted spirit, but the true
platform of our paths, and the sweet scope of our pilgrimage, even Jesus
Christ thy dearly beloved son our savior. Wherefore I poor sinner humbly
beseech thee not to carry long, or defer my deliverance from this weary
journey. Let not my soul always be clad with mourning, and my bones witherwith
anguish, thou Lord have created me of nothing, and thou gave me life in my
mothers womb. Thou have chosen me to be of thine, and thou have given me thy
holy spirit the testimony: O dear father, let not thy graces be in me in
vain, let me not be overwhelmed with the iniquities of this troublesome world:
but prevent me with the extended force of thy right hand, and save my soul, O
God, my rock of strength: Behold not that which is amiss in me, neither let
my sins and infirmities make separation between thy mercy and me: drive out,
or at the least wise hold down in me the cruel sting of raging concupiscence,
by the increasing might of thy holy spirit impresse in my heart a fear of thy
laws, and instruct me so to number my days, that I may apply my self wholly
to thy statutes. Also (O most merciful father) as the door of thy mercy is
always open, and as thou will never refuse humble suits of thy servants: hear
me, O Lord, in my earnest petition, for thy little Church of England let me
never see it governed again with the mistie cloud of deep ignorance, suffer
me never to see thy holy temple and sanctuary defiled with the beastily
superstition and blasphemous idolatry of Antichrist: strike not the lamp out
of our hands in thy wrath, and so make us go groping in palpable darkness: I
must needs confess (O dear father) that the multitude of our sins (which
are grown in such ripeness) due worthily deserve thy grievous plagues: even
from the highest to the lowest we have all gone astray, and prowdly breaking
our allegiance, have disol eyed thy precepts. But yet (O mighty Jehovah, who
admittest dust and ashes to speak unto thee) hear thy poor servant, I
beseech thee, even with the tears of a sorrowful heart, appease thine anger,
hold thy heavy rod, shed not the violl of wrath upon us in thy surie, let not
thy spirit be moved with man because he is but flesh, correct us not in thine
anger, least we be consumed and brought to nothing, but convert us, O Lord, and
we shall be converted, change us, and we shall be changed, for thine elects
sake, O father, spare this Realm of England. Defer the day of revenge, and
so much more plenteously pour thy precious spirit into the hearts of thy
children, which now already feel thy fatherly calling, that they with all
speed making have into thy vineyard, may painefully sweat in dunging,
earthing and priming the trees, to the increase of thy vintage, to the glory of
thy holy name. Lord hear me I beseech thee, and so kindle in the hearts of thy
children the love of thy law, and zeal of true profession, that we may walk
together in all brotherly admonition and Christian exhortation that we all
strive to go before others in godly zeal, and flourish in the fruits of
perfect faith: That we use not our liberty to the infirming of the weak, but
every one burn in desire to win a soul unto thee. Finally, that our
steadfast going forward and continual increase may be to the strengthening of
the weak and comfort of the strong, to the sifting out of Wolves, and defense
of the Lambs, to the shining credit of thy Church, and final confusion of
Antechrist, that so turning from us thy heavy displeasure, and vnbending the
bow of thy wrath, thou may embrace us in thy arms of mercy, where gaining
the fruition of thy favor, in all patience and thanksgiving we may expect the
day of our liberty, which we shall one day obtain by the dissolution of this
life, and entrance into that unspeakable rest, that Christ our savior has
purchased and entered into by his precious blood, to whom with the father and
the holy spirit be all praise and thanksgiving for ever, Amen.

Godly meditations to be used at all times.
O Eternal God and heavenly father, whose wisdom and power is infinite, and
yet whose mercy surmounteth all, in whom all creatures have their being, and
from whom all goodness flows as from a fountain: I humbly beseech thee give
ear unto the groaning requests of my spirit, and pity the salt streams that
(for the sight and sense of mine own infirmities) flow from the inwards of my
consuming heart. And also I ask nothing but that which sounds to the glory
of thy holy name, and to the credit of thy Church: show thy self, O father, as
willing as able, that my spirit being refreshed, and my heart receiving
comfort, I may boldfast the rejoicing of my hope, with a sound and settled
conscience to the end.

Against temptation.
O Thou maker of heaven and earth, deliver me from the continual and most
dangerous assaults of Satan, who privily lays baits, and secretly diggeth
pittes for my soul, leaving nothing unattempted that might work my
destruction, and I feeling my self nothing but a mass of infirmities, and
ready to decline at every stroke that he gives, cannot but mistrust my self
altogether, and wholly flying unto the sea of thy mercy, power and wisdom,
do beseech the incessant supply of thy gifts, in the continual access of
thy holy spirit, that in the throng of temptations I may be delivered and stand
victorer in Jesus Christ.

For patience.
O Most loving Lord suffer me not to be tempted above my might: neither by
affliction of body or soul, neither by whatsoever earthly penury the enemy
would press me with, but even in the midst grant me patience to suffer thy
fatherly trials thankefully and without all grudging, as worthily may beseem
the child of so loving and merciful a father.

For increase of faith.
O God, thou creator of al mankind, increase my faith, and purge me of
unbelief, that I always calling to mind thy wonderful loving work of our
redemption, may with all boldness of spirit in the blood of Jesus Christ so
apply thy comfortable promises to the saluing of my sores as that in using of
the same precious oil of thy grace, I may always fear to make wast thereof.

For sanctification.
O Thou mighty God of Israel, grant me such an understanding heart, and so
instruct my senses to be studious and capable of thy heavenly mysteries, that
according to the right rul^ and perfect platform of thy provident direction. I
may love in all singleness and humility of heart, as a feeling member of
Christ Jesus, suffer in him mutually and fructify in all abundance of godly
life to thy honor.

For temporal benefits.
O Father of all mercies so moderate thy merciful hand in blessing me with the
benefits of this temporal maintenance that neither through abundance old Adam
may set up his feather, nor yet thy virtues be in me through scarcity obscured.

For thankfulness.
O Thou comforter of the comfortless, rend out of my heart all fleshly thorns
and impediments, that would at any time incline me to forget thy goodness, or
neglect to serve thee, and give me a heart always affected to honor thee, a
mind ever meditating upon thy mercy, and a spirit burning with zeal of thy
worship, that daily I may pay my vows unto thee, and speak to thy praise in
the midst of the congregation.

For mortification and resolution.
O Most bounteous God, so mortify old Adam in my members, and redouble the
strength of the inner man, that despising this momentanous life, I may not
stick in the joy of any earthly pleasure, or yield my self to the delight of
this present life, but always refusing to endeavor my self in an uncertain
hospidge, and knowing that I am here but as a pilgrim. I may shun my
acquaintance with all things of fickle stay, and fix my heart, my solace and
delight, upon the hope of beholding the majesty and beauty of thy glory even
as it is, where my joy shall be full, and nothing wanting for ever: which
joys, as my spirit groneth to see, so, O Lord I beseech thee with expedition
finish thy good works in me, and shortly bring to an end my sorrowful days,
that my soul as a dove may once take her flight from this earthly tabernacle,
and being received in to the bosom of thy dear son, may be placed in that
most happy rest which he has purchased for the same, with the price of his
most precious blood, to whom with thee, O father, and the everlasting comforter
be all praise, dominion and power evermore ascribed, Amen.

A prayer against the fear of death.
O Eternal God, my most loving and merciful father, I praise and glorify
thee even from the depth of my infirm heart, for all the benefits and riches
of thy goodness bestowed upon me, from the beginning of my life unto this
present time: but especially for the blessings of my election, redemption,
vocation, justification and sanctification in Jesus Christ, in all which thou
have in part taken me out of this world, and given me the pledge of thy holy
spirit, which witnesses unto my spirit that I am thy child, thou have (I say)
given me the earnest penny of my salvation, and whilst I was yet thine enemy,
have reconciled me in Christ: yea, thou tookest me out of the blind dungeon of
careless ignorance, to serve thee in simplicity, to fear thee in love, and to
call upon thee in spirit and truth, and in all these (most loving father) have
then made me proceed and profit unto this present day, wherein happily thy good
pleasure seems to incline me toward the greatest benefi^ that I ever yet
tasted, that is, wholly to free me from all the miseries of this present life,
and to bring me to that heavenly liberty where my joy shall be full, and no
t^st of mixture with bitterness. Now therefore dear father, for Jesus Christ
his sake, I beseech thee, respect me thy unworthy servant, and as all times of
my life thou have fatherly fed, nourished, preserved, and defended me, so now
in my last need visit and regard me: that as the enemy will now with all rage
bend his force against me, so thou with thy fatherly and mighty protection by
thy holy spirit wilt comfort me and with the comfortable presence of thy
majesty strengthen me, that my ^^^th still increasin^ with armed patience I
may despise the fe^re of this bodies death, knowing that it is the unavoidable
way that thy good pleasure has appointed to do away our mortality, and to
bring us those joys, which thy unspeakable providence has ordained us unto,
without all deserving on our parts: teach me new therefore so to number my
days, that I may apply my heart unto thy wisdom: teach me (sweet Lord) as
heretofore to live, so now to frame to die to thy glory, whereunto I, poor
wretch, do with a sighing heart beseech thee never ^o forsake me with thy holy
spirit, but that mine understanding may always be lightened with the feeling of
mine own infirmities, so that in all perfect humility I may fly from the
mind of all earthly stay, and cleaving inseparably to thy promises, and
apprehending my salvation with sure hope, I may expect the dissolution: so
beholding thy majesty with the clear eyes of my faith, I may grow, as by
degrees weaker in body, so fuller and stronger in the spiritual body or inner
man: so that when the last breath has passed, my soul may joyfully respire
the triumphant odours of an endless life, in the bosom of Abraham withal thy
saints: whereto hasten me, O dear loving father, even for Jesus Christ his
sake our savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all power, glory,
and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said in affliction.
O Thou only wise God, and most loving and merciful father, I thy unworthy
servant do humbly beseech thee to look down from heaven, and behold the
wounded heart of him whom thou have stricken and visited, according to the
good pleasure of thy will, and because man in his own nature is nothing but
blindness and folly before thee, and therefore cannot poss^bly conceive
rightly of the things that are above, it may therefore please thee according
to thy wonted mercy toward me, to renew and refresh thy spirit in thy servant,
that the same instructing my heart in true wisdom, and fear of thee, whereby
I may willingly and obediently study thy commandments, and exrecise my self
in thy Statutes, I may come to the understanding of mine own evils, and feel
the cause of thy scourge, that so my wound being laid open to mine eyes, I may
defer no time to seek the salve to heal it: My good God hear the voice of
thy servant that cries unto thee, consider my complaints, and weigh mine
inward woe conceived through hate of mine own infirmities, for I fly from my
self as from an unwalled castle, and I fear all my footings as though I
walked on thorns. O Lord therefore deal not with me in thy displeasure,
neither let my sins separate thy favor from me, but quicken me in my
afflictions, and make me wax wiser by thy punishments, give me such a feeling
of my infirmities, and so perfect a perseverance of my great negligences in
serving of thee, as that I may wholly dispose my self to a contrary order, and
thereunto so join the increase of thy grace and strengthening spirit, as I may
be able thereby to perform my race in that good way, which thy goodness has
moved me to. And that I may not be a vain beholder of thy works, a
momentaneous ^iewer of thy graces, but diligently noting the effectual working
of thy wisdom, and making due observations of thy profitable exercises in thy
children, I may lock them in the closet of my heart, and make store of them
for mine own uses in the time of my trial: in which times also, O merciful
father be near unto me with thy joyful countenance, and open my eyes of faith
to behold thy love, so that I be not too much shaken by the enemies assaults,
but may be furnished from thee, both with ability, constancy, and patience,
to give him both his daily and final repulse and overthrow, which that I may
do to the greater credit of thy Church, and increase of thy kingdom: make, O
sweet Lord (now and the rather for that I have had trial of my enemy his
sleights already) me thy servant to arise out of all the fathers of sloth, and
never to trust hereafter to the the treachery of the enemy, but to stand warily
upon my guard, and never to descend from the watch tower of my health, but
there night and day to use the counsel of thy spirit, and to exercise my self
in the spiritual weapons of my salvation, that when I have spent my youthful
days in the vigilant watch of my charge, as thy mercy and loving kindness shall
enable me, when thy son our General shall come to take account, I may be
endued with the days of rest, which he has purchased for me with the price of
his most precious blood, and receive at his hands the privileged rod of
liberty for ever. The love of our good God that created us, the grace of our
Lord Jesus who has redeemed us, and the assistant fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, who has sanctified us, govern and continue with us even all thy Israel
for ever.

Before we receive the Lords supper, it shall be profitable thus to meditate.
ALl the righteousness that may rise unto man, or can be in us, we have it
neither from the East, nor from the West, but from the body of Christ, neither
is therein the world any other sanctification, so that all we that be here this
day, and all people else of the world, except we know perfect manhood, and our
own nature to be really united to the person of the son of God, who has
sanctified himse fe for us, there is no sanctification for us under heaven.
Even as our hands and arms and other members are not nourished but only by
the meat received by the head, so our spiritual meat of righteousness and
life is not given us but from our head Jesus Christ. And as the veins are
means by which nourishment is conueighed to every part, so faith is the means
by which we retain from Christ all that is healthful unto us. And as by
joints and sinews our members are really knit and made a body unto the head,
so really, truly, and indeed, by one spirit we be knit unto Christ, as
perfectly and substantially made one with him, as our members are one with our
head.

A prayer before the receiving of the Lords supper.
O Almighty God and my most merciful father, in wonderful mercy (I
acknowledge) it has pleased thee to purge me unworthy wretch by the bloody
passion of thy son from all my sins, to have adopted me thy child, and
g^uen me the earnest of my salvation, touching my heart with an infallible
feeling of thy mercies, and settled confidence in thy promises: in the joyful
commemoration of which thy unspeakable blessings, my soul is now thirstingly
entered into thine house, to take the wholesome cup of salvation, and to call
upon thy holy name, give me now therefore, O Lord, a wise and understanding
heart, that I may conceive rightly of thy sacred mysteries, discern them
secretly, and receive them effectually, to the perfect consummation and
finishing of that happy building which thy worthy goodness ha^h begun in me, yea
until I become to the measure of the age and fullness of my Lo^d and Savior
Jesus Christ, unto whom, with thee, O father, and the Holy Ghost, be all power
and do^inion for ever, Amen.

(...) of my health in this life. (O sweet Lord) I take no care, so that thy
good pleasure be therein fulfilled, for if thou will I live and recover of this
my bodily infirmity, I have just cause to be thankful unto thee therefore:
and if thy wisdom has now determined to finish in me these days of sin, I
have double cause to pour forth the tears of a melting heart for joy, not
because I would leave these days of pain and sorrow (which my sin ten
thousand times double deserves) but that I would cease to displease so dear a
Lord, and loving a father, and that being transported into that heavenly life
of thy immortal children, I may praise and serve thee in that sweet society
of Angels, where the burden of this flesh shall find no place to encumber me
for ever. Thither therefore, O Father, if thy wisdom have so determined,
speedily conduct me: in the mean time make, that this my bodily affliction may
conduce to thy glory on earth, and my salvation in heaven, by the conduct of
thy holy spirit, through Jesus Christ my only advocate and mediator, Amen.

Godly petitions to be used of every Christian.
O My God, accept thy most unworthy servant here humbly falling down before
thee, I acknowledge thy great mercies, and (in sundry sort) thy extended
goodness toward me, yet in fear of mine own frailety, I eftsoons present
my self before thy majesty, to look favorably on me always, and to open
mine eyes more clearly to see thy majesty, for the little taste that thou have
given me, has persuaded me already that thou art sweet, yea and the more that
I discern thy sweetness, the more I see also my uncleanness: the knowledge
of thee therefore (I confess) is the leader to salvation, for the
consideration of thy greatness, makes me despise my baseness, and thy
purity my filthiness, and thy wonderful goodness my monstrous
unworthiness. Forgive me then, O Lord, my sins, and let them not hold back
thy bounteous hand, now begun to be opened toward me, (I say begun, my
Lord, because my self has but now begun to see it:) give me a wise
understanding heart, and send me knowledge from above: drive from my mind the
mistes of fleshly darkness, and make me capable of thy heavenly riches, fill
my mouth with good things, for I will open it to receive of thy blessings. Let
me not die, but live and declare the praises of my Lord. Why have thou made me,
but to glorify thee? Why have thou enlightened me, but to love thee? yea, why
have thou redeemed me, but to save me? And for what cause have thou sanctified
my heart but to make me fit for those good things that thou purposest to bestow
upon me? O sweet Father, thy love is not to be expressed: Now therefore go
forward, and cease not with thy poor servant, perform that good building
which thy spirit has begun in me, thou have made me thirst for thy
righteousness, replenish now therefore my heart with gladness, make my flesh
to vanish, and the new Adam to rise up in strength, tha^ I may be discreet in
my ways, and stand in the continual search of thy judgments. And when thy
mercy thus ha h enlarged me, as a full cloud, so shall I declare thy
kindness, and as the savor of Myrrh, so shall my lips send up thy praises.
Blessed be the Lord who ha^h hidden these things from the wise of the world,
and revealed the way of righteousness unto the simple, Lord I thy handmaid or
son of thy handmaid will attend upon thy will, and repose myself under the
shadow of thy wings both day and night. Thou art my wisdom, my power, my
beauty, my strength, my riches, my glory, my king, my God, and my salvation.
The grace of God the Father, the peace of Christ Jesus our savior, through the
comfortable fellowship of the holy Spirit, be with me, preserve and keep me
this day, this night, and evermore, Amen.

A godly prayer to be said at all times.
O Eternal God and most mighty King of majesty how can I hide my self from
thy presence, or with what cloak or pretense might I cover my shame from the
piercing fight of thine eye, since I have nothing, O Lord, but a guilty
conscience, intollerably oppressed with the heavy but then of sin, by which
I am almost driven to the door of despair, if thy mighty hand stay me not, I
fall, and if thy wisdom provide not for me, I am always in danger. The
sorrows of my heart are enlarged, for my days consume in sin, and the grave
gapeth to receive me, before I gain the gift of love: Unrighteousness
reigns as a king in this my corruptible body, and concupiscence deceives my
sight till I be entraped: verily when I come to fight, I wonder that thou
did not destroy me, saying, O Lord, who is able to number his sins, or
what soul is righteous in thy sight? shall man strive with God? who can say I
will be saved, fith thou art just? Why did not thou cut my thread whilst I
provoked thee? why did not thou send me to the inheritance of the wicked,
but thus thou use to comfort thy children in their great necessity, and my
soul had perished but for this relief long ago, therefore cry I unto thee
from the depth of my heart: take me not away, O God, in my sins, neither let
me reap the portion of the wicked: thou have showed me the days of comfort,
and often delivered my soul from the Lion. And because thou in thy great
mercy have let me see this goodness, and also made me to rejoice therein,
increasing light after a darkness, and doubling joy to my pain I will never
cease O dear father to call upon thee in my afflictions, and to look for the
good hour in my danger, increase my faith, and settle me in the knowledge of
thy will: Plenteously bless me with thy grace, and let thy spirit be my
protector: for misery O Lord, is threatened unto thy children, and ruin to
the faith of the younglings, no place is safe from the rage of thy adversaries,
but thou art the God of might, and have power to preserve our peace. Oh if I
might ask the death of this old Adam, so that all concupiscence might vanish
as a smoke, then sure (say I) I would wholly be exercised in the law of my
God, and at all times would I sing praises unto his name, but I will not
presume about thy servant Paul, whom thy wisdom thus answered, My grace is
sufficient for thee: thus will I beseech thee while I live, that this balm of
thy grace may always be poured fresh into my wounds, that even in my
infirmities I may ever gain a double rejoicing, and that the most subtle
assaults of the adversary may always fall out to be his soulest fail, and my
weakness my wisdom by the renewing of thy grace and enlightening my spirit
with the sweet balm of thy lou^ng countenance, through thy most tender mercy
in the purchase of thy beloved son our dear Savior Christ Jesus, unto whom
with thee and the holy spirit be all power and dominion for evermore, Amen.

A prayer for women with child.
O Eternal God, and most merciful father, who notwithstanding my manifold and
grievous offenses have of thy gracious goodness in marriage made me fruitful,
which I take as thy great blessings and benefits bestowed upon me, beseeching
thee now most humbly to help me thy poor handmaiden in these grievous pains
of travail and childbirth. Thou have willed us to call upon thee in all our
needs and necessities, and have promised in thy great mercies never to fail
them that call upon thee: help me now, wretched sinner, in these intolerable
pains, that I may overcome them with patience, and evermore praise thy
majesty. Comfort me with thy holy spirit, that I sink not under this heavy
burden. And as graciously thou have blessed me hitherto from time to time in
giving me children, so mercifully sanctify them to thy use, and increase of
thy congregation. And as hereby I feel thy heavy judgments upon me for
sin, in feeling those grievous pains, and am put in mind of the old
disobedience of our parents Adam and Eve, (the very cause of these punishments)
lighting justly upon me, being a branch of that poisoned stock. So O dear
father, let me feel again thy merry, who through thy beloved Son have
wrought my deliverance from the punishment of that disobedience to wit, from
sin death and damnation, so that now my transgressions are removed from me,
the damnable sin of my filthy concupiscence by nature is turned into a
sanctified blessing, and we both made heirs of everlasting glory, help me
therefore, O God of comfort, and give me safe deliverance, that I may dedicate
that which thou have given me wholly to thy service. I know Lord that as many
as thou have taken to thy self, to them thou have given this honor, that they
be made thy children and believers of thy name, which are not begotten of
blood, nor of the lust of the flesh, nor of the desire of man, but of thy
self. whom thou fashionest according to thy will. Thou therefore which have
promised not only to be my God, but the God of my seed, seal this assurance
of thy election in this feuit of my womb, to the glory of thy name, mine own
comfort and the benefit of thy church. Grant these things, O father for Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory,
Amen.

A prayer made for the Church and all the estates thereof. I. F.
LOrd Jesus Christ son of the l^uing God, who was crucified for our sins, and
did rise again for our justification, and ascending up to heaven, raignest now
at the right hand of thy father, with full power and authority ruling and
disposing all things according to their own gracious and glorious purpose, we
sinful creatures, and yet servants and members of thy church, do prostrate
our selves, and our prayers before thy imperial majesty, having no other
patron nor advocate to speed our suits, or to resort unto, but thee alone,
beseeching thy goodness to be good to thy poor church militant here in this
wretched earth, sometimes a rich church, a large church, an universal church,
spread far and wide through the whole compass of the earth, now driven into
a narrow corner of the world, and has much need of thy gracious help. First
the Turk with his sword, what land, nations and countries, what emp^^es,
kingdoms and provinces, with cities innumerable, has be won, not from us,
but from thee: where thy name was wont to be inuocated, the word preached, thy
sacraments administered: there now reigns barbarous Mahomet, with his filthy
Alcoran. The flourishing churches in Asia, the learned churches of Grecia, the
manifold churches in Africa, which were wont to serve thee, now are gone from
thee. The seven churches of Asia, with their candlestickes (whom thou did
so well forewarne) are now removed. All the churches where thy diligent
Apostle Saint Paul, thy Apostle Peter, and John and other Apostles so
laboriously traveled, preaching and writing to plant thy Gospel, are now gone
from the gospel. In the kingdom of Oyria, Palestina, Arabia, Persia, in all
Armenia, and the Empire of Capadocia, through the whole compass of Asia, with
Egypt and Africa also unless amongst the far Ethiopians some old steps of
Christianity peradventure yet do remain) either else all Asia, and Africa
thy church has not one foot of free land, but all is turned either to
infidelity or to captivity, whatsoever pertains to thee. And if Asia and
Africa only decayed, the decay were great, but yet the defection were not so
universal. Now in Europe a great part also is shrunk from thy Church. All
Th^acia with the Empire of Constantinople, al Grecia, Epirus, Illyricum and now
of late all the kingdoms almost of Hungaria, with much of Austria, with
lamentable slaughter of Christian blood, is wasted and all become Turks.

Only a little angle of the West pa^tes yet remains in some profession of thy
name. But there alack comes another mischief as great or greater than the
other. For the Turk with his sword is not so cruel, but the Bishop of Rome on
the other side is more fiecce and bitter against us, st^r^i^g up his Bishops to
burn us, his confederates to conspireour destruction, setting kings against
their subjects, and subjects disloyally to rebel against their Princes, and
all for thy name. Such dissension and host lity Satan has set amongst us,
that Turks be not more enemies to Christians, than Christians to Christians
and Papists to protestants: yea protestants with protestants do not agree, but
fall out for trifles. So that the poor little flock of thy church, distressed
on every side, has neither rest without nor peace within, no place almost in
the world where to abide, but many cry now from the earth, even as thine own
reverence cried once from the cross: My God, why have thou forsaken me?

Amongst us Englishmen here in England, after so great storms of persecution,
and cruel murder of so many Martyrs, it has pleased thy grace to give us
these Ascion days, which yet we enjoy, and beseech thy merciful goodness
st^il they may continue. But here also alack what should we say? So many
enemies we have that envy at this rest and tranquillity, and do what they can
to disturb it. They which be friends, and lovers of the bishop of Rome,
although they eat the fat of the land, and have the best preferments and
offices, and live most at ease and all nothing: yet are they not therewith
content. They grudge, they mutter and murmr, they conspire and take on
against us. It fretteth them that we live by them or with them, and cannot
abide that we should draw the bare breathing of the air, when they have all
the most liberty of the land. And albeit thy singular goodness has given
them a King, so calm, so patient, so merciful, more like a natural father
than a Prince to govern over them, such as neither they nor their ancestors
ever read of in the stories of this land before: yet all this will not calm
them, their unquiet spirit is not yet content, they repine and rebel, and
needs would have with the frogs of Esope a Cicema, an Italian stranger, the
Bishop of Rome, to play Rex over them, and care not if all the world were set
on fire, so they with their Italian Lord might reign alone. So fond are we
Englishmen of strange and foreign things: so vnaturall to our selves: so
greedy of newfangled novelties, never contented with any state long to
continue, be it never so good: and furthermore so cruel one to another, that
we think our life unquiet, unless it be seasoned with the blood of other. For
that is their hope, that is their golden day, their day of Iubiley which they
thirst for so much not to have the Lord to come in the clouds, but to have our
blood and to spill our lives.

That, that is it which they would have, and long since would have had their
wills upon us, had not thy gracious pity and mercy raised up to us this our
merciful King, thy servant James, somewhat to stay their fury. For whom as me
most condignly give thee most hearty thanks, so likewise we beseech thy
heavenly Majesty, that as thou have given him unto us, and have from many
dangers preserved him to the comfort of thy servants: so now in his royal
estate he may continually be preserved not only from their hands but from all
malignant devises, wrought attempted, or conceived of the enemies, both ghostly
and bodily against him. In this his government be his governor we beseech
thee: So shall his Majesty well govern us, if first he be governed by thee.
Multiply his reign with many days, and his years with much felicity, with
abundance of peace, and life ghostly: that he with his Braunthes may flourish
in this land, until the consummation of the world.

And because no government can long stand without good counsel, neither can
any counsel be good, except it be prospered by thee, bless therefore, we
beseech thee, both his majesty, and his honorable counsel, that both they
rightly may understand what is to be done, and he accordingly may accomplish
that they do counsel, to thy glory and furtherance of thy Gospel, and
public wealth of this realm.

In general, give to all the people and the whole state of this Realm such
brotherly unity in knowledge of thy truth, and such obedience to their
superiors, as they neither provoke the scourge of God against them, nor the
Princessword to be drawn against his will out of the scabard of long
sufferance, where it has been long hid, especially give thy gospel long
continuance amongst us. And if our sins have deserved the contrary, grant
we beseech thee with an earnest repentance of that which is past, to join a
hearty purpose of amendment to come.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Ed. All, for Ed. White. 1610.


