A SVMMONS TO IVDGEMENT.

OR A SERMON APPOINTED FOR THE CROSS, BUT DELIVEred upon occasion in the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul London: the 6. day of June, 1613. being the first
Sunday of Midsommer Term.

By THOMAS BAVGHE, student of Christ-Church in Oxford.

HEB: 10.37. For yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry.

LONDON, Printed by G. ELD, for WILLIAM JONES, and are to be sold at his shop
near Holborne Conduit, at the Sign of the ^unne. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN LORD BISHOP OF LONDON, continuance
of all grace, and peace by JESUS CHRIST.
Right Reverend Father in God,
YOU that from the first have been a Father to my studies, and are now, by
Gods most gracious blessing to our Church, set as a Father over it, suffer me
with fearful boldness, and humble ambition, to offer up to your Lordship, not
any Lordly, but this mean and lowly present. For my University, my College,
my place, my person, my profession, my living, and all, enjoin, and enforce me
to vow, and consecrate to your Lordship, if it were possible, more then my all.
And on what fairer Object can the eyes of Oxford, and the hearts of Christ
Church be set, then upon you, who are one of the great blessings of Oxford, and
the very joy of Christ Church hearts. True it is, that being conscious of my
own private meannesse, and ever most fearful and timorous to appear in
public, I had purposed to have laid aside this Sermon, as I my self lie, in
oblivion and obscurity. But since it has been, once, and again desired,
prodire in lucem, to see the light; and that by some high and honorable
personages, such as are eminent both in place and power, it was not in my power
to conceal and keep in that, which their grave wisdoms thought fit to go
abroad. And I might have been condemned of rudenes, should I have denied the
world that, which, unworthy though it be, yet men of such worth judged might
profit the world. And now right Reverend Father I shall ever esteem it my
greatest happiness, if this too soon and untimely borne infant, which cries to
you for succor, may be accepted and favored of you. For weak though it be in
it self, yet being armed with your powerful name, it will thence gather and
collect strength. I must confess, and the world will find, it is an Embrio,
an imperfect and formeless issue, for I had not time, Lambere foetum, so much
as to cloth and coat this though my first borne child: and therefore the more
bare and naked that it is, so much the more it needs to be covered under the
wing of your gracious favor.

It was S. Paul's speech, Quis idoneus? who is fit for these things? and I may
say, Qui idoneus? how can I fit this living thing the Press, that am pressed,
and almost oppressed with a world of labor and care. And yet I esteem all my
labor but ease; and my yoke, were it heavier then it is, seems but light,
since I live under your Lordship, who have ever been, and (to your immortal
honor) continue still, vir laborum, a holy and heavenly laborer in the Lords
vineyard. Again it cheares up my spirits, and glads my heart, that I serve and
sit at the feet of so godly a Gamaliel, as the learned, religious, and most
studious and painful Doctor, the reverend Doctor Spencer; whose name as it is
famous through the Church, so shall it ever be most dear and precious unto me.
But I fear, in publica commoda pecco, Qui longo sermon moror tua tempora;
therefore to conclude all, I pray from the ground of my heart, that your
Lordship may long and long live happy in our Church, and that our Church may
still be happy in you, and that you, and yours, and all your holy endeauours,
may ever be blessed from above, by Jesus Christ the sole head of the Church.

Your Lordships de^^^^ed, and ever to be commanded in all Christian obser^^^^e,
THO: BAVGHE.

Quid faciam cum surrexerit ad iudicandum Deus? Et cum quaesierit quid
respondebo illi?
When God shall come unto judgment, what shall I do? when he shall ask, what
shall I answer him? Job. 31.14.
THE Apostle Saint Paul was rapt up on a sudden into Heaven. 2. Cor. 12. and
I (that am not worthy to name a Saint, or to be called an Apostle,) am rapt up
on a sudden unto this place, which I ever reputed an earthly heaven; and that
the rather, since the most splendent and glorious Suns of our kingdom shine
here, and the most gracious Stars of our Land, nay of the world, are placed
in this Orb. 2. Cor. 12.
And though Saint Paul in his vision, knew not whether he were in, or without
his body, yet I that come now with my vision unto you, know that I am in my
body, but in a weak, a bruised, a broken body, yet well is it with me, if
like, not a Lamp, but a small candle, I consume my self to enlighten others.
For we read, that, virtus Dei infirmitate perficitur, the power of God is most
strongly seen in a weak man; and my hope and confidence is, that the Spirit
of the Lord, which quickens all bodies, and all spirits, will cheer up a
decaying body, and animate my fainting Spirit.

When the Disciples were sent to speak before Judges, Christ bids them take no
care, for, dabitur illa in hora, a word of wisdom shall be given them in that
hour: and being I am to speak before you (grave and reverend Judges,) my
prayer is, vt detur hac in hora, that a door of utterance may be opened, and a
tongue of the learned may be given me for this hour. And since I come hastily
before you, what fitter text, what apter message can I bring, then a foresight
of the judgment, which is ready to hasten, nay fall upon us all. Now that your
grave wisdoms are assembled, to exercise the judgments of this Land, what
better present, or president, could I have for you, then a touch and strain of
that judgment, which must come upon all lands; that so, iudicium iudicia, the
judgment of God might direct the judgments of men; Et iudex iudices, and your
righteous judge might advise you to judge righteously.

When I was first sent to this second Niniue, this great City, I came, not
like Jonas with forty days, and destruction; but I came like the Dove, cum
oliua pacis,, Genesis
with a branch of Peace and Olive in my mouth; yet now my Master Christ, that
came with a whip into the Temple, has sent me, cum virga iudicii, with a rod
of judgment in my hand. When Saint Paul, spoke of judgment there was a fere
persuasit, one almost persuaded to be a Christian, and would to God this my
denouncing of judgment, might persuade, not one, but all, not partly but
fully, to be, not nominall, but real Christians; for God ponders, vias and
semitas, Prou.
the high, broad, and beaten ways of man, as also there by-waies and smallest
paths: and in all our ways, nullum ignorant factum qui omnia fecit, he sees,
and spies out the least fault, who made every thing without fault. That Son
of God who is, principium sine principio, the beginning without beginning, will
judge all that has been done from the beginning: He that is a, and o, the
beginning and the end, Revel.
will judge all that have lived from the beginning of the world unto the end.

The day of this life is the day of mortal man, but the day of judgment is the
day of the living God: not but that all days are his; but such is his mercy,
as that, though he show mercy every day, yet he has reserved but one day for
his judgment; but that is a day of blacknes, and of wrath; insomuch that the
Prophet Malachy cries out, Malac.
Ecce dies domini, behold this is, with a witness, the Lords day; it burns like
a furnace, and all the wicked are but as stubble. The power of the Lord had her
day in the Creation of the World, the mercy of God had her day in the
Redemption of Man that little world: and the justice of God must have her day,
in the just punishment, of the unjust and wicked of this world: For, fulminabit
e coelo, the Lord will thunder from heaven, and the highest will give his
voice. And if the thunder and rattling of a cloud be so terrible, what terror
shall there be, when he shall thunder, that sits above the clouds? the thunder
does but, eradicare turres, demolish towers, and root up trees, but when God
shall thunder out his judgment, extirpabit homines, he will crush and cast
down King, Prince, and people, that have not made him their fortress and
their tower: The thunder does but, quatere nebulas, make clouds fly like birds
up and down the air, but when GOD shall thunder out his judgment, quatiet
conscientias, he will appale and astonish the heart and conscience: yet shall
there be then great difference betwixt a good and a guilty conscience; for a
good conscience shall be moved, sed vt folium, but as a leaf, with a little
wind and breath of Gods displeasure; but the guiltie-one shall be removed, vt
fundament^ terrae, as the foundations of the earth are shaken, with the full
rigor of Gods wrath. For then as Saint Hierome has it, terra tremet, mare
mugiet, the earth shall quake, the sea roar, the air ring, the world burn,
and all this All, become as a firebrand and burning coal.

And if, tota terra, the whole pillars of the earth must move, qui glebam
terrae, how then should this move man, who is but a clod of earth? if that,
virtutes coeli, the powers of heaven must tremble, what will befall those
minds, of mud and earth, that have never minded heaven? if the Angels of God
shall stand then at a gaze, how aghast will the wicked ones be, whose portion
is with the Devil and his Angels? Si soluantur coeli, if the Heavens must
cleave, and the elements be rent a sunder, quid corda terrena; how will earthly
hearts fail and break, in this day of sorrow, and of wonder? if the righteous
shall scarce be saved, vbi impius, where will the wicked, and the sinner
appear? if just Job, but thinking of judgment; come with his, Quid faciet,
what shall he do; alas then! Quid fiet, what shall be done to the unjust,
whose bodies must boil, and whose souls must fry for it, when GOD shall come
unto judgment?

When God shall come unto judgment what shall I do? This text of judgment
diuides it self, as the world shall be divided in the day of judgment, in
deum and hominem, into the Majesty of God the judge, and the misery of man
that cannot stand out in the judgment: So that here may be observed, first, a
judge, secondly, people to be adjudged, and thirdly, a judgment: In the Judge
and judgment, there be these heads; first the time when; secondly, the person
who; thirdly the manner how; non mittet, sea veniet, he will not send but come;
fourthly, the end wherefore, to judge; fifthly, the order by which, quaeret, he
will sift and scan, ask, and visit: he will make a privy search, a strict
inquisition into the works and words, and thoughts of men. In those that must
be judged there is a double misery: first they shall not know, Quid facere, what
to do, for, quid faciant contra factorem? How shall they make their part good
against their Maker? and secondly they shall not know, Quid respondere, what to
say; for, Quae verba valiant aduersus verbum, what word can they have against
him that has the words of eternal life? against him that is the word and the
life? against him that is the life of the word, and the word of life?

Again, for judgment there is first a time; for, factor temporis and qui
natus tempore, He that created time, and that was borne for us in the fulness of
time, will judge us, for our not used, or abused time: and then, o quae
destruction! what ruin will come, and how much would we give, to redeem a
little time?

Secondly, there is a person, God, and in him, o quae perfectio, O what
perfection! for the Cherubins cover themselves from his face, and Libanus
shakes at his voice!

Thirdly, he shall not send his Deputy, his Legate, Ambassador, Agent or
Factor, but he shall come in his own person; and there, o quae consolatio! O
what comfort will there be, when he shall come for us, that went up to send the
comforter unto us!

Fourthly, he shall come, non indicare, not to finger or point out our sin,
sed iudicare, but to judge us, for every, even the least sin; and here oquae
desolatio! O what desolation will he work, on the wicked workers of the earth!

Briefly, God, and not an Angel, or mere man; will come, and not send; to
judge, and not save; and in judgment, quaeret non teget, he will reveal, not
conceal sins; and then, Quid facient? when sinners are undone, what can they
do? Quid respondebunt? when the mouth of iniquity and wickedness shall be
stopped, what can the wicked say?

But first of the time of judgment. Some like forward Merchants, and bold
adventurers, have presumed to define and determine the term and precise time
of judgment: of which some prefixe the year, saying it shall be in the
immediate end of the six thousand year; and there ground is this, because a
thousand years are with the Lord as one day; whence they infer, that as God
made the world in six days, so he will destroy it in six thousand years.
Others out of the Prophet Malachy, Ecce dies domini; Malac.
Behold the day of the Lord, auerr that God will come to Judgment in the day.
Others out of the Apostle, Veniet quasi fur nocte, S. Matthew.
He will come like a Thief in the night; affirm that the Judgment shall be
in the night; S. August.
And Saint Augustine consents thus far to these, that it shall be, nocte
rerum, non temporum, in a night and darkness of knowing, and good living, not of
seeing: Some go further and design the very point and moment of the night, for
out of that of Saint Matthew, factus est clamor media nocte, S. Mat.
there was a cry in the midst of the night, they collect, that God will judge
at midnight; and Cassiodore has the same building, though on another ground,
for on that, percussit primogenita, God struck the first borne of Egypt at
midnight, he concludes, that the judgment shall be in the middle of night.

There be yet some more fancifull and curious then these, conceiting that the
judgment shall be in the fourth watch of the night, because it must dissolve
the four elements, and what was compacted or composed of the four Elements.
Others imagine that it shall be in the third watch, for that it is the work
not of the first, or second person alone, but the joint work of the blessed
Trinity. Some defer it to the second watch of the night, for that the Son
of God, the second person in heaven, is appointed to be the judge of all the
earth: and lastly some tie it to the first watch of the night, because it is
said, that Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep.

Now to these vain curiosities, and curious vanities, what have we to oppose;
namely first that of the scripture, Non nobis datum, S. John.
it is not given unto us to know the times and seasons, which God has reserved
in his own power: Secondly, of that day and hour knows no Man, no nor the
Angels, no nor the Son, S. Augustine
but the father only. Thirdly, as St. Augustine has it, Qui ante tempora, he
that was before al time, and gave beginning to time, will come to judge us in
due time; Revel.
when that of the Revelation shall be true, Tempas not erit amplius, there
shall be no longer time.

And here me thinks I may fitly gather one question out of S. Augustine, S.
August.
for where he says tam occultas dies iudieii, vt lateat ipsum tudicem, the day
of judgment is so secret and close, that it is unknown even to the judge, it
may seem perhaps to some, not fully Orthodoxe and good; for what, has the
father committed iudicium filio, all judgment to the Son, and yet retained,
diem iudicii, the day of judgment unto himself? I will not, either dispute or
define this point, only I will point out, what others say. S. August.
Some affirm that the Son knows not the day of judgment, qua homo sed qua
Deus, Bellar.
as he is man, but as he is God: Others that he knew it as man, but not to
reveal it unto men: others that he knew it not as a Savior, qui tum erat,
which he only was while he was in the world; S. August.
but as a judge, qui nondum erat, which he is not till he shall come to judge
the world: Sed satis temporis in tempore, I have spent time enough in bolting
out the judgment time, I will therefore conclude this point with some few
moralls. S. Greg.
And first that of S. Gregory, Latet dies vltimus, vt omnes obseruentur dies,
The last day is not specified to man, that man might judge every day his last:
Secondly, that of S. Augustine, S. August.
latet iudicium, sed universal, non tuum; quia mors tua, iudicium tuum: The
day of the general judgment thou can not find, but thy particular judgment
will find thee in the day of thy death. Thirdly that of the same S. Augustine,
S August.
Latet iudicium, tamen piorum fidem non latet, iustum esse vt lateret, The day
of judgment is obscure, yet they that are enlightened by faith, see reason why
it should not see the light. Lastly that of Saint Bernard, S. Bernard.
Incertus dies quo veniet, vt sic viueres quasi hodie veniret, the day of
Christ's coming is uncertain, because it might learn thee so to live, as if
he would certainly come this present day: and then blessed is he, that shall
hear; Hodie mecum eris in paradiso, S. Luke.
this day shall thou be with me in Paradise; so I come from the time when, to
the person who; when God.

2 God might have sent forth his summons; have commanded both by earthly and
heavenly warrants; he might have made both Angels, and Saints, and the souls
of just men, as his apparitors, and officials to convent us to judgment; but
to show his Majesty, and release his out of misery, apparebit ipse, God
himself will appear in judgment: And if GOD come to be our judge, then
doubtless there will be, rectum iudicium, a right and true judgment; Psalm.
for God is truth, and he cannot fail; either ignorantia iuris, as not knowing
the law, for he gave the law, and will judge, as S. John intimates, S. John.
acording to Moses, and the law; nor yet ignorantia facti, as not seeing the
fact, for he knows our thoughts long before, and therefore much more are our
facts and deeds before him.

Again, if it be God that will judge the earth, then sure, aequum iudicium,
his judgment will be righteous and good; for, nec errat ipse, nec sustinet
errantem, he cannot sin himself, neither yet endure a wilful sinner; and
we cannot corrupt him with presents and goods, for, bonorum non indiget, as the
Psalmist Psalm.
has it, he has no need of our goods: we cannot win him with personal
favor, for God is no accepter of persons: and lastly we cannot move him to
malice or hate, for, nihil odit eorum quae fecit, the maker of all, hates
nothing that he did make.

And here I must crave leave to question, and resolve some doubts, First, multi
dicuntur Dii, since many be called Gods, in holy Writ, it may be questioned,
which of those gods shall be our judge: For the Angels they are called gods,
GOD stood in the assembly of gods, says the Psalm; Psalm.
and yet the Angels shall not judge us, since Saint Paul tells us, that we
shall judge the Angels: Secondly, the devils are called gods, Psalm.
but the gods of the Gentiles, Dii gentium Daemonia, the gods of the Gentiles
are devils; neither yet shall these be our judges, for the Prince of this
world (that is the Devil) is judged already: Psalm.
Thirdly, the just and righteous men are called gods, I have said you are gods:
and yet these shall not judge us, for, vix stabit iustus in iudicio, the just
shall scarce stand out, nay up, in judgment. Fourthly, Kings are called gods,
the gods of the earth are lifted up; and yet though these be Kings in this
world, they shall not be Judges in another: but, as it is in the book of
Wisdom, Wisdom.
Potentes potenter, mighty Kings shall be mightily punished, if they sin
against the Almighty. Fifthly, Priests are called gods, offerte Dii, let the
Priests offer, and yet these shall not judge us; for both Priest and people,
congregetur coram Deo, must stand before the tribunal of God. Sixthly,
Magistrates are called gods, Diis ne detrahas, speak not evil of the
Magistrates, and yet nor they shall be our judges, for they are but Gods
stewards, under God, and must render, rationem villicationis, an exact account
of their Stewardships unto God. Lastly, Judges they are called gods, the cause
was brought, ad Deos, unto the Judges, and yet though these execute the
judgments of God upon earth, God himself shall come from heaven to judge
them. For, habent vel supremi iudices superiorem iudicem, the Lord chief
Justices of this world, have there Lord above, that shall do them justice: So
then we must now, excluding al these, conclude all, Iudex vniuersalis, deus
vniuersi, that he that made all, will judge all. He that is God will judge
the gods: he that is the Angel of the great counsel, will judge the Angels:
he that is a King, will judge the Kings: he that is a Priest, will judge the
Priests: Iudex iudices, homo homines, Christus omnes iudicabit; He is Judge,
that will censure and sentence Judges: he that is man, will convent and
convict man; and yet there shall be but one judge of all men, even JESUS
CHRIST God and Man.

Again, since God shall judge, and there be, though but one God, yet three
persons, it may be questioned, which of the three persons shall be our Judge?
And this the Psalmist seems to answer, Psalm.
when he says, Deus vester veniet, He shall be your Judge that is most
yours; Now the second person is most ours; for he was borne to us, he lived
with us; he died for us; and what he either did or suffered, it was all for
the good of us.

But why does the second person judge and not the first? S. John
Why the Son and not the Father? First, because Saint John tells us, the
Father has given all judgment to the Son; and to the Son, S. Bern.
as Saint Bernard expounds it, non qua filius suus, sed hominis filius, not as
he is the Son of God begotten before the world, but as he is the Son of the
blessed Virgin, borne in the world; Secondly, the Son judges, and not the
Father, because it best fitteth a King to judge his own Subjects; and we are
now the immediate subjects of the Son: Indeed in our Creation, we were
absolutely the subjects of God; but by rebelling against God, we became the
slaves and vassals of Satan, and not the Subjects of our God; yet now being
bought out of the subjection of Satan, by the precious blood of the Son of
God, we become the subjects of the Son: Not that this is to be understood,
exclusive, as excluding from the work of our Redemption, the Father, or the
Holy Ghost: Sed appretiatiue, as the Schoolmen speak, but because the price
of our Redemption, was paid by the Son, and not the person of the Father, or
holy Ghost; and in that the Son did, sustinere poenas, undergo our
punishment, and procurare praemia, and purchase our reward, he must, dispensare
praemia and poenas, both dispose of our punishment and reward.

Yet once more, since in the Son there is a double form, a Divine, an humane
nature, it may be questioned, in what form, and nature he shall judge. Saint
Augustine answers, S. August.
eadem forma iudicabit nos, He shall judge us in the same form, wherein he
stood before the judge for us; he shall judge us, not as God, but as Man:
according to that of the Scripture, ye shall see, filium hominis, the Son,
not of God, but of Man, coming in the clouds. Veniet qui deus, non qua deus,
He that shall judge us is God, but he shall not judge us as he is God: not as he
is God, because, as Esaias has it, Esaias
tollatur impius, the wicked must be taken away, that he never see the glory of
God; but as man, vt homines videant, that men may see, and behold the judge of
men. The Papists ad, that not only the judge shall be visible, but out of that of
the gospel, they shall see, signum filii hominis, S. Matthew.
the sign of the Son of Man, they would euict, that the cross shall come
before him, as a verge, rod, and scepter unto judgment: but this opinion
deserves correction and a rod; for though with Saint Paul, we preach Christum
crucifixum, Christ crucifide upon earth, yet I never find, that the cross and
crucifixe of Christ, was ever taken, as Saint Paul was, up to Heaven.

Lastly, since Christ shall Judge us as he is Man, it may be questioned,
whither there shall be no difference, between the man Christ living upon
earth, and the man Christ as he shall come a Judge from Heaven. Yes
doubtless, much difference, not in substance, but in quality; for he that was
here a man, natus praesepio, borne in a stable, is there also a man, Sed
regnans coelo, but commanding in the heavens. He that was here, inter homines,
a man amongst men, is there, supra Angelos, a man above the Angels: He that
was here, corpore infirmo, in a body of frailty, is there corpore glorioso, in
a body of glory: He that was here, Salu^tor verus, a true Savior, is there,
iudex seuerus, a sharp judge: He that came here, pati pro dilectis, to suffer
for his beloved, sits there, triumphare cum electis, to triumph with his chosen
and elect: he that came here, mori ad tempus, to die for a time, is there, deus
viuens, living with God for ever; and the everliving God.

Yet (grave and Reverend Judges,) before I close up this point, I must say one
thing that concerns you, that touches your scarlet, and your judgment
seats. For where it is said, the Father has given all judgment to the Son,
then, the Anabaptists infer, S. John.
why then do other the Sons of men judge? and so learned Fathers of the Law,
would they wound, nay ded you, who are the pillars of truth, the life of the
living, and the defense of men appointed unto death: But I answer, God has
given all judgment to the Son, that is, omne futurum iudicium, all the
general, universal, and future judgment: and secondly for you, non tam vos,
quam deus per vos iudicat, it is not so much you, as God that judges in, and
by you; according to that of Deutero. Deuteronomy.
you exercise the judgments, not of man, but of God: and thirdly, Iudicat homo
hominem in opere, sed deus in cord, that though God only judge the heart, yet
man may judge, of the fact of man. And so I come to my third part, will come;
when God shall come.

In God rising (for so reads the vulgate) and coming, (for so has the
English) unto judgment, I observe two things: First, the certainty, then the
vicinitie of the judgment: It is not said, Deus venit, God does, or has come,
but, Deus veniet, God will come; and yet according to the rule of the School,
Futurum in Deo aeque certum, quam aut praesens aut praeteritum, that which is
to come in God, is as sure, as if it were either present, or past. And God will
come to judgment both for the glory of God, and of Man, and of Christ both
God and Man: First, for the glory of God; for God has promised a judgment,
and all the promises of God are yea, and Amen: The Prophets and the Apostles,
both the Law, and the Gospel bear witness of a judgment: I will contend with
thee in judgment, says God in Jeremy: Ier.
The Nations shall see my judgment, Ezekiel.
says God in Ezekiel: I will sit and judge all people, Joel.
says God in Joel. In Saint Paul we read Statutum est, Death is appointed,
and after it comes the judgment: And in Saint Peter we find a Iudicaturus
est, S. Pet.
that, as if God had put on his robes, and were set on his judgment seat, he
is now ready to judge the quick and dead: God promised a flood and it came, Et
qui verus diluu^o, cur non iudicio? he that performed in the particular, shall
he not also perform in a general judgment? In Philosophy, posito vno
contrariorum, if we grant one contrary, the other will follow: but we have
had experience of Gods mercy, which is opposite to judgment, and shall we
not also have a trial and a judgment? GOD has showed justice in Heaven, on
rebellious Angels, and will he not show justice on men, if they rebel upon
earth?

Secondly, there must be a judgment for the good of man: for here the holiest
and most heavenly men be in most heauiness: Hic optimi pessime agunt; here the
righteous man has most wrong; and therefore God will judge, and do him right.
Here Iezabel sits brauing in a window, while Jeremy lies sticking in the mudd.
Here Dives sits in his palace, S. Luke.
clothed richly, faring daintily, while Lazarus lies at his gate naked and
hungry. Here Herod will please his Herodias, though it be with the head of John
the Baptist; Nonne visitabit, shall not God visit, and come to judgment for
these things? Here the condition of the godly Christian, is much like to the
state of Christ his master, nec viuus domum, nec mortuus sepulcrum habet, they
have scarce a house wherein to live, and (such has been the Popish fury)
their bones have not had rest after their death: while they lived they found
exilium, and equuleum, banishment, and the rack: and being dead, the wicked
did, saeuire in manes, not let them rest when they were at rest: Eusebius.
Much like to the story in Eusebius, where they were not content to burn the
bodies of the Saints, but they cast there ashes upon the water, with this
obloquie, colligat Deus, Revel.
let the Lord gather them if he will have them. But O LORD, holy, and true,
how long, how long? the blood of thy Saints is shed round about this round
world, and they are cut in pieces, even as men cut and hew wood, and will thou
not yet come, to be avenged on such a people as this? Yes, says the Psalm,
Psalm.
the Lord will come, and not keep silence: and, as it is in another Psalm,
Doubtless there is a God that will judge the earth. Psalm.
And as in a balance, or a scale, that which is lightest mounteth highest, so
those that were of light, or no esteem in the world; shall then be taken up
unto the highest: Gemunt boni, though the godly, mourn here like a Dove, yet
fruentur summo bono, then they shall be comforted, by that Spirit, who appeared
in the likeness of a Dove: Though the good have, pressuram in terra, grief, and
oppression upon earth; yet they shall find, vsuram in coelo, interest and
increase of glory in the Kingdom of heaven.

Lastly, as there must be a judgment for the glory of God, and good of man:
so it must also be for the honor of Christ Jesus, God and Man. For the world
did not believe Christ to be the Messiah: the Jew held him but a mere, and
miserable man: the Gentiles derided him, as a crucified God; and therefore will
he call heaven, and earth, and come and judge his people; and he will come in
such power, and majesty, that the whole world shall confess him a Messiah;
that the Jew shall acknowledge him a God; and that both Jew and Gentile shall
fear, and grieve, to see him so highly glorified, whom they basely slew and
crucified.

Secondly, I observed the neerenes and vicinitie of the judgment: It is not
said in the Apostles Creed, veniet, Symbo. Aposto.
sea venturus est iudicare, he will come, but he is at hand, he has, as it
were, set forth, and is on his way coming to judgment. Non instat iudiciam,
sed fere extat, the day of judgment is not so much future and to come, as it
is already present and in sight. Iudex adianuam, now is the judge riding his
circuit, now has he sent forth his summons, now has he put on his robe,
now is he set upon his throne now is thy indictment reading, now is thy cause
pleading, and now, even now, the sentence of thy eternal life, or death, may
be passing: witness that of the Apostle, Nunc est iudicium, he does not say,
nunc erit, now the judgment shall be, as if it were coming, but nunc est,
now is the judgment of this world, as if this moment, this instant, and
present now, were allotted for the judgment. The world, that great man, has
the throws and panges of death now seazing on him: And as man, the little
world, when he has lived many years, draws then near unto his end, so the
world, that has lived now almost six thousand years, must needs consume and
have an end: In the time of the Apostles the Kingdom of God was at hand, and
now after so long a time as from the Apostles, is it yet far off?

When the Sun has passed the twelve signs, Malac.
we know then the year ends: Now Christ, our Sun, has passed through these
signs, and therefore the year of the world must have an end. Christ in his
birth passed through Virgo, for he was borne of a pure and blessed Virgin:
Inchino.
He passed Gemini, in his incarnation, for there was both a Divine and humane
Nature: He passed Cancer, in his descension, for he descended, and came, as
it were back, from God to man. He passed Libra in his Passion, where his
mercy, and his merits, ouer-wayed our misery and sin: And (not to be,
although I might be, curious in all) he passed Leo in his resurrection, when
he rose strong as a Lion, and overcame the grave, death, and hell, and that
hellish, roaring, and devouring Lion. Now then that Christ has passed all
these signs, it is a sign that the world, and all must pass away.

Alas then why do some, and some Christian men so live, as if there were no
judgment after this life? Nay more, as if they were Advocates, and Orators,
and Sophisters for the Devil, why do they dispute against the judgment of
our God? For say some, why should God judge man after his death, since he has
his judgment at his death? I answer, S. August.
that in death we have a particular judgment, but God will also have a
general: Secondly, S. Bern.
in death we have the judgment of the Soul, but God will judge both Body, and
Soul: Lastly, S. Hiero.
in death we have a secret doom, but God will have an open assise, a public
Sessions, and a manifest judgment: O then put not far from you the evil
day, but so live, as if you were to make, your personal appearance before your
God, this present day. For be you sure, if any hear me this day, and regard
not in his heart the judgment day, that even this Text, these words, this
Sermon of judgment, will rise up against them in the day of judgment. So I
come to my fourth observation, the end of Christ's coming, it is to judgment.

4 And here I note these things: First, the multiplicitie of judgment*
Secondly, the quality of Gods judgment: Thirdly, the prodromi and
forerunners of the judgment: Lastly, the followers and attendants on this
judgment.

There is a manifold and various judgment: Bonauen.
For, (as Bonauenture notes) their is in God* iudicium praescienti^, a
judgment for those sins that were but intended: Secondly, there is, iudicium
causae, a judgment for the cause whence they sprang, and the end whereunto they
tended: Thirdly, there is, iudicium operationis, a judgment for every evil
act committed; And lastly, iudicium approbationis, a judgment of every just
punishment inflicted. There is a judgment of retribution for the good: a
judgment of reprobation for the evil: and a judgment of discussion both for
good and evil.

There has been already a judgment of water, S. Peter.
which did wash away sinners, but not sin: and there shall be a judgment of
fire, which shall burn away both sin and sinners.

Secondly, I noted the quality of Gods judgment: and first, it is full of
Majesty: for the King of heaven shall come, cum militia caelesti, with all the
army, troop, and train of heaven: He shall send forth, as it were, his
Herald and Beedle, and call a Convocation, of Angels, and Saints, heaven and
earth, to cull, and sever, and mark out his sheep from the goats. Posuit
thronum, God is come, as it were to the Kings Bench of his justice; he has
opened a book, and another book, as it is in the Revelation, Revel.
to wit the book, scientiae diuinae, of divine knowledge and science, and a
book, humana conscientiae, of man's guilty and accusing conscience. O wretched
man, says a good Father, tanta contra te fit praeparatio, does God so prepare,
so muster up his men for thy judgment, and will thou, either not feel thy
imminent judgment, or if thou feel it, not amend thy life, that thou may
escape in that fiery trial, and fierce judgment?

If our gracious King, (whom the King of Kings set for ever as a signet upon
his right hand) should take his Peers, and Nobles, Bishops, and Judges, to
judge a rebel, or a malefactor, how would the countenance of that Traitor
fall, his tongue faulter, his body tremble, and his heart and spirit even
thawe and melt away! And yet (good God) such is our frailty, that though we be
traitors, to our judge, our Savior, and our own souls, yet we more awe and
fear, a temporal, then an eternal judgment: and are more daunted with him
that can but kill the body, and that for a time; then with him that can
destroy both body and soul, and that for ever.

Secondly, there is mercy in this judgment. For Christ will judge us, not by
the letter and rigor of the Law, but as it were in a Court of Conscience. Et
Conscientia qualis, sententia talis, and our verdict shall be given in,
according and agreeing with the Conscience we have within. Neither will our
merciful judge proceed against us without witness; nay not without a thousand
witnesses; and those no foreign, aliene, or strange witnesses, but such as are
in our own bosom; such as are more inward with us, then that soul which is
within us: For unless our conscience, which is as the soul of the soul, do
like another Cerberus bark within us, we shall escape that true Cerberus and
dog of hell.

Besides our merciful judge will not condemn us for one accuser: for except
Moses and the Law accuse us, S. John.
as Saint John has it; except Singuli errores, our particular and singular
errors, single us out, and become, singuli accusatores, each of them accusers of
us; nay more, except man himself do condemn himself, Christ who is God and
Man, will not condemn. Nay more, except Sin and Satan come with plain,
direct, and unavoidable evidence against us, it shall yet, maugre all their
malice, go well with us. And, Lord, how will that accuser of his brethren in
that day accuse us! S. August.
S. Augustine brings him in thus inditing man, Just iudex, mark, he does not
say, Bone Deus, good God, to move clemency and mercy; but just judge, to
whet and sharpen him on to rigor and severity; and the bill of his enditement
runs thus, Indeed just judge these sinners were thine per gratiam, by thy
grace to them committed, but they are become mine, per culpam, by that sin
which they committed: They were thine, per misericordiam in thy mercy; but
they are become mine through their own misery. They were thine, per passionem,
through thy cross and passion; but they are become mine, per persuasionem, by
my sly and subtle persuasion. They were thine, creatione, in the creation; but
they are become mine, destructione, since they have brought themselves to their
destruction. They have forsaken, Sacramenta tua, thy Sacraments, and have
followed blandimenta mea my allurements, and therefore just judge, since they
belong to me, let them be condemned with me. Alas good Christians, being thus
arraigned at the bar of Gods justice, by whom will you be tried? By your God?
Why he must be just: by a Jury of Angels, and Saints? why they cannot quit
you: For it is God that condemns, and who can justify? by your own hearts?
Why they cannot clear you: What then remains, but before we hold up our hands
at this bar, to cry guilty; And, Lord Jesus, we are guilty of many, and
manifold sins, but remember sweet Jesus, that thy blood was shed for sinners.
We have committed that, quod damnet, which might send us to a thousand hels,
but in thee there is such store of mercy, quae saluet, as may save us, S.
Augustine
and ten thousand worlds.

Thirdly, this judgment is intolerable. For who can endure, when as above, our
judge is angry with us; and below hell is gaping for us: when within our
vultur conscience gnawes us; and without the flame is ready for to burn us:
when on our right hand sin oppresses us; and on the left the Devil frights us:
When we have God, and his Angels all against us; and none but desperate men,
and damned spirits with us.

Lastly, this judgment is unavoidable: for the hills cannot hide us, nor
mountains cover us from the presence of the judge: And whither can we fly from
him, who is, not only here and there, but every where? if we mount and soar up
to heaven he is there; Psalm.
if we go into hell, he is there too; if we take the wings of a Dove, and fly
to the utmost part of the earth, he is there: and if we lie down in the deep
and bottomeless sea, he is there also. If we say, peradventure the night shall
cover us, we must know that the day and the night are to him alike. So that,
pati intolerabile, and latere impossible, it is not possible to endure, nor
possible to avoid the judgment.

Thirdly, I observed the precurrents, and forerunners of the judgment: S.
Gregory notes that the last tribulation has many antecedent troubles, S. Greg.
vt per crebra mala, caueantur aeterna mala, that by the sight and sense of
frequent evils, we might escape the eternal evil. And first, the Sun and
Moon shall be darkened: Now this may admit, either a litterall, or mystical
exposition: if we express it by the letter, then these visible lights, the Sun
and Moon, shall be darkened; yet not, (as some schoolmen hold,) priuatione
luminis, as being deprived and spoiled of their light, sed superveniente maiore
lumine, but as being dimmed and ouershadowed with a greater light: And if we
run from the letter to the spirit, then this Sun is Christ, and the Moon
is the Church of Christ; and both these have been darkened; For Christ has
been supposed to be but a mere man; and the Church has been dimmed, not by
interpositio^ of earth and land, but by ablation and taking away the Church
land: and in this case may it not be said; non deletur peccatum, nisi
restituitur ablatum, our sins will hardly find remission, if we make no
restitution. Pulcrum fuit, in the time of superstition it was thought the
glory, and the merit of the Papist, to enrich, and endowe the church; yet
herein their luxury did abound, and they offend; but, (as the Moralist has
it,) it was on the safer part, being, in excessu, in making the church exceed
in riches; and I wish that there Excess do not in the day of judgment,
condemn the defect of them, who do, non tondere, not only fleece, sed
deglubere, but flea the church. S. Matthew has eight signs that must, S. Mat.
as it were, usher in the judgment. First, many shall come in Christ's name,
saying; Ego Christus, I am Christ: and have not, Batcabas, Inchino.
and Tabiculanus done this abroad; nay would this had not been done at home in
this honorable City.

S. Matthew.
Secondly, Nation shall rise against nation: And is not this now true, almost
in every nation? for has not the Turk risen against the Christian; yea and
Christians too against Christians; but, sweet Christ, from whence we
Christians derive our name, let it at length be thy will, that Christians may
shed no more Christian blood, but that all may jointly concur, to let the Turk
blood, and that even in the heart vein.

S. Matthew.
Thirdly, there shall be plague and famine, and they shall kill you. And, not
to go out of the gates of your City, have not these things been found within
your walls? Has not the punishing Angel struck here? and the rod of
pestilence drawn out, not only the blood and marrow, but the life and spirit
of many, many thousands in this City? have not young and old, mothers and
babes, men, and virgins, fainted and fallen down, before your eyes, both in
the corners, and the open places of this place? Has not the staff of your
bread been broken? Has there not been blacknes of face, and cleanness of teeth
in this City? London, London, thou pride of nations, and glory of the earth,
bless thy God, that there is peace within thy walls, and plentiousnes within
thy palaces; and that the rod of plague and famine is not so much as shaken
over thee; but take heed, least pride, and fulness of bread, and the sins of
Sodom, bring not only a plague of the body, and a famine of bread: but a
plague of the soul, and a famine of the word upon thy head. Again, has not
the same, occident vos, they shall kill you, been found here? witness Mariana
tempora, that quinquennium of Queen Mary, when our Martyrs were made faggots
for the fire, and the very stones and pauements of your streets were washed
with their blood. But Lord God, our heavenly, and holy Father, let no such holy
father as the Pope, no such bloud-sucker as Boner, martirize and massacre
again, in this our I Will; And if there be any in this land, that wish they
might, let them have my wish with them, would all their heads stood but on one
neck, that one fair blow might strike them off; and let all that favor this
my wish, say Amen.

Fourthly, you shall be hated for my name: S. Mat.
And when ever more then now were Christ's Apostles hated and despised? Are not
we held, omnium peripsema, 1. Cor. 4.
the very refuse and of-scouring of the people? And as the boys cried after
the Prophet, Come up thou bald pate, come up thou bald pate, so does not the
world cry after us, come up thou Priest, come up thou Priest: In the law none
that was lame, or deformed, but the choicest of the people were made Priests;
but now Priesthood, and Christ our high Priest is so contemned, that if one
have but one deformed son, they hold him fit enough to make a Priest: 1. Cor.
1.
Thus are we made, purgamenta mundi, as the filth of the world unto this day: I
speak not this to shame you, for though it were the shame of Jerusalem to kill
her Prophets, yet it is, and has ever been your honor of this imperial City,
to cherish up the messengers of God: yet am I bold to tell you here at home,
what favor we and our calling find abroad.

S. Matthew.
Fifthly, there shall be false Prophets, and false Christ's; and this is
verified even in our days: For who can be a falser Christ, then the son of
perdition Antichrist? And need we go far for false Prophets, when the
Prophets of Rhemes, and Rome, nest and swarm, I will not say only at Rome,
but almost in every room?

S. Mat.
Sixthly, iniquity shall abound, and charity wax cold: And alas that our sin
were but green; and our iniquity but in the blade; would we were not grown
ripe in sin, and that we were not ready for the sickle: would our offenses,
like Nabucodonosors tree, were not grown up to heaven, and did not cover the
whole land! O that there were but a plenty, and not an excess of sinning! Oh
that, that sin of excess did but remain, and not reign among us! But alas
our age has now another deluge, not of water, but of wine: And though Lucifer
lie bound in hell, yet walks he loose and free upon the carth. Nay more, we
may take up that of the Orator, ferae propria, homo omnia habet vitia; Beasts
are faulty in some things, but men in all things are most vicious. Abundauit
iniquitas, iniquity has abounded. And as for charity, that is not cold, but
ded; nay twice ded, and plucked up by the root: For men will feed their
hawks, and hounds, and horses, and that with diet, and with their own hands;
and yet suffer poor souls, whose souls were as dearly bought as theirs, to
pine and die for want of food.

Seventhly, the Gospel shall be preached to all the world: S. Matthew.
And has not the sound thereof gone through the earth? Has not Asia had her
seven churches? Has not S. Peter been the Tutor of the Jew, and S. Paul the
Doctor of the Gentiles? Did not the Apostles, those seeds-men of the word,
preach the Gospel to every creature? And though they call us, Et penitus toto
diuisos orb Britannos, Britains set apart from all parts of the world, yet
has the Gospel sounded unto us; and that so loud, that there is no nooke, nor
angle of this I Will, where the language of the gospel is not heard: And, O Lord,
let the light of thy Gospel shine for ever in this our little Goshen: Let our
candlestick never be removed, not our candle put under a bushel: Let not
darkness cover this Land, nor gross blindness our people, but let thy truth,
like the Sun, break forth daily more and more, till it come to her full
brightness.

Lastly, S. Matthew.
the abomination of desolation shall be set up in the holy place. And though
Rome were once the holy city; though her faith, as then it was, were famous
throughout the world, yet is not the abomination of desolation set up in her?
Romans
Look into the lives of the Popes, and Cardinals, how some have been
idolaters, some sorcerers some Sodomites, some adulterous, some incestuous,
all, or the most, more or less impious, and tell me where abomination can be,
if it be not here? Holkot, Holkot.
one of their own, confesses, that among them, they who in the morning did
worship, virginem matrem, the blessed Virgin Mother, did at night make,
virgins matres, of maids mothers. O double abomination! Thus you see, that
these eight fore-running signs are past already, and have ouerrun us; and
therefore what remains now, 1. Tim. 4.
but a fearful expectation of judgment?

We read in Timothy, that in the last days, Quidam discedent, some shall
depart from the faith: Et quidam transfugae, and some of our runnagates of
Rhemes, and Rome, that were in, but not of our church, have fled to the Popish
sinagogue, from our christian Catholic church: but they were, Quidam, but
certain uncertain men, that having nothing but hope and fortune, to be their
guides, would venture upon any fortune: S. Bern.
so that, as S. Bernard speaks, desperatio fecit Monachos, they became Mo^kish
not out of judgment but despair.

Secondly, says Timothy, some shall attend to the Spirit of errors; 1. Tim. 4.
and our Separists of Amsterdam have clothed every naked, and revived almost
every ded error: These be those our English Pharisees, which will not be,
sicut reliqui, as others; but dividing themselves from all, they only will be
the singular and elected brethren: but to these I say, that God is the God of
unity; and that Christ was never the author of division.

Thirdly, 1. Tim. 4.
some shall maintain doctrine of Devils: and do not the Papists while they
deny marriage, and allow stews, and simple fornication, in the one teach, in
the other tolerate a doctrine unfit for any but a Devil?

Lastly, says Timothy, in the last days, 1. Tim. 4.
men shall have their consciences seared; and had we but windows in our
breasts, mutually to behold each others conscience, I fear me we should see,
the conscience of the rich man seared with pride: the young man's conscience
seared with wrath: the old man's with avarice: the great man's with vainglory:
and all men, both great and small, with some greater or less impiety. Thus
then as Christ our judge came to fulfill all, so we may conclude, that all,
that should come before the coming of Christ, is now fulfilled. Therefore I
will now speak of that which shall follow the judgment.

Here I observe, that there shall be two attendants and followers of the
judgment, praemium, and poena, reward and ruin: The reward shall be every
way absolute: First in place, as being in Heaven, not on Earth: Secondly in
continuance, as being not for time, but for ever: Thirdly, in essence, as
being not in body only, or in soul only, but in soul and body. In the
body glorified and rewarded shall be (as the School observes) four things.
Thomas.
First, claritas, beauty and clearenes: insomuch that Saint Chrysostom says,
S. Chrysostom.
that the bodies of the Saints shall be, septies clariora sole, seven times
brighter then the Sun. Secondly, in bodies glorified, there shall be
spiritual agilitie; and hence it is that some ascribe, the actiuitie and
quicknes of our soul, and spirit, to a glorifide body; saying, that such
bodies are not spirits, but spiritualized bodies. Thirdly in a glorifide body
there is, imp^ssibilitie; for though here we suffer of every thing, yet there
we shall be subject to no corruptiue passion or suffering. Lastly, there shall
be in a glorious body, S. August.
immortality; here indeed, orimur, and morimur, at our birth we begin to die;
accedimus, we enter into the world: succedimus, we succeed one another in the
world: and at last, decedimus, Job.
we depart all out of the world: but when we shall see God in our body, as
Job speaks, we shall have immortal bodies.

Secondly after judgment there is a reward for the soul: and that reward
consists principally in two things; in our union with GOD: and our vision of
God: both these may be gathered out of that of Saint John, S. John.
when he shall appear we shall be like unto him, and shall see him as he is: we
shall be like unto him, there is our union; and shall see him as he is, there
is our vision. Others add to the beatitude of the soul, two other acts; one
the fruition; another the eternal retention of God. And it is controuers'd
among the learned, in which of these four acts, the felicity of the soul
does consist. Henri. Ganda.
Henricus Gandauensis thinks the souls happiness, resides, in her union with
GOD, because that union does deifie the essence of the Soul. Thomas lays it
to the vision of the Soul, because, Aquin.
that vision does bless and beatifie the understanding of the Soul: Scotus
Scotus.
draws it to the fruition of the Soul, because, that fruition does satisfy
the will of the Soul: Aureo.
Aureolus puts it to the retention of the Soul, because that, and that only,
does fully glad and rejoice the Soul. I will not determine: Only I say,
blessed souls and bodies shall have, triumphum, and gaudium, triumph and joy.
They shall have triumph, first, over death, for death shall be no more.
Secondly, over him that has the power of death, that is the Devil, for they
shall be freed from his power. Again they shall have joy, first in the Majesty
of God, secondly in the humanity of Christ, and thirdly in the society of
Angels and Saints.

There is also after judgment, poena, a punishment for wicked souls. And this
punishment is double, Aquin.
sensus and damni, of sense, and loss: of sense: for there the wanton eye
shall see fearful objects: the delicate smell feel filthy odors: the dainty
ear hear ghastly howlings: In so much that a good Father breaks out thus, O
si, O that we could lay our ears to the mouth of hell; O that we could hear
and see what men suffer in hell, doubtless we would descend, viui ad inferos,
to a lively consideration of hell in this life, that so we might escape it
after this life. For there is a fire for the body, and a spiritual worm for
the soul, and both these eternal. For well were it with the damned, if they
might be no longer in hell, but till a Dove could take up all the sand of the
shore; or a Wren drink up all the water of the Sea; or a Child gather all the
grass of the earth; or a man count all the stars of heaven; for then there
might be at length some hope of release; but this is Orcus orci, the hell of
hell, that the wicked must reside for ever in hell. So I come to the order that
God will use in judgment, Quaeret, he will question all our ways and works.

God will resolve four questions in the day of judgment; First the question,
An sit Deus, against the Atheist, who shall then find that there is a God:
Secondly, the question, Quid sit Deus, against the Papist, who shall then see,
that stocks and stones are not God: Thirdly, the question, Quotuplex Deus,
against the presumers, and despairers; for then the presumer shall feel, that
God is just, as well as merciful: and the despairefull behold, that God is
merciful as well as just. Lastly, the question Propter quid homo, against all
the wicked, who shall then know; that though God made the world for man, yet
he made man for himself and not the world.

And in this Quaere, and inquisition of the judge, though it will extend to all
things, yet suffer me to observe but two things: Quid, and Quos, what, and whom
God will then visit and enquire of. First, Quid, what will God visit? Man,
and the estate of man. Man, to see if man remember, whence he was, and had his
creation: and whither he have not lost the image of his Creator. God will
demand of man, what he was by nature: who he was in person: of what rank and
order he was in life and conversation. Nay God will scan, and sift all that is
in man: He will demand if our wisdom have not been craft: our severity
rigor: Musso.
our justice cruelty: and our government tyranny. He will ask if our
authority have not been oppression; and our zeal contention: He will visit
and see, if our humblenes have not been baseness; and our courtesy have not
been flattery, our jesting scurrilitie, our free life dishonestie, and our
silence singularity. He will demand if our simplenes were not folly, and our
feruor in religion, formal hypocrisy.

And if we dare contest with God, and say, Quid mali? What evil have I done?
the Lord will ask, at quid boni, but have thou not left much good undone? If
thou say I have not hindered, alienaa^ vitam, the life of another: he will ask,
at qutuam, but how have thou ordered thy own life? If thou say, non
blasphemaui Christum, I have not blasphemed Christ, he will ask, nonne
blasphemasti Christianum, but what, did thou never speak ill of any
Christian? If thou say, Neminem occidi, I have killed no man; he will ask, but
have thou not hated, and so killed thy brother in thy heart? S. Luke.
If thou say I fast; God will visit and see, whether thou fast for thy purse,
or for the poor: if thou say as did the Pharisee, I give alms; God will
visit, and see if thou have given them for his glory, or thy own pride and
vainglory.

Secondly I observed, Quos visitabit, whom God will visit: Indeed God will
visit all sinners: but because a world of time would not serve me, to open all
the sins of the world, suffer me to set but three regnant, and praedominant
sins before you:

First, then God will visit the Usurer: Thesaur nonus.
and if that of the Postill be true, this will be a heavy Visitation for him;
For he is a bloody, a crimson, a scarlet sinner, nay wurse then any other
sinner: He is wurse then the thief, for the thief takes it privily, and in
the night: but the Usurer takes openly and in the day; nay he takes both night
and day. Secondly a Usurer is wurse then the grave, for the grave restored
hirded at the Passion of Christ: but he never restores, though the poor be
ready to fall into many, and many a bitter passion. Thirdly, a Usurer is wurse
then hell, for hell tormenteth only the evil, but he crusheth, and oppresses
both good and evil. Fourthly a Usurer is wurse then a Jew, for a Jew will not
take of a Jew: but a Christian Usurer will take, and ouer-take a Christian.
Fifthly a Usurer is wurse then death, for death kills but the body, but he pines
and kills both body and soul. Sixthly a Usurer is wurse then Judas, for Judas
sold Christ but once, but he buys and sels Christ, in his Christians, every
day. Lastly, the Usurer is wurse then any sinner, for the Glutton will sometime
fast, the proud man will sometime be humble, and every sinner, will sometime
leave of, and rest from his dear and darling sin, but the usurer will never
rest from taking interest. Nay more, the house of a Usurer, is the bank of the
Devil; and the purse of a Usurer, it is, Os diaboli, the mouth of the Devil.

Secondly, God will visit the Temple-pirate, and the Church-robber: for he can
dispute from Christ against the Ministers of Christ: Christ says he was poor
and naked, and why then do the Ministers of Christ ruffle it in silks, and
strut it in their satin? Christ was a foot man, and never rid but to
Jerusalem on an Ass, why then are the Ministers of Christ grown so gay, that
they must have their change and choice of horses? Christ had not a place where
to lay his head, why then have the Messengers of Christ not only places, but
Lordly palaces? Yea, yea, hoc vrit homines, it is this that grieves the hearts
of some, to see the Church hold up her head: not that they so malice the
Church, but because they would also enclose the land of the Church. But tell
me, have the Legates and Ambassadors of earthly Kings, and that justly, their
honor and place, and shall the Legates of the King of heaven, have no place,
no honor? or because the Infant-church nedd not so large, so fair a garment,
shall now the church, being in her full growth, go more then half bare and
naked? You make your Sons and Daughters clothes according to their stature,
and their growth, and shall the Kings Daughter, grow she never so high, go
always in the same attire? No, no, since we give you spiritual things, and
that in abundance, you should not pare, nor lop, nor cut off our temporal
estates.

Thirdly, God will visit the Simonist; for he enters into the Church, not by
the door, as Christ the head did, but he betrays Christ for money as Judas
did: He comes, Thesaur: nouus.
in locum spiritus, into a spiritual place, but it is, respectu carnis, for
some carnal respect: so that he may be, collector pecuntae, well monied: but
he can never be, rector animae, well minded. And here me thinks I see a
covetous patron, that like Judas sels CHRIST for, Quid mihi dabitis, what will
you give me? and a sacrilegious person, that thinks Christ can be bought,
with that of the Devil, Haec omnia dabo, S. John.
all this will I give. We read in Saint John, that Saint Peter was, victus per
ancillam, overcome of a Maid, and I fear there be some patrons in the world,
that will not give livings, before they be, victi pro filiis, and filiabus,
overcome for the good of their wives, and children: yet the Prophet Micha
pronounces a woe to them, Micha.
qui aedificant Sion sanguinibus, (I know the sense litterall, but give me
leave to apply) that give the goods of Sion and the Church, to those only of
their own blood: as if the possession of the Lord went by descent, and not
desert. Visitabit Deus, God, the great Bishop of the whole earth, will visit
for these things. So much of the Majesty of the judge, and judgment; now of
the misery, and state of those that must stand in judgment: and that shall be
so great, that they shall not know, what to do, or say. First, Quid faciam,
what shall I do?

1 This part of my speech must be real, and personal: Real, and then what
will those do that make the world, and the things of the world their stay, S.
Bernard.
when the world, Et res, and reculae mundi, and all the wealth and substance of
the world must pass away? What will the penny-father, and covetous person do,
who, like the Serpent, Genesis
is ever licking up the dust of the earth, and scraping up gold and silver,
that red, S. Bernard.
and white earth, when silver and gold, and earth shall be no more? What will
the proud ones do, that fold themselves in silks, and load themselves with
pearls, S. Hiero.
and jewels, when jewels and pearls shall be no more? what will the wantons
do that crown themselves with buds of Roses, Prou.
when there shall be no budde nor Rose? What will the bibber do that washes
away his soul in Wine, when there shall be nor Vine, nor grape? How will the
magnificent and stately builder do, when building and state shall fall to the
ground? What will the grand purchaser do, that lays house to house, and land
to land, when he shall see nor house, nor land? In a word, what will any
worldling do, when the world it self must be undone? when there shall be no
earth to bear us, no sky to please us, no fountains to cool us, no shades
to hide us, no sun to warm and light us, no foul or fish, no herb or
beast, for to feed us; no houses to receive us, no Temples or Churches to
instruct us: in this Chaos and confusion of all things, what joy can there be
in any thing?

And now must I turn my topicke place, a rebus ad personas, from being a
Real to be personal. First therefore (you grave and reverend Judges,) suffer,
not me, for who am I, or what is the house of my father, that I should speak
before you? yet suffer my text to speak, not only to your ears, but to your
hearts.

Then (grave and reverend Judges,) you that are the fortresses of this Land for
security; the walls of this land for strength, the flowers of this land for
fairenes: Et faui, and the hunny-combes of this land for sweetness, if you that
be called gods, judge against God: if you judge not as God does with
tranquillity; Wisdom.
but as the wicked judge did, for importunity: if you, that be, (as Hugo
speaks) homines primi, Hugo
the first and chiefest men, judge not your selves first, before you judge
other men: if in judgment, you beat down, S. August.
aegrotum potius quam morbum, rather the offender then the offense: if you be,
iudices quasi ius dicentes, Cyprian
rather speakers then dooers of the Law: if you that sit to condemn sin,
have either the same, or a greater sin: if you be pricers, non iuris sed
muneris, not of the cause but of the coin: if you judge for favor, or fear,
or faction, or affection; if you delay, or hasten; inuert, or pervert
judgment, here is a Quid facietis for you, what will you do, when God shall
call you to judgment, and shall visit, as it is in the Prophet Osee, Osee.
the Judges and their ways?

And you the Right Honorable Lord Mayor of this honored and admired City, you
that are the head the eye, the hand, and heart of this great body; if you cut
not off the head of sin; if you strike it not even to the heart; if your eye
spare, and will not find offenders; or your hand be shortened and will not
reach them: if you put not to death those dedly sins, which have too much
life in this your City: if you be not a father to the Orphane; a righter of
the Widow and the Poor: if you that bear the name, and office, and sword of
God, faint in your office, and protect not with Gods sword the Name of God: if
you do not justify, and condemn, those good, and bad, that appear before
you, here is a Quid facies for you, what will you do, when you shall appear
before the Lord?

And you learned Counselors of the Law, you that are factors for the truth,
and the agents and instruments of peace, if you hinder, as it is in Zachary,
Zacha.
the judgment of peace and truth: if you kindle debate, and be as the
seeds-men of sedition: Plutar.
if like Camels you trouble the water, that you your selves may drink the
better: if your Counsels, infringe Gods precepts: if you come sometime with
querkes and tricks of Law, sometime with color and pretext of conscience, but
to subvert both law and conscience: if you that should plead for right and
justice, make justice a stranger in her own Court, here is a Quid facietis for
you, what will you do when you are called to that heavenly Court? Take heed,
periculosum est, S. Ambro.
says Saint Ambrose, in foro versari, it is great danger to follow Courts: for
Judas, in foro, in a Law-Court sold Christ; and Simon Magus, in foro, in a
Law-Court would have bought the holy Ghost.

You the holy Ministers of the holiest, you that be the Angels and Ambassadors
of GOD: the servants of the Lord, and the tongue of the LORD unto his servants;
if you have before your mouth, non ostium, not a door which may open and shut,
sed obstaculum, but a wall which will never open; if you affect to ouersee
Christ's flock, not as it is, opus bonum, a good work, 1. Tim. 3.
but as it may gain you, opes and bona, goods and wealth: if you take the
houses of the Lord in possession, and take no care to build up the Lords house:
if you say and do not: if you be not like cocks, S. Greg.
first beating down sin in your selves, and then crowing out against the
sin of others: if you that be, sal terrae, the salt of the earth, loose your
savor: if you that be sol mundi, the light of the world, give no light, here
is a Quid facietis for you, what will you do, when God shall bring every thing
to light?

Eccl.
You Gentles, and Gallants of this age, that be in the very pride and glory of
your time, and the May and Flower of your youth, if you remember not, that
remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, but make your selves vassals to
any, even the fairest creature: if you seek for, not the true glory of GOD,
but the vain glory of this vainest world: if you desire rather a gorgeous and
rich back, then with true valor, and virtue, to enrich your mind: if you be
hot and fervent spirits, and yet more forward for the flesh, then for the
spirit, here is a Quid facietis for you, what will you do, when you shall be
stripped of flesh and spirit?

You beauteous Ladies; and fair matrons, and damzels of this Honorable City,
you that are the object of every eye, and perhaps the desire of many hearts: if
you come hither clothed like Solomon in his royalty, rather to draw the eyes,
and chain the hearts of others unto you, then to lift up your own eyes and
hearts unto your God: if you take more care to powder the hair, and plaster
the face, then to seek God and his face; if you make the hair of ded men and
women to live again upon your heads: if you make, Esaias
as the Prophet speaks, a tinckling with your feet, and think the ground too
base for you to go on: if any of you be, (as I hope none is) either like
Semiramis lascivious, or like Cleopatra proud and ambitious: if like Thamar you
sit in the way for to ensnare, or like Dalila you offer a bosom but to
murder: if like Herodias you love to dance, and strive, rather to keep
measure in your footing, then your living: if you more regard a glittering, and
garish suite, then a gracious, and godly soul: if you more weigh a light
feather, then the Law of your heavenly Father, here is a Quid facietis for you,
what will you do when you shall be excluded from God your Father? And if, as
ashamed of Gods image, and scorning that form and face which he has lent
you, you picture and paint out to your selves anointed faces; suffer, not me,
but Saint Ambrose to tell you, S. Ambrose.
that this dawbing and parjetting of the face, is in some respect wurse then
adultery it self: For in that foul act, persona vitiatur, only the person
is polluted; but in this ungodly and unnatural painting, natura laeditur, even
nature her self is more then too much corrupted.

To sum up all in a word: you who like Absalon stand fair, yet be
ambitious: you who like Achab be rich and yet be covetous: you that like
Achitophel be wise and yet malicious. You Merchants that venture more for gold,
then for God: you artizans in general, that love more the gaining of a noble,
or a crown, then you fear the loss of a heavenly and eternal crown, here
is a Quid facietis for you all, what will you do, when you shall stand before
the judge of all?

2 Secondly, we shall not know what to answer: Quid respondebo? What shall I
answer? It is in the singular, what shall I answer, to show that God will
single out, and set apart every one to answer for himself. In this judgment
we cannot answer by a proxy, a deputy, a solicitor, or attorney; nay the
Kings of the earth, cannot send their Vice-royes, and Legates, to answer for
them, before the King of Heaven. For God will send out his atachment, and as it
were his sub poena, to make every one appear, either to pain, or rest, in his
own person. Let us then follow that counsel which Moses gave unto the Hebrew,
attend tibi, look unto thy self, since every man must answer for himself.
Let us remember that, S. Matthew. 9.
of Christ in the Gospel, vade in domum tuam, go into thy own house: the
house of thy family; the house of thy body; the house of thy soul; and the
house of thy conscience which is kept within thy soul; for every man must
answer, for the order, or disorder of his own house. And, domus tua, Musso.
ipse tu, man himself is the house of man. Therefore if the head of this house
rebel, it must submit: if the eyes, those windows of this house be vain,
they must be shut: if the senses, those doors and gates of this house be
loose, they must be kept: if the flesh, the wall of this house be weak, it
must, by being more weakened in the outward man, be made stronger to Christ,
who is God and Man. And if any part of this house be out of order, we must
labor to order it, and that well, and in every part. Esaias 38.
Else when it shall be said to thee, as it was to Ezekias, thou shall die,
what will thou answer to the living God, in that judgment which must follow
after death?

What will the hypocrite answer then, who does now cover, Luciferum suum, his
pride under the mantle of humility, when after death he shall have no part in
Christ, that humbled himself unto the death? what will the blasphemer answer
then, who now comes too near unto God with his lips, and swears him over,
from head to foot, part after part, when in the sweet mercies of his God, he
cannot have the least part? What will the furious spirits, and unmanly manhood
answer then, who now count it their greatest grace, to mangle and murder a
man, for a lie, or a less disgrace, and cannot stay till they wash their hands
in blood, when they shall be bard the benefit and blessing of Christ, and his
most precious blood?

In this strict Visitation of the Lord, the malicious cannot answer, we are
men, and cannot forgive our enemies: for they shall see Saint Steven a man, Acts
not only pardoning, but praying for his enemies. In this visitation the
devouring gluttons, who do nothing but feast, and riot, cannot say we were
men and could not fast: for they shall see John Baptist a man, S. Hierome.
whose life was a perpetual fast. What then shall we answer? Will thou say
with Saint Paul, nihil sum conscius, I know nothing against my self: alas thou
can not. For as Saint James speaks, S. James.
in many things we offend all: yet if thou could, this will not acquit thee,
this will not justify. Better were it with the Publicane to stand far off,
S. Luke.
as knowing thy filthiness: to look on the ground, as confessing thy
unworthiness; to knock thy breast, as showing thy pensiuenes; to cry,
miserere, Lord have mercy, as being guilty: and that, on me a sinner, as
being laden with misery. Or will thou answer with Saint Peter. Non noui
hominem, I know not the man; when ever did I see Christ hungry, and did not
feed him? or naked, and did not cloth him? alas good Christians, Christ
himself will reply thus against this answer; inasmuch as you have not fed
the hungry Christian, you have not fed Christ^ in that you have not clothed the
naked Christian, you have not clothed me: as then in him you have not known
me, so now, Nescio vos, I know you not, you shall not reign with me? And here,
like him in the Gospel, that wanted his wedding garment, we must needs stand
speechless: and no marvel. For if we be not able to answer sickness, when it
speaks unto us, how then shall we answer, saluti nostrae, that judge, that
Jesus, who is the Lord both of sickness and health? If we be not able to
answer death, when it shall question, and arrest us, how then shall we answer
the God both of life and death?

But what? will thou fly from answer to petition? and come with a supplicat
to the judge? Why in this dreadful judgment, and day of misery, there is no
place left for mercy: yet does a good father, bring in thus, a sinner, and his
judge; sweet Savior (says the sinner) remember now thy bitter passion: true
(says the judge) but yet now there is nor time, nor place for compassion: yet
Jesus, let me come unto thee: no, for in thy life thou said, Depart thou
may not come near unto me. Yet Jesus have thou but one blessing, give me a
blessing before I part: no, thou art under the curse of the Law, and therefore
go from me you cursed. Yet since we are accursed, let us feel, no other
punishment, then thy curses: Yes, as you have burnt with the fire of lust, so
go you cursed into the fire: ah, but who is able to endure this flame: Let it
not sweet Jesus continue long: yes, as you would have sinned for ever, so shall
this fire last for ever, Go into everlasting fire. Yet give us some comfortable
mates and fellows, which may refresh us in this flame: no, but as you were of
your father the Devil, so go into that flame, which was prepared for the
Devil.

What now shall a soul thus surprised do? whither shall it fly? from Christ
unto Christ: from Christ as he will be our judge, unto Christ as he is yet
our Jesus. It is a term among those that be graduates in the school,
Respondebit pro me Aristoteles, that Aristotle, the eye of nature, and heart of
Philosophy, shall answer for them: so we that are blanke and dumb of our
selves, have no other anchor of hope but this, Respondebit pro nobis Jesus,
that Jesus our blessed Savior will intercede, and mediate for us. And sweet
Jesus let thy wisdom answer for our folly: thy humility for our pride: thy
meeknes for our cruelty: thy righteousness for our sin: Thou, O Jesus, art a
lamb without any spot, answer thou for us, who like Jacobs Lambs are full of
spots. And if God blessed Laban for Jacobs sake, much more will he give us a
blessing for Jesus sake: Genesis
Ostende patri latus and vulnera, Present, sweet Jesus, to thy Father, thy
side, S. Bernard.
that as thy side was opened, so his heart may be open unto us: present also
thy bleeding wounds, that those wounds may heal us, from those sins, that
like the blood of Abel cry against us. So I come to speak in a word, of the
last word of my text, answer him.

3 We are but, vermiculi, little worms that crawle and creep on the face of
the earth, and what can we answer him, who is Lord both of heaven and earth?
We are but, vernaculae, S. Bernard.
the vassals and slaves of sin, and what can we answer him, who in heaven,
earth, and hell: angels, men, and devils, has punished, and will punish sin?
The heavens melt, the mountains smoke, the earth quakes, and the Cherubins
cover their faces from him, and the four and twenty Elders cast down their
crowns before him, Et quid coenum coelo, O then how shall we ever be able to
answer him? He is goodness it self, and we are evil: he is wisdom it
self, and we are foolish: he is power it self, and we are weak: non sumus
respondendo, we cannot be able to answer him. For if that ready Philosopher
were daunted and silenced at the sight of Hannibal, Plut.
and his manly presence: Dan.
if the Prophet Daniel were dismayed at the view of an Angel: how will the
approach of him, who is the God both of Angel and Man, daunt, and dismay us?
When Christ came into the world to save his people, yet then those that came to
take him, fell down before him: how then will he, as it were, fell and hew
down sinners, when he shall come to judge his people? In the Revelation,
dilectus iudicis, John the Disciple whom Jesus loved, fell on his face, Revel.
visione iudicis, when he saw his judge but in a vision: how great then will
be the fall of those that love not God, when they shall both see, and feel
him, in his most rigorous and seuerest action? Cyprian.
Saint Cyprian is said so much to fear, diem iudicii, the day of judgment,
that he clean forgate, diem Martirii, the day of his martyrdom and earthly
torment: and no marvel neither, for, timor mortis, nihil ad timorem iudicis,
the fear of a temporal death, is nothing to the fear of him, that has power
of eternal life and death. And if they be in such a maze, ad quos iudex, unto
whom, and for whose glory the judge shall come: how then will they stand
amazed, contra quos iudex, against whom, and for whose eternal shame, and
pain the judge shall come?

But because my hours are spent, and I am not as Joshua was, able to stay the
Sun, I will but perore of the Judgment in a word, and so commit you to him
that must be our judge, even our God. You have heard, first, of the day, and
time of judgment, how though some would have it in the day, some in the night,
some at midnight, some in one, some in another, watch of the night, yet latet
dies and hora, that day and hour is not known, that we might expect it every
hour both of day and night.

Secondly, you heard that God should judge; and then, since many were called
Gods, that, Deus vniuersi, the GOD of the whole world should judge the world:
and thirdly, that since in this one God there were three persons that God the
Father had committed the judgment to his Son, the second person: and
fourthly, since in this second person, there were two natures, a divine, a
humane nature, you heard, that he should judge humanum genus, S. August.
all mankind in his humanity: otherwise periret humanum genus, si iudex non
esset humanus, all men of every kind, might perish, if the judge should not be
humane and kind.

Thirdly, you heard of the coming of this judge; and therein two things:
First, the certainty of his coming; and that in respect of GOD, in respect of
Man, in respect of Christ, who is God and Man. Secondly the vicinitie of his
coming, non inslat sed extat iudicium, the judgment is not near, but even so
near, that now is the judgment of this world.

Fourthly, you heard of the judgment it self; and there first the
multiplicitie of judgment; secondly, the quality of this judgment; thirdly,
the forerunners; and lastly, the followers of this judgment.

Lastly, in the judgment, you heard of the order by which God would proceed;
it was, quaerendo, visitando, he will demand, ask, and visit; and there I
observed two things, Quid, what he would demand; Et quos, and who they were
that he would visit.

In those that must be judged, I noted three things; First they shall not know
what to do: secondly they shall not know what to answer: and thirdly, since
they have sinned against him that must be their judge, they shall not know
what to answer him: For the sums of our sins are great, and we cannot
cross or cancel the handwriting which is against us; and therefore, blessed
Jesus, nail this handwriting unto thy cross; and the more thou see our
miseries to be, so much the more remember that we need thy great mercy. It was
thy pleasure to weep over Lazarus: and sweet Jesus, let it please thee, to
give unto us, gratiam lacrimarum, true penitential tears, to wash our sores,
that are poor Lazares ouer-spred with sin. Unto Lazarus thou saidest, veni
for as, Lazarus come forth; so vouchsafe, dear Jesus, to say to us, and call us
forth of that sin, wherein we lie stinking, like rottennes, corruption, and
the grave. David professed, that he was, mundus a sanguine, free and clear
from the blood of Abner: but, gracious Jesus, let us be, mundi per sanguinem,
cleansed and purged by thy most precious blood. S August.
For we have no other refuge, but to fly, ab irato deo, ad placatum, Revel.
from Christ as he shall be our judge to Christ as he is yet our Jesus: Veni
domine Jesus, Come Lord Jesus; come quickly: Yet come, not as a rigorous judge
to condemn us: but come as a Savior and a Jesus to release us. Now to this
Jesus, the Son of God, with the Father and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all
honor, power, praise, and Majesty, now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Errata.
For not, read non. page 9. lin. 22. for then, read thence. p. 17. lin. 6. for
Separists, Separatists. page 34. l. the last, for alienaam, alienam p 40. l.
11. and at qui tuam? p. 40. l. 12. for curses, r. curse p. 54. l. 7.


