The trauayled Pylgrime, bringing news from all parts of the world, such
like scarce hard of before.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Anno Domini. 1569.

Eccle. 10.The glory of the rich, of the honorable, and of the poor, is the
fear of God.

Proverbs. 2^. The rich and poor are together, the Lord is the maker of
them all. TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir William Damsel knight, receyuer
general of the Queens Majesty's Court of Wards, and Liveries. S. B. wysheth
most prosperous health, and endless felicity.
AMONG Diverse benefits received (Right worshypfull) considering with my self
in what order or by what means I might deuyse, to show some part of
recompense, thoughfar, to acquit that which I have received, I forthwith
called to mind these words, Marcus Tulliu^ Cicero.
Non solum gratis esse debet, qui accepit benificium, verum etiam is cui
potestas accipiendi fuit, he ought not only to be thankful, which has
received a benefit, but also, he to whom, has been power of receiving a
benefit, so I confess, who have not only received so many benefits at your
worships hands, so often as I have required: but also on your part have
augmented your friendly benevolence, more then as yet I have deserved. In
consideration hereof, and thinking with my self by what means to gratefie some
part of your deserved labors toward me, I thought good to dedicate this my
simple and unlearned travail, who having nothing else on your worship to
bestow, called the travailed Pilgrim, wherein I have painted forth the fond
devise of man, and the strange Combats that he is daily forced unto, by
means of this our feeble nature: showing also how every degree should, or
at the least ways ought, to frame themselves, and so advisedly to watch that
we be found vigila^t watchmen, aspecting the great and second coming of our
lord Jesus Christ, that at what hour the thief break in upon us, we be
ready armed to withstand the same, reporting also that the said Pilgrim
brings news out of all parts of the world, by which news is signified the
strange inventions of man, which at no time contynueth in one estate (...)
stay, so long as the vital breath remains within this wretched corpse of
ours: Furthermore, to consider of this my foresaid enterprise, not that I
write this to the intent to correct or amend any fault or faults in other men,
but only by way of friendly exhortation, exhorting every faithful Christian,
to have such regard to this their Pilgrimage here on earth, that in the life
to come, they may enjoy the happy gain of endless felicity. So right
worshipful the effect of this my simple and unlearned enterprise being drawn,
I mused with my self to whom I best might bestow the same, and knowing none
other more fit then your worship, considering the benefits as well present as
past, thought good to present the same, beseeching your worship to except more
my good will, then otherwise the effect of this my simple travail, and in so
doing I shall not think my labor herein vneffectually bestowed: thus I end,
beseeching the Almighty God to preserve you both now and ever. Amen.

Your humble Orator. S. B.

To the Reader.
THough the matter (gentle Reader) contained in this my simple treatise, be not
altogether fruitless, but that many things therein might very well be
amended, yet notvvithstanding so far I presume of thy indifferent judgment,
that thou vvilt not be according to the common sort of curious quarellers, a
captious or a malipert correctour of the labors or diligent study of any to
hinder, although in some points thou be able to correct: but favorably
consider the good will of the writer, and then if any thing chance contrary
to thy mind, show forth thy friendly commendations, with such ordered
corrections, as may not only encourage the Author, but also get to thy self
in like effect like commendation or praise. It is hard for one to please many:
therefore in few words I have thought good, to knit together this my simple
work, called the trauayled Pilgrim, wherein is set forth the state of man,
and the innumerable assaults, that he is daily and hourly environed withal,
not only with outward or bodily enemies, as loss of goods, or life, of wife,
children, or familier friends, which eftsoon happens, as the loss of goods
by theft, or fire, the death of thy friend or familye, by slander and
murder, these and such like distu^bances, still either in the one or other,
man is always subject unto, yet better to be avoided, then the inward
cogitations or thoughts, which daily by Satan, man is vexed and moved, for
the one may by patience, in suffering vvrongful dealing, oftentimes escape the
doings, which otherwise might else happen to his or there great pain and
grieuance: the other must not only be overcome with patience in suffering, but
also faith and good works must proceed, which be two chief causes, that
God by his son Jesus Christ being our Mediator, does continuallye hear,
not the outvvard prayers only, but also our inward thoughts so long as true
hope with these three does remain, that is to say, patience in suffering,
faith in believing, that God in Christ Jesus, is able, and will forgive the
sins and offenses of all true obedient hearts: good works, does and shall
receive her revvard, which is everlasting life. And hope then is brought from
calamities which she long desired, unto iocundity and triumphant glory. Thus
much gentle Reader. I have thought good to write concerning the state of man,
but whatsoever I have left unwritten in this my base and simple Epistle,
although not altogether it chance to please some frovvarde brains, yet as
much as I have thought convenient, so much have I written, not that I know
in my self, but that by the wise and learned, many things may be amended:
impute therefore the lack of any thing which may chance to discontent Time,
not to ignorance, but only the full mind and effect hereof to the writer,
who thinks this done sufficient.

Read, but deride not, at merry things laugh not,
After mirth comes sorrow, for Momus I care not
Farevvell in the Lord. S. B. M.

The child signifies good Infancy: the rod, Correction: the ancient or aged
man, Reason: the book, Truth: the armed Knight, youthful Courage: the spear,
good Government: the shield, Hope: the sword, Courage: standing in the field
called Time.


Here the Author begins his voyage, being ready armed, bidding Infancy
farewell, and now growing by Reason to further possibility and strength.

THe mighty Jove celestial, when first he took in hand,
That Chaos huge, he made to fall, and formed so a land,
Wherein he set and created, all things as now we see,
First beasts, then man, which he prepared their governor to be,
And named him in Eden ground, Adam, that name he gave,
Where nothing then could him confound, till he a Mate did c^aue.
She, Eua, hight, a woman kind, when he awakte her saw,
As Innocents no sin did mind, till Satan wrought their awe.
That Woman first she did consent, the Apple for to prove,
Whereby the serpent did invent, all joys from them to move.
For their offense they were exilde out of that pleasant place,
And carth accursed forth did yield, the crabbed thome a space.
The earth then feign were they to till, still laboring the ground,
Thus satan's drifts the^ thought to spill, he gave that deadly wound:
Although that Adam did offend, yet God so shewde his grace,
A new Adam he after sent, which did all sin deface.
Such mind has God always to those, that joys his laws to love,
And such as are his mortal foes, with plagues he does them prove:
As Pharao that cruel king, which did so sore oppress
The Israelites above all thing, and would not them release.
It were to long all to recite, I mind them to forgo,
The swallow swift once taken flight, then Auster straight does bloe,
With nipping showers and frosts so cold, few may it long endure,
But that once past then does unfold the sweet and pleasant shower,
Whereby all things do spring and grow, with orient smell most sweet,
Till Hyems force himself does show, then Pisces joys in deep.
So I as one bereft of joy, in order minds to frame,
The gliding pace, the state so coy, yet loath were (one) to blame.
The state of one to nominate, yet all I wish to look,
Conceive in mind, do nothing hate, till read ye have this book:
He that disprayseth ere he know, may well be thought a fool,
The Heart the Hind does time foreshow, yet void from reasons school.
Of Dolor and Debilitie, these two I chiefly name,
The first is hard to understand, the other makes tame,
In bringing youthful years to end, now know you what he is,
Be mindful therefore what you read, if not, you may soon miss.
The field Time: he with wings, Thought: the other, the Author: travailing in
the said field.


In time Thought moves the Author.

IN Hyems force, both tree and herb does vade as rest of life,
On sodeyne then to me appeard, the state of worldly strife:
As I thus going all alone (one) did to me appear,
Awake, quoth he, from pensive moan, of me have thou no fear.
Both he and I together went, as friends a certain space,
Till at the last I did repent, my former time and case,
Then stepped I forth full suddenly, as one bereft of glory,
And to my mind I did apply to note thereof some story.
As afterward there shall be seen, with such advised heed.
The state of life I will begin, thus have I full decreede.
Consider first both life and wealth, be mindful still thereof,
For that will bring most perfect health, so shall at thee none scoff.
If that forgetfulness endure, no hope there is of gain,
Where state decreaseth be thou sure, bereft from joy to pain,
The time once past, needs must consume the pleasant orient smell
Of tree and herb that grows on ground, as proof full well can tell.
Likewise all trees that fruit does bear, in light they show a shade,
And time once past straight will appear, y^ al things needs must vade,
So likewise those that vainly spend, their lives they care not how,
The wrath of God on such attendes, and age of force must bow.
The tree that once clean withered is, can be by no means green,
No more can Age be young ywisse, it never has been seen,
Conceive therefore full well in mind, and youthful time so spend,
That when Death comes thou be not blind, to late then to amend,
Needful it is also to know, and how thy self may stay,
That Dolor and Debilitie, they guide a cruel way,
None may escape them by no ways, these knights so valiant are,
Yea Antropos with force them stays, and sharply does them snare,
Most horrible and dangerous, the passage is to see,
With combats great most marvelous, not one away may flee,
Till that he be bereft of life, they are so fiercely pressed,
They never cease, but still at strife, at no time take they rest.
And Dolorousnesse by his great force, an Thought does still attend,
Debilitie through feebleness, to death he all does send,
Which death appears in^isible, with gliding dart most sharp,
The dent thereof the life does quell, the soul from body part.
They never cease in working still, which way they best may find,
Both Prince and King they come until, thereto they are assignde.
See now therefore ye understand, the Herault will appear,
That Dolor he, will thee withstand, of him be not in fear.
Since thou thy self have given the charge, I will thee me regard,
In spending youth be not to large, thine enmy is preparde,
Who minds still thee to invade, with his great force and strength,
Arm thee therefore as I have said, some case to find at length.
Think thou thy self to be more stout, than ever Sampsons grace,
Or Hercules which went about, that Pluto to deface:
Art thou bereft from wisdoms school, what Salamon to exceed,
Oh caytife base and simple fool, refrain I say with speed.
Diomedes with Marshall skill, does far exceed the state,
What got Absalon by his will, could he from death escape:
Not one of all the worthies nine, could Dolor once withstand,
Provide therefore all things by Time, still take him by the hand.
Since that the hour draws nie, be ready at the sound
Of trumpet shrill, with blast most clear, thine enmies to confound:
The lofty sound of trumpet blown, often warns to prepare,
With spear and shield now all is known, of these my words beware.
The armed Knight signifies true Obedience in all estates, his armor,
Strength: the shield, Hope: the sword, Courage: the spear, Adventure:
delivered to the Author, by Thought being present in the field called Time.


The Author putting all fear aside, armeth himself, and so rides forth on
his horse called W^ll.

WHen Time had said to me his mind, I pondred then in thought
To work and do as he assignde, forthwith I armor cought,
As (...) then forste I put it on, by horned Cinthias light,
And armor dight or Phoebus shone, so forth I took my flight,
The Horse whereon I sat was, Will, whose force few youth may stay,
My sword was, Courage, pressed to kill, so rode I on my way.
My armor was both tough and strong, of strength it was new made,
My shield also was, Hope, among mine enemies to invade.
My spear was wrought and fabricate, with glittring gold most bright,
Thereby that I assuage might Hate, and put my foes to flight,
Thus rode I on courageous, some prowess for to win,
In passing forth most venterous, I practice did begin.
Two days I rode but nothing saw, among the hugie rocks,
Not one adventure worth a straw, so void I Momus mockes,
Whereby I might recite at large, to please the Readers mind,
I let that pass and put in charge, that Thought to me assignde:
It is not n^edefull here to tell, my doleful woe and pain,
A thousand griefs aye set to quell, and Time did me disdain,
But when I had escapte the ways, being past the mountains great,
A goodly green there did appear, which worldly pleasure hight.
So much the place delighted me, my self I clean forgot,
Till that I did Adventure see, in midst of pleasures plat,
A knight appeared there in sight, of corpse both huge and great,
Upon a steed all, Ire, he hight as black as any Ieat.
And toward me he came a main, with countnance fierce and grim,
Regard, quoth he, in time, refrain, of me thou naught may win,
See thou with speed thy self prepare, for I will have no nay,
My might to prove, if that thou dare, else here I will thee stay.
Forthwith I granted his request, but first his name to tell,
And then to prove if he thought best, so would I with him mell,
With irefull speech and lofty voice, he aunswerde me in haste,
Disagreement, who first has choice, all flesh to stroy and waste,
I Disagreement all would deflowre, from quiet peace and rest,
Through Eluttonie increase my power, all other I detest,
Not one if once I take in hand, from me may scarce escape,
I rent and pluck as small as sand, nay few to me dare prate,
Since thou art not Debilitie, nor Dolor which is fell,
Thy force I hope to mollify, I now thee know full well:
Debilitie and Dolor eke, for these two do I seek,
Who keeps the wood of Antropos, and cause all flesh to greet:
Debilitie to most is known, by sickness or by age,
Because the state in man consumes, to death his corpse does gage,
But Dolor now is very strange, which may or may not be
Without corruption of that, wherein one may it see.
Debilitie therefore to him, I have so ioynde in kind,
That Dolor he may well be callde, a foe to friendly mind,
And why? because all flesh is loath with goodwill hence to part,
Therefore I have thought good as now, to join them as one heart.
Being both together, are as one, still striving man to win,
When youthful years are gone and past, then age needs must begin,
With hollow eyes and visage grim, and countnance wan and pale,
Thus Jove above all times assigns, this news account not stale.
From those two, mind I to escape, if that by power I may,
Thou may be sure thou come to late, to vanquish or to fraye,
With that he spoke with eger mood, as one distraught of wit,
Though none of those, yet sure their friend, together are we knit.
Thy self defend, if that thou can, I mind thy force to prove,
Make no delay, do surely stand, from me thou shall not move:
Our Spears on rest, we both fast set, each other so did meet,
That both to ground we fell therewith, and after fought on feet.
His Spear was shod with little Wit, wherewith he down me cast,
That counterbuffe I feel as yet, and shall while life does last.
Our spears at once clean broken were, with swords each other struck,
So fierce was I, none could me fear, till Time my state did shake:
With the licour of foolishness (therewith) were both swords wrought,
With vain desire and wilfulness, each other struck aloft:
The strokes were very strange to hear, that each to other sent,
And straight to me there did appear, the idle life so spent.
Thus still together did we fight, as fools to strive with Time,
Till at the last appeared night, yet Cinthia gave her shine,
Whereby we both might well perceive, all goodness crept away,
By Diligence then was I feign, to crave as guide and stay.
The Author fights with Disagreement, the spear that Disagreement has
broken, is called Littlewit, the Authors spear is Adventure, both swoordes in
this place signify foolishness, wherewith each strikes other, till pleasant
Lady Memory defends the Author from Disagreement, in the field called Time.


Here Disagreement speaks to the Author, and so both begins the combat.

STill Disagreement me assaylde, whose force so still en^rcast,
His restless strokes so did me quail, that fain I would have ceast:
I saw no way how to escape, from him I might not start,
Nor knew not how to find a mate, to aid me from my smar^.
And being thus in pensive care, still looking for my end,
Deuoyde from joy as one threede bare, naught having to defend:
That lusty Lady Youth forth came, on whom I did depend,
His strokes she counted but as game, whereby we made an end.
Her fervent love did so me aid, her strength so did me stay,
Of naught by her I was afraid, so rode I on my way.
As I thus pressed was forth to ride, again she did me call,
And willed me with Time to bide, to see what would befall.
To Disagreement thus she said, do grant to my request,
And let him pass, not once denayde, for so I think it best,
To see more of the worldly state, some prowess for to win,
Refrain therefore no time abate, since Youth does now begin.
He aunswerde me most currishly, since that I must of force,
A sure foundation see thou be, By the Cap that Disagrement gives to Memory,
to deliu^^ to (...) is signified (...) of (...) means possible (...).
to Age have good remorse,
This Cappe here take, a thing of price, most meetest is and good.
To drive away all fond device, a salve to nourish blood.
It shall be like a springing Well which nourishes the ground,
Even so all grief it will expel, and fond device confound.
When that I had this Cappe receiude, I was so glad of cheer,
Away with have, full well appeasde, I thought none then my peer.
The fatal chance and destenie of Herpelus his love,
Auailed not to molifie, although he long did prove,
A thousand more I could recite, yea, thousand thousands sure,
Which are so fond in their delight, deuoyde from ease or cure.
Where fickle fantasy moves the mind, of fond desirde fools,
Their youthful race soon waxes blind, and falls betwixt two stools:
For he that on two stools will sit, may chance miss on them both,
Where one will serve it is unfit, such fools who will not loath*
Who ever in one age more saw, of vain superbitee?
Regard of laws who stands in awe, as all full well may s^^.
So many as will venterers be, your armor see be fast,
Of Faith, Hope, Love, and Charity, then life be sure to taste.
Thus by the way I do thee warn, regard my words full well,
Then be thou sure to void the harm, of pains infernal hell:
By order seen, shall every state, in what case here they toil,
And how thou may thy self abate, from Satan's drifts and soil.
Thus striued I so long with Time, till Youth was almost gone,
And Thought to me so did incline, that woe began my song:
In suffering combats manifold, still hoping Time to rule,
Till Time in Courage waxed bold, then began I straight to pule,
As one forsakte, departed I, not knowing where to rest,
In doleful woe I began to cry, Thought did me so molest,
Then rode I forth some way to find, and night approached near,
And Vesper bright began to shine, whereby I saw full clear
A house or place, most fair to see, which did my heart rejoice,
The way thereto likened might be, to subtle Nimphias voice,
A Laberi^th I thought it sure, or some infernal place,
The more I sought, Age did procure, all Youth from me to chase:
Yet at the length through much adooe, the way at last I found,
Approaching near, I straight did bow, to hear some voice or sound.
And thus still musing in great grief, I straight espying one,
To whom I called for relief, which heard my grief and moan.
Here the Author by long travail meets with Understanding, and requires
lodging: Obedience or true Diligence, guides his horse called Will, in the
field called Time.


Here the Author speaks to Understanding.

IF thou salvation hopest to have, then grant me my request,
And license me since now I crave, and do me not detest:
For that thou understanding hight, of Gods eternal grace,
So much the more I do delight, to see thy splendent face,
Whereby that I may grace attain, my foes for to subdue,
Thereby to void each endless pains, which else may me ensue.
Therefore to lodge with thee all night, is sure my whole desire,
That I by thee may have some sight, naught else I do require.
His answer was both meek and kind, and thus to me he said,
Welcome thou art with heart and mind, be sure I will thee aid:
Scarce one, there does to me resort, for (almost) all is gone,
And few or none comes to my port, thus live I all alone.
My son I will thee entertain, the best wise that I can,
Twice welcome say I once again, now give to me thy han:
Then forth he led me to a place, which seemed very strange,
Wherein I saw Joy and Solace, in every corner raunge.
The noise of pleasant harmony, so much re^oyst my heart,
That I forgot my sorrows past, with all my grief and smart.
Forthwith he straight unarmed me, and did on me a goune.
Which hight all fervent modesty, mine enmies to resoune.
I never was before so lodgde, nor saw so worthy an Host,
In no place where I ^rst had been, in City, town nor Cost,
All things which needed there I had, my corpse for to suffice,
And Infancy that pretty ladde brought water for mine eyes.
Whereby I might perceive and see the clear light from the dark,
Twice happiest truly (thought) to be, from me as then depart:
Yet not so clean gone but by stealth, he touchte me now and than,
With sundry cares of worldly wealth, often had me by the han.
The thought of worldly wealth nor gain, might not me once molest,
So long as Reason ruled the vain, which froward will detest,
Thus he and I togithers went, into a secret place,
Where I to him gave full consent, sins motion clear to chase,
Through singleness of life to be, in perfect love and peace,
Always continuing to the end, my self for to releace,
From all woe and calamity, which in all flesh does rain,
In the supernall throne to be, from all woe, grief and pain:
Well doing goes far out of way, where faith is not in place,
And faith alone is void of stay, yet both obtains grace,
Who well does live, all virtues has, then needs he not to fear,
With orient smell, and pleasant bath where mercy does vpreare.
From worldly pleasure and delight, of God to be in awe,
Though satan seeks with al spite, from him he may none draw,
Not one of them which Christ does choose, shall perish and decay,
Not one he will at all refuse, that flies their former way,
And calls unto him for grace with constant mind and zeal,
For such he does provide a place, his mercy thus does deal,
To every man so equally he does bestow his love,
Therefore his laws do magnify, who sittes in throne above.
Thus when he had said all his mind, he took me by the hand,
And brought me to a place where he, bid mark and understand:
Such cheer, quoth he, I have provide, as shall you well suffice,
The Bread of life, the Cup of health, see you it not despise.
The lively word of God I mean, which saues all men by grace,
The Cup of health and fervent zeal, all errors forth does chase.
Content your self with this a while, thereof take first your taste,
Ere long you shall drink of the wine that shall not fret nor waste.
Understanding makes his banquet, and comfort the Author: true Diligence
furnishes the table in the place of Reason.


Here the Author being moved with great desire, requires of Understanding what
his name is: which, being as yet to him unknown.

WHen that to me he all had said, togithers we did walk,
Till at the last I mused how, I might devise in talk
To know his name and whence he was, my whole desire was set,
I could no longer it forbear, nor naught my thought could let.
And how he in that place first came, to know was my desire,
At length I spoke as came in mind, his name I did require:
Full lovingly he aunswerde me, saying he would recite,
And how that he first thither came, by whose strength power and might.
Since that to me your name is known, I also mine shall show,
With heart and mind I will reveal, and also let you know.
Understanding, the very same, which erst you said you sought,
Most known am I in every place, and yet of fewest cought.
Because the way of ioylesse life is broad and very plain,
I have made here my dwelling place, all scorners to refrain.
The bread whereon I daily feed, is sobriety and peace:
The wine which I also receive, is Love, which hate does cease.
Thus live I here without disease, nothing does me annoye,
By grace divine I sustain those, that to my words employe:
Yet sin to me is very sharp, which daily I pursue,
Whereby I may the sooner get, to Jove that Judge most true,
Which sittes aloft in splendent throne, of crystal light most clear,
In glorious joys magnificent, among his Saints most dear.
To him therefore I give the praise, Jehovah, thou art he,
On whom in heart I do delight, thy splendent face to see.
With such delight thy self prepare, since I thy state do know,
Fro me thou nothing may hide, as after I will show.
And since thou art but young in years, not yet come to full strength,
Let Reason therefore be thy guide, Reason speaks to y^ Author.
he will thee ease at length.
Remember well what I have said, and do it not forget,
Though horror fell do thee molest, at no time see thou fret.
As valiant knights, seek to defend, the City, Town or Nation,
So fight thou still with all thy power, against all variation.
Of all false and usurped powers, from such see thou decline,
As soldiers fierce that fears no showers, but tarry for the time,
Not fearing threats of worldly power, but him which can destrye
Both body, soul, yea, all on earth, or turn thou can thine eye.
Put on thine armor now with speed, since forward thou must go,
And strength thee with the shield of faith, against thy mortal foe,
Debilitie is always pressed, awaiting till thou come,
To carry thee as his captive, from him thou may not run:
Debilitie and Dolor both so sore will the assail,
That from their hands thou may not escape, they mind thee sure to quail:
So rule thy self in time therefore, the laws of God regard,
The less thou need then to fear, although they be preparde*
Seeing now I have declarde to thee, a time thou may avoid,
Both Dolor and Debilitie which carst thee still annoyde.
If once on thee they do take hold, away thou may not fly,
Nor to retire, it is but vain, although for help thou cry.
But in the enterprise thou go about, thou shall attain,
To get such praise as few has done, if me thou not disdain,
Dolor he that Champion stout, even he seeks thee to let:
If thou him win, for laud thereof, great fame I will thee get.
And for as much as (good intent) thereby thou mindest to prove,
Take thou this spear of Regiment, thy foes thereby to move,
In length of time thou must decrease, thou may not keep one stay,
Yet force thou not this state of thine, thereat do not dismay.
Thou shall be able to endure, if thou my words obey,
Cease not therefore, but put in ure, let nothing now thee fray,
That now when Dolor does approach, then strike him if thou can,
So for a time thou may escape, my words now rightly scan:
Yet one thing more do well regard, before thou take in hand,
Laud God always, who has thee made, do not his word withstand:
See that in chamber secretly, thou always give him praise,
Then will he thee defend and keep, at all times and assayes,
Let heart and thought agree in one, since he of naught thee made,
And thank him for his benefits, from them at no time vade,
And yet on our behalf nothing deserved is, whereby
That ought at all we sure should have, or joy in throne on hie.
When supper was thus finished, and thanks given for our meat,
Straight way we rose to walk a while, more matter to entreat:
Thus when we had the Evening spent, great grief it was to me,
For to forgo the sight of him, which erst before did see.
Unto a chamber fair and sweet, Here the Author is brought by Reason to his
bed called rest.
he brought me to a bed,
All rest it hight, whereon was laid a pillow for mine head:
I never was before so laid, Rest there so did me stay,
That I forgot betime to rise, till Sol foreshewde the day.
No sooner I awaked was, out of my slumbring sleep,
The noise of Birds made me to muse, whose notes and tunes were sweet,
To see what sluggish sleep could do, when man desires reast:
Even like an Ass bereft from wit, compared to a beast.
Full soon I start then fro my bed, as one which lost had Time,
Still searching how I might devise to fly my former crime:
With that I met Obedience, which brought me to a place,
Where I did see the Virtues all, a wo^drous pleasant case.
Whose pulchritude did far excel Procerpines look or grace,
So splendent were their ornaments, that none might them deface.
Justice justly there did judge, both matters right and wrong,
Fortitude and strength, also with Love, sang there her song.
Whose notes surpassed the Nightingale, she did me so inflame,
That I desired still to hear the sweet and pleasant Dame.
She hight the love of Gods word pure, his name she still did praise,
Both night and day at no time ceast, still lauding all true ways.
There Temperance ^ate, and Faith also, with Charity and Hope,
Each one with other there did sit, and Concord set the note:
The harmony which I there heard, would make a heart of stone
Relent, and turn from his sin past, and cause him sore to moan
To see the happy life and state that they always were in,
And then to vewe all mortal flesh so burdened with sin:
There joys did not so much me glad, as sorrows did forth slide,
When that I calde to mind, that I might not there still abide.
Sincerity and godly Zeal to Gods precepts divine,
With Innocence, Grace and Light, as one, so did incline,
Sincerity is hard to find, and Zeal from most is fled,
Mercy and Compassion now, is thought to be near dead.
And all true promises are broke, of few, or none is kept:
Good ways are scarce regarded now, su^erbitie does let,
Most mischief now bears all the ^way, the more we may lament,
If that in time none do foresee, be sure then to be shent.
In stead of concord now does reign all wrath and cruel hate,
Among most men every where, with peace are at debate:
When that I heard Obedience declare the state of Time,
I loath was then to take in hand, least I should fall in crime.
So many foes about me were, that it was strange to see,
In every corner where I walkte, I saw no place was free.
With ill will from that heavenly noise, which I before had hard,
Departed I while time did last, and Thought me wholly snarde.
As I thus musing with my self, my former friend me met,
In quiet chamber where I lay, by me himself did set,
And how I likte my place that night, whether ought did me molest,
I gave him thanks and told him then, to me it was the best.
That worthy Champion Strabo he, Polichro. lib. 2. cap. 1. says, that Strab^
saw the ships of Punie when they were. 135. mile from him.
felt no such ease by sight,
Nor yet the puissant Jason eke, for all his force and might:
The one in sight surpassed all, the other for his love,
Adventure did both life and lim, as stories well can prove.
Thus thanking him for my repast, which he to me had showed,
With amiable countnance, he thought it well bestowed.
Saying to me with cheerful voice, you may not hence depart,
Til you have seen things strange and old, which will revive your heart.
Such treasure strange have I to show, of which if once you see,
For to depart from sight thereof, unwilling will you be,
And yet no Coin, Silver nor Gold, no Gem nor Ouch so clear,
May once compare their state to that, you never saw his peer,
With that he opened wide a door, which seemed very strange,
Both dark and dim, where mourning stood, and grudge about did raunge:
The lock whereof, was made of Glass, the Key all Knowledge hight,
^he sight thereof did me amase, till I espied light.
The room was large and very fine, replete with colors fair,
With characts strange and pictures wrought, that shined like the air,
The sight thereof so did me quail, wherewith I started back,
But Understanding did me stay, quoth he, what doste thou lack?
Dismay thee not in any wise, give ear I will thee show,
From tristfull cares thy self apply, let Reason with thee grow,
The sooner may thou Knowledge get, and purpose eke attain,
To follow me I think it best, thereby the more to gain.
Here Understanding shows the Author a number of Virtues in the house called
Reason, to withdraw him from vain delites, declaring the dangers that does
ensue: that done, the Author trauaileth further.


After the Author had seen every Virtue, and considered the worthiness of
them, imagines how he may keep in the house of Reason, not minding to
travail any further, till Understanding moves him to proceed in his journey.

OH Venus fair, and Vesper bright, which shows the day to come,
And gladneth all such as delight to see that pleasant son:
That Phoebus fair, that Titan eke, nay Sol that pleasant light,
Which does surpass all lights on earth, who may such style recite.
The splendent hue and pulchritude of fair Helena she,
May not compare to Sol in sight, that may in no wise gree:
Because the one was thrall to death, the other free from pain,
Therefore shall Sol still have the praise, and Helen I disdain.
A thousand Helenes now does reign in pulchritude and shape,
Yet very few that minds to leave, that, sin for to escape.
The more may all true hearts lament, to see so little care,
Of people now in these our days, that will no time beware.
Examples therefore will I show, to each state and degree,
Of strange things past, which carst has been to all that will you see,
And how the state of things has been among the wilful sort,
And pleasure eke of virtuous men, I also will report.
When wrathful Ire first took in hand, that wilful Cain to move,
Then cruel Envy wrought in breast, not Abel more to love,
And why? because his sacrifice did still descend to ground,
Therefore that wilful caytife he, sought Abel to confound:
And when he had his brother slain, then began he straight to fly,
Even like an abject void of grace, as though none did him spy:
Then straight way that celestial Jove to wicked Cain did call,
To know where Abel was become, and who began the brall.
For that thou have thy brother slain, an abject shall thou be,
And all thy life long still in doubt of every plant and tree.
Debilitie shall thee possess, thou shall not once escape,
Since thou have slain thy brother dear, I therefore will thee hate.
This Cain was he that first found out, which way the land to till,
And was the first which did invent, by murder man to kill.
Therefore as vacant lies his race, yet he much issue had,
And when he was fled from the Lord, in Nod, he there him clad.
The rest I mind not to recite, now forward will I go,
To show in order many things, and eke that mortal foe,
Mysandros he, that cruel fiende, which seeks all flesh to spill,
If he once may the maistrie get, then breeds he naught but ill.
God grant therefore all Christian hearts, his laws to have in mind,
And that we may with heart and will, detest all horrors blind:
To practice therefore in the life, all virtuous facts to use,
No other way is there to find, therefore the light do choose.
Remember well the valiant deeds, that Sampson did, when he
The Lion fierce first slew with might, as plainly we may see:
When that he unto Thamnates went, not far out of the way,
The Lion fierce did him assail, bereft he was from pray.
And also when that he in mirth, a Riddle did declare,
Amidst the banquet where they sat, with all their gorgeous fare,
Not one of thirty could assoyle, nor once tell what it meant,
Till they by slily drifts had won, of her which did repent.
He twice by women was deceyude, for all his force and strength,
And by his foes so handled was, he lost his eyes at length.
But when his locks were grown again, three thousand sure he flew,
And brake the pillar that chief stay, of those which did him view,
And thus through indignation, to void the former wrong,
The Philistines he so did annoye, that doleful was their song.
By Dolor so they always sought, by ire they still did fly,
And he to end his restless days, amidst his foes did die:
That fond fool Dianira she, in hoping love to find,
A shirt enuenomde she did send, not witting to her mind,
In hope to have got Hercules with her again to be,
And he therewith was poisoned, himself he could not free.
And to be brent in such a flame, by Dolor ever was,
That Nessus fell, her did deceive, to late she cride alas:
As one bereft from worldly joy, when that he felt the smart,
In fiery flame he did consume, both body bones and heart.
The mighty Caesar in likewise, to death full soon was brought,
By such as he nothing suspect, full soon his death they sought:
With bodkins sharp they did him pierce, till all his blood was spent,
Instead of pity irefull ire, this murder did invent.
Thus flickring Fame does bost abroad, in every land and cost,
The cruel facts of froward minds, among both least and most,
This Tragedy is not unknown, nor may not slide from mind,
Refrain therefore all irefull hate, show not thy self unkind.
The worthy Alexander king, Cassand^r was son to Antipater which poisoned
the king Alexander in Babylon.
that conqueror so great,
Was poysned by Cassandrus as he sat at his meat,
Which poison was so venomous, that nothing might it hold,
Except the hoof of some horse foot, wherein they did it fold.
Antipater first took in hand, by Dolor he most fell,
Who seeks in every land and cost, all states to vaunt and quell,
Lament ye Gods in Crystal throne, let fall your brinish tears,
With parched face and bloubred eyne, at wrath do stop your ears.
Where is become that Trojan stout, the worthy Hector he,
Bereft full soon by fatal chance in stories we may see.
That worthy Greek Achilles he, at Trojan siege was slain,
Two worthy Champions of renown, lo, death is now their gain.
Such is the force of Dolor fell, so fierce is he in fight,
That none on earth may him withstand, his power is such, and might,
The brazen gates of Trojan town, they might not long endure,
When that Debilitie was come, to death then did procure.
I mind also to nominate the worthy Roman eake, Plutarchus in Romana
historia ad M. Viniciu^ says, that one Titius slew Pampey, but Polichronicon,
that young Ptolomie did cut of his head, and sent it to Julius Caesar think^ng to
have done him great pleasure, but he was therewith very sorry.

Pompey by name, which lost his head by Ptolomeus feate,
When Pompeius came unto his Court, desiring him of aid,
Forthwith he took from him his ring, and causde him to be stayde.
The lofty and courageous heart of worthy Hanniball,
Might not withstand the poysned ring, to late for cure to call:
When he on fingar once had set, then straight began his pain,
So ended he his life also, in earth his corpse remain.
Likewise Agamemnon he, by mean of his false wife,
Was slain through Engist cruelty, and so bereft from life,
His long absence at Trojan siege, did not her like a whit,
Ne lusty Youth could not assuage, thus she to vice was knit.
The like sequel made an end of Holofernes stout,
His tyranny could not prevail, nor eke his power or rout:
By Judith he to end was brought, even subject unto death,
After much mirth and i^litie, full soon he lost his breath.
That worthy Queen and Matron she, whose praise is without end,
Did seek always her own to save, and country to defend.
With godly zeal and fervent mind, she to the Lord did call,
And he as Judge omnipotent, by her destroyed them all.
With hammer and with nail that Cicera was slain,
By Iahel she that worthy wife, whose fame shall still remain,
Whereby the Israelites as then destroyde their mortal foes,
Lo, thus can God do when he list, Debilitie disclose.
And Ioab with his dagger sharp, did Abner pierce to heart,
When he thought least of present death, full soon began his smart:
Thus cankerd ire does always lurk, till he has brought to pass,
Not fearing him whose fatal stroke, does make him cry alas.
Goliath that Philistian, what got he by his strength,
By David he was put to flight, for all his force at length:
It is not in the strength of man to do what thinks him best,
Therefore regard the laws of God, so shall you find most rest.
Hammon he was iudgde by right, since he a gallows made,
Thereon to hang as reason would, for that he would enuade,
To rule and do as he thought best, through pride he was detest:
And Mardocheus was preserude, for Hester looude him best.
Because he was both true and just, and one that feared God,
Therefore she did preserve and keep him from that cruel rod.
Who therefore seeks an others fall, does often himself disease,
And feels the like to come to pass, when naught may else appease.
A thousand mo I could recite, if need should so require,
But these I think sufficient, where reason has desire.
God grant all men the truth to love, and so to run each race,
In the supernall height above, to have a byding place:
But such as will the Worldlings fear, and not the Lord above,
Be sure that such shall never see, the joys of life to prove:
Fear God and those that preach the truth, the other count as vain,
And then be sure to rest in joys, when others shall in pain.
Understanding said to me, Here Understanding gives the Author charge to be
mindful of that which is showed.
the fourth part is unseen,
And things of worthy Memory, which long ago has been.
But for this time, this shall suffice, from hence we will depart,
And see that you in any wise, do not forget in heart:
But rather see thou meditate, or contemplate in mind,
These worthy notes not to forget, as erst I have assignde,
See that you do, your self employe, let Time not from you slide,
Increase do you sanguinitie, with Love, your former guide.
And so we came as friends, from out of place where we
Had long togithers communed, of each state and degree,
The house of Reason so it hight, where Justice true does bide,
Mercy and Compassion eke, not one from thence does slide.
As we came forth with whole Judgment and wise Consideration,
I pondred then what things I saw, by Wisdoms sage narration,
Displeasant began delights to spring, with most assured doubtfulnesse,
With painful pangues and doleful care, appeared then Disquietnesse.
Because I had not seen the rest, a grief it was to me,
For that I thought the greater part in Time I might not see.
When that from out of place we were, amasde I was to think,
Of Dolor fell which would assail, and with his force me link.
Debilitie as then not near, which made me less to fear,
Ne yet no part or show thereof, against me did vpreare:
And also Understanding he, so said to me his mind,
That if I would not from him start, Here Understanding comfort the Author.
no time would be unkind.
By me thou shall know all the force, of fierce Debilitie,
And how he does order mankind, from each state and degree,
And what the armor is that he, is fortified with all,
And at what time he does subvert, and whom he first does call.
Not one that feeble is and weak, his force may once abide,
No Fort nor Fortress may withstand, nor none may from him slide.
The sight of Banner once displayde, scarce one dares him withstand,
In no place where I erst have been, on sea and eke on land.
When frosen hearts with fond desire, do think to over run,
Then Antropos like flaming fire upon them soon does come,
Whose force is such, the time once past, the corpse then comes to dust,
To irefull ire a boiling bath, lo, this is full discust.
The Spider labors still to make, a web to snare the flies,
So Satan he attendant is, with falshoode and with lies,
To catch in trap if that he can, and by what means to get,
The simple soul into his power, he daily lays his net.
When we thus ended had our talk, straight made I preparation,
My self to arm, I then thought best, avoiding desolation:
For all the haste I might not pass, till I had broke my fast,
By Reason he I took my leave, departing so at last.
A thousand thanks I gave him then, for my repast and cheer,
And promised him assuredly, before him to appear,
At no time to forget the words, which he to me had said,
If I once might from dangers escape, which made me sore afraid.
Thou Reader mark what this does mean, from vice I do thee warn,
By figured show thy life to mende, thy self to keep from harm:
Although thou find that seems strange, as Dolor, Time, and Zeal,
Such messengers they represent, all vice they warn to quele.
Debilitie does signify, the inward grief of mind,
Which does decrease through cruel thought, thereto are most assignd:
Then Dolor he does represent, the carking care of man,
Whose greedy mind seeks all to get, still doing what he can,
In all estates both hie and low, they love so worldly mucke,
That when they shall depart this life, their sin from life does pluck:
The life I mean which lasts still, in the supernall throne,
Where Gods elect in rest does dwell, from all woe, grief and moan,
Bear well in mind, all that is past, the better shall thou knoe,
In that which restes for to be read, to rid thee from thy foe.
The Author by Reason takes his journey, and receives the Spear of Regiment.


Will, his horse no sooner feeling himself ready to journey, begins to run
in the field of Worldly pleasure, showing himself so courageous, that to
stay his wilful boldness the Author is sore vexed and w^ried, yet at the
length through much a do, the Author forces him to stay.

FOrthwith I leapt upon my horse, which ready was preparde,
Will, he hight, which few may rule, as erst I have declarde.
Thus being ready forth to iourne, he gave to me a Spear,
The which was shod with Regiment, my foes to quell and fear.
Which friendly Reason willed me, and Understanding eak^,
Both gave me charge, in any wise, not once their laws to break.
Thus iournyng forth with courage good, till I espide a straight:
The present Time, it called was, which minds on none to wait.
To some the way is large and broad, yea long ere they can find
The end thereof, such is their lot, by Jove above assignde:
To other some both straight and short, and soon they come to end,
Lo, what is man to strive with Time? on Jove therefore depend.
Mark well where riches does abound, the Time so steals away,
And causes many in the end, to perish and decay:
Because that such have more regard, unto the wordly mucke,
And time once past to late to call, example of the Bucke,
Which Esope long ago declarde, that praisde so much his horns,
So fell at strife with his small legs, Esopi fabulae.
that straight was staid with thorns.
The yelping voice and sound of dogs, on sodeine made him start,
And crabbed horns which he so praisd, both wrought his death and smart.
Such men therefore as will not see, and have regard in time,
May likened be to Esopes Heart, that at his legs did pine:
Leave off therefore from vain delights, least they at length you stay,
And lead you from the way of life, to late then to dismaye.
But fond desired Wilfulness, often thinks it ouerpast,
When oftentimes he scarce does touch, and he then at his last:
Both pleasure and felicity, from Time so fleetes away,
Even as the wind is left behind, unto their own decay.
Thus leaving off from troublous thought, Here the Author is weried by his
horse will, in the midst of the field called worldly pleasure.
I began again to mind
The journey, which I took in hand, and how I was assignde,
Not once to stay till I had been in every land and cost,
Whereby that I such news might bring, as well to least as most.
As I began to view the field, my Horse then named Will,
Began to run with such great force, no Dale he sparde nor Hill,
Till he attainde in midst of plain, then began him self to shake,
My arms and hands so weried was, that straight began to ache:
As I beheld me round about, the first that I there saw,
Was a Knight with courage stout, of whom I stood in awe:
His standing was both stiff and strong, well weaponed and sure,
With valiant courage me abode, in armor bright and pure.
With Travail he so armed was, his Horse was called Pain,
And Shield also fair painted eke, with watch that does disdain,
The heavy mind and slumbring sleep, which often on men does fall:
Be ready therefore I you read, regard him that does call.
His Cote was of a certain Maile, the best and surest sure,
That could be sound by Suffrance, and constant Zeal most pure:
By semblan^ show of his attire, some trauailer to be,
Which from some battle was escapte, as Reason showde to me.
As I beheld him thus, me thought it good to stay a time,
To see if that he would assail, or use unlawful crime:
As I thus musing with my self, to me he came amain,
With courage stout his horse began run, which erst was called Pain.
Age here begins to make battle with the Author, in the field of worldly
pleasure.


The Author after long fight, yields him self to Age, and receives his
counsel, promising to fulfill all such covenants, as Age has given charge
withal, and so taking his leave, proceeds on his journey.

FOrthwith my Spear I set on Rest, each other strongly stroke,
That therewithal to ground we fell, and both our spears we broke:
The dent of stroke did not dismay so much our strength and might,
But that full quickly we arose, and strongly began to fight,
Even like unto a valiant knight before me did vpstart,
With Falcon strong began to strike, wherewith he made me smart:
And I as yet not void from strength, with trunchion of my Spear
Let sly amain with courage eke, not yet vanquished by fear,
So long as Regiment, my Spear, did hold and was unbroke,
So long did I the valiant knight, keep off by dent of stroke,
But when he by his puisiance, my Spear had all to rent,
Then did decrease my former strength, which Jove above had lent.
Thus fighting still he watched how, some mortal wound to give,
But I by Regiment did defend, that he me could not grieve:
His furiousness to me was such, that wonder was to see,
To recompense I showed the same, amain I strokes let flee.
When he espide my courage so, that I took no regard,
A new assault he began on me, that drove me to my ward:
His Falcon strong and sharp also, did me so much annoye,
That to defend then was I feign, my self so to employe.
Full many a stroke I did awarde, till all my Spear was rent:
I then was feign to draw my sword, yet loath for to relent,
Although he seemde to vanquishe me, I did the best I might,
Till he so struck upon my head, that feign I was to stoop.
This combat was in such sort fought, that naught remained whole,
Both flesh and armor sore was cut, thus Age does deal his dole.
My shield with strokes almost he claue, whereon was all my stay,
As yet he could me not subvert, nor once my hope dismaye.
Thus each of us still labored, the utmost of our power,
But lacking breath were feign to stay, the space of half an hour:
Full glad was I and (...) wise, to leave this cruel fight,
Till we attained had some strength, and so recouerde might.
As I thus breathing on the ground, full well then did behold,
That g^i^y Age which we ass^ide, with countnance grim and bold,
Then with my self I (...), how I might know, where he
Did most remain, and in what cost, as after you shall see.
WIth Love so much enflamde I was, that straight to him I spoke,
O Knight most worthy said I then, my love to thee do take,
And show to me if that thou please, Corrineus came and arrived with Brute at the
I Will of Totnesse in Cornwall, and there in wrestling, slew Goginagog a Giant,
which there inhabited, as says Polychronicon. etc. of Corrineus came the name
of Cornwall, and Cornishmen. Some affirm that Cornwall came of Cornu a borne,
because it is fashioned like a horn in circuit or compass, which may so be:
but because the first is the older, I do suppose that to be the truest.
thy name and eke thy place,
And then as friends we hope to gree, from ire, to joys solace.
If thou will show thy name to me, to satisfy my mind,
Demand the like if thee it please, I ready am assignde,
To show to thee the like again, grant me now my request,
And from henceforth thou shall me find, obedient unto rest.
He aunswerde me with heedfull speech, with words most soft and wise,
I am of royal blood descend, and wilful youth despise,
I am of more known on the earth, than ever Hector was,
Or Corrin stout which slew by might, the Giant tough as brass,
My proper name is called Age, the Register of Truth,
Which notes the time of every one, whereby great good ensuth,
No force of youth may me withstand, although he do excel,
In Marshall feats and prowes eke, though thousands he do quell.
This plain of Time, which thou art in, not one may ouergoe,
But by my leave and ayding help, thereby the way to knoe,
For he that thinks from me to escape, his labor is in vain,
To strive with me he does but get, great sorrow, grief and pain.
Perforce to me hey needs must come, there is no saying nay,
Except they die in youthful years, then come they not this way:
What froward and malignant fool, would seem to strive with Age,
When lusty youth I win with force, and make him serve as Page.
And forasmuch as thou art now, thus fallen on my hand,
Thy self in time do yield to me, thou may not me withstand,
My puissant force thou soon shall find, if thou will not relent,
An answer quickly therefore give, least after thou repent.
When he to me had said these words, me thought I felt as still,
A remnant left of youthful strength, whereby I fearde no ill,
With that he gave defiance stout, whereby I set no store,
So began the battle much more fell, than all the time before.
His Falcon houge did so me daunt, my Spear then being broke,
Whereon was grounded all my might, no more to give a stroke.
When thus my force was broken clean, then began I to dismay,
Yet fighting still the best I could, while Courage did me stay.
And after this the easier, to bring me to decay,
From he took my shield of hope, without further delay:
By dent of Falcon valiant, so sore did me pursue,
Without resistance at the length, by state of age I grue.
Thus feeling in my self at length both very weak and faint,
Not able to continue so, his strokes me did restraint:
To think upon the youthful race, and now to Age must bow,
With sobbing cares and inward thoughts, Here the Author ^^cideth to Age.
to Age I made a vow:
Requiring him to pardon me, and take me as his thrall,
Thus feign was I my self to yield, not knowing what would fall.
To strive with Age I thought it vain, then began I straight to say:
Require of me what you think good, I truly will it pay.
With that he did withdraw himself, and ceased from the fight,
And took my Gauntlet of my hand, as conquered by right:
Most lovingly with semblant show, he took me by the hand,
And said if I would ruled be, Bellepheton was a Knight of Arges, and served
king Pircus: Aurea was wife to Pircus which sought the Knights death, for not
consenting to her adultery.
no foes should me withstand.
For as the servant ought by right, his Masters words to keep,
So ought thou most faithfully, no jot from this to fleet:
If that thou be, then be thou sure, not perjured to be,
Let Aurea king Pircus wife, example be to thee.
When that she saw Bellepheron would not to her consent,
She ever after sought by means, a mischief to invent:
And at the length she did complain, and told the King in deed,
That he accomplish would his will, by force he had decreede.
But he like to a valiant knight, her mischief did prevent,
And so by Pircus was assignde, to fulfill his intent,
Which was to kill a monster fell, and then pardned to be:
So forth he saylde the place to find, thus was their whole decree.
Thus every faithful Knight is bound, by justice and by law,
To keep in mind and to fulfill, and not to stand in awe.
All promyses with right to keep, the truth to aid with might,
For that pertaines as chief renoume, to every worthy knight.
No greater fame on earth may be, then Truth to bear the swaye,
Therefore to Truth so bend thy mind, that is the surest way.
The promise made by true advice, for no man do forgo,
Then be thou sure at all assayes, to spoil thy mortal foe,
Give ear to me and mark my words, Here Age gives his charge to the Author.
and so keep them in (...).
That from henceforth thou prosper may, thereto thy self incline:
Such amorous and dainty Dames, that venerie does seek,
From such see thou in any wise, no company do keep.
And also those whereas their Lords by fraud their house do keep,
With Flattery and eke Deceit, in no wise such do greet.
Arm thou thy self always with Truth, and thereto give delight,
Then be thou sure from such to escape, which Truth always does spite.
There is no man that I account once reasonable to be,
That dreadeth not such wicked thought, as thou full well shall see.
Wherefore if that thou will attain the state of worthy Age,
At all times see thou do refrain, The Poets have feyned that Cerberus was
porter of hell, having iij. heads, which heads were three vices,
covetousness, murder, and lechery.
from Cerberus seruage.
The worthy state of wedlock keep, beware of Satan's snare,
If not, be sure at length to weep, and eke to feel great care:
For he that is desirous, either Maid or Wife to foil,
Let him be well assurde that he, in hell therefore shall broyle.
Let honest marriage thee suffice, and be therewith content,
Then God will bless both Youth and Age, with grace thee to frequent:
The Zodomites destroyde were, because of filthy life,
With tears lament thy former days, at such be still at strife.
Both deed and thought let still be pure, from vice do always fly,
Cast vice away behind thee so, least in the end thou die:
On thy left hand do thou it leave, account it none of thine,
And to my words have good regard, away from vice decline,
From following of diverse Courts, I likewise do thee warn,
For where much people do resort, there lightly breeds harm:
The old Proverb is certain sure, after d^ibling comes dirt,
So where much people do resort, in some does mischief lurk.
A number sure have been decade, whose youthful years have spent,
And all to get renowned fame, in Age away are sent,
Though one among a hundredth, a fleece have got by pain:
A thousand to that one, I say, in base estate remain.
Climb thou therefore so for renown, with Reason and with Time,
Thereby to joy in that thou have, and void thy self from crime,
For he that wades for dead men's shoes, may chance at length go bare,
And when he thinks to have his fill, on bare walls he may stare.
Where extreme poverty does dwell, there doleful days are sto^^,
Provide therefore in time do thou, that thou may have the more.
Of meat and drink and clothing eke, thy state for to supply,
For poverty abhorred is, and naught of rich set by.
Behold the forest of Lost time, take heed thou come not there,
Nor enter not in any wise, thereof be thou in fear.
For he that loyrers all his life, and minds no art to learn,
Shall bear the bob in Disserds school, and grind in Mo^us querne.
To Idleness have no desire, some practice put in ure,
And mind to live as I have taught, by Sapience sage demure,
In any wise Gods laws obey, the better shall thou live,
To put in ure that I have said, as Truth does counsel give,
Those things that young men take in hand, concerning great renoune,
Is of their own both cost and charge, if they in wealth aboune:
The gallant green and youthful minds, desires to bring to pass,
Aduenturing so long till some, therefore do cry alas.
Take heed in time, the best way seek, the more shall be thy gain,
Thy body eke in strength shall grow, so less will be thy pain.
When that thou shall have cause to deal, in combats sharp and fell,
Thou may thereby be able then thy foes full soon to quell.
If so it chance that thou decrease, not able to withstand,
Yet faint not thou in any wise, give not distrust thy hand,
With fervent zeal and constant faith, thy self so yield in time,
That thou thereby thy soul may save, and so be rid from crime,
Though all the fiery furies were, with Plutos rage in place,
And Osmodeus ready dight, yet naught could they deface,
What got the furious serpent fell, when he just Job did pain,
Could he thereby obtain his will? no, no, this is certain:
The chiefest point which does behoue, all men to keep in deed,
Is perfect Faith and Charity, therein still to proceed,
Now have A showed unto thee, see well unto thy charge,
Pass not the limits given to thee, row thou in no such barge.
I aunswerde him by fervent Age, The Author agrees to the counsel of Age.
his charge so to observe,
That I at no time would forget, but with all power conserve,
And kept so well his charge, that I at no time would detect,
With diligence and constant zeal, in no wise to neglect.
On that condition said he then, Age licenseth the Author to travail further.
take now thy leave to go,
Beware I say, do not forget, make not thy friend thy foe,
Ponder well all my precepts, the better may thou iorne,
A thousand streights thou needs must pass, and not again return.
Straight way from him I did depart, through the desert of Age,
When that my state discovered was, it forste me not to rage,
According to appointed Age, adventure to obtain,
I passed so the nighest ways, with Will I rode amain.
Thus as I rode I thought upon the worthy Champion stout,
In that he did so friendly deal, with me when I came out:
Both horse and armor he me gave, as friend and not as foe,
A Gorget eke he did prepare, thereby me still to knoe,
Which altered somewhat my state, when I graye hears espide,
And yet for all that, loath to leave, had not been near my guide,
That Memory so did me move, my oath not to misuse,
That therewith nothing me dismayde, ne counsel to refuse.
Thus when Age, had all said his mind, and ended of his talk,
About his charge he did attend, and I from him did walk,
And I as one full bent to iorne, devised then some song,
How I might keep the promise made, and time I thought full long,
Incontinent I turned back, in light escried I Age,
Within my face did then appear, with countnance grim and sage,
To fly him fro I thought it vain, therefore I did embrace,
And joyful then was of my state, though youth from me he chase.
As time did pass I rode me up, upon a mountain hie,
The whole race there of all mankind, full soon I did eserie,
I being thus aloft did muse, which way for to discende,
And suddenly I was conuaide, unto the lower end.
For in the life of man it is, more difficult to rise,
In climbing hie the rock of Faith, God grant that non^ despise,
Full prone is man through Adams fall, and loath also to clime,
Or any pains to take in hand, whereby to void his crime.
As I began in all the haste, my ways for to direct,
The desert huge did near approach, the which I did detect,
And then like as the snayle consumes himself with creeping long,
In like estate my self near brought, if I had further throng.
The winds full calmely there did blow, me thought it did me ease,
Likewise to smell the pleasant fumes, a time did me much please,
In outward show it seemde to be, a place and joyous rest,
Within all ire and cruelty, which does the truth detest.
This building fair does signify, the world both fresh and gaye,
Which by his subtle practices, himself a time does stay,
The Damsels eke are vices fell, which does man's heart infect,
Alluring such as with them mell, and so themselves detect.
In practicing of vain delights, thereto they give their minds,
And for to climb aloft they hie, such would excel the winds,
But when they are aloft in deed, there vain and carnal wings,
By heat of sun consumes away, with other dreadful things.
Then Satan he his trumpe does blow, which Horror called is,
For soye he skippes aloft in air to view those that be his.
Thus have showed the full effect of this my simple mind,
Take well in worth, repent with speed, show not thy self unkind.
The laws of God are manifest, thou never more were taught,
Beware therefore of fond desires, such trifles count as naught,
The old Proverb is certain sure, the best does longst endure,
The best in time therefore do seek, let deeds this put in ure.
The Author being carried by his horse Will to the palace of disordered livers,
seeing then the abuse of all virtues, and the maintenance of filthy luxuria,
remembers his promise made to Age, looks in the glass of reformation,
straight takes his journey, forsaking utterly those abuses.


The Author seeing Abusion of all ordered virtues, so decked like a fool,
suspecteth that all the rest inhabiters, are no fit companions, concerning his
promise to Age, leaves all and ^e^arteth with Memory.

NOw shall I show thee all the state, by order and decree,
How every one in his attire themselves did show to me,
But first of all their minstrelsic, and then each one by name,
And how at length I did escape, whereby I got my fame.
A Pilgrim right I may be callde, because I never rest,
In seeking out on sea and land, that which may like me best:
The strange report of Authors old, so much enflamde my mind,
That I therewith even forced was, the Indian land to find,
From ship to land, my self to ease, great combats did I fight,
Till Antropos at length me met, and so bereft of might.
Unto my matter taken in hand, I purpose now to go,
And so forth on unto the end, my voyage strange to shoe,
A thousand soundes of instruments most musical I hard,
Whose harmony was callde Deceit, in each degree preparde,
A number there began to dance, Deceit so did them please,
With skippes aloft they began to friske, although to some small ease.
Deceit so finely did set forth, her dulcent harmony,
That me almost she had near caught, into her company:
A while me thought no pleasure like, might be compared sure,
Orpheus he for all his mirth, Pluto son to Saturn, the Poets feined that he
was the devil of Hell.
might not with these endure.
Who sought his wife full many a day, in Hell where Pluto king,
Held her as his, till he by mirth, from thence apace did bring:
But ere he was all dangers past, not minding no Deceate,
That Pluto he took her again, he wrought this crafty feate,
Thus as I near approcht the gate, a Porter there I saw,
Which called was Abusion, of whom I stood in awe,
But when I knew his force and strength, then straight to him I spak^
Desiring him to answer me, which he did not forsake.
Saying, this palace fair and fresh, wherein so many are,
Is very strange for me to tell, thus he began to snare,
With lofty cheer, but scorning voice, those which thou see above,
I tell thee plain is vile Delight, the place is called Love.
It hight the love of worldly wealth, with pleasures of the same,
Thus have I showed thee all the state, wherein they still do game:
His words me moved to retire, not once to mind such love,
But vile desire did what she could, and thereto did me move.
To enter in among the rest, she did me much procure,
With striving I sure feeble was, not able to endure.
Good Memory did me defend, which unto life do run,
And charged me to fly desire, as I had erst begone.
Forthwith was showed to me a glass, wherein I saw full clear,
The former facts that I had done, as well those past as near.
Within that glass espide I Age, which noted well my trade,
And frowning brows to me he bent, away consumde as shade:
Because I did so small regard, mine oath and promise just,
He showed himself most wrathful still, even bent to bate my lust,
No sooner I graye hears espide, and face with wrinkles full,
My youthful courage then decreased, lo thus did Age me pull.
Yet Lust and eke Concupiscence, assaulted me so sore,
By their attempt I scarce could get, then languisht I the more,
In sorrows fell and deadly thoughts, had not Remembrance bin,
No way could I escape them sure, from that allured sin.
But Memory declarde to me, By the corse, the Author means the whole state
of the earthy man, being corrupted in sin.
such words of lively force,
That straight to her I did incline, and yielded straight my corce,
As one full bent no more to straye, her counsel did I crave,
And she forthwith did show full plain, which way my self to save.
No man that lives on the earth, may sin so from him move,
Therefore to suffer pains thou must, so does it thee behoue:
For Satan he will tempt thee still, and do the best he can,
To trap thee fast in deadly sin, such is his trade with man.
Therefore in time do call to mind, away will go thy youth,
And seek those things that will thee save, for troubles often ensuth:
Disturb not once thy memory in things that pass thy wit,
For who does so, by fraud is caught, for thee it is unfit.
And albeit Concupiscence and Lust do thee assail,
Refrain them still, then be thou sure, in time thou may not quayle.
When I had well beheld them both, then did I understand,
Their counsels told to be deceit, and foes to every land.
Forthwith I called Memory, wherein stood all my stay,
Desiring her me to excuse, from Lust I took my way,
If any of these errors fell, do after me inquire,
Say that you know not where I am, let them return with ire.
Thus in the end all was but vain, that Lust does take in hand,
That Memory by sundry ways, releast me from their band,
From them she did me still defend, and brought me in plain way,
For joy thereof I did revive, thus was she still my stay.
With courage then I took in hand, from wilful fraud and guile,
Wherein I saw no reason was, at those I began to smile,
Deceit and Guile fast brideled were, for knowing any good,
In deserts dry I left them all, and Reason by me stood,
Who bade me say, adewe fond love, now bid I thee farewell,
God grant that I, nor no man else, desire with her to mell,
Considering her vain estate, and her deceitful love,
To quietness my heart I set, fond love no more to prove.
Not one estate that she regardes, if she in them bear swaye,
Who list or will know her therefore, sure breeds his own decay:
By Reason do thy self content, let Understanding guide,
For they are those whose beauty shines, surpass the world wide.
The mighty Jove that sittes on hie, full well all states does vewe,
The very secrets of men's hearts, often times he chaunges a new,
If that in time they do repent, with faithful mind in deed,
He ready is us to forgive, and that with fervent speed:
Forth on my voyage iorned I, with will and good intent,
My faithful promise to fulfill, by Ages commandment,
Thus as I rode by Dale and Hill, I ganne my way to view,
And straight appeered I in sight of Age before I knew.
Where I on sodeine was beset, with sights both huge and strange,
The air full dim began to shine, a show of state to change:
The earth began to tremble eke, By wea^^^ed Age is meant the unprofitable time
spent, the state of Age is barren, when there is no fruits of good life
appearing.
it made me quake for fear,
Infections forth also began fly, which did much empeare,
With miseries replenished with careful pain and grief,
No land it is of profit sure, wherein does rest relief,
For pain to pain there does resort, each other so does pay,
Thus wearied Age in barren land, a time does bear his swaye:
The trees that there are, bears no fruit, so barren is the ground,
But thorns sharp which sore does grieve, there sorrows does abound
Nothing at all that bears taste, a dungeon like it is,
Most tenebrous withouten light, yet few that land does miss.
Most ruinous this place is sure, there dolors do increase,
Of vitaile eke there comes none, whereby Age to release:
The Well springs there full bitter are, and called Violation,
So were the named sins their first state, of darkened inclination,
No sun nor Moon there does appear, no light at all is seen,
No goodness there may have recourse, beware such trap or grin,
Despair, Dispraise, Disdain and Ire, so rules this place or land,
That Love and Truth with constant Zeal may not with these gests stand.
No place at all once Health to find, he will not there abide,
Nor Gladness she may not be seen, if wrath her once have spide,
This vacant land that barren is, even froward Age does show,
Which ruled is by fond desire, over such Gods wrath does flow,
An other Island yet there is, not far from Violation,
Infirmity also it hight, most full of perturbation,
Decrepitie there bends his sail, so long as air gives breath,
And in the end preuayles so trim, that health he turns to death.
As yet I came not in that place, but sure I felt the smell,
Which represents to me my state, as Time full well can tell,
To think thereon it does me fear, with tremblings low I quake,
For that I know the count is great, that I to Jove must make.
Full sore I languish in my heart, for to see the world now,
Without regard of life to come, from thence they bend and bow,
A number minds no life I trow, each man himself does love,
And to relieve ye poor they grudge, no threats their minds may move
Our weakness and infirmity, no lasting life can get,
On what then does man hope upon, himself he does but let:
For while he strives to get renown, the thread of life is cut,
On sudden thus he leaves behind, that he so much did glut.
Beware of fond desired life, of Ill will and Despair,
For they as Mates together are, and Attropos chief air,
Those three does bring a double death, I say therefore beware,
Their path do fly, receive them not, nor row with no such fare,
No kind of benefit there is, that may compare to health,
If it be such as evil holds, then breeds it but small wealth,
No evil is on earth certain, of nomination small,
But if that thou employe to it, will be a plague mortal:
The life of man may likened be, unto a barren land
With oughten people it to till, or there to live and stand,
Which lies so all ouergrowne, with Bremble, Brier, and Thorn,
So man deuoyde from virtues grace, by Demon straight is torn.
Avoid therefore the path of ire, fear not Debilitie,
Decrepitie, nor none of his, may stay eternity:
Yield thou thy self with all thy griefs, to the eternal king,
And call for grace while thou have space, to Jove he will thee bring.
By the aged or old man traueling in the wood, is signified the desert of Age,
that is, when youth is consumed, and the vital powers decreased, man's time is
nothing else but pain of body possessed with Dolor and Debilitie, still
looking for the last combat, which is Death.


In the desert of Age there is no going out, decrepite or consumation of the
body may not escape the prefixed time appointed. Also the Author goes further,
being not yet come to Decrepitie, and shows of certain combats done by
diverse valiant Champions, as follows.

AS I thus was in the desert, from Age no way to fly,
I thought then best with him to stay, so stood I him fast by,
Thus with my self I did agree, with Age to be content,
So wish I those, that Age will see, least after they repent.
But yet a number I did see, that Age did much disdain,
In painting out their faces gaye, and would not thence refrain,
Till Age decreast so much their state, by force he made them yield,
For wrath thereof they did proclaim, to combat in the feelde.
Dame Dainty first began the broyle, These combats were fought in the vale of
^gnorance, being in the midst of the land called lost time.
by Ignorance assent,
Which hoped sure poor Age to kill, this was her whole intent,
Full fast on rest she set her spear, on Pride, she rode amain,
Thereby she thought so Age to fear, thus did she him disdain,
By grave assent he did retire, a time to see when she,
Would leave her ire, and go her way, or unto him agree:
Dame Littlewit when that she saw, that Age began to retire,
With vain Beauty on Age she struck, in hope of her desire.
But when he had got all these Mates togithers on a row,
Then he let fly, Time past and gone, and made them him to know:
This combat sure was marvelous, it caused me to smile,
To see those fools so trimly decked, themselves deceived by guile.
Thus were they feign forthwith to yield as captives unto Age,
And to leave off their fond attire, for all their force and rage,
Dame Flattrie with haste came in, with worldly pleasures fine,
Receites for Dames therewith to paint their parched face to shine.
Dame Meretrix with brodered hears, a wooden face she had,
For nothing she ashamed was, Luxuria so her clad:
With irefull voice she began to rail, for losing of her Mates,
And brought with her Dame Flingbraine so, with many other states.
Whose names I mind so to recite, in order if I can,
That all that reads this book may know, those furies to withstan,
Dame Ire and Idell loving Mates, Dame Discord and Pick thank,
Beldame Coy, and maistresse Nice, with Prater sauce and cranke.
These hoped sure a fresh to fight, they did their very best,
But all in vain, such was their gain, he them so long oppressed,
That they were feign by cruel pain, of force he made them bow,
Thus were they forced to fly amain, from youth they knew not how.
So fond desire of Brainsick fools often breeds their own decay,
When they in time will not foresee, but follow still their sway.
The envious fool seeks still to strive, yea though he have the worse,
Decreasing still his own estate, and goes with thread bare purse.
Where Prodigality does reign, and fond Suberbitie:
With such as may no state maintain, such breeds their misery.
The one by large expense consumes the whole his father got,
The other he aloft does look from virtue sure a blot.
Of cancred deed and filthy life they practice with such tools,
That Ignorance shall sure them dub, to Uicar of Saint Fools,
His Parisheners and friendly mates, whose end is doleful woe.
Except in time they do foresee, some other path to go.
So long they strove till Age them caught, by force he made them bow,
And Youth so saw his state decrease, to Age he made a vow,
Thy course so run on boisterous seas, too high hoyse not thy sail,
Let Reason rule, so may thou best at all assayes prevail.
What craft on earth can Age beguile, if man long time remain,
Where once he comes such hold he takes, y^ none may him refrain,
Till death appears, which brings the end, so long is he his guest,
Even to the grave he does all bring, a time the bodies rest.
Now to declare the ayrie state, some what I mind to say,
Of all Complexions what they are, and how they do decay.
Sanguine fierce and valiant, as Authors do declare,
Melancholy full of ire, with body lean and bare.
In Choler he full gross does wax, as grim as Bacchus grace,
And Flegmatike no cowarde is, where he may hide his face.
But where these four in one are knit, by noble Nature she,
There for a time the body spredes, even as the herb or tree.
But when these signs do disagree, and Sperma do decrease,
Then straight begins to putrify, the inner parts and grease:
To dryness then the body grows with parched hands and skin,
And so continues to the end, but Youth no more can win.
Who would not travail all his life such science for to knoe,
As able is to rid from strife this carcass bare and woe:
The state it self is nothing sure, full soon does vade away,
No earthly thing does long endure, but once he does decay.
Why then is man so loath to go, this fickle life to leave,
Since he so well the state does know, he does himself deceive:
The pompeous state and worldly wealth, does many minds so blind,
That when they should accomptes repay, most farthest are behind.
The Bird that in the Cage does sing, sometimes both shrill and clear,
In ayrie sky with better note, as does full well appear,
Because his kind is there to be, if he the Cage may escape,
Most joyful then begins his lay, no more for fear does quake.
But man's regard is nothing so, the Cage of sin to fly,
The greater plague does often ensue, when that the poor does cry,
For many, goods so well does love, they care not how they get,
So they may have to serve their minds, their whole desire is set.
To matters full of iolitie, and news both strange and rare,
I mind to tell with modesty, no more for thought to care.
Hark now begins my whole pretense, though rude in ear it sound,
Yet do not laugh till all you know, least you your selves confound:
The Author and Memory passes the field of worldly pleasure, and after
talks of the dreadful combats not yet seen.


Will his Horse as yet nothing tired, for all his long travail in the field
of worldly pleasure.

AS I beheld this combat great, twixt Age and all his foes,
And how they thought him to resist, as straight I shall disclose:
And eke had vewde the barrainesse of all this ioylesse land,
With all the incommodities that therein still do stand.
And eke how many youthful states began him to resist,
Although no power at all was theirs, so long for to persist.
And when as I had viewed his land, so cast in Islands twain,
Infirmity and Weariness, as named they remain,
With all their scarcity full bare, and withered place to see,
And violations bitter streams, approaching fast to me:
I was so much appalde in mind, I wist not what to think,
That forced I should be so soon, of Ages Cup to drink:
To think upon my youthful state, it grieved me apace,
Considering that my beauty now, Age should so soon deface.
Then as alone I rode full sure, appointed for to fight,
With spear made apt, for Horsemans course al harnessed so bright.
As quite despairing of my self, I soon hung down my head,
And rode amassed withouten spirit, as one that were half dead:
Espying that no Spear ne shield, could save me from such ill,
Nor long experience could resist, that withered Ages will.
Now entering the dale of woe alone my self so sad,
I began lament my ioylesse hap, in sorrows then so clad.
I lookte about if hap I could, some other Wight epsy,
That would have tasted of the Cup, of Age, as well as I.
And staring long none I could vewe, of high nor low degree,
Then quite dismaide I thought such chance, should hap to none but me.
Well forth I rode with trembling corpse, and face both wan and pale:
So entering in the hollow cave, and way to Ages dale.
With troubled brains of wit bereft, and save a quaking heart,
That so a love I should of force, sustain such cruel smart:
Alas said I have I alone, deserved so to be,
Still looking round on every side, if any I could see.
Then thought I sure to turn again, and escape that crooked way,
I began to rain stout Will my horse, as meaning there to stay,
And back again to take my course, forthwith to pleasures Feelde,
Unto whose grace, I had supposed, my body for to yield:
And never so to come again in peril of such woe,
If hap I could escape the pathe, of Ages Island so:
But when I would have raynde my horse, and so escaped out:
I saw no way that I might take, I put you out of doubt.
My horse was then with me dismayde, and so began to reele,
Since he no path of stable ground, nor sitting sure could feel:
There was no comfort to be rept, but woe and much distress,
Since none I could epsy, that might to me the path express:
Then mourning in my inward mind, I wished I had gone still,
Forth on my way to Ages dale, that he had had his will:
And that I might soon have been spent, and Age of me beguilde,
When hollow grave, with bloody bones, of me should be defilde.
And not in such a Laberinth, of endless woes to wend,
As I had found in such a case, not having any end.
Well: yet I thought some way to find, and spurs I set to side,
Then leapt my horse and plunged sore, a pace forth on to glide.
And laboring full long therein, at last he found the trade
That erst before were turned back, in journey we had made:
And then apace we went forth right, sore trembling and afraid,
In desert place so comfortless through which I was dismaide.
And thought as then to yield my self to Ages falt alone,
For all this while to take my part I sure espide none,
Till at the last when all my hope was well nigh gone and spent,
I cast my head aside: and lo, in path where as I went,
Dame Memory again spide, I which late from me was gone,
And when she saw me she made haste, to come to me anon:
She marked my cheer, how sad I lookte, and askte me of my chance,
Oh Madame Memory said I, in case of great greeuaunce.
For as I deem this is the way, to Ages ioylesse Dale,
To think upon, therewith it makes my face both wan and pale:
Since I alone must run this race, to desert in such haste:
And that none else I can epsy, of it with me to test.
But when she hard me make such moan, and inward gro^i^g grief,
She vttred words of comfort strong, to me for my relief:
She bade me cheer and not dismay, ne yet to make such moan,
And then she proved by Argument, I should not go ^lone.
She made relation unto me, as we rode forth a pace,
How many goodly wightes before, had run that crooked race,
And yet because I should not faint, I Will ride with thee she said:
And keep you company a while, therefore be not afraid.
And as we rode she ganne rehearse, to me in lofty style,
Whose comely iesture made me glad, when often she did smile,
How many kings and Princes eke, to fore that journey came:
Whom after this we shall express, as she did truly name.
To my great joy and comfort then, her company I did keep,
Whose merry tales and stories true, would never let me sleep,
But all the words of Memory, which there I marked well:
Of which I mean to make discourse, and out of hand to tell.
Here the worthy and victorious King, Henry the eight, defends him for a time
against Debilytie, and like a prudent Prince most princely, yields to his
judgment, after long fight had with Debilitie.


Valyauncie the Haroldes rides before the King, and bids the Combat, being
first moved thereto by Dolor and Debilitie.

FIrst that I should not all despair, and loath my wearied life,
She named certain unto me, which I remember rife,
As Adam, Noe, and diverse more, David and Solomon,
Hector, and Caesar, Julius, and other many one:
As Pericles, and P^^amus, and Polymon of Greece,
Hercules and Jason stout, which wan the golden fleece,
Atreus and Agamemnon, with diverse worthy Wightes:
As Alexander Macedon subject to fatal flightes.
Some unto age, and some in youth by Attropos consent,
To have the vital threedes cut off, and yet to be content.
And therefore thou, quoth Memory, think not thy self so strong,
To put thy trust in Will thy horse, thy days for to prolong.
Ne faint to view old Ages gate, and palace of distress:
Quoth she to me, for stranger news, yet can I well express.
And at the last forth riding still, said she, cast up thine eye,
And then forthwith a desert plain, I began for to epsy,
Where nothing grew but withered trees, and parched grass or ground,
And ruinous as I beheld, it seemed to be round:
At one side sat one full of bones, withouten flesh or skin,
With Scepter crown, and robe like clay, with trone all carved within.
And him before a Champion stout, his Haralde sure he was,
With Cote of Arms as he did give, lo thus it came to pass:
And on the right hand of the plain, I saw a worthy King,
In complete Harness meet to fight, preparde in every thing,
Like Alexander in his height, resembling Hesters grace,
Or like Achilles he did seem, then marching on a pace:
A ken before him was a Wight, in complet harness thoe,
And horse well barbed under him, his puissance to shoe.
With Spear in hand to give thassault, as seemed unto me,
A Harolde then went from the king, most gorgeous for to see,
And did embassage from his Grace, unto the Champion stout,
Whose challenge was to fight, as seemed by trauising about,
Then as^te I Memory what he meant, and of the plain by name,
And full courteously forthwith, to me did show the same:
The field quoth Memory so bare, is wilderness of Death,
Where every mortal wight is forste to leave his vital breath.
The bony corpse that thou do see, The Harolde that wears Deaths Cote with
bones, is called Defiance.
is Death that puissant Prince,
Which with his final Scepter does, all earthly things convince:
The Champion that before him is, Defiance sure is hight,
Who vilipendeth all estates for Death his Master right.
The king quoth he in harness set, so bold in lively grace,
Is Henry stout of England king, the eight of name and place:
Which wan such valyant battles strong, and foreign towns laid wast,
Which ruled by prudent skill so well, and pollitique forecast.
Which brought all nations under fear, of his high majesty,
Which made all foreign powers to quake, through magnanimity.
Which first began as Joshua did, Gods foes for to dispoyle:
The same is he which first of all, gave Antichrist the foil.
Which brake the neck of Papistrie, and gave a deadly wound,
Unto the Mass that romish Hell, that did our souls confound.
The same is he which first set to, to break the romish cloud,
And first to sound the Trumpet blast, of Gods true word alowde.
Which first defied the banning Pope, and all his Bulls of lead,
And he which first denied the Pope, to be the supreme head.
Which wanne himself pre-eminence, by courage stout and bold:
And first began the Romish claim, and title to withholde.
And did by Target bright of faith, the Popes high curse receive,
And washing of the same began first, on Christ's truth to cleave,
Which staide the Popes revenues here, and pulled the Abbeys down,
And spoylde the Romish lubbers all, which lurckte in every town.
The same is he which did command, Gods pastors for to preach,
And gave them leave in Popes despite, Gods holy word to teach.
The same is Henry sure the eight, whose fame is fixed in sky:
Whose trumpe victoriously does sound, Here begins the Comb^t twice these
(...) valiant Champions, Debilitie and the worthy king Henry ye eight.
whose conquest can not die.
The Wight before him is, quoth she, Debilitie by name,
The Champion stout of Death so pale, it is the very same:
He makes the way and winnes the field by weakness in his kind,
Death does triumph by his great force, as daily we may find.
The Harolde of the King, to him, is Valiauncie in deed,
Who goes to know the Champions mind, and what he has decreede:
Whose answer is that he must needs for all his fame relent,
And unto Death with all the reast as first to be content.
I sure am he which Philip slew, and Alexander both,
Darius and that Ptholome, though they were very loathe:
So forth we went, and she with cheer, bade harken to her talk,
For she would show me more than this, quoth she, as we do walk.
Then spurs I set to Will my horse, our journey to pass on,
What chanced after this, I shall declare to you anon,
To haste on way, apace we rode, till at the length we came,
Into that vale of restless time, which so is callde by name.
That King in courage was so stout, against that Champion bold,
That scarce he could, the challenge made, his fingars from him hold,
For he was not afraid to pass the seas with all his host,
And bid his foes the battle stout, in their own land and cost.
He feared not to pitche his Camp in heart of foreign land,
And battle wage with enemies force, yea, even hand to hand,
At last Dame Memory lookte back, and straight she bade me stay,
And there I saw a worthy fight, as truth I will display.
Debilitie the challenge gave, and Death in judgment sat,
But yet this worthy King did show no blushing face thereat:
Then came Defiance with a scroule, thou king said he, take heed,
Debilitie shall thee convince, and vanquishe thee with speed.
Though many Kings thou have dismayde, with that thy manly face,
And made thy foes abashed often in presence of thy grace,
Yet think thou not us to withstand, yield therefore if thou will,
Least hap contemning long, thy days with weariness be spilt.
The Champion now Debilitie or Weakness is by name,
At this triumphantly reioyste, as glad to hear the same,
Then sent the King stout Valiauncie, embassage for to tell,
That he well knew their courage bold, should not his power yet quel:
Ne yet will yield at thy proud boast, though hored hears he have,
It is not thou with all thy bragges, that can him yet deprave:
With that the Champion made his course, and eke the King him met,
Then was the sight full cruelly between them fiercely set.
Their fiery strokes and dreadful blows abasht my fearful eyes.
I think the sound of them was heard abeue the lower skies,
At last they paused for breath, well nie both being quite dismayde,
Till judgment came from Thanatos, a while they stoutly stayde.
The sentence definite was this, as I could understand,
The wind so bare away the sound, that it could scarce be scande.
Omnia mortali mutantur lege creata, All things created must changed be by
mortal law no doubt,
Therefore in vain thou valiant King, art thou so high and stout:
Abase thy self, he must convince, yet now these words descrie,
Mori non turpe est, sed turpiter mori:
It is not filthy for to die, his file must cut the threede,
But filthily to die, that same is filthiness in deed.
When as the King had heard these words, he began for to recite,
His noble acts which he had done, that might him then requite.
No might said he, no strength ne fame, triumph nor victory,
Can me resist, which am the Prince of fatal destiny.
With that the King began again, a stroke or two to fight,
But soon he was by weakness spoylde, and void of courage quite:
Lo, said Dame Memory to me, this Pageant did thou view,
All Wightes must suffer this conflict, by destiny most true.
First Age, then eke Debilitie, and Death must sure extend,
As of this King, so of the rest, in time to make an end:
Despair not thou, quoth she to me, for yet I will thee show,
Of mo that suffered have this fight, whom thou did truly know.
Make speed quoth she, and ride apace, and so we did no doubt,
Till we the sight of the bare field, had wholly passed out:
And then I askte Dame Memory, if I might make report,
Of that Combat which I had seen, there tried in such a sort.
Yea, quoth she, fear it not to tell, for doubtless this is true,
King Henry was a King full stout, as all men then well knew,
Which reigned thirty seven years, as Chronicles do tell,
And did in Marciall prowes then, all other far excel.
And yet at last with David King and Solomon his son,
With Iosaphat and Josias, his strength must needs be done,
And so must all mankind likewise, said she, there is no way,
Of fatal stroke there is a mean, to make a perfect stay.
Though long they live as Nestor did, or as Methusalye,
Yet once the time approches near, wherein they needs must dye:
And therefore said she think thou still on Death and on thine end,
And thou shall keep thy life so straight, that thou shall not offend.
This talk we had as we did ride, with much more I confess,
Which were to long, it to recite, if I should it express.
When we on way had iournayed long, in Times most pleasant feelde,
To other talk Dame Memory addressed her self to yield.
Approaching near unto a plain, of goodly pasture green,
Where many think of right good praise, were plainly to be seen:
But when we were now entering in, she bade me then prepare,
To see and hear the chance and truth, whereof I now declare.
The Author and Memory riding forward in the field called Time, stays in
the midst thereof beholding every state there assembled.


The valiant Prince and King addressed with Valiancie his Harolde, to bi^
defiance against Dolor and Debilitie, Thanatos being judge.

Lord Thanatos in Throne I saw, as Prince of deadly cheer,
And eke defiaunce still him by, as plainly did appear:
Then asked I of Memory, what meant him there to be,
He rules all the earth she said, as plainly thou shall see.
And there in judgment is he set, and judgment to display,
Twixt two Champions that thou did behold this other day.
With that I hard a deadly sound, as seemed of Trumpets blast,
The noise whereof even dullde my spirits, and made me sore aghast.
Faint not, quoth Memory to me, ne dread this deadly sound,
For now preparing is for fight, as I did erst expound:
At last out of an hollow Cave, came one so stout and brave,
As though he would within an hour, all mortal Wightes deprave.
On sturdy steed in harness bright, and Helmet decked with plume,
His countenance showde that he would soon, all human strength consume:
His lofty gate made me to think, on him I saw before,
This same is he quoth Memory, muse thou on it no more.
This same is stout Debilitie, that Champion blythe and strong,
Which thou shall see to win the field, before that it be long:
And lo said she, cast up thine eye, on the other side the hill,
Forthwith approached straight in sight, the glymce of spear and bill:
Then lookte I up and saw a far, a Prince both young and fair,
In complet harness bright and clear, resembling Marsis heir:
About a seuentene years of age, of comely stature true,
It did me good his Princely grace, and personage to vewe.
In beauty like Narcissus sure, Dame Iunos comely face,
Begot of Jupiter he was, I deemed by his grace,
And after him a goodly train, of puissaunt men of might,
All so preparde in armor clear, and ready for to fight.
Then as we rode our journey on, and still saw them draw near,
I prayed y^ Memory would then, make plain their names appear:
That princely child said she, that king, that young Narcissus fair,
Whose valiant heart shows him no less, then worthy Henry's heir.
That same is young Josias tried, the sixth Edward quoth she,
That found Gods book in broken walls, and made it preachte to be,
The same is he which read himself, Gods book with lofty sound,
And sent the preachers through his land, it plainly to expound.
Helchias this king did esteem, as high Priest of his land,
By whom all Arguments of truth, should be with power scande,
This worthy Priest loved Zaphan well, the Scribe aprooude in wit:
Which two did always with the king, in regal counsel sit.
By whose great wit and policy, and by this kings consent,
All false Idolatry, was quite out of his Region rent,
The hill Alters and groves in woods, and Priests of Baall each one,
Were sone broke down, and they cast out, from presence of his throne.
The living God Jehovah, he did worship and obaye,
All superstition that stood up, he soon conuayde away.
The book of Deutronomy pure, he openly did reed:
And so commanded as his land, in truth for to proceed.
In fine as erst his genitor, king Henry had begoon,
By him the Romish rabble was quite ransackt and undone,
As noble Sire by noble mind, had laid foundation sure:
So he that building finished, his reign for to endure.
The Pope he clearly banished, and named as supreme head,
He utterly defied the Mass, and all his Bulls of lead.
He brake down all Balls Images, and Pilgrimages vain,
All Trentals, Diriges, ^riftes and rites, of Rome he did dismayne.
He took the slyng of truth in hand, and stone of zeal that flent,
And gave the Pope Goliath sure, a wound and deadly dent:
He threw his pardons out the door, his power he full defied,
And cast his care on Jesus Christ, that Lamb which for him died.
Then this done he when Antichrist had lost his title clean,
His honor and his power usurp, which was not worth a bean,
By counsel of that Zaphan wise, this king erected right,
By Helchias the Priests advise, in Antichrists dispight.
New laws and institution, within his realm and land,
And purged the English Church therewith, of Popery out of hand:
He threw the Alters down with force, which made us like the Jews,
And set up Tables by and by, as Christ himself did use.
The books of God he made be read, I mean Christ's Testament,
Quoth she which Antichrist the Pope had hid long time and rent:
And made them plain in mother tongue, translated for to be,
And made the people serve the Lord, in truth and verity.
He ruled his land seven years quod she, in such advised wise,
As Fame therefore does sound his praise, even to the starrie skies:
But whether rydes he now quoth I, and all those Wightes so brave,
To age desert with speed quoth she, as Natures course does crave.
But range thy horse said Memory, stand still be not afraid,
For ere he come at Age byhalfe, his journey shall be stayde:
With that comes one evil favored wight, all deckte in strange array,
And crept among his sturdie wightes, as they rode on their way.
See him quoth Memory to me? I see him well quoth I,
Thou shall see more of his unhap, quoth she, even by and by:
The same is he which sure will work, the fall of that same ^ing:
And him before the time of age, unto destruction bring.
Unfortunate, that is his name, a wight most fierce and fell,
As thou shall see quoth she anon, I need not thee to tell,
With that I saw an other wight, Debilitie he hight:
Which crossing came another way, unto this young king right.
And then I saw before this king Dame Fortune shyning clear,
With her most glittering siluered bushe vnkemd as might appear:
Which covered all her face and breast, it was so thick and long:
Me thought her self so did behave, as one that meant him wrong.
For she her balde and hearelesse head, turnde toward him behind,
This represents said Memory, that thing which he shall find:
For though he have been fortunate, her forehead to behold:
Yet speedily she will turn back, of this thou may be bold.
No youth ne beauty may prevail, no honor fame nor praise,
No wealth nor dignity be sure, that Thanatos assaies.
As she the words have vttred forth, came Hope that heavenly Dame:
And began to comfort up his heart, deserving well the same.
High Enterprise was at his hand, a noble Lord and stout,
With that Dame Memory bade me, to leave looking about,
And cast thine eye upon the king, so singe like that rode:
From whom deceytfull Fortune fled, with all her bushe abroad.
At whom he caught but all to late, she had no hear behind
Said Memory, now mark thou well, to recreate thy mind:
But recreation none I saw, but doleful grief and woe,
To see so sweet a King dismaide, by guilefull Fortune so.
For why Debilitie began praunce, when he was nere the king,
And eke Defiaunce came in post, Ambassadge for to bring:
Mouth he unto Debilitie, now ply thy strength full well,
And suffer not old Age to gain, ne yet thy power to quell.
With that the king espied a far, this Champion stout and strong,
And he to send to know his mind, did not the time prolong:
(High Enterprise) it was that rode, Embassage to display,
And eke to know to what end, he thus did beset his way.
Thy sovereign Edward thinks quoth he, Debilitie I mean,
To pass to Ages land as did, his father stout and clean,
But do thou write it may not be, that he should it attain,
I here am set him to prevent, his journey to restrain.
High Enterprise retirde again, and told the answer so,
Which made the kings courageous heart, to be enflamed tho:
Shall I quoth he prevented be, no faith I will assail,
To make the Champion stout relent, and eke his purpose quayle.
There Hope stepped out, and went before, and he came down amain,
And met the Champion with such force, that he had near him slain:
Then did Defiaunce sound the Trumpe, of Death against the king,
At which the Champion gave a blow, that did him shrowdly wring.
He faynted at the stroke in deed, and yet so stout was he,
That his young Princely heart respire, and thought reuengde to be,
And bent his spear to strike amayne, but as his stroke was bent,
That Feebleness behind him came, and did him much prevent.
Then struck Debilitie that Wight, and down fell Edward flat,
It would have grieved a faithful mind, for to have been thereat.
To see a king so toward and stout, a right Josias sure,
Such hard conflict and great mishap, in childehood to endure.
In tender youth alas, said I, to Memory my friend,
What chance is this y^ this good child, so sone has caught his end:
Unworthy sure quoth Memory, the land was of his grace,
Their vile unchristian thanklesse life, made him to lose his place.
But sure quoth she this is the trade, all men once needs must go,
No Wight on earth but young and old, must subject be to woe.
Then forth we rode, but to look back, it greeude me at the heart,
To see that Princely child dismayde, and pressed with deadly dart.
It grieved me sure to see his fall, and how he was dismaide,
And sure that strumpet Fortune then, did make me sore afraid:
Oh, who would trust said I with tears, and doleful heavy mind,
To Fortune that unstable blast, that wauereth like the wind.
Well yet said Memory to me, come on now ride apace,
For I will show thee more as yet, behold thou yonder place:
It was about a ken from us, so we did pass away
Till we came near, then what befell, hereafter I will say.
These two Champions signify Valiauncie, and Defiance, a dressed like Haroldes
by outward shape: because Dolor and Debilitie are certain accidents, or
inward mouings, the which are felt, but not seen: Each strives with other
who shall be the chief Governor, Thanatos takes the supremacy, and
compels them both to serve him.


The Author an^ Memory beholds the cumbat, marking w^li what is spoken of
Queen Marie.

WHen we had rode a good long space in field that is so green,
When we had talked well, of things which we before had seen.
We came at last unto a Dale where we went down apace,
I saw two Champions pressed in arms, which ready were to chase.
One as it were a ken me thought from other in hollow plain,
Both bent with countnance stout to see, to fight with might and maine:
Thus as I cast mine eye about, I saw a Harolde dressed,
Which came as though some message he, already had expressed.
Whose irefull countnance made me shrink, his lofty speech to hear,
Proceeding on his journey still, as after shall appear,
Forth on I came with vised heed, well marking every pace,
Till both these Champions I saw, each other lookte in face,
Their meetings were so valiant, as rare appeerde in sight,
Which did so sore my heart dismay, that void I was of might,
With hollow cheeks most strange to see, and glymping eyes sunk in,
Even like to that Heraclites from weeping does not linne,
A witherde face and skin so parchte, and bones by sorrow made full dry,
That I began tremble all my flesh, to see him as I passed by,
The other sure did far surpass, so lean, so slender, thin and bare,
As though he had been pinde and kept, with very thin and homely fare.
And such a sent came from him ward, as made me sick in senses all,
It dulde my wits, it palde my sense, yea sure it turned up my gall:
And as I was thus out of frame, I cast mine eye up to the hill,
And there I saw old Attropos in deadly throne there sitting still:
As though in judgment she had been, to cut y^ thread that Clotho spon,
Alas said I, I am beset, yea sure I thought I was undone,
When I thought on the worthy sights, and pleasures great I passed fro,
Oh so my mind it did oppress, bewrapt I was in doleful woe.
The glorious Princes decked so fine, so many a lusty Wight,
The Country fair, the fruitful soyles, that were before my sight,
The worthy plattes and orient lands, the bewtifull adorned glee,
Now to forsake, and thus in grief, of such a barren field to see.
And eke such ougly wights therein, such fearful Champions twain,
And most of all Dame Attropos, her sight was most my pain,
I showed mine human nature then, that thought in pleasures trace,
That no misfortune should have hapt, my courage to displace.
I thought as many think no doubt, in midst their pleasures dance,
In time of wealth and iolitie, The Author here lamentes the state of all fond
desired worldlings
of no such fatal chance:
Of Death nor of Calamity, of poor and wretched state,
I thought as many think I see, that bear a lofty gate,
Like diverse Wights as Philip king, who ruled Macedone,
And eke as Nero did surmise that grieuance should be none:
But sure I was deceyude, so they deceived are likewise,
That trust in worldly pleasures vain, in Fortunes false surmise.
In beauty, strength, in wealth and pride, in honor fame and praise,
For in the turning of a hand false Fortune goes her ways.
And then such as do not forecast in wealth to frame with woe,
The loss of wealth does yerke them near which quickly her forgo.
The loss of fame, the loss of joy, the loss of store and case,
Does such that trusted still therein more grievously displease,
Than it does those that never had, of pleasure any taste,
As I now feel, said I in deed, with sorrow near down cast.
This word Dame Memory belike heard as I spoke the same,
And she forthwith would know of me why I was out of frame:
Alas Dame Memory said I, these wights makes me aghast,
Which here I see in this same Dale, since I mine eyes down cast.
But stir thou not, quoth Memory from me, be not dismayde,
For many mightier than thou have been of them afraid:
Behold therefore and thou shall see, great combats sharp and fell,
As dreadful sure, the like not past, mark well what I thee tell.
I have thee shewde quoth she, ere this, that thou shall not alone,
Tread on the path of mortal steps, but other many one,
And these two wightes I shall thee tell, which present here do see,
What be their names, that know you may, what both their natures be
The woeful wight with hollow eyes, is Dolor, pain and grief,
Which in betrapping of man's steps, is known to be the chief:
When youthful Age is past and gone, and lusty years all spent,
When cheerful mind by changed days, and wasted time is rent:
When Fortunes glittring bush turns back, when pastime bids adue,
When riches wasted or when fame, in course cannot renew,
When merry heart by toyling care, of siluered Age is woe,
When pleasant Cupid does the Courts of Jupiters forgo.
When Bacchus Cups do turn to want, when Ceres crop do lack,
When Venus shall with Vulcan be, no more in iron rack:
When Iunos beauty withered is, when Phoebus beams made dim,
When Cleopatra lies in tomb, that was before so trim:
When Salmacis the wanton Nymphe, is monstrously transposed,
And she with Hermaphroditus so dolefully enclosed.
And when Apollo has forgot to tune his instrument,
And hearing Orgaine stop by Age, which youth did still frequent.
Here the Author and Memory beholds the last Combat betwixt Dolor and
Debilitie, clearly convinced by Thanatos.


After long vewing proceed on their journey.

THen ginnes this Champion Dolors reign, procure to the grave,
Most chiefly then although the rule, of all man's life he have,
And let the wanton sort a while, and wealthy ones at will,
To tread there pleasant path with case, as casting yet none ill.
Yet other while ^oth grief creep in, Despair a Champion stout,
That does where fear of God is not, all former joy blot out:
And what is all man's life said she, but dolor grief and pain,
What joy can be in wretched vale, where world and all is vain.
Fear not therefore quoth she to me, for thou shall taste no ill,
Before it be thee limited, by God and by his will:
The other Champion calde by name, is sure Debilitie,
As feebleness or weakness hight, whom thou so lean do see.
He rules when Hercules has lost, his tawle victorious strength,
And when infections Nothus blows, throughout the air at length,
When good digestion stomach fayles, and sithes the heart does break:
Then does man's body wanting youth, become all sick and weak.
When Soll that plannet full of grace, shall give cursed Saturn reign
And Luna join with Venus cold, than gins that weakening pain,
When Natures fail by collors heat, and powers cannot digest,
Then weakness or Debilitie, sone has his rule expressed:
When she had told me both their names, by this, they twain were met
And we so nere that we might hear, their words withouten let,
They spoke aloft as egerly, as they could both in ire,
And then to stay I did in mind, to hear them much desire.
The wind was somewhat hie but yet, I heard them very plain,
How Dolor and Debilitie contended for the reign:
I Will reign said one it is my right, the other did deny,
At last they greed their tytles both, by argument to try.
Then Dolor did rehearse the means, how he took place at large,
By loss of goods, by loss of friends, by loss of Fortunes charge,
By poverty by aduerst chance, by Fortunes frowning face,
By fire, by sword, by thrall, by lack, eftsoon does grief take place.
By loss of beauty strength and fame, by loss of purpose bent,
By hatred, slander, and mishap, when Saturue shall prevent.
A thousand ways he did rehearse, how Dolor reigns in man:
Outward and eke a thousand mo, of inward chances than.
Which makes his entrance to the mind, to fill man's mind with grief,
And therefore Dolor did conclude, that he ought be the chief.
But then to hear Debilitie what bragges he made at this,
By arguments as strong to prove, that right ought to be his.
He called the Planets all for proof, by ayrie argument,
As Saturn, Mars, and Luna cold, complete with their assent:
That be the Authors of disease (said he) and ioynde with Planets good,
They make complections turn and joyce, they turn the helthlesse blood
As if hot Planets rule, amplect with cold which are to base,
Then they make choler grow in man, and stomachs heat apase,
If Planets cold get maistries, then fleume does straight abound,
The watrie reumes and stomachs ill, in parts of man is sound.
With pestilence, Gout, and Fevers strong, Lasks, Dropsies, then appear,
Quarterns, Tertians, and beside, such as do touch more near,
As Paralysis Palsy hight, which sprung of humors cold,
Makes sinews all as resolute, powers vital to withholde.
Then Apoplexia comes in kind, rising of humors gross,
Which filles the vessels of the brain, to speech and moving loss:
Then Epilepsia likewise of gross cold fleume does spring,
Or else of Melancholy sure, well known a weaking thing.
So Dissinteria comes likewise, which nature clean does break,
Continual torments comes with him, to make man's body weak:
And of Disuria springes a cold, of fleume both gross and tough,
Who pains the bladder in such sort, and makes a man to bough.
Ephialtes, Epialos, those Fevers both take place,
One cold, and the other burning hot, man's strength for to deface:
The Hemerhodes also do come of fullness of the veins,
Which much deprive man of his strength, increasing grievous pains.
Iclerios which Iaundice hight, pretending in their kind,
Of every sort much weakening man, as I can prove and find.
Beside ten thousand more said he, of sore diseases fell,
Which now our time will not permit, in order for to tell.
Yea, and beside a thousand new, which springs low every day
As plagues made due devised by God, man's new sins to repay:
New ways man still inuenteth now, his God for to offend,
And so God does new plagues devise, to bring him to an end.
Not new as though God should have need, new things for to invent,
But new because man didnot trust, as yet such punishment:
I therefore quoth Debilitie, do prove my self the best,
By whom mankind in this his race, is most of all oppressed.
For sorrow may be put away, as cause thereof does spring,
Of pensive heart sweet instruments can joy and solace bring,
To sor^e heart for poor estate, a salve is to be had,
And that is money which forthwith reuiues and makes him glad.
If woe for lack of fame or praise, actiuitie comes in,
If grieude with wounds the medicine straight his ease does then begin:
But he that is to weakness brought, Physicians may take pain,
And minister by Art and skill to make him hole again:
Yea, cure his sickness as they may by knowledge evermore
But yet his strength they will confess, God only must restore:
With that began Dolor half distraught, to fix his spear on breast,
And straight Debilitie began likewise to be addressed:
Their words displeasant were to each, they were incenst with ire,
And so they began to close amain, with strokes as hot as fire,
Assuredly like Champions stout and valiant in the feelde,
It was not cowardnesse that could, make either so to yield.
But pawsed and fought, and pawsed again, so cruel was their fight,
And sure full deadly blows were given, on either part did light.
How likest thou this, said Memory, sure said I, gracious Dame
I never saw yet such conflict, no worthier than the same,
It is but vain, quoth she certes, for them thus to contend.
For see where one does sit in throne, that shall their battle end,
Why? that is Attropos quoth I, truth quoth she to me,
And these two Champions to her grace, both but as servants be.
With that same word I heard a voice, and Attropos began speak,
Wherewith these champions both at once, their battle of did break:
Her judgment was that Grief, or Pain, or Weakness were but sent
As Messengers of Attropos, and for her high intent.
Not for your selves, quoth she, that you to raging be,
But that when either of you strike, man might prepare for me:
Your power and strength is little worth except I be your guide,
The honor therefore sure is mine, I fully have it tried.
With that they stayde and flong their spears, each one out of his hand,
And cast their eyes to Attropos, where as her throne did stand,
And we rode by when all was done, the furious battles hot,
And through the Dale amain we rode, our horses for to trot.
But as we rode Dame Memory began talk as wont we were,
Of that same sight which we had seen, whereof I was in fere:
So falling out and commoning, as we rode on our way,
Of many things she put in mind, which she before did say,
And eke how these two champions had, full many a Wight down cast,
And eke how man was but a flower, a bud or western blast.
And so among much other talk, it came into my mind,
Talking of Princes and of Kings, which yet was left behind:
To ask her who succeeded next after in Britain land,
That sweet and comely Edward King, whom Fortune did withstand.
Truly quoth she, thou well have spoke, I had her quite forgot,
Since small desert of memory, she left behind God wot
Marie a bitter flower God knows, sprung of so sweet a tree,
Yet bright she was in splendent throne, as any Queen could be:
Marie succeeded Edward sure, a branch of Henry's blood,
Though that her reign with Hesperus did Britain land small good.
A noble Prince no doubt she was, respecting reign and crown,
As reigning over such a land, as bears so high renown:
And wise she was as such one could, so left in brothers stead,
And wiser if she would have sought, to be the supreme head.
But she cast down that father raisde, which brother eke made sure,
And set up that which they cast down, of all things most vnpure:
Yet royally she ran her race, as fancy did her guide,
And sure right godly was her life, if knowledge had been tried.
A just religious mind had she, but wanting skill of truth,
Which caused in Britain land much woe, much wailing, pain and ruth
If thou will more said Memory to me, of Mary's reign,
The Acts and Monuments put forth, of that time show thee plain:
The tragical discourse thereof, the bloody slaughter fell,
Time will not serve me, but that book shall show thee very well:
At last when she had raignde in pomp, adjoined to such a throne,
Scarce willingly gave place to death, which Bellials sort did moan.
She seemed as yet to show a grace, that fatalls to defy,
And with these Champions both she sought, as time did them descrie:
But she alas was all to weak, for all the pomp she had,
And all the help of Balams flock, which prayed as they were mad.
Which roared and bleared in every route, that she had lost her life,
Because they knew if she were gone, then would begin their strife:
Well yet at length Debilitie and Dolor so preuaylde,
That they of her obtainde the price, which they had long assaylde.
And Attropos when they had done, cut off her vital threede,
How grievously and in what wise to show, is more than need,
And even as Memory had done this short discourse to me,
Of this same Queen, her reign and end, a Fort we began to see.
And eke a house or Mansion place, as we rode up the hill,
And underneath a valey fair, but forth we rode on still,
Till we were come unto the house, where Memory bade light,
There she constrained me to rest, because it was nere night.
Here will we bide, said she, a while, until the morrow day,
And then of other matters straight, I will to thee display,
At her request I lighted down, and put our Steedes to grass,
Then went we in, yet will we tell, what after came to pass.
The Author and Memory walking on foot, beholds the ancient show and
Funerals, of mighty Conquerours past.


Whereupon the Author beholding the same, desires Memory to show him the
meaning thereof, as erst to fore she ^ad begone.

When clowdie night so dark and grim, was paste then we arose,
Even when Auroras comely hew, began mornings cheer disclose.
When Cinthias horns were hid, when Phoebus took his race?
In glittring Chariot through the skies, fro Esterne throne apace.
Then said Dame Memory at once, make speed the day draws on,
And so we took our courteous leave, and went to horse anon:
The pleasaunts Dame is Memory, to ride or go withal,
She mooues the mind not to forget what after shall befall.
The cheerfulst Lady on the way, Dame Memory is sure,
That ever matched with Pilgrim tryde, his fancies to alure,
Besides recovering up the talk, that we had over night,
The cheer, the banquet and repast, the pastaunce and delight.
She had a thousand merry tales, of stories past and gone,
Which were with wisdom enterlaste, right meet to think upon:
Sometime by travail I began tire, and was right dull in mind,
But she espying me, forthwith adrest some mirth to find.
So passing on with merry tales, and wavering thoughts of me,
We began about the eleventh hour, a pleasant field to see.
I should have told first of the hill, where that the Forte did stand,
Where we had lodgde all the night, right worthy to be scande.
For on that hill the way lay right, a street bright, fair, and plain,
Much like the way that mountes the hill, Pernassus as they feign:
Save only that Pernassus way, leads up the wined hill,
And this from top has turnings none, but leads downward still.
Of all the places where I came, or aye have seen to tell,
To none I can compare this hill, whereon our iournay fell,
Except it be to that same place, under Pernassus side,
Where all the worthy Muses mine, Parnassides abide:
So fair, so sweet, with flowers and trees, of fruits a long our way.
That it unto Thesperides Garden compare I may,
Still all a long till at the last, the way led down amayne,
From whence as casting forth my sight, I spide y^ pleasant plain.
The beauty of the which, to much revived up my mind,
That still I longde to be therein, but lo I was behind:
It showed pleasant in mine eye, that field so fresh of glee,
As though from Oetas top, the Greacian land might see.
And still the nearer it I came, the fayrer it did seem,
Which made me muse and what it was, it caused me to deem:
And musing on it as I rode, as many minds are bent,
To changed fancies new and strange, grave study to prevent.
To please the eyes and fix their minds, often times or fangel^d chainge,
So I confess as one of those, whose mind did often rainge,
But as I mused, Dame Memory, had told me many a tale,
But sure I wist not what they were, no more then Jack a vale.
My mind was so bereft with toys, and fancies that I saw,
That what she said, I knew no more, then did a foolish dawe:
I was much like then as I thought, to some that I did know,
Which often does come in preaching place, where truth does bud and grow
To Sermons as they used when as, I was at home in rest,
To which full many well I know, would often be ready pressed:
And yet when as they were in place, their duties for to here,
So many toys and fancies fond, before them did appear.
That often when preacher had left off, if one should them desire,
They could as many words declare, as sea burn in the fire,
And knew as much their duty then, when Sermon ended was,
As Linus in Lupercall wood, to help Pans priest sing Mass.
So much beside my self was I, as they were with there toys,
To see this pleasant field so fair, it much encreast my joys:
But Memory much having said, perceiving eke my mind,
Knew well before she asked me, how my disease to find.
I answered hum and ha to her, but naught I did regard,
Of all the pleasant stories which she had for me preparde:
Much like as some, when wisemen shall, of wisdom touch them ought
And yet their ydell brains do still regard the same as naught.
At last said Memory in deed, as marking well my cheer,
Where on my friend is set thy mind, that me thou do not here:
Now sure dear Dame said I, this field bewraps my senses so,
That I am ravished with the sight, the further that I go.
With that Dame Memory to me did say, I was not wise,
To lose the marking of her talk, for pleasaunce of mine eyes.
This field she said which thou do see, so fair, so fresh and green,
Unto an other seems bare, as time has ever been.
This Field is Time that now appeeres of such a lively hew,
To thee and certain other mo, which peril never knew,
Which have enough as health and wealth, and ease withouten pain,
To whom each hap of words and deeds, still fall out perfect gain.
Whose sweetened mouths, no hunger taste, whose heart do take no thought
Whose hands to labor have no need, that Art should out be sought:
Whose pleasant face the siluered drops of trickling sweat does hate:
Whose wandering eyes are not oppressed, with watching over late:
Whose Corpse adourned takes no cold, at Borias bitter blast,
Such think this field a pleasant graynge, which never woe do taste,
Such as have all thing at their wills, withouten thought or care,
As ravished sure with sight thereof, there fancies fully are:
Whose Coffers are right full of Gold, whose Tables have no scant,
Whose costly lodgings in the night, of casement have no want:
Whose gorgeous vestments are framde, to pleasures of the eye,
Which as in honor, pomp, and praise, in Fortunes favor hye.
Those think this field of Time no doubt, a pleasant field to be,
Like Garden of Hesperides, or Thessal Grecians glee.
But unto such are tasting woe, grief, hunger, pain and smart,
Whose howling sight for ioylesse state, proceed from swelling heart:
Whose bodies are with toil oppressed, which cold with Saturs ire,
On whom Dame Fortune turns her back, not as they do require,
Which lack and taste of pinching pain, both naked poor and bare,
Which scarce do live in meanly state, for all their toil and care.
But glad to go from door to door, in howling yrcksome grief,
And are constrainde with witherd cheeks, to crave and ask relief:
To such this pleasant field of Time, which thou do think so gay,
A ioylesse plat they hold it sure, deuoyde of comfort they.
Some other think, as they likewise, of Balams flock I mean,
Which are dispoylde in this same time, of all their comfort clean:
Which had a time for them full fresh, men's souls to bye and sell,
Which were inricht by merchandise, y^ saved men's souls from hell.
What said I: saved? nay quite dispoyled, of everlasting joys,
While they in time of Molochs reign, were flattred forth with toys,
While such like Princes were inrichte, and fared of the best,
While simple sort like Idiot lobbes, or innocents were dressed.
They clothed in silks as Merchants rich, with Uenefices full,
With Benefices would I say, that made their brains so dull:
Which now do howl, in corners crept, for loosing of their gain,
And of this pleasant time for grief, do very much complain:
Though others joy, and think it sweet, yea happiest time of all,
When Gospel has them freede from Pope, and Popish cruel thrall:
And that belyke said Memory, does make it seem to thee
The Garden of Hesperides, more bewtifull to be.
For their grew Golden apples sure, which Hercules bereft,
But here the sound of lasting life, in holiest Garden left.
Yet mark and see the fickle chance, that happens in this time,
As well as in the ancient graunce, that was so full of crime.
And as the prosses of her talk, was thoroughly at an end,
We did begin in midst of field, apace for to discende,
Where as there was so fair a grove, and Arb^r for to rest,
As Phoebus in Meridian raze, began to be adrest.
We both in place there did alight, and as we walked by,
The pleasant fruits that there we saw, was passing to the eye,
The fragrant Rose, and smelling Mint, the Oliefe branches green,
A place most fit for valiant hearts, as for Minerua Queen.
Thus as we walkte Dame Memory, began take me by the hand,
Said she of other matters yet, I Will let thee understand,
She friendly askte me how I likte that Garden fresh and green,
Now sure Madame, said I ere this, the like I have not seen.
Go with me then she said, wherewith she began my steps to guide,
Out of a privy way that opte all at the sotherne side:
And being there straight was in sight the goodlest daled plain,
That is I think in all the coast, twixt Macedon and Spain,
Beset with great Pyramides, and Monuments right hie,
In good proportion and in hegth, Here Memory shows the Author the ancient
monuments.
right pleasant to the eye:
At thonside rocks and Mountains huge, and goodly groves to see,
Than all that I to fore had seen, this more delighted me:
Then as I cast mine eyes more low, I spide a mighty Prince,
With Diadem and stowtnesse there, and Scepter to convince,
In goodly Throne I saw him sit, with princely grace and cheer,
Like Philip king of Macedon, his countnaunce did appear.
Or like to Alexander sure, which wan by force of fight,
The universal world throughout, in thirtene years by might,
The shows of this old monuments, were notes of Princes past,
For other purpose serude they not, thus fame has end her blast.
So many as were valiant, their deeds do well record,
And for their faithful service here, they reign with God the Lord:
To such therefore as spent their time, like cruel Nero he,
Those monuments stand to their shame, as all full well may see.
Herod fell, Goliath stout, what praise left they behind,
Or Bacchus he, that belly God, sure Momus guestes assynde,
Their cruelty rest to their shame, unto the worlds end,
Their infamy and cankred hate, from light their eyes did bend.
Mark well therefore quoth Memory although these sights thee please,
The sights not seen with Jove above, does breed more joy and ease:
For these are things though fair, yet vain, a time to please the eye,
The life to come does far surpass, that journey let us hye.
Bewrapt I was with heavy care, when thus much he had said,
And very loath from thence to part, therewith I was dismayde.
Yet at the last she so me aid, to her I did consent,
With pleasant show of sugared words, my sorrows to prevent.
If we should make so much report, quoth Memory of all,
That we have seen and do behold, the Readers mind would pall:
Therefore from hence now let us part, our journey forth to pass,
As we have done from time to time, for run is half our glass.
To speak somewhat of worthy lights, which shines very clear,
I mind in deed for to declare, mark well, and thou shall hear.
That worthy Queen Elizabeth, that splendent Rose so clear,
Whose fame is spread in every coast, all Europe far and near:
With that I spoke to Memory our journey forth to ride,
And she with speed her self addressed, which I full soon espide,
On Will I rode, and she on Ease, from lofty hill to dale,
As afterward shall well be seen, such news account not stale.
The night approcht, and Vesper shone, Cinthia gave her shine,
Yet now and then when Clouds were past, from light for to decline,
A place we saw which did us joy, where we had hope to rest,
But being near Aurora she her self aloft adrest:
Seeing now therefore quoth Memory the day so fair begins,
Let us proceed our former talk, anoydiug Tritons ginnes,
His whistling Wilke shall not allure, nor yet his slily song,
That to escape we shall full well, his craft can not us wrong:
Ne fickle fancy let not move, your senses to withholde,
For Jove above does strengthen all, as erst before I told,
Where Memory and Reason eake, in man does still abide,
There virtue grows with lasting joys, at every time and tide.
The whole discourse of each man's life, may likened be to grass,
Whose state and stay is no time firm, for all away does pass:
The vehement cold congeales to yse, yet heat of sun does melt,
To grateful hearts a lasting praise, as all such past hane felt.
The Author beholds the discourse of Dolor and Debilitie, Thanatos sitting
and gives judgment, Attropos giving place.


As they are at contention, the worthy Queen Elyzabeth passes by, neither
Dol^r nor Debilitie, as yet not able to resist.

AS worthy facts deserves great fame, to such as virtue love,
So worthy praise is always pressed, by proof who list to prove.
No tongue ne pen may well express the benefits we have:
Not only store of worldly wealth, for that we need not crave.
All things that we can think or wish, concerning each estate,
Are brought to us, we lack them not, we need not fear of hate,
Of foreign power, Prince, nor land, if we each other love,
And do obey our noble Queen, as duty does us move.
Whose royal reign God so endue, sure Nestors years I wish,
That she long time may be our guide, her foes still to vanquishe:
And that we may while time we have, by duty seek to please,
Her royal grace our supreme head, Gods wrath thereby to pease.
No nation sure in Christen land, may so as we compare,
No worthier Princes bears life, nor none more takes care
To keep and govern this her Realm, by prudencie and skill
Is all her care, her land to rich, no subjects more have will.
Her splendent face and Crystal eyes, her comely corpse and gate,
Is able sure a heart of stone, to cause relent and quake,
By way of sage sobriety, her public wealth does guide,
I think the like scarce may be found at any time or tide.
What shall I say in farther praise, full well all men may know,
God grant therefore we thankful be, and duties to her show:
That land or nation which do love their Prince with heart and will,
God does and will them ever bless, in City, town and hill.
Well, to proceed quoth Memory, as erst we have begun,
Let us with speed no time delay, away our course does run.
Behold quoth she that yonder vale so bare and void of grass,
All barrenness the place is callde, where none may ouerpasse.
Behold also the ougly corpse, that bony figure he,
Is Thanatos which ends the life of every degree.
As Judge he sittes in midst of plain, to view the comers by,
And those in arms are champions stout, not one from them may fly.
If that he chance within their sight, full hard then may escape,
Debilitie so cruel is, and vital life does hate,
The Har^lde there Defiance hight, unto the comers by,
From Thanatos as Messenger, in wea^ned corpse a spy.
When flesh by Dolefulness is brought, to weak Debilitie
Then straight Defiance lie betwixt, the marie joints and knee:
Ever striving still in man, except fresh blood abound,
Decreasing all the vital powers, and Death straight gives the wound.
Conceive thou well quoth Memory, these Champions now behold,
A Cumbat sure we straight shall see, as erst before I told:
Their stryuing sure is all in vain, till God does give him leave,
Therefore with haste as we pass by, do close unto me cleave.
Fear not at all, as yet the force, may in no wise us let,
Although they strive who first shall reign, and lay their trapped net:
As we were talking in the vale, a far of I espide,
A Charet set with costly stone, and plumed on every side.
In haste I spoke to Memory, and askte her what they were,
Which came in order marching on, withouten dread or fear:
Remembrest not quoth Memory, Elizabeth that Queen,
Which I erst spoke, that worthy Prince, even she most comely seen.
With those her Nobles of her land, on prograce now they ride,
Through worldly pleasures trapped way, forth on apace they glide:
To vewe and see how every coast, is furnished with store,
If need should be, her foes to match, the boat and ship with Ore.
As well on seas of trobleous time, that nothing lacking be,
Her to defend in all assayes, from dangers eke her free:
Her captain stout Gods gospel pure, will fight so for her grace,
That Pope and Jew shall stand in fear, of her most splendant face.
And constant faith in Jesus Christ, Liefetenaunt hirs shall be,
Which seeks by means the life to come, as all full well may see.
All these already are with her, her mind they still obey,
So long as she goes forward on, not minding once to stay:
And for as much as she has care, her Realm to keep in peace,
It her behoues all coasts to seek, at no time sure to cease,
Not that she fears scarce time to have, such is her godly zeal,
But for to see all things well set, thus she for us does deal.
Debilitie ne Dolor eke, so strives to get them praise,
As she does sure think bring to pass, by sundry kind of ways:
That which is said as erst I told, if thou my words did here,
It shall suffice give ear again, behold they draw us nere:
Concerning that Debilitie, which striued so of late,
Is nothing else but want of blood, which lusty youth does hate:
And Dolor he does signify both pensive carpe and care,
Which does in time man's flesh abate, to fleshlesse bones all bare.
And Thanatos is griefly Death, which makes an end of life,
From hie and low, from youth to age, and eke both man and wife:
Discord and Grudge, delights to braule, and then they have their fill,
By sword or knife, each one to stay, still pressed they are to kill.
And since these sightes are passed by, we will not here abide
As yet, if thou will follow me, I still will be thy guide:
With that on Will I rode me forth, as now not far to iourne,
Quoth Memory behold, that thou may not again return.
Forth on we needs must take our way, for we two will alone
Debate of matters past and gone, as after shall be shown:
My color straight began to change, and strength did eke decreast,
And grayer head did then appear, I might not be releast.
Here the Author and Memory riding alone, Memory comfort him to provide and
arm himself against Thanatos.


The Author being somewhat moved by Memory, passes over the field of worldly
pleasure, and Time also nere past, begins to faint, yet for a time recovered
by Reason.

AS I rode on with countnance grim, and almost half dismayde,
That I also no way might fly, I began to be afraid:
For that I saw so many dead, of all degrees on ground,
I mused how I might escape, that none should me confound:
With that Dame Memory looked back, quoth she do not dismay,
No way there is therein to escape, the truth I do display:
When natures course by Time is spent, then needs must all adresse,
With spear and shield against the foe, I after will express.
For as these Champions still have striude, and thee beset full often,
Now thee to leave they will not sure, mark well this time is naught:
A werie place and painful vale, a dungeon dark and ill,
Where nothing bides in one estate, thou may not have thy will.
When I considered her words, and weyde them well in mind,
I began again for to revive, because she was so kind,
In showing me the dangers great, which passed were and gone,
And those to come, with cheerful words, so forth we rode alone,
To pass the field of barren Age, so much my mind did move,
That sore I was therewith dismayde, that (Will) no more to prove,
And spear of Regiment to lose, and eke my sword so bright,
Which Courage hight, wherewith I often did put my foes to flight.
Thus musing still the life to come, quoth Memory behold,
That Island plain, which does appear, with glasie Ise so cold.
That place is called Consumpsion, so empty, void and bare,
Which thou must pass, there is no way, thy self therefore prepare.
Within that place the Champions are, which minds thee to assail:
Distrust, Despair, and eke Disdain, but see thou do not quayle:
Thou shall them feel, but not them see, therefore do not dismay,
Their power is such where they bear rule, they turn to night y^ day.
The night I mean of worldly cares, which many do esteem,
To be more worth than lasting life, a day full bright does sheene,
For who that minds the life to come, himself may well insure,
This worldly vale and dungeon dark, does man from life procure.
Therefore quoth she, now let us ride apace till we have got
Some house to rest, where harbor is, that none by way us stop.
Behold quoth she, that Phoebus fair begins to dis^^^de,
And Vesper she, ere long will show, the day to be at ^^de:
With that I set my spurs to horse, whose pace began to dull,
Nothing so quick as at the first, no race could run at full:
Espying thus my horse to faint, I long desirde to see
Some house or place for us to rest. Then both we did agree,
Before that Vesper began to shine, a place we did epsy,
Whereby with haste rode on our way, and thither did us hie,
But ere we further do proceed, quoth Memory to me,
Be not to rash in entering in, some light now let us see.
With that I looked round about, aloft I spied light,
So clear it shone as does the sun, with all his beams so bright,
To knock quoth she, I will begin, this place I surely know,
Which called is the Hoped Time, which faithfulness does show,
Well, quoth Memory alight, till some us come until,
Ere long there will approach to us, obtain we shall our will:
And with that there came a messenger, True Zeal which did prepare,
A chamber fresh which Pain it hight, as we shall now declare.
Here the Author by Memory takes his rest, at the end of the desert of
barren Age, or Consumption.


And being lighted of their horses, the Author sickeneth in the Chamber called
Pain.

No sooner entered was I sure, such pain in corpse I felt,
That I was feign to lay me down upon a couch or pelt:
Till that true Diligence for me, prepared had a bed,
And godly Zeal full ready had a kerchefe for my head.
Th^s lying down upon my bed, in doleful sort began moan,
Perceiving well that needs I must, do that that erst was shown:
That is, to ^^aue this fleshly corpse, and changed life to see,
Which I long time s^ught to defend, and yet it would not be.
To think upon that Will my horse, my grief did more abound,
Him to ^orgo it gr^e^de me much, even like a deadly wound:
With that came Memory to me, and bade me take good heed,
Not to dismay although the time, by Jove is full decreede.
Why do thou sighe and languishe so, it may thee not prevail,
Lo, Reason he shall so thee rule, that thou shall well prevail:
To ^ide the saute of Thanatos, he will thee so inflame:
That from Despair, Disdain, and Ire, thou shall escape as game.
So long as thou will ruled be, by Reasons sage advise,
True Diligence and constant Hope, will coun^ thee then full wise:
Lo Patience straight will then appear, and endless joy and guide,
To drive away Distrust and Ire, as gold thou must be tried.
With that came Reason to the bed, and bid him not dismay,
For I sure am a friend of thine, my love I will display,
And lay abroad before thee so, if thou will me regard,
And after me as faithful friends, already are preparde.
That is, faith, hope and charity, which will thy mind allure,
To do and say all that shall prove, and life they will procure:
By me therefore now ruled be, then mark what will ensue,
A happy state and joyful life: these words as sure most true.
Behold where I am resident, there always grows fame,
To prince, to king, and every state, I still incur good name:
So if thou will be ruled by me, I will not fro thee part,
Till Cloth^s he have sp^n her threede, with all her slily Art.
Till Attropos have whet their knife, the vital threede to end,
Till Thanatos his course does end, my love I will extend.
Therefore of me thou may be sure, if thou my words regard,
No enemy sure shall thee (...), although ^ull near preparde.
When Reason thus had said his mind, to Memory I said,
How like you this I pray you show, I need now of your aid:
With that she smilde as one yet glad, espying not forgot,
His counsel sure is certes good, and sins away will blot.
No man on earth may Death withstand, therefore unwise is he,
Which will contend with yrefull words, as all full well may see:
For yrefull words breeds cankered hate, Debilitie to vex.
And Dolor he must needs decrease, beware of Discordes checks,
In sickness he that way ward is, and will no reason here,
Always does breed, his own disease, as may full well appear:
The frantike minds of many one, so to their wills are bent,
That medicine and physic both, may cause them to repent.
Such wilful pacients therefore, that will not turn in time,
May well be sure to feel the rod, of pinching pain and crime:
For there as Reason may not rule, nor Memory that Dame,
In steed of hops of endless life, Distrust there reapes the game,
And where Distrust once bears sway, their straight apeeres Despair
To draw away that soul from light, and state thereby appaire.
God grant therefore all christian hearts, so to provide in time,
That lively spirit of just belief, may not from thee decline.
But that which fervent zeal does show, by Jove above divine,
Disturbance he does grudge and hate, much more he does repine:
For when he sees the feeble corpse, oppressed with woe and pain,
Most busiest then he is to me, although most vile and vain.
He will therefore provide in time, while prosperous state does last,
In calling still for Gods merey, shall not be made aghast:
Of wicked spirits for to delude, they shall not thee annoy,
Though thousands have thy corpse (...), with g^^lefull fanci^s coy.
No man on earth himself may free, from the infirmity*
Of fleshly life while he have breath, such powers to disagree:
I wish therefore all faithful hearts, there minds so fully bend,
And still to crave mercy and grace, for that they have ^^^nde.
These words when Memory had said, they did my ^art such good,
My sickness I almost ^orgate, but Reason with me stood:
My heart was lightened very much, wherefore I calde amayne,
For armor then, and Will my horse, yet once again to rain.
Wherewith that I wou^^ make an end, of this my trauayled time,
The sooner then to end this race of ^^nkered ire and crime:
But seeing weakness so opp^^sse my s^^ly corpse in deed,
On Will I began my foe to ^^^^te, that Thanatos with speed.
And being armde with Godly Zeal, my self so did apply,
That not estate ne loss of li^^ could make me back to fly,
But when he came his might was such, I could not him withstand,
Forthwith I yielded as captive then, and void of foreign land.
God grant unto all faithful hearts, such race always to run,
That no desire of worldly wealth, their minds once ouercume:
Then be you sure, when vital thread, by Attropos is rent,
With Gods elect in lasting joys, no care more to relent.
Farewell my friends, lo ye have heard, such news as I have seen,
In every cost and land where I, long time and days have been:
Let this suffice your fickle minds, except you farther iorne,
So this now done, my self does please, and so does serve my turn.
Though plain and base, not eloquent, as well sure as I can,
A better may hereafter hap, if that thou rightly skan:
Farewell adue yet once again, mark well ere thou dispraise,
Least in the end thou be to rash, not trading Reasons ways.
FINIS.
John. 3. They shall die that believe not in Christ, and the wrath of God
abides upon them.

Eccle. 9.They that be dead know nothing, such as are dead in sin, thy dead
men shall live, such as are dead in the works of the flesh, shall be quickened
in the spirit. Sapiens. 13.Among the dead there is hope, among such wicked as
will be converted from their abominations, there is life promised, so that
they return not to their vomit again. Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham,
dwelling in Paternoster row, at the sign of the star.

Anno Domini. 1569.


