SIR PHILIP SYDNEYS Ourania, That is, Endimions Song and Tragedy, Containing
all Philosophy.

Written by N. B.

LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde, for Edward White, and are to be sold at the
little North door of Saint Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1606.

TO MY EVER-HONOred Lady and Mistress Arcadian Cynthia, Maria Pembrokiana.
WOrlds wonder, learned, mighty Cinthia,
Arts Darling, and Times Babe, subject of fame,
Wits object, Arcadian Pastorella
Wisdoms Trophae honor and virtues frame,
Pardon (Princess) though I conceal thy name.
Thy Train, and Paragons of high degree
Homer and Virgill, used to do the same,
And Astrophill when he decyphred thee,
Baxtero Mastix may disparage me,
That I dare make thee subject of my pen,
At whose aspect Poets amazed be,
As things beyond the reach, of private men.
But wonder, Learning, wit, Fame, Wisdom, Time,
Shall glorify the subject of this Rhyme.
Time, wisdom, learning, wit wonder and fame,
Endimion told me should attend on thee:
He consecrat's Ourania to thy name,
Without respect of paedanticall fee,
But if perchance great Astrophill thou see,
And Fates with-holde thee from Endymion:
He humbly sues that he released be,
Of arrogance, and proesumption,
That he without his knights iniunction
Should dedicate unto thy princely Shrine,
The treasury, and hidden function,
Of Iehouahs Hexameron divine.
And he that whilome lived in Grecian deep's,
Craves help of thee, as he in English creep's.
N. B.

To the right Honorable and virtuous (...) the La. Katherine Countess of
Huntington, the Lady Mary Countess of Pembrooke: the Lady Susan Countess of
Mongomria: and the Lady Barbara Viscounte^ Lisle, wife to the noble Knight Sir
Robert Sidney Viscount Lisle.
THey say the soaring Eagle eats no Flies,
yet it may pleasure her to see them play:
The smallest spark that couched in embers lies,
Shows whilom sier in that circle lay,
Each thing created may yield a sweet delight,
To wi^est wits perpending it aright.
Great Macedon when he laid by his Lance,
Sported himself with Homers golden verse,
And Hercules in his obscured trance,
Would needs have Theseus Madrigals rehearse,
And Astrophill when bloody wars were done,
Pastim'd himself to see the Muses run.
The wisest Monarch of Jerusalem,
Viewed the Pismire for recreation,
Glorious Adam, Seth, Methusalem,
Had Marble stones in admiration.
Pliny, and Virgill wrote of seely Bees,
Of Gnats, of Fleas, of Shrubs, and Myrtle trees.
Yea simple^wormes are used for a sport,
And Ladies love to see a Monkey play,
And every tired wit seeks comfort,
In honest mirth to pass the time away:
The Ladies Spaniel snarling in her lap,
Sometimes delights her after her mis-hap.
The greatest Clearks of yore to try their wit,
Made foolishness the subject of their Pen,
And for their pleasures others thought it fit,
To prove that Baldness best becomes men.
And every Stationer has now to sale,
Pappe with a Hatchet, and Madge-Howlets tale.
And now comes cre^ping (...) Endymion,
Leaving Mysteries Theological,
Scarce worth the rotten earth he ^readeth on,
And tells strange Tales Philosophical,
Anatomizing th'uniuersall round,
and whatsoever may there^^ be found.
He pipeth in his homely Country Reed,
Made of an old Aristotelia^ Quill,
He ken^ no Crochets of contentious breed,
Nor has that Quintessentiated skill,
He has no fine Dichotom^ating wit,
Such music as he learned, he descants it.
You mighty Ladies that seeken repaste,
When weighty causes have your Spirits tired,
Rest here your wearied lims, and take a taste,
Here view the works of God so much admyr'd.
And fit your selves of Byr^^, of Beasts or Fish,
Twist Laurel Garlands, a^ your hearts can wish.
High-pryz'd Ourania, let her live with you,
And shield her from surprising infamy,
That virtue entertaines with frowning brow,
And learning scorns as pining beggerie,
Making more reckoning o^ a golden Ass,
Then of Trismegist-Caelestiall- A^l^s.
Endymion vow's if Fates do (...) aright,
With Corollaries of a laurel Tw^ne*
That shall endure th'euerlasting light,
He Will shortly dignifie your princely shrine^punc;
Meanwhile all honor shall your states attend,
Blessed ^e your life, and hap^^e be your end.
N. B.

To the Right Noble, and Honorable Lady Susan Vera Mongomriana.
VAliant whilome the Prince that bare this Mot,
ENgraued round about his golden Ring:
ROaming In VENICE ere thou wast begot,
AMong the Gallants of the Italian spring.
Never omitting what might pastime bring,
ITalian sports, and Syren^ Melody:
HOpping H^lena with her warbling sting,
INfested the Albanian dignity,
LIke as they poisoned all Italy.
VIgilant then the eternal majesty,
ENthraled souls to free from infamy:
Remembering thy sacred virginity,
INduced us to make speedy repair,
Unto thy mother everlasting fair,
SO did this Prince begette thee debonaire.
SO wast thou chaste and princely Nymph begot,
Under Ce^ilias education
STrong in allied friends of highest lot,
AMidd the court of estimation
NOr do I give thee this for adulation:
NO Pen can show thy propagation,
ALl heavens bless thine operation.
NAked we landed out of Italy,
INth^al'd by Pirates men of noe regard,
HOrror and death assayl'd Nobility,
IF Princes might with cruelty be scared
LO thus are excellent beginnings hard.
COnioyn'd thou art to great Mongomria,
A Peerless Lady only fit for him:
SOber and chaste, he was in Cardiff Cambria,
THe Knight I knew before mine eyes were dim,
IF Temperance, and continence, an Earl may trim,
Under the Orb of mighty Phoebes round,
SYdn^ian Knights like him are hardly found.
N. B.

To the Honorable La. Kalandra, the noble D. Hastings.
NOble Kalendra Niece to Cynthia;
Endymion with all humility,
Sends to thy blessed self O^ra^^a,
With her accomplished Philosophy,
Long kept she Greekish Ladies company.
And thence arrived in Britannia,
Inquiring for Nymphs of high dignity,
Great Pastorellas of Albania:
Tritonizing Fame blazed Doro^beia*
Thrice renowned, learned, religious,
Thy self, modest, virtuous, Hastinguia,
In the Garland of Nimphs illus^rious:
High prized Branch of Noble Huntington,
Cherish Ourania, and grace Endymion.
N. B.

To the virtuous Lady M. Agape Wrotha.
IN all the Greek None but this word is found,
That does contain a true description,
Of virtues Cardinal, which d^ on abound
In thine Heroy call disposition*
Agape shows thy compositio^
Love it is called in our Dialect*
EROS is Venerie; but this Di^ection,
Chaste, holy, modest, divine and perfect,
Arcadian Sydney gave thee this aspect,
When he forsook this transitor^e Globe,
To mount the whirling Orb^ with course direct,
Adorning thee with love for marriage Robe.
Since famous W^OTH Agape has possessed:
Ourania pray's a while to be your guest.
N. B.

To the right virtuous young (...) Mansella.
Virtuous young Lady deigne Endymion,
Though he be chained in obscurity,
Humbly to send thee salutation:
Presenting thee with Shepherds melody,
As wanting ritcher means to glorify
Thy noble Knight, and thee, whose high estate,
Ourania crowns with faelicitie:
Prysing thy youngest years at highest rate.
Noble Sydneian babe Intemerate,
Endymion's feeble infant is his wit,
Such style and phrase, of worth to fabricate,
As might give life, and luster unto it.
But my defects Ourania shall supply,
In teaching thee and thine Philosophy.
N. B.

To the Right Worshipful, and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Daniell wife to the
Right worshipful Sir William Daniel^ Knight one of his Majesty's Justices of
the Common Pleas.
RIght virtuous Lady, health and happiness,
Mourning Endymion in Obscurity*
Does wish to thee, though he be in distress,
Entrapped by malicious Treachery,
Of such as glory in his Misery.
He found thy Knight a Patron in his grief,
Commiserating his extremity,
Vn-monyed Preachers seldom find relief,
Of men excelling in that faculty.
There lies some secret hidden mystery*
That wit of mortal man cannot unfold,
Why blessed caelestiall Divinity,
And learned men, are Measured by their gold,
Happily Ourania shall untwine this string,
Good Lady read her book, and hear her sing.
N.B.

Sir Philip Sidney's Our^nia. OR* ENDIMIONS Song and Tragedy, Containing all
Phylosophie.
WHen Phoebus gave his fiery horses rest*
And circled had his glorious Hemisphere:
When every Creature thought him fully blessed
And Tytan began old Thetu^ bed to cheer,
When silent-nights black mantle did appear,
In secret sort I gave the looking on,
While blessed Cynthia graced Endymion.
I saw how that the sacred Nymph came down
In purple Robe, with stars y^retyzed
I saw her guard, chaste Ladies of renown,
Blessed of the Gods, with fame enthronized:
In neuer-dying Rowles eternized.
I knew them all; Endymion the Swayne*
And mighty Cynthia with her blessed Train.
She is well known whom all the world admires
For virtuous life, and prudent modesty;
Rare are her gifts full of Sydner^an-fyres,
Muses and Graces of high sovereignty:
Attend and garnish her with modstie.
I mean not now therefore to paint her praize,
Being a task too high for withered Baize.
But show the story as it then fell out,
When she first favored Endymion:
And how false Lyuidus brought it about,
That Cynthia had him in suspi^ion:
(No heart can shrowde it in obl^uion)
And who so reads Endymions woeful Verse
Let him with tears his Tragedy rehearse.
It greeues my heart to se the gentle Swayne,
That kept his tender Lambs on Ida Mount:
And brought them down again into the plain,
To take their pleasure by the siluered Fount,
Folding them all, and taking just account,
Least one of them by Careless oversight
Should wandering perish in the darke-some night.
It greeues my heart (I say) to hear his moan,
Fast by the walls of Troy where once he dwelt:
With wringing hands and many a grievous groan,
He did express the miseries he felt.
A heart of flint I think would surely melt,
To see a gentle Shepherd thus cast down,
By Enuies practice and great Cynthyas frown.
You mighty Princes and high Potentates,
That with your Scepters swaye great Monarchies,
You Lords and Knights and all you meaner States*
Which do excel in happy dignities:
Foresee your fall by enuies Treacheryes;
And chase her from your habitation,
As Hagge of Hellish generation.
Observe her practices in tumbling down,
The greatest princes of the Oulderne times:
Bereauing Monarchs of the Imperial Crown,
Against their persons urging feigned Crimes,
As you may read in Poets golden Rymes.
And see in this most woeful History,
Glorious Endymions Catastrophie.
In Troy Town situate in Cambria,
There dwelt this Sheapherd of a gentle race;
Near fronting upon great Mongomria,
Where Princely Arthur kept his courtly place,
Guiding great Albion with his golden Mace,
Where Knights and Ladies cladde in princely wee^s,
Showed testimony of their worthy deeds.
There did this gentle Shepherd feed his flock;
There tuned he his well contryued Reed:
Sitting on top of highest Ida rock,
Suffering his tender Lambs mean while to feed,
VVhiles he, clad in his homely Country weed,
Sang Madrigals and Stanzies of great worth,
And descanted to bring his Music forth.
Well could he sing divine and sacred lays,
With blessed notes as Poets did record,
In siluered lines painting high Ionahs praise.
And eke the death of Christians dying Lord.
Such Music did he often his ^^ocke afford.
As made them leave their food to listen well,
As if they were inchaunted with the spell.
Satyrs and Siluans at the harmony,
Sometime came darting from the darkesome Grove,
Approouing often the chaunting melody,
And with their harsh and rural voices strove,
To sound the praises of celestial Jove;
But when their Pipes and voices disagreed,
They held their peace and cast away their reed.
Sometimes he made the Rocks for to rebound,
With Echo of his Notes; sometime the dales,
And woods, and springs, to yield a burbling sound,
As beaten with reflexe of Madrigales;
Sibillas Oracles, and prophets ^ales:
Which show the way to immortality,
In perfect Hymns of true divinity.
So well he could his warbling Notes divide,
That other Shepherds did his ^ayes admire,
And set their Notes, as he their Pipes did guide,
Until they could unto the like aspire:
Yet never took he recompense or hire,
But as he lay upon the Idaean hill,
He daily sounded loud his (...) quill,
Long lived upon this Mount the gentle Swayne,
Recording songs unto the Deity:
Till Cynthia walking with her blessed Train,
Approached the shepherd and his melody.
Where she observing well the Harmony,
With Majesty divine and princely grace,
Retired her self and pauz'd a little space.
I well did view the Coronet she ware,
With Diamonds and Sapphires orient,
A Carkenet most precious and rare,
Fretized with Carbuncles which Hebae sent,
(The same which Pyrocles did first invent)
Did circle twice, her sacred neck, and breast,
In which the Muses, and the Graces, rest.
Between her paps a lustrious Diamond;
Linked to her Carkenet by curious Art,
(Of yore found out by skillful Belysond,
And given by the mighty Britomarte)
So placed was, that light it might imparte,
To all inferior Orbs in darkest night,
When Phoebus had with-draw'n his glorious light*
A surcote all of purple silk she wore,
Diapred with Flora's curious skill,
Butned with oriental Pearls before,
with golden loops to fasten at her will,
Framed for her body by great Astrophill.
Such as Bellona used heretofore,
In chasing of the feirce Adonian Bor^.
Wauing and wide tuck't up unto her knee,
Adorned with a frinoge of purest gould,
Whence parcel of the Lawne I chanced to see,
That whiter then it self, her skin does fould;
By Physis framed for feature uncontrolled:
Like whitest Iuorie beautiful and trymme*
Whiter then Swannes that in Meander swim*
Part of her legs gave luster to my view,
As Iuorie pillars bearing up the frame;
By that I judge my other speeches true,
Which who so sees shall verify the same.
Pardon divine and most Illustrious Dame,
Though simple Swaynes do glorify thy name,
Since by this subject get we lasting fame.
Her Iuorie legs and feet the bu^ltins hide,
Of curious stuff with gold imbellished,
Lest natures Ornaments should be espied,
Of worth-lesse wantons, rude, unpolished,
Or Venus brats of wits unfurnished:
For over all, she vaild her with a Robe,
As azur'd welkin ouer-spreads the Globe.
Two Greyhounds swift and white as whitest snow,
Attend her to pursue the nymble Dear:
And in her hand she bare a dreadefull bow,
To kill the game, if any should appear,
Or any deadly foe approach too near,
Thus stands great Cynthia in the midst of May,
With all her Train to hear Endymions Lay.
What was the Subject of the Shepherds Song,
Ask noble Cynthia, for she can tell:
I list not now to keep you ouer-long,
For needless things become not stories well:
The Stationers the Shepheard^ music sell.
But listen well I Will tell you more anon,
Of Cynthias Ladies and Endymion.
The first was Vera daughter to an Earl, Vera.

Whilom a Paragon of mickle might:
And worthily then termed Albions Pearl,
For bounty in expense, and force in fight,
(Me list to give so great a prince his right)
In all the Tryumphs held in Albion soil,
He never yet received disgrace or foil.
Only some think he spent too much in vain,
That was his fault: but give his honor due,
Learned he was, just, affable and plain;
No traitor, but ever gracious, and true:
Against Princes peace, a plot he never drew.
But as they be deceived that too much trust:
So trusted he some men, that proved unjust.
Weak are the wits that measure Noblemen,
By accidental things that ebb and flow;
His learning made him honorable then,
As trees their goodness by their fruits do show,
So we do Princes by their virtues know.
For riches, if they make a King; tell then;
What d^ffer poorest Kings, from poorest men*
One branch amongst the rest; he left behind,
To spread the glory of th'Oxonian line:
Noble by birth, true, liberal, and kind.
The glorious fruit of high Cecilian vine;
Sacred in marriage with everlasting twyne,
Which Juno sponne for great Mongomria,
A mighty Prince in western Cambria.
Calandra, Hastingua.
Calandra was the next of Princely race,
Hastingua bred her, in her sacred Cell,
Of wisdom excellent, of modest grace,
Profoundest Oracles of Christian spell,
She wisely could unfold and plainly tell,
Ashebie de la Zouch.
She learned this skill of that Ashbeian Prince,
Who often did Carpocrates convince.
Agape, Wrotha.
Agape, with Musophila the Bride,
Ladies of worth, and babes of Sydneia,
Euph^es ornaments, and natures pride,
Musophila, Herberta.
Nimphs, Pastorellas of Arcadia;
Fostered in the Muses Gunakeia.
These four followed blessed Cynthia,
To view the gardens of Hesperida.
With many another honorable Dame,
Blessed Phileta, Clara, Candida;
These lodge within the house of Cynthia, Phileta. Clara. Candida.

Within the Land of Terra Florida,
Fronting the Fountains of Ca^^alida^;
These circle fairest Cynthia in a King,
While she does stay to hear Endymion sing.
The Jewels which they wore gave such a shine,
Upon a sudden to the silly Swain,
That all unable were his feeble ^yne,
So great a luster longer to sustain,
Down fell his pipes, dead was his musick^straine,
For private men, hardly behold^ her face,
But strait they stand amazed in the place.
But Cynthia stooped and took him up again,
And rubbed his Temples with her tender hand:
Each Lady strove to take the greatest pain,
To rouse him from his Trance, and make him stand.
Each way to save his life, was deeply scand,
But all in vain, till Cynthia laid aside,
Her Majesty, that daunteth rural pride.
At last the silly Shepherd began revive,
Yet as amazed he knew not where he was:
But stood as one half dead, and half alive,
As often times we see it come to pass,
(For mortal man compared is to grass)
Flora cannot sustain the parching heat,
Of Phoebus beams incessantly to beat.
But she that knew the cause of his distress,
Releiued him with words of sweetest grace
And said: Thou gentle Swayne, the Gods thee bless,
Be of good cheer: Cast sorrow from thy face:
Keep on thy Lay, and blessed be thy race,
Thrice happy he that taught thy Music sownd,
Joy to their hearts, whom Mis^rye does wound.
Cast fear away, I Will be thy Patroness:
While Chynthia lives Endymion is sure;
Let no astonishment, thy mind oppress:
Thus did her gracious words, the Shepherd cure.
Who looking up with countenance demure,
Bowing himself with humble reverence,
Address^d this speech, unto her Excellence.
Renowned Cynthia glory of thy Sex,
For learning had in admiration:
The shine of whose illustrious reflexe,
May dazzle wits of high invention:
Divine Mistress of Elocution,
Pardon poor Shepherds rude, and worthless Rymes,
Not such as were the Lays of Olderne Times.
Rare is thy skill, in mighty Poesy;
Whom Poets Laureat crown, with lasting Bays,
In Songs of never dying Memory,
Such as greater Homer sung in former days.
When he with Hymns, did chaste Cassandra praise.
O let me live I pray thee, on this Hill,
And tune in Country sort my crazed Quill.
This modest suit, (quoth Cynthia) is not fit
For thee to crave; nor for my state to grant:
Thou oughtst in higher strain t'aduance thy wit,
And sacred Notes among learned men to chaunt;
Me list not to thy face thy Music vaunt.
I like it well, and this may thee suffice,
Songs of no worth I utterly despise.
If thou accountst my judgment any thing,
And deemst me far remote from flattery,
Let me entreat thee once again to sing,
Melodious Notes of sweetest Harmony.
For such do please the highest Deity,
And comfort us after our weary Hours,
Which we have spent in gathering Gilliflowers.
The Shepherd lowting low, m^^le obeisance,
To all the blessed Ladies in their gre^:
He promised to show his puissance,
And took his Pipe down from a laurel Tree.
(For hundreds such on Ida planted be)
Appollo set them circle-wise for w^nder*
To shroud the Shepherds from lame Vulcans thunder.
And all the Ladies placed themselves a row,
To compass round the mighty Cynthia.
Before was never seen such glorious show*
To grace Endymion in Cambria.
Who (encouraged by Musophila,
The Lady Bride, and Bride of happy choice)
Tun'de well his Pipe, unto his trembling voice*
And sang the Song of universal Pan,
High Sovereign God, and Prince of Happiness:
When, where, and how, great Iou^ this Globe began,
To show his everlasting Mighti^es.
How every Orb his center does possess,
And all things else as now they framed been,
In blessed order, comely to be seen.
I heard him sing a Lay of mickle worth,
Which I by parts will orderly relate,
Help me great Cynthia to set it forth,
Being choice Melody and intricate,
Prized by Poets at the highest rate,
A Subject fit for Sydneys eloquence,
High Chaucers vain, and Spencers influence.
The Song.
BEfore this world (quoth he) ^as set in frame,
Or any thing, had Essence, fo^^e, or Name,
Or Sun or Moon or starry F^^mament,
Or Planetarie Orbs, or Element*
Or Snow* o^ Hail, or any Meteore,
Whereof each Element produces store:
Or Sea, or Sand, or Pearl* or Foul, or Fish,
Or any Jewel, which the world may wish,
Or Flora^ Mantle garnished with flowers,
Wherewith you Ladies, deck your princely Bower^:
Or Trees, or Beasts, or any creeping things,
Which nature in abundance daily brings:
Or Gold, or Silver, Copper, Lead or Brass,
Or glorious Man, or blessed woman was,
Or any thing that may be thought upon,
Had either state* or constitution;
There was one Sovereign God, which we call Pan,
That cannot be defined by mortal man.
Ieho^a. Elo^^m. Theos (...).

Deus quasi (...) Ti^or.


Some call him Ioua for his Existence,
Some Elo^ym for his excellence,
Some call him Theos for his burning light
Some call him Deus, for his fearful might.
Some call him mighty Tetragrammaton
Of letters four in composition,
There is no Region underneath the sky,
But by four letters write the Deity.
For four is a perfect number square,
The Deity written by 4. Letters.

We called that Good, which now we call God.


And aequall sides in every part does bear.
And God is that, which sometime Good we named.
Before our English Tongue was shorter framed:
Pan in the Greek, the Shepherds do him call,
Which we do term the whole universal.
All in himself, All one, All every where,
All in the Center, All out, All in the Sphere,
All seeing all, All comprehending all,
All blessed, Almighty, All aeternall,
Comprehended in no circumference
Of no beginning, nor ending essence,
Not capable of composition,
Quality, accident, division,
Passion, form, or alteration.
All permanent without Mutation*
Principal Mouer always in action,
Without weariness or intermission.
Immortal, and without infirmity,
Of everlasting splendent Majesty.
One in Essence, not to be divided,
Yet into Trinity distinguished*
Three in one essence, one essence in three*
A wonder I confess too hard for me.
Yet divine Poets innumerable,
With strong Arguments irresistable,
As Theorems, and Demonstrations,
Deliver it, to our Contemplations.
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost these three,
Are subsistent persons in the Deity:
Abba, Ben, Ruach, blessed Poets sing, Abba, Father. Ben, Son. Ruach, Spirit

Are the true Names of Pan celestial King.
This may suffice, to show a mystery,
That passes mortal Man's Capacity.
Now to proceed: Blessed immortal Pan, Angels not made before Heaven.

Was not alone before this world began,
Yet were no Angels as then created,
Nor Angels Offices destinated.
Nor could their attendance do him pleasure,
In whom consisted all blessed treasure,
All comprehending Pan was then no where.
A certain place must every Angel bear.
Not circumscriptiue but definitive. The Reason. Place. Circumscrip Definitive.
Repletiue.




Pan fills each place in manner repletiue.
But Abbae, Ben, Ruach in Trinity,
Making one Pan in perfect unity,
Whole Pan in each, and each of these in Pan,
A mystery that passes reach of Man,
These were sufficient of themselves to frame,
This glorious Engine which we Cosmos name. Cosmos: the world.

Who when he pleased to make his glory known
And have his power manifestly show'n,
He puts on triumphant Majesty,
That all his creatures might him glorify.
And at one instant with his only word,
As a most mighty, and imperial Lord,
This wondrous frame, of Heaven and Earth we s^e*
At once were made in substance as they be.
Yet was this frame a Mass unpolished,
Void of all form, rude and ungarnished,
Water, Earth, Air, Fire, together blended,
As if Confusion were the thing intended.
But mighty Ruach spread his powerful wings,
Upon this Mass, of all confused things;
And kept it warm, making it apt to take,
Such different form as pleased Pan to make.
So mighty Jove commanded separation,
Twixt light and heavy things for generation.
And of light Bodies made a Circumference,
In circle wise from the earth for difference.
And made the earth both fast and permanent,
The Center of th'vniuersall continent.
And all these light bodies did he then dispose,
Ten heavens.
Into ten Heavens, the rest to enclose,
The Imperial Heaven first and principal,
Coelum Empyreum.
Most large and beautiful glorious, eternal,
Where Pan himself, does usually rest,
Where Angels dwell, and sacred souls are blessed:
Primum Mob^le.
The second the first moving heaven is,
Not Christaline as many think amiss,
Whereby all other Orbs do chiefly move,
According to the will of Pan above.
Coelum St^ll^ticum
The third is called the starrie Firmament,
which to our view is always eminent.
Packt full of stars as Goulden Nails in Poast,
To give a luster unto every coast:
To give direction to them that sail,
(...) Hyades.
From port to port, for their Countries avail.
To bring sweet shewers to Tellus excellence,
As they arise by blessed influence.
One shepherd thought this Orb the first that moved,
Arist. de (...).
But false it is by many reasons proved,
In order then do follow (...),
Known to each Figure-stinger under heaven,
That wize from thence many a^ vncou^h-tale,
As if great ^an were closed in their Male,
With fiery Trigons and watrie Triplici^^^,
They dazell the minds of humane simplicity,
Turning the true nature of Ast^onomie,
Into judicial Egyptian Sophistry, Caster of figures.

For Planets show by their opposition,
Trine, Quartile, Sextile, or Conjunction,
Whereto the weather and bodies do incline,
By Natures course not prophecy divine.
Nor can they show by any secret star,
Whether thou shall die in pris^n or in war,
Yet doubt we not; the Stars have operation,
Working a secret inclination.
But what and how many of these Stars there b^^,
Of that infinite number which we see,
Whether the thousand and two and twenty,
Which Shepherds single out of that plenty; 1022. stars known.

Or all the stars together in the Sky,
Can show when, and where, thou and I shall die.
Or all the virtues of the Planets seven,
Can prove thee damned, or bring thee unto heaven:
Since judgment of the stars can all things show,
They can unfold this Mystery I trow.
The end of stars, as seely shepherds saine, The end why the stars were made.

Was to illuminate this darkesome plain,
And to demonstrate to men of reason,
Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter season.
Not to foreshew what certain shall befall,
To every part of this universal.
But to conclud, I say, as I began,
A modest wisdom well beseemes a man. Three other heavens or Orbs. Saturn.
Jupiter. Mars.




Yet these are the names of the Planets seven,
As near as simple shepherds (...) them (...),
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are three,
Next to the starrie Welken in degree,
Much slower than the rest in motion,
Because of their lofty Constitution.
Sol.
Phoebus is next which we call Sol, the Sun,
Without whose light the world were clean undone
Without whose heat nothing that liu's could live,
For Light and Heat, No Planet else does give.
He is the Fost'rer of this earthly Round,
And all the creatures that therein be found,
Piercing all things below with powerful Rays
(Hark how the chirping Birds do chaunt his praise)
He swiftly runs over th'vniuersall,
In twenty four hours a day natural
And yet he keeps a station divine,
Staying one Month in every Zodiake Sign.
Producing creatures of such variety,
As mou's all men t'admire his Deity.
No Star within the VVelkin takes place,
But borrowes light of his resplendent grace.
The mighty Ocean is nourished by him,
Phaebe her self without his light is dim.
Jove's winged messenger sweet Mercury,
Is fed by Phoebus blessed harmony.
Venus the darling to the god of war,
Does never rest if Phoebus be too far.
The bottom of the Sea, the fish, the sand,
Receive their comfort from his blessed hand.
Tellus her self, and Flora in her pride,
Die and consume, if Phoebus look aside.
The Diamond, Saphyr, and Rubie red,
By Phoebus scorching heat are engendered:
The golden metals in the deepest Mine,
Do consecrate their being to his Shrine.
Ceres that Queen does fade and pine away,
If mighty Phoebus hide his golden ray.
Yea Bacchus and Pales, are soon withered,
If Phoebus in the Spring do hide his head.
Aeternall night shall all the world oppress,
If Phoebus do withdraw his golden Tresse.
There was a Light before there was a Sun,
And Day and Night before Phoebus begun.
Yet is the Sun the cause of Day and Night. Day and night before the sun was
made, Genes, 1.

Shepherds divine must judge the reason right,
They say a glimering light did whirling wend,
From East to West, unto none other end,
But to supply for a time Phoebus place,
Till he was made to run his princely race.
But then this whirling light that Heaven graced,
Contracted was, and in great Phoebus placed,
Who ever since was cause of Night and Day,
As learned Shepherds sounden in their lay.
Next is the Orb, and Sphere of Cytharaeae,
Lame Vulcans wife, unconstant Dal^la, Venus.

Cupids mother, Diana's mortal foe,
Cause of most wars which Gallants undergo.
When bloody fight the god of war has grieved,
The joys of Venus has him often relieved:
Therefore has Venus Vulcans bed forsaken,
And dreadful Mars his lodging undertaken,
But why does Beauties Queen love man so well?
Whose words are wounds, whose frowns do death foretell
She Triumphs in his Conjunction,
She Is grieved at his opposition:
When he is merry, then she laughes or smiles,
And with conceits the longest nights beguiles.
Can there ^e any perfect Sympathy,
T'wixt bloody wars, and Chamber-melodie?
Else Pan forbid: but let us understand,
The matter well that we do take in hand.
T'wixt wars and peace can be no Sympathy,
But man and woman are in peace pardie.
Great Pan ordained as Shepherds do relate,
Contrary Elements without debate,
Should altogether in one body dwell,
Loving each other, and agreeing well:
So though Mars be bloody in his Center,
Yet is he pacified if Venus enter.
Again fair Venus with smyling pleasance
Know's how t'asswage his angry countenance,
So that there is a perfect harmony,
Twixt white and black directly contrary,
Which being mixed do agree for ever,
Whom neither Art, or Nature, can disseuer.
And this is the reason, as shepherds skan,
Why a fair Lady loves a Martial man.
Next comes to our consideration,
Mercurius.
Mercury fraught with sophistication.
Nimble, ingenious, busy as the Bees,
Witty, as an Ape, to follow what he sees.
In each thing some skill, in full Art no bodie^
Thus whirleth about this Mercurial nodie.
Prate like a Perrot and ready of tongue,
At dice* Cards, and gaming all the day long.
Of wit sharp and subtle, of quick apprehention,
Fit to exployte any rare mad invention.
Why these be Mercurial, if thou would weet!
It Is because Mercurius has winged feet,
All designments to put in execution,
As Planets superior work revolution.
Faithfully keeping his circular Spheere,
Passing the Zodiak signs in one whole year.
Lun^.
Now must we speak of earths blessed mother,
The lowest Planet swifter than other.
Lowest of all, and nearest to our view,
Resplendent Phaebe, chaste, powerful and true.
Glorious Nurse of all this lower frame,
Infusing moisture to the burning flame,
Of parching Phoebus, whose fiery beams,
She does allay, and cool with moistning streams.
The Moon, Dyana, Phaebe, Cynthia,
Shepherds call her in Terra Florida
Apostrophe ad Her^^nam qu^ (...) Ma^iam Pemb.
One of her names I do ascribe to thee,
In whom her princely virtues seated be.
Dee'r Princess Laureat of Helli^on,
Deigne to accept it from Endymion.
Since thou participat'st with her in quality,
Her name thy mightiness shall dignifie.
I call her Phaebe now for difference,
Between thy self and her magnificence.
All things upon, and all within the round,
Unto her Sovereignty are deeply bound,
Her greatness is the nine and thirtieth part, The Moon the 39. part of the
earth.

Of all the earth as shepherds find by Art.
In eight just hours, and seven and twenty days,
She runs through the twelve Zodiac signs always,
She swiftly passes through the Zodiac,
Great Phoebus in his course to overtake.
In twelve hours and nine and twenty days,
She ouertak's the Son, Ptolom^e says.
And this is justly called Heavens wonder,
That these two Planets distant far a sonder,
Once every month, meet in Conjunction.
To celebrate matrimonial function.
O joyful time when these two ^ouers meet!
When with sweet Congies one does the other greet.
But when they meet long time they cannot stay,
Phoebus must part, swift time calls him away.
Phaebe returns to undertaken (...),
No hour granted in idleness to ma^ke.
Phoebus parting gives her light sufficient,
T'lluminate th'inferior Continent.
Which like a faithful wife she does dispose,
Proportionable to the need of those,
That high or low have their habitation
Capable of her Constellation;
She waggoneth to Neptunes Palace than,
That wonneth in the mighty Ocean:
She views the Creekes, Ports, Havens* and Towers,
And giu's them Floods and Ebbs at certain hours.
Which evermore she truly does observe,
Not one momentall minute does she swerue,
Which skillful Mariners as well (...) tell,
As little babies can their Cross (...) spell.
Thence she does se^rch the Cauerns of the deep,
Where strange and hydeous monsters use to keep.
Hydrippus, Balana, and Hydra fell,
Gendred by Cerberus Porter of Hell,
Hin'dring by virtue their venomous brood,
Drenching their spawne in the brinish flood.
That sailing passengers at their leisure,
Might safely touch their Port with pleasure.
She viewes the bottom of the Ocean,
Where never walked mortal living man.
There been shell-fishes innumerable,
Armed with scaly-shields impenetrable.
There lies Muscles with Pearls replenished,
Wherewith the Robes of Nymphs been garnished.
There grown the Scallop, Cockle, Welke and Oyster*
The Tortoyse, Creuise, and creeping Lobster,
Lympet, a round shell, which women lay upon the nepples of their sore breasts.
The Lympet, Sea-snaile, with infinite more,
Which in the treasury of Thetis go;
All these she cherishes, as if they were
The noblest creatures in the highest Sphere.
She giu's them gifts that most of them should yawne,
At each full Sea for comforting their spawne.
And to the sea she gives daily motion,
To ebb and flow to void corruption.
She giu's her fertile generation,
And perfect Means of Vegitation.
So that Thetis has more provision,
of fish and foul in great division:
Then all th'inhabitable Earth can show,
Or skill of mortal man can know.
But all that of the Sea is said, or done,
Is to demonstrate the glory of the Moon,
For the Seas place and constitution,
Requires a special discourse alone.
And is reserved to his proper place,
So I Will proceed to speak of Phaebes grace,
And show how she within her Spherick Globe,
Cherishes great Tellus and Flora's Robe;
Cotchelling all things in their (...),
Till they have got strength and maturitie.
There is no man, or woman, (...), or Trade,
Nor any thing that mighty (...) has made,
Nor Tree, nor Plant, nor herb, nor grass, nor flower,
But is maintained by her mighty power.
She shows the Plowman when to sow the ground,
To crop, to fell, to have his timber sound*
She wizeth Surgeons when to open a vein;
To ease the sick, and stop it fast again.
She shows Physicians times necessary,
To purge by Pills, drink or E^ectuarie.
To cure Rheums, fluxes, and bodies laxatiue,
To give a medicine preparatiue,
To give a vomit, clister, or garga^ise:
Marking the sign wherein fair Phaebe lies.
These sacred virtues, qualities divine,
Do make her wonderful in shepherds eine,
And strain the world to celebrate her name,
With lovely Hymns, and everlasting fame.
Thus were the heavens orderly disposed,
By glorious Pan as you have heard disclosed.
Yet is Endymions task but now begone,
When one would think his web were wholly sponne
Unfold he must an other Mystery,
And anatomize divine Philosophy.
How the vast space t'wixt heaven and earth was filled,
With elementall Spheres as Ioua wil'd,
That Emptiness might have no habitation,
Amongst the works of Gods creation.
O you Caelestiall everliving fires*
That done inflame our hearts with high desires;
Our Spokes been blunt, rude, ha^^^ish, vncooth,
Unable in Mysteries to know the sooth.
Unkempt, unpolished, ignorant lewd,
Uneath with one drop of Nectar bedewde.
High are the Mysteries we take (...) hand,
To discuss^ of fire, aier, sea, and land.
With every thing therein contained,
And by the wisdom of Pan ordained*
On bended knee therefore with humble prostration,
Endymion makes his supplication,
To illuminate The Eyes of his blinded mind,
The secrets of this lower world to find,
To discover them to men unlettered,
Whose knowledge with Ignorance is fettered.
And he will sacrifice unto your shrine,
The fat of Lambs and sweetest Eglantine:
With Garlands of Roses and Gilliflowers,
He Will deck and garnishe all your sacred Bowers,
And with his choycest Notes and Roundelayes,
Cause Hil's and Dales to celebrate your praise,
And all the bordring Shepherds shall admyre,
The strange effects of your Celestial Fire.
The force whereof does make me to entreat,
Of that which does adioyne to Phoebus seat;
Which is thought to be the fiery Element,
The Element of Fire.
Above the rest for lightness excellent,
Most rare and thin, most hot, yet does not shine,
Of no color, yet of quality Divine.
Round in Figure, yet most swiftly moves,
Not of it self as Aristotle proves:
But by the mighty Agitation,
Of Planets superior in operation.
Next to the Moon in constitution,
Speedy, and swifte in revolution.
Giving heat to every thing compounde,
That has his being in the lower round.
Not Conspicuous to any mortal Eye
Because of his Thinnes, and Raritie,
Yet burns and consumes utterly,
What so resists his flaming Fury.
He works strange Meteors in the Night,
Fiery meteors.
Which shepherds hau'n often in their sight.
By vapors drawn from the heat of the Sun,
What a Meteor is.
From out the Earth to A^rs high Region.
Which vapors (once by this Fire o^ flamed)
Express strange forms which Meteor^ are named*
Such as be Comets and the bla^^ing Sta^s* Comets.

By which some shepherds prog^^sticate wars.
But certain they signify stirili^i^,
By reason of the Earth's great ^iceity,
For want of Shewers and sweet moystening Rain,
The cause of springing, and growing of Grain, They Signify want of corn.

For Comets always in Summer appear,
When Ceres calls Aquarius for ^eere.
The shortest Time, that blasing stars remain,
Is seven days as Philosophers ^ayne; The shortest and longest time that
Comets endure.

The longest time is days foure-score,
(Too long, by so long for Pierc^ Pl^m-mans store,)
And then they disolue into Ayr^ or fire,
As the substance of the vapors require.
Stars of false Helena, and Stars flying, Stars of Helena.

Known to Mariners in their long sailing,
Are within the Comets comprehended,
And from th'Elemental fire descended.
So Castor, and Pollux, are to Sailors known, Castor and Pollux.

By these their Ruin, or safety is showen.
This Comet sometime lights on the Mast,
Thence flies to the Sayl's and ^acklings in have;
Skipping here and there without certain byding,
The matter's unctuous, and must needs be glyding:
And if it appear before the storm begin, When that Comet is called Helena,
and when, Castor and Pollux.

It foretells the perrils that the Ship is In.
Then they call it the star of Helena,
Hell's Fury, Deaths messenger, fierce Megara;
They wail and wring their woeful hands for grief,
They look for death expecting no relief.
But if such Comets fall when storms are ended,
They say that Castor and Pollux them defended.
They joy and revel vowing Sacrifize*
For life is esteemed the richest prize,
This Comet constrains the greatest wight. The profit we reap by this Comet.

To magnify Pans majesty and might.
Who forewarn's them of dangers imminent,
To make the Sailors wise and provident,
All means within board, carefully t'aduise,
For dreadful storms shall presently arise.
If storms be ended when they see it fall,
It is a Messenger unto them All,
His glorious Name, on knees to magnify,
That has preserved them so graciously.
Such fiery vapors oftentimes are seen,
Fyerie vapors in Churchyards and about places of ^xecu^ion.
In Churchyards, and places where dead bodies been
Buried, or executed in Summertime,
In time of pestilence, or for some crime,
Which Idiot's say'n bin dead-mens Ghosts or Sprigh^s,
Walking those places in the Irke-some Nights.
When as no mortal man can be able,
To prove or defend such ridiculous Fable.
For Shepherds said by natural reason,
That from Bodies buried in Summer season,
An vnctuos vapor, hot and dry does rise,
Which Phoebus seazeth according to his guise,
And does inflame it in a little space,
Making it tumble up, and down the place.
Such fiery vapors, sometime do abide,
Upon the bodies of men that lightly ride,
Or on their horses-bodyes as they nimbly pace,
Daftly remoouing seat, from place, to place.
For when men post lightly they getten heat,
Which being turned to an Oyly-sweate.
Sends forth dry vapors which the Sun does (...),
Whereof he does a skipping fire make.
Colors about or above the Moon.
For colors which often in the Welkin seem,
Which been fiery Meteors as men do deem:
They be not very colors in the Sky:
Our eyesight fayl's us looking so high;
These have not the Suns Inflammation,
Nor any fiery Generation,
A circle about the Moon.
But mighty vapors drawn from the Sun aloft,
Which to us representen colors often;
A circling garland compasses the Moon*
Presaging winds and Tempests ^^sing soon^*
Blackish in color, of thick composition,
Showing the weather by foul disposition.
This is no inflamed fiery Meteo^,
But a cloudy, moysty, dark, thic^^ vapor.
One bright shining circle greatest of All,
Which learned Spephards Gala^^a call, Galaxia a shining white path, in the
midddest of Heaven in a frosty-night.

A beaten highway to the Gods Palace*
Glorious, beautiful, full of Solace.
Shyning most clear in a Frostie Night:
And in the starrie firmament is p^ght.
Yet is not a vapor, nor meteor we know,
Nor drawn from the Sun which is far below.
But shines most bright by resple^dant grace,
By the beauty of stars that furnish the place.
Besides, stars dispersed, one hundred and eight,
Stars of Note, of high regard, and weight:
With glorious beams their shining display,
And hence it is called the milky-white way,
And if you will weet what starre^ they hight, The stars of Note that makes
Calaxia clear.

That maken the Welkin in that place so bright:
Lysten you Shepherds I Will set them in order,
As they done garnish, that circulare Border.
Cassiopeia has thirteen stars of Note, Cassiopeia, 13.

Wherewith she frettizeth her purple Cote*
The siluered Swan that dying sweetly sings, Cygnus. 1^.

Adorn's with twelve stars her beautiful wings.
The soaring Eagle bearing Jove's Ganymed,
With four Oriental Stars garnished. A^uila. 4.

The hateful Scorpion does never fail, Ca^da Scorpion^^ ^.

Of five bright Torches in her poisoned Tail.
Sagitarius the Archer brings Three, Sagitarius. 3.

And the Centaur twice as many as he, Centaurus. 6.

Twenty three stars, the noble ship of Greece, Nauis Argol^. 23.

Bring's in, as Lamp's to spy the golden fleece.
The Twinn's eighteen; The Wag^^er seven, Gemini. 1^. A^riga. 7.

Perseus seauenteen, to lighten this heaven. Perseus. 1^.

All these Stars maken one hundred and eight,
Bright and conspicuous without deceit.
Sporades Stella dispersa sine or dine.
Sporades also dispersed Stars been,
Confusedly mixing their glimmering Sheem
These been the stars that maken so bright,
The welkins broad way which seems so white.
Yet not in any sort color verament,
For no colors has the starrie Firmament.
(...) the rayne-bow.
Nor is the Rayne-bowe a fiery Meteor,
Though there appear in it colors store,
But is a mystie exhallation,
By great Phoebus without inflammation,
After a Shower appearing in the air,
Showing the weather thence forth to be fair.
And ever appears half circlewise,
Oppos^te to Phoebus always does rise;
Having three colors seeming in our eye,
Red, Yellowe, Green* in the low Region Aerie.
Red highest, as nearest the Elementall Fire,
A white waterish Yeallow, next place does require*
The lowest like Emeraulde, green as the grass,
Reflecting such colors to us (like a Glass,
Taking the form as it is objected,
Presently sending the same form reflected,
Back to the Author, and does not contain,
Any such form till you show it again)
Raynebow in the Night.
Sometimes a Rayne-Bow shows in the night,
After a shower of Color watrish white,
Not red, nor green; to the Moon opposite.
Thus glorious Pan discovers his Might.
But divine Shepherds soothly sayen,
In their high Lays with words plain:
That though it be, one thing by generation,
Yt's another thing in contemplation.
Representing to us all sickerly,
A sealed eternal Testimony,
That this center of the universal round,
As once it was should not again be drownde.
Nor cloudy water^ hi^ (...) below,
Should dare presume the earth to ouer-flowe.
But should them hold in their habitation,
That man and beast should ha^^ a quiet Station.
Thus blessed glorious everlasting Pan,
Safely provided for the life of man.
Some other things the Philosopers have named,
That Fiery been, and are not yet inflamed.
The burning Thunderbolt, the lightning flash. Thunderbolt and lightning.

That Trees, Beasts, and buildings in pieces dash.
Wreaking by fell spite on the world this injury:
Confounding all things in their spightfull fury,
That mortal wights, takne them for Fiends of Hell,
That in a moment simple creatures quell.
Of so swift and forceable penetration,
Of so sudden motion, and operation,
Yea, of so wonderful a quality,
By reason of their hot agilitie*
That things incredible by them been done,
As sowring the Wine, and saving the Tonne;
Breaking the sword not hurting the sheath,
The stem of an Oak in pieces they wreath.
And upon the world bring desolation,
Seeming to spoil the frame of creation.
The fiery whirle-windes which we Prester call,
Of fearful wonders exceeden All. whirle winds dry Prester.

Which been hot dry vapors whirled together,
From the earth to heaven, no man knows whither.
In form of a circled Pillar they wend,
And through our Region of the Air ascend.
with violent motion making a pray,
Of each loose parcel that stands in their way.
Gyring and whirling it up to the sky,
(Some Laundresses seen their ^ynnen so ^lye)
Brute beasts at the coming thereof do cry,
As fearing their immynent ieopardy.
These taken ships out of the Ocean,
And caryen them beyond the skill of man.
Letting them fall from the Ayrie region,
To their utter Ruin and Subversion.
Whole Floods of waters from the brynish-store,
Of Thetis they suck up for evermore*
Carrying them to the Ayers middle region,
The coldness whereof stops them Anon.
Driving them down headlong to the Center,
Not suffering them that Region to enter.
Spoutes of water in the Sea.
So all at once they fall down suddenly,
As a great Mountain by extremity.
Drowning whole ships vnder-sayle in their Rage,
For nothing but death may their fury assuage.
The profit we get by this consideration,
Is to have Gods works in Admiration,
The use of this point of Philosophy.
And to bethink us, with what facility,
Pan can destroy, all humane Hostility.
And so to humble us under his hand,
That free from dangers we may safely stand.
Steadfastly hoping to stand unreprovable,
As mighty Mountains vnremooueable.
Now hence must we proceed incontinent,
The Air.
To discant of the Ayery Element,
Being simple, and subtle, thin, rare, and quick,
Pierced by gross substance, heavy, and thick:
Capable of all forms and Figures jniected,
VVhererby her body, is often jnfected;
Situate next to the fire in degree,
By reason of his transparant Leuitee.
Receiving Meteors elementarie,
According as ascending vapors vary.
Affording breath to every earthly thing,
That opens mouth, or flies with feathered wing*
Yea the Fishes in the Ocean were dead,
If cold thicke-yce the Ocean ouer-spread.
Which ioyeth in Airs respiration,
To keep the waters from corruption.
For Fishes in the deep been murdered,
If Ayers refreshing Gales been hindered.
Hot and moist, by essential quality,
Yet has a coole-refreshing property.
By reason of the waters vicinitie,
Sending forth vapors cold continually.
Which by the Ayers Agitation,
Are made a temperate respiration;
Aided by the cooling of the breathing wind,
Whereby this Element is often refin'de,
And man, and beast, and every thing that liu's,
Is nourished by the temperature it giu's.
And Worms abandoned from budding trees,
And extreme heat, allayed by degrees.
Thus was this splendent Ayrie Element,
Placed by Pan with perfect Complement,
Distinguished into Regions three,
As bookish shepherds evidently see;
The highest next the fiery Element, Three Regions of the Air.

The middle second's it incontinent:
The lowest is that space wherein we dwell,
Whereof great Philosophers wonders tell.
The first is hot: the middle extreme cold;
The third is temperate for reasons told.
The lowest Orb* the Fowls ^oon glorify,
And with sweet Notes great (...) do magnify.
The Eagle, Griffin, Falcon, Marlion,
The Nightingale, and turtle Pidgeon,
The Thrush, the Lynnet, and mounting Lark,
Besides the Fowls that flyen in the dark,
The Bittour pyping in a Syrin^ Reed,
VVayling that virgins loss in mourning weed.
With Fowls of Price and worth Innumerable,
VVhere-with great states gar^ishen their Table.
These take delight to sport them in their Air,
Cheefely if Phoebus make the Region fair,
The middle Region's coldest in his Place, The middle Region cold^.

For Phoebus there yet never showed his Face.
Which is the cause of Slee^e* of Hayle, of Snow,
All which by virtue of this Region grow.
The highest hot.
The highest Region of the Air is hot;
Where all the fiery Meteors are begot.
Being placed next the fiery Element,
Which does inflame with heat that Regiment
The Meteors to the Air destinated,
The Ayrie Meteors simple.

Included Meteors.


Are simply winds, and Earthquakes nominated
Included in a vapor others there be,
Which yet are Meteors in their degree.
As storms, and whirl-windes, and the mighty Thunder,
Rumbling as if heaven would cleave a sunder.
Winds are vapors included in a Cave,
Winds.
Whence by Phoebus force they issue have;
And drawn by heat to the mid Region,
(Which is all cold by constitution)
There they would enter, but being expelled,
To be dispersed they are compelled.
To every part of this our lower air,
Whereby they purge it, And make it so fayer.
All Merchants and Sailors are highly bound,
To the time when first this Meteor was found.
Winds. 32.
Two and thirty winds Maryners find out,
By which they saylen the round world about.
To east and west, Indies fair Virginia,
Guyana, Chyna, P^ru, and Gynnea;
And whatsoever the Southern Pole descryes,
What hid treasure in America lies,
The winds discover to great Brittania,
The noble Empire of old Albania;
Another commodity Shepherds find,
By the excellent nature of the wind,
Another commodity by the winds. viz. to make rain.
When a watry-cloude from the sea is taken,
By the wind it is, all-in-peeces shaken;
And so disseuered into drops of rain,
To comfort the withered, and parched plain:
The scorched-grasse, on the lofty Mountain,
Reuiu's it self and gets life again.
For if this watery cloud should wholly fall,
The weight would destroy and ouer-whelme all.
These are not winds of monstrous generation,
But natural winds of gentle inclination.
The earthquake is a simple Meteor,
Ayrie and uncompounded as before;
An Ayrie vapor, closed in some de^,
Or concaue of the earth, remote from men, Earthquake.

Serching for an issue, and finding none,
Beats up and down, seeking to be gone,
But all in vain, then being fast enclosed,
It shak's the earth in searching to be losed.
This is the cause of great Tellus trembling
(A man in a shaking Fever resembling)
What future events it does prognosticate,
I will not presage, the effect is intricate.
But if a small vapor be of that power, The Profit we get by this Meteor.

To shake the whole frame of the earth in one hour,
How may proud man full of infirmity,
Sustain the fury of the Deity?
Of the Whirle-windes we have spoken before,
Neither will we as now add any more.
But that they be not Meteors conta^ned,
In the Fire, or Air, but to both restrained.
A storm is of a windy property,
With force dispersing vapors watery,
With great drops of rain so beating the place, A stormy-winde.

As if it would beat the skin off a man's face.
Such fearful storms, are hurtful to the Tree's,
They pinch the Cattle and destroy the Bees,
Beat down the Herbs, and grass* and blades of grain,
Wherewith the Shepherds must their flocks sustain.
The fearful Thunder must not be forgot,
Of ayerie, and watery vapors begot* Thunder.

Drawn by force to the highest Region,
(where it may have no perfect Mansion)
Rowleth in the air with fearful sound,
Till water gets issue to moist the ground.
Then down it falls with drops violent,
Therefore be sure it cannot be permanent.
Now comes the watrie Element in hand,
Watrie El^ment.
Enuroning round the habitable-land,
A body moist fluent, circular, and thin,
Penetrable and cold containing therein,
Innumerable fishes of great variety,
Differing in magnitude and quality.
Continually moving in form circular,
About the brim of this earth particular,
The substance of this Element ouerspred,
And the body of this earth environed,
So that the face thereof could not be seen,
But hidden lay as if it had not been,
Till almighty Pan this watrie Element,
Gathered together from the Continent;
Into one vaste-roome, station and place;
Leaving fair Tellus* with vnuailed face,
Dry and vnmantled, without viriditie,
Hard and solid without humiditie.
Then began the mountains of Armenia,
Burning Tartarus, Aetna in Sycillia,
Sacred Olympus, Parnassus Crowned
By the Muses, Hermon renowned,
Tabor, Horeb, ever blessed Syon,
Sometime Iehouah's habitation.
All rocks and hills though they were far distant,
Appeared eminently at one instant.
The Dales and Plains, and barren Wilderness,
Appeared dry, all void of comeliness.
For Flora yet was hidden in her Bower,
Grinding her colors fit for every flower,
Green, Vitrioll, Violet, Vermilion,
To garnish up the Queens Pauilion.
The siluered Ceruse, and Cuchenella,
The azured Blew and Purpurella,
With these colors must be enamiled,
The flowers which Tellus have apparelled;
Naked therefore and void of Ornament,
Pan discovers this earthly Element.
And these huge waters he divided*
That some in Clouds above the earth should go,
That with distilling drops of moysth^ng rain, What are the waters above the
earth.

Might comfort Tellus parched face again.
The rest might keep their perfect ^^ation,
T'ingender fish, and further nauiga^ion:
He made it of continual motion,
To keep the fishes from corruption,
He made it salt above for special reason,
That it might the slymie fishes season.
In twenty four hours it ebbs and flow's twice, The cause of ebbing and
flowing.

Impossible therefore to be overflowed with ice.
The cause of this swift agitation,
Is mighty Phaebes alteration,
For as she wanes, or does in light increase,
So does the Sea her floods augment, (...) cease.
The cause of her saltness is by accident,
Of Phoebus piercing beams so vehement.
Bringing from the Seas foundation, Saltness of the Sea.

Dry vapors which by inflammation:
Are burned to salt by the heat of the Sun,
And hence the saltness of the Sea begun*
For waters themselves have no sau^^r at all,
But as it comes by cause accidental.
Hence are engendered moist Meteors,
Almighty Iouah's strong Ambassadors, Watrie Meteors eight.

The Mist, the Deaw, the Frost, the hollow Clowd,
That does the Elementall vapors shroud.
The Rain, the Snow, the fearful Hail, the Sleete,
Wherewith in February or March we meet.
The Sleete can never in the Summer fall,
For then the middle Region's coldst of all,
The Mist is a vapor which all men know The Mist.

And does of watrie Exhalations grow,
If it ascends before it does rain,
Of much Rain it is a token certain,
But if it does rise when shower is e^ded,
Foul weather's gone, and the air amended,
It is the matter also of the falling Dew,
Which does the face of great Flora renew.
And if this vapor be foggie and thick,
The rain will ensue: then speed away quick,
If not rain, then snow, or hail without doubt:
Shall be the issue, therefore look about,
But if this mist appear subtle, or thin,
Deaw.
Then shall the sweet Deawes, or sharp Frosts begin.
But in Summer, Deaw: in Winter the Frost,
Do follow the mist in every coast.
The cause.
The cause of the Deaw as Shepherds do find,
Is Lukewarm breathing of the Southern wind.
The cause that hinders the Deaws generation,
Is the Northren winds cold inflation,
The aptest times for the Deaw to abound,
The Hinderance.

Fittest time for Deaw.


Spring, Harvest, faire-day, when no winds do sound,
This Meteor works mighty effects;
And is high prized for many respects,
When herbs and grass are parched and combust,
And Phoebus burning flames colors them like dust,
The effects of Deaw.
Then comes the Deaw, and does them recreate:
Making them fresh, virent and fortunate,
The bowels of the beasts it makes soluble,
And all the grass more sweet and voluble,
A wonder yet he^e-hence, is collected,
Which some Wise shepherds hau'n objected.
How Manna a Deaw which is hot and dry,
Withering the herbs and making them die,
Manna a wonderful deaw.
And now is taken for purgation:
Should have a contrary operation;
And nourish th'Israelites in the Desert,
The solution is for men expert,
This is wonderful to a mortal eye,
Yet is no matter in the Almighty,
The Frost.
The Frost to us men most profitable,
Though it seems nothing comfortable,
Is a Meteor watrie amongst the rest,
And for man's avail is not reckned lest.
Of a thin watrie vapor is engendered,
Which to the wintrie Air soon is tendered.
And by the same, in crustie Pearls concreate,
Falls on the grass, and pincheth vital heat,
It crusheth and abateth Floras pride,
Stripping her naked, as a naked bride:
Spoiling her flowers, discoloring her green.
Imprisoning her as if she were no Queen;
All these be discommodities I trow,
Observe the commodities which do grow
By this Meteors virtue, and quality,
Which grow'n by his forces abundantly.
All hurtful worms in the earth it does kill,
And all noxious humors in the body spill: It kills worms and hurtful
humors.

These are the benefits which Pan does give
To a cold frost, that mortal man might live.
The name of a Cloud is so commonly known,
That labor is lost if more should be shown:
For it is a vapor moist, gross, eleuate,
By Phoebus force to the Region situate
In the middst of the Air: where being compact,
By the cold circle till it be ransact
by Phoebus heat: so moystned again,
Is squeezed into a shower of rain,
As a Sponge in water deeply sunken, This Cloud compared to a Sponge.

Until it has the whole moisture drunken:
If with force of hand you squeeze it suddenly,
Water from sundry parts thereof will fly:
Rain is an issue from a Cloud watrie; Rain.

By drops discending from a Region ayrie:
(The middle Region of that Element)
To moysten this habitable Continent.
Where man and beast receyuen nourishment,
And Flora makes her mantle orient*
When a moist vapor thick elevated,
And by the cold Region mace^^^ed,
Descends down upon the earth below,
It is then called a Meteor of snow. Snow.

The drops that done fall, resemble a feather,
Not as rain's-round-drops contracted together,
The feathered-flakes dispersed are bound,
To cover the lower circulare round.
Shepherds at this time fodderen their ^^ocke,
With the provision of the Summer ^tocke.
Lime-twigs.
Boys setten Lime-twigs, and diggen pit-falles
Watching hungry Birds behind trees and walls:
Which coming thither, for food, unawares,
Are tangled in lyme, or taken in snares;
Shepherds wear Freezes, and Ladies use furs,
To keep them from Rewmes, Ca^arres, and cold Murres;
Snow-water.
Snow water, Hus-wiues at every turning,
Save in a glass against scalding or burning.
So far is the snow from doing of harm,
The utility of snow.
That roots of trees, corn and grass, it keeps wa^^e*
As with a mantle the earth it enfoldes,
Preserving the same from violent coldes.
It fattons the Fallow as Shepherds rehearse,
Mellowing the ridges, for Coulters to pearse.
In the highest mountain and frozen hill,
Snow gendreth Cristall.
Snow gendreth Cristall and shyning Berrill.
Thus is Snow not the meanest ornament,
For us that in the earth are resident*
Hail.
The Hail is reckoned as a mighty curse,
Making all worldly creatures much the worsse.
And in Summer season is engendered,
When grass and corn is chiefly tendered.
The reason why it is hard compacted,
The reason of Hail in Summer and not in Winter.
Is because it has his cold contracted.
For when it came to the middle region,
He found it colder in disposition
Then it was wont to be; because the heat
Of Phoebus beams, does now more strongly beat*
Which when it cannot bear, it gathers round,
It self, least Phoebus should his force confound.
And so dissolve it into rain, or sleete,
To do some good* for which Hail is not meet.
Therefore round, cold, and hard, it does descend,
Of purpose princely Flora to offend.
"For there can be no perfect con^enience,
"Twixt noble Nature and male^olence.
Upon her fruits it makes intrusion,
Beating in pieces with confusion,
The buds of trees, the herbs, the corn, the flowers,
Which Tellus kept for Floras Para^ours.
There is no watrie Meteor in the Air,
But is profitable and debonaier,
Except this crabbed and furious Hail,
That fiercely our nourishment does assail,
For Sleete is not so forcible or strong,
To do Dame Flora and her Babies wrong. Sleete.

Discending in March, or in February,
When Phoebus shows his burning luminarie, Sleet always in February or March,
and never in December.

A question.



But here some may a question propound,
Requiring a Philosopher profound,
Why is the Airs middle Region,
Coldest in the burning Summer season?
And in the Winter time more temperate,
Rain (and not Hail) fitter to generate?
Answer. Two contraries do always fly, Answer.

The one from the other naturally,
So when it is extreme hottest weather,
The cold collecteth his forces together,
And keeps himself close in his own defense,
Least heat should surprise or expel him thence.
Then is he colder then he was before,
Having abundance of coldness in store.
But if that heat be from him divided,
His force is dissolved: Our point decided,
Now is the discourse of the water ended.
And the shepherd to the earth descended:
The Center of the whole universal, Earthly Element.

Whose circumference is Imperial,
Whose body is round wholly considered.
Though of other form in peece^ severed.
Cold, and dry by natural property,
Seated permanent, on her Axeltree,
Aequallie standing, no way declyning,
Solid, and heavier, not bright, or shyning,
Full of Creatures of Divine Excellence,
Gracing high Pans might and magnificence.
The mother of all gross, and heavy things
That grow, creep, or go, or fly'n with wings;
(Fynnie footed fowls excepted, and fishes,
Which ^eruen for Thetis banqueting dishes)
Although their might arise some difference,
Whether Sea, or Land has the pre-eminence.
For fethered fowls first Generation,
Which in the seas have propagation.
For that Sea-fowles, as Shepherds understand,
Layen, and hatchen, their eggs on the land,
And also never to Sailors appear,
But it is certain some Yland is near;
Yt seems, I might conclude in general,
Tellus is mother of Fowls universal.
A mother adorned with virtues excellent,
The Earth, Mother of all Creatures therein.
In Action, Passion, and habit, different,
From all other Elements supernall,
The Center of Creation-naturall;
She has 7. properties, of a good Mother or wife.
Having seven rare, special properties,
Whereof each-one a Mother glorifies:
Fruitful, Good, Neuer-weary, Patient,
Most Constant, Faithful, liberally-bent.

What heavenly Forces, beget to our seeming.
She daily produces, and brings to light.
She Is always with child, in winters despite.

To all her Babyes, by generation.
Cherishing them all in their infancy,
Till they may shift for themselves hansomlie.

Cheerfully viewing, each place of her Cell.
Swathing, and Bathing, well the tender Limbs,
Of all her yonglings, and with butter T^^mm^s,
The chafed Places of their Fylmy-skinne,
Curing their Bodies without and within.
Patiently suffering sclaunderous words, (...).

Which wounden the mind more deeper then swords.
She suffers worldings, to spit in her face,
To disgorge, to trample, spurn, and disgrace,
To wound with ploughing, where they liken best,
To search her bowels, her belly, her breast;
To steal her jewels, and deep hidden treasure,
Both for necessity, and for pleasure.
Constant, not wavering, always the same,
Immooueable, keeping her glorious Frame.
Faithfully saving, what to her you tender,
Until you require her the same thing to render.
If wheat you deliver, wheat shall you receive;
She means not with Darnell, your Barn to deceive.
If gold you deliver, then gold shall you find,
For Tellus bears, a most faithful mind.
But if you will speak of her liberal plenty,
For one Corn of Grain you shall receive twenty.
When all thy friends thy body have forsaken;
Then mark the Earth what she has undertaken.
A body dead, stinking corrupt, impure,
Whose stench and gastly-view none can endure,
Opening her womb, she takes it in again.
And keep's it safe from P^utos fiery train.
Rendring't again in shining purity:
From putrefaction to immortality.
Observe thou well her qualities divine:
And by immitation make them all thine.
For further must my wearied Pipe assay,
By part's, her hidden treasures to display.
Showing the glory of her blessed face,
Her breast, her womb, and every secret place.
Arcadian Orphe^ make my music able, The covering of the earth called
Tellus-Mantle.

To annatomize Mysteries unspeakable.
Hearken great Cynthi^ how Euterpe sings
Of Tellus Mantle, which sweet Flora brings,
Of color green with flowers entercheckt:
By curious skill of princely Architect.
With herbs and Plants, and grass for every beast,
Tapistred with Fowls, and beasts comely dreast.
Now has Queen Tellus put her Mantle on,
Flora tryumphing in her Paragon*
She deckes her Queen with Roses white and red,
Musk and sweet Roses in Damasco bred.
Flowers.
Fragrant Gilliflowers and Carnation,
Enamiled with pure Vermilion,
The purple Violet, and Columbine,
The silu'red flower of sweet Eglantine,
The Dasie, Cow-cup, sweet smelling-Walflower,
The Flower de Luce: the Raine-bowes Paramour,
The whitest Lilly, and the Daffadill,
The Paggle, and the blessed Pimpernill:
The Mary gold, and party colored Pinke:
The Paunsey, and the Hearts-ease, as Shepherds think
With others infinite in variation,
Differing in color, form, and creation,
With Savor, and odoriferous smell:
Refreshing the brain, as Ladies can tell,
The Gilliflower strikes admiration,
To Shepherds marking her creation.
A flower, a wonder.
Marking the Substance whereof it is framed,
The different form whereby it is named,
The precious color wherewith it is varnished
And the sweet savor where with it is garnished.
Besides the flowers which in the Mantle been,
Herbs.
Diversity of herbs, and Plants, are seen.
Wherewith our Ladies, curen Maladies:
Saving our Bodies, from extremities.
These done fair Ladies, in their Gardens Plant,
As in a storehouse, to supply their want.
The Sage, the Basil, and the Lauender,
The bitter Worme-wood, Rue, and Germander,
The lovely Veruin, Balsam, Sauory,
The Smaladge, Liuer-wort, and Centorie,
The Eyebright, and the powerful Cel^dony,
The Camomill, head-purging Beto^y:
Bloodwort, Muggwort, Hartestrong, and Patience,
Parcelye, Penny-Reall, for ingredience,
Leaves of Violets, Strawberries, Succory,
Endive, Time, Buglosse, Spannish Pellitory,
Margerom-gentle, Spikenard, Southern-wood,
Burnet, Burrage for Claret Wine good.
Sauen and Spurge, for strong purgation,
Hurtful to women's generation*
Clary, Dragans, blessed Angelica,
Holy Thistle, and Indian Tobacca.
Featherfew, Knot-grasse, and Maiden Hear^,
The breast and Longs, from Phlegm clear.
Speremit, Playntaine, and fair E^^mony,
Spinach, Costmary, for a Timpany*
Sparage, Beares-foote, and Oculus-Christi:
Whose black-seedes, Purgen eyes, dim and Mistie: The admirable virtues of
the Herb called Oculus Christi.

Eight or ten, of these seeds put in thine eye,
Will run, up to the, eye lids Immediately:
Not grieuing the eye or hindering the ^ight,
And there will they work till they have made bright,
And purged the eye, from all corruption:
Then full of white slime, will drop out alone.
Besides these Hearb's, been Trees innumerable, Trees.

Some bearing fruit, of taste de^ectable,
And some for stately building^* profitable,
Whereof men maken Ships Na^igable.
It were a matter hard, and intrica^e,
Orderly of each, to particulate,
But these were all made, for man's sustentation,
Or else of purpose, for his recreation,
And on the face of mighty Tellu^ stand,
Admirable works of Pans powerful hand.
The lofty Caedar, and Sable Cypress,
Threatening the welkin, with his mounting Tresse.
Sweet smelling Fur, and Saxifrace,
Which men venerous, done highly grace.
Besides their smell yield Turpentine,
Profitable Pitch, and richest Rozine,
The builders Oak, and Plough-mens Ashen tree:
Princes, and Soldiers, regard in their Degree.
The weeping Elm, the Be^ch, the Byrch, the Playn^*
Have virtues rare, and were not made in vain.
For fruitful Trees, that been commodious,
Are so well known, that it were tedious
To reckon them in order severally,
For it is thought fond in Philosopy,
To prove a thing by demonstration,
That none denies, or needs probation.
So many fruits of blessed quality
Does Pan provide for man's necessity.
That would the mind of mortal men amaze,
No Pamphlet, but huge volumes must them hlaze;
We know, we have, we use, we taste, we eat:
The virtue, tree, the leaf, the fruit, the meat:
Now must Endymion dress himself to sing,
Of beasts, of Fowls, Of every creeping-thing*
Of Bees, of Waspes, of Hornets* and of Flies,
Which Pan made not: But of corruption rise.
Wild, feirce, raging beasts garnishen her Robe:
Lion, Tygre, Hyena, Panther, Rhinoceres, Bear, Unicorn, Ermine Leopard,
Martin, Sable, Lu^erns Fox. white and black.. Mineueer, Elke, Bugle, Budge,
Bucke, Gemps, Shamoys, Heart, Wolf, Squirrell,
And with variety diaper her Globe;
The roaring Lion, and dreadful Tiger,
The strange Hyena and fearful Panther,
Armed Rhinoceros, the ugly Bear,
The precious Unicorn, whose horn is dear.
The Ermine, Leoparde, Martin, and Sable,
Whose princely skins been rich and marchantable
Rich Luzerns, white and blake, Fox, Mineueer,
Elke, and Bugle, Budge, and the swift Reine Deer,
Gemps; Shamoys, Roe-bucke; and the stately Heart;
The Wolf, The Squirill iumping by Art.
From tree to tree, with that dexterity,
As makes men wonder her celeritie.
The siluered white, black and gra^ (...): Con^^y.

Good for the House and sparing of mo^^ey.
The skins of these beasts been profitable,
Highly prized and to Merchants ^^able.
The Vrchin and the quilled Porpen^ine; Vrchin, Porpe^tine.

Are good for medicine as the grea^e of Swine.
The emparked nimble Dear Red and fallowe, Deer.

Making horns to Sound, and Hunters ^allowe.
Light footed Hare a Game for mighty Kings, Hare.

At whose Pursuit, The Faery (...) sings:
Redoubling twice, or thrice, the merry Soundes,
Of hallowing Knight, shril-horne, (...) chau^ting hou^des.
The crafty Badger, the Watery Ott^^
Whom Howndes pursue, Badger, Ott^^*
till they haven got her
These Beasts been of highest Regard and Price
To pleasure Princes and to murder vice.
Wild Apes, Apes, Monkies, Marmezite.

Babioun.


and Monkies with the Marmezite
Wherein our noble Ladies Done delight.
The Rammish filthy stinking Bab^oun,
That lewd Mountie-banks leaden up and down,
To make of fond people, a great co^^^ou^se,
(A notable bayte for Perkin-Pickp^rse.)
These been all wild, and yet of great esteem,
Though some of these later, as tamed seem^.
The Pole-catte, and wilde-catte, the Weezle, and Stoate, Polcat, Wild-cat,
Weezle, Stoate. Musk-cat. Dormouse. (...), Mice. Mold-warpe.

Are wild, yet discribed in great Te^lus Coat.
The Muske-Catte for Ciuet, and the Dormouse,
Damned Rats, and vilde-Mise, the plague of a house.
Flora's sworne-foe, the Mould-warpe* or Want,
Subuerting the Corn, the grass and the Plant:
Spoiling the Medow's and the Pas^ure ground,
With infinite Hillocks, ray^^d up round,
Out of the earth, cast up with her Nose,
Neither is she blind, as many suppose. Not blind.

These been Floras foes, scarce worth the naming,
On whom no wise Man, bestows the taming.
Besides sauadge Beasts there been domestical, Tame beasts.

Serving for man's use, as friends natural.
The friendly Elephant, powerful, and Strong*
Elephant.
Armed with Tushes, of Yuorie long,
Sharp, solid, and of mighty quantity,
Wherewith he macerates his enemy.
With these, the haughty Porus of India.
Fronted Alexander of Macedonia.
These breaken ranks of the great Battalia*
These fear not the Cannons of Romania,
These carry mighty Castles of lightest wood
Upon their backs, to make their parties good:
Wherein some twelve or thirteen armed men,
May use their Arms* and one too good for ten:
One may rule him, with a twisted thread,
So wise is he, and has his lesson read:
I say one man, this mighty beast, may guide,
Being the King of all the Babes of pride.
Horse.
The fierce and warlike horse, which Chiron bred,
And princely Hector often nourished:
Whose fiery eyes done threaten blood and death,
Whose furious Nosethrils smoken flaming breath,
Whose crest is Proud, lofty, thin, half circled,
Whose Mane with silver locks, his neck does spread,
Whose ears been short, and pricked near do stand,
As if some mighty battle, were in hand:
Little, and short, and thin is his visage,
His nosethrils wide, his teeth in equipage,
Whose foaming mouth bends to his stately breast,
Scorning the foe-mans Lance in armed rest:
Champing the Bit, and trampling with his feet,
Crushing the fiery stones amid the street.
Broad breast, strait back, large and spacious,
Courageous, nymble, soon check, and gracious,
Broad-buttocks, long-taile, cleane-legs, Pastorns-shor^,
Like great Bucephalus in Greekish Fort.
Round-bellied, not gross, nor gaunt, footlocks hairi^*
Proud in his trot, not cutting, faint or weary.
Barbed in steel with rich caparison,
Fit for the God of war to mount upon.
O how he glories in the bloody fight:
At Trumpetters dreadful sound to show his might.
Look how he bites and strikes on ^^erie side,
To show the glory of the Hipp^^an pride.
But when great Caesar's mounted on his back,
He breaks the squadrons like (...) thunder-cracke:
Disordereth ranks, Lances knapping in sonder,
Witness Sidneyan-Knight Alba^i^^ wonder.
High Jove bestowed him for an ornament,
To make a mortal man more excellent.
He knows, he lou's, He marks his masters voice,
A stranger cannot make him to rejoice:
But you shall hear him laugh after his kind,
If he but chance his masters person wind.
The stately Camel, Camel. Dromedary,
swift Dromedarie
That Merchants goods done speedily carry:
The Spanish Iennet glorious in his pace, Spanish Ie^net,

Th'Irish Hobbie of a stately grace. Ireish Hobby,

The Scottish Nagge of ancient Galloway, Galloway* Nagge,

That nimbly knows to run and pace his way.
Englands Paulfrey our English La^ies please, Engl: Nagge,

To go their iournyes, and return a^ ^ase*
The Turkish horse of Pegasus descended, Turkish horse

Charlemaine has mightily commended:
The Mule, the Ass, the Lawyers do maintain, Mule. Ass,

Their Clients cause softly to entertain:
For coursing Nagges are not for m^n of state,
To mount and manage causes intricate.
The Ox, the Cow, the Sheep, the Goat, the Cat,
That murders in the night the Mouse and Rat. Ox, Cow, Sheep, Goat Catte,
Dog,

The fawning Dog full of saga^i^i^*
Excelling in sense and capacity.
The hardy Mastife, and nimble Greyhound, Mastif: Greyhound.

The ornament of Floras blessed round,
Whose use we know, the Hare does ^eare his might,
The squatting Hare does ^remble at his ^ight.
The noble chaunting Hound with pleasing throat, Hownde.

With bace and treble, m^ane, and (...) n^at.
Warbling his voice, making the horn to sound,
Orderly tunes to immortilize the Hound:
Spannell.
Quick ^enting Spannell, sit for Princely game,
To perch the Pheasant, and rare Birds of name.
To set the Heath-cocke, Partrich and the Quail,
The Snype, the VVoodcocke, and the dainty Rail.
To serve the Spar-hawke, Faulcon and Laneret,
The Gosse-hawke, Ger-faulcon and young Eglet*
The Marlyon, Hobby, Hawks of swiftest wing,
Which many pleasures unto Ladies bring.
Deserves praise of the best fluent Pen,
That ever wrote the benefits of men.
The Spannell for the water and the land,
Water-spannell.
That all their Masters rules done understand,
To couch, to retriue, and to range the field,
Of purpose, game to spring, and sport to yeilde:
And of their Masters seek none other gains,
But comfortable words for weary pains.
How may (...) pen these Spanniels commend
Whose qualities are such as have no end?
If thou will seek a constant faithful friend
In life and death, thy body to defend
Walking and running by thy Horses side,
Scorning all dangers that may thee betide
Being a faithful and true Companion
In joy, and woeful desolation
Whom neither change, or sad calamity,
Nor raging famine, or adversity,
Nor naked state, or pyning poverty:
Can make to shun, or leave thy company:
Then take thy Dog: or find thou such another,
Let him be thy nearest kins-man or Brother
Or converse with thee all days of thy life
(Except thy dearest Mother, or thy wife)
And take for thy pains, if I be contrould,
The fattest Lamb contained in my fould.
Tumbler.
The Tumbler a Dog of rare quallitie,
To furnish the Kitchen abundantly,
With Connyes in a Warren suddenly,
Surprising with Art so cunningly
The silly Connyes before they be aware,
That the beholders think it wondrous rare*
This Dog deserves commendation
As a wonder of Pans creation.
The little Spannell in the Ladies lap, The Ladies Spannell.

Is blessed with extraordinary hap,
Feeding and lodging in that Princely place,
That whilom did renowned Hector grace.
Young loving Lords do wish, it were their Doom
A little while to take their Spannels ^oome.
Now must Endimion make the world acquainted,
With Serpents, Serpents.
and worms which Flora painted
Upon the face of Tellus Mansion
Where nature shows her deep invention.
The fearful Crocadil, and Scorpion,
The flying Dragon from the Dungeon
Of Nessus springing: the poyzoned viper*
The Snake, the Slowe-worme, and the Adder,
The monstrous Cerberus, and Hydra venomous,
The Cocatrice, of sight so perrilous.
The creeping Dragon and the swelling Toade,
The Neught, the Swift, lurking in the Road*
The Aspe covering herself in highway dust,
Whom careful passengers will hardly trust.
These Serpents been of great defor^^tie
Yet excel all other in Subtilty.
Of great force, and incredible fury,
Of great foresight to preuentiniurie,
Capital enemies to Mortal man,
And he to them by all the means he can.
Except the Lizzard a Serpent admirable, Lyzard.

Of color green, to man Amiable.
Before him running on a little space,
Delighting herself to behold his f^^e.
Well watching the place, where a man does sleep,
Guarding his body does him safely keep.
From other Serpents which would him devour,
As he careless sleeps in Floras bower.
Salamandar.
The Salamander living in the fire,
The greatest Philosopher may admire.
Worms.
For seely worms and other creeping things
Which of corrupt putryfaction springs.
By these does Phisi^ show her Deity,
In framing them with such variety.
In Number infinite, and in quality
Surpassing the Serpents excellency:
Earthworms.
The Oil of Earth-wormes mightily preuailes,
Against the Gowte, that humane joints assailes.
Dodman. Snailes.
The shelled Dodman, and white, and black Snaile,
Ioynt-eating Fellon, cures without fail.
Glow-worme
The Glowe-worme shining in a frosty night,
Is an admirable thing in Shepherds sight.
To catch fish.
Twenty of these worms put in a small Glass,
Stopped so close that no issue do pass;
Hanged in a Bow-net and suncke to the ground,
Of a Poole, or Lake, broad, and profound:
Will take such plenty of excellent fish,
As well may furnish an Emperors dish.
But of all creatures, which nature did form
Silke-wormes
Of this kind is the admirable Silke-worme,
Whose dainty web does cloth potentates,
Kings, Queens, Princes and Magistrates:
All princely Ladies celebrate her fame,
Shining in glory of the Silke-wormes frame.
This might abate, the glory of humane pride,
Since a poor Silke-worme has it magnified.
Why boastest thou thy shining Satin Suit?
Is It not a part of the Caterpillars mute?
Her form, her life, her food, her work, her end,
Doct. Muffets Book of the Silke-worme. Spider.
By Doctor Muffet is eloquently penned.
The Spyder next in contemplation,
Excellent in her operation.
Amongst creeping things, is numbered in her kind*
Though she be thought to bear a hateful mind.
To vital heat, and healthful (...) (...),
Because cold poison, she does generate.
Yet if you mark her composition,
And view her virtuous disposition,
To suck from Earth the fell deadly poison,
That so corrupts natures blessed ^oyzon:
And with her feet weaueth a dainty Net,
To show that Ladies webbes been counterfeit:
If with her smallest threads they been compared,
So rare, so thin, so excellently shared*
Mark how in her, Dame nature shows her Art,
Tryumphing in her work in every Part.
And tell me then, if all the world beside,
Be not meere-bunglers unto Natures pride*
Mount little Pismire, from thy hollow cave,
Thy turn com's next, thine honor shall thou have, Pismire.

Since mighty Pan within his sacred Lays, Prou. 6.

Did make thee rowze, the Sluggard from his ways.
How do thou labor in the Summer season,
When Butter-flyes done range void of Reason. Butterfly.

Through grassie Meades showing their painted coat,
Scorning the VVinters blasts as lightest Moate.
But when fell Boreas shows his Ghostly face,
They pine, they sterue, they die, gone is their grace,
Their wings been worn, no meat to live upon,
Repentance comes too late, Time's past, it is gone.
Thou, thou art appointed a Schoolmaster,
To retchlesse, careless, Ryotous-waster.
In Summer time, thou lay'st thy limbs to work,
Noe idle person, in thy Cave does lurk,
Thou packest up thy strawes for winter fuel,
Esteeming warm'th, and meat, a princely Jewel.
Thou fillest thy Barnes, and (...) with thy Corn,
when beggars dye for cold, for food, forlorn.
Nature tryumpheth in thy bodies Frame,
Thy small compacted limbs, witness the same.
Who vieweth but the Pismires little head The Pismires head.

And sees the Organs therein comprised.
Her little mouth to apprehend her meat,
Her tongue to taste, her throat hollow and neat,
To swallow down the juice of what she takes:
Her hot stomach which good digestion makes.
Her lower parts egesting excrements,
Her nimble legs with other complements:
One joint to another soundly compacted,
Orderly couched, no way distracted:
Her wit to discern when Summer begins,
Presaging foul weather or ever she lins,
Or leaves her work for herself and her train:
With labor seeking her house to maintain.
The Pismires bury their dead.
Her orderly care to bury her dead,
Some carrying the feet, some other the head.
To a place remote from her habitation,
To Avoid the stench of mortal contagion.
Who vieweth these things, must greatly admire,
The noble virtues of the little Pismire,
What shall I sing more? The least creeping thing,
The Flea, the Louse.
Brings admiration to a mighty King.
The skipping Flea, and the poor beggars louse,
May make a wonder in a Princes house:
Viewing their mouths, their bodies and legs,
In eating their meat, and laying their eggs.
Fowls.
Floras rich mantle was fretiz'd with Fowls,
Which Shepherds have discribed in their rowles:
And now enioyning poor Endymion,
As plain song for his Pipe to warble on:
Birds of pray for our mean capacity,
Devouring Birds of great rapacitie.
Then smaller Birds that are of lower size;
That gentle Ladies rate of higher prize,
Must be the tenor of the shepherds song,
Though wearied voyse cannot endure long:
Eagle.
High soaring Eagle Empiring and bold;
The shining face of Phoebus to behold.
In the Ensign of victorious Emperors,
Impressed; flying as great conquerours,
Of all furious (...)*
Woe to young (...) way.
The Phaenix bred in great Arabia, The Phaenix.

(A country known to might^ (...)
Of golden color and ^are qua^ities,
Who living always cha^^, ^he burning d^es.
Two of these Bird^ the world cannot (...),
From bird to worm, from worm to (...)*
Using no act of generation,
As eggs used for procreation*
But fire only for privation,
Whence must proceed the (...)*
And then behold an alteration,
Which deserves admiration:
The Ashes yeelden forth a creeping worm
Which Time does cause to take the (...).
Hereby (...) learned Shepherds high^y scan, The vs^.

The resurrection of a mortal man,
To be as possible out of the ground,
As, of a worm a Phaenix to be found.
The Griffin half a bird, and half a be^s^, Griffin.

Strong armed with mighty beak, (...), and creast,
Making an armed man his Evening (...),
The mounting (...).
The monstrous Vulture, Pro^^^heus to mentor, Vulture.

(Of fire natural the first inuent^^)
Merciless, not sparing in his (...),
To offer harmless creatures injury*
The Ostrich of deuou^ing quality. Ostrich.

Oxe-footed, broad beak'd, (...) of (...) title,
And of incredible ceteriti^*
And yet of gross and (...)*
Not able to mount, but holp^^ by (...)*
Great admiration to the hunters bring^*
Disgesting steel, and breathing (...)*
Yet she adornes our Gallants with (...).
The spoiling Goss-haw^^^ not so goo^ for sport, Goss-haw^^.

As fit to feed an army in ^ Fo^^*
The Faulcon, and Ierfaulcon for pleasure,
Faulcon, Ierfaulcon* Tersell. Lan^ret. Lanner, Muller, a bastard Hawke.
Marlion.
Are accounted for a Princes treasure:
Terscell, Tarcell-gentle, and Laneret,
The Lanner, bastard Muller, Malleret,
The princely Sagar, and the Sagaret,
Which Bastard-Hawkes, Faulconers can hardly get,
The thrice renowned noble Marlion,
Which Ladies use for recreation,
Hobby.
The long-wing'd Hobbie for the mounting Lark,
Fit for young eyes the towering game to mark.
Sparhawke.
The Irish Sparhawke to follow slender game,
Deserves with Hawks to register her name:
Musket.
In Winter time the Musket at a bush,
Will serve shepherds to maze a simple Thrush:
Kistrell.
The Kistrell if he be well managed,
For swiftness will not be disparaged:
Kite.
The Coward Kite fittest to ceaze the Mouse,
To gurmandize young chickens from thy house.
She serves to take the garbage from the field,
Least putrefaction might infection yield.
The Buzzard most hurtful to thy warren,
Buzzard.
With spoil of Rabbets making it barren,
Deserves not so much to be hated,
If he were to gaming animated.
Ringtaile.
The Ring-taile eke will truly kill her game,
If cunning hand and wit her nature tame.
The Raven (some say) if she be cicurated,
Raven.
Deserves in some sort to be nominated:
Dangerous for the eyes.
But take thou heed of all the Birds that flyne,
The Eagle and Raven will strike out thine eyne:
Prevent it therefore, least it come to pass,
And arm thy face with spectacles of glass.
The silver stringed sweet sounding Virginal,
Without the Ravens quils is rusticall.
To write the Roman hand, and Secretary,
The Ravens Pen is found most necessary.
Thus for supposed inconvenience,
Her feathers yield young Ladies recompense:
And some commodity does seem (...) grow,
By the noisome devouring (...). Crow.

To cleanse the streets near to (...),
Of stinking carions corruption
The Rooke, the Chough, the (...) for borne, Rooke, Chough, Daw. Mag-pie.

Which feed not of the carrion (...) of corn.
The partie-coloured chattering (...),
Gorgeth herself upon impuritie*
Learned Drayton has told Madge-ho^^ets tale, Michael Draitons Owl.

In covert verse of sweetest Madrigal^*
She whoops at all the World in fro^^^ ^ight*
Blazing the sins wherein it takes delight.
The Bat and she does take their recreation, Bat.

If Phoebus be in declination
The Owl, banquets with Chickens at ^er feast, To see as well by night as by
day.

The Bat delights herself with Bacon b^^t.
If you will see as clear by night as day
Annoint your eyes with blood of Bats they say.
But dance not thou after Albertus (...),
Till thou can better understand this ^iddle:
For of this point Shepherds warn th^^ before,
Eyes so anointed shall never see more
The Kings-fisher labors in her kind, Kings-fisher.

With her breast opposite against the (...),
To seize the fishes spawne, and little fry,
That heedlesse in a River swimmen by
Her painted feathers maken Flies counterfeit,
Tied upon Hooks the leaping Trout^^ get:
The colored Woodspite runs along the trees, Woodspite.

Killing for food the creeping worm slu^ ^ees:
The filthy Cormorant, and the Sea-gull, Cormorant

Whose Crawes with eating will be neu^^ full;
In Floras mantle have some place afforded,
Therefore Endymion has them recorded,
But leave we these, and let our Music ^^ount
To sing of princely fowls in our account.
Pair sweetest Laeda's Swan both wild and tame,
Which mighty Monarchs keep'n for their game. Swan.

Hearne. Crane.
The towering Hearnshaw, and the wake^^ll (...)*
Shaming Ca^cas^s, fearing to be ^ane,
By dreadful Eagle watching for her pray,
Trussing the Cranes a^ they flyen that way.
They keepen therefore silence in their Flight,
Till they have escaped that mountain in the night.
As two lines of a Tryangle meeting together,
At the end, so flyen they in cold weather,
In two ranks spredding themselves a sonder,
They ^oyne at one sharp end, great is the wonder.
They have one leader, whom they duly mark,
Following one another in the dark.
This leader lights far off from the rest,
As one with solitariness oppressed.
He keeps his standing as a Centinell,
That all his Soldiers might in safety dwell.
But if an adversary come that way,
He makes a noise: The troup is in array.
He mountes, they mount, they take the^ to their wing^s
To seek some place that lesser perrill brings.
Goose, Duck, Widgeon, Teale. Curlew, Dotterell, Pewet, Bustard, Godwet,
Plouer, Heath-cocke, Partrich, Pheasant, Rail, Quail Lark.
The Goose, The Ducke, the Widgeon and Teale,
Like order keep as in a common weal.
The dainty Curlew, Dottrell and Pewet,
The Redshanke, Bustard, Bittor, and Godwet,
The Snipe, the Woodcocke, Plouer, Gray and Green,
Garnish the Table of the greatest Queen.
The Heath-cocke, Partrich, Rail, Quail and Phesant,
Are Princes dishes, and pastimes pleasant.
Sweet sounding Lark art not the meanest wish,
That often is made to furnish Princes dish.
Furthermore in blessed Tellus coat,
Are framed Birds, of sweet and pleasing noate.
Long living Ouzle, little chaunting Thrush,
Ouzle. Thrush.
Singing on tops of trees, and highest bush;
Delighting passengers with Melody,
Varying their tunes so curiously.
That Shepherds wonder how so diverse Noates,
Should couched be within such little throats.
But't is an admirable (...)
To hear the delectable (...)
Of sweetest Noates, with (...)*
With lofty streynes, Musi^^ (...),
Of little Philomela, (...)*
Phoebes Phoenix, Organ^^^ (...)* Nightingale.

Let no Musition with her (...)*
No voice so sweet, so exquisite and (...).
Dame Linnet, and birds of Ca^^ria, Lynnet, Canary birds.

With Music please Arcadian (...).
Robin-red-brest, the little dainty (...), Redbrecht. Wren.

With sweetest noates content the (...) of men.
Some other Birds Flora brought in (...),
Which not in voice, yet (...) Pride.
The prating Parret, Parakito small, Parret. Parakito.

Which please our Cinthian Ladies best of all.
As these been taught, so utter they (...) voice
They make much sport, and Ladies ^oo^e rejoice,
Oriental been their Feathers de^estable,
Of color excellent, and variable.
But other virtues in them know I none,
But to eat a soppe and burnish a bone.
The Golde-finch, Bulfinch, Gould-finch. Bul-finch. Mar^let, Swallow.

A red stone in the Craw of a Swallow prob Oil of Swallows.

English iayes. have the falling sickness. Peacocks.


Marlet and Swallow
Of colors diverse, in virtues shallow.
The Red-stone in a Swallows (...) is good,
To stop the Flux and efusion of blood.
The Oil of Swallows, Phisition^ have told,
Help's swelling of joints, proceeding of cold.
Thou shall not once handle our English Iay,
The falling-sicknes infects her a^way.
Peacocks been Birds of rare quality,
Of shining Feathers, pride, and Majesty,
Foes to the Adder by creation:
Contriuing always his destruction*
Sabaean Queen for estimation,
Presented these to mighty Solomon*
The Turkie-cocke, a Crauen by (...), Turkey Cock

Is excellent meat, and of Large st^^ure.
Turtledoue.
The simple harmless groaning Turtle-doue,
Twixt man and wife paints neuer-dying love:
Dove.
The Dove commended in Divinity,
Graced by the third person, in Trinity,
Her bodies heat for sustentation,
Her qualities for imitation.
Stockdoue.
The doleful mourning Stock-doue may thee move,
To view thy state and praise thy God above.
Storke.
The Storke may teach children with reverence,
To yield their parents due obedience.
When crooked age their parents does possess,
And stiffened lims wax faint with weariness*
When poverty their substance does assail:
And vital blood their Arteries does fail.
When blinded eyes done sink in hollowed head*
When trembling hands that should the mouth have fed;
Steddily can hold no sustenance,
And grinding teeth (the stomachs maintenance)
Their offices no longer can fulfill:
And way wardnesse attacheth aged will:
When legs do fail, that should the rest support;
And cold, and age, and grief afoords no comfort:
Then mark the young, the strong and lusty Storke,
That day and night incessantly does work,
Her aged dying parents to maintain,
Refusing pleasure, and enduring pain.
To bring in food his parents to sustain,
Thinking the parents life the children^ ga^^e.
And if he do perceive that food be scant,
And that his parents perishen for want;
So that constrained he must leave the place:
Then woefully he viewes his fathers face,
Showing his grief to see his parents lack,
And all at once he takes them on his back.
And adding force unto his fearful wings,
Swiftly flees to the palaces of Kings.
And laying aged parents safely down,
For food he rangeth all about the town.
Which got, he brings (...) with (...) speed,
Whereof his parents and himself do ^eede.
But here Endymion began to (...),
As if himself were drown (...) sorro^es deep.
I know not what did touch the seely man*
But yet at last he thus again began.
O blessed Pan grant us that Shepherds been,
Aged, unwieldy, with choler ouersee (...)
To find young Storks to carry us (...)*
To feed our mouths to bear our (...) rage:
Alas I fear it will be otherwise
Now children done their parents (...) despise:
And if they done to a little money (...),
Their Parents may in no (...),
To call them sons, the bl^^^-mon^^'d filthy Ass,
Thinks himself shamed if that should come to pass.
For Hercules must needs be this man ^ather,
When he might justly challenge Iris ^ather. Iris the basest beggar that lived
in his time.

A fustie golden Bragga^ochio,
A Lumbardarie scauld Bora^^^o.
The disgrace of an honorable how^^*
As to a Lady is a body lowse.
But let this rest^ A b^ond of infamy,
(There pride abhorred (...))
With frumps derides them (...),
And secretly pursues them with (...).
Endymion must take another subiectl^
Of high regard and princely by respec^,
A wonder for the world to gaze upon,
Which still is out of form and fashion.
A seely foul, a Pellicane by name,
Shall show how much this world in out of frame. Pellicane.

The Pellicane will spend his chiefest blood,
To do his friends or yonglings an^ good;
But we will spend our warm and (...) blood,
To hang our friends or children in our mood:
We brag, we prate of Christiani^^^,
Our hands are full of blood and cru^ltie:
Our tongues can talk of Jesus Christ his death,
And curse, and swear, with one, and the same breath.
We fast, we pray, we sigh, we groan, we preach,
We write, we read, we hear, catechize, and teach,
We bend our knees, aloft we lift our eyes,
As if our hearts were ravished to the skies.
We rage at others vice, reprove corruption,
Speak against usury as abomination:
We speak against the pomp of Prelates in their gree,
And yet who lives in action worsse then we?
There is no sin that worthily is blamed,
But we commit, and are not ashamed.
If true piety consisted in words,
When working actions from the same discordes:
Then are we perfect in Religion,
Our words been plentiful, our deeds been gone.
Except we take corrupt and stinking weeds,
For blessed sacred and religious deeds.
We had rather cut our poor neighbors throat,
Then relieve his want with one seely groat.
And if he fall into extremity,
By shipwreck or other casualtie:
Shall we relieve his woeful penury,
Or help to keep his wife and family
Of our own purse? nay let him sterue and die,
And wife and children beg. O Christianity*
Thy sacred lore teaches quite contrary,
From which who so does obstinately vary,
Shall be acknowledged for none of thine,
Nor be partaker of that glorious shine,
Of bliss, of honor, and of majesty,
And live with th'euerlasting Deity.
Another Bird I have yet in my roll,
Which may be spoken of without controwle,
A bird for courage, and for quality,
For husbandry, thrift, and utility:
Inferior to none that Nature has framed,
House-cocke*
And is the proud and wakefull House-cocke named.
Armed with spurr's to daunt assayling ^oe^,
Crowned as a King, tryumphing as he goes.
Observe the tender love, borne to his wife, The Coc^^ loves his wife*

For whose saueguard, he spares not his life.
If Corn or bread he find, if but a cro^me,
He chucks, and calls his wife until she come:
Before he lays down that piece of bread,
Not feeding himself, if she be unfed.
Each man knows his nature by experience,
To hold you long were inconvenience.
The Titmouse and the multiplying VVren, Titmouse.

That deuours Spiders, and lives amongst men,
For order of our Sonnet as it lies,
Requires that we speak ^f diverse flies:
And specially of flies by creation, Flies.

For many Flies rise of corruption.
The Bees from Pan have their original,
At creation of things natural.
Flesh-Flyes, and VVasps, and Grassehoppers,
Crickets, Hornets, and Cowsherders,
Dorr's, and such like, as flying (...),
Have their original as Mise and Rats.
By Phoebus Heat, and putrefaction,
They taken form and generation.
As mighty Cursses, and great plagues are sent,
Upon this wicked world for punishment.
Great is thy wisdom everlasting Pan,
In all thy works serving the use of Man:
All thy creatures strike admiration,
To Shepherds in their contemplation.
But when we nearly mark the ^ittle Be, Bees.

Our hearts must needs be ravished in thee.
That such a little Fly should far surpass,
The wisest workman, ever framed was,
And all the Artist's in the world beside,
Are argued of insolence and pride,
If they presume by superficial skill,
To know the cause of this thy secret will.
The Bees body described.
How is her body framed in every part,
Admirably contrived beyond all Art?
Her little head her eyes, her mouth, her tongue,
Her throat, her breast, her little heart, her longue.
(As some do think, to houlden breath and heat)
Their little Stomach, to digest their meat:
What Lower intrayles Dame Nature inuents,
To empty, or avoid their Excrements,
Their alwaies-Armed-sting for their defense,
Their little joints, and legs of finest sense,
Their wit to suck the juice from fragrant flower,
Their skill to keep, and carry it to their bower:
Their Art to fly a mile into a plain,
And every Be to find his home again.
But when we come to see their Citadell,
As by a Serieant Mayor squared well:
How justly are Philosophers amazed,
When they have proportionably gazed,
Upon a little concaue or a Hiue,
In which they do their policy contriue?
Circle-Muring strong their pettie-fort*
With Pallazado, Flanker, Loop and Port,
Rampires of wax, and thick Baracados,
To withstand the theeuish Rats-Brauados.
But enter once within their Hiue, or wall,
And see their order universal:
Marking how they do place their Colonyes,
To dwell according to their qualities:
First for the King his Tent imperial,
Next been placed States, Peers principal.
Then every other state in his degree,
According to his service has his fee:
For him and his, a house peculiar:
Private for every thing particular:
For meat, for rest and Cradles for their young:
So neately dressed as passes Shepherds tongue.
Framed six square Geometrical,
Each side to the other, proportional,
And every one his lodging several,
Framed by nature artificial. Every lodging (...)*

Not seiled with unprofitable knacks,
But every lodging of the purest wax,
These lodgings are appointed in rega^d,
That every one should labor, watch and ward.
Thus settled in their Cell against the Sun,
Each falls to his work till day be done.
Some maken Honny-pots, some Ho^^y cleanse,
Which closely they hide, and hourden ^n their De^s.
Of all the flowers growing in the field,
Which fragrant smell unto the sense do yielde:
They gatheren this composition, Honry*

The sick man's Leeche, and best Phisitio^.
They nourish up their younglings in their trade,
Till time and practice has them skillful made.
When Summer has provision for their health,
They swarm them forth into the commonwealth.
To get some place for their habitation,
And labor in their generation.
If any one among them chance to die,
He is removed thence immediately.
For they can abide no dead carrion,
For fear of pestilent infection.
By just desert therefore they are recorded,
That have to Man such benefits afforded.
Rivers and Springs, and Bathes, Rivers.
and pooles there been
That Beautify the Mantle of this Queen.
That flowen from the mighty Ocean
Running again thither where they began.
Loosing their saltness in the hollow vain:
Of Tellus Intrayles where they do remain.
Their swiftness spoils the force of Phoebus Heates,
Which on the buttom of the River ^eates*
The Pike, the Roach the Cheu^^ and the Dace, Fishes of the River.

The Breame, the Barble, with his ^earded face,
The Perch, the Gudgeon, and the silver Eele,
Which Millers taken in their (...) weel^:
Dwell in the River as principal fish.
And given by Pan to garnish thy Dish,
The Salmon, Trout, Flounder and Creuise,
Do dwell in Rivers where the Menow is.
Carpe. Tench.
The Princely Carpe, and medicinable Tench,
In bottom of a Poole themselves do trench.
Pool.
The Poole of necessity has a spring,
Which feeds it, and does fresh water bring,
Least Phoebus burning beams done make it dry,
The mudde to stink and all the fish to die.
Who dare the noble burbling Spring despise,
Springs.
Which from the belly of great Tellus rise?
Where Birds done drink for sustentation,
Where Nymphs and Graces, take their recreation.
Swiftly descending from Parnassus mount,
To sport themselves by cool Castalion-Fount.
Bathes.
There been Bathes also of high Soueraignetie
Med^cinable for man's infirmity.
Cold Bathes.
Cold Bath's springing up from an Allum-mine,
Curing hot Gowts, and Maladies of eyne.
Who^.
Hot Bath's always worken quite contrary,
As spring from a hot Mine Sulphurie.
And thus is Tellus Mantle finished:
And with beauties rich glory garnished.
There rests that Endimion begin,
The Jewels and treasure within the earth.
To show what treasures Tellus has within.
Thrice honored Cinthia deigne to hear this song,
Blame it not, as teadious or to long:
For thou shall hear therein discovered,
Things that before in darkness houered.
The Mothers womb thoroughly Anatomized,
With glorious Meteors therein comprised.
So that if I should have a Trophae made,
When Shepherds life were turned retrograde:
Of all my skill except Theology:
Set up his pillar of Philosophy,
And let thy Poet be eternized,
For Philosophy epitomized.
And let Arcadian Cynthia never die,
But live in records of Antiquity.
And ever triumph in Endymions Lays,
With flourishing and everlasting Bays*
For listen how by Indagation,
In Tellus Belly by Creation
Are perfect metals, Stones, and things between
That neither perfect Stones, nor metals been
Gould, Silver, Brass, Iron, Steel, heau^^-lead, Tin,
Are Metals seven, All things within the earth are either Metalls, Stones, or
Mixed.

7. Metalls.


contained within
In Tellus belly whereunto some add:
Copper which is fine Brass if truth be had.
All these by Phoebus made effectually,
As he is remote, or in propinguitie,
The nearer Phoebus comes to the line,
So is the Metal either course or fine.
As Phoebus fiery Steedes circlen the Sphere,
Declyning the line, or approchen near:
So are his beams of force, or weak estate
Mineral Metals to operate,
As is the substance of the earth in quality.
So is the Metal framed in poverty. The cause of different Metals.

Plenty of Gould is in America,
Peru, Moluccus, and Phillipina,
Little Gould, or Silver in Virginia,
France, Ireland, or Brittania. No plentye of Gold in Virginia, and why*

Yet Copper, Tin, Iron, Brass, or Le^de*
Are in those Countries plentifully bred.
America so near the burning line,
Breeds abundantly the golden Mine*
These other Countries subject to the cold,
Can yield less plenty of silver and gold.
For Gould and Silver is the Care of man, Gold the Object of the world.

For these men maken wars, and (...) and ^an:
Forswear themselves, and sell their dearest life.
For these the husband and kills his guil^lesse wife.
Friend sels his Friend as Judas did his Lord:
Simplicity, truth, virtue is abhorred.
Kings make war with their neighbor Kings for gold^
Religion is wounded, conscience is bought and sold^.
Abbayes, Churches, Altars ruinated,
Whilom to piety consecrated.
Bishoprics spoiled, their Lands divided,
Study decayed, Scholars deryded.
Scholars constrained to buy their places dear,
The Parsonage farmed, it lies the Patron near.
The Patron claims the Tithe to find his Diet:
Or else the Parson must not live in quiet.
But out of doubt, my Lord's a Puritan,
A virtuous and a most Religious man.
Making a Scruple of his conscience,
As does a Beggar to take a six pence,
The Mistress wears the Parsonage on her back,
The Peacher, his wife, and family do lack.
But tell me, is not this a golden age,
When Rascals ride in Golden Equipage
With Princely Lords and men of highest blood,
As Tarleton clad in Caesar's goulden Hood?
When gilded spurs, adorn Hodge-Cli^^perton,
To friske the Hay with Glabbring-Iillion?
Fetching a Caper full as high from ground,
As forty Angels is from twenty pound*
Spoiling more Cates and Viands at one Meal,
Then five great Mastiffes in a common weal.
Provided it be of an others cost,
For his great Grand father never eat Roste.
And tell me? yst' not a goulden season,
When Golden fools are pr^^sed for reason?
As eloquent as learned Cicero,
As sententious as aged Cato:
Pithye, sage, and Grave, with a long white beard,
Like mine old Horned Goat, praeceeding the heard*
What Stratagems of war, are wrought by gold?
What secret mysteries does it not unfold?
What Towns and Cities has it not betrayed?
What Princes councels, has it not bewrayed?
What strange adventures do men (...),
And all for gold, commodity to make*
A man regards nor Age, nor quality
Sex, wit, learning, virtue nor honest^e.
Friendship, faith, Soul, credit, Sincerity*
So he get gold and worldly dignity.
Damnable Usurers Suburds of hell, ^

Jews by profession, Baw'ds of Bride-well,
Devouring English Gentlemen alive,
That once approchen your pestilent (...)
Nets of Beelzebub to ensnare noble frye*
Pretending conscience their wants to supplye.
Protesting that for perfect amity
(Hoping there may be some Affinity
By marriage, between your sudden Daughter,
And this wanting wanton youth heareafter)
If he will knowledge a Satute of his Land*
For men are mortal: and a single Band*
Is not for you that are a Citizen.
When he is content: what do you for him the^*
You will furnish him immediately:
Either with money, or commodity,
But wot ye what? (Pouchmouth Civility)
Now begins your pack of Scurrillitie*
You dampne your selves and swear that money's (...)
But rich commodities he shall not want,
That certain Money presently will ^eeld:
If he be skillful to Marshall the field*
Silks, and veluets at Intolerable price*
Embroydered Hangars, Pepper and Rice*
Brown Paper, Lute-strings, buckle^ for a Saddle,
Perwigs, Tiffany, Paramours to wadd^e.
Great bars of iron, and Spanish Tuck^:
(Thus like a Horse^leech thy vanity suc^es)
These takes the Gentleman, at such a Rate,
As brings repentance speedy* but to late.
For half in half, is loss reasonable*
The Broker swears they are not seasonable.
O inchaunting gold, O alluring witch*
Does not a mind contented make men rich*
Desire of Thee, has damned the Usurer,
His wife, and children, and fill the Broker.
Desire of Thee makes many Merchants wives,
Forsake their husbands beds, their souls, their lives.
Women forsake their husbands beds, for gold, and their excuses. Pandresse.
Under pretense of blessed Religion,
Inflamed with caelestiall vision:
To haunt the beds of younger golden states,
Buying short pleasures at the highest rates.
Desire of Thee constraines the Pandresse seek,
Each angle of the town, each house and Creek,
To bend, persuade, allure, a simple Maid,
For Gold to have her honesty betrayed.
This Pandresse she, alas, she is past the best,
And knows the fittest means t'ensnare the rest*
Bankrupt becomes a preacher for gold.
Desire of Thee draw's the bankrupt merchant,
To become a blind Buzzard praedicant.
To blaze the Bible far above the reach,
To be a Puritan.
To be a Puritan, Catechize, and preach:
To single out a Church remote for ease,
Where he may best his auditorie please.
Where never comes wise nor learned man,
Their fond absurdities to hear or scan.
But sweet Kate and Cisse, Bab, and Julian,
Fair Parnell, and my blessed sister Anne.
Pen at a push, divine ^^inophila,
Prudence, Priscilla, with Polonyma.
These know to use the sacred Oracles,
As lack-an-Apes a pair of Spectacles.
With divinity as well edified
As a red Brick by water's Albified.
Mark his subtlety.
This fellow first to get the worlds applause,
Cries out against the policy and law's.
And says the Chuch is full of superstition,
And her officers without commission*
Thrust thereinto by Romish Antichrist*
Defended by Popish Artagonist.
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Prebendaries,
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Commissaries,
Common-set-prayer, and Citations,
Suspensions, and Excommunications:
Lord Bishops, Barons of Parliament,
Made Justices of civil government.
These are not of Christ's institution,
But by corrupt times Revolution.
Infecting the Church by Popes intrusion,
Poisoning her with woeful confusion.
He says unpreaching Ministers been dumb dogs,
Fitter for plough and serving of hogs,
Then to taken Christ's blessed (...) in hand,
Reading the things they do not understand.
If this be true thou pecuniarie Ass,
Art not thou come to a woeful pass?
That into Christ's Church have thrust thy self,
To coffer up this yellow worldly pelf?
And in a Pulpit do but prate and clatter,
Without Divinity, Method, or matter?
Thy foolish spokes all learned men do scorn,
As spur-gall'd-words, triuiall, and threed-bare worn.
Thy senses need Eleborus, They are too too blunt,
Such Parradoxes of thy self to ^unt.
The Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, unto thee,
As the renowm'd and ancient fathers be,
Thou speak as perfect Ciceronian,
As a Monkey iabbereth Italian.
If I demand how thou attain'dst thy skill,
Thou simply answerest: it was Jove's will*
It came to thee by inspiration:
And by a secret Revelation.
Thus thou obtain'dst thy Consecration,
By an extraordinary vocation.
Contrary to the sacred Regiment,
Settled by Jesus Christ, and parmanent.
But for the Registers of Antiquity,
And interpreters of Divinity,
The holy fathers blessed Monuments,
Which Christ has used as his Instruments,
To make divine Theorems perspicuous.
And obscure sentences illustrious:
Thou do^st reject them as ridiculous,
And interpretations perilous.
Thou only read'st the inuectiues of T.C.
Which by profound writers answered be.
Why without blushing dare thou discommend,
The orders of the Church, or thus contend
About high points beyond thine Element?
Thy time in learning might be better spent.
But well I know what brought thee to this vain,
Not conscionable zeal, but hope of gain.
And this thou shall acknowledge evident,
Upon record as certain Precedent.
Thou that before with railing bitter words,
Denied'st Christian Bishops to be Lords:
And squared Cap, and Surplesse did forswear,
Shunning the Ministers that did it wear,
Saying it was a Relic of Antichrist,
Brought into the Church by the devils high Priest.
The Cross in Baptism, and Ring in marriage,
Is a foolish toy, and mere Surplussage,
The Book of Common Prayer is tittle tattle,
Much like to a Babies playing rattle.
But now thou have by thine own subscription,
Retracted thy former assertion.
Mutabilitie, Mark here he subscribeth.
Affirming the policy of our land,
With Gods eternal verity to stand.
Using the Ceremonies as they been,
Established as all thy people ween.
And what thou formerly have contemned,
As things by Christianity condemned.
By thy hand writing thou have approved,
(As plain truth has far thy betters moved)
Thou wear'st the Surplesse, and the cornerd cappe,
Only but for a bush to stop a gappe.
Thine Audience demand of thee the cause,
Why thou subjects thy self unto these laws?
Since thou have preached direct contrary,
As white and black in colors seem to vary. M^ke his hypocrisy.

Thouh sai'st foul iniquity of this time,
Procured thee to perpetrate this crime.
Out of thy mouth I straight do argue thee,
Of false dissembling hypocrisy.
For if it be direct iniquity,
Discording from true Christianity;
Why will thou thy conscience contaminate,
And with thy pen and hand corroberate,
Things merely false and diabolical,
Forsaking God, and things Caelestiall?
Answer me now or be thou well directed,
Least of hypocrisy thou be detected.
Thou sai'st thy skill is greater now then then; An other* excuse.

(You blessed people answer all Amen.)
Then shall thy flock be excellently fed,
Like the Camelion of the Air bred.
Thou have nor Art, nor wit, to feed thy sheep,
No more then Wolf, or Fox thy lambs to keep.
Thou know no more the Scriptures to unfold,
Then does Aphron th'Alchimist to make gold.
But flesh is frail, and thou art loath to say,
That which we shepherds ^ounden in our lay.
That thou will stay thy self upon this ground*
As fast as will the Hare before the Hound.
Return therefore unto thy trade again,
For in the Church thou labourest in vain.
Think thou our Bishops will thee deigne to preach,
Rude, unlearned, a Mercinany* Dog-leach?
No* no: Saint Nicholl is too wise for that,
Thou'st never in an English Pulpet chat.
Till thou have better skill to manage well,
The mysteries divine of sacred spell.
Yet herein art thou worthily commended,
That have the Churches policy defended.
And forsworn Geneuian Presbytery,
Being a fantastical Anarchie.
But if thou will be an everlasting so,
To this new vpstart Disciplinado:
Studiously with Pen mark each word and line,
A Book called the Su^u^y of Discipline.
Of that learned survey of Discipline,
That which thou do do of intelligence,
Not for lucres sake, but for conscience.
Upon this condition I Will let thee go,
And speak of certain golden wonders more.
For out of doubt it works strange effects,
When every man the golden Ass respects.
An old wife chosen and made young by Gold.
A lusty Gallant seeks his wife for gold,
Though the withered Crone be foure-score year old,
Blind, crooked, lame, deformed, full of gout:
Her gold, her gold, shall paint the Buzzard out,
As young, as beautiful^, as Pollix^n^,
Wise, courteous, wit learned, as my Cynthia.
Gentle as a Dove, for why she cannot bite,
Forty years agone she was toothlesse quite.
A foul and foolish daughter made fair and wise by Gold.
Yea a young puppet, ill favored idiot,
A slabbering, grenning, laughing fool (God wot)
Gold can transform to fair and gracious,
Witty, and sober, in talk sentencious,
Able as wisely to utter her mind,
As Seneca's wife could see being stark blind.
Yea, in a Country where no gold does grow,
By arteficiall skill we will make gold, I trow.
That shall abide the fiery test as well,
As stubble can abide the fire of hell.
Alchimie.
This skill is called the noble Alchimie,
Which brings all her friends to beggerie:
For with great expense and longation,
Must come this metals alteration;
Perilous is the way by curtation,
Having no certain operation,
By the white and green, and red Lion,
By fixing Sulphurs liquefaction;
To have a perfect calcination,
Right Tincture, and Maleation,
To make it ductible and fusible,
Close lured in an earthen Crusible,
Bewaring of too hot combustion,
Till forty days and nights be come* and gone:
Secretly working by thy self alone:
Thou shall obtain the Philosophers stone.
A fine red powder, which being proiected,
(By great Art and skill, least thou ^e detected)
Upon a piece of Brass as big as a house,
Shall make a piece of gold as big as a louse.
Goodly Manors and Possessions are sold,
To make simple Brass artificial Gold.
But as a Velvet Ape remains an Ape,
Though he be attired in golden shape:
So shall a piece of Brass be perfect Brass,
Though it be somewhat purer then it was.
Well, this that is spoken proves evident,
That this Metal of Gold is exce^lent.
For which all states and sexes macerate,
Themselves and theirs with labors intricate.
Though Gold it self, as by creation,
Is not the cause of such corruption*
But man's vile infatiable desire,
To lade themselves with this thick earthly mire,
Brass for vessels, and fodder fast our Steel, Brass.

To make Canons, whose force our foes do feel.
Iron and Steel are metals of dignity, Iron and Steel.

Of great esteem, virtue, and quality,
The one with the other may so be tempered,
That by no Art they may be entered,
They make mighty instruments of war,
Bellona, and Palace with these armed are.
With these the Captains of Britannia,
Beard the proud Monsters of Romania.
The force of these has conquered India,
These fright the Muses and fair Cynthia.
And all young Ladies that delight in peace,
Whereby their joy, their love, their sports increase,
Praying great Mars, no more to manage arms,
That they might claspe him in their Iuory arms.
The use of these for which they were intended;
Was that our confines might be defended,
From foe man's force, and fierce Invasion
That blessed peace might build her station,
That there might be no fell corrasion,
Death, nor bloody depopulation.
But out alas! Sacred intent of Pan,
Is quite perverted by the mind of man,
By a malicious disposition,
That turn these Metals to pardition.
They kill, destroy, and murder one another,
The Father kills the Son, the child the Mother:
Man kills man, whom he ought to defend:
Knives were ordained to a better end.
Woe worth the man, that first the sword invented,
Never sufficiently to be lamented.
For since the time these weapons first began,
In small regard was had the life of man.
Each swaggering Ruffin now that walk's the streets*
Proud as Lucifer, stabbeth whom he meets.
Trampling the Guts of men under his feet,
Tryumphing in his brothers winding sheet.
O blessed region where no Iron grows,
Where no man Steel, nor gold, nor silver knows,
Where Guns and swords, been reputed wonder
Where roaring Cannon is holden thonder.
Where never wonned any martial Man,
Where men done never cu^sse, nor swear, nor ban,
For Gold: but ledden a contented life,
Void of pride, Malice* contention, strife,
Giving a lump of Gold for a small Bell,
A needle or a pin, contents them well.
Peace commended.
Thou Solomon renowned prince of peace,
How did thy kingdom flourish and increase?
When Silver was compared unto dust,
Void of contention, malice and distrust?
Gold was as plenty as stones in the street,
Neighbor used neighbor solemnlie to greet.
Saying ( Shalumleca) peace be unto thee,
Then was Jerusalem in high degree.
But after he was dead, then wars began,
Peace was exiled, waxed sick and ^an,
Civil sedition, and dichostasie:
Clangor of Trumpets, noise and fearful cry
Trampling of warlike Steedes, Banners displaide, Discommodities of war.

Beating of Drums: Armor rustie Assayed.
Mighty men at arms, raunged in array.
Towns full of clamor, women ran away.
Lamenting of Mothers, wives wringing hands,
Blood-breathing Mars, at each corner stands.
Two Kings in one Land, each clayming right,
Soldiers ignorant on which side to fight.
The whole land full of desolation,
Expecting nothing but diuastation*
A lamentable woeful Spectacle,
When closed was the blessed Tabernacle,
The laws worship and Sacrifice d^d cease,
Exterminated quite with sacred Peace.
The champing horse up to the Foot^locks stood,
In flowing streams of dying Sould^ers blood.
No reverence to the aged man at all,
The wife does dye to see her husband fall.
The Children weep to see their Fathers death;
The aged Matron yields up her breath;
Young virgins without regard deflowred,
Studies decayed, Students devoured.
Merchants spoiled, and their goods divided,
Justice despised, Judges derided,
The whole Kingdom brought to confusion,
Thy house, thy good's, thy land's by intrusion,
Of a godless impudent companion,
Taken by force from thy possession.
Thy woeful wife ravished before thy face,
And presently thou murdered in the place.
Tell me now if thou have any conscience,
If this in making Steel were Pans pretense?
The armed Plough-Share in making Furrows long:
Our Horses Iron shodd, to footen strong.
Boord's strong nailed, to couch together close:
Keys, and artificial locks, to shut and lose:
With other infinite commodities:
Which by this Metals principally rise.
Of these two Metals shown, use principal,
For deadly wars been things accidental.
The leaden mines, are now in chief request,
Lead.
For which we riuen sacred Tellus breast.
And turn them to bad uses contrary,
Unto their first created destiny.
We use it now to make Bullets round,
To gorge our Pistols Christians to wound.
Caliuers, Muskets, and such Trumpery,
Executors of humane cruelty.
Are stuf'd with Bullets of the purest Lead,
To kill a harmless Man unfurnished.
We used them first holy Church to cover,
At the charge of many a Christian Lover.
To cover close, the Palaces of Kings:
Least rain might enter which corruption brings.
Glasiers can tell of uses manifold,
That need not in our story be enrould.
This proo^'s there is a strange mutation,
Of all things from their first creation.
Tin.
Excepting Tinn formed for Vtensils,
Which sculleries of Noble Ladies fills.
This metal receives corruption,
By Pewterers sophistication.
Corrupted by Mixture of Lead.
Chargers, Basens, Platters, Pots of Tin,
Mixed with lead craftily foysted Inn.
Making them heavy, and of color blew,
But Tinn's light, and white, if Substance be true.
If otherwise it is adulterated*
And by Cosonage sophisticated.
Thus is rich Tellus glorious within,
In deeper search if thou will wisdom win:
Stones done occur next to be sur^ey'd,
As nature has them orderly conue^'d. Stones with their deuisio^s.

Gems, Marble, whetstones, Flmt's and building bones,
Are ribb's of this Lady, or our Mothers bones*
Hearken the music of mine Oaten Reed,
As Endymion does orderly proceed.
Gems are principally memorable Precious stones.

As Jewels of price inestimable
In barryne Rocks, and mountains engendered,
And by great Pan to Ladies tendered*
To garnish all their Princely Ornaments,
Tyres for their heads, vailes, and Abbillements*
Their caules, their hair, their neck^, their breasts, their hands
Whose price none but the owners understands.
Of watery substance been they composed,
And by the burning heat of Phoeb^^ disposed.
Into diverse colors hard oriental,
Shining throughout, not superficial^.
The thicker they been the more of regard,
So they been impenetrable and hand,
This watry^substance by cold is congealed How they come to resist the fire,
and yet being endred water.

And then by Phoebus long time A^ealed.
Yea hardened so by the heat of the Sun
By continual Reuerberation.
So hard compact by Phoebus burning charm,
That the flaming fire can do them no harm.
These been called precious for their qualities,
Not for their Maginitude or quantities.
These casten such a luster to the (...),
As might a mazen Shepherds tha^ been wise.
Resembling often with their splendent light* Gemmae. perspicuae. Op^ca^.
M^x^a^.


Twinkling and shining Stars i^ frosty night.
Of precious stones some shining and clear,
Some been obscure, and therefore not so dear.
Some partly clear, and in some part obscure,
Yet very precious, and will long endure.
Perspi^^^*
The Diamond, Carbuncle perspicuous,
Blew Saphyre, Emerald, Iacynth lustrious,
Obscure, and dark, is the jewel Onix,
Op^^a, ^ Mys^^*
Clear and obscure, Jasper, and Sardonix.
All beasts and plants of force must needs give place,
Many stones of more virtue, the^ beasts and plants. Lodestone. Diamond His
virtues.
To many stones precious for virtuous grace.
The truth hereof is evidently shown,
By the Lodestone universally known.
The Princely Diamond of high respect,
Pierces an armor with his hard effect:
Nine days together resists the fire,
Who does not then his qualities admire?
It expels fear, as Shepherds have tried,
If it be to a Ladies left wrist tide:
Carbuncle, or Rubie.
At midnight Carbuncles give such a shine,
As if Phoebus blazed his power divine:
It makes a man merry that looks thereon,
Virtues.
Against Melancholy preuailes this stone.
Emerald.
Most precious of all is the green Emrald,
Which of us Shepherds a chaste stone is called.
It is the softest, and foe to Venerie,
Virtues.
When thou and thy wife go to bed, lay't by:
If thou have drunk venom, or poisoned thing,
Drink this in wine, it will remedy bring.
Against falling sickness it is a remedi^,
Which Physicians call Epilepsie.
The fearful dreams that risen up in us,
The Emeralde does utterly discuss.
Blew Saphyr. Virtues.
The blew Saphyr makes found the eyes,
That been oppressed with mystie maladies,
Choler-adust, it cures perfectly,
Drunk in wine, and powdered cunningly.
It does prevail against the Scorpions sting,
The powder also remedy does bring,
Against a Carbuncle, or pestilent sore,
Strawde upon it and drunk as before.
The Iacinth preserves from the lightning, Iacinth*

Those that wear it garnished (...)*
From the pestilence it keep's men sound, Vert^e^.

That air infected may them no^ confound.
A precious help for them that cannot Sleep,
Get this stone and do it safely keep.
The Marble stones excel in Dignity, Marble.

All other stones that been ordinary.
Representing a shining looking-glass,
Showing the faces of them that done pass.
Excellent for building of gorgeous Rooms,
Theators of state, and Emperors Toombes.
some white, some black, some green, with spots distinct,
Such as great Cynthia has in her precinct.
Porphirie for riches is commended, Porphyrie.

Wherein Phisis has her skill extended.
Alablaster shall not in silence sleep, Alablastar.

Wherein our Ladies done their Ointments keep.
Whet-stones been next as Endimio^ finds, Three kinds of Whetstones

Devouring Metalls: hereof been three kinds,
The Touchstone, and Whet-stone of Darnasco, Touchstone.

And the Indian Whet-stone, the razors Foe. Damasco Whet-stones of an
A^hecolour.

Gould-Smiths use the first to try their Metals by,
As Gold and Silver from false Alchymie.
The second common used to this intent,
To whet our knives, or other instrument.
The third is yellow which the Barbers have, Indian Whet-stones yellow.

To whet their Razors if they mean to sha^e.
The nature of the flint all men do^ admire, Flynt-stone.

How that special stone is fit to strike fire,
Scholars* Soldiers, and Maryners are bound, Men much bound to God for this
Stone especially, Students, Soldiers, Mariners.

To bless the time when first this stone was found,
If all the fire in the whole world ^ere gone:
Tellus can help thee with one silly stone,
For common stones of great infinity,
Framed by caelestiall Divinity.
Different in color, form and fashion,
For nature, use, and Operation.
Stones ordinary
Hardened by the burning beams of the Sun,
Being dust and sand, ere they were begun.
I Will single some as stones of rarest name,
Which justly do deserve Records of fame,
The Load stone first comes to my memory,
Lodestone.
A Stone of admirable utility.
Drawing by secret divine influence,
Iron and Steel surpassing humane sense.
Two ends it has, if they be rightly squared,
Done wondrous things which cannot be declared.
Nor can we all the secret virtues tell,
Which in this little ragged stone done dwell.
For one among the rest is admirable,
The reason whereof is Ins^rutable.
Virtues.
One end draws iron to it all the day;
The other end does make it run away.
One end draws iron to the southern Pole,
The other, to the center of the Northern-hole:
So strange and implacable enmity,
Such hidden raging Malignitie
In working nature of this stone is found,
As does the wit of all the wo^ld confound.
All Mariners of force must be dismayed,
Mariners.
If they should want the Load-stones blessed aid,
By this they sail, else know not where they were,
Such sou'reigntie in Ship does Magnes bear.
Lapis Herculeus it is called those,
Hercules the first inuentor of the Lodestone.

Smiris for Teeth.

Pumc^ for Parchment. Ta^tarum for Spots in the face.

Lap^^ Sectil^s.


That say Herculeus did it first disclose,
Smiris a noble stone in operation
Much used for the Teeth's purgation.
The Pumice stone was not formed in vain,
To cleanse your parchment and to make it plain.
Tartar found in the bottom of Wine-Leyes,
For Pimpled spotted face, is of high Price.
A stone there is of color black as sables,
Which Marchaunts often, use for wrighting-tables.
This also deserves some memory,
Because it serves man's commodity.
The stone which Shepherds done Acthites call, Acthites.

Is of great virtue, though the stone (...) small,
For this I wish young Ladies understand, Virtues for women traveling with
child

If they hold this stone closely in their hand,
Or apply it, to the place Parturient
They shall be delivered incontinent.
This sounds Endimions in his Lays,
Make use thereof and after give him praise.
Read and white coral as hard as a stone,
Tellus refuses because it is none,
But a sea herb combust by the hea^e of the Sun, Coral no stone but an
Herb.

Wherewith some women feign wonders been done.
Drunken in powder, it virtue impart's,
To the Greene-sicknes* and languishing Heart's,
Neither is Ieat within the stony Law Ieat.

As sit for naught, but to take up a straw,
The third part of all the mineral's that been, Mixed mineralls.

Found in earthes-bellye, and daily seen:
Have strange and secret virtues intricate,
Profitable for mortal man's estate.
And first Physicians done highly ex^^t, Sal Gema. Ammoniacum. Salt Peter.


The Pearled, and the Ammonian Sa^^.
Saltpeter, Mineral of high regard*
Dug by commission, in each hou^e and ward,
Where by the Devil invented Gunpowder,
That hell might triumph and death ^e prowder*
Which with sulphury composition,
Procurs fatal death and Perdition.
Sulphur the Damme of wild fire and brimstone. Sulphur.

By a filthy devilish commixion,
Which has brought to final subversion,
Many a strong and worthy champion.
Many a learned Scholar of renow^^:
The princely Soldier, and the rural^ Clown:
No City, Castle, Fort, or stately Tower,
Is able to withstand his raging power:
This has Dame Tellus in her regiment,
Close coffred against the day of judgment:
If minds revenging would vouchsafe it rest,
In darkesome closset of his Mothers breast.
Alume.
Alume is also a famous mineral,
Cold, Abstersive, peircing, medicinal.
For Cankers in the mouth, Ulcers and blaynes,
Hot and dry Scab's, and itching of the veins.
Glass.
Of Viscous matter, is glass composed,
Which in her breast, Tellus has enclosed.
Whereof men vessels* excellent contriue,
Looking-glasses.
Looking-glasses, and Glasses perspectiue*
Composed by Art Geometrical,
Whereby been wrought things Supernatural.
Perspectiue glasses.
Men with half bodies, men going in the Air.
Men all deformed men as angels fair.
Besides other things of great admiration,
Wrought by this Glasses Fabrication.
Drinking Glasses. Glass for windows. Burning-Glasses.
Drinking Glasses, and plain window Glass,
Placed by Art, that light and heat may pass.
Though it be strange, we know it may come to pass,
To set ^ire on a Town, or a Ship by a glass.
How are old men bound to Pans Majesty:
Whose sight is dim, with their antiquity?
That they might in age read his Oracles,
Spectacles.
He helps their sight with glassie spectacles.
You learned Searchers of rich natures skill,
That oils and waters sovereign distill,
Limbecks Viols.
What glassie Limbecks, and receptacles,
And closed fast luted Tabernacles,
Frame you of this one brittle treasury,
Safely to keep distilled mystery?
Nimble quicksiluer what shall I say of thee?
Quickesiluer.
Mineral excellent in thy degree.
Mother of Metals, transformer of all*
The seven Metalls universal.
How shall I celebrate thine excellence,
Or glorify thy great Magnificence,
Gold joins not to silver but by thee,
Thou piercest all Mettalles that formed be.
No Metal hinders thine agili^^^
Tou flyest the sight of man's iniquity*
Admirable things might well be wrought,
If man by Art, could fix thee as they ought,
And beat thee forth into a silver Plate,
Whom neither Tuch, nor Test could macerate.
No silver then, to thee were comparable,
Made with small cost, excellent and durable,
This I think were a far greater mystery,
Worthily fit to be called Alchymie*
Then thus to make our wealth, and wit to range,
Good Copper, into seeming gold to change.
Which thing is as possible to be done*
As for a Weezle to eat up the Sun.
But Mercury whom we quick silver call, Quick silver may be (...).

May be fixed as silver natural:
Perfect good silver, permanent and (...),
And shall all proofs of Tuche, and (...) endure.
No difference twixt other silver and this:
But that is steedefast, and this running is,
Yet as it is it cures Maladies,
Ache in the ioynt's, and french infirmitie^.
And men once cured, with never dying praise,
With sacrifice and sacred rounded lays
Do blaze with Trumpe, of everlasting fame,
The glorious order of this circled frame.
And now Endymion has Anatomized,
The universal world, and all therein comprised,
One only thing remain's as yet untouched,
Which is most admirable, yet closely couched,
It Is this: to what end all these thing^^ were framed?
Which in this particular we have named.
The answer is the use thereof is great* The use of this philosophi^.

Either for contemplation or Meat.
Principally for blessed man's behoof,
These things were framed as a certain proof,
That he would love him everlastingly,
For whom he framed universality.
For when worlds engine was thus finished,
And all the parts perfectly polished:
Yet this whole fr^me served Pan to no purpose,
Nor did he benefit by one of those,
Whom he had made, upon, and in this round,
Heaven, or Earth, or what therein is found.
For next to heaven were the Angels made,
When the Angels were made.
And shortly after some fell Retrograde.
And became devils by alteration,
Of all their qualities in creation.
And have their place within the spacious air,
Kept in Chains of everlasting Despair.
Yet not of Angel, Devil: or ought created,
The fall of Angels, and their place.
And Pan need in pleasure situated,
Yet would he make this glorious world, and why?
For that he meant to frame a Monarchy:
Or large Empire full of sovereignty,
Then formed he a Prince of royal dignity
Man made, and why?
Of a wonderful Grace and Majesty,
To sway this Imperial Monarchy,
He framed first his bodies lineaments,
With all his admirable Complements.
As a young man of thirty years of age,
A perfect man. Ephe. 4.
Beautiful, gracious, of comely visage.
Yet dead he lay, as carcass on a green,
No life or motion in him felt or seen.
Like sweet Adonis sleeping on the Mount,
Whom peerlesse Venus had in high account.
A living soul.
Then breathed he into him the breath of life,
Where presently began a gentle strife.
When every limme began it self to move,
And stretch it self his vital force to prove,
Life the effects of the soul.
The closed eyes their Curtains did display,
The rolling eye had motion every way.
The nosthrils began to feel the fragrant smell,
Of sweetest sented flowers which there did dwell,
The ear began to hear melodious notes*
Of dainty Birds, from out their warbling throats.
The Rubie, liquid, warming vital bl^^d,
Passed every vein, as riuer^ streaming flood.
From Livers fountain t'impart nour^^hment, The Liver fountain of blood. The
heart principal.

Unto the heart that has the government*
And so through conduits secretly con^riu'd,
Is blood to every humane part derived.
This life to every part gave perfect ^ense,
To feel according to their differenc^*
Within his head by hidden instruments,
Were placed Natures blessed Ornaments. The head receptacle of senses
intellectual. Fantasy in the forehead: Memory in the hinder part of the head.

Understanding in the crown of the head. Dura Matter, P^a Matter.



The forehead kept objected fantasy,
The hinder part reteyneth memory.
Intelligence has her place principa^l,
In the crown of the head highest of all,
Fit to receive objects from fantasy,
And to commit them unto memory.
Within a branchie filme there lies the brain,
Close rampir'd up with Barracados twain:
Both matters, and the flint-hardie Scull*
Here reigns the Soul, in manner wonderful.
From thence she does diffuse her operation,
To every member in his situation. The soul Immortal, Simple.

No part of Gods essence. Created, that is, breathed.



This breathed Soul^s an immortal substance,
Simple, spiritual and of puissance.
Though breathed, yet no part of Pan^ Essence,
But a created glorious existence.
Fitting the body for Procreation,
It self not fit for generation. Not ex trad^^^^ that is, One soul to beget
another.

A simple essence cannot be divided,
As Philosophers have well decided.
Thus being animated his tongue did move,
And spoke some words which tended unto love.
Then never present Pan took him by the hand,
And set him on his feet, making him stand. He saw God as he might behold him.

And made him view his glorious Majesty,
As far as might his perspicacitie.
And made him view the glory of the place,
With all things framed, and set before his face.
Producing to him all creatures framed,
He named all things his Mansion.
So to be termed, as he would have them named.
He made EDEN, BEGAN, JEHOVAH habitation,
Fit for a Prince of his creation,
Replenished with fruits of every kind,
To ^it the belly and to please the mind.
In the midst of the round world Situate,
Paradise in the midst of the earth. Man King of the earth.
The rest with great eas^ to contemplate.
There he invested him, as in a Throne,
Giving him season and possession,
And imperial domination.
Of all this lowest roundes creation.
Gracing his government with certain law's,
Which Clarkys comprehenden in their Saw's.
And being high points of Theology,
Surpass Endymions Philosophy.
Divinity begins, where Philosophy does end.
Mark ( Cinthia) where Philosophy does linne,
There always does Theology begin.
He called him ADAM: ISCH: an earthly man,
Worlds wonder, Monarche, Terrestrial Pan.
So glorious shining, Princely excellent,
Virtuous, holy, wise, and continent:
Sober, modest, strong, grave, and temperate,
Amiable, Magnanimous, and moderate.
Of comely jesture, and sweetest carriage,
Fit to possess Ioue's Queen in marriage.
Yet desolate alone, and comfortless,
Rich yet poor, pinched with solitarines,
Commanding all things that were created,
Yet could not his mind be recreated
Because he was constrained to live alone,
Without inioying a companion,
Which Pan perceiving, cast him in a sleep,
Commanding Morpheus, this prince to keep.
As one receiving Opium, or Dwall,
Deprived of vital sense, does deadly fall:
So falls down this mighty earthly Prince*
Never felt Flora such a creature since,
Except he were more then a mortal^ man,
Receiving Pearl of Tullus, part of (...).
Falling she took him in her blessed arms,
And lul'd him fast a sleep with sacr^d charms.
So dead a sleep with Incantations*
She dressed his body with Carnations:
Crimsen Gilliflowers, Pinkes and Pauns^es,
Muske-Roses, and other pleasing P^ansies.
Thinking herself, a Queen most fortunate,
If she might live to choose him for he^ mate.
But mighty Pan provided otherwise, Woman made*

Out of his senseless side he made to rise,
A young Princely gracious loving creature,
Far surpassing any former feature.
Of such a shape divine, and Majesty,
As amazeth my best Philosophy.
Her face was like my fairest Cinthya*
And peradventure like Musophila*
Her grace, behavior; and modesty,
Surmounteth any man's Capacity.
Nor by Endimion can be blazed,
But it will make the whole world amazed.
Heaven and earth cannot the like afford,
As must be wife to this imperial Lord.
For she must be of body excellent,
That must lie by a King Magnificent,
And it behooves her to be precise,
To talk with him that is absolutely wise.
Pan therefore taking consultation,
Said she should serve for generation.
Her skin was white as was the I^orie,
Thin and smooth as the finest Tiffany,
Where through a man might perfectly behold,
The azured veins, her inward parts to fold.
A reddie intermixed vermilion,
Diffused was pleasant to look upon.
Her golden hair dispersed to her thighs,
Close shrowd's, Lucina's sacred Mysteries.
Her modest eyes like sparkling Diamond^,
Pure and chaste (unlike to Rosamonds,)
Piercing like Cupids fixed fiery Darts,
Stern, fierce, and bloody, Marble: Martiall-hearts,
Loves mountains, apples of Hisperida,
Such were her breasts witness my Cinthia,
From whence by coral conduits flowing are,
Streams of the sweetest caelestiall Nectare,
Her crimson smyling lips did make a show,
That mirth and pleasure in her mouth did grow.
Her teeth even set by natures curious hand,
As rows of oriental Pearls did stand.
These keep her tongue, and instruments of voice,
Of purpose made to cause her Lord rejoice.
Tender her hands, her fingars long and small,
Fit to delight her Lord and sport withal.
Thus framed she was in just proportion,
Which made the world amazed to look upon.
But for the Ornaments of her princely mind,
For excellency were not far behind.
The noble soul of Adam first created,
If they be viewed and justly estimated.
Some shepherds hau'n seely folks abused,
The woman's soul was not made of (...) soul, but infused by God.
Which done deny her soul to be infused
Into her body, as blessed Adams was,
But rather that creation came to pass,
By propagation out of Adams soul.
We find no warrant for this in our roll.
For simple essence can no way generate,
Observe.
His like: and yet conserve his former state.
Thus was the glorious Queen accomplished,
Adam, Adamah.

Nekebah per^orat^, boared as with a wimble, of the word N^kab signifying to
bear a thing Hollow.


And with caelestiall beauty furnished.
Pan blessed her, and called her Adamah,
A female earth, and after Nekebah.
By reason of her great concauitie,
To take and hold begotten progeny,
This being done, he viewd the sleeping man,
At his command Morpheus swiftly ran.
In the darkesome Caves of E^ebus*
With all his mistie charms Somnife^^us.
And left the sleeping Prince in Flora^ lap,
Not knowing what was done for his good hap,
At last his lustrious eyes, he began adua^nce,
Rouzing himself, and shaking of hi^ ^raunce,
And standing up upon his princely feet,
Pan caused his virtuous Lady him to greet.
Whose sudden view, struck him to such amaze,
As marueling a while did naught but gaze,
He wondered at her beautiful proportion,
Her gracious looks and constitution.
And looking well upon himself (quoth he)
So well this peerless frame, resembles me,
As if she were my propper flesh and bone,
In body and soul* we seem to be but one.
In all the earth her match can not be found,
In whom humanity does so abound.
Then ever living, everlasting Pan*
Acquaintd him how every thing began,
And said absolute shall be thy pleasure,
Take here to wife this surpassing treasure,
The Prince obeyed, the Lady was content,
Mighty Pan married them incontinent.
And blessed them: saying they should increase,
And fill the world till heaven and earth did cease.
This pleased the Prince, in token of consent,
He gave her half this worldly regiment.
Parting between them, earthes circumference,
And cal^d her ISKAH for prehem^^ence, Iskah a Mannesse as we say a Duchess.

Then was the marriage solemnized,
And in our sacred rowles eterni^ed.
Where blessed Angels sounded harmony,
And chirping Birds chaunted their Melody,
The King and Queen, with joyful hearts did sing,
And hills and dales, rebounding Eccho's bring.
Tellus and Flora, kep't it holy day*
Attired in their most gorgeous array.
And all the Orbs and Spheres gave looking on,
When Princely Adam took his Paragon.
How long they lived in their felicity,
Is not contain^d in Natures Mystery.
What was their art, their life, their fall, their end,
By sacred lays and Oracles been pend.
WIth that, Endymion cast his eyes aside,
And saw a gentle Knight come pricking on,
Swift was his pace, and knightly did he ride,
Bending his race toward Endymion.
As stately Knight he was to look upon,
Complet his arms in rich Caparison,
His horse like Pegasus, and he Belerophon.
Likely he was to manage Martial arms,
Well could he couch in rest his dreadful Spear,
He rode as one that scorned Thessalian charms,
Nor did he any strange adventures fear:
The Arms and Shield which I did see him bear,
Were colored blew, thick set with silver Stars:
His Shield an azur'd Porpentine, with golden bars.
His wauing Bases manaced the skies,
Like as his Armor to Welkin semblant,
Couched in his Saddle close to enterprise,
Stratagems and adventures puissant.
If any in the earth were commorant,
And single Combat quick to undertake,
Against hellish Monsters or Lernaean snake.
His steely helm, a Corronet of Bays,
Empaled round: the penon of his Lance,
The ignorance of all the world displayes,
For when he began, his warlike Spear ta'duaunce,
Some golden Letters writ I read by chance.
The Motto was (if I remember right)
Learning Triumph^ in Enu^es great d^spigh^.
The simple Shepherd cried out (...);
Fly noble Cynthia we are betrayed,
So sore amazed was the Country swain,
That he forgot what he had done or (...).
Renowned Cynthia was no whit dismayed,
But comforted the amazed senseless man,
Willing him hold his course as he began.
And all the Ladies from their seats arose,
To view the coming of this warlike Knight:
In circle-wise they fair Cynthia clos^*
To shrowde Diana from Acteons sight,
The Shepherd would have taken himself to flight,
But that he was asham'de to run away,
Leaving the Ladies to the warriers pray.
He laid a side his Pipe, and took his Hook,
As if he would an armed Knight withstand,
The seely soul put on a manly look,
Yet better was his running then his hand.
He wished himself far off in other land,
For fitter were his hands to use a pen,
Then manage Arms with any Ma^shall men.
But making virtue of necessity,
He made a show as if he meant to fight,
Upon his feet, he started suddenly,
To shield these Ladies from that manly Knight.
No question there had been a noble sight,
To see him wield a wooden rustie ^ooke,
That fitter were to manage sacred ^ooke.
O how the Shepherd would have (...) his stumps,
And laid about him with his smo^tie Book,
His wooden Crook had given such deadly thumps,
As would have stricken down a falling Ox.
So would the Knight have feared the Shepherds knocks,
As if a Bulrush hit him on the Crest,
Or if a Gnat had stung his armed b^est.
But all was well, no terror was intended,
The Knight nor cared, nor knew Endymion.
He rein'd his Steed, and lightly down descended,
And with a Courtly disposition,
Lift up his Beuer, whereby every one,
Knew him to be, the mighty Astrophill,
Whose praise is painted with an Angels quill.
Prince of all Poets in Acadia,
Magnanimous of everlasting Fame,
Of chief regard, with famous Cynthia,
Appollo parted with him half his name,
And gave him skill dark ignorance to tame,
Appollo twined with his learned hand,
The Laurel Crown, which on his head does stand.
But when my Cynthia knew 'twas Astrophill,
She ran to claspe him in her dainty Arms,
But out alas, it passed mortal skill;
Inchaunted was the Knight with sacred Charms.
His body dead of yore, the more our harms.
O noble Drayton well did thou rehearse,
Drayton upon the death of S.P.S.
Our Damages in dryrie Sable verse.
Thrice Cynthia tried to fold him in her arms,
But all in vain, she nothing comprehended:
Her vital blood that all the body warmes.
Forsook her veins, and to her heart ascended.
For lo, she fainting falls as life were ended:
Making most woeful lamentation,
Yet Astrophill still kept his station.
The worthy Nymphs that circled Cynthia,
Amazed at her fall made such a cry,
As waked the Satyrs of Syluania.
And feeding Lambs did greatly terrify:
The Shepherd in a mortal trance does lie,
The tender Ladies had the better heart*
Setting all cowardice and fear apart.
Nymbly they took, and rubbed Cynthia*
Till she revived, who lifting up her ^yes,
Beheld the Elsin of Arcadia,
And cri'de dear: brother do not ^e^porise:
Nor do thou Lady Cynthia despise,
Why speak thou not to her that loves thee best,
What dismal humor has thy mind possest^
With that as from a deep concau^ti^,
A siluered voice, and words of great import,
Proceeded from the Knight with Majesty,
Distinct, pithie, plain, but wond^o^^ short,
Yet such as unto us gave great comfort.
A man, a ghost, a knight, a potentate,
Humane, divine, forcible, laureate.
Dies, lives, fights not, yet mortally does wound,
Death, life, time, fortune, wisdom, learning, wit,
Nature, Art, form, languages pro^ound,
Glorious earthlie-pompe, fame ex^^lling it:
No earthly thing eternally shall si^*
Virtue, Piety, and pure Sanctity,
Shall wear the Crown of immortality.
These words the trembling Shephe^rd did revive,
They were so full of raritie and choice,
Resembling skill of Astrophill alive*
The sound he thought was not unlike his voice.
Endymion did mightily rejoice,
And said aloud, or thou ar^ Astrophill,
Or thou have learned this Sonnet from his skill.
Shepherd (quoth he) I am and am not he,
I am not perfect Astrophill, but (...),
The shade which now appears ^^to thee,
Is substance spiritual fram^d by Art;
What mortal was, is slain by dea^ly Dart
Of Thanatos, corrupt consumed to ^^st;
Such is the end of all this worldly (...).
But what art thou that sitst among these baye^?
Unfold to me for I must needs be gone,
I was reader (quoth he) in former days,
Unto great Astrophill* but now am one,
Stripped, and naked, destitute alone.
Naught but my Greekish pipe, and staff have I,
To keep my Lambs and me in misery.
Art thou (quoth he) my Tutor Tergaster,
He answered yea: such was my happy chance,
I grieve (quoth Astrophill) at thy disaster:
But fates deny me learning to advance.
Yet Cinthia shall afford thee maintenance.
My dearest Sister keep my Tutor well,
For in his element he does excel.
And for thy self, I bring thee happy news,
Thou shall enjoy a long and happy peace:
Which former bloody wars, and death ensues,
For civil heat in Albion-soyle shall cease,
And noble blood shall perfectly increase,
Churchmen heareafter shall agree in one,
Bannishing sects, and superstition.
Pride shall be turned to humility,
Each man shall keep himself in his degree,
Discurtesie shall be civility,
Wanton Maids shall modest Matrons be,
Noe Man shall seek the fruit of others tree.
Noe Rapine, swearing* or abusion,
Noe Murder, ribauldrie, confusion.
Each man shall seek, to do his neighbor right,
Green grass shall flourish in Westminster Hall:
You shall discern a beggar from a Knight,
Extortion and briberie shall have a fall.
Gold exchanged for things caelestiall.
Virtue, Truth, Honesty, Religion,
Shall Triumph in the british Regyon.
Caesar shall see his foes subversion,
No man shall lift a sword against h^s Crown,
His issue shall not fear dispersion.
Christo Mastix shall be tumbled do^ne,
Peace, faith, love* joy, honor in every Town.
Trumpets shall sound, and bells shall ring for joy,
Virgins and boys, shall sing Vine ^^ Roy.
Reverend old age, shall bring thee to thy Hearse,
And glory shall adorn thy progeny:
Eternal fame shall blaze in golden verse,
Thine honorable life and destiny.
Renowned Poet's of highest Ingenie,
Shall deck thy Tomb with everlasting fame,
And with goulden pens celebrate thy name.
And when thy body shall consume to dust,
Resting it self in deep obscurity*
With dreadful Trumpe shall rise again the just,
Thy body shall surpass in dignity,
The welkin which thou see in Majesty,
Mean while thy spirit a substance divine,
In triumph rid's in equipage with mine.
About the Orb's and Spheres caelestiall,
Dignified with ever shining light,
Viewing the majesty imperial,
Clad in a vesture of the purest white.
Which Amnos made before the world was dight,
Where thou with me, and I with thee shall sing,
Eternal praises to the immortal king.
These blessed Nimphs, enuironing thee round,
Thrice noble, by their propagation:
Neeces to Astrophill, of honor ^ound,
Of modest, virtuous inclination,
Happy shall be their generat^^n.
And blessed they till Jove have w^ought his will,
And caused them mount, the (...) Ast^ophill.
And now my Cinthia time sommons me henee,
My news been done I can no longer stay.
He mounted Pegasus and hy'de from thence,
Piercing the welkin, vanished away.
Leaving the Ladies in woeful dismay,
Lifting their heads, and gazing on the skies,
Observing the course, as Astrophill flies.
Galaxia the white path in the firmament.
Galaxia took him in her splendent arms,
Sweetly she couched him in her Canapie,
She sealed the passage, with her counter charms,
To guard her sleeping Knight from Ieopardie.
Without regard of impaciency,
Cinthia would needs ascend Olympus hill,
To live or dye, with blessed Astrophill.
Nature persuaded her to stay a while*
Her time prefixed was not yet assigned:
The fatal Sisters, would not cut her file*
Her robes unmade, her Coronet vntwin'd.
Nor was the quintesence of nature fined,
Neither was yet great Astrophill awake,
That might her entertainment undertake.
Cinthia replied not, as one resolved,
Her will to put in execution:
Oftentimes her sacred soul reuolued,
Which way to make a dissolution,
Of this her bodies constitution
And justly knowing twa's not in her power,
Determined to stay her fatal hour.
And yet to spend in contemplation,
The better part of her remaining days:
Which vow she keeps in veneration,
Witness her learned Poems, and her Lays,
So often crowned, with Arcadian Bays.
Thus long sitting silent in that place,
Aurora began to show her blushing Face*
Then all the Ladies hasted to depart*
And Cinthia turned her to E^dimion^*
With words of grace proceeding from her heart,
She thanked him for his former ca^tion.
This Mount (quoth she) take for thy mansion.
Here shall thou dwell, and feed thy little flock,
I with my Ladies, will increase thy ^^ocke.
The stately Garland of her blessed (...),
For beauty matchless, incomparable*
With greatest favors graced this co^ntrie Swain,
(Particulers will be admirable)
Of esteem they were invaluable.
And out of doubt they had been durable,
If worldly envy had been curable.
He lived a while in reputation,
Expounding Oracles of Theology
His flock was had in estimation,
As guided well by his Philosophy.
Profoundly could he chaunt that mystery.
In languages of higest Poetry,
Unfolding riddles of antiquity.
I left the Shepherd in this happy st^^e,
Feeding his lambs in mirth and iolli^ie:
But it fell out, when I returned of late,
His mirth was moan his solace mis^^ie,
(Lo hear worlds-glasse of mutabilitie)
He wrung his hands, and made a ru^ull moan,
His drops of tears might pierce a Marble stone.
I wondered how his blessed Com^edie,
Could have so sudden alteration.
I asked the cause of this his Tragaedi^,
He answered: enuies sophisticat^^^.
I thought to write, the whole narrati^^,
But ^ith Tragaedies have a bloody e^d,
During his life, he will not have (...)*
^. B.

FINIS.
To the right Worshipful Sir John Smith of Olde-Hunger Knight, a worthy
favorer of learning.
YOur ancient love to him that wrote this Book,
Has made Ourania speak an English verse,
The Greekish Ladies of Castalion Brook,
Entombed are, close couched in Sable-herse.
The mourning Cypress and dark Popler-tree,
A^e testimonies of their low degree.
Endymion lay's aside his Hebrew Reed,
And bids Ourania harp Philosophy,
Whereof his English Lambs and flock may feed,
Till Phoebus rays dispell obscurity.
He willed her yet such pleasing Music sing,
As might con^ort with Aristotle's wing.
Such as delights Arcadian Cynthia,
And comforts Scholars at their idle times,
Viewing the secrets of Ourania,
As she will chaunt them in her homely Rymes.
Wonders above, and all within this round,
Must be the subject of her dainty sound.
She sings of Sun and Moon, and wandering stars,
Of uncouth Elementall Meteors:
Comets, Heralds of death and dreadful wars,
Fire, air, winds, vapors, Ocean, showers,
And whatsoever you can think upon,
Ourania sings: so bids Endymion.
Read learn, and hear, try, ponder, write, digest,
Words, matter, song, truth, art, wit* Mystery:
Commend Ourania: take her to your guest*
She Will teach the younger Lambs Philosophy,
Such Mysteries as never English Pen,
Afforded yet unto the view of men*
N. B.

To my Worshipful ^ren^h (...) Stone Esquire, Counselor at the Law, and
Secondarie of the Counter in VVoodstreet London.
NO liquid Oil proceeds from a Pumice-stone,
Nor Alchimist produce an Oil from thence:
It Is hard indeed if thou were such a one,
As loved a Scholar only for his Pence.
But since th'enclosing of Endymion,
He found some Oil from Secondarie STONE.
Counsel they say is no commandment,
That Is false if counsel be but equity:
Whereto a man must be obedient,
If he aspire unto faelicitie.
No wrong had seized old Endymion,
If he had taken counsel of a Stone.
Things past, and things to come be different,
For they are gone, and these are in expect.
Think not on former days maleuo^ent,
The fates to come work contrary effect.
And cause thee bless the day, the place, the hour,
That thou receyued'st Endymions P^ramour.
Ourania sings obscure Philosophy,
Like Bats, and Owls in silent dark^ some night,
In Olderne times she chanted melody,
Of high^er strain: And when she comes to light,
Shee'l^ sing thee such a blessed Madrigall,
As th^^ shall think the lay Ca^^^^iall.
^. B,

FINIS.

