A BRIEF INTROduction to the skill of SONG: Concerning the practice, set forth
by William Bathe Gentleman.

In which work is set down X. sundry ways of 2. parts in one upon the plain
song. Also a Table newly added of the comparisons of Cleues, how one follows
another for the naming of Notes: with other necessary examples, to further the
learner.

FABIVS. Musica est honestum et iucundum oblectamentum, liberalibus ingenijs
maxim dignum.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Este.

To the Reader.
IGnorance as Divines do testify, is one of the plagues put upon man the
creature, for transgressing of the commandments of God his creator from
which we are to come, (as the patient from his disease) by degrees. Man's
understanding is likened by Aristotle to the eyes of the Howlet in the
daylight. Solomon says: Dedi cor meum vt scirem prudentiam, doctrinam,
erroresque, et stultitiam, et agnom quod in his quoque est labor et afflictio
spiritus.

The fame of our ancestors that diligently labored to bring us, and in many
things brought us from ignorance to knowledge, shall never be forgotten so long
as those things wherein they labored, be in estimation, and (in mine opinion)
so far forth as we may, we should Imitate the steps of them, for this plague
of ignorance is so great, that neither did they neither shall we find so much:
but that we must leave sufficient, for our posterity to be found.

Wherefore seeing sufficiently others to labor and travel in other Sciences,
I thought good to bestow my labor in Music, seeing that pains might so much
prevail, as by the fruit of my labor may plainly appear. I took the matter
in hand upon this occasion, though it were far distant from my profession,
being desired by a gentleman, to instruct him in song, I gave him such rules as
my Master gave me: Yet could I give him no song so plain, wherein there
chanced not some one thing or other, to which none of those rules could
directly lead him. Marking then how in mind, I did know what by rule I could
not teach, I perceived how under the shade of rule, I attained to many things
by rote* and how pleasant, speedy and sure it is to run by rule, I took
this labor in hand, and brought it to this pass. Old Musitions laid down
for Song, manifold and crabbed, confuse, tedious rules, as for example: though
there be in all but six names, Vt, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La, having amongst them an
easy order, yet could not they by rule declare, whether of these should be
attributed to every Note, unless they had first framed the long ladder or
skale of Gam-vt, to which some added, thinking the ladder too short, some hewed
off a piece, thinking it too long. Then would they have the learner be as
perfect in coming down backward, as in going up forward, least in his
practice he should fall, and break his neck. Then must he learn, Gam-vt, in
rule, Are, in space, b my in rule, C faut in space, etc. Then must he know Gam
vt, how many cleues, how many notes. Are, how many notes, etc. Then must he
know b, quadrij, proper chant and bemul, re in Are, whereby vt in Cfaut,
whereby mi, in Alamire, whereby etc. And when all have done, after their long
circumstances of time, whereby they should be often driven to millibi, for
Notes standing in diverse places of Gam-vt, have names that the place where
they stand comprehend not. Touching all the prolixe circumstances, and
needless difficulties, that they use, it loathes me greatly that here I
should write them: and much more would it grieve the Reader to learn them.
Also many things are used in Song, for which they give no rules at all, but
committed them to dodge at it, hark to it, and harp upon it. Now (Reader)
the effect of my pretended purpose, and fruit of my finished labor is this,
where they gave prolixe rules, I have given brief rules, where they gave
uncertain rules, I have given sure rules, and where they have given no rules,
I have given rules. After all this that I have said of their rules, I do
affirm that they deserved greater commendations above me, for finding out the
long way, then I above others for laying down the short way. For had not they
opened the gappe, touching me, it might very well hap that I should in no sort
enter my self, and much less in any sort inuit others: nothing can at the
beginning be persected, and therefore are they to be holden excused as the old
verse has: But ere the Painter can sure his craft attain,
Much froward facion transformeth he in vain,
By raising superfluity, and adding that does want,
Rude Pictures are made both perfect and pleasant.
For such things by negligence are left undone,
That by good diligence might be won.


There be sufficient, many, and firm proves had of this that I say, which may
by my rules be done, of which I will here put down some of them, though I get
as little by being believed, as I should loose by being belyed.

In a month and less I instructed a child about the age of eight years, to
sing a good number of songs, difficult crabbed Songs, to sing at the first
sight, to be so indifferent for all parts, alterations, Cleues, flats, and
sharpes, that he could sing a part of that kind, of which he never learned any
song, which child for strangeness was brought before the Lord Deputy of
Ireland, to be heard sing: for there were none of his age, though he were
longer at it, nor any of his time, (though he were elder) known before these
rules to sing exactly.

There was another, that had before often handled Instruments, but never
practiced to sing (for he could not name one Note) who hearing of these rules,
obtained in short time, such profit by them, that he could sing a difficult
song of himself, without any Instructor.

There was another, who by dodging at it, harkening to it, and harping upon it,
could never be brought to tune sharps aright, who so soon as he heard these
rules set down for the same, could tune them sufficiently well. I have taught
diverse others by these rules, in less then a month; what my self by the
old, obtained not in more then two years. Diverse other proofs I might
recite, which here as needless I do omit, because the thing will show it
self. Diverse have repented in their age that they were not put to sing in
their youth; but seeing that by these rules, a good skill may be had in a
month: and the ways learned in four or five days: none comes too late to
learn, and specially if this saying be true: That no man is so old but
thinks he may live one year longer. As Aristotle in setting forth his
predicaments, saw many things requisite to be entreated off: and yet unfit to
be mixed with his treatise: he therefore made ante predicaments, and post
predicaments: so I for the same cause (desirous to abolish confusion) have
added to my rules, ante rules, and post rules. Vale.

The ante rules of Song.
To prepare for naming the Notes.
Practice to sunder the Vowels and Consonants, distinctly pronouncing them
according to the manner of the place.

To prepare for Quantity.
Practice to have the breath long to continue, and the tongue at liberty to
run.

To prepare for Time.
Practice in striking to keep a just proportion of one stroke to another.

To prepare for Tune.
Practice to have your voice clear, which when thou have done, learn the
rules following.

The skill of song does consist in four things.

Naming. Quantity. Time. Tune.
The Scale of Music, which is called Gam-vt, contains 10 rules, and as many
spaces; and is set down in letters and sillables, in which you must beegin at
the lowest word, Gam-vt, and so go upwards to the end still ascending, and
learn it perfectly without book, to say it forwards and backewards: to know,
wherein every key stands, whether in rule or in space: and how many Cliefes,
how many Notes is contained in every Key.

^ Hie. Midst. Low.
ee la 1 Note dd la sol 2 Notes cc sol sa 2 Notes bb fa b-mi 2 Notes 2 Cliffes
aa la mi re 3 Notes g sol re vt 3 Notes f fa Vt 2 Notes c la mi 2 Notes d la
sol re 3 Notes c sol fa vt 3 Notes b fa b-mi 2 Notes 2 Cliffes a la mi re 3
Notes G sol re vt 3 Notes F fa vt 2 Notes E la mi 2 Notes D fol re 2 Notes C fa
vt 2 Notes B mi 1 Note A re 1 Note P vt 1 Note

For Naming. Cap. primo.
There be six names, Vt, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La. The order of ascension and
descention with them is thus. ^

Exceptions.
Change Vt, into Sol, change Re, into La, when the next removing Note is under.

^ for ^

The Cleues whereby we know where the Vt stands are thus marked as.

^

The G: cliefe is the mark of the higher G sol re vt. In the scale: and the C:
clefe of that place called C sol fa vt. And the F: cliefe of F fa vt the lower
in the scale.

Now in this sort you may find by the cliefe where every note stands: and
least there should seem any difficulty, I will begin from the first sight of
the book, that all things that do belong to their knowledge, may be the
better understood. First when a man sees the book before him he may see
certain rules which go along lineally by 5 and 5 which number of 5 is called
a set of prick song (for a set of plainesong has commonly but 4. rules,) then
he may see in the first of the set always one of the foresaid cleifes upon
some rule, and whatsoever note stands upon the same rule with the cliefe, is
said to be in that place whereof that cleife which he sees is the mark, and
if any note stand in the next space above, it is said to stand in the next
place above that place, whereof that cleife is the mark. And so upward and
downward continually counting from the close as in this example.

^

The first note stands in C sol fa vt, because it stands upon the same rule
with the clief which is the mark of C sol fa vt, the second in D la sol re,
because D la sol re is next above C sol fa vt in the scale of Gam vt: the third
in B fa b mi, because it is in the next place beneath C sol fa vt: the fourth
in E la mi, because E la mi is the next place save one to C sol fa vt, and the
said fourth note stands in the next place save one to the cliefe which is the
mark of the place C sol fa vt. And so of all other notes: then in the end of
the set, he may see a thing thus ^ marked, which is called a direct, because
it is always put upon the rule or space wherein the first of the next set
stands, and does so direct a man, even as in books the word that is lowest
upon every side of the leaf does direct a man to the word next following.

The rule of Vt.
The next thing necessary to be known for the right naming of notes, is the
place where that note stands which is named Vt. And as by counting upward and
downward from the cliefe it is to be known where every note stands, so it
is to be known by counting upward and downward from that which is called Vt,
what the right name of every note is: but first let us set down how the place
where the vt stands is known, which is thus. There be three places, in one
of which the vt must always be: that is to say, in G. which is Gamvt and G sol
re vt, when there is no flat in C, which is C fa vt, C sol fa vt, and C sol fa,
when there is a flat in b mi, or b fa b mi. In F which is F fa vt, when there
are two flats, one in b mi or b fa b mi, the other in E la mi, or E la.

As for example.

^

Now thevt is in G. Now in C. Now in F.

No b flat, the ( vt) in G. The b flat in b only, the ( vt) in C. The b flat
in b and E, the ( vt) in F.

1 G puts Vt to the same place. 2 F and B to the next up, as. 3 ^ 4 C
puts Vt to the fifth place up, and from C down to the fourth. B, takes place
of the rest.

B, is placed last to show that it takes place of the rest.

5 If there comes two, b. b. being a fourth, the upper takes place. 6 And
being a fifth, the nether takes place, as: ^ 7 D. puts Vt to the fifth place
down, but it is seldom used. 8 If there comes two b. b. being a second a
sunder, the upper takes place, which chances very rare. More shall be said of
naming in the chapter of tuning.
When you have in this sort found out the vt, you must understand that every
note that stands in the next place above it is named re, every note that
stands in the next place to that is named mi, in the next to that fa, then
sol, then la, then fa, ascending up always orderly, counting the rules, and
spaces: then next above that again is vt: for you shall find that place,
which is the eight place from that wherein your other vt stood, to begin with
the same letter: So that if the rules and spaces were infinite, you might in
this manner give every note his right name: and as you did count upward Vt, re,
mi, fa, sol, la, fa, and so come again to vt: so must you come downward from
vt, the same way backward, by fa, la, sol, fa, mi, re, vt. And so come to fa,
again. And in this sort the right name of every note is known. Two things
from these rules are excepted, the one is, that every re, should be named la,
when you ascend to it, or descend from it: and that every vt, should be named
sol, which two things are used euphoniae gratia, and yet this name of vt, is
most proper to the base or lowest part in the first place.

Objection against the latter exception.
In the latter exception it is said, that vt should be always changed into
sol, therefore seeing it is never used, it is in vain placed in all this
former tractation.

Solution. It is placed in all this former tractation for two causes, the one
is, that it should be distinguished by that name from the other sol, and the
other is, because it has been a name used from the beginning, and now commonly
changed into sol, euphoniae gratia: it may sometimes nevertheless be used, for
(as I said before) the cunning singing man keeping every note in his right
tune, may name it according to his pleasure, for these* names be no necessary
accidents, for you see daily that when any song is lettred, these names be not
attributed to them, though then they be sung in their own order, according to
the opinion of many, yea very many. I know I should add a third exception,
that is to say, to except also, that every note having a sharp before it,
should be named mi, as in this example,^ the third note. And because that of
that opinion there be so many, I will for them show a probable reason as by
our principles may be showed: then after by resolving them, show what is most
profitable, not refuting the opinion as an error, because that looking to the
matter, we may find that they may be named as well mi, as fa, insomuch as
the names (as I said before) are no necessary accidents, but nevertheless,
because here we seek the most apt name, it were unfit to pass it over.
Wherefore the principal argument for them we may in this sort form.

Objection. We should name all notes so near as we can, according as such
notes are named in the gamvt, for it is certain, that these are the names which
are most fit, for so in the beginning by the first inuentors of Music they
have been set down: but no note that is sharp in the gamvt is named fa,
therefore no note made sharp by a collateral reason, should be named fa.
Secondly, throughout all the gam vt, from sol to fa. Next under it is a whole
note, but from that sol to that fa, if we should call it fa, is but half a
note, therefore if we call it fa, we break altogether the rule of gamvt,
which we should observe: thirdly every place in the gam vt that is sharp, is
named either mi or la. Therefore this note (because not so aptly la) must be
named mi. Before we fully satisfy these arguments, one thing must necessarily
be known: that is to say, that in naming the notes in gam vt the first
inuentors did observe two things, whereof the one was, to name the notes
according to the vt: the other, to name every note which is sharp (as the
argument proves) mi, or la: and it falls out sometimes, when notes flat by
collateral reasons are made sharp, that one of these two must necessarily be
violated, that is to say, that either the note must not be named according to
the vt, or a note sharp must be named fa, so that the controversy lies in
knowing, whether of these two should soonest be observed: so according to this
we answer to their arguments. To the first, where they impute a fault in us
for naming a note sharp, fa, seeing that no sharp note in all the gam vt is
named fa, we may impute an other absurdity to them, seeing they would have the
next note under sol, mi, which is not found in all gam vt, which is the more
absurdity (as we will prove in the solution to the third argument) To the
second, the solution is easy, that even as every sol to fa, next under it is a
whole note: so from every sol to mi, next under it is more: so that according
to the gam vt, in that respect none of them is true. To the third we answer,
that it may be as well la, as mi, because that if there were any reason why it
should not be as well la, it might well be, to eschew this absurdity, that
then in two places together there should be one name, because the next under
it is also la, but by naming it mi, the same absurdity comes in another
place, therefore the one is as absurd as the other, as in this example, where
two ^ places together must according to them be named mi, but to name two
places together with one name, there is none but will think more dissonant,
then to name them with diverse, whatsoever: for if a man did name mi, six times
together in one place, being quauers, the one coming fast upon the other,
would make them seem as though it were mim, mim, mim, as for example, ^ whereby
it plainly appears that this is most absurd. But because that it were as
good that our selves should bring that, which others may do, by sharp grating
upon our solutions, in this sort we may frame a reply. Let us suppose, that in
the middle of a song which had fa in C sol fa vt, there came two notes, one in
C sol fa vt, and another in B fa b mi, having a flat before it, then if the
latter note in B fa b mi, having the flat before it, be not called fa, it is
against the order of the vt, which by the solutions should most be kept, if it
be named fa, then comes the absurdity proved in the last example: that is,
that two places together should have one name, and likewise if six quauers did
come in that sort, the fast coming of the one upon the other, would make them
seem to be faf, faf, faf, which is as absurd and dissonant, as mim, mim, mim.

Resolution. Of the flat so coming, and of the sharp, there is not like
reason, because that the flat so coming should alter the vt, so that as many
notes as had come in C sol fa vt, after the flat, should be named sol, and not
fa, but for the first note, and the second, they must be both fa, nevertheless
because there may not be many of them together, as there may be of mi, and
because that in quauers, twice fa, in that sort likely never chances, the one
is not so absurd as the other.

Replication. It is granted by the last solution, that the flat so coming
should alter the vt, but to alter the vt, does alter the key (which is in
music a great absurdity) therefore by the last solution, there is a great
absurdity granted.

Solution. It is granted conditionally, that is to say, if the like happened
(as in the argument objected) though sometimes in the midst of a song, to
change the key, and come into it again, is allowed. Wherefore for the names
being the least necessary and most troublesome accident, let this suffice.

For Quantity. Cap. 2.
There be eight quantities whereof every one has his proper mark, and proper
rest, as follows.

Large. ^ Long. ^ Brief. ^ Semibreefe ^ Minim. ^ Cratchet. ^ Quauer. ^
semiquauer ^
The proportion that these quantities has one to another is that there should
go two of every one to the next upward as two semiquauers, to a quauer, two
quauers to a cratchet, two cratchets to a minim, etc.

To these are reduced the quantities of proportions, as where there goes three
cratchets to a minim length of which the black semibreefe comprehends two,
and there the minim rest is but as long as one of these cratchets. ^

Here note that the prick is in quantity half so long as the note before it:
as a prick after a large, is in quantity as a long. etc.

Pricks of division are used to separate diversity of kinds in quantity.

For Time. Cap. 3.
There be 2. kinds of time, Semibreefe time, and three minim time. Semibrefe
time is the striking up and down of the hand equally in length continuing.
Three minim time is the striking down and then up of the hand equally in
length, making each latter stroke, just half the former.

The mark of the former kind of time is.^ The mark of the latter is. ^

In tuning Songs of Semibreefe time, you must put of the notes, as much as
makes a minim length to every moving of the hand, likewise in the minim time,
save that to every stroke there goes but a minim length.

Here note that these two kinds of time, may be divided into minim time, by
keeping all strokes equal in length, putting a minim length to every whole
stroke.

For Tune. Cap. 4.
There be eight notes, whose ascension, and descention do comprehend all
tunes, as the root does the tree, be they never so difficult, with flats and
Sharps, who so knew how to use them, the notes are common, the use is rare, or
not yet found, which being known, will give great light to Musitions, and
breed great ease to Singing men, the eight notes are these that follow, as:

The tune of these eight Notes is to be learned by practice, and to be believed
as a principle in Music.

Tune the first Note of any song as it serves best for the voice.

If the Note from which and to which you go, be both according to the Vt, of
the Song, count according to the eight notes altogether.

If the note to which you go be altered by some intermingled flat, then for
comptings sake name the Note from which you go, as well as the note to which
you go, according to the Vt, of that intermingled flat, and in so doing take
great care not to loose the tune of the note from which you count, as, sol fa
sol fa fa fa ^

First sing thus: then count thus: and so proceed thus.

If the Note to which you go, be altered in tune by some intermingled sharp,
observe both in the note from which and to which you go, this Rule.

Count to the tune of sharps by the Vt, put down to the third place, when you
have thus compting by wrong names gotten the right tunes, give the right names
after, as: la sol fa mi sol fa ^

First sing thus: then count thus: and so proceed thus.

The sharp may be put in the upper fa, in the nether fa, and in Vt.

The sharp in the Vt, takes place of the sharp in the upper or nether fa, for
by the Vt of it, the other two places should be sharp, the rest of the places
remaining naturally as, ^

Vt for compting.
Likewise the sharp in the nether fa, takes place of the sharp in the upper
fa, for by the Vt of the in the nether fa, the upper fa must be sharp, the
rest remaining naturally: as, ^

Vt for Compting.
The flat may be put in two places, in Mi, and in La, also it is common in Mi,
but not so common in La: also if the flat be in La (according to the Vt of it)
Mi must be flat: as, ^ Here note that for to tune sharps, put down Vt, to the
third place.

If the note to which you go may neither in tuning nor naming belong to one
order of ascension, go back to the note before, and so Count: as, sol fa fa mi
sol fa ^

First begin thus, Then go back thus, and so proceed thus.

As men name according to the Vt, of the flat, so there be, that (for facility
and fitness of the name to the tune) do name according to the Vt of the sharp
sometimes: as, mi re mi. ^

Here note, that the intermingled flat bears force but whilst notes as
appendant come in the same place, though for handsomnesse men name before or
after according to it: Likewise the sharp, as, la ^

Thappendancy of the flat by the sharp, and of the sharp by the Flat is taken
away, though by negligence and ignorance of prickers, we are often driven to
gather thappendancie by the course of the song. Look in the last example.

The prick is to be continued and kept in one tune with the note before it.

Here note, that the Cleues may remove from one rule to another, and that they
are used for Flats. Also that the Direct is put to show the note following: as,
^

Every Note in the order of Ascension is a whole note or tone above the next
under, save the upper and nether Fa, which be but half notes or Semitones.

For readiness in setting Notes distant, let the learner practice these
examples following, with all such things as make variety in naming, or tuning.

Also for readiness, note that every four rules and a space further, makes an
eight, and every eight, has like names.

^ vt mi re fa mi sol fa la la fa sol mi fa re mi vt re vt ^ sol fa la sol mi
la fa fa sol sol fa fa la mi sol re fa sol ^ sol la sol fa sol sol sol la sol
mi sol fa sol sol sol la sol fa sol sol sol. ^ Sol la fa sol la la mi fa fa fa
sol la fa sol la fa sol sol fa mi fa fa la sol sol la sol. ^ Fa sol fa la fa
sol fa la la mi fa sol fa sol la fa fa fa la sol fa. ^ O God that art my
righteousness, Lord hear me when I call; ^ thou have set me at liberty,
when I was bound and thral. The 3 parts follovv.

^ The Church Tune.
^ Fa la mi fa sol fa sol fa fa fa la mi la sol la la la sol sol sol mi fa sol
fa. ^ Fa la sol la sol fa sol la mi fa sol fa la sol la fa la sol fa fa la sol
fa.

The post rules of Song.
Here follows the post rules of Song, which are reduced to the unlimited
observations used in Singing.
For naming. Cap. I.
THe exceptions from the order of ascension and descention are diuersely used
according to the diversity of place, and accordingly, they are to be given,
for each order in naming seems best to them that have been brought up
withal.

D, is sometimes used in old songs as a Cleue, and puts Vt down to the fifth
place.

In Italy (as I understand) they change Vt into Sol: In England they change Re,
into La: when the next removing Note before or after be under.

Some there be that use sometimes in defending at this day, the names of Re,
and Vt, there be that name at randon, some for pleasure, and some through
ignorant imagination, often times bears great force in making a thing seem
comely, or uncomely, as if in coming down, Sol, Fa, La, Sol, a man should
name the first two notes Re Mi, it would seem to a singing man very uncomely:
yet if the singing man did imagine, that the singer were putting a dittie, or
word of four sillables, as: Remigrare, to these four Notes, he would not
think it uncomely, and yet in doing the deed, both ways are all one, for the
first two sillables of, Remigrare, are Re, Mi.

For Quantity. Cap. II.
TO make one and the self same mark of quantity sometimes long, and sometimes
short, Musitions in old time, borrowed colors of the Painters, sometimes
making it red, and sometimes black, etc.

They borrowed numbers of Arithmatike, sometimes making this, and sometimes that
figure, etc.

They borrowed Circles and Semicircles of Geometry: sometimes putting in the
Center or a line, and sometimes leaving it out, etc. Sometimes also thereby
signifying alteration in time.

They borrowed similitudes of Philosophy, sometimes leaving fullness, and
sometimes Eclips, as appears in the Moon, sometimes knitting and sometimes
loosing, as in generation and corruption.

They used moreover many signs and tokens and marks of Quantity, that are cut
off as superfluous.

They used also manifold names to distinguish these things one from another, to
the wonderful pestering of the memory, and great toil of the understanding,
though some of them were necessary, yet many were superflous.

The Quantities in Proportion are diverse, according to the diversity of
Proportions, which are infinite in potentia, that is to say, in possibility of
increase, as number is.

Many of these things are yet used, as the Semibreefe rest, in three minim
time, for three minim rests.

Some strange marks and knitting of Notes which time I doubt not will cut off,
nevertheless here shall follow examples of some, to which the redsidue are to
be reduced.

Perfect mood. Perfect mood. Imperfect mood. Perfect time. ^ Imperfect time.
Mayor prolation. Minor prolation. ^

Diminution, Imperfect time. Diminution, perfect time. Prolation Minor,
Imperfect time. Prolation Minor, perfect time. Imperfect mood, Imperfect time.
Imperfect mood, perfect time. Perfect mood, Imperfect time. Perfect mood,
perfect time.
By these examples following, the four Modes are known what quantity the
lesser notes are to the greater.

^ The lovver notes are as much in quantity as the higher with their pricks.
^ Pricks of Division are those, which are set above notes and not by them, and
they show the note to be perfect before the prick: and the note follovving
does belong to another stroke. ^

2 longs to the black large. 2 briefes to the black long. 2 semibreefes to the
black brief. 2 minims to the black semibrief.
^

XII Examples of Legatures.
^ 1 2 3 4 5 6 ^ 7 8 9 10 11 12 ^

More Examples of Legatures, as follows.
^ ^

For Time. Cap. III.
IN timing hard proportions that go odding, many take care only of the whole
stroke, wholly kept without dividing it to the going up and then down again of
the hand.

Some keep Semibreefe time, as sufficient easy of it self, and do not
divide it into minim time.

Three minim time is more difficult, and therefore some do divide it into
minim time: as, ^ 2 mi: 4 mi: 3 mi: 8 mi:

Take a stick of a certain length, and a stone of a certain weight, hold the
stick standing upon an end of some table: See you have upon the stick diverse
marks: hold the stone up by the side of the stick: then as you let fall the
stone, instantly begin to sing one Note, and just with the noise that it makes
upon the table, beegin another Note, and as long as thou hold the first
Note, so long hold the rest, and let that note thy Cratchet or thy Minim, etc.
as thou see cause, and thus may thou measure the very Time it self that
thou keep, and know whether thou have altered it, or not.

For Tune. Cap. IIII.
SOme learn to Tune only by the Voice of anoher: some use help of an
Instrument, which is the better way.

Learners use to tune by a certain continuance of time, according to the Vt of
the song, before they practice intermingled Flats or sharps.

Here note, that C. called Csolfavt cleue, is a fifth beneth G. called Gsolrevt
cleue, and F. called F favt cleue, is a fifth beneth C. called Csolfavt, Cleue.

Also a man may count from any cleue, by the letters, compting them forward
when he goes upward, and acompting them backward when he goes downward,
telling but the first seven letters: by the knowledge of this, men may give
their tunes to the parts without knowledge of the Gamvt. Yet for the common
use, it were not amiss, that learners should sometime or other commit the
Gam-vt to memory.

Many things are here taught by rule, for which teachers heretofore, gave no
rule, and if they were asked how shall a man know the like? they would answer,
that is according to the course of the Song, but this answer is so uncertain,
that it is as good for the young Scoller, they had said we know not.



A general Table comprehending two parts in one, of all kinds upon all plain
Songs, upon all prick Songs, and in all ways that may be found, one part
beginning, the other following, the plain Song or ground being sung beneth
them: all which are found by this present table, with such facility, that the
upper part is made, and never booked, as here follows.

The observations of the places up are six 6 85 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 1 7 6 5 4 3 2
4 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 3 2 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Places up. 1 7
6 5 4 3 2 Courses down. Courses up. 1 1356 6 135 16 35 136 5 2 7 6 135 16 35
136 5 1356 3 6 135 16 35 136 5 1356 6 4 5 16 35 136 5 1356 6 135 5 4 35 136 5
1356 6 135 36 6 3 136 5 1356 6 135 16 35 7 2 5 1356 6 135 16 35 136 8 Vt su: 1
1356 6 135 16 35 136 5 Places down 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 The observations of the
places down are six. 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 2 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 3 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 4 7 1 2 3
4 5 6 5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 6 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

THis present table, may serve also, who so marketh it well, for 2 parts in
one, without a plain song, of all kinds, and in all ways for 3 parts in one,
without a plainsong, or ground, the third part being under: of all kinds and
of all ways for 2 parts in one, upon 2 plain songs, or grounds at once, for
maintaining reports, and other such things as these be.

First it is to be understood by this word place, is meant the distance of the
following part, to the former part, as the same place or unison, is called the
first place, the next or second place is called the second place, whether it be
up or down, etc.

Next here is to be understood that by this word, Course, is meant the
distaunce of that which follows just so long after, as the following part
rests to that which goes before, in the plain Song or ground, as if the
following part have a Semibreefe rest, then the Note of the ground is in the
first course, which has in the same place that which follows, just a
Semibreefe length after, and that note is in the second course, which has in
the second place that which follows just a Semibreefe length after, whether
it be up or down, etc.

This being known, first look in what place up or down, you would have the
following part to be, which is according to the pleasure of the maker, and so
it is how long the following part shall rest. Then look in what course up or
down is the note of the ground, for which you would make, then look what
square of the table meets with the place and course, and there you shall
find noted by figures, what concord serves for that course.

All Concords next expressed in the square, make discords betwixt the upper
part and the plain song or ground. Nevertheless, they may be brought in, when
they may be guarded by the place next adjoining, for whatsoever makes a
discord, the next place to it makes a concord.

Note also that just so long before the close, as the following part rests,
you make not that which breeds a discord, betwixt the upper part and the
ground, not that which to the close of the ground is one more in number then
the second figure of observation.

Note also, that if just so long before the close as the following part
rests, you make that which to the close is two more in number then the first
figure of observation, then then the best way is to make it sharp.

Note also, that from the beginning forth, of so far before the close, as the
following part rests, all concords serves.

The exposition of the figure of observation.
THe first and second figures shows what distaunces (in respect of the latter
notes of the course) should not come twice together, removing one way with the
latter notes, and also where in respect of the latter note of the course, a
flat for a sharp, or a sharp for a flat, contrary to the order of the place
should not be.

The third and fourth shows what moving one way with the place, just so long
after as the following part rests, makes discords.

The fifth and sixth serves wherein the distance, there should not be like
moving one way with the place just so long after as the following part rests,
and the fifth figure. Also where sharp for flat, or flat for sharp, contrary to
the order of the place should not be just so long after as the following
rests.

Here note, that under each number are comprehended all those that makes
eights, or concords, of that kind to it, except that under the last figure of
observation such as make eights to the number one way with the place, and such
as make ninthes to it in the contrary way are comprehended.

Here note that two parts in one in the vnizon, fourth, and fifth, do differ
from the rest, for in the rest, both parts are tied, to like order of
ascension, but in these both parts do keep like order according to their place.

Note also, that in two parts in one, in the fourth up, and in the fifth down,
the upper fa, kept flat in the nether parts causes a strange flat to be
brought in the upper part, therefore the best way is to make it sharp, unless
it be in such places as a strange flat will do well to come in.

Two verses comprehending the foresaid Table, which for necessities sake of the
matter, must be written crossing one another:
Gladius Musicus.

Aggredior quo aderis cado cernis adesto mi Ihesu

Vnum addas tollasque loco stet quatuor addas



IN this Table or figure aforesaid, four things are comprehendend, the
places, the 6. figures of observation belonging to them, the courses and
concords serving for them, for the seven places, there be seven words in the
blade of the Sword: the first word, Aggredior, is always for the first place:
the second word downward, quo, is for the second place downward, etc. And the
second word upward, mi, is for the second place upward, etc. This word, Ihesu,
is cut off from the rest, to signify that it beelongeth to another kind, for
in it the letters numerable being 5. do fignifie the first and second figures
of observation, and it is written one way with the verse, to signify that it
goes according to the word of the verse, which is for the place, for it
signifies one number with the word of the verse, that stands for the place,
as if the world be the fourth world of the verse, then it signifies, 4. etc.
and 5. signifies the fifth number, to that, as the fifth number to four is 8.
and so are the first and second figures of observation found. Then are the
other four figures of observation to be found by the cross verse, which
says: add one to the place, take one from the place, let the place stand,
add four to the place, and so shall you find the third, fourth, fifth, and
sixth figures of observation.

Here note, that if the place be the vnizon, because you cannot take one from
a vnizon, take it from eight, which is of the same kind, when you have thus
done, turn the point of the Sword down, and then the seven words, serves
for the seven courses in this order: First the word that serves for the place,
serves for the first course, the second word upward, for the second course
upward: the second word downward, for the second course downward, etc. As the
Sword now stands, compting about upon the seven words, when you have found
what word serves for the course, look what vowels be in it, and thereby you
shall know the concords, that serves for that course, as if the vowell be A.
it signifies the vnizon. If it be E, it signifies the third, If it be I, it
signifies the fifth. And if it be O, it signifies the sixth. Lo, thus are all
the things expressed at large in the table, briefly contrived in the compass
of two verses.

The names of the Cords for Counterpoint, Descant, and any set Song in how many
parts soever.

A concord is divided into an
Vnizon. Third. Fifth. Sixth. Eight. Tenth. Twelfth. Thirtenth. and a Fiftenth
and their eights.

Discord are these.
A second. A fourth. A seventh. A Ninth. A leuenth. A fourete^th. and their
eights.

^ Concords, perfect and imperfect ^ Concords, perfect and imperfect.

Discords.

^

Concords.

^

De Inuentione.
CRescit in infinitum, Inuentio tempore cuncto,
Sed tribus est dixis saepe morata malis.
Est mora paupertas prohibens Inuenta probars,
Non poterit fieri stultus inanis ait.
Vis, piger inquit, adire via latitante leone?
Sic mora pauperies, stultus, homoque piger.
Laus nunc, laus semper, laus omni tempore summus:
Discens atque docens, dicite: lauique Deo.
FINIS.
CANTVS.
^ O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry: ^ Refuse me
not that am un- just, but bowing down thy heavenly eye. ^ Behold how I do
still lament, my sins wherein I do offend: ^ O Lord for them shall I be
shent, Since thee to please I do entend.

TENOR.
^ O Lord in thee: etc. ^

ALTVS.
^ O Lord in thee: etc. ^

BASSVS.
^ O Lord in thee: etc. ^

10. sundry ways of 2. parts in one upon the plain song.
^

1. ^

2. ^ ^

3. ^

4. ^ ^

5. ^

6. ^ ^

7. ^

8. ^ ^

9. ^

10. ^

FINIS.
Place the Table of the comparisons of Cliffes after this.
A Table of the comparisons of Cliffes, how one follows another for the
naming of Notes: changing (Vt) into (Sol) and (Re) into (La.)
^ Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. Sol. La. Fa. Sol La. Mi. Fa.
Sol. La. Fa. Sol. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. Sol. La. Fa.
Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. ^ La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa.
Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa.
Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi.
Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. ^ La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa.
Sol. La. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi.
Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. La.
Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. ^ Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa.
Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi.
Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. ^
Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi.
Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Fa. Sol. La.
Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. ^ Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi.
Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La.
Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. ^ Mi. Fa.
Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa.
Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa.
Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La. Fa. Sol. La. Mi. Fa. Sol. La.


