THE Christian man's Closet.

Wherein is contained a large discourse of the godly training up of children:
as also of those duties that children owe unto their Parents, made Dialogue
wise, very pleasant to read, and most profitable to practice, Collected in
Latin by Bartholomew Batty of Alostensis.

And now Englished by William Lowth.

Est adolescentis aetas suspectior, aetas Lubrica: delitijs ebr^a: Legis egens.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas dawson, and
Gregory Seton and are to be sold at the sign of the Hedgehog in Paul's
Churchyard. 1581.

To the right worshipful and his singular good friends, M. Thomas Darcie and
M. Brian Datcie Esquiers. William Lowth wishes happy health, joyful
prosperity with the increase of all Godly knowledge in Christ Jesus our Lord.
WHEN I had diligently weighed and duly considered with my self. (Right
Woorshipfull) the manifold courtesies, and sure tokens of unfeigned
friendship, which diverse and sundry times I have heretofore received at your
worships hands, sithence my first coming into this country of Essex: I was
inwardly moved, stirred, and procured thereby, to devise, study and find out
some way, whereby I might some what exonerate and discharge my self of the
heavy load of your undeserved friendlinesse toward me and mine. So that
after I had well deliberated of this matter, ransaked all my weak and silly
senses, and thoroughly recounted with my self, mine own estate, wealth and
condition, I found it altogether more simple, ba^e, and slender, then that it
might in any respect counteruayle your kindness. Notwithstanding at the
last by good hap, lighting on a Book (...)* De Oeconomia Christiana, A
matter co^taining a Christianlike ordering and governing of an houshoulde and
family: collected, framed and composed in the Latin tongue (after the order
of a Dialogue) by the first Author Bartholomew Batty of Alostensis for the
utility and profit of his brethren, children, and country men, whereof. I
taking some good liking at the first view, settled my self therein, and would
not give it over, until such time as I had thoroughly perused and diligently
read over the same. And the matter being pitthy, pleasant and profitable,
bewrapt me in such delight, that I could not choose, but bestow the second
reading thereof, and so waded through again with a more deep consideration,
care and diligence then before. Thus passing through the second time I gleyned
and gathered together certain special notes for mine own better instruction
and reformation of mine own family. Of the which when some of my dear
friends had taken the view, together with the Book, and also having good
liking thereof, they began to persuade me earnestly, and that with many and
great reasons, that it would be very profitable not only unto my self, for
mine own private exercise and increase of knowledge (but also unto all Parents
and children, Masters and servants old and young, of what estate, degree and
condition soever, being ignorant of the Latin tongue) if I would bestow, not
only the translating thereof. But also afterward commit the same to the
printing, that thereby our country and countriemen (which are right dear unto
us) might also reap some profit and commodity. And albeit I thought my self
far unfit for that purpose and not sufficiently able to perform their honest
and earnest requests nor to manifest the Authors just deserved praise, in
framing so fit a pattern for this our age and time. Yet at the last as well for
their importunacy, as also chiefly for the increase of mine own knowledge, and
to do my countriemen some pleasure (after the example of others.) I have
presumed very boldly to attempt this matter. And as time would permit me
fro^mine other daily exercises, have brought the same to such effect as may now
appear, without any injury unto the first Author. I have now disfurnished and
changed him out of his own rich robes and gallant garments, and have
apparelled him after the English fashion, which though perhaps to some may
seem evil shapen, at the first sight, and will also deem, that the stuff is
not so fine, excellent and costly, nor set out with such delicate devises,
picked points, and curious colors, as the worthiness of the thing does
deserve, nor that I have showed my self there in a cunning and skilful
Artificer: yet is it good, wholesome and durable, and not of the coursest nor
vilest kind of stuff, neither of the basest and simplest fashion. So that such
as shall behold the sound body and inward substance, rather the^ the outward
show, and shall endure the same unto the end: shall find (no doubt) sufficient
matter ministered unto them: to guard and defend them at all assayes from many
mishaps, sharp showers, terrible tempests, injuries and inconveniences, which
otherwise for want thereof, might more suddenly annoy them. And for that your
worships are Fathers of many children (which I am persuaded are dearly beloved
unto you) and masters of great families, whereof I know you have care to be
virtuously instructed, guided, governed and trained up in the fear of God. And
because this whole discourse tends to the same purpose and effect, I have
thought it good to offer these my simple pains and travels unto your
woorships, as the present of a true and faithful friend, which feign would
have offered you a better gift, if his power would have extended thereunto. But
herein following the examples of poor men in the ancient hystories, I am so
much the bolder, even for the very goodwill I bear to you and yours. Humbly
beseeching your woorships to shroud the same under the shadow of your wings. So
shall I think my self safe, let the bawling Barkers, curious Cauillors,
sawsie Sycophants and Momus his mates, with all the rabble of Ruffians in their
fretting fumes say what they can. Which if you will vouchsafe to do, I have my
whole desire, and will continually pray unto Almighty God, to send you in this
earthly habitatio^ happy health, joyful prosperity, with the increase of
much woorshippe. And after this life everlasting blessedness in the heavenly
Jerusalem.

At Malden the xxxj. day of May. 1581. Your VVoorships most bounden William
Lowth.

To the Reader.
AFter that I had finished this small treatise (gentle and loving Reader) being
moved thereunto partly for mine own pleasure and increase of knowledge, and
then again urged by the earnest instigation of some friends, for our
countries cause (which stands in great need of the godly and wholesome
documents, with the grave counsels and pithie precepts in this little volume
contained.) And herewithal calling to mind that worthy and notable saying of
the Divine Philosopher Plato, cyted by Cicero in his first book of Offices.
Non nobis solum nati sumus: ortus enim nostri, partem patria vendicat, partem
parents, partem amici. I was hereby incited, stirred, and procured, to make
this more familiar and openly known unto thee, being a matter so profitable
and necessary for all parents, masters, children, and servants, Wherein as in
a most clear glass they may plainly see, what does appertain to their
several duties.

And albeit I have used a plain and simple style in this my translation: yet
well beseeming the matter (I trust) though perhaps not to each man's lyking. For
it is truly said of Terence, Quot homines tot sententiae. Or: Quot capita,
tot sensus. So many men, so many minds. Or: So many heads, so many wits. So
that I think it an impossible thing to please every man's judgment, neither is
it my purpose and meaning. But I have offered this unto thy view, as well for
the discharge of my conscience, as also for the entire love I bear unto my
native countriemen, let the curious cauiller say what he will. Praying the
(gentle Reader) to take in good part the simpleness of my gift, and let it
not grieve thee to bestow thy pains and diligence in the reading over this
fruitful Dialogue, for thine own profit and commodity. Have not so great
regard unto the authority of the writer: as to note diligently what it is,
that is written. I dare warrant thee, that the oftener thou read it with due
consideration and aduisement, the greater shall be thy profit, and as for my
pains and travail taken herein, if I may reap thy good will, I ask no more.

W. Lo^^th.

The duty of Parents toward their children. The first book.
The speakers.
Amusus, Theodidactus, Theophilus, Martina the mother.
Amusus GOD save you with all my heart most reverend master doctor: and God
(which is the true light) send you good success this day and ever.


Theodidactus. And I (my good loving father) do wish as much unto you with all
my heart. But hear I pray you, from whence come you so early? It is scarcely
day as yet, has any thing chanced contrary to your mind? Is your wife and
children well, and in good health?


Amusus. My wife, with my whole family are in very good health (thanks be
unto God) if you weigh and consider only their bodies. But if you inwardly
behold their souls (which is the most excellent part of man) then shall you
find nothing to be more lamented, nothing more miserable, nothing (to be
short) more out of order, the Lord God amend it when his will is.


Theodidactus. Alas, why so? Let me know it I pray you, keep it not secret,
be not afraid, believe me I say, I will help you either with my counsel, or
otherwise with any thing that I may, to the uttermost of my power.


Amusus. When I do behold the families in these our borders and parts Amusus
^e^^^leth the state of disordered families.
every where, I am exceedingly moved with sorrow: for I see the youth grow
up in every place without any instruction of godliness, virtue or good
manners, as if they were the children of the most barbarous nations, nay rather
of the very Turks and Infidels, so little regard is there of true godliness
and virtue for the most part. And again when I am compelled to come to mine
own family and to consider the same so far out of order (I had welnigh said
utterly corrupted and past al hope) I am altogether weary of my life: For by
the disposition of mine own children I easily gather, that the youth in this
our age is not only void of al good discipline, but also grown to such
liberty and boldness, that almost they will receive no admonition, be it never
so godly. This plague when I note in mine own: I am moved unto anger, I
chide, I threaten, yea and sometime I strike them, but with all these things it
avails little or nothing. Wherefore very earnestly and not without tears I
have often desired of Almighty God, that in this my great heaviness and
sorrow he would vouchsafe to send me some wholesome and godly Counsel, so
that after many prayers, and supplicatio^s made, I have found nothing to be
more profitable for me, then to commit the same to some godly and learned man,
which after I had deeply weighed and considered in my mind, you are the first
with whom I met, therefore al shame laid aparte, I come unto you, as it were
mine only aid and sanctuary, and this has bin often in my mind heretofore,
but I have been afraid to trouble you, yet now at the last, necessity that
cruel weapon, has even compelled me to shake of al shame and fear.


Theodidactus. I am angry with this your continual and unprofitable
shamefastness: have not I ever borne you goodwill, even as to my brother? And
therefore, why should you not be bold to come unto me after a familier
manner? I have often promised unto you my study and travel without any
exception, and am still minded to perform the same: what is the cause therefore
that you have not come to my house? so that if you had come, think not that you
should have troubled me, but rather that nothing could have chanced more
acceptable, and joyful unto me then your presence.


Amusus. Reverend Sir, I most humbly thank you for this your great courtesy
and goodwil toward me, and I heartily pray you, that according to your
accustomed wisdom and godliness you would teach me, and as it were with your
finger, point me out the method and order of godly and virtuous education and
instructing of children, for albeit I am unlearned, and a poor house keeper,
yet (God is my witness) how earnestly I do desire and wish with all my heart,
to see my poor and wretched children godly and virtuously trained up and
instructed in the true knowledge, faith, religion, and fear of almighty God.
And further, that they might be taught in all civility and good manners, and so
learn to walk in the ways of our Lord God, that at the last after this
wretched miserable and short life, they may be made heirs of that most
excellent and everlasting joy with the elect and Saints of God in heaven: for
what other thing is this life, then dust, a shadow, and the very image of
death? The prophet David says, thou have Psalm. 39.
made my days as it were a spanne long, and mine age is even as nothing in
respect of thee: And verily every man living is altogether vanity. For man
walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteh himself in vain: He heapeth up
riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.


Theodidactus. Verily, neither by chance, nor fortune* have you come hither,
but by the determinate will and appointment of God. Forasmuch as I have
earnestly desired to have some conference about this matter with a man thus
hungring and thirsting after righteousness, the word of God, and chiefly in
this kind of study, or exercise, wherein is handled the duty of householders,
Parents and Children, then the which in this our time I judge nothing more
acceptable to God, nothing more profitable or necessary to mankind: For as
there is nothing more to be lamented, then that father of household which
neglects his family in their good reformation: so is there none more honest
or godly, then he which begins to inform his youth even from their young
and tender years, and does provide to have them diligently instructed in all
good and godly literature: And again as there is nothing more unseemly or to
be lamented in a family or household, then to see the youth suffered to grow
up and pass forth their time, without showing unto their Parents or
Masters, any honor, reverence, or obedience: so is there nothing more
pleasing unto God, and more joyful to Parents and Masters, then diligently to
see their families exercised in the fear and love of God, and to show due
honor unto their Parents or masters, with all obedience and reverence in the
Lord.


Amusus. It is God only, and that by his providence wherewith he governs
althinges, that guided and brought me unto you, to the end that I of you
being well, and Godly instructed might return unto my family, and that so
hereafter I may be able to exhort and instruct my children, and servants,
that they as well by mine examples, as exhortations and counsels, may learn to
serve God, and walk in his ways all the days of their lives.


Theodidactus. When I had diligently read over Saint Paul 1. Corin. 12. If one
member suffer, all suffer with him: if one member be had in honor, all the
members be glad also. I do not judge my self bound to you only, as one
member to another, as the foot to the hand, and ear to the eye, but I
acknowledge my self a servant unto all men, and that I am borne to the end I
should do good unto all with counselling, teaching, and releeuing their
necessities to the uttermost of my power, chiefly me to whom he has
committed his talent. And I being thus admonished with this lesson of Saint
Paul, when I was about xxv. years old, It chanced that I took in hand this
pains, not without great care and diligence to gather together examples out of
diverse Authors, whereby I might admonish and instruct as well fathers and
masters, as children and servants of their duties, seeing that I judged this
kind of doctrine very profitable for both: and that the chief part of man's
happiness in this life flows out of this fountain. And to the end that this
my pains might be more profitable unto all men, I began to collect from all
parts of the best Authors, diverse Sayings, Examples, Apothegmes, Similitudes,
Comparisons, and the most apt sentences, which seemed to apperteine or tend
any thing at all, to the instructing either of parents or children in their
several duties. And these are gathered chiefly out of the sacred writings of
the Prophets and Apostles.

Moreover, I have chosen and selected out of the writings of godly fathers
such things as I have thought meet for this purpose whereunto lastly I have
joined also very many things out of the Philosophers, which might* seem any
thing profitable to godly householders, So that I have endeavored in this my
study, that The works commended.
my collection might increase to a reasonable volume, without doubt very
profitable and necessary for fathers, mothers, and children, wherein as in a
most clear glass, they may plainly see what is their several duties.


Amusus. Oh right happy and fortunate day, in the which it has chanced me
to enjoy your presence and speech, would God I might have convenient time to
stay with you, and to hear those things, that you with so great pains and
diligence have collected I say, if this might be brought to pass, I should
then have good hope, that it should be very profitable both to my self, and
also to my family, and that if afterward I might hear from you the
interpretation and apt applying of those things which you have thus gathered
together, I should judge my self more happy a great deal, nay rather
persuade my self, to be altogether delivered from all those perils and
dangers which to me and mine are imminent.


Theodidactus. Have good hope and confidence dear friend Amuse, I say your
godly request shall be accomplished.


Amusus. Sir, I most heartily thank you, or rather God, that has given you so
willing a mind. But yet Sir I beseech you before we proceed any further, that
we may send for Theophilus our neighbor and very friend, who (as you know)
is a man of an excellent wit and very good memory, a lover of godly
admonitions, and learned both in the Greek and latin tongue: I verily am
unlearned, of dull wit and no memory, so that he will demand many things of
you, which I should not once think of. Wherefore if it please you, we will come
to you tomorrowe, in the mean time I will certefie him hereof, whereby he may
hear you with better attention, and demand of you more aptly the things that
are convenient, I in the mean while will give my self to silence, so that with
some profit I may hear your godly communication, and commit the same to
memory with all that I may.


Theodidactus. I can not but greatly commend this your wholesome counsel,
undoubtedly all things shall have good success, if Theophilus will vouchsafe
to handle this kind of argument with me, for we have conferred many things
heretofore, concerning the education of children: therefore you have done well
to put me in remembrance of him, But for that the night approaches, let us
prepare our selves to rest, and call upon God with hearty and fervent prayers,
that he will grant tomorrow, that I may so speak, and you so hear, as that
his glory may be set forth, and the good state of many families increased.


Amusus. Sir, according to your appointment yesterday, I have not feared to
come unto you with our very friend Theophilus, and have also brought with me
Martina my well-beloved wife, that she might in like manner hear, and perfectly
understand your godly admonitions, for this is without all controversy, she
must show her self as well a Mother, as I a Father, unto our family. And for
this cause, by the commandment of God, she is no less bound to do her
duty, than I mine: and this can she not do, except she be first taught of
some body.


Theodidactus. You are all most heartily welcome, and chiefly you (O my good The
family is committed to the wife, as well as the husband.
Martina) and I can you thank, that you have followed the wise counsel of
your husband, for it is most certain, that your children and family are as well
committed unto your charge, as unto your husband.


Martina. Reverend sir, I believe nothing to be truer, than that you have said,
and for that cause am I come hither, to hear your godly conference, whereby I
might the rather learn, how to accomplish and perform my duty.


Amusus. Sir, yesterstay I was so ravished with your words, and had such great
joy and pleasure in them, that I was once minded to have brought all my
children with me.


Theophilus. Good neighbor Amuse, tomorrow shall be more convenient for that
purpose, when we shall treat of their duties (that is to say) the honor and
obedience that children owe unto their Parents: for then shall it be good that
you bring them all, because it shall be very profitable for them.


Theodidactus. But before we proceed any further, I think it meet to divide
the argument unto you that be here present, to the end that an order being
observed, all things may the more easily be understood. Wherefore we will divide
this argument into six parts: and first we will speak of Matrimony, and the
procreation of children. Secondly, of the profit and necessity of
instruction. Thirdly, we show certain duties perteining to the Mothers.
Fourthly, The argument divided into si^ parts.
we will set before you how horrible and pernicious a thing it is, when
Parents neglect their duties. Fifthly, we will declare that children are
often punished for the offenses of Parents. Sixthly, and lastly, we will let
you understand of certain vices, from the which your children are to be
feared. Of these points severally (by the assistance of almighty God, without
who^ we can do nothing) with the greatest diligence and wisdom that we may,
we will speak in order, and those things which we cannot finish in one day,
we will end them in two or three. And there is no labor so painful, neither
charges so great, which for your sakes I have not willingly purposed to bestow.
For amongst friends, all things are common.


Theophilus. And I also for this your good will do think my self greatly
bound unto you, for I perceive this your purpose shall be profitable and
necessary for me, I would there were more of our friends present, to take
the benefit of your counsels together with us. When Amusus came to me
yesternight, and showed me in what you had communicated unto him touching this
matter, I was more glad (so God help me) than if a man had powered into my
lap many millians of gold.


Theodidactus. I would it might please God, to grant us many of your mind and
towardness: but ah las, I fear me that the most men do more esteem millians,
nay rather one millian of gold, than the counsel and admonitions of their
faithful friends, though never so learned and godly. The world is now set on
such folly, undoubtedly most like unto the Ass, that had rather to feed on
the dry Barley straw, then of good wheat, were it never so sweet and
pleasant. But I will omit these things, and return to my purpose: And for
because marriage is the original and fountain of all private and public
government, I will touch some things, of the beginning, excellency, and end
thereof. Marriage is properly a lawful and godly The definition of marriage.
joining together of one man, and one woman, ordained to the service of God,
for the procreation and virtuous educatio^ of children, to the preservation of
his Church and common wealth. Or as some other say, it is the lawful coupling
together of a man and his wife, instituted for the cause of procreatio^ of
children, and the avoiding of fornication.


Theophilus. What is more true or manifest, than these definitions? But of whom
was Matrimony instituted, of God, or of men? Marriage was first instituted of
God. Gene. 2.



Theodidactus. Godly Matrimony was ordained of God him self, and that in the
terrestrial Paradise, a place full of all joy and pleasure in the time of man's
innocence, and was adorned and bewtified with great miracles in Cana of
Galalie, where Christ him self vouchedsafe Joan. 2.
to be present at the marriage with his mother Marie the virgin, and his
Disciples, and with his divine power turned the water into excellent good and
most pure Wine, which was highly commended of the Master of the feast, by
whose presence and miracle is plainly testified, that lawful marriage pleases
him greatly, and it is certain that God does bless the marriage of those that
fear him and call upon him faithfully. And Saint Paul highly Marriage does
please God.
commend, that holy and lawful coupling of man and wife together, saying
thus: Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled. Wherefore I
may boldly and freely affirm, that marriage is the most excellent state and
condition of life, instituted of God, preserved and garnished with his
blessing, which all the godly both by preaching and example have commended unto
us, and placed the same in the top of all good works.


Theophilus. Unto what end has God instituted, this holy and lawful
Matrimony?


Theodidactus. The end of lawful Matrimony is in three sorts, God has The
end of marriage is in ^ sorts.
not ordained marriage for carnal pleasure and delight, this is not the final
cause: But the first and chiefest end of marriage is, for the avoiding of
fornication and all uncleanness, that such as have not the gift of
continency, might marry, and keep them selves undefiled members of Christ's
body, The second, for the procreation of children, to be brought up in the
fear and nurture of the Lord, and praise of God, that they may be meet for
his Church and the common wealth: for Parents ought to teach their children
true religion (whereof we will speak more at large hereafter.) Thirdly, for
the mutual society, help and comfort, that the one ought to have of the
other, both in prosperity and adversity.


Theophilus. What duty ought the godly couples to use in marriage?


Theodidactus. Saint Peter says, Ye husbands dwell with your wives
according to knowledge, in giving honor to the woman, as to the weaker
vessel, and that your prayers be not hindered. This commandment properly
belongs unto the man, because he is the head and Author of the nourishing
and confirming this concord, which shall by this means come to pass, if he
use a mild and moderate kind of government, and not a tyrannous: sometime
pardoning Good lesson^ for husbands and wives.
the woman, because she is y^ weaker creature, not endued with like fortitude,
and greatness of courage: but yet it is not the wives part to abuse the
moderation, courtesy and lenity of her husband. For the wives fair and gentle
speech, and modest silence, shall quiet and pacify much chiding and brawling.
It is also the wives duties to know and consider their own weakness and
infirmity of nature. And that I might comprehend much matter in few words,
the most excellent duty of godly married persons, is to solicit and call The
duties of godly couples.
upon God with hearty prayers very often, that he would vouchsafe to be
present with them, and that they might continually nourish concord and mutual
good will between them: and with great diligence, that they accustom them
selves to lenity and gentleness, bearing one with an other, and study to
take in good part whatsoever shall chance, and so shall their conversation
be most pleasant and joyful together. Forthermore, if afflictions,
contentions, or any other evils (which the Devil is wont to thrust upon the
married persons) do assail them, and seem to be imminent: straight way that
both of them with their eyes lift up into heaven, do desire Gods aid and
protection, and cease not from prayer till they find some comfort, for the
Lord is ready at hand to those that call upon him in faith, without douting.
For Christ himself says, Where two upon the earth do agree together,
whatsoever they shall ask of Mat. 18.
my heavenly Father, it shall be granted unto them. Prayer is most necessary
in so great perils and dangers of life, neither is there any thing more
seemly and pleasant in the house, than to see and behold an honest and godly
society, of the husband, wife, and children, when they strive in their
several duties, to love cherish, and comfort one an other, that they talk
upon God, and of his benefits, that they call upon him with one voice, and
have a care that the knowledge and true worship of God may be set forth. And
lastly, that the Parents hold not this doctrine only in words, but also by
example of life.


Theophilus. Seeing now, you have so excellently set forth unto us the Godly
duties of Matrimony, it rests, that you declare somewhat concerning the
procreation of children.


Theodidactus. You put me well in remembrance, for as the procreatio^ of
children Of the Procreation of children.
is the gift of God, so is it the proper office of true and lawful wedlock,
which always for the most part, does wait thereon, as an inseparable
companion, which has the blessing of God, as witnesses she scripture. Gene.
1. where as Moses says: God blessed them and said: increase and multiply, and
replenish the earth. Hereupon it is, that she was holden accursed, which had
no seed in Israel, Gene. 3. 1. Reg. 2. Iudi. 13. Luc. 1.
and it was a great shame to have no children. Thus did Rachael bewail the
shame and reproach of Lyae. So did H^nna when she was ^a^ren* pray unto the
Lord, and conceived. So in like manner, Elizabeth the mother of John Baptist,
moved God with continual prayers, and was heard.


Theophilus. As the scripture pronounces them happy, whom God has thus
blessed The peruers judgment of the people.
with the increase of children: So at this day the common people judges them
most unhappy, to whom God has given many children, such is the perverse and
preposterous judgment, of the unlearned, nay rather wicked men, which look
what God calls good, they dare call evil: and what God blesses, they dare
curse.


Theodidactus. It is the error, or rather the malice of the common people, from
Pro. 10. Pro. 17.
the which as from a common plague the godly ought to shun, and let them rather
agree with Solomon, which says: The crown of the aged, is childers children:
and again, The crown of old men, is their sons sons, and the glory of
the sons, is their fathers, and great graund fathers. And David says,
Blessed are they that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways. For thou shall
eat the labor Psalm. 128.
of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy shall thou be. Thy wife shall be as
the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thine house: Thy children like the Olive
branches round about thy Table. L^e thus shall the man be blessed, that
fears the Lord, And Isocrates, being an heathen man, confirms ye same also
in these vers^s:

Foelix fouet been moratum quifilium,
Matre sobolis prouentu eris f^licior.
Happy is he which fostereth up,
A well taught child (says he.)
Yet in thincrease of many good,
more happy shall he be.
ANd when Cambises compared himself with his father Cyrus, and that his
friends did sooth him, that he far exceeded his The wise answer of Cresus
father. Cresus ouerhearing the same, answers after this manner: That he was
nothing comparable to his father, the which had left behind him a son in the
world (for at that time Cambises had never a child) judging that this was not
the least benefit toward the common wealth, if not only, a man show
himself a virtuous and worthy man, but if he beget such as he is himself,
and make them fit members for his country and common wealth. And let this be
sufficient, touching the procreation of children. Now let v^ prosecute the
second point (that is to say) of the necessity, and utility of the
instructing of children. And first we will approve the same by the commandment
of God: secondly, by the example of the holy scriptures, and lastly, by the
Ethnickes.


Theophilus. Very wisely and worthily spoken, fors^eing that the procreation
of children is not the common gift of God, it is not without cause, that we
ought to bestow al our pains and diligence, that youth may be brought up in
the fear and word of God. But in what words has God commanded and enjoined
unto us this diligent education, and instruction of children?


Theodidactus. The God of Israel, begins after this manner. Deuteronomy. 4. saying,
Be not forgetful of the words which thine eyes have seen, and that they slip
not out of thine heart, all the days of thy life, Thou shall teach them thy
sons, and thy sons sons, saying, When thou stodest before the Lord thy
God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, gather me the people together, and
I will make them hear ^^^ words, that they may learn to fear me, all the
days that they shall line upon the earth, and that they may teach their
children. And again, These words which I command thee this day, shall Deuteronomy.
6.
be in thine heart, and thou shall show them unto thy children, and shall
talk of them when thou art at home sitting in thine house, and as thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: And thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine hand. And they shall be warninges between
thine eyes, and thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon
thy gates. And in the 11. Chapter he says: Therefore shall ye lay up these
Eodem. 11.
my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your
hands, and set them before your eyes, teach them your children, that they may
talk of them, when thou sit in thine house: And when thou walk by the
way: when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: yea, and thou shall write
them upon thy door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates, yt your days
and the days of your children may be multiplied. Tell your children of it, and
let the^ show it to their ^^^l. 1.
children, and so they to certefie their posterity thereof. Behold, ye truth
hates not the light, but will be manifested in all things. Therefore the
Prophet is not content to teach the people of his time, but does desire yt
they might be taught unto ye end of the world: And he does exhort them, yt one
generation might teach and instruct an other. And now, albeit that very many
Parents at this day (my Theophilus) do lightly regard ye teaching and
instructing of their children: yet how earnestly, the instructing of them is
charged and commanded here, your self may easily judge. So yt when I do
bewail sometime the negligence of many parents, I often burst out into these
words. Alas, unto what end would the education of children have come, if there
had been no commandment, nor order prescribed for the same* By this we may
gather, none other thing, then exceeding darkness and confusion of mind: and
that the nature of mankind should have utterly been defiled, which so
shamefully contemns her children of her own self begotten and borne, whom God
and nature nevertheless would have beloved and carefully regarded: As these
places also following, do manifestly show and witness. Thou that have
children, Eccle. 7. God commands children to be nurtured. Eccle. 30.
says Jesus Sirach, Nurture them and hold the^ under from their childehood, he
says not, Make them rich and cocker them, but nurture and chastise them. And
again he says, Teach thy some, and be diligent therein, least it be to thy
shame: The whole Chapter is worth the reading. We find a like commandment in
Solomon, which says, Chasten thy son, whiles there is some hope of his
amendment. And Saint Paul is not unmindful of this godly precept, saying:
Ephe. 6.
Bring up your children in instruction and information of the Lord. Paul
would have young men and children brought up, first, by instruction, and then
by correction in the Lord, which reasons and orders if they were of every
Parent diligently observed, it could not be why at this day so many families
(utterly spoiled and overthrown) should be lamented. Such is the infinite
goodness, care, and great love of God toward us, who does not only send us
children: but also most diligently sets before us, the form and order how
we shall nurture and correct them.

Moreover, to these his holy precepts, he adds most sweet promises, by the
which he exciteth and stirs up the minds of Parents are stirred up to
instruct their children with sweet promises. Prou. 29. Eccle. 30.
Parents unto a more seruent care, and these places, which I will now recite
in order, do truly testify the same. Nurture thy son (says Solomon) with
correction, and thou shall be at rest, yea, he shall do thee good at thine
heart. And again, he that teaches his son, is praised in him. He that
teaches his son, greeueth the enemy: and before his friends he shall have
joy of him. But these are made more plain by the Antithesis.


Amusus, How is that I pray you? declare it unto us.


Theodidactus. That is, if we put those places negatiuely, after this manner.
Who so nurtureth not his son, has little joy of him, is seldom praised, and
gives great occasion for his enemies to rejoice.


Amusus. It is very true, and that does daily experience prove the same.
Neither do I marvel, that negligent Parents suffer many griefs and sorrows by
means of their children: for they bring great heaviness and sorrow voto us
also, which use the greatest care and diligence that we can in this, that they
may be godly and virtuously brought up.


Theodidactus. You say truly, for Cain, Ismael, Cham* and the children of
Samuel, Heli, David, and of many others be examples unto us, but that I may
return to my purpose: Yesterday with sorrowefull mind and great heaviness
you complained unto me, that you could very hardly govern your children,
although you did assay al means possible* and that the matter should come to
chiding threatening, and cruelt words, but neither with threatenings nor with
stripes only ought we to deal with children* but in a contrary manner must we
deal with them. For first, children are to be instructed with Godly
admonitions, and trained from their tender years unto the fear of God, which
(a^ Solomon* witnesses) is the fountain of We must not deal with youth by
threatenings and stripes.
all good things according to the examples of the Patriarchs, prophets, and
other godly (...) which have brought up their children (...) and in the fear
of God. And as I socrates says, Non mult^^t exact^ leges, se^ bona inst^^ta
and honesta disciplina, mores iuuentutis emendant. Not many and strict laws
or rules* but good instruction, and honest discipline do correct the faults
of youth.


Amusus* I pray you rehearse unto us some particular examples of such godly
men, as have taught their children the fear of God: for men oftentimes take
great profit by the number of examples.


Theodidactus. Solomon confesses himself y^ he was taught of his father,
saying: Tobi. 4.
I was y^ beloved son of my Father, and he taught me in my tender years,
Tobias taught his son in the fear of God even from Dan. ^3.
his infancy. The Parents of Susanna because they were just and feared God,
taught their daughter according to the law of Moses. When Mathathias lay at the
point of death he instructed his sons in the 1. Match. 2.
fear of God, by the examples of Abraham, Joseph, Phinehes, Iosue, Caleb,
David, Elias, Daniel with many others. And thus you may consider through out all
ages since the beginning of the world: y^ whosouer put their trust in God were
not confounded: the mother taught 2. Match. 7.
her 7. sons in says and constancy. Timothy learned the fear of ^, Tim. 1.
GOD from his infancy, as well with his Grandmother Lois as also with his
mother Eunica. And he profited so exceedingly in the study of the scriptures
being but a child, that at length he proved a notable Preacher of the word of
God: So a^ayleable is the godly education of youth from their tender years.
Also the example of Joseph Luke. 2.
and Marie does move Parents not only themselves to be careful in y^ study of
godliness, and willingly to they ye public ministratio^ in ye congregation:
but also, accustom their child^e^ thereunto, and so other parents by their
examples, y^ they may war^e from their* tender years, to love religion and y^
true worship of God* and willingly to be present at public prayers and
sermons, that they may truly understand the knowledge of the divine mysteries:
other wise how shall they govern their own housholdes and families in the
fear of God?


Amusus. I perceive now plainly, that the sons are to be instructed very
carefully, but in the mean time, what shall become of the daughters?


Theodidactus. Jesus Syrach says: If thou have daughters, keep their bodies,
and show not a cheerful countenance toward them. Marry thy daughter Eccle. 7.
and so shall thou perform a weighty matter: but give her to a man of
understanding.


Amusus. Truly it is very godly council, if so be parents would always bear
it in remembrance: and follow it. But for the most part in the bestowing of
their daughters and sons no wadaies, they rather regard wealth then wisdom*
beauty, then bashfulnesse: finenesse, then fidelity or any other good gifts
or qualities either of body or mind.


Theophilus. We have heard of you that Solomon, Tobias, Mathathias and other
godly me^, have diligently instructed their children: but to the end we might
be the more confirmed, if you have any other examples, I pray you recite the^.


Theodidactus. Nothing more gladly. Athanasius even from his childhood was Of
Athanas^^^ Bish. of Alexandria.
instructed in the Arts and in ye study of godliness, he was very cheerful
and willing to learn, he had a meruellous quick wit, to judge of most grave
and weighty causes: And therefore by Alexander Bishop of Alexandria; he was
received into the Church who for his excellent towardnes, and the rare virtues
which he noted in him, gave him most loving and friendly entertainment.

Origin as yet being a child, was exercised in the holy scriptures, Of Origin,
(...) Eusebius.
but his father was a great aid and furtherance unto him for the obtaining of
the same: for over and besides ye study and exercise with he had in in ye liberal
sciences, with his Tutors and teachers: it was his fathers chief care to have
some daily co^fere^ce with him in ye sacred scriptures, with study and daily
exercise was nothing grievous to him, but co^trari wise he had such pleasure and
delight therein, y^ he was not content with the simple and orderly reading, but to
enquire* for some special points of religion and to search out the deep
knowledge of ye words, whereby he added a spurr unto his father to y^ great
increase of his own study, by his de manding of many questions. Hereof
^usebius makes report. And if all householders would endeavor themselves to
follow the examples of the godly fathers Athanasius, and Origin. O good God,
how soon would all things in the Church of Christ (now miserably racked
and defaced) be restored again. Then undoubtedly should we see in short
time the Apostolic Church in her pristinate state to florishe, with the
salvation of many souls. For the glory and advancement of Christ's Church,
does depend for the most part of such like godly education and instruction of
youth, wherefore I do exhort and humbly beseech all godly Parents, that they
would follow the examples of these and such like godly Fathers, which if they
will in some measure follow, then shall they easily perceive what great
prosperity, health and profit they shall purchase unto their families. And
again, let them consider what great shame, reproach, and hinderance they bring
unto them, which do neglect and contemn this duty.

John Egiptius a very godly man, was wont to admonish men Johannes Aegyptius.
coming unto him to ask counsel: That they would carefully provide that
their children should be virtuously brought up, and instructed in the holy
Scriptures whose counsel would God many parents would follow.

Moreover, because (as I have said) the examples of good men, have great force
in teaching, I will describe here the example of Cato, of the fatherly care
and great love toward his young son. The example of Cato.
Whose business and affairs in the common wealth was never so great, but that
he would always be present at the washing and dressing of his son being
newborn, and after as he grew up, and was both of years and aptness to
learn, he would never commit him to any other teacher then himself. And when
he was persuaded by his friends, to commit that care and pains to some one of
his servants whom he best trusted, and that he thought meetest for that
purpose: answered, that he could not abide to see his servant pluck his son
by the ears, and look upon him with angry and frowning countenance: if
Parents now adaics had such and so great care of their sons, rather then to
suffer them to consume and spend their times so vainly in Hauking, Hunting,
Di^ing, Carding, and many other such like vain pastimes: then should it never
chance so often, that such wildings and unsavory fruits should be gathered
of so fair and floorishing trees.


Theophilus. It is very truly said, and therefore these examples ought to
stir us up unto a more diligent care. For if Cato being an Heathen man did so
diligently and carefully teach and instruct his son, shall we which profess
our selves to be Christians, be moved with no care or love of the godly and ver
tuous education of our children? But still remain (...) without any natural and
fatherly affection chiefly in a labor so necessary, and a work so godly.


Theodidactus. I might allege here many such examples, both out of the
writings of godly fathers, and wise Philosophers: but I will let them pass,
least that I seem tedious unto the readers or hearers.


Theophilus. Your words are sweeter and more pleasant unto us, then the
dulcere drink of the Gods, whereof the Poets feign. Wherefore I bese^ch you for
the old acquaintance and friendship which has been between us, that you will
pretermit, or forget nothing, which you shall judge profitable for us or our
children.


Theodidactus. It would be to long to prosecute every thing, but to the end I
might some what satisfy your request, I will recite those things that Children
are to be instructed by the examples of the Elders.
shall seem most profitable: S. August. says: Non magnum esse pascere ventres
cito morituros, sed magnum esse pascere animos in aeternum victuros: It is no
great thing to feed the bellies which shall die very quickly, but it is a
greater thing to feed the souls which shall live for ever. And Seneca says.
Science being distributed, receives increase, and it is no less godly to
teach the soul wisdom, then to give meat to the body, for, says he, great
care and diligence is bestowed about the provision of the body, but much more
ought to be bestowed about the soul and mind, by how much the diseases and
infections are more secret, grievous, and also more dangerous. S. Basil also
says: As parents have imparted to every one of their children alike, the
essence of their bodies, so by very good right, they ought to bestow and give
unto the^ equally and with like condition such things as do appertain to the
use of their life.


Theophilus. Seeing that the instruction of children is so needful and
necessary, the care of the magistrate ought not to be the least concerning the
same.


Theodidactus. You put me well in remembrance of the Magistrate, for The
necessary instruction of poutly:
Arist^tlo* says, That he ought chiefly to look and have spetiall regard to
the discipline of youth, for if that be negl^gted in Cities and great towns,
it brings great detriment and damage to the common wealth. Plato in his 4.
book de Legibus, is of the same mind, saying, We say that a man is a meek
and gentle creature: truly, if with his nature, he get also good and virtuous
disciplins, he is made a gentle and divine creature: But if he have not good
bringing up, he becomes the most fierce and cruel beast of all that are bred
upon the earth. Wherefore the magistrate should not light The best schol. Master
is to be chosen.
ly regard the necessary education of youth: but ought chiefly to use all
diligence and care, that the most virtuous and godly man be chosen, which
should have the government and education of youth: Therefore the Lord God has
especially commanded even to the Princes themselves, that they should not have
greater care of any thing, tha^ of y^ government and custody of youth. Nemo
enim sapiens nascitur, For no man is born wise: but it comes to pass in
process of time. For as a field albeit it be very fertile, without culture,
diligent dressing, and (...)ing cannot be feuitefull: no more can the mind
without doctrine. And Aristotle says, I^^e(...)s non potest esse sapiens, quia
prudentia requirit experientia^, quae indiget te^pore. A young man cannot be
wise, because wisdom requires experience, which needs time. As Seneca
says: Id sapit vnusquisque quod didicit. Every man perceives that which he
has learned.


Theophilus. It is very needful, that children first be instructed in true
religion and the sincere worshipping of God (as you say) and then exercised and
practiced in wisdom, the use of reason, and honesty of life.


Theodidactus. You understand my meaning very rightly. He shall hardly ever
Daily Experience proves this true.
prove a good man, a wise man, and a profitable member unto his coutrie and
common wealth, which has not been accustomed from his young and tender years
in the study of virtue and godliness by careful and diligent instruction. And
this is out of all controversy or doubt, y^ no teachers of manners and honesty
of life, also no instructors of godliness and true religion can be hoped for,
from thence, where there is no discipline and godly instructing of children.
Therefore the first and chiefest care is to beebestowed about the virtuous and
godly training up of youth, for because in y^ age the seeds either of virtue,
or vice once received, after wards abides forever. Also Isocrates teaches: y^
it is not possible y^ a young man have any great study or card of virtue, without
often and Isocrates.
profitable admonitio^s. And Plato says: No^ hactenus cognoui cui rei maiore^
diligentia^ quisque adhibere debeat, quam vt optimu^ filiu^ reddat. I have not
yet known wherabout a man ought to bestow greater diligence Plate.
the^ that he might make his son virtuous and godly. Therefore, if thou
lonest thy son (says he) have also the chiefest care for his virtuous
educatio^ Erasmus says, y^ father with desires to have his son not only like
him in words, feiture of face, and comely countenance the lineamentes and
proportion of the body) but also in inward gifts and qualities of the mind:
so soon as he shall have any aptnes to co^cciue learning, must diligently
provide to have him taught in good letters godly discipline, and the wholso^e
precepts of philosophy: wherefore, to the end thou may be a true and perfect
father, thou must bend all thy whole care and study for the virtuous trayning
up of thy son, without the which he shall* rese^ble thee nothing at al. And
therefore says Murmellius; it is the determinate will of God, that parents do
bring up their children honestly, y^ they restrayn then with due correction
from lice^tious liberty, and chiefly provide y^ eue^ from their infanry they
may be instructed in the principles of religion, y^ by the^ the glory of God
may shine abroad, and be set forth unto the posterities, the common The end of
instruction is this
wealth duly executed and the quiet and frie^dly society of me^ preserved. No
horse willingly obeys his rider except he be first made fame and gentle by
the dilligent and wise ha^dling of his breaker, so is their no wit, but y^ it
will prove fierce, cruel, and outrageous except it be famed brideled and subdued
by wholso^ precepts and good education.


Theophilus. You have manifestly showed by the authority of the scriptures,
that children are to be instructed, and have confirmed the same by examples,
similitudes and most cermine arguments, for the which we heartily thank^lyon.
And now I pray you show us, how, and at what age, you would hate children
instructed.


Theodidactus. Parents, so soon as their children are able to speak every
thing Children must be taught from their tender years.
plainly, should instruct the^ to call upon God by prayers and supplications ^ by
little and little make the^ understand the sum of the Gospel. And seeing that
children are a great part of Christ's church let parents and teachers know, that
there is no little charge committed unto them: wherefore* they ought with great
faithfulness and diligence see them A good similitude.
taught and governed. For Pla^ster being tempered, must be used and wrought
straight way, because it waxes stiff and dry very quickly: so youth must be
framed unto godliness, learning, and manners, before they wax great, rude, and
sturdie, and then cannot abide nor suffer the hand of the reformer and teacher.
The plaster though it wax hard and dry, may be beaten, watered, and easily
brought to the former temperature: but after that the wits of young men be once
infected and hardened with vices, they can hardely be reformed. Therefore
parents ought to be very careful, that they by and by instruct their tender
youth: for as the plaster or clay, whilst it is moist, may be wrought to what
fashion or form the woorkeman will have it. So the tender wits of young
Children are to be framed, which way the teacher shall think good Paulus Ver.
Paulus Vergerius says: The foundation of good life must be laid in the young
and tender age, and the mind framed unto virtue, whilst it is yet fresh and
apt to receive any kind of impression: For young age is very prone to sin,
and except it be restrained by the examples of the elders, it easily waxes
worse and worse. And Joan Murmellius says, children are to be exercised in
good manners Joan Mur.
and the studies of learning from their tender ^eeres. Jeremy says O how good
is it for a man, to bear the yoke of the Lord even from his youth up?
^^enorun^.



Theophilus. But to the end that we and our children might the better
understand you, show us by some other apt similitude, that children are to be
taught from their infancy.


Theodidactus. It shall be done, Even as the members of infantes so soon as they
be be borne, be carefully tended roled and swadled, that they grow not crooked
and deformed: so is it meet, that the manners of youth, be aptly framed and
fashioned in the beginning. Wherefore the poet Phocilides says.

Dum tener est natus gener^sos instrue mores.
Whilst that thy son is tender and young.
Teach him good manners, and also wisdom.
If they have once received into their tender minds from their infancy, good
and virtuous instructions, they will retain the same even unto their old age:
but if they be neglected in their youth, and so pass forth unto their riper
years, then with great difficul tie, grife and labor, will they suffer
themselves to be taught, Proverb.


Imo saepius, and oleum, and opera perditur.
Nay often labor will be lost,
With all thy charges and thy cost.
For as it is truly said in the proverb: Colla canum vetera, n^lunt attingere
Lora. The necks of the old dogs cannot abide the collers. And trees when
they begin to wax old and take A similibus.
deep roots, if after they be removed, do seldom yield either profit or
pleasure to the husbandman. The wild and rugged coltes, prove often the best
horses, if a man do bestow great pains and labor in their breaking. Even so
we must deal with fierce and courageous wits. Wherefore there is no better
nor surer way, than from their childhoode and tender years to have their
children in good and godly discipline trained and instructed.


Theophilus. The study the^ of godly parents ought to be this, that they have
their children and family well instructed from their first years.


Theodidactus. Nay rather the principal part of their pains and care ought
to be in this, that their youth be taught the true knowledge and woorship of
God even from their young and tender years, according to the saying of that
worthy man Ioannes Caesarens, written in these verses.

Si Christum been scis, satis est si caetera nescis.
Si Christum nescis, nil est quod caetera discis.
It is best to know Christ, though in other things thou fail,
For know all things without Christ, and what shall it prevail

Theophilus. Cannot then the knowledge of arts and sciences profit, without
the true knowledge of God.


Theodidactus A young man to be well seen, in all the sciences, it profits
nothing, if he be not a regenerate christian, endued with virtues and gentle
behavior: wherefore first he must be taught the knowledge of God and exercised
in the holy scriptures, out of the which he may learn the true woorship of God.


Theophilus. The common people now adays are not of that mind, for they think
A causa.
that they have done well with their children if they have taught them but a
little good manners, though they have no knowledge of God, or godliness at al.


Theodidactus. These me^ truly are far deceived: for the foundation of
godliness A causa.
must be laid in the beginning whilst he is yet a child, and ye he may know
himself how weak and evil he is by the pronenesse of his own nature: so y^ he
is not h^ng, neither can he or is able to do any thing without the help of
God, therefore he must call v^o^ him in true faith and y^ very often, and not to
trust y^ he ca^ bring any thing to pass without his assistaunce. Thus may you
easily see the great blindness of the (...)on people, that are altogether
deceived in their judgment and estimation of things. And again, that God is
almighty, whom they ought to fear: their creator and preserver, whom they
ought to honor, the giver ^f al good things, to whom they ought to render
continual thanks, for so great and innumerable benefits: that reconciled us
unto himself, when we were his enemies, by the death and passion of his dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ, for the which we ought to love him with all our
heart mind, soul and strength: these and such like documents must be carefully
inst^lled into their mind whilst they are yet children.


Theophilus. Without doubt it makes a great matter, in what kind of study,
this first age is exercised: For as Horace says: Quo semel est imbuta recens
seruabit odorem test a diu.

The new vessel will savor long,
of the first licour, if it be strong.

Theodidactus Therefore my friend Theophilus we must have great care and regard
y^ the vessels of these young minds be not seasoned with the vain opinions of
this world, but with the chief and principal points of the christian faith,
whereby they might be exercised in christian godliness, and learn to know Christ.
For what grief can be greater, then to have deformed children, altogether boyd
of virtue and godliness? Whereas if they would employ their chief^ care and
diligence to have them well and godly taught in their tender ye^^s, then should
they be sure to have them comely, virtuous and godly when they attain to
(...)re and riper years.


Theophilus. We must needs believe and persuide ourselves, that good education
is very necessary for children, but no we would we be glad to hear what
What things children are to be taught.
chiefly they are to be taught.


Theodidactus. The most holy things are first to be taught unto children, and
deeply engraven and settled in their minds, lest they be first infected with
any pestilent errors. And they must be instructed very often what difference
is between Hercules and Sardanapalus: the learned, and unlearned: a wise man
and a fool.


Theophilus. I pray you show us the difference.


Theodidactus. Although the Poets and Heathen writers, have fained that there
be many Gods, and have lied: yet our youth are to be admonished, that they
constantly believe that there is but one God, omnipotent, eternal,
incomprehensible without beginning, without ending, loving, gentle, pacient,
merciful: which knows all things, ^eeth all things, governs and disposes
all things: the which also is true, just, and terrible.


Theophilus. How shall our youth comprehend and believe that there is but one only
God?


Theodidactus. They may know it by three things chiefly. First by the
co^templation By 3. things may we know that there is a God, etc.
of natural things Secondly, by the holy scriptures, in the which God makes
himself manifest unto us. Thirdly, by the spirit of God drawing us.


Theophilus. What these things mean, I pray you declare more at large.


Theodidactus. Heaven, earth, and all things contained in them, as the Sun,
Moon, Stars, fire, water, fruits, fishes, fowls, and all the beasts of the
earth, do sufficiently teach that there is one God. And again, the children
must be taught of the Parents that they meditate and study in the law of God,
that therout they may learn the knowledge of the true God. And lastly, that
they submit them selves unto the spirit of truth, moving and drawing them.


Theophilus. The Creed of the holy Apostles, Nicaene, and Athanasius, does
teach that God is a Trinity. Are our youths to be taught the same? or not?


Theodidactus. Yea always, for albeit there is but one God, yet are there
three distinct persons, The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: And
therefore this must be taught faithfully unto children, least they become
Arrians or Anabaptists.


Theophilus. What should children be taught more?


Theodidactus. Also children ought to believe, that God loves them, sees
Children ought to believe these things chiefly.
them, cares for them, defends, delivers and hears them when they call
upon him in their perils and necessities, that he has given his Son for
them, that our only salvation is in Christ Jesus. And again, that there is one
Catholic Church, in the which, God does most lovingly pardon sins, to those
that do truly confess the same, are penitent, and repose their whole trust
and confidence in the merits of Christ his passion. Lastly they shall teach
their children constantly to believe the resurrection of the dead, in she
which, who so has done good, shall enjoy everlasting life, and they that have
done evil, shall be thrown into everlasting fire.


Theophilus. Good and provident husbandmen, before they sow their fields, The
examples of husbandmen.
with great choice do weigh and consider, what manner seed agrees best to
every field, For that, for the most part, they cast into several fields,
several grains, that by such means, they may receive the more fruitful
harvest and reaping. If husbandmen deal after this manner with their grounds,
much more ought godly Parents to weigh and consider, what manner seed ought to
be sown, as it were in the most convenient soil, in the minds of children:
that at length it may bring forth worthy men in godliness, and profitable to
the Church of Christ.


Theodidactus. Surely you reason very wisely, for the diligent care and labor
of the husbandmen, ought to move us to the diligent study of the bringing up
of our children, that we may perfectly know what manner seed we ought to sow
in the minds of children.


Theophilus. I pray you what manner seed shall it be?


Theodidactus. There is no seed more excellent, nor that of it self brings
forth What seed ought to be sown in the midst of children.
more plentiful, or more profitable fruits, than to cast into them, into the
inward and deep sense and judgment of their minds, both the name and
knowledge of the almighty God, that they may begin to love and reverence him,
from who^ they daily hear all things are given and bestowed upon them.
Wherefore as often as children do desire y^ the things might be given the^ which
they ask, (as tablets, jewels, costly garments, or any such thing) so often
should parents signify unto the^, that it is the reward and gift of God, that
in the very beginning they may learn to love him, who^ it is meet also to
fear, not with a servile fear, for that is nothing acceptable unto God:
neither does it profit any thing at all unto innocence and true virtue: But
with y^ fear, which with love is so conjoined, that it cannot be divided or
pulde away, of which it is written in the holy scriptures by the holy Ghost:
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of al wisdom. And truly, into whose
mind soever this fear and love has settled, when we say that the one with the
other is mixed and coupled, of such a one, it is never to be feared (whatsoever
he be) y^ he should utterly give over him self into the wicked ways and
trades of life: which thing chiefly must be attempted and labored in a child,
that this good root fructifiyng to blessed life, may very timely and firmly
be planted and fastened in his mind, whilst there is avoid place, not yet
possessed with any strange seeds, graffes or plants, by reason of the
newness of nature.


Theophilus. Why and for what causes ought children to be instructed after
this manner?


Theodidactus. Erasmus Roter. A man of very good judgment, sets down
four special causes. First says he it is very needful and requisite, The
causes why children ought to be instructed.
that these young and tender minds receive the seeds of godliness. Secondly,
that they both love and learn liberal sciences. Thirdly, that they be
instructed to the duties of honest and virtuous life. And fourthly in good
manners, without the which man is little regarded.


Theophilus For that it is certain, our children are rude, ignorant, and
naturally without any civility, I judge that they are to be taught as well
those things that apperteine to their bodies, as to their minds: Wherefore to
the end they may be of good and gentle behavior in the meetings, assemblies,
and common society of men, I pray you how shall they be taught and instructed?


Theodidactus. The father which desires y^ his son should not only be
adorned in the virtues of the mind, but also would have him well instructed in
an honest and civil manner of life, ought to observe diligently, that he be
carefully instructed and exercised in certain precepts of good manners.


Theophilus. What manner precepts be those? I pray you tell us.


Theodidactus. He shall teach his child after this manner: My son, as often
Precepts of good manners.
as any man speaks unto thee, to whom thou owe any reverence, settle thy
body in a comely order, put off thy hatte or cappe, let not thy countenance be
sad, heavy, sower, lowering, shameless, unstable, nor terrible: but tempered
with a cheerful modesty, thine eyes demure, always beholding him to whom
thou speak: thy feet joined together, not wagging or standing of one leg
(like a Goose,) not trifling with thy hands, nor biting in thy lips,
scratching thy head, or picking thine ears: In like manner, let thy
countenance, apparel, and iesture be so settled and framed in good order, that
the whole habit of thy body, may show forth an honest modesty, and a
towardness inclined unto virtue. Answer not foolishly nor rashly, neither let
thy mind be wandering in the mean season, but mark what he says, with whom
thou have to talk.


Theophilus. You shall find many fathers now a days, which know and confess,
that their children should be taught and instructed. But how they should do
it, they are altogether ignorant. Wherefore I pray you prescribe unto us an
order if it please you.


Theodidactus. We must deal with children, that they be taught by little and
little, like as when we would fill a narrow mouthed vessel: For if we power
in a great deal of licour at once, it runs over on every side, but if we
will power it in fair and softly, as it were through a fonnell, it will be
filled unto the brimme. Plantae quum modicis alantur aquis, crescunt: multis
ver^ suffocantur, eodem mod^ and animus, quum mediocri vegetatur labor, sub
nimio demersus opprimitur. Plants when they are moderately watered, grow and
increase the better, but with overmuch, they are choked: So the mind is
refreshed and comforted with moderate labor, but being drowned with overmuch,
is utterly overthrown. Therefore from continual pains, a certain Recreation
must be used.
pawsing must be given unto children: for we must remember that all our whole
life is divided into recreation and study or labor: So that we have not only
the day to wake, but also the night for sleep, not always war, but sometime
peace: not winter, but summer: not only working days, but holy days also, and
to speak at a word. Otium laboris est condimentum. Rest is the sauce of labor
and travel And this does not appear only in living creatures, but also in
things that have no life, as a Bow, Harp, Lute, or other instrument.


Theophilus. These things are no less wisely, than eligantly spoken: But yet
if you have any other Method of teaching, I pray you show it unto us.


Theodidactus. Children, in good Arts, and unto good and godly studies, are to
be drawn: some with praise, and through hope of preferment: others with small
gifts, and inticements: others are to be compelled Optimaratio iustituendi.
with threatenings and stripes. Pueri bonis artibus, ad bona rectaque studia
sunt inducendi: alij laud, and per spem honoris: alij munusculis blandicijsque
alliciendi; minis alij flagrisque cogendi erunt. But yet all these things must
be so duly considered, and by reason guided and moderated, that in ordering of
wits, Parents and Teachers do use great Art and skill, and beware that they
be neither too gentle, nor too severe. For as too much liberty and cockering
marreth a toward wit: so too sharp and overmuch chastisement, dulleth the
same, and quickly extinguisheth the little sparks of nature in children, which
while they fear all things, dare attempt nothing. And so comes it to pass,
that they always err, whilst that they fear, they shall fail in every
thing.


Theophilus. I understand, you have gathered together many places and
arguments, by the which Parents may learn their duties toward their children:
the which if you will co^municat to Amu. his wife, and the rest of their
friends, you shall therein do God good service, and pleasure us al very much.


Theodidactus. The chiefest duty of parents is, that they carefully provide
to De nobili officio parentum.
have their children taught in the word of God from their infancy, and to
instruct them in their duties toward God, and also toward themselves. And
seeing the darkness of man's mind is so wonderful, it is necessary, that parents
see their children taught in the Catechism (that is to say) in the true
doctrine of the law and Gospeh from their tender years: that the holy Ghost
may have a place and instrument, through the ministration of parents, whereby he
may infuse his gifts into the childrens minds: And thus shall they not only
move them with words, but also stir them up by their good examples: This is
their vocation, this is that duty that God requires of the^. Therefore they
shall indeudur themselves, that they live godly, in the sight of God and of
their children, that they be merciful, gentle and loving unto the poor, not to
care for this only, that they leave their children rich and wealthy when they
are at the point to die, but rather that they leave them to Gods providence:
for ye earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. And as David says: I have
been Psalm. 36. 37.
young and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor their
seed never begging bread.


Theophilus. I gather of your speech, that God does exact of Parences, that as
by words, so in like manner by godly examples they ought to instruct their
children. But what is there more required of good and godly Parents?


Theodidactus. It is the duty of a vigilant father or master to be always
occupied A good form ^^ teaching.
with his children or scholars, to spare no labor whereby he may make them
learned, he shall admonish them often: he must chide them, but not
contumeliously: he shall dissemble sometime, but warely: Let him pardon them
often, but yet beware he give the^ not too much liberty: Let him be angry, but
yet moderatly. Let him exhort them very often unto virtue, honesty, good
manners, integrity of life, and of the excellency of learning. Seneca says,
Imitantur facillime puerimores, quos in maioribus conspiciunt, Children most
easily immitate the conditions and behavior, that they see in their elders.


Theophilus. What is the property of a true Father?


Theodidactus That he be just, and also of courage to defend his own, that
he The description of a true father.
be liberal, in helping those that are good, chaste, a hater of filthiness, true
in word and deed, gentle, not suspicious, painful and diligent in providing
things necessary: that he love his children with all his heart, and be ready
to bestow his life for them, if they be godly, virtuous, and obeidient. He may
not be busy in other man's matters, but careful for the good government of
his own family. Et senum officium est (test Cicerone) iuuentutem, amicos, and
rempublicam Senum Officium.
consilio, ac prudentia iuuare. And it is the duty of old men (says Cicero)
to help their young men, friends, and common wealth with their counsel.


Theopilus. But forasmuch as there is mention made so often of a father of
house hold or family, some will peradventure marvel, why we did not define
this word in the beginning.


Theodidactus. You shall hear what Augustine says touching this definition.
Diffinitio patris familias.
Quilibet pater familias, quia superintendit domui, Epicopus dici potest Every
father of a family, may be called a Bishop, for because he has oversight and
charge of the house: For he that cares not diligently for his family to
ouersee, instruct, and teach them, is unworthy the name of a father, much
more unworthy the name of a Bishop.


Theophilus. What is one of the highest callinges and duties amongst mortal
men?


Theodidactus. Among men, there is none that has greater power or authority
from God, than fathers, for they are unto their children, princes Judges,
Bishops and teachers. Wherefore God has given children a great charge and
Commandment to honor their Parents.


Theophilus. If parents have received so great an authority from God, than is
it a great dignity to be exercised among children. What it is to be occupied
with children.



Theodidactus, You say very well: For to be amongst children is to be in the
midst of Angels. For their angels says Christ, does always behold the
face of my father which is in heaven. If all parents did understand this
excellency and dignity given unto them, with what pleasure and cheerfulness
would they teach their children.


Theophilus. With great pleasure no doubt. But tell us I pray you, what and how
Fathers should use 3 offices at once. Tobias. 4.
many offices ought the father to exercise at one time?


Theodidactus. Three especially. First of a godly Teacher, as we read by the
example of Toby, who daily taught his children the fear of God. And again,
he must exhort them to go to public prayers, and sermons: and when they
return home examine the^ diligently, what they have chiefly noted in the
sermon, that he may know whether they understand any thing or no Secondly he
must take upon him the office of a good Magistrate or just Judge so minister
correction Prou. 29. Eccl. 30.
in time: For if either sons, daughters, or servants do offend, he must
(according to Solomon's counsel) correct them with the rod: for if thou do
smite thy son with the rod, he shall not die thereof, and thou shall deliver
his soul from Hell. Thirdly, he must be a faithful father and gouerner of
household, yt can wisely as a good steward, order all things in the house,
provide for his family, that they may have wherewith to live: That he see every
one do their duties truly, as well children as servants, and that they may be
truly recompensed for their pains, with such like.


Theophilus. What is more godly, more excellent, or more profitable then these
fu^ctions and duties?


Theodidactus Fathers of families shall diligently and faithfully do their
duties An Antidote against Arrogancy.
co^mmaunded the^ of God, and above al things take heed, that they trust not
to their own wisdom, strength and policy, for y^ rashness and arrogancy
is not only incurable, but also damnable. But if thou be a Prince, a Bishop,
Judge, or father of family, be not ashamed A good prayer.
to fall down upon thy knees and say, O Lord God Almighty, thou y^ of thy
great mercy and loving kindness, have appointed unto me the office of a Prince,
Judge, Bishop, Pastor of the Church, Magistrate, father of family etc. I most
humbly beseech thee therewithal to govern, to teach and give me counsel,
wisdom, and power that I may be able truly and faithfully to execute and
perform the charge committed unto me, unto the honor and praise of thy most
holy name, and the profit of my Christian brethren. Amen.


Theophilus. Seeing that Parents ought not to put confidence in their own
wisdom and strength, for the government of their families, but rather desire
the assistance of God: much less ought they to instruct them after their own
fantasies.


Theodidactus. This pain and charge lies upon Parents, and for this cause
chiefly are they appointed of God, that they teach and bring up their Ephe, 6,
children, not according to their own fa^tasies, and as seems best to the^
selves, but after the co^ma^dement of God. Whereupon Paul says, Educate filtos
in eruditione and correptione domini. Bring up your children in instruction and
information of the Lord. Parents therefore ought to bring up their children
according to the will and word of God, and always bear in mind, that they do
not bring up and instruct their own, but Gods children, who has created them
for himself. And A good ca^eat unto the parents of our time.
how surely they keep and greatly esteem the things they have learned of
their elders, all men may judge for the most part. And this is a common saying
at this day: I will believe as my forefathers have believed, and I will do as
mine elders have taught me. Do not the Jews, Turks, Infidels and Papists,
under this pretense, defend ye errors which they have received from their
forefather the devil, who has so bleared their eyes, that they cannot see the
truth of the Gospel, shine it never so clear. Therefore let every father of
children, and master of family take heed what they teach their children,
households, and families.


Theophilus. Then, me think by your saying, it is very meet that parents
instruct their children not only with godly admonitions and wise councels, but
also with the examples of their own vnrebukable life.


Theodidactus. The father (how learned soever he be) as it is said in the
Proverb: A common f^ing very true;
Leonis catulum educauerit: shall bring up a Lions whelpe, except by his own
good manners and godly conversation, he point out the way, wherein he would have
his son walk. Corrumpet enim pupillam tutor, si praeter literas nil
christiano homine dignum in se oste^d^rit. For the Tutor shall utterly spoil
his pupil, if besides learning, he shall show him nothing in him self,
worthy for a Christian man.

For as there is a contagion of the bodies, so is there an infection of Mat.
18. Mark. 9.
the mind and soul, which is more to be regarded, because it is more
precious and of greater valiewe then the body. And our Savior Christ says:
Who so shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea. Here may we see what great account the Lord
God makes of children, and how dearly he loves them. Who would not therefore
make great account of this, to minister unto them, to whom the Angels do
service, which are ever in the presence of God? There ought nothing to seem
troublesome and grievous unto Parents, Scholemaisters, Pastors, and al other
that have charge of children and youths: if so it be, that such heavenly
Princes are not ashamed to take charge of them, and to be present with them.
And therefore Parents ought to take great heed, that they be not offensive to
their children either in word or deed.


Theophilus Ought not a godly father (to the end he might perform his duty
thoroughly) to be very careful that he nourish not up degenerat children?


Theodidactus. It is better to be without, and never to have any, than to have
wicked and ungodly children, I read of Epaminundas an excellent Of degenerate
children.
wise man, and of great authority in his time, which did never mary: and when
at a certain time one Pelopides a friend of his did reprove him therefore,
because he could leave behind him no sons in whom he might sow the seeds
of his virtues, therefore he provided very evil for his country: Epaminundas
smiling thereat answered: Take heed you provide not worse for the same, which
shall leave behind you so wicked a son: by with words this wiseman shows, y^
parents should fear nothing more, then y^ they should have and leave behind
the^ degenerate children either in body or mind. Erasmus says, A man's mind in
a beastly body, is a monster to be abhorred, as we read of Circes, that with
her poisons could transform men into Lions, Bears, and swine: Who could
abide says Augustine to be called the father of such a monster? But a beastly
mind in a man's body is more monstrous. And yet there are many (in their own
judgments, and in the judgment of common people very wise) which content
themselves with such issue, and think them no degenerat children (and that
very truly) for they digress not at all from the wicked manners and beastly
behavior of their A good lesson for parents.
parents, Ex malo enim Ouo nunquam nascitur bonus Coruus. For out of an evil
and corrupt egg, never comes a good bird. Therefore it is the duty of
godly Parents, to bring up their children not to riotousnesse, but to
modesty: not to spoil them with cockering, but to chasten them with due
correction if they offend: to praise them if they behave themselves well and
obediently: to move them to virtue with good exhortations and fair promises:
to fear them from vice, with rebukings, threatenings, and stripes if need
require: But above all things, let thy family whether they be children or
servants be taught to fear God, to love their neighbors, to hate no body, to
wish well unto all me^, and to do good to who^ they may, not to remember
injuries, but to do good for evil. Whosoever therefore has taken upon him the
office of governing others, let him take heed least he disdain or neglect the
same with being given to idleness and drowsines, or that he leave not ye flock
whereof he takes charge, to be spoiled with wolves, and the blood of the lost
sheep be required at his hands: but if any provide not for his own, and
special for the^ of 1. Timo. 5.
his household, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.


Theophilus. I think it is also the duty of Parents to exhort their children
unto liberality Hortandi sunt liberi ad eleemosynam. Prove. 11.
and giving of alms.


Theodidactus. You say very true, For the soul (says Solomon) which does
good, shall be filled. Christ gave bread to his Disciples, to be distributed unto
the people who gathered together, xij. baskets full of the fragments: by which
example our children are to be admonished, Mat. 14.
that the blessing of the Lord does always accompany alms, nesther are they
the poorer y^ give unto y^ poor with singlenes of heart: For we see manifestly
by the words of Solomon: Some man gives Prou. 11.
out his goods and is the richer: But the nigarde (having enough) will depart
from nothing, and yet is ever in poverty.


Theophilus. Is it not also the duty of Parents to provide learned and godly
Scholemaisters for their children?


Theodidactus. If every family had their Catones, there should be no such
need, Children must be committed to godly schoolmaisters.
neque Paedagogis, neque Praeceptoribus: but because now adays, the most
fathers of families are unlearned, and have neither that car^nor love toward
their children that Cato had, therefore they must provide the best learned and
most godly teachers for their children from their tender years, from who^ they
may draw first the knowledge of God, then the understanding of Arts, with the
increase of good manners. For says Plato, The beasts which shall turn us to
most profit, may not be without their heardes men: servants without their
masters: nor children without their Tutors and Teachers: for otherwise they
will become the most deceitful, fierce and cruel of all other beasts, and
therefore had need to be holden back as it were with many raines. And
Chrysostom teaches: Iuuentute^ 4. Timo. 2207.
esse feram quaeplurimis indiget magistris, institutoribus and paedagogis:
quare qui filium vult relinquere diuitem, bonum and benignum, illum doceat, aut
docericuret. That a young man is a wild beast that needs many masters,
instructers, and teachers: wherefore he that would leave his son good,
rich, and gentle, ought to teach him, or cause him to be taught from his
youth. Therefore godly parents shall rather suffer their children to be taught
and instructed of wise men abroad, then to be holden at home about tri^lling
matters which shall turn to no profit.


Theophilus May not a diligent Scholemaister teach his scholars two arts or
faculties together?


Theodidactus. I judge it very profitable to teach a child two arts together:
for A man must not bestow his whole study in one art only.
it is not to be feared y^ a childs wit shall be ouercharged any whit y^ more
with two teachers of diverse arts: for the pains of y^ child does nothing
increase, and yet his diligence is to be divided, so by that means his
irksomeness is taken away, for when he is weary of y^ one, he flies to y^
other, as it were to the part and rest of his labors.


Theophilus. What manner teacher shall a father choose for his son?


Theodidactus. A Father shall provide with all diligence for his son a godly
Ludouicus ^^ues Plinius
instructor, not infected with any notorious crimes. Pliny says, Trade filium
tuum praeceptori, a quo mores primum, mox eloquentiam discat, quae male sine
moribus discitur. Commit thy son to a master, of whom he may first learn
good manners, and after eloquence, which without manners is evil learned. And
that this is necessary and convenient, it may be proved by notable examples:
First, by the example of Philip king of Macedonia, which immediately after his
son Alexander An example of Phi. of Macedon.
was borne, sends to Aristotle the philosopher, writing after this manner,
Philippus Aristoteli salutem dicit. Eilium mihi genitum scito: quamobrem diis
habeo gratiam: non perinde quia notus est, quam pro eo quod nasci contigit
temporibus vitae tuae, spero enim fore vt educatus, eruditusque abs te, dignus
existat and nobis and reru^istarum successione. Phillip to Aristole sends
greting. Understand that a son is borne unto me, wherefore I heartily thank
the Gods, not so much for that he is borne, as that it has chanced him to
be borne while thou are living: for I trust it shall come to pass, that he
being well brought up and instructed by thy means, may prove worthy both for
us and in our life time, and the succession of these our goods and kingdoms
when we are dead, Seeing then this mighty Prince being an Heathen did make so
great account of the bringing up, and instructing of his son: ought not we
(which desire to be called Christians) to be much more diligent in the godly
trayning up of our children? Plato says: That the kings of the Persians did
always allow four teachers, sought out with great care and diligence, to
instruct those children, in whom they had any hope to succeed them in their
kingdom. The first, the truest, that might be found, which did ever teach
them that truth in a king was always most chiefly to be regarded and
maintained. The second, the iustest who ever taught them that justice and
politic government was to be preserved. The third, the temperatest, who
always set before them examples kings of the Persians.
of temperancie. The fourth, the valiantest, who ever showed them many things
concerning fortitude, heroical virtues, and the worthy Acts of Kings
Princes and Noble men, and he exhorted them diligently to follow the good
examples: and to eschew, hate, and utterly detest the tyrannous examples of
most shameful enterprises of the wicked. Thus every one advisedly and with
great diligence taught that, that to his charge and duty did appertain. And
as long as the Persians used this order of instructing and trayning up of their
young Princes: so long their kings were most famous and renowned in those
virtues, prudence, Justice, Temperance and Fortitude: At the least, with these
examples Parents ought too be admonished and stirred up unto the instructing
of their sons, if their hearts be not hardened a^ the Adamant. For those
parents which commit their children to be virtuously trained up, are a great
deal more worthy praise, then those that beget them: for they are only
thauthours of life, the other of good and blissful life.


Theophilus. Seeing that man's chief felicity in this life consists (as
appears) in the good educatio^ of youth. I beseech you let us hear those
things which I have seen you gather together heretofore, concerning the
utility, praise, and effect of good education.


Theodidactus. Although a certain towardnes of wit and goodness of nature The
efficacy of education.
are chiefly to be required to the perfect ordering of life: yet nevertheless
good and honest education and the discipline of parents has such force and
efficacy, that oftentimes it brings therewithal, that same very felicity
and happiness of man's life: and corrects and changes sometimes a wit and
nature that is not so toward. Pro. 22.
Therefore children as it were new vessels, are to be seasoned with good and
godly documents. And Solomon says: Teach a child in his youth what way he
should go, and he will not forget it when he is old. And Plato teaches that
there is great virtue and efficacy in the education of children, Educatio
eruditioque bona seruata, ingenia Plato in libro 4. de republic
quoque bona efficit: Bringing up and good teaching, well observed, makes a
good and toward wit. Again, he says, Qui rectam nacti sunt disciplina^, omnes
firm probi euadu^t: qui co^tra, improbi. Al those for the most part, which
have had good bringing up, prove honest and virtuous: the other oftentimes
prove lewd and wicked. Erasmus in a certain place reasons Erasmus.
very elegantly and in few words of the effect of discipline, saying, Efficax
est natura, sed hanc vincit efficatior institutio: nam diligens and sancta
educatio, fons omnis est virtutis. Nature is of great effect, but instruction
being more effectual, does far exceed the same: For diligent and godly
education is the fountain of al virtue. Also Isocrates the Philosopher greatly
commends the effect of good bringing Isocrates.
up in these words.

Omnes benignos reddet eruditio: bacillus est vitae egregia eruditio: hominis
opes pulcherrimae sunt literae. Good bringing up, it makes men, both gentle
and demure,
It is the stay of life to some, which lastingly does dure.
Of all the Jewels that man can get, sure learning is the best:
It wins friends, with wealth also, and brings quiet rest.
Deogines, roganti cuidam quid ex philosophia lucratus esset, respo^dit;
Deogines.
and si nihil aliud, vel hoc ipsum, quod ad omnem fortunam praeparatus sum. To
one demanding, what advantage he had by his Philosophy: though nothing else,
said he, yet at the least, I gain thus much, that I am ready prepared to
all manner fortune, be it good or bad. And to one asking Aristippus, what his
son should be the better for y^ learning Aristippus.
of Philosophy, answered, Et si nulla in re, vel in theatro, non sede bit
lapis super lapidem. And if in nothing else, yet that in the Theater, one stone
shall not sit upon an other.


Theophilus. You have proved by diverse arguments and good reasons, that the
nature of children, though it be not so pregnant, apt, and toward, as might be
wished, yet may it be helped, and very much altered by good education, and you
say, this is proved very often by the example of bruit beasts, but to me it
seems incredible, wherefore if you have any example, show it us I pray you?


Theodidactus. Lycurgus, the worthy lawmaker among the Lacedaemonians, on
Lycurgus gives an example of two whelps.
a time took two young whelps of one dam, and caused them to be brought up
the one from the other in contrary order and manner. For the one he made
gluttonnous, wanton, and idle, the other he accustomed to hunting, and to find
out by his sagacitie the footings of wild beasts. After wards when he had
gathered together the Lacedaemonians to see this sight) he said unto them: To
the attainment of virtue, Oyee Lacede, use, discipline, learning and the right
framing of life is very commodious, and much avails, which at this present
I am minded to make manifest unto you. Then brought he forth his two whelps,
and (causing a pot full What use can do in education, is here showed.
of pottage or sosse, and an Hare to be placed in the midst before the Dogs)
uncoupled them, and let them go. The one pursued the Hare with great
eagerness, the other hyed as fast to the pottage pot. But when the
Lacedaemonians could not yet conjecture what he meant thereby, nor wherefore he
brought forth into the midst of them, those two diverse natured and nurtured
Dogs: Both these (said Licurgus) had one damme, but yet being framed and
taught with unlike use, the one (ye see) is desirous to swill, glut, and fill
his paunch: the other applying the chase, is desirous to follow the footing of
wild beasts. I with that Parents would well weigh, and deeply consider this
example of Lycurgus, touching education in contrary manner: whereof also Plato
writes: That a child well and virtuously nurtured, is like to prove a divine
creature: but contrarily, if it be unhappily taught, and suffered to run at
liberty, then is he like to prove a most wicked and cruel beast.


Theophilus. What if the father shall see his childs wit, to be but dull,
blockish, and rude, shall he therefore leave of from his godly instructing?


Theodidactus. Not so, but he shall continue in his duty without wearines,
We must not leave of instructing for the stupiditie of wit.
with an assured trust and confidence, expecting Gods aid and blessing: For
look what seems impossible to men, the same is possible with God, which
rules and governs the hearts of all men, and knows how to deal with
them: And which loses the tongues Matthew. 9. Marci. 7. Number. 22.
of dumb beasts, yea, and that of the very Ass, and makes him to speak
after the manner of men. And even as there is almost no beast found, so
outrageous, fierce, and cruel, which with the careful handling, wisdom and
diligence of the breaker cannot be tamed and made gentle: So let us think no
wit of man (much less of a child) so rude, untoward, or past hope, which by
diligent instructing, and due handling, cannot be helped, and made gentle and
apt to receive whatsoever is taught. Albeit a certain Philosopher is not
altogether of this mind, which when he had two scholars, the one hard and
dull, but yet laborious and painful: the other very apt and ingenious, but
yet slouthful and lazy: Ambo, inquit, male pereatis, tu quum velis non potes,
tu vero quum possis, non vis. There shall neither of you both take profit (says
he) for when thou would thou can not, and when thou may, thou will not.


Theophilus. I gather now by your words, that to govern children well, asks
great skill and diligence, and chiefly by how much they are more noble in birth,
and of pregnant wit: by so much the more harder may they be brought unto the
true obedience of their Parents.


Theodidactus. You have said true, for to bring up children godly, is a very
hard thing, which may be seen in Samuel, and in other godly men. Wherefore
unto education, these three things chiefly are both profitable and necessary:
Preaching of the word of God: fervent prayer unto almighty God: And
discipline, or correction of manners. Pericles, In education, three things are
necessary.
as often as he was made Captain general of the wars, was wont to say to
himself, putting on his cloak or coat armor: Take heed Pericles, because
thou shall have authority, rule, and government, over young men, both Greeks
and Athenians: with these words this wise man did exhort himself, that he
should take upon him y^ soueraintie or lordship with great moderation, and by
these words he did also testify, that to govern youth well, did require
great wisdom and skill: Albeit in very deed, the vulgar people are of a
far contrary mind and opinion, which judge that there is nothing more
facile, light, or easy, than to govern a family: And therefore think it meet
and convenient to bestow more industry, pains, and diligence about their
Sheep, Swine, Horses, Hounds and other beasts, than about their children and
servants.


Theophilus. How and after what manner do you think these noble and excellent
After what manner forward wits should be used.
wits are to be ordered?


Theodidactus. Socrates sets down a very good order, saying: we must
deal with them, as we would do with those Horses, in which we see great
courage, good proportion of limbs, countenance and pace: if straight from
their tender years we watch them, handle them carefully, and break them
orderly, they are like to prove excellent for the Saddle, and very profitable
to serve their masters turn, in all his exploits and needful business,
either for profit or pleasure: But if they be neglected and suffered to run
over long, then they become wild, int^actable, and profitable to no good use
or purpose: And hereof it comes to pass, that those Coltes which by all
signs were like to prove very good and profitable, are spoiled by the
ignorance and unskillfulness of the breaker, which straight from good and comely
horses, are converted and changed into very Asses: For like as the earth, the
better it is and more fertile by nature, the sooner it will be spoiled and
ouergrowne with weeds, nettles, and briars, if it be not orderly tilled,
manured, and dressed: Even so the forwarder and nobler wits, except they be
the better ordered and instructed, will the sooner be inclined to wickedness, and
obdusked, and defaced with many vices. For noble wits if they be well and
rightly ordered and instructed, profit very much, but if they be neglected,
then are they a great plague unto the common wealth: For seeing they hold no
mean place, so do they not know how to observe any mediocritie. Quare
Paedagogus Themistoclis dicere solebat, nil mediocre futurus es O puer, nam aut
magnum bonum eris reipublicae, aut magnum malum. Wherefore the Tutor of
Themistocles was wont to say unto him, O my child, thou shall be no mean
thing, for either thou shall do great good, or great harm to thy common
wealth.


Theophilus. For that you have set before us so excellent and profitable
admonitions for the instructing of children, we heartily thank you. But yet,
for that Saint Paul would have children brought up both with learning and
correction in the Lord, therefore we heartily pray you, that you would impart
unto us those good lessons and counsels which you have collected touching the
chastizing and correcting of children.


Theodidactus. Our Lord God in whose hands we are all, which also loves
Children are to be corrected.
our children exceedingly, provides for them, and keeps them very
carefully, which of the children of his wrath, has made us the children of
God, and would have us to be the heirs of his celestial kingdom, through the
precious blood of his dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ: Even the same God I
say, would not only that our children and youths should be virtuously and
godly brought up and instructed: but would also have them continually preserved
and kept under the same godly discipline and correction. For correction is no
less necessary and profitable for children, than instruction: which these
places do clearly make manifest, that I will resite here in order, in the
which God does set forth his will unto us concerning this point. For Solomon
says: Noli subtrahere a Prou. 23.
puero tuo disciplinam, si enim percusseris eum virga, non morietur: tu virga
percuties eum and animam eius ab inferno liberabis. Withholde not correction
from thy child, for if thou smitest him with the rod, he shall not die
thereof: thou smitest him with the rod, but thou shall deliver his soul from
hell. This sentence does not only contain a precept, but also a most
comfortable promise. And again: Qui diligit Eccle. 30.
filium suum, assiduat illi flagella, vt laetetur in nouissimo suo. Who so
loves his child, holds him still under correction, that he may have joy of
him afterward. Tonde latera euis duminfans est, ne forte induretur and non
credat tibi. and erit tibi dolor animae. Hit him on the sides while he is yet
but a child, lest he wax stubborn, and give no more force of thee, and so
shall thou have heaviness of soul, read over this Chapter. And in an other
place Solomon says: Qui parcit virgae, odit filium suum: Pro. 13.
qui antem diligit illum, instantur erudit. He that spares the rod, hates
his son: But who so loves him, holds him ever in nurture.


Theophilus. Seeing that our Lord God, has commanded us so often and so
earnestly the chastening of our youths, marvel it is, that Parents, do so
spoil and mar their children with nice pampering, and too much cockering of
them: and chiefly seeing that they are stirred up unto the performance of their
duties with most loving and sweet promises. For to those Parents, which use
due correction unto their children, the Lord God does promise a sweet and
joyful life, yea, in their old age: which benefit cannot be obtained with gold,
silver, nor any other treasure though it be of never so great price or value.
But yet I beseech you in the mean time proceed to show unto us those godly
places, in the which correction is commanded.


Theodidactus. As, to those Parents (which carefully perform their duties in
correcting their children) there are promised great joys both of body and
mind: So they are compelled to bear and suffer great shame and grief of
mind, which without any regard of fatherly admonitions and corrections,
permit and suffer their child to grow up in all lewdness and disobedience,
as by these texts do appear. Puer qui demittitur voluntati suae, confundit
matrem suam, and rursu^: Pro. 10.
Confusio matris est de filio indisciplinato. The child that is suffered to
run after his own will, does shame his mother, and again: A rude and
unmannerly son, shall be a reproach to his mother. Dolor patris Eccle. 4.
filius stultus: melior est puer pauper and sapiens, rege seen and stulto:
filius sapie^s laetificat patrem, filius vero stultus, maestitia est matris
suae. A foolish son, is the sorrow of his father: better is a child poor
and wise, than a king old and foolish: A wise son is a great joy to his
father, but a foolish child, is the heaviness of his mother.


Theophilus. Without doubt these voices of God are greatly to be feared of
negligent parents: but yet would we be very glad to hear of you what the
ancient fathers have left unto their posterity concerning the chastening of
children.


Theodidactus. Saint Augustine teaches manifestly, that children and servants
Augustinus.
are to be corrected, when he says: Non putes te amare seruum, quu^ eum non
caedis: aut tunc amare filium, quum ei non das disciplinam: aut tunc diligere
natum tuum, cum eum non corripis, non ista est charitas, sed, languor. Think
not that thou love thy servant, when thou do not bear him, or that then
thou love thy son, when thou do not give him correction, for this is not
love, but languishing or fond feebleness, or rather foolish pity. And that
Epistle which he wrote unto Fabius, after this manner shows the same more
plainly. Dilecto filio Fab. Augustinus Episcopus salutem. Congratulor vna
tecum, quum^te prolem nuper habere cognoui. Sed deprecor vt dum tempus
adfuerit, castigare prolem non differas: nam sicut fructus non inuenitur in
arbore, in quo flos prius non apparuerit: sic and in seen viro, qui nisi a
patre tempore adolescentiae in bono nutritus fuerit, tempore senectutis fructus
bonorum operum non apparebunt: castiga igitur quem debes dum iunenescit. Vale.
Augustine Bishop, to his well-beloved son Fabius, sends greeting. I rejoice
with you, for that I understand you have a son. But I heartily pray you, as
time and occasion shall serve, that you do not spare to chastise him, For as
fruit is not to be found in that tree, on the which blossoms have not first
appeared: So in an old man, except he have been well governed of his
Parents in the time of his adolescencie, the fruits of good works shall never
appear in the time of his old age: chastise him therefore whom thou ought
to chastise, whiles he is yet young and tender. Fare you well. These be his
words. Also Saint Bernarde says: Non irasci vbi irascendum est: est peccatum
peccato Bernardus.
addere. Not to be angry, where a man ought to be angry: is to add one
sin unto an other. And S. Hierom says: Parents qui liberos suos non
corrigunt, sed sinunt eos pro sua libidine and arbitrio viuere, hi inquit
etiams^fuerint alioqui sancti and vitae inculpatae condemnabuntur. Those
Parents that do not correct their children, but suffer them too run at
their own will and pleasure, these men says he, albeit they shall be
otherwise Godly and of life unrebukable, yet shall they be condemned.

Hereunto does Innocentius assent and agree, where he says: Innoconti^^.
Parents si viderint Liberos peccare, and non castigant, non tantum Liberi,
verum and Parents a Deo condemnabuntur. If Parents shall see their children
offend, and do not correct them, not only the Children, but also the
Parents of GOD shall be condemned. Correction is necessary. Seneca.
The Ethnickes also in their writings do testify and teach, that the
chastening of Children is very requisite and necessary, as first it is
written in Seneca: Vitta transmittit ad posteros qui praesentibus culpis
ignoscit. He sends vices unto the postericies, which pardons present
faults and offenses. And again he says: Qui non vetat peccare cum possit,
iubet. He which does not prohibit and forbid to sin, when he is able,
commands the same. Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit. He hurts the good,
which favors the wicked. Aristotle says, Nulla Belua suae sponte aliquid
boni agit, neque pueri. There is no beast does any good thing by the own
accord, nature and inclination, no more do children, Therefore they are to
be admonished and compelled. Wherefore Parents ought to have a special care
and regard to their Children, for they are not such as do obey for A good
note.
shame, but for fear: not such as do abstain from wicked things, for
filthiness sake, but for punishment. Fear is to be driven into children,
correction and punishment is to be given, that being brought into some fear,
they may leave their wickedness.


Theophilus. Oh immortal GOD how truly have these Heathen men depaynted and
set forth the wicked and corrupt nature of Children, and truly it were
very good for us, if we had always fixed before our eyes this corrupt nature
of our children, but in the mean time what others have written, touching this
thing. let it not grieve you to recite unto us.


Theodidactus. Cicero says: they that think and judge, that it is meet to
Cicero.
pardon young men's faults, are much deceived: for because that age, is no let
or hinderance to good studies, if therefore sin cannot be remitted, then is
it to be punished. And Isocrates says: Isocrates.
The offenses of young men, are to be imputed to their elders, wherefore their
intemperancie and unruliness, ought to be restrained and holden back by the
honest instruction and sharp correction of their elders. I can show you also
that the heathen men have not only liked and allowed the chastisement and
correction of children by their writings, but also by their examples, as we
read in Valerius Maximus. Brutus par gloria Romulo* quia ille vrbem, hic
libertatem Romanam condidit, filios suos Tarquini dominationem Valeri. Max. de
Luci. Bru.
a se expulsam reducentes, summum imperium obtinens, comprehensos,
proquetribunali virgis caesos, and ad palum religatos securi percuti iussit:
exuit patrem, vt consule^ ageret, orbusque viuere quam publicae vindictae
deesse maluit* Brutus deserved no less glory than Romulus, for the one built
the City of Rome: and the other maynteyned the Roman liberty: For whereas
his sons sought by all means possible to restore Tarquine unto his former
dignity, (being before expulsed by Brutus their father) Brutus at that time
bearing the greatest Rule and Authority, caused them not only to be
apprehended: but also straight way after commanded that they should be beat
with rods in the place of judgment, and then bound fast unto a post and so
beheadded. Here heputteth of and depriueth himself of the natural affection of
a father, to the end he might perform the duty of a good Consul, and had
rather to live destitute of children, then that the common wealth should want
her public auengement.


Theophilus. A notable deed truly, and most beseeming so noble a Counselor.


Theodidactus, Surely the voices of all Godly men, and also of Ethnickes (as
you hear) do cry out every where, that Children ought to be chastened and
corrected: and experience it self does even ^. Reg. 12.
compel us to confess no less. It was commanded and straightly enjoined
unto Samuel of the Lord God, that he should daily pray for the people, when
he says: God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying
for you, but to show you the good and right way. The same was also commanded
unto Saint 1. Cor. 9.
Paul, which did confess that he should sin grievously, except he did
preach the Gospel, saying: Woe is it unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.
Even so shall negligent Parents confess, that they do grievously offend the
Majesty of GOD, if they do not carefully perform their duties in the
instructing and chastening of their Children, according to the commandment of
GOD. For God requires a diligent obedience of all men, the which he will
neither have deferred, nor violated. Neque enim liberos habere laudi est: sed
been pi^que institutos, cast gatosque habere, hoc demum omnibus laudandum est.
For to have Children is no great praise, but too have them virtuously and
Godly instructed and corrected, that in all men is highly to be commended.
Wherefore, the Godly Parent ought to bestow greater care in the garnishing of
the minds of his children with godliness and Virtue: then curiously too clothe
and pamper the Body with delicate daynties,. For if we bestow so great
labor, and Body and soula compared together.
toil to scrape together and purchase for our Children, the pleasures of this
earthie body, and Commodities of this short, frail and momentarie life, how
much rather ought we with greater care and diligence to seek after those
things which should feed the soul unto the Celestial and everlasting joy?
For there is no reason why the Body should be had in greater price then the
Soul, as the Garment should not be esteemed before the Body. For the Soul
and mind is heavenly: but the Body we have common with Beasts. By how
much therefore the Soul is more excellent then the body: So much the more
advisedly, and with greater consideration, ought we to provide for the same,
having always such respect unto him, as in whom nothing perishes, to whom it
is committed. But what sweeter, delectable, or more pleasant meat can there
be to the soul, then the knowledge of Mat. 4. Luke. 4.
the word of truth? For the soul of man lives by every word that
proceeds from the mouth of GOD. Wherefore if the father at any time hear his
Child or Servant rapping out any execrable curse, or detestable and
blasphemons oath, by and by he shall rebuke and correct him, that he may
understand that it is a foul fault and vicious thing and that he take
greater heed to his speech and tongue, upon the pain that thereof shall ensue.

And let him be admonished also of the Angels of GOD standing by him which
cannot endure nor abide such things: and if the Angels for such filthy and
Diabolical cursing and blasphemy be compelled to execute punishment of those
offenders how shall the Almighty GOD suffer the same, which sees and knows
all things? Therefore the most sharp and terrible wrath of God must always
be set before our eyes, least lightly and negligently we regard the instruction
of our youth.


Theophilus. You have most perfectly and playnelie showed us, that children
should not only be instructed, but also corrected, and you have confirmed
the same as well by the Scriptures, as by the Godly Fathers abuse their
authorities.
Fathers and Wise Ethnickes. But now a days we see and know among Fathers
of Families, not a few which too filthily and shamefully do abuse their power
and authority: and are in correcting their children, so ireful, fierce and
cruel, that they seem to use a tyrannical power, rather then that a man would
think they have any natural and fatherly affection toward them. Wherefore
we earnestly beseech you that you would briefly describe unto us, the manner
and order how to chastise them, least that when we would perform the duties
of good and natural Parents, we play the parts of unnatural wicked
Tyrants.


Theodidactus. For that hitherto (as is convenient) you have made so great
account of the holy Scriptures, and opinions of Godly men, and with so great
reverence embraced the same: Therefore here shall you hear not mine, but the
most Godly and wise answeares of Solomon, which says: Chasten thy Son
while Prou. 19.
there is yet hope: but let not thy soul be mooned to slay him, for great
wrath brings much harm. Again he says Punishments Ephe. 6.
are ordained for the scornful, and stripes for fools backs. And Saint
Paul says, Fathers provoke not your children to wrath. Ambrose.
And Saint Ambrose also teaches after what manner children are to be
corrected, saying, Leuiter castigatus exhibet reuerentiam castiganti, qui vero
crudeliter castigatur vel increpatur, nec increpationem suscipit nec salutem. A
child that is gently and easily corrected, yields reverence unto his
corrector* but who so is cruelly chastened and rebuked, does neither admit
rebuke, nor receive health nor amendment. And Seneca writes, Cordatorum esse
parentum, filios obiurgare citra Seneca.
contumeliam, and laudare citra adulationem: quamobrem curare debent parents
vt filii eos reuereantur ob vita seueritatem, and ament ob moru^ iocunditatem
castigandi quidem sunt filii: verum pattern, non tyrannice. It is the part of
wise parents, to rebuke their children without contumely, check or taunt, and
to praise them without flattery or adulation: wherefore parents ought to have
great regard unto this, that their children reverence them for their gravity
of life, and love them for the pleasantness of their manners, truly children
are to be corrected, but yet fatherly, not tyrannously.


Theophilus. Was there ever Parenes at any time, that have been moved with such
wrath, cruelty, or rather madness, which have exceeded the bounds and limits
of their function and duty in chastening, and have used themselves like
Tyrants: toward their children?


Theodidactus. Yea, in Titus Liuius is described at large, the tyranny of
Lucius The tirannie of L. M.
Manilius, the which against all equity and against the law of arms
commanded his son to be beheaded. We read also Axio the noble Roman
passed the bounds of his duty in correcting his son.
that Axio a Noble Roman, whipped and scourged his son in such cruel
manner that he dyed thereof presently? whom (through the indignation of which
cruel and horrible fact, when all people as well Parents as Children were
gathered together, and would have slain him with their penciels or bodkins
in the market place) Augustus Caesar with all his authority and power (though
very great) could scarscely save* and deliver out of their hands.

Wherefore Parents ought to train up their Children so warily and wisely, that
they beat them not like Asses: nor that they spoil them with cockeringe or
dallyinge with them like Whelps. But that they go directly in the midst
admonishing them, sometime with praises, sometime with severity, as the matter
and time does require and minister occasion unto them. For Parents must
observe and keep the golden mean, least that A mean in correcting is best.
they amase their children with too much threatening: discourage them with
their two sharp and bitter reproaches: or with their rigor and cruelty to kill
and murder them: which great faults and errors have so prevailed in those
which have supposed and judged that threatninges and stripes, are the best
means and readiest way to bring their children to virtue and learning: whereas
on the contrary part, it has put them very often in such sear, amazedness
and terror, that it could hardly be removed from them when they have attained
unto mature and riper years. For as too much drowth does wither, dry up, and
kill the young plants and graffes: even so does too sharp and austere
severity kill the hearts of young men. It were good for Parents to keep
always in remembrance those good lessons of Phocilides, which says: Filiis ne
difficilis sis tuis, sed mitis esto. Sine contumeliaplectito quibus praees. In
filium iram non bonus nutrit pater.

Be not too sharp to children dear, but use a modest check,
And over whom thou have a charge. without reproach correct:
Good parents will not foster up, their wrath against their child:
But rather seek their mendment with their counsels grave and mild.

Theophilus. Wherefore and with what purpose and intent ought children to be
corrected?


Theodidactus. Agustine, says, Nemo prudens punit, quia peccatum est, sed ne
peccetur. Augustine gives a reason with what intent children should be
corrected.
Res est enim optima non sceleratos omnino extirpare, sed scelera. There is no
wise man that corrects and punishes an offender, because of the offense
which is committed: but rather least he or any other should offend again by
the like example. For it is not always the best way, utterly to extirpe and
root out the malefactors and offenders, but rather their heinous and wicked
offenses, that they may be amended and brought to a better order of life.


Theophilus. What should the father think upon, while he is correcting his
child?


Theodidactus It shall greatly mittigate and assuage the rage and fury of What
the father should think upon whilist he is in correcting.
our minds, if we hear in memory this saying of Pliny, which after this
manner does admonish a sharp, severe, and cruel father, that he should not
deal with his son or handle him too sharply or rigorously, saying: Et illum
adolenscentulum esse, and te fuisse cogita: atque in hoc quod pater es,
enitere, vt memineris te hominem, and hominis patrem. Way and consider this,
that he is a young man, and also that thou have been one thy self. And
further in as much as thou art a father, call to thy mind that thou art now
a man, and the Father of one that may be a man hereafter.


Theophilus. A very excellent and wise way surely to pacify and quiet the
furious and raging minds of Parents, when they shall correct their children.
And in my judgment there is no man that could have given more wholesome or
better counsel concerning this matter, wherefore it is worthy of all men to
be followed. Not withstanding I my self have known sum furious parents a
broad, which have used to strike and buffet their children about the face and
head, and to lay upon them like Malt sackes with cudgels, staves, forke or
fire shouel, or whatsoever came nighest their hands, yea, and very often also,
have cast them on the ground, and spurned and kicked them like dogs, which
manner of correcting I judge is utterly to be detested and abhorred, neither do
I think it lawful by any means that they should use them after such order.
Wherefore I pray you tell us, how should they be admonished and persuaded,
that hereafter they do not use and handle their children and servants after
such raging, furious, and beastly manner.


Theodidactus. First and chiefly, we must show them and set before them, the
most pure and sacred word GOD, for these men peradventure (being so waywarde,
fierce, and cruel as you have said) would utterly contemn and despise men's
reasons, wisdom and counsel.

But y^ Lord our God of his unspeakable good will and favor toward us,
does so dearly love parents, and so tenderly provide for their children, that
he does not only command them to correct their children, but being very
desirous and willing to cure and remedy such rage and fury, deeth also show
unto us, what instrument is meet, and what we ought to use and exercise in
correcting.


Theophilus. With what matter or instrument I pray you ought children to be
corrected?


Theodidactus, The Lord our God by Solomon does teach every where that Prouer.
13. Children should be corrected with the rod.
children should be beat with the rod, saying after this manner, Withholde
not correction from thy Child, for if thou shalt smite him with the rod,
he shall not die thereof: Thou smitest him with the rod, but thou shall
deliver his soul from Hell.

And again, who so spares the rod, marreth his child. Lo here, not that
wise Solonion, does teach that children ought to be corrected with the
rod, but the Lord our God himself which has spoken by the mouths of his
holy prophets, whose word abides for ever.


Theophilus. If these foolish, harebrayned, and rash Parents would hear and
willingly obey and follow this little admonition, then should they not have,
so many deaf, blockishe, foolish, bleere eyed, and also oftentimes mad
children as they have: which discommodities we see come very often, by the
continual and unreasonable beating and buffetting of them about the heads, as
I said before.


Theodidactus. You gather and apply all things very rightly. For if Parents
would not beat their young and tender children with their hard fistes upon
their ears and heads, but in steed thereof, and of their Cudgels, Staves,
and such like, (according to the counsel of Solomon) would take and use the
rod, then should they have wherein they might rejoice and become the parents
of wise and worthy children, whereas contrary wise they are compelled will
they, nill they, to have the government of deaf lumpishe, ignorant and foolish
children all the days of their life, to their great sorrow and grief very
often.


Theophilus Whereas I have now begun to move you with my questions I know
not yet where or how to make an end, seeing therefore you have alredie showed
unto us the instrument where with children should be corrected and admonished
that they should not be beaten about the heads. Now I beseech you show us,
where and on what part of the body they should be beaten.


Theodidactus. I teach nothing here, neither would I persuade or council
That part of the body which is to be beaten.
you, that you should follow mine opinion and mind in this thing, but rather
the godly opinion of the holy Ghost, which by Solomon speaks after this
manner: Tonde latera eius dum infans est: Hit him upon the sides whilst he is
yet a child etc. Behold here the clemency and providence, behold here I
say the exceeding great mercy of God, which also has vouchsafed to show and
manifest unto us that part of the body, which he would have beaten* least at
any time either we our selves, or our little children should sustain any
loss, peril or displeasure by means of our correction.


Theophilus Wherefore are parents compelled to be so diligent, careful and
provident, in the instructing and chastening of their children, and what is the
end of this so great labor and travail?


Theodidactus. They shall instruct, nurture and chasten their children, not to
the end that they might set them forward and promote them to The end wh^e
children should be corrected.
worship and great honors, or that they should excel others in humane
knowledge, wisdom and science, or that they should gather together and heap
up great riches and treasure for them: But they ought chiefly to respect this,
that they may be made virtuous and godly. And this end and manner of training
up of youth is most profitable and excellent of all others: wherein all godly
parents ought to have their chiefest pleasure and felicity. For Parents over
and besides that natural love and affection which nature has ingraffed into
al living creatures toward their young ones, and besides those sorrows, and
griefs, which they often sustain in their bringing up, yet ought they to have
their chiefest care for their godly education (as we have often said) And
this let them do, not with angry, bitter, and raging mind toward them, when
they After what manner children ought to be chastened. A good note.
find them not so apt and forward as they wish, least they begin to refuse,
hate, and detest instruction, and virtuous discipline, before they shall feel
the profit and commodity thereof. Let them temper and bridle the austeritie,
sharpness and rage of their authority and power, with such affection and
desire of lenity, gentleness and mildness, and so rebuke and chide the
offender, that they had rather to have them corrected and amended, then
punished or tormented: and let them rather endeavor to withold and draw them
from future faults and offenses, than rigorously to execute punishment of
their faults presently committed.


Theophilus. The greatest part of the welfare and prosperity of children,
does depend (as far as I perceive) of the good instruction and diligent and
wise chastening of parents.


Theodidactus. It is very true: for the Lord our God has commanded that
children should honor and obey their parents, and in the same commandment
also he has given a charge unto the Parents, that they should perform and
do their duty (that is to say) that they teach and instruct their children in
the true knowledge of God, and bring them up in the fear of the Lord. For how
shall the children perform their duties toward their Parents, if that
parents shall first neglect their duties toward their children? And albeit
the sloth and negligence of parents does not excuse the wickedness and
impiety of children before God, notwithstanding parents owe this duty to
their children, that they provide for them not only corporal food for their
bodies: but much rather spiritual food and nourishment for their souls, if
otherwise they covet and desire to have them saved.


Theophilus. But if after all wholesome admonitions and councels, instructions
and chastisements, they remain stubborn and disdaineful children, and do
receive no godly admonition, nor will suffer nor abide any correction, what do
you think is meet to be done with such, and how should a man deal them?


Theodidactus. Such stubborn, wicked, and rebellious wretches are first to be
dispoiled, and deprived of all their possessions and inheritance, and that by
the authority of the laws written.


Theophilus. How many causes be there set down, of ingratitude, contumacie,
stubbornness and disobedience, for which a father may disherite his son?


Theodidactus. There are setdowne and regestred fourteen special causes.


Theophilus. Declare them unto us I pray you, for (by the grace of God) it may
be, that in the hearing of them, it shall drive a greater fear and terror into
them.


Theodidactus. 1 Prima si filius parentibus manus intulerit. The first is, if
the son Inglossa cap* quinta vallis. Obquae exhaeredari posset filius.
shall lay violent hands upon his Parents. 2 Si grauem iniuriam eis fecerit. If
he shall work them any villainy, injury, or wrong. 3 Si contumaciter eos
accusauerit, de causa quae non est aduersus principem, vel rempublicam. If
stubbornly and disobediently he shall accuse them of a matter or cause, that is
not against the Prince or common wealth. 4 Si cum maleficis versatur. If he do
haunt, or be conversant among wicked persons, drunkardes, whoremongers,
thieves, murderers, and such like. 5 Si maledicus efficiatur. If he become a
cursed speaker, railer, and blasphemer. 6 Si parentum vitae insidiatus fuerit.
If he shall lie in wait to slay and murder his father. 7 Si vxori vel
concubinae eius se immiscuerit. If he shall meddle or Deuteronomy. 22.
have to do with his fathers wife or concubine. 8 Si exdilapidatione filij
grave dispendium parents sustulerint. If the Parents shall sustain great
damage, loss, and hinderaunce by means of the riotous and wastful spending
of their son. 9 Si pro persona vel debito eius in quantum potest, fideiubere
noluerit. If he will not undertake and become surety for his fathers own
person, or his debt, to the uttermost of his power. 10 Si prohibuit eos facere
testamentum. If he shall prohibit or let them to make their will and Testament.
11 Si contra voluntatem parentum inter arenarios and mimos perseuerauerit, quum
pater non fuerit illius professionis. If against his fathers mind and will, he
keep company, with Ruffians, quarrellers, foolish Minstrelles and such like,
when his father is not of the same profession. 12 Si filia luxuriosam vita^
egerit, quu^ parents vellent eam pro posse dotare: nisi neglexerint eam
maritare vsque ad 25. annos. If the daughter shall lead aluxurious, wanton, and
riotous life, when her Parents are willing to bestow and set her forth in
marriage, to the uttermost of their ability and power: except they shall defer
her marriage until she be 25. years old. 13 Si parentibus furiosis debitam
curam non impenderit. If they will not give due regard, and reverence to their
Parents, although they be furious and way ward. 14 Si patre^ captu^ de
carcere deducere neglexerit. Hae, inquam, sunt causae cur parents liberos suos
haereditate excludere possint. If he shall neglect, contemn, and have no
regard or care to ransom and deliver his father out of prison, being taken by
enemies.


These (I say) be the causes, wherefore parents may disherite their children.


Theophilus. But if they be more wicked and stubborn, than that these
corrections and punishments can bridle and hold them under, or rather after
all these good and wholesome admonitions and chastisementes they continue
rebellious, what do you think is to be done then?


Theodidactus. The same, that the Lord has commanded by Moses his A
stubborn and disobedient child to be sto^^ed to death.
servant, saying after this manner: Si genuerit homo filium contumacem, qui non
audiat patris aut matris imperium, and coercitus obedire contempserit,
lapidibus eum obruet populus. And if a man have a son that is stubborn and
disobedient, which disdayneth the voice and Deuteronomy. 21.
commandment of his father and mother, and when he is chastened, will not
hearken unto them, but contemns it, all the people shall stone him with
stones unto death.


Theophilus. A hard sentence without doubt, and of al stubborn and rebellious
children, deeply to be weighed and considered.


Theodidactus. Truly, it is an hard and fearful sentence, wherout all young
men may gather, as is meet for them, how great the wrath of God is against the
sin of disobedience. Neither does the law of God only hate and detest such
stubborn and rebellious children: But also the very Ethnickes would have them
cast off from their parents, and to be utterly dispossessed, which Aristippus
teaches by an excellent Apophthegme, after this manner: A certain man accusing
him for that he so cast off his son and contemned him, as though he had
never begot him: he says, Do we not cast Degenerate children are to be
cast of and forsaken.
away from us, our spittle, lice, and such like, as things unprofitable, which
nevertheless are engendered and bread even out of our own selves? His mind
and judgment is, that they are not to be accounted for children, which
otherwise have nothing in them, whereby they might commend them selves to the
love and effection of their Parents, but only that they be by them begotten.
So the old father Menedemus, to his son Clinia, (brought in by the Poet
Terence, in his third Comedy) speaks after this manner: Ego te meum dici
tantisper volo, dum id quod te dignum est facias.

So long and no longer, shall thou be my son,
As thou behauest thy self with discretion.
Thus did the very Heathen men (which had not the law of God to direct them as
we have) handle their degenerate and disobedient children, whom God would
have also to be an example unto us.


Theophilus Thus of your fatherly benevolence, have you taught and diligently
instructed us hethertoo, how good, how profitable, and necessary it is to
instruct and chasten youth in virtue and godliness. From whence as out of a
most sweet and pure fountain, al other virtues do flow.

Now (if it seem good unto your curtisie) we would be right glad and very
willing to hear and learn of you, what a Sea of evils, damages, calamities,
and perils, this negligent and corrupt instruction of Parents does bring with
it.


Theodidactus. Concerning this negligent instruction of children, there are so
many weighty and grave sayings, and such horrible and fearful examples
every where, as well in the holy scriptures, as also in other godly Authors,
and Heathen writers, that if I should go about to show and declare unto you
every thing that I have read and noted, touching the same, a whole day would
not suffice. But because the thing is so reasonable, which you do demand of
me, I will satisfy your request, what I may conveniently.


Theophilus. If opportunity and leisure do not serve, to show us every thing
as you wish, yet at the least, you will vouchsafe we pray you, to recite such
things as may seem more sharply to admonish, and as it were, compel
negligent Parents, that (at the last, this filthy drowsinesse, and pernicious
negligence being shaken off,) they may more diligently and carefully discharge
their duties.


Theodidactus. Men might easily be drawn to the duties of their vocation and
Against negligent parents.
calling, if they were thoroughly persuaded, and would believe that their
children are the gift of God, and that they are the pledges of God him self,
neither needed they any compulsion in this matter: But rather very willingly,
and of their own accords, would they credit and believe, that these pledges of
God, ought with great care and diligence to be preserved, instructed, and
corrected: For it they shall be neglected, spoiled, or lost by their means and
sufferaunce, then shall they be required at the hands of the Treasuror and
keeper. Now for example sake, a King or Emperor, has his Treasurer, or some
one of his Privy Chamber, to whom he commits many things of great charge
and value, to be kept, preserved, and diligently looked unto. Suppose and
think it to be a precious Crown, most worthy for a Prince, the Imperial
Scepter, Letters Pattentes, precious Stones, Pearls, Jewels, and other rich
and costly Robes, which are most commonly wont to be in kings and Emperors
palaces. I say, He that shall carefully keep, and diligently preserve these
things, according to the trust in him Children (...) the pledges of God.
reposed, shall not only of the King or Emperor be esteemed and greatly
beloved, but also at the last, promoted unto great dignity, and woorthely
rewarded. But if this Chamberlayne or Treasurer shall neglect his duty and
office, or spoil and lose those most precious Jewels and ornaments of the King
or Emperor. Then shall he not only lose his office, but also be deprived and
dispoiled of all his possessions, goods, and Cattels, and besides, that suffer
most extreme punishment. Even so our Lord God, which is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, after that he has created our children, and with his own
precious blood has redeemed them, and committed them to our trust and keeping,
to be carefully governed, and diligently instructed. So that if the
Chamberlayne Argumentu^ a simile.
or a Treasurer of a King or Emperor, for the loss of the Crown or Jewel
(which is only bought with Gold or silver) be so sharply and severely punished?
What shall become of those Parents, which ^o negligently regard the gifts and
pledges of God (which cost neither silver nor Gold, but were purchased and
bought with the inestimable and that most precious blood of his dearly beloved
Son our Savior Jesus Christ) and with too much liberty suffer them to be
spoiled? Surely such Parents ought to fear, exspect and look for none other
punishments, than everlasting torments. Wherefore, or what was the cause that
Heli the high Priest in Israel suffered punishment? But only for that his
children 1. Regum. 2. 4.
had so exceedingly offended the Majesty of God: In this example, Parents
ought to look and learn the fear of God, and shake of this sluggishnesse,
sloth and negligence in trayning up their children. For it is the promise of
God, that the Angels of children do always behold the face of God our Father
which is in heaven.


Theophilus. If children be so precious and highly esteemed of God, that he
thinks them worthy to be preserved of Angels, and that they be the
pledges of God, why should we not care for them, and instruct them diligently?


Theodidactus. Forasmuch as the whole state and prosperity of man's life does
altogether depend and stay upon the godly educatio^ of children: why should the
right ordring and governing of children be so neglected? which if it be
negligently and carelessly looked unto, does not only bring great misery,
plagues, and destruction, unto the Parents them selves, but also to the common
society, and neighborhood of all men. Wherefore this one thing ought greatly
to stir and move us, (that is to say) the dignity of children, with the
which God vouchethsafe to adorn and garnish them.


Theophilus. But yet this one thing rests, from whence, I pray you, do you
think, this negligence of Parents, and this corruption of children does
chiefly spring and grow? and that they consume and spend their force and
strength in the perpetrating and committing all kind of wickedness?


Theodidactus. Too much cockering and pampering of foolish Parents, I
Cockering is the original cause of negligent instruction.
indge to be the original cause of this so great a mischief. For that too
much cockering and sufferaunce, makes their minds (as a certain wise man
says) so wanton, nice, and tender, that within a while, they become apt to no
goodness, and sildome prove honest men, or fit members for their country and
common wealth.


Theophilus. You have said as true as may be: But yet all this while cannot I
understand nor perceive, that Parents, which both by the laws of God and
man, do owe such love, godly instruction, chastisement, and all other duties
of godliness and benevolence to their children, how they can give them selves
to such folly, or rather madness, that they utterly spoil and destroy their
children, with that too much cockering and wantonness?


Theodidactus. Seeing you cannot perceive how Parents spoil their children,
^ere the absurd excuse of Parents is re^^^yed.
I will open and make the matter more manifest unto you. When they are
admonished of their duty, they will answer, and say, that their child can
perceive as yet very little or nothing by reason of his age, and they say
truly: No more can the Spaniell or blood Hounde, the Horse or Mule understand
what they ought to do, nevertheless they learn to go, to come, to follow,
to carry, to recarrie, to do, and to leave undone, to watch, to find out,
and such like things, which they understand not: Also, neither does the wood
or stone understand, that it is a foolish and absurd thing, toward the
building and framing of an house: but after it is hewn, fashioned, and framed
of the Artificer and work master, by and by he understands where unto
each thing shall serve in his due place and time. Now, forasmuch as these
things which lack reason, can be taught and framed to so many good purposes:
How much more a reasonable creature, which is created to the Image of God?
Surely I wish you should weigh and consider this with your self: if other
men's children perceive and understand very many things. Why should not
yours understand some things in the ways of virtue and godliness:
Undoubtedly, if you will not teach them, but still pamper them with too much
cockering and delicate niceness, you shall answer and bear the sins and
offenses of your children. And how sharply and severely the Lord God
executes punishment for the contemptuous bringing up of children, only Heli
the high Priest with his sons, may be for an example (as i^ said before)
which miserably finished their lives. He, for that he spoiled his children
with too much liberty: they, for because they would not hearken to, nor obey
the counsels and admonitions of their father, though very gentle, light and
easy.


Theophilus. Did Heli then the high Priest in Israel, offend the Majesty of
God, being so worthy a man, with too much cockering of his children? And yet
I remember, he did reprove them very often.


Theodidactus. The voice of God testifies otherwise, which sounds after 1.
Regum. 3.
this manner: I have told him that I will judge his house for ever: because
his children did curse God, and followed Beliall, and he would not chasten and
correct them: Therefore have I sworn unto the house of Heli, that the
wickedness of Helies house, shall not be purged with sacrifice and burnt
offringes, for ever.


Theophilus. Verily this voice of God ought greatly to be feared of all
Parents: For if the iniquity of Heli so worthy a man, and of so high
calling, could not be purged for ever, which notwithstanding sometimes
corrected his sons, and seemed willing to cleanse and purge their sins and
offenses with certain sacrifices and oblations. What shall be done with them?
which scarcely at any time have chastened their children neither in word nor
deed, neither do they once believe that God will execute punishment of so
great wickedness, it is so far from them, that they are willing to bewail
and lament, this so great a fault, with true sorrow and unfeigned tears.


Theodidactus. We deny not, that Heli the Priest reproved his sons doing
Heli suffers the punishment of his negligent instruction.
wickedly, but yet he reproved them not earnestly and sharply, but lightly
and tenderly, as many Parents use to do now adays (the more to be lamented.)
And therefore, that good and godly father, suffered pain for the iniquity of
his sons, by which example, such negligent Parents ought with good cause to
be moved, or if this do not move them, yet me thinks this saying of Paul
should rowse them up, and shake of all their drowsinesse, which says: Si
quis suorum and maxim domesticorum non Paul.
agit curam, fidem denegauit, and est deterior infideli. If a man have no care
of his own, and specially those of his own household and family, he has
denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.


Theophilus. If you have any more such like examples, by the which you might
sti^ up and move those negligent Parents from their fluggishnesse, bring them
forth I pray you.


Theodidactus. I have many other examples, of which you shall hear this
Cicero. Verr^.
one, because it is worthy the noting. Marcus Tul. Cicero, in the Oration
which he made against Verres, in his first book, among many other things
which he objected unto him by way of reproach, this is one and the chiefest,
that he had so trained up his son, that he had never seen, chaste,
shamefast, or sober feast or banquet, for the space of three years togethers,
but was ever conuersaunt and in company with wanton Harlottes, and unchaste
women, and with riotous Kuffians, and intemperate men, so that if he had any
desire to be good, yet could he not escape from them either wiser or better.
By means whereof says he, thou have not only wrought great injury to thy
son, but also to the common wealth: Susceperas Negligent parents are
injurious to their country and commonwealth.
enim liberos non solum tibi, sed etiam patriae. For thou have begot children
not only for thy self, but also for thy country. Which should not only be to
thy self a joy and pleasure, but also profitable and commodious afterward
unto the common wealth. And thou ought to instruct and train them up in the
knowledge and understanding of grave and weighty matters, as the quiet
government of people in public assemblies, of Civil government in Cities,
Towns, and other affairs of the common wealth, that love and neighbored might
be maintained, and not after their own lewd lusts and wantonness, and
licentious liberty. Thus much of Cicero to Verres, touching his son. A very
Christian saying of an Heathen man, and meet for all men to be set on the
outward posts of their doors, in their bed Chambers and closets, or rather
after the manner of the Hebrews, that all fathers and mothers should have them
on their philacteries, and skirtes of their vestures, and to be written in
golden letters.


Theophilus. I do not so much marvel, that such corrupters of youth were found
amongst the Heathen which lived without the light of the Gospel, and true
knowledge of God: but that this chances very often amongst those men, which
boast themselves to be good and perfect Christians, this is much rather to be
marvelled at, and by no means to be suffered. At this day, as it is manifest
to all men, our children are brought up with Fathers' and mothers spoi^: their
owns children.
such liberty and boldness, that a man cannot sufficiently bewail the same
with abundance of tears: here is no shame, here is no reverence, no regard
of duty, parents utterly spoil their children, with cockering and
wantonness, and seeks to refrain them with no fear or correction. Mothers
take no regard, no care of their daughters, but wink at their faults, suffer
them to rome abroad, seek their amendment by no mild nor moderate correction,
neither do they persuade them unto sobriety, mildness, nor modesty, with
their wholesome admonitions and motherly counsels. We have greater care, and
will take more pains a great deal about any thing else, then about the godly
education of our children. I am persuaded that God is greatly offended with us,
even for this one fault, that we deal so negligently with our children, and
cast the raines of al liberty and looseness into their own necks after this
manner: For as we would have them prove when they shall be men and women, so
must we deal with them and instruct them in their green and tender years.
So that whereas many things fall out amongst us christians so untowardly and
peruersly touching the disobedience of our youth now adays, I judge one
chief cause to come, grow and proceed from this, that there are so few which
take such pains and diligent care as they ought to do, for their godly and
virtuous training up, And albeit better is to be hoped for, yet certainly
this is still to be expected and looked for from Children, that they will
grow worse and worse, except Godly instruction be joined with moderate
correction.


Theodidactus. Without all doubt a horrible punishment remains to such
Parents, which so negligently contemn and despise their own natural
children, besides that it is a very great negligence, or rather a horrible
mischief, either to cast the bridle into the necks of young men, or to
corrupt and spoil them with wicked instruction or their own lewd and
naughty examples. Nevertheless how common these things are in man's life, it
is too manifest: when Parents or Teachers are either Epicures, or otherwise
lewd and licentious livers, and do not exercise their children and servants
unto the knowledge and fear of God, but oftentimes do nourish and confirm
them in wicked, erroneous and detestable opinions: these mischiefs are to be
punished no doubt, as God himself says: Contemnentes me, reddam contemptos, I
will make my contemners, contemned and despised.


Theophilus. O twice, yea thrice happy are those parents, which do not
vainly and negligently here these and such like threatenings, but proceed and
go forward I pray to recite other places, wherein God does threate^, lither
slouthful and negligent parents.


Theodidactus. Fathers and masters which withholde their children and families
from hearing and learning the word of God, by commanding and appointing them
in the mean time some other business, or else by reason of their ignorance or
impiety have no care or regard, to be taught and trained up in true
godliness, are not only wicked and injurious to themselves, but also to their
whole families, so that such shall receive double the greater condenination.
It is set down in the Decalogue or ten Commandments, That children would
honor their Parents, but with what face dare that Father exact of his child
the honor commanded of God in the second Table, when as he himself does not
perform his own duty, which in the first Table of the Commandments is
required of him, touching the due honor of God, and the sanctifying of the
Sabbath day? Children are not borne of their parents at adventure, but they be
the gift and blessing of God. The Scripture says, God blessed them and said:
Crescite and multiplicamini. Increase and multiply. And the Psalmograph says:
Filii tui sicut nouellae Children are the blessinge of God.
Oliuarum in circuitu mensae tuae: Ecoe sic benedicetur homo qui timet dominu^.
Thy children shall be like the Olive branches round about thy Table: Behold,
thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord. Children are given unto
Parents by the divine and Almighty power of God, and are committed unto them
as an heavenly treasure, not to the end that they should be profaned and
brought up only to the use of this terreine and earthly City, but that they
should be sanctified and hallowed unto the use of the heavenly Jerusalem, we
have lost in our first Parent the right of our heavenly life and inheritance,
and we are borne the children of Gods wrath, death and hell.

Therefore, what is more cruel, what is more horrible or How the inheritance
of y^ he ^uenly life being lost, is recovered by the parents.
monstrous, then such a father, which after he has children, does not apply
all his whole study and endeavor to this end chiefly, that he may recover
again the right of that Heavenly inheritance before lost as is said* For
except this be brought to pass, what other thing do children gain by their
Parents, but hell and everlasting death.

But these are the manners and conditions of many Parents, in these our days
in the governing and ordering of their families, that they have a far greater
care about their Horses and Swyne (as we have often said) then about their
Children and family. For, twice in one day at the least they give Meat and
Water unto their hogs and Horses, to eat and drink to refreshe and comfort
them, and to keep them in good liking and plight of their bodies, but in a
whole week, they will scarscely spare so much time as once or twice to have
their minds refreshed and their souls fed with the wholesome food of the
word unto everlasting salvation.


Theophilus. I have known many which very diligently have taken great pains
and care how to teach their Parrats, Popinieyes, and Pyes to pratle and talk
unto them very timely while they are yet but young, knowing this, that the
elder they are before they take it in hand, the harder and more difficill can
they be taught, according to the old proverb, Psittacum v^tulum negligere
ferulam. What manner watching and pains is there about a prading Parret, or
chattering Pie, and what Lithernesse and negligence about the teaching of
Children*

Men take great pains, as we see every where, and will refuse no labor
Negligent parents are sharply accused.
or travel that they might have a fair dog to hunt and pursue the chase, a
lusty and courageous horse, to take a journey, run his course, and too fetch
the carrier: But about their children they seem to have very little or no care
at al, that they might become the servants of God, ornaments of his Church, and
good members for the common wealth. What answer shall these Parents make to GOD
the most just Judge, when he shall demand an account of them for their
duty so shamefully neglected?


Theodidactus. Do you desire to know of me what manner an account the Lord
God will take and exact of such? Surely none other than as he required of Heli
the high Priest of Israel, which was most divine and holy, and shall be to
the end of the world, at which judgment and account, whosoever does not
tremble and fear, I judge them to be more hard than the Adamant, and such as
unto whom this vehement and horrible exclamation of Saint Augustine may be
very aptly and well applied, saying: O dolosa libertas, O grandis filiorum
perditio, O paternus amor mortifer. Ecce filios sedicunt diligere, quos
veraciter ingulari procurant, dicunt eos amare, A vehement exclamation of S.
^ug against negligent parents.
quibus tam suspendia parant: melius sane fuisset eos nunquam fuisse natos,
quam sic miseros liberos suos extremis malis perdere, and tandem in aeterna
Barathra conucere. O lamentable liberty, O great perdition, O fatherly
affection the deadly destroyer of children, behold they say, they favor their
Children whose destruction they rather procure: they say they love them, for
whom ere it be long, they prepare the gallous and hanging: Surely it had been
much better they had never been borne, then so to cast away their miserable
children into extreme punishment, and at the last to throw them into the
bottomless pit of hell for ever.


Theophilus. O immortal God, before this day I could never understand the
wickedness of these parents, which both by their negligence, and ungodly
examples spoil and utterly cast away their children, and be not only
injurious to themselves and theirs: but also they strive, and endeavor as much
as in them is, to extinguish the Church of God, trouble, disquiet, and destroy
the whole common wealth, and so at the last utterly extirpe and root out all
good love and neighborhood amongst men.


Theodidactus. O my Theophile, there is nothing truer then this your judgment,
which also may be confirmed and proved by many reasons and Arguments, and
also by daily experience it self. For whosoever What and ho(...) great
mischiefs do arise by negligent instructinge.
has children not altogether foolish and unapt for the study of the holy
Scriptures, and good letters, and does not commit them to a skillful teacher
and instructor: they do most grievously offend, they diminishe and take away
the glory of GOD, they spoil the Church of Apostles, Ministers, Pastors and
Preachers, and of other profitable and most necessary gifts: For who so does
neither teach his son him self, nor cause him to be taught and instructed
of others, sets a great window wide open unto the Devil, to put in practice
any kind of wickedness, he provides to establishe the kingdom of Satan by
any means, giving occasion to disturb the kingdom of Christ, and in the
mean time does miserably deliver into bondage and subjection of the Devil
himself the souls of very many. For if we shall have no preachers and
teachers, then of necessity it must needs follow that men shall fall every
where in most pestilent errors What shall befall upon us without preachinge
and teachinge.
and detestable heresies. True faith, the word of God, and true worshipping of
God, shall altogether be confounded of the false faith, superstition, and
false worshipping, and seem almost to be vanquished and overcome.

Furthermore, the common wealth by this means does receive great ditriment,
peril, danger, and incurable plagues and punishments. So that neither the
Turk, nor the Devil himself, can bring in or devise so great perils,
sieightes, and mischiefs to mankind, as he which shall not set his son to
the Schole (being any thing apt to learning) What can be more pernicious, what
more pestilent, what more cruel then such a Father? Surely the Lord God
(before whose eyes all things are manifest) will grievously punish such a
negligent and careless father, without al doubt (for such negligence) most
hurtful and dangerous to all mankind (which God, who is a just judge) shall
not suffer to escape vnauenged.


Theophilus. As far as I can gather of your words, children can scarsely
have a more wicked and cruel enemy, then those Parents which do not rightly
discharge their duty.


Theodidactus. You have hit the nail on the head (as they say): The Jews
Negligente parents do exceed in cruelty Pharao Herod or any other. Tyraunte.
have offered their children to Devils: Pharao and Herod were most cruel and
tyrannous toward children and infants, but parents which neglect their duties
in bringing up their children, or which do corrupt and spoil them* (that is
to say) do not teach them the knowledge, fear and love of God, are far
more cruel and outrageous enemies: For Pharao and Herod only destroyed the
bodies of y^ infants and young children, but these destroy both body and soul.
And Erasmus teaches in a certain place, that they are more brutish, fierce,
and cruel then they which throw out their young infants into any wood, to be
devoured of wild beasts, whose words be these: Non satis est, inquit, filios
genuisse and ditasse, nisi accedat diligens Erasmus.
educatio, parents nec sibi, nec filiis satisfaciunt. Leges in eos seuiunt qui
faetus suos exponunt, and in nemus aliq^od obiiciunt feris deuorandis: at
nullum crudelius exponendi genus, quam quod natura dedit optimis rationibus ad
honesta fingendum, id beluinis* affectibus tradere. It is not sufficient
(says he) to beget children and to make them rich, except you join thereunto
diligent and careful education, for otherwise parents neither do good to
themselves, nor to their children. The laws are cruel upon them, which
destroy their children, and cast them in some wood to be devoured with wild
beasts: but there is no kind of destroying more cruel, than look what thing
nature has given to be framed and facioned after a due form unto honest and
virtuous things, to teach and bring up the same in beastly affections.

If there were any woman of Thessalia, which were able with Women of Thessalia
were transformers of men ^ut^ beast*
her Witchcraftes and Sorceries, and would endeavor and practice to transform
thy Child into a Swyne, Woolfe or other Beast, would thou not think her
worthy to suffer any kind of extreme torment? And look what thing thou
do hate and detest in her, thou thy self do st^^^e by all possible
means to bring it to pass thy self.

And Saint Chrysostom says: Patres qui liberorum modestiam Tomo. ^.
and temperantiam negligunt, liberorum sunt interfectores, atque hoc grauiores
and acerbiores, quod haec sit animi perditio and mors. Fathers which have no
care nor regard to teach their children modesty, temperaunce, and such like
virtues, are Killers and Mutherers of their own Children, and so much the
more horrible and cruel, because this is the destruction and death both of
mind and soul.


Theophilus. Now I have heard this, I cannot sufficiently marvel, neither can
I comprehend by any reason or imagination, from whence (in those which
notwithstanding rejoice exceedingly to be called fathers) such cruelty and
great vncurtesie does arise and grow.


Theodidactus It is indeed an horrible cruelty to kill and murder an Infant,
Those that do not teach their children, be the destroyers of Christ's Church.
but it is a far greater and more detestable and pernicious wickedness, not
to instruct nor to chasten a Child, for not to teach and instruct children,
is utterly to overthrow the Church of GOD, and the foundation of all our
Christian Religion, because the whole force of the Catholic Church
consists in the succession of our posterities, which if they be neglected in
their young and tender years, become like unto a Garden, which in the spring
time is not dug, weeded, sown and trimmed: For where there is nothing
sown, there is like to be nothing reaped, but Weeds, Thissels and Briars.
And herein with me also does Ca^iodorus accord, which says: Indigne
transacta ad^le sce^tia odios^ efficit senectut^; and honest ac sapie^ter acta
superior ^^^^, fructus capit authoritatis. Quid autem senectus surripere valet,
in quo i^ue^tus reprehe^sibilis? Youth being passed over neglige^tly and
unworthily brings an odious and detestable old age: And the time or age
past, being honestly and wisely performed spent and passed over, gets and
obtains the fruit and commodity of great authority. For what shall old
age be able to get or challenge to it self, in whom youth has deserved al
reproach and shame?


Theophilus. Alas, what incommodities do you show and declare unto me, what
perils, what dangers, what calamities and miseries does the small regard and
contempt of youth bring with it?


Theodidactus. These calamities and detestable dangers does Saint Chrysostom
Tomo. 3. 14. What a Sea of evils this negligent care of children does bring.
greatly deplore and lament saying: Vnde damnis and incommodis afficimur? vnde
casus varios, vnde calumnias? vnde malainnumera quotidie perpetimur? Nonne quod
filios nostros malos aspicimus, and eos emendare negligimus? How comes it to
pass that we are so vexed and disquieted with losses and discommodities?
whereof comes our diverse mishaps casualties and calamities? what is the cause
that we daily Tom. 2. 292.
suffer such innumerable plagues and mischiefs? Is it not because we are
contented to behold and see our children so wicked and yet seek no means to
correct and amend them? And in an other place he says: Quemadmodum ager diu
non proscissus: sic iuuentus neglecta siluescit, ac passim innumeras vepres
producit, and addid etiam hanc similitudinem: Sicut terra fructuosa est
iuuentus, quae si negligitur multas producit spinas. As an Orcharde or field
not weeded and proyned of long time, brings forth no fruits but bushes and
brembles, even so fares it with youth, being negligently used, and hereunto he
adds another Similitude: As the earth without tillage and manuring brings
forth many thorns, and briers. So youth without diligent and careful
handling, yields of it self Erasm.
no good fruits or commodities.


Theophilus. What is it that Crates the Thebane, was wont to exclaim against
such Parents as did neglect the instructing and right reformation of children?
which nevertheless in the mean time did study and endeavor by all means
possible (if they might) to leave them as rich as Cressus.


Theodidactus. Crates that Ancient Philosopher, when he had got him up into
the highest place he could find in the City, Thebes on the The exclamation
of Crates.
market day, was wont to cry out often unto the people, there assembled in
this wise. Whether throng ye after this manner O ye men of Thebes, and to
what end serves all this your pains: You will refuse no care study, or
travel, whereby you may scrape together great sums of money, and hoorde up
riches in great abundance: but of your children to whom you would leave the
same surely you take no regard or care at all.


Theophilus. O Lamentable case, what a preposterous care have these men of
their Children? Without doubt they seem unto me to do none otherwise then
those which use great care and diligence about their shows, and in the mean
season care little or nothing for their foot sore wounded and full of pain,
neither will they suffer the same to be helped and cured.


Theodidactus. There is so great blindness and malice in men's minds, that they
study to care and provide for all things saving their children as Erasmus
has left unto us written very eligantly. Immodico studio ( inquit) paratur
possessio, possessoris autem nulla est cura. Possessions are prepared (says
he) with unmeasurable study, but of the inheritour or possessor there is no
care at al. And again he says: Nihil in omnibus possessionibus filio est
preciosius, at eo nihil est neglectius: quod re ipsa ostendi potest, nempe
agrinitent, nitet domus, nitent vasa, vestis ac tota suppellex. Belle docti
sunt equi, pulchre instructi famuli, solum filij ingenium squallet, sordet,
horret. Of all the possessions that a man has, there is nothing more precious
then his son, and yet is there nothing less regarded then he, which may
playnelie be showed by the thing it self, for their grounds shall be well
husbanded, the house decent, the vessel as bright as silver, their Garments
fine and trim, and all the whole house in veryegood order. The Horses
welbroken, the Family well instructed, only the nature and wit of their
Child is stained, filthy, unfruitful, and out of culture.

Saint Bernarde also does greatly bewail the negligence of these Parents:
Cadit, inquit, asinus and est qui subleuet: perit anima S. B. does bewail the
negligence of Parents.
and non est qui curet. A man's Assefalleth down (says he) and straight way
one or other lifts him up again and succoureth him: but the soul perishes,
and there is not one that cares for it. Again he says: Dolent Parents
sibi ablatas oues, and a Lupo diglutas, sed non dolent proprios filios a Lupo
Diabolo scilicet soductos and perditos. Parents sorrow excedingly, if their
sheep be stolen from them, weeried with Dogs or devoured of the Woolfe, but
they bewail not their own natural Children seduced and destroyed of that
insatiable and most ravenous Woolfe, that is to say, the Devil.

Diogenes in his Apothegme teaches very elegantly, that Parents have more
care of their beasts then of their Children: For when among the Magarenses,
he did behold their sheep well covered with wool and fell, against the
injury of the sharp nipping Frostes and cold, but saw their Children naked:
Satius est inquit, Magarensis esse arietem quam filium. It is a great deal
better (says he) to be a sheep of the Magarenses then one of their
Children.


Theophilus. I cannot sufficiently wonder at the negligence or rather
bruitishe drowsinesse and sluggishnesse of those men, which so filthily do
contemn and so wickedly do destroy their children.


Theodidactus. You say you cannot leave woondring, and not without a cause,
neither are you only holden with this admiration, The admiration of Lucius
Apuleus.
but all Godly men in like manner, do marvel, lament and detest this ungodly
wickedness of Parents: And namely, Lucius Apuleus whose words are these.
Nihil eque miror, quam quum omnes cupiant optime viuere, and sciant non alia
reviui quam animo, nec fieri posse quin vt optime viuas animus colendus sit,
tamen homines animum suum aut suorum non colunt: I cannot so much marvel, as
seeing all men do desire and wish to live well, and that they also know they
live by none other means but by the soul, neither is it possible, but that if
thou would live well, thy soul must be regarded, favored and esteemed, all this notwithstanding men do neither regard their own souls, nor the souls
of those over whom they have charge: And verily those Parents are greatly to be
detested and abhorred of all men, which do neither teach them themselves, nor
provide that their Children be taught some profitable art either meet for
public or private government. But yet much more are they to be abhorred
and contemned, and altogether unworthy honor or estimation, which not only
do not teach and instruct their Children in the Art and cunning to know God
out of his word: But also do so corrupt and spoil them with their lewd and
wicked examples, that they cast them away for ever.

Moreover their servants and families are so lightly regarded and looked
unto, that chiefly on the Holy and Saboth days (when The Sabbath day abused.
they should exercise them selves in the service of God, and learn the
duties of humble obedience) they suffer them to raunge here and there, from
Alehouse to Lauerne, gulling, gurmandizing and bowsing, tippling and quaffing,
dancing and frisking, that at the last they prove as giddie as Geese, and as
wise as Woodcocks, so that a man shall never hear to proceed from them any
honest and profitable speech worthy the remembrance: but in stead thereof,
such lewd and Deuilish devises, such gibing and jesting, cursing and rebauld
talking, filthy and blasphemous swearyng, that it would grieve any Christian
ears to hear them, or eyes to see it. So that I think the Devil is never
better served, than on the Sabbath days, where such abuses are suffered.


Theophilus. I can not tell what I should say of such wicked and ungodly
Parents: but of this I am assured, that they make them selves unworthy of
that honor, which the fifth commandment does exact of children, and with
their pemitious and detestable examples, they lead their children together
with them selves, the readiest way into the bottomless pi^ of hell.


Theodidactus. That worthy Orator Quintiliane, was wont to cry out against
The exclamation of Quintilian^
such wicked corruptors, after this manner: Vtinam, inquit, liberorum mores
nostrorum non ipsi perderemus: infantiam statim delitijs soluit mollis educatio
quam indulgentiam vocamus, omnes neruos mentis and corporis frangit: Quid non
adultus concupiscet, qui in purpuris repit? iam coccum intelligit, iam
corchilium posoit. Would to God (says he) that we our selves did not
corrupt the manners of our children. Nice and delicate bringing up (which we
do call cockering) does forthwith spoil infantes, which delightful and
pleasant fancies, it vanquisheth and overcomes all the forces and powers both
of soul and body. What shall not he seek for, covet, and desire, when he is
a man, that is crept into his purple, whilst he is yet but a child? He can
already skill of skarlet and other fine cloth, and wishes now to have cloth
in grain.


Theophilus. Seeing that these negligent corrupters of youth, are the causes of
so Whether negligent Parents are to be compelled by any law.
great and manifold mischiefs, and that negligent instructing of youth
brings with it such an innumerable sort of perils and dangers, were it not
good to set down some act, order and decree, to compel such parents by force
of law, unto those things which appertain to their duties and voeations?


Theodidactus. Parents are not to be compelled, specially those which have
been once baptized and taken upon them the name of Christians, those I say,
ought not to be compelled and forced by the rigor of any law, but rather a
fatherly affection, love and desire, should If the fear and love of God will
not cause Parents to be careful for their children: much less will any law
that can be devised by men.
move them unto so godly and divine a work. For who so is once thoroughly
persuaded that he is to be preserved, saved, nourished, and defended, through
the benefit and divine power of Almighty God, How can it be, but that
willingly he direct, fashion, and frame him self to instruct, teach, and
inform his children and posterity, that they do the like? He that once
reposeth his whole trust and confidence in God, and loves him with all his
heart, munde, and soul: How is it possible, but that he will show, set
forth and declare in like manner, his exceeding great benefits received from
time to time? chiefly to his children and domestical servants? But who so
neither believes nor loves God, nor his word, what shall he be able to
teach unto his family, albeit he be compelled a hundredth times by any law
prescribed? There seems therefore to be no reason, why such a law should be
ordained and set forth by any Magistrate.


Theophilus. I do not altogether mislike or despise your opinion,
notwithstanding What is the chief of man's felicity?
in the mean time, I think and judge that it is not unprofitable if such
negligent Parents should be admonished, and the rather, for because the good
and virtuous education of children, is a thing so worthy and so necessary,
that if a man will account it the very fountain and whole sum of man's
felicity, I judge he should not be greatly deceived. And if I be not
deceived, I think I have either heard or read, that there was a law set
forth against those corruptors of youth, and that of Solon, the law maker
among the Athenians.


Theodidactus. It is even so in deed, you have read and remembered very well,
Solon, that most wise law maker set forth a sore sharp and grievous law, to
keep Parents in their duties, and they took great care of their children to
be kept according to the prescript rule of the same, So that if they had let
pass or forgot any thing, and being moved either with covetousness or any
other wickedness, had violated and broken the good purpose and meaning of the
law, touching the education and instructing of their children. There were
pains Solons law was very sharp against negligent Parents.
prescribed and set down, and grievous fear of judgment, to the which it was
lawful for any man that was willing, to bring the^, that would complain of
such a father. Moreover, their lawful authority was taken from them, which
nature by the law of humanity had given them, and that the child did owe to
his father: For neither was he compelled to regard nor reverence such a one,
nor to sustain, cherishe, comfort or relieve him with his goods or money, no
though he were poor, sick, feeble, or indigent. To conclude, who so did not
thoroughly perform the office and duty of a good father toward his child,
the law would not that any duty should remain and abide in his force and
authority from the child either of natural love and affection, or of a
thankful and willing mind toward such a father.


Theophilus. It was an extreme law, and they were grievous pains no doubt,
which would have all humanity, authority, and love (which is due unto
Parents) to be as it were extinguished and utterly rooted out of the hearts of
children. These things do not consent and agree to your mind and opinion.


Theodidactus. They do dissent and disagree from mine opinion, I must needs
confess: but yet I affirm that those Parents are not to be constrained, which
have professed them selves Christians, and which have been truly taught and
instructed in the true faith and knowledge of God, and are not altogether
(...), that is to say) estraunged from a natural and fatherly affection, such
(as I have said) are not to be compelled: For there is great difference
between a true Christian Parent, and an Ethnicke. Solon, though he were an
The Ethnickes are to be compelled one way, but the Christians an other way.
excellent wise man, yet did he want the true faith and knowledge of Christ,
Also, the Athenians for whom he made that law, were in like manner Heathen
men, altogether void of the true knowledge, love, fear, invocation, and faith
of the true living God, for the Ethnickes are to be compelled one way, but
Christians after an other manner.


Theophilus. But if there be found now amongst the Christians some, which are
no less guilty in this fault, than the unfaithful Athenians in time past:
were it not good and very convenient to compel such wicked and negligent
Parents?


Theodidactus. When I see those Parents offend as grievously (which
notwithstanding glory and boast them selves to be dipped and dyed in the blood
of Christ) as the Infidels, and have as little care and regard of their
children: And are not only equal with the Gentiles, but also do far exceed
them in that fault, I might easily be persuaded, that they should be urged
and constrained unto their duties: For albeit little fruit from them were to
be looked for, yet this law might be an example unto others, which might be
excited and stirred up, unto a greater diligence and carfulness toward
their children, and chiefly when they did hear the instruction and virtuous
education of children so earnestly commanded of God: which when it is rightly
taught, sets forth the glory of God exceedingly, and is most necessary
and profitable as well to the common wealth generally, yea as also to all
families perticularly. Wherefore as I have often said heretofore, so I now
say again, that diligent care and regard is to be had about this first age:
which the porche and entrance of life, shows it self, as it were, a
certain platform, and frame or whole building of the years following.


Theophilus. For that you have so diligently dissolved this doubt, and so
plainly declared and made manifest this question unto us, we have to rejoice
and give you hearty thanks, If I remember well the matter going before, you
proved by the testimonies of godly and learned men, that Parents run in great
danger which shall not bring up and chasten their children virtuously and
carefully, albeit they them selves shall lead a godly and virtuous life. And
because this your opinion seems somewhat obscure and dark, I would have you
make it more plain unto us.


Theodidactus. This doubt is easily discussed, if we will give credit to the
holy scriptures: For if the lord God does require the blood at the hand of the
watchmam, for that he will not show unto his neighbor his offense and
trespass, that he might be converted unto the Lord: How much rather will the
Lord God require the blood of children at the hands of those Parents, which
will not declare and show the ways of God unto their own children, and when
they offend and wander a stray, will not reduce and bring them again into the
right way, and chasten their offenses:


Theophilus. Out of this place of Ezechiel it is said, the Father shall bear
the sin Ezechiel. 1^.
of the child. The same Prophet says: The son shall not bear the sin of
his father. And contrarily, The Father (says he) shall not bear the iniquity
of the son. I would be glad to hear of you how these places are to be
understood.


Theodidactus. Parents shall take heed diligently, that they live godly among
their children and family, and that they bring them up in the fear and the
information of the Lord, and a greater patrimony than this, can they not
leave unto them. But if they them selves shall How the children bear the
sins of the Parents.
live ungodly, and their children shall commit the like wickedness received
from them, they them selves shall not only be accursed, but also their children
shall inherit the curse of their Parents: Not that the children if they
repent, do bear the sins of their Parents, but that whereas the same
wickedness is and shall be committed of the father and the son, there it
must needs be, that there shall be a like punishment of the ungodliness. And
the Lord says, Exodus 20. I am the Lord thy God, a mighty, and a jealous
God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
forth generation, of those that hate me, etc. In these words Parents and
children do hear, that Parents ought to take great heed that they sin not
against God, that their children Children may not deride their Parents. Gene. 9.
also learn not to sin, and so of God be removed and destroyed from their
posterities. Children ought not to deride and offend their parents, lest they
and their posterities be accursed, even as Cham was accursed. Therefore, this
saying, the father shall not bear the iniquity of the child, thou shall
understand it after this manner. The father that shall live godly and without
fault before his children, and shall provide that they may be virtuously and
godly trained up and instructed, then if the son will not obey the godly
instruction and counsel of his Parents, then he shall not bear the
iniquity of his child: But if the Parent shall not diligently and carefully
perform his duty, he shall bear his childs offenses, and the Lord will
require the blood of the child at his hand: For not to teach and inform his
child in the ways of God, is great wickedness, neither can the holy Ghost
dwell or have any perfect working in yt man, where there is so great impiety,
for true faith and invocation of God must needs be far from such a one, and
the Lord does detest and abhor him.


Theophilus. Surely Parents if they be wise, they will study and endeavor to
ef^hue this sin and great offense, with all regard and care, lest they get and
purchase unto them selves and their children, the great wrath and indignation
of Almighty God,


Theodidactus. Although simply and in plain words, children are not said to
bear the iniquities of their fathers, yet are they punished with ^ore plagues,
and with death it self, for the offenses of their fathers, which I will make
manifest and apparent unto you by many places of the scripture. In Genesis 7.
Moses witnesses, saying: The wrath of God does not only destroy the men and
women, but also little children and infantes, yea, God does destroy also the
child yet unborn, for the horrible wickedness committed of their elders and
forefathers. Moreover, there was none but Noe with his family that loved and
feared God, and therefore through his Gene. 1^.
Almighty power they were preserved, all the rest perished with the floude. In
like manner, it happened unto the Sodomites, which very long with their
horrible wickedness, provoked upon them selves the wrath of God, and would
not obey the voice of GOD uttered by that godly man Loath. Wherefore they were
all miserably consumed, yea the very infants, which yet had not offended.
Numeri. 16. Sub pedibus Lorach Dathan and Abiron dirupta est terra, Number. 16.
and aperiens os suum deuorauit eos cum tabernaculis suis, and vniuersa
substantia eorum. etc. The ground cloue a sunder that was under them, Parents
and infantes together are grievously punished
and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, with their houses and
all their substance, and all those that perteined unto them, so that the very
infants did not escape, but they all went down alive unto Hell, and the earth
closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation. And all
Israel that were about them fled at their cry, and said, let us be gone least
the earth swallowe us also.

In the book of Iosue 6. The infants are also grievously punished, Iosue. 6.
for the offenses of their fathers and elders, as it is said: They took their
City, and slew all that were in the same, from the man even to the woman, and
from the infant unto the hoar head.

Were not the sons and daughters of Acham and all their Iosue. 7.
sheep and oxen, burnt and consumed for their theft?

Aman that most cruel enemy of the people of God, by commandment Hester. 9.
of the king was hanged, neither did he himself only suffer the punishment of
his tyranny, but also his ten sons, were al killed and hanged,

Darius the king commanded them to be thrown unto Lions Daniel. 6.
to be denoured, the which falsely accused Daniel the man of God, together with
all their wives and young children.

Roboam the son of Solomon, destroyed the greatest part of his Regum. 11.
kingdom, and that for the Idolatry of his father, because he had forsaken
the ways of the Lord.

King Achab committed a horrible sin before the Lord, but believed Regum. 12.
the words of Elias the Prophet, obeyed them,, did repent him, and humbled
himself before God: and because he has obeyed and humbled himself, for my
sake. Non inducam malum in diebus eius* sed in diebus ^ilii sui infera(...)
malum domui eius, a^t Dominus. I will not bring a plague in his days, but in
the days of his son, will I bring a plague upon his house, says the Lord
God.

Here we see manifestly, that children do suffer grievous plagues Deuteronomy: 2^.
for the offenses of their Parents, as also Moses witnesses in another place,
saying, But if thou will not hear the voice of the Lord that thou may keep
and do all his commandments, etc. Maledictus fructus ventris tui, and
fructus terrae tuae. Cursed be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
earth. And that these things be most true, daily examples do approve and
confirm the same: for we see at this day in many places worthy families, and
noble stocks and kindreds miserably decayed, nay rather utterly defaced and
consumed, and almost worn out of all remembrance. And that for none other
cause, then for that parents through their grievous sin and wickedness have
stirred and provoked the Lord God unto wrath.

Wherefore, these and such like fearful examples ought not only earnestly
to excite and stir us up unto the fear of God but also with good cause ought
to urge and compel us unto lamentable tears, and continual prayers, that
every one of us might duly govern our families, and faithfully walk in our
vocation and calling: least we do throw our children (than whom nothing
ought to be more belooued and dear unto us) into such miserable and horrible
calamities.

For if parents shall be virtuous and godly, having this fear alalwayes
before their eyes, and shall learn to settle, stay, and repose their whole
trust and confidence in the only Almighty GOD, Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: they shall not only obtain and get his blessing unto themselves, but
also for the most part to their whole posterities. Behold now how A hight
and excellent treasure to be borne of good parents.
good, and how high and great a treasure it is to be borne of good and Godly
Parents: and on the contrary part, how great and miserable a plague it is to be
borne and brought up of wicked and ungodly parents.

Therefore those Parents which diligently and with their whole heart, do
bend themselves unto this onething, that they serve GOD and walk in his
Commandments, shall not only provide well for the^^elues, but also for their
whole posterity as witnesses Moses Exodus 20. And this manner of providing A
good way to provide for children.
is much more available, than if they could gather together, and leave them
the riches and wealth of Craessus. Magna est enim eorum insania, qui liberis
male institutis, portentosas opes coaceruant, quibus ad libidinem, and propriam
perniciem vtuntur. For it is exceeding madness in those Parents, which for
their children rudely brought up, do heap together great wealth with
strouting bags of money, which they lashe out, spend and consume, very
quickly in riotous and ^asciuious manner, to their own shame, overthrow and
utter destruction.


Theophilus. Togather and scrape together, and to leave great riches and
abundance Riches are not to be heaped v(...) for children.
of wealth unto children which have no good and virtuous bringing up, do you
say it is a kind of madness? without all question if this be to be mad,
then very many (not of the common people only) but of the worshipful and noble
men, which seem in their own iugdement both learned and wise, are in deed
very mad. But my good Theodidactus, do you not think it meet and
convenient, to leave unto our children though not exceeding great wealth, yet
at the least some measurable stock and portion?


Theodidactus. I do not so much detest, neither do I judge it a thing meet
to be reproved or misliked to leave a measurable portion either of money,
lands or goods (that is to say) so much as may well suffice and serve for the
virtuous and godly trayning up and instucting of their children. But if any man
desire to follow the best and most absolute order of providing for their
children, let him receive and take it from him which is the fountain of all
goodness, paternitie and fatherlinesse, (that is to say) our heavenly father,
whose care Psalm.
is infinite toward the fatherless and widow.


Theophilus. Our heavenly Father, as he is the wisest, so without all doubt, he
ha(...) the very best method and order of providing for his children, by which
he always shows him self most willing to provide for his all things
necessary, which who so will not follow, must needs show himself, most
foolish, and I judge it very profitable and necessary that you show the same
and make it plain unto all fathers of families, and masters of householdes,
wherefore I pray you let it not grieve you to declare unto us this order and
care of our heavenly father.


Theodidactus. I will show you, but it is altogether contrary to the Proverb.
3^
order and manner of this world. For that most wise King Solomon prayed after
this manner, saying, O Lord give me neither poverty nor riches, only grant
me a necessary Solomon's prater.
living, least if I be too full, I deny thee and say: who is the Lorde^ And
least* I being constrained through poverty, fall unto stealing* and so forswere
the name of my God.

Here we see, he only desired a necessary living, and despised the abundance
of riches being a mighty Prince. But what do they, which now adays hoorde up
and heap together great stoare of wealth for their children without ceassing?
Do they love them well, think you* And does not the Almighty God love his?
And cannot he give them abundance of riches at his pleasure? And wherefore
does he it not? Because he loves them, and knows that riches would be
their destruction. So he gives to some, and holds from other some, as
seems good to his wisdom. Therefore let us follow that order of providing
for our children, which our heavenly father uses toward his, as the very best
and most absolute order.


Theophilus. If we follow this order of our heavenly Father (as it is very
meet we should) then we shall gather together either no riches at al, or else
surely very mean, poor, and simple.


Theodidactus. Among the ancient Fathers I find such as have greatly detested
and abhorred the madness of those, which have studied to leave great abundance
of riches and wealth unto their children and posterities: And some among the
Heathen Philosophers, that have derided and contemned such fathers, which I
purpose to prove here first by the authority of Saint Chrysostom, to the end
I might a little call back, and withdraw those covetous and mad Parents, and
fathers of families, from their madness (that is to Tomo. 3 fol. 7 84.
say) from that wicked and inordinate care of riches, and bring them rather
unto the study of Godliness, whose words are these: Operaem dabimus non vt
filus i^gentes diuitias relinquamus, sed vt doceamus eos virtutem. Et
benedictionem Det illis imprecemur. Istae maximae sunt facultates, istae
ineffabiles diuitiae, quae non absumentur. Let us endeavor ourselves and do
our best* not that we might leave our children Virtue and the blessing of God
the chiefest riches.
great wealth and riches, but that we might teach them virtue, and pray unto
the Almighty God to send them his blessing, these be the chiefest riches,
these be such, as neither heart can think, nor pen discrine, which shall
never be wasted nor consumed.

And again: Operam dabis, filium relinquere non diuitem, sed pium. Have care
to leave thy son, not rich, but virtuous and godly. Erasmus, that worthy
man says Videmus doctrinam ac virtutem tutissimas Erasmus.
esse diuitias, quae nec eripipossunt, nec grauant circumferentem. We see
(says he) learning and virtue are the best and surest riches, which can
neither be taken for a man, nor trouble him any thing in carriage. And Philomon
although an Ethnicke, in plain words does abhor Philomon.
and detest the hoording up of riches: No man (says he) that is wise, studieth
to accumilate and heap together great sums of money for his children, to the
end he might leave them rich, for that neither profits them, nor the City
or place, where they shall after inhabit: Wherefore it is very convenient
(says he) that a Father have his chief care, that he may leave his son
virtuous and of good and gentle conditions and behavior, and so much the
rather, as virtue, learning, and good manners, are to be preferred before the
vain trashe and mucke of this world. For the good and virtuous child though
he be left poor, shall quickly and easily get and purchase unto himself
as well friends, as also wealth and good fortune: whereas the rich, being rude,
rechlesse and wicked, shall soon scatter, waste, and consume his portion and
patrimony, and after obtain the hatred and detestatio^ of all men. And
Epictetus, Cura, inquit, vt filios tuos magis eruditos quam opulentos
relinquas: Epictetus.
prestant enim eruditorum expectationes quam indoctorum diuitiae. Provide
(says he) that thou may leave thy sons rather learned then rich: For the
good hope and expectations of the wise and learned, are far better then the
wealth and riches of the unlearned and foolish. Which the French men do
affirm after this manner. Scauior pass auior.


Theophilus. Without doubt these are golden sayings, which I wish al greedy
gripes, covetous cormorants, and foolish fathers, might have them always
fixed before their eyes: But now albeit you persuade and teach us, that we
ought not to endeavor, nor labor, that we might leave great wealth and riches
for our children: yet I judge it were not meet, that we should leave our
children void, and without some succor.


Theodidactus. Although (my good Theophilus) I do persuade you, that you
should not leave your children such monstrous strouting bags of gold and
silver, and such heaps of treasure, and wealth without measure, yet my meaning
is not, neither would I have them left altogether unprovided for* at the
wild adventures, void, empty, and as bare as my nail (as they say) or as
poor as I^us.


Theophilus. What then would you counsel or wish most chiefly to be provided,
got together, and left for them?


Theodidactus. Si ^^s filiis tuis, inquit Chrisostomus, magnas relinquere
diuitias, Tomo. 4. fol. 57.
relinque illis prouidentem Deitutelam, If thou will (says Chrysostom) leave
great riches and wealth for thy children, leave them that provident wardship,
custody and safe keeping of Almighty God. And Isocrates Isocrates.
says, Certissimum liberis suis patrimonium relinquet, qui ciuium
beneuolentiam, and honestam famam relinquet. Whosoever shall leave unto his
children the good will and love of Citizens, and an honest fame and report,
shall leave them the most assured Patrimony.

And again; Magis expetendum ducito, vt liberis tuishouesta^ fama^ A good name
is better then riches.
qu^n magnas opes relinquas: nam hae mortales sunt, illa immortalis.
Famapecunia acquiri potest, fama amissa pecuniis emt non potest. Account thou
it a thing rather to be wished and desired, that thou leauest thy children
good name and fame, rather then great riches: For these be fleeting and
mortal, the other permanent and immortal. Through thy good name wealth and
money may be obtained and What manner of inheritance should be left for
children.
gotten, but thy good name once lost, it cannot be recovered and bought again
with money. Opes etiamimprobis contingunt: gloriam vero parare non possunt,
nisi virtute praestantes. Riches also happen to the wicked: but none can
obtain true glory, but such as excel in virtue.

This question also was demanded of Plato. Who being asked what thing was best
to be left for children? Get them such riches Plato.
says he, as if it chance they should suffer shipwreck, may yet swim
forth with the owner, which is neither gold nor silver, nor any other
precious jewel, but a mind garnished with virtue, wisdom, and understanding.

And Saint Chrysostom also writes thus: Sididicerit, inquie filius tuus ab
initiis philosophus esse, diuitias acquiret omnibus diuitiis maiores: non enim
dives est, qui multis pecunits abundat, and sumptuose vestitur, sed qui nulla
re opus habet. If thy son says he, shall learn to be a Philosopher from
his young and tender years, he shall then purchase riches greater and more
excellent then all the treasures of the earth: For he is not rich, that
walloweth in wealth and bags full of money, and is sumptuously arrayed in
gorgeous apparel, but rather he which has no need of any such thing.

Instruct and teach thy son in these things, for they be the chiefest and
most excellent treasures, and seek not how thou should make him famous and
renowned in the vain pomp and outward show and wisdom of the world, but
rather care how thou may make him to contemn the glory of this life, that
he may be the more glorious in the life to come, and seek not so much how
he might lead a long life here, as that how he might live for ever in the
world to come.


Theophilus As very many men are vain, moved, and led with the blast of vain
glory: So do they seek by all means possible, to leave behind them some
monument, that it might continue long in the memory of their posterities. What
manner of Monumente I pray you, shall a godly and wise Father study to leave
behind him?


Theodidactus. A godly father can leave behind him no monument more What manner
of monumente a father ought to leave behind him.
excellent then his son, the very lively Image of his manners, virtues,
constancy, wisdom, and godliness.


Theophilus. Forasmuch as you have taught us, that we should not study and
care how to inriche our children and to leave them great wealth and
possessions, by this we gather, that children are to be brought up and holden
in some honest labor and exercise, and not in ease and idleness: Now Of pains
^^^ labor.
such as have no patrimony left them, and yet refuse to get their living with
some pain and labor, such oftentimes we see suffer and endure great hunger,
thirst and cold: notwithstanding in the mean time no man can deny, but that
God gives abundantly unto us, all things which are meet and do apperteine to
the maintenance of ourliuing, but yet he helps few or none except it be by
second causes.


Theodidactus. You gather my reasons very rightly. For those children which
have nothing left them, are compelled to labor and take pains, and that not
for necessity only, but much rather for that it is Gods commandment. In
sudore vultus tui, vesceris pane tuo. In the Gene. 3.
sweat of thy brows, shall thou eat thy bread. Which law is not written
only for the poor, but also for the rich, which who so observes not,
undoubtedly falls into the wrath of GOD, and shall suffer grievous
punishmente. As also daily experience teaches, for whosoever will not labor,
we see them suffer extreme hunger, according to this saying, He that will
not labor, let him not eat. 2. Thessa. 3. lob. 5.


And that godly man Job says: Homo nascitur ad laborem, and auis ad volandum.
Man is borne to labor, as the bird to fly. To the which both Cicero and
Quintiliane do describe, for Cicero says: Vt ad cursum equus, ad arandum bos,
and ad indagandum canis: sic homo ad duasres intelligendum and agendum natus
est. As the Horse to his course, the Ox to labor in the plough, and the Dog
to hunt and find out his game: So man is borne unto two things to understand,
and to endeavor and put in practice the thing conceived.

Wherefore, young men ought always to bear in mind this Oracle of Cato:
Nihil agendo homines male agere discunt, nihil enim deterins otio, nihilque
laudabilius industria and negotio. By idleness and doing nothing, men devise
and learn to practice wickedness for there is nothing worse then idleness, and
there is nothing more commendable then industry and labor.


Theophilus. Fathers of families ought then to take diligent heed, least their
youth wax not lasie, filthy, rude and sluttishe with idleness, but that they
be kept and holden in some honest labor and exercise: For of Idleness there
comes great perils and dangers, I learn both by your words, and also by
experience, but of pains and labor there comes and grows great profit
and commodity.


Theodidactus. Optimi patres familias ab his quibus imperant, otij magis quam
negotij There is nothing more to be detested then idleness.
ratione^ exigere debe^t, Good fathers of families and masters of housholdes
ought rather to examine and take account of the idleness and time ill spent,
than of the labor and diligent pains of their servants and family over whom
they have charge. And the learned from the beginning have thought nothing more
worthy hatred and detestation, then sloth and the great loss of time. Hinc
Bernardus otium omnium Bernardus. Augustinus.
vitiorum sentinam appellat: and Augustinus, puluinar Satanae. For this cause
Bernarde calls idleness the sincke of al vices: And Augustine, the pillowe
or quishen of Satan. Wherefore this was their use and custom for the better
avoiding of this vice, that before they did dyne or suppe, they did call their
young men to the Table: and did take an account of them, what service, duty,
or labor they had done that day, and so from day to day. Et illis solis
esculenta apponebant, quorum industria comprobabant: illos autem ex caenaculo
extrudebant, qui per ignauiam and inertiam nihil egissent, and cibum officio,
negotioue vt lucrarentur, imparabant. And those whose pains and diligence they
liked and allowed, before them only did they set meat: But those which by
reason of their sloth and idleness had done no good, they thrust out of their
presence, and commanded that they should deserve their meat with their
service, charge, or labor.


Theophilus. It was a very good order sure, and worthy to be observed in
these our days with all families, because in young men there is nothing more
detestable then sloth and idleness. But now I pray you on the other part,
that you would show us the commodities of pains and diligence.


Theodidactus. The commodities of pains taking, are diverse and many. First
Laboris commendatio ab honesto.
we know and are assured, that God commands nothing, but he likes and
allows the same: And he which truly labors in his vocation, obeys the
will of God, and hereof no doubt, he purchases and gains unto him self the
love and favor of God. Again, he taking pains (through the blessing of God)
gets his living, and there wants nothing meet and necessary for him, for
Ab vtili. Celsus.
the well ordring of his family. And if we may believe Celsus. Rectae
valetudini plurimum confert exercitatio corporis and animi. Moderate exercise
of body and mind, helps very much to good and perfect health. Wherefore
Plato also says: Iuuenibus conueniunt multi maximique Plato.
labores. Much pains and great exercises are convenient and best agreeing to
young men. And Xenophon says: Studium and laborem omnium Xenophon.
bonarum and honestarum rerum esse causam. Study and labor are Epicharinus.
the cause of all good and honest things. And Epicharinus: Dij, inquit, omnia
nobis vendunt laboribus. The Gods, says he, sell al things unto us for our
pains and labor. Et qui velit esse corpore fortis, subijcundum est animo
corpus, and exercendum in laboribus atque in sudoribus. And he that would be
strong in body, must make it subject unto the mind, and exercise the same in
labor and sweating. Therefore A necessitate
the exercise of the body, is always necessary: For sloth and drowsinesse
makes the body dull, fainte, and effeminate, but industry and moderate
pains, does strengthen the same, and makes Lycurgus law.
men more cheerful and lusty. Wherefore Lycurgus commanded that young
stripplinges should not be brought up in the Court, but in the country, to
the end that they might bestow and pass forth their first years not in
ryote and wantonness, but in painful labor and exercise of the body, as in
hunting, running, swimming and wrestling, and that they should be able to
sustain and bear, hunger, thirst, heat and cold, without any fetherbed
under them to procure sleep, but rather a mattresse or pad of straw, to take
a nappe and away, and he appointed that they should not return into the
City again, until they were men grown. Also Marcus Cato in libris de
moribus, has left to memory Mar. Cato.
an excellent comparison, saying: Vitam humanam esse vt ferrum, quod si
exerceas, conteritur, and cum splendore quidem, sin minus exerceas rubigo
interficit: Man's life is like iron, which if you do occupy, it wears and
wastes away, but yet with a certain excellent brightness, but if a man do
cast it in a corner and do not occupy it, then it canker fretteth, and
consumes away with rustinesse: Even so young men, if they be not trained up in
some honest exercises, do consume their years in idleness and lazy
lithernesse, to their own shame and great reproach, which also brings more
peril to their bodies, and detriment to the common wealth, than their moderate
pains and labor. Deogenes The pains of studies are not to be remitted.


And when Diogenes being now an old man, was persuaded by his friends to
cease from his labors and painful studies. Quid inquit si in staedio
curreremvtrum oporteret iam maetae Vicinum cursum remittere? an magis
intendere? What if I should run in a race (says he) were it meet, that
when I am now nigh the mark, I should give over and slake my running? or
rather to force my self more earnestly unto the end? He judged very rightly
concerning the study of virtue, for the less time we have to live, so much
the more ought we to study, how we should dye well, and with deserved
praise, rather than to live in dishonor, and wax faynte in so good a purpose.

And again, he says: Quod si senes a laboribus quiescere non debent, quanto
minus adolescentes turpiter in otio nutriendi siunt? But if old men ought not
to cease from pains taking, how much less are Marcus Marullus.
young men to be filthily nourished up in idleness? Marcus Marullus does
commend labor very earnestly, saying: Labor corporis vegetatur intellectus,
voluptatum appetitio coercetur, superbia frangitur, virtus retinetur, and
quicquid per otium corruptum fuerit, per laborem instauratur. With the labor
of the body the understanding is comforted, the desire of carnal lusts is
restrained, pride is vanquished, virtue is retained, and whatsoever is
corrupted through idleness, is repaired, and reformed by labor. And as labor
is commended both of the godly Christian writers, and also of the Heathen: So
is idleness every Solom, 12.
where detested and abhorred of all men, as a common plague and infection. As
we may see in Solomon, and many others. For we read in Proverbs, 12
Stultissimum esse qui sectatur otium. Who so follows idleness is a very
fool. And again: Egestatem operata est manus remissa. A slow hand brings
poverty. And again: Propter frigus piger arare noluit, mendicabit ergo
aestate, and non dabitur illi. The idle and flouthful body will not go to the
plough for the cold of winter, therefore he shall beg in Summer, and there
shall nothing be given him.


Theophilus. Seeing that labor produces and brings forth unto us so many
and great commodities, which I hear to be allowed and commended not only of
godly men, but also almost of all Heathen writers: but idleness for the
miseries and discommodities that it brings and draws with it, is to be
detested and utterly condemned: me thinks an occupation, science, or
handicraft is always best, and I judge it the surest way to be chosen and
taught of all men: for without this, I cannot perceive how labor should be
exercised and maintained.


Theodidactus. Surely you put me well in remembrance of a thing convenient A
handicraft science or faculty is to be learned. The law of the Spartaines.
to be spoken of, and nothing disagreeing from our purpose: And I have ever
hethertoo liked the law and order of the Spartaines, and do greatly allow
it. For that all their sons do ^earne some Art or Occupation, to the which
Parents do perceive that they are most inclined and drawn by the aptness
and benefit of nature. And this they do before they attain to mature and
ripe years, and that the raines of liberty be cast into their necks, and
before they send them to the Universities for the increase of their greater
knowledge and discipline, for there for the most part, they conceive a
certain hautinesse and pride in them selves, when they have once got a little
smattering and taste of learning: and also have thrust them selves into the
fellowship and company of the great and chiefest learned men. Wherefore although
thou be a rich man, yet if thou be wise, provide that thy son may learn,
some Art or honest faculty. For goods oftentimes are taken from a man by some
mishap or chance, as by fire, theft, war, shipwreck, or for some fault or
offense: but an Art or Occupation is the surest possession, which always and
in every place is ready to comfort and releive a man in his necessity,
whatsoever. For as it is said in the Proverb. Quaeuis terra alit artem.
Every country nourishes Art or cunning, That is to say, cunning men, and
such as have any faculty or Science, whether soever they go, shall lack no
Suetonius.
living. Suetonius also writes, that it was showed before unto the Emperor
Nero, by his Astronomers, that the time should An example of Nero.
come when he should be put out of his Empire, by reason whereof, he gave
himself so much the more egarly unto the study of Music, insomuch that he
became very excellent, and then he was wont to have often in his mouth the
said proverb. And esteemed it the foulest reproach that could be laid unto
him, to be called an evil Harper or player upon Instruments. The like thing
also An example.
(as in an other place is mentioned) did happen unto Dyonisius king of the
Syracusians, which after he was thrust out of his kingdom, came to Corinthe,
and there did set up a School and taught children letters and Music. For
this cause among the Greeks, art Science the Port of need.
and cunning is called the Port or Haven of necessity unto mortal men (that
is to say) the only refuge in poverty. Aliquid agendum est, vt corpus valeat,
vt animus vegetior fiat, We must do something, that our bodies might be kept
in health, and that our minds may be made more quick and lively. Ignauia
(inquit Celsus) corpus hebetat, labor autem firmat, illa maturam senectutem,
hic longam adolescentiam reddit. Sloth and drowsinesse (says Celsus) makes
the body dull and fainte, but labor makes it lusty and strong, that
hasteneth old age, this prolongeth youth. Children are to be compelled and
forced unto wisdom, which is the best and chiefest of all other things, They
are to be exercised in their bodies, but yet so, that the gifts of their
minds be not hindered. For it is a very hard thing, at one and the same time
to be exercised in mind and body, whereof great and diligent care must be had.


Theophilus. O most courteous and loving friend Theodidactus, hertherto you have
set before us most excellent and godly rules and orders, after what manner our
children should be instructed, nurtured, and corrected, from whence all godly
Fathers of families may most commodiously learn, what they ought chiefly to
follow in trayning up their children. But now it remains, that after your
loving and friendly From what things youth a^e to be feared.
manner you show unto us, what ought to be shunned and avoided: That is, from
what vices children ought to be feared, for there be an innumerable sort of
vices, into which foolish and frail youth are like to fall, except they shall
be premonished diligently, and feared from them in the beginning, whilst they
are yet under correction.


Theodidactus. I will satisfy these your lawful requests and petitions, for
I judge it mine office and duty, not only to show you what is to be
followed, but also what is to be shunned and abhorred.


Theophilus. You say well, for as it is the part and duty of a wise father,
that is, sending his son into a far country, not only to tell him of the
pleasure and commodities of the way, but also faithfully to show and make
manifest unto him the great perilles and dangers that are like to befall in
that journey: So seems it unto me, that it is the office and duty of a
godly instructor and teacher, that he do not only command those things,
which are good and godly, but also that he do demonstrate and set before
them, the things that are dangerous, and for their greatest hurt and
annoyaunce. Wherefore I pray you, that you will not deny this your duty unto
us, in this case.


Theodidactus. I will do it, and that willingly. Parents ought first of all
First, from Adolatrie.
to have diligent care, that they withdraw and hold them from false and
ungodly worshipping of Gods. Forasmuch as it is said before, that there is
but one true God. Secondly, they must Secondly, from all these vices following.
be drawn and holden from laciuious and wanton company, and the familiar
fellowship of household servants, from all beastly and filthy sightes: from
the company of light and wanton women, from common daunsings and Maygames,
Fayres and other open places and assemblyes, from wanton meetinges and
banquettinges, from rebauld speeches and iestings, from railings, backbiting,
and slaundering, from pride and disdain, from all superstition, from
idleness, from having of money, forasmuch as they can not tell how to use it,
and from all dishonest games. Furthermore, also their Parents shall admonish
them that they give no credit to coniurations, Witchcraftes, sorceries and
such like vain trifles.


Theophilus. You give us very good counsel, but from what kind of vices
besides these shall children be feared, for there be almost an innumerable
sort of mischiefs and slightes, by the which Satan does assault children,
and in which he studieth and lies in wait to intrappe them.


Theodidactus. To the end that children may become and prove good and honest
Thirdly, children are to be feared from lying.
men, they must be diligently and carefully kept and feared from the vanity
and custom of lying, than the which nothing is more filthy, nor more ungodly
or wicked. Wherefore the voice of God is to be heard as well in the Prophets,
as also in the Apostles and others, which in Moses cries out in this manner.

Non mentiemini, nec decipiet vnusquisque proximum suum. Ye shall not Leuit. 19.
lie, neither deal falsely one with another. And S. Paul forbids lying,
saying: Nolite mentiri inuicem. Lie not one to another. And too the Ephesians
he says: Deponentes mendacium, loquimini veritatem, Collo. 3. Ephe. 4.
vnusquisque cum proximo suo. Laying aparte all Lying, speak ye the truth
one to another. The Lord our God forbids us to lie, because it greatly
displeases him, as witnesses Solomon saying: Dominus odit linguam mendacem.
The Lord hates and abhors a Prou. 6.
lying tongue: And again: Abominatio est Domino labia mendacia, qui autem
fideliter agunt placent Deo, testis iniquus peribit. The Lord Idem. 12. Idem.
21. Psalm. 5.
abhors deceiptfullippes, but they that labor for truth pleases him, a
false witness shall perish. And the Psalmograph says, Odisti omnes qui
operantur iniquitatem, perdes omnes qui loquuntur mendacium. Thou hate all
the workers of iniquity, thou will destroy all that speak leasing. And
Solomon says: Testis fidelis non mentietur profert mendacium dolosus testis. A
faithful witness will not dissemble: but a false record will make a lie. And in
the 30. chap. he prays that vanity and lies might be removed far from
him. And Jesus Sirach says: Jesus Syrach 20.
Do not love lying, for it brings many euilles, according to this saying: Os
quod mentitur, occidit animam. The mouth that lies, slays the soul. What
wickedness and destruction lying does always bring with it, may easily be
gathered by the example of Ananias and Saphira Act. 5.
his wife, both which died within the space of three hours together. By this
example (I say) let us admonish our children to flee from lying as from a
common plague.


Theophilus. You have plainly taught us by the most assured testimonies of the
holy Scriptures, ihat our children are to be feared from this filthy vice of
lying. But to the end they might be the more feared from this great mischief,
if you will show us some examples out of the heathen writers, you shall do us
great pleasure.


Theodidactus For that I perceive the saying of the old Philosophers have
great force in counselling and persuading, I will willingly here Solon.
bring some things to your remembrance. For nothing ought to be more strange
unto an honest man, than lying.

Wherefore Solon among many other good laws which he made for the Athenians,
he straightly forbad them this great vice of lying.

Aristotle says: Omne mendacium pr^uum est and fugiendum. Al Aristotle.
lying is wicked and to be abhorred. And again he says, Verax creditur tamet
si fing it aliquando sed mendax non creditur etiamsi jurat. A true man is
believed albeit he feign sometimes: but a Lier is not believed, though he
doesweare. Among the Persians also it was a very The Persians taught their
children three things. Aristotle.
great fault to lie. Wherefore, they taught their Children three special
things in their youth: Equitare, arcusagittas excutere, and vera loqui. To
ride well, to shoot fair, and to speak truly. Aristotle being demanded
what a man gained by his lying, says: that when he speaks truth he is not
credited. And Plato says: An nescis, quod ipsum mendacium omnes homines,
Dijque oderunt? Do thou not know that all men, yea and the Gods also, do
abhor lying? And Cicero says: Si quis semel veritatis fines transilierit,
actum est de eius fide. If a man have once passed the bounds and limittes of
truth: his credit is sore cracked (as they say.)


Theophilus. You do not know what great commodity and profit you have
brought to us and our posterity, by showing us as well out of the word of
GOD, as also by the Heathen Writers, What great perils and dangers comes by
Lying. Now I pray you show us some other vices, from the which our Youths
are to be feared.


Theodidactus. Also this Age chiefly must be kept from wicked Beasts, From
wicked lusts. Cicero lib, 1. officiorum.
and must be exercised in Labor, in travail and in patience both of mind
and body. Vt in Bellicis and Ciuilibus offic^s eorum vigeat Industria. That as
well in fears of War, as also in Civil duties, their pains and industry
may floorishe and have some force. Caueant intemperantiam, meminerint
verecundiae and sobrietatis libidinosa intemperansque adolescentia, effatum
corpus tradit senectuti. Let them beware of intemperancie, and have mind of
shamefastness and sobriety: For a Libidinous and intemperate youth, soon
commits and delivers a weak body unto old Age.

But to the end that our youth may more manifestly see and perceive what a
great evil lust is, and how great a plague fornication and Adultery is, out
of the Fountaynes of the holy Scriptures I will plainly show, how straying
and wicked Lusts are utterly forbidden of GOD, and thereunto will join the
pains and grievous punishments due for the same. It is written in the
twentieth Chapter of Exodus. Thou shall Exodus 20. Leuit. 20.
not commit Adultery. And Leuiticus 20. Si quis maechatus fuerit cum Vxore
alterius, and adulterium perpetrauerit cum Coniuge Proximi sui, morte moriantur
and maechus and adultera. If a man shall break Weadlocke with another man's
wife, even he that shall break Weadlocke with his neighbors wife, let them
be slain both They must flee fornication and Adultery.
the Aduouterer and the Aduoutresse.

Tobias performing the duty of a good and Godly Father, admonishes his
Son after this manner: Attend tibi mi Fili Tobias 4.
ab omni Fornicatione, and praeter Vxorem tuam, nunquam patiaris crimen scire.
My Son keep thee from all Fornication (and Cor. 6.
besides thy wife) see that no fault be known by thee. And Saint Paul
says: Be not deceived, neither Fornicators nor Idalaters, nor Adulterers,
nor Effeminat, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkardes, nor reuilers, nor pillars, shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

And to the Ephesians he says: Fornication and all uncleanness, Ephe. 5.
or covetousness, neither foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
comely, Let it not be once named among you. For this ye know, that no
Whooremonger, neither unclean Person, or covetous Person, which is a
Worshipper of Images, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of
GOD. With these Godly Sentences shall Parents terrify their Children, least
they pollute and defile them selves with these horrible and filthy crimes. And
because this vice augmented, and increases very much of idleness, riotous
banqueting and drunkenness, therefore I also judge it meet that children be
restrained from wine, the immoderate use whereof, is enemy to good health,
besides many other Drunkenness is to be shuned.
perils and dangers as may appear here following. It is written by the
Prophet Esaie: Vae qui consurgitis mane adebrietatem sectandam, and potandum
vsque ad vesperam, vt vino aestuetis. Esaias. 5.
C^^hara and Lyra, and Timpanum, and Tibia, and vinum in conuiuijs vestris, and
opus Domini non respicitis, nec opera manuum eius consideratis. Vae qui
potentes estis ad bibendum vinum, and viri fortes ad miscendam ebrietatem. Woe
unto them that rise up earl, to follow drunkenness, and to them that continue
until night, till the wine do inflame them. And the Harp and Vial, Timbrel
and pipe and wine are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the
Lord, neither consider the work of his hands. Woe unto them that are mighty
to drink wine, Eccle. 19.
and to them that are strong to power in strong drink. Vinum and mulieres,
apostatare faciunt sapientes, and arguunt sensatos. Wine and Women Prou. 23.
Ibidem.
lead wise men out of the way, and put men of understanding to reproof. The
Drunkard and the glutton shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed with
rags. Cui vae, cuius patri vae, cui rixae, cui foueae, cui sine causa
vulnera, cui suffosio oculorum? Nonne his, qui commorantur in vino, and student
calicibus epotandis? To whom is woe? To whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to
whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? and to whom is the
redness and glaring of the eyes? Even to them that tarry long at the wine,
and to them to go and seek mixed wine. Ebrietas est blandus Demon, dulce
vene^um, suaue peccatum: quam qui habet, seipsum non habet. Drunkenness Aug. in
quodam sermon. Aug. in lib. de paeniten.
is a flattering Devil, a pleasant poison, a sweet sin, which who so uses
knows not how to use and guide himself Ebriosus quum ab sorbet vinum, ab
sorbetur a vino; abominabitur a Deo; despicitur ab Angelis: deridetur ab
hominibus: destituitur a virtutibus: confunditur a daemonibus: conculcatur ab
omnibus. The Drunkarde when he suppeth up the wine, the wine swalloweth him up
again: he is hated of GOD: despised of Angels: derided of men: deprived of all
virtues: confounded of the Devils and utterly forsaken of all honest men.

Moreover, the same Saint Augustine says: Aufert memoriam ebrietas: discipat
sensum: confundit intellectum: concitat libidinem inuoluit linguam corrumpit
sanguine^: omnia membra debilitat: vita^ diminuit, Adem.
and omnem salutem exterminat. Drunke^nes takes away the memory: it
dissolueth the sense and feeling: It confounds the understanding: it proves
filthy Lust: it faltreth the tongue: it dyminisheth and shorteneth the life:
it banisheth all health and prosperity.

Wherefore I think it not amiss, to describe unto you the The order of the
Lace. ^euching drunkenness.
order of the Lacedaemonians concerning this point, which when they had any of
their servants so beastly blemished and overtaken with drink, caused them to
be brought before them at their feasts and bankets: not to sport and delight
themselves, with beholding their beastly behavior, and fond or foolish
words void of all reason: but rather by their example to show their young men
and children, how filthy and odious a thing it is to see and behold a
drunkarde. Therefore children in their drinking of wine (from their young and
tender years) should temper and mix the same Children must abstain* from
wine.
more with water then with wine: Nam fomentum est libidinis vtnum. For wine is
the nourishment and provocation of lust, if we give credit to Saint Paul,
which says: Nolite inebriare vino, in Ephe. 5.
quo est luxuria. Be not drunken with wine wherein is excess. Wherefore
Parents also ought to have great care, that they inglut not their children
either with too much meat, or too much sleep, for that makes them dull
witted, drowsy and slothful, if they use it. But let them rather study that
their children may love and embrace sobriety, learn to talk of God, and be
kept from filthy communication.

Moreover, they shall take heed, that their children do not wax Aulus Gelli.
hautie, being puffed up with too much pride of praises and commendations
without their just desert. Furthermore, wise Parents ought to endeavor with
great diligence y^ they induce the^ unto modesty, and sometime set before them
the examples of such, which for their lewdness have suffered grief and
punishment: or for their virtues have obtained praise and great glory. Haec
enim duo perinde Plutarch.
ac virtutis elementa sunt, spes honoris and formido paenae. For these two
things, the hope of honor, and fear of pain, are as it were the principles,
elements, and first foundations of virtue. For whereas that one makes us more
prompt and ready to put in practice y^ worthy studies of virtue and works of
honesty, this other makes us flower in committing vile, filthy, and
dishonest things. Docebunt praeterea patres filios continentes linguae esse,
silentiumque apud filios multis laudibus commendabunt. Besides this, Parents
shall teach their children to be continent of tongue, and shall commend
silence unto Hope of honor and fear of pain.
them with great praises. For silence used in time convenient is sign of great
wisdom, and more to be preferred then any speech Quare liberis a
garrulitate, detractione proximi, ac caeteris linguae vitis Idem. Plut.
abstinendum esse, docebimus, and flagisiosorum hominum consortio: vtpote
assent atoribus, potatoribus, aleatoribus, and scortatoribus. Wherefore Parents
must teach and counsel their children that they abstain from chattering,
babbling, backbiting of their neighbors, and all other vices and abuses of the
tongue, and from the company and fellowship of wicked and flagitious men: as
quaffers, flatterers, dicers, haunters of Harlots and ruffians. For there is no
creatures living more pernicious then flatterers, none that brings young men
sooner to destruction. Qui tandem patres and filios radicitus obliterant, Who
at the last do root out, consume, and utterly bring into oblivion, both
Fathers of flatterers. etc
and children, through the sugared bait of their pretended pleasure. For these
are such as incite and stir up their young masters to royst it out lively,
and to cut it out of the whole cloth. The life of man is but a moment (say
they). Therefore (my good young master) spend not your time so basely and
obscurely as many young Gentlemen do, like momish meacockes and bashful babes
what need you regard your Fathers threats and menaces? He doteth with age
and is almost ready to be laid on Beer, which ere it be long we shall
hoyse up upon our shoulders, and carry out at the doors to his funeral
farewell. And afterward, so soon as ever they begin to burgen and sproute up
a little, then do they persuade them, either to keep Harlots, or else move
them to marriage before they be wise, or have any experience of the world,
and this must be done in all y^ post have that may, that afterward they may
have leisure to repent them all the days of their life: And then for their
maintenance, they must scrape and catch from their parents, whatsoever they
can get by book or croke: so that at y^ last they royst it out so long, that
they are driven to this issue (for present payment of ready money whereof they
ever stand in great need) to make out leases of their lands, before they
have them in use and possession, yea and oftentimes morgage, or sell away
before hand their possibility whiles their father is yet living to the great
bewayling, lamentation and heaviness of the good old man which pearceth so
deeply, and is so surely settled in his sorrowful heart, that full soon it
hasteneth his hoare head unto the greedy grave, which is the thing that these
young Roysters have long wished and desired. Wherefore such Parents as have
any godly care of the good and virtuous education and trayning up of their
children, let them repel, amoue, and shake of from them all such pestelent
flatterers, as most proud disdamefull, and ravenous beasts.


Theophilus. Of what special points does the true and perfect education of
children consist?


Theodidactus. The most perfect order of bringing up children (as witnesses A
declaration of Saint Paul's words. Educat liberos per eruditionem et
correptionem.
Paul) does depend upon two things (that is to say) of godly instruction and
moderate correction. And it apperteineth unto erudition that Parents from their
tender years show and set before them, the Almighty power, goodness, and
clemency of our most merciful God, and put them often in remembrance of his
innumerable benefits, which he bestows upon them most bountifully, as well
for the furniture of their bodies, as also for the adorning and garnishing of
their souls, and thus daily more and more does he bind them unto him through
his bountiful liberality. For the gifts and benefits as well of the body as
of the mind, are exceeding What, and how great benefits children do receive
from the(...) parents.
great, as strength, agilitie, and health of body, and what soever serves both
to the outward and inward garnishing of the same. And this is not to be
thought one of the least benefits, that it was his goodwill and pleasure that
we should be borne, not of the Heathen Infidels, and of wicked and ungodly,
but of godly, faithful, and christian parents, which have caused us to be
baptized, that so being washed and bathed in the Lauer of regeneration, by the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, and cleansed from the filthiness of our sin
(wherein we were conceived and borne) are now ingraffed and have society in
the fellowship and company of all the children of God, and faithful servants
of Christ.

And furthermore, this is greatly to be accounted of that through the great
love, care, and liberality of Parents they are instructed in y^ true knowledge
of god, so that now they repose al their whole trust and confidence in the
tender mercy of God. And do feel and understand that for the exceeding tender
love of the Mediator and reconciler Jesus Christ our sins and offenses are
not only pardoned unto us: but also we with him are made inheritors of the
kingdom of heaven. These, I say, and such like things which do apperteine to
the former part of this instruction; a good and godly father that is dessrous
to have his children virtuously trained up, shall not contemn and despise: but
very diligently provide that they may be surely fixed and ingraffed into them
whilst they are yet young and tender. Dishonest and unlawful things are to be
shunned.
It remains now y^ we speak somewhat of the other part, which teaches that
parents ought to reprove and correct their children for their offenses, and
that from their tender years, they may learn to shun, detest, and abhore, al
filthy, dishonest, and unlawful things: and it shall profit very much, and be
very available to this purpose, if they declare and set before them, the wrath
and anger of Almighty God, toward those which commit such things, and
rehearse and put them in remembrance of the horrible pains and plagues with
the which he has afflicted and plagued them even from the beginning of the
world. And it shall not be amiss to begin from our first parent Gene. 3. The
manner and order how t^ter^efie children.
Adam, to whom (alas) how greatly and exceedingly the Lord God showed himself
offended, not only for his disobedience and transgression: but also of all his
posterity in whom the same has ouerflowed, may easily appear in Gene. 3.
Again, he has left a manifest proof and example of this his detestation of
sin and wickedness, when he destroyed and drowned the whole world (except those
that were in the Arc with Noe) with y^ deluge and fearful flood, read Gene.
6. and 7. chap. After this when he plagued, destroyed, and utterly consumed
with fire and brimstone from heaven Sodom and Gomorrha, with the cities nigh
bordering upon them (that is to say) Adamam, Seboim and Segor. Moreover,
parents must show their children, Gene. 6. 7. by what means children may learn
to fear the wrath of God. Gene. 19. Exodus 8. 9. 10 etc.
that God being stirred and provoked against the Eegyptians with a hatred and
detestation of their great wickedness, disobedience and rebellion, afflicted
them and laid upon them ten grievous and fore plagues (that is to say) with
frogs, lice, moraine of beasts, botch and sores, hailestones, thunder,
lightening grasshoppers, darkness, and the killing of their first borne. And
for y^ the more examples you shall be able to express, the more it terrifieth
in this case, you shall add heereunto, that woeful and horrible spectacle, of
the wasting, consuming and destruction of the City of Jerusalem: the
discomfiture, overthrow, and utter subversion of the miserable people of the
Jews, the which continues even till this day. At the last, least these
things may seem to small purpose being so long since, they shall recite unto
them the lamentable turmoyles troubles and persecutions of the Christians,
throughout all the corners of the world, as in Asia, Aphrica, and Europe. And
then let us yet come a little nigher to our selves, and that within the
compass of our own remembrance, and we shall easily see perceive and
understand how those mortal and sworn enemies of Christ and all Christians,
the Turks have on every side mightily prevailed, and do daily more and more
invade our borders and territories, how they rob, spoil, imprison, mannacle
and cruelly vex and torment the poor Christians, wherein manifestly appears
the wrath of God toward us, for our disobedience, rebellion and wickedness.
For, these rumors of wars, these motions of sedition, these tumultes and
vprores, these commotions, throughout al kingdoms and provinces, these many
strange and grievous diseases which daily increase to our great annoyance, the
dearth of corn and other victuals in many places, this exceeding pride without
profit, this lack of true friendship, good neighborhood, and unfeigned love,
with many other more mischiefs as ill, let them persuade their children, that
they proceed of none other cause, then the heavy wrath of God, for our
disobedience and rebellion against the Lord, and are as it were his whips and
scourges, wherewith he does smite, correct and chasten us, which otherwise
would never turn unto the Lord. To conclude, before all other things, parents
shall provide, that this be surely settled, and firmly fixed in the tender
minds of children, that not only they may perceive and judge these temporal
and bodily afflictions are laid upon us for our sins and offenses: But that
they may surely persuade themselves that there are far greater and more
grievous, prepared for us (that is to say) most dreadful damnation and
everlasting torment, except we speedily repent and turn unto the Lord.


Theophilus. Without all question, these and such like admonitions are not only
profitable, but also very necessary. For there be many fathers of families,
which are altogether ignorant that the worshipping of Idols is so great
abomination before God: And there are also very few that know what an heap
of mischiefs, lust, lyinge, and drunkenness brings with them. Therefore
you have done marvelous well, that you have put us in remembrance of these
things, and we heartely beseech you, that for this godly care you have
toward us, you would also teach and instruct us, by what means young men
may best be holden back, restrained, feared and terrified from corrupt
religion and false worshipping of God, from disobedience, rebellion and from
all those other vices.


Theodidactus. Youth may be moved and terrified by diverse ways and means
from those evils, perils and dangers which are often wont to hurt, and greatly
anoy as well the body as the mind, as if we do lay before them the examples of
those, which for their stubbornness, disobedience and contumacie against their
Parents, have suffered most fearful plagues and grievous punishments.


Theophilus. I pray you show us what they are, which have been punished and
Here are horrible examples of rebellion etc.
plagued for their disobedience and rebellion. For you shall find us willing
to hear you.


Theodidactus, It shall be very profitable to set before children the terrible
examples 1. Regum. 4.
of the wrath of God, which light upon the children of Heli, Hophny, and
Phinees, which were slain in the wars. Of Cain, Gene. 4.
which was accursed. Of Dathan and Abiron with their accomplices, which were
swalowed up of the earth. Of Absolon, who rebelling Number. 16. ^. Sam. 18.
against his father David, in the chase of his enemies was hanged in an Oak,
and so perished miserably. Of that seditious Zamri, against Helam, which
perished with fire. Of Cham, which was accursed, for that he saw his father
naked* and derided him. Of Sheba, who moved ^. Sam. 20.
sedition against David, and by the wisdom of a woman was beheaded And
children shall learn not only by these, but by daily examples to fear the
wrath of God, which appears every where. For God will not leave any wicked
sin unpunished, as it may be seen in murderers, thieves, robbers, rebels,
seditious persons, and pirattes, all which we see by the determinate will of
God are caught up in every place, whose fairest end is either the Gallous, or
else do suffer some other Tragical death and cruel torment to their utter
shame and confusion.


Theophilus. For as much now as we have learned of you the absolute order and
perfect method of the instructing and ordering of our youth, so that what
soever pertains to the same, you have made it so apparent and manifest unto
us, that (except we were more sluggish and dull than the drowsy Dormouse, or
more blind than the mouseling Molewarpe, whose pleasure is to be always
wrooting in the earth, and cannot endure the light) we may easily see,
perceive, and understand, what each of us ought to follow, and what to shun
and avoid: with which your so excellent documentes and instructions (I say)
when we have our children well seasoned and furnished, do you think it meet
and convenient that we manumit them, and set them at liberty to do what they
like best, and to ride or go whither their fond affections shall move them?


Theodidactus. Nay not so. For the nature of all men is so vitiate infected,
and poisoned with the sin of our first Parents Adam and Eve, that except we
be continually restrained and holden back with godly discipline, good counsel
and admonitions, we degenerat and grow ever worse and worse.


Theophilus. But if the utility and profit of children and youths so
require, that Whither children ought to be sent into strange countries to
learn the liberal sciences.
they might travel into far countries, to have some further sight, skill, and
judgment in the liberal Arts, and to have more knowledge in the tongues, and
experience in diverse other things: Shall they not rather always abide and stay
at home, and be severely kept under the discipline of their Parents?


Theodidactus. I have known some young Gentlemen which have traveled into
strange nations, and at the last, have returned home adorned and garnished
with excellent learning. But yet in the mean time I have known not a few,
which have returned home to their Parents, not only unlearned, but also most
vile varlets wicked unthrifts, and roysting Ruffians, nouseled in most wicked
and ungodly opinions, blasphemous, and stained with most filthy and monstrous
manners, and beastly behavior: which with much more profit might have stayed
at home with their Parents, as daily examples do clearly testify.
Notwithstanding, if it may seem profitable and necessary to any, to send
their sons into Italy or France, to common studies in their Universities,
and to have greater understanding and knowledge in the tongues and liberal
Arts and Sciences. I will not gain say it, or strive much with them, so that
it be done with great aduisement, counsel, and consideration (that is to say)
if Parents shall first diligently instruct their children in the true knowledge
and reverend fear of God, and that the same be surely settled, and most firmly
fixed in their hearts, that it may not be easily removed, and they carried
away with every vain blast of blasphemous doctrine, and hateful Heresies,
which shall soon be blown as well into their outward ears, as also into their
inward minds, wherewith their hearts shall be so infected, that both body and
mind shall soon be out of all good course. Whereof all the Patriarchs and
Prophets had great regard, as we may read in their Books, which have most
diligently and carefully taught and instructed their children in the fear of
God, foretold them of perilles and dangers, and discouraged them from the
company and fellowship of wicked men, as we may see by the example of
Benjamin, which was always kept at home of Gene. 42.
his father Jacob. And except Joseph had been diligently instructed of his
father in the ways of the Lord God, How (I pray you) had he avoided the
lascivious words of Putiphers wife? which with her daily allurementes, and
with her peruersse policies did solicit and move him, that by some means
she might draw him into the horrible sin of adultery: except (I say) he
had been carefully taught of his father, and that from his childehood, the
true knowledge and fear of God, undoubtedly he had been intrapped with her
fair promises, and had utterly perished with the sugared words of this lewd
lascivious woman. For Joseph was young, well favored and comely. And if per
adventure there be any that will not be moved with these godly examples, De
Natura Ceti.
let him read Pliny de natura Ceti, A Sea fish of very great bigness, who
describes his body to be 600. feet in length, and 300. feet in breadth,
which watches and keeps his young ones very carefully, neither does suffer
them to stray far from him, and is moved with such exceeding care toward them,
y^ in the time of any storm, he receives them into his womb again, least
they should be hurt with the force and violence of the storm and tempest, or
fall into any peril or danger, and when the storm is once over, and the Sea
calm, he eiecteth and vomiteth them out again: By which example, I wish all
Parents to be admonished that they send not their children into strange and
far countries except, (as I said) they be well and virtuously instructed: and
so as well by reason of their age, as also by the experience of many things,
they become wiser, and of more perfect judgment to discern between good and
evil.

Again, if a man be ignorant, and knows how and after De Delphinis natura.
what manner this first mutable, wavering and slipperie age ought to be
defended, preserved and instructed, let him learn this lesson also of the
Delphins, which do accompany their young ones a long time, until they be
well grown and able to shift, and pray for them selves: neither will they
suffer their young ones to raunge abroad and depart out of their sight (except
some elder one attend upon them as a guide and ouerseer. By this example also
are Parents to be admonished, that they send not their sons into strange
countries unadvisedly without their Paedagoges, Tutors and Governors, least
that they be Italianated, as that worthy man master Aschan has sufficiently
described, in the latter end of his first Book, entitled the Schoolemaister.
Moreover the Jews also at this day, do observe this one thing very carefully,
that they suffer none of their sons to forsake and leave their fathers house,
and so to trauell-into any strange nation or country, except they have first
lived in wedlock, and have had the fellowship and society of a wife by the
space of three years at the least, and have begot children by them: And then
liberty is granted unto them to depart and go whither they will about their
needful affairs, and necessary business.


Theophilus. The Jews in this point, are far wiser than many of us
Christians. But now seeing that by many arguments and good reasons you have
showed and declared unto us, how and after what manner Parents ought to
instruct and bring up their children: now we earnestly desire to know of
you, after what sort the Mothers ought to deal with their children in their
bringing up. For it is certain, that Mothers by the commaundeof God, ought to
have no less care and charge belonging unto them, than the Fathers and
Masters, touching the good government of their sons* daughters, and
servants.


Theodidactus. I cannot deny or refuse this my duty unto you, desiring so
good and godly a thing: First, this duty belongs to godly matrones The
duty of mothers. Ephe. 5. Col. 3. 1. Pet. 3.
and mothers of families, that they them selves be in subjection to their own
husbands, as Saint Paul admonishes, saying: Mulieres subditae estote viris
vestris, sicut oportet in domino: Wives submit your selves, and be obedient to
your own husbands, as unto the Lord: Wherefore a good wife ought not to
abuse, the moderation, humanity, and lenity of her husband, for then she
resists the commandment of God. For it is one thing to obey, an other
thing, to rule, and an other thing to command. And it nourishes love and
concord exceedingly, when the wife is ready at the beck and commandment of
her husband: enclineth and prepares her self to accomplish his requests, and
studieth to pleasure and gratify him to the uttermost of her power: And
eschueth all things which she knows would offend him. For thus verily (as
one says) a good wife by obeying her husband, does also after a sort, rule
and command him. And this ought a woman to do, not only for the avoiding of
variance, discord, and breach of love, but rather for that it is the
commandment of God.


Theophilus. What are the chiefest ornaments of Godly Matrones?


Theodidactus. Saint Peter says: that the most excellent ornament of godly
Pet. 3.
Matrones is, to stay and repose their whole trust, confidence and hope in the
living God: That they should be sober in their outward apparel, and be decked
inwardly with the virtues of their minds, as with gentleness, meekness,
quietness, and chastity, which are most precious things in the sight of God.


Theophilus. But now seeing we know that Matrimony is instituted and
ordained of God, for the procreation of children, what (I pray) would you
advise and counsel the mother to do, when she shall perceive and feel her
self with child?


Theodidactus. So soon as the mother shall perceive or know her self to be
with child, she shall commit the same so conceived in her womb, unto the
Lord God with fervent and hearty prayers, and shall have great care during
that time, that she do not vere, disquiet, and give her self to anger. Also
she shall forbear all dancing, and immoderate stirring, striving, lifting
and labor, from intemperauncie in eating and drinking, and from all other
things which might be offenciue or hurtful to the child whilst it is yet in
the mothers womb: And when through the providence of God she shall perceive
and feel the time of her travail to be at hand, she shall wholly give her
self to earnest and godly prayers, and after that the infant is borne, then
according to the order prescribed by the word of God, shall prepare to have it
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.


Theophilus. Now when the infant is borne, is it not the mothers part and
duty to nourish it with her own breasts and milk?


Theodidactus. In mine opinion, it is most necessary and best agreeing to the
Mothers oght to nourish their children with their own dugges.
nature of the child, that mothers nourish and give suck to their own
children; with their own dugges and breasts: for mothers with a greater care
and diligence will cherish them, and are moved thereunto with a certain entire
love, and natural affection, for y^ they are of them bread and born. And
therefore they have often this proverb in their mouths: It is a near collop,
that is cut from their own flesh: So that the mothers love is unfeigned But
these Nurses use no true, but fained and dissembled love, because they are
hirelings and so by y^ means: urged to practice and use their kindness, for
gain and lucer sake. And Aulus Gellius says: Optima matter non permittat
aliouius Aulus Gol.
lactis contagione filiu^ suum infici. A good mother cannot abide nor suffer
her child to be infected with the contagion of a strangers milk. And nature
her self does evidently declare and show, that mothers ought to cherish with
their own milk those, which they have engendered and borne. And therefore
nature has given to every living beast that bringes forth young, power to
nourishe and comfort the same, with their own milk. And God by his great
providence and inscrutable wisdom, has provided and given unto women two
breasts, that if it should fortune at one travail, they should be delivered
of two children, that then they might have two fountaynes for their better
nourishing. Great rare therefore must be employed, and pains bestowed, that
the very mothers them selves (as I have said) do nourishe and bring up their
infantes with their own breasts and milk.

For the benefit of the mothers milk, has wrought such great effect,
reward and merit with our elders, that whenever the mothers have desired
any hard or difficult thing at the hands of their children, they have ever
desired and requested the same after this manner, that (for the tender love they
bear unto them in their infancy, when they nourished and suckled them even
with the milk of their own breasts, with great care and diligence, mixed
sometime with sorrow, and the often abridging of their wonted pleasures, with
the abandoning of many sweet sleeps) they would grant their requests. As
Homer makes report of Hecuba, the wife of Priamus King of Troy, Quae nudatis
vberibus (quae suxerat aliquando Hector) orabat vt se intra maenia contineret,
Which with her bare and naked breasts (which Hector her son, that most
noble, valiant, and worthy wight, had sometime sucked, and with their sweet
sugared and dulcete drops, had batled and nourished him up, when as yet he
was any manner way far unable to help and succor him self; For the
requiting whereof, and as ever he would show him self a loving, natural,
and obedient child toward her) she (I say) desired and entreated him, that
he would now save, protect, and defend her within the reared rampires, and
warlike walls of Troy; that most famous and renoumed City, from the furious
force of the raging and cruel enemies, which he most obediently (as well with
valiant courage, as also with prudent pollicitie) performed, until he him
self was slain by Achilles, one of the most valiant Capitaines of the
Greeks.


Theophilus. You have showed great reasons why the mothers should give suck to
their own children, But if they be oppressed with infirmities and diseases,
and be unhealthful, (which may happen) or hasten to the procreation of other
children. Shall they not then procure Nurses for the better nourishing and
bringing up of their infantes?


Theodidactus. Yes forsooth, then must Nurses be provided and gotten, but not
How a Nurse should be chosen, if need re^u^re.
without great regard, good aduisement, and singular choice: For you may not
intertaine and admit bondwomen, forerenners, nor drowsy drunkardes: you may
not choose sawsie sluttes, malapert mawdes, wanton wanderers, gawd^e gosseps,
neither unchaste or dainty fingred dames, nor of the rascal rebauldes, and
rudest sort: But such as be sober, honest, wise, discreet, well condicioned,
of gentle behauior, of a good complexion, cleanly, and such a one as can well
frame her tongue to an exquisite order of speech, in delivering and pronouncing
the same plainly with apt words, lest the young and tender infant in the
budding and flouring years be stamed with corrupt manners, and unseemly words.
And so with sucking the milk and nutriment of such lewd Nurses, issuing and
proceeding from an unnatural body and disordred mind, be infected with the
most pernicious contagion, of soul filthiness, odious errors, and detestable
diseases, which shall very hardly or never be removed and cured. For even as it
is most necessary and expedient to frame and fashion the limbs and members of
children (so soon as they be borne) that they may grow straight and seemly:
So in like manner, it is convenient and most decent to indue their children with
good manners (even from their Cradles) and to frame them up in civil behavior,
whilst they are yet young and tender: For infancy is a flexible thing, and
fit to frame to what thing you please, (as we have said before.) And as Seals
be soonest insculped and engraven into soft wax, so are good disciplines,
precepts and eruditions, with great facility instilled and printed in
childrens tender minds. And Plato seems very diligently to admonish Nurses,
that they sing not to their babes and youg infantes every trifling tale,
rusticke ryme, baudie Ballet, and old wives fabled fanfies, lest from their
Cradles it shall fortune, that they be nouseled in folly, and fraught with
corrupt conditions, and too bold behavior. And this also is not to be
pretermitted, that so What company a child ought to use, and what play fellows
he must have.
soon as children be grown up to some strength and bigness, that you take
great heed with what companions and playfellowes ye do associate them: For
you must choose such, as be seasoned with goodness, and endued with virtuous
manners, and such as can speak their language quickly and readily, least they
using the company of barbarous bablers, bitter blasphemers, cruel cursers, rude
roges, sawsie slouens, and all the whole rabble of rascals be of them infected,
corrupted, and imbrewed. For David says: Qui tangit picem cum ea Proverb.
inquinabitur. Who so touches pitch shall be defiled there with.


Theophilus. What is the first thing that the mother or Nurse shall teach the
child to speak?


Theodidactus. So soon as it shall attain to such age, as it ca^ once begin to
speak, the first word that it should be taught to pronounce and utter, is What
a child ought to pro^our^e first.
God, from whence as from a most lucky lot, all the whole web of speech
should begin. For this motherly care and discipline shall be very profitable
to children of young and tender years, and shall make them more apt and ready
for the attaining of greater studies.


Theophilus. A fatherly instruction is not only profitable, but also (as I
perceive by you) the mothers discipline is wonderful effectual in children.


Theodidactus. Nothing more effectual. Wherefore S. Ambrose was wont to
persuade and counsel mothers after this manner, saying: Matres ablactate
Ambrosius.
filios vestros, diligite eos, and orate pro his vt longaeui super terram sint;
monete eos, vt magis crucem domini tollant, quam vt hanc vitam d^ligant.
Mothers suckle and nourish your own children, love them, cherish them, and pray
for them that they may have prosperity upon this earth to Gods pleasure;
admonish them that they may rather take the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ and
follow him, than love this vain and transitory life.


Theophilus. Ambrose gives very wise counsel. But after that children have
passed their infancy, and begin to gather unto them as well the vigor and
strength of body, as also the gifts and qualities of the mind, what manner
care and diligence shall the mothers use and bestow then, for their better and
more perfect instructing?


Theodidactus. More diligent care and pains ought to be bestowed upon them ^ut
duty to God, our Parents, and country.
then, than before. First, they ought to teach them, the true knowledge and
worship of the Almighty, immortal and ever living God, the creator and maker
of all things: the duty they owe to their country: the reverend love y^ they
should bear toward their Parents and kinsfolks: that from their tender years,
they might receive and taste that, which is the very groundworke and sure
foundation of all other virtues, and without the which nothing can prosper. Let
them have fellowship and acquaintance with those, which in them selves shall
show some hope of towardness such as shall fear God, and obey the laws:
honor their Parents, and reverence their elders: which with their equals shall
be courteous and gentle, and to their inferidurs, favorable and friendly: Let
them admit and receive all with cheerful words and countenance, as
companions without any disdain, but yet let them use the best most familiarly.
In like manner teach them to observe and keep a temperancie and moderation in
meats and drinks, that (as it were) the foundation of continency might be
laid, and framed unto a future fortune and age yet to come.

Furthermore, let them admonish and warn them to flee and shun those
delights and pleasures, which are inwrapped with any kind of shame and
dishonestie: And let them bestow their study, diligence, and knowledge in
those things, which may be to their praise, profit, and pleasure, when they
shall attain to a greater age, and grauer exercises in y^ common wealth. In
these things (I say) and such like shall mothers inform and teach their sons
and daughters, that they may the more easily procure and get unto their
children these aides, helps, and furtherances unto good and godly doctrine.
Besides this, look, what is a shame for them to do in secret, suffer them
not to talk and jest thereof openly. From what vices children ought to be
feared.
Therefore restrain and keep them from al filthy, contumelious, and rebalde
words, and if it happen that any dissolute, dishonest, and unseemly speech
do escape them at any time: they may not laugh at the same, and hide it with a
kiss, as many fond mothers do: but rather reprove them, and give them such
moderate correction for the same, as may be for their amendment. And I would
wish that mothers should abandon from their children, all wrath, envy,
hatred, covetousness, and filthy lust, through which vices, virtue decays
and waxes very fainte and feeble.

Moreover they shall admonish their children very often, that they abstain
from all blasphemous and filthy oaths, for surely they shall gain no credit,
which are ready to swear and rap out their oaths for every vain tristle, and
light occasion. And let them accustom to speak truth, for truth in her
nakedness is most beautiful. And there is an old Proverb, not so common as
true, A common pr^verbe.
that is: Truth may be blamed, but it shall never be shamed: Ideoque
veritati adhaerendum in rebus omnibus: And therefore in all things we stick
unto the truth. Veritas simplex oration. Truth tells a smoothe and plain
tale, without any glosing: But the maintenance of a Lie, needs not only a
good memory, but also many circumstances, and what both the true speaker and
the liar gayneth, Aristotle makes manifest in these words, Verax creditur
tametsi fingt aliquando, sed mendax non creditur etiamsi jurat. A true man is
believed, yea though he do feign sometimes: but a liar, is not believed
though he do swear.


Theophilus. You have showed unto us many excellent lessons, for which we
think our selves greatly bound unto you. In deed for because mothers are
always for the most part conversant at home with their children, therefore I
judge a more special care and regard of the daughters is enjoined unto them,
and that they may more easily and conveniently instruct and nurture them, then
the fathers.


Theodidactus. I do easily believe it, Saint Chrysostom was wont to exhort
Chrysostom. his exhortation unto mothers.
mothers that they should be very mindful of their duties, saying thus:
Matres filiarum vobis curam assumite, est ea vobis cura perfacilis: curate
solicit, vt domi iugiter sint, etc. Mothers take upon you the charge of your
daughters, it is an easy care and labor for you: look to them carefully,
that they may be kept within the doors, and holden in some honest labor and
exercise, let them learn such qualities as may be most seeming and best
agreeing to their state and calling. And suffer them not to run gadding and
gambolding, from Alehouse to alehouse, or from Tavern to Tavern in any lewd
or light company. And before all things bring them up in the fear of God, and
true religion, teach them to be contemners of this outward decking, trimming,
and niceness: and haters of idleness, the very fountain of follies, and
mother of all other mischiefs: And in steed of this outward beauty and
garishe gaudinesse, garnishe them with the inward virtues and beauty of the
mind, as wisdom, shame fastness, modesty, soberness, silence, and
chastity, which things shall sooner prefer them unto a wise man in the way
of marriage, then any other dowry. And instructing them after this manner, you
shall not only preserve them, but also their husbands (when time shall permit)
from many inconveniences, which otherwise on them might befall.


Theophilus. My good Theodidactus, here would I be glad to hear of you some
examples of godly matrones, by the which mothers might be more diligently
admonished, that they slack not their duty at any time, but that they may
the more diligently care for their children and families by their good examples.


Theodidactus. There be many examples of Godly matrones, by the which mothers
may not only be exhorted, but also excited and stirred up to the better
perfourmance of their duties, For what mother will be so hard hearted,
unnatural, and discourteous, that will not be moved with this one, and that so
godly an example of Monica the De Monica matre Aug. exemplum.
mother of Augustine, which, with what painful labors, what exceeding cares,
what great diligence, and watchfulness, what ardent prayers, and almost
coutinuall tears did she draw forward Augustine her son unto the true
religion and faith in Jesus Christ, who shall not easily perceive and see ex
liberis confessionum? For he writes of himself in his 3. book, after this
manner. Et misisti manum tuam ex alto, and de profunda caligne eruisti animam
meam, quum ploraret ad te matter mea, fidelis tua, amplius quam flent matres
corporea funera etc. And thou O Lord did send down thine hand from heaven,
and did deliver my soul from utter darkness, when my mother thy faithful
servant, wept and lamented unto thee, more then mothers commonly use to weep,
lament and mourn for the corporal funerals of their dearly beloved children.
The examples also of the Heathen do sometime move our minds unto virtue,
wherefore it shall not be amiss for good Matrones and mothers of families to
follow the example of Euridices, who though she were an Illyrian, Euridices.
of the Barbarians, and a woman well stricken in years, yet to nurture and
instruct her children in virtue, and in the exercises, manners, qualities, and
behauiours best liked in what country, she bestowed great study, care, and
diligence.

Moreover, when a certain woman at Ephesus named Ionica, made great vaunt and
boast of a piece of cloth of Arras that she Ionica.
had made: and had wrought the same with Images very curiously, and set it out
point device with diverse costly colors, as a thing most precious, in token of
her great huswifery: One Lacena Lacena.
by and by brought soorth her four Sons which she had with her own
breasts nourished, and after with great pains, care and diligence instructed
in virtue, and all other honest qualities and seemly behavior, most decent
and agreeable for such toward youths. In these and such like exercises (says
she) ought an honest and virtuous matrone and mother of family to rejoice and
vaunt her self, and not in the fine curious clothes, and costly robes of the
Ephesians.

Cornelia the mother of Gracchus (when Campana that gallant dame Cornelia.
soiourned at her house, and showed unto Cornelia, her rich array, Jewels, and
costly garments, than the which there could be no costlier worn at that time)
reproves her after this manner, When her children returned from the School,
and behaved themselves in most humble and duetifull manner: Then she answered
Campana (glorying as she did before) that there could be nothing more
commendable, precious or excellent in this world, then children well nurtured,
and virtuously trained up and instructed, from their infancy and flouring
years, about the which she her self had bestowed greater pains, industry,
and diligence, then about her own outward garnishyng. With these and such
Women get great renow^^ in the good and virtuous education of their children,
then by the curious garnishinge of themselves etc.
like examples (mothers being admonished) ought to persuade themselves, that
they shall gain more glory and greater renowm in the virtuous education good
ordering, and perfect instructing of their sons and daughters, then in their
gay garments, curious counterpointes, and costly hangings, where with they are
wont to garnish and set forth themselves and their houses in most gorgeous
and stately manner.


Theophilus. There re^^eth as yet one scruple or doubt, which greatly troubles
my mind: and not mine only, but also many others. I do see and know many
parents, both learned and godly, which after they have caused their children to
be both virtuously and godly taught, and instructed in all kind of discipline
and good literature, and that at their great cost and charges, have
notwithstanding at the last, so degenerated and brast out into such wicked
manners, detestable disobedience, lewd lasciviousness, and horrible crimes,
that it has procured great sorrow and grief unto their Parents, and
hastened their horeheades unto the greedy grave. Which when I see and consider
in my mind, I know not what to say thereunto, nay scarcesly, what to think, I
am so vexed and troubled.


Theodidactus. There is no cause (my Theophile) why you should be so molested
and troubled, for these and such like are to be committed unto Gods divine
providence, for that they exceed the reach and capacity of our minds, and
are known to God only. Wherefore let we these things pass, neither let us
exceed the meets limits and bounds appointed unto us of God in his most
sacred word.


Theophilus. You do satisfy me herein very well, but in the mean season,
such is man's fragilitie and weakness, that it cannot contain it self, ^^^^t
that it must needs wonder and marvel at these works of God: ^^t what think
you meet to be done unto those miserable Parents, which wither and pine away
in sorrow and grief of heart? ought they not to be comforted?


Theodidactus. Yes always.


Theophilus. How, or by what means, shall that be done? I pray you tell me.


Theodidactus. They shall be comforted nothing more effectualy nor more
effectually, How parents are to be comforted, which after al godly
instructions, are compelled to suffer wicked and degenerate children.
than by the examples of the holy* Patriarchs, Prophets, and other godly men.
For such is the ordinary course of the things in this world, that not only
with sluggish^ (...), and negligent, but chiefly with vigilant, careful, and
godly parents, children are wont to degenerate grow out of all good order, and
become inoste ungracious, wicked, and abominable. And by how much their
Parents are more noble, of greater birth and parentage then others, by so much
rather the fortune and event of this calamity and misery, is wont to chance
unto them. Adam our first parent Adam. Gene. 4. Noe.
being formed and made by God himself, and adourned with great majesty, had
two sons, Cain and Abell, the which no doubt he trained up and instructed in
all kind of Piety and Doctrine: as their Sacrifices do sufficiently
witness. Nevertheless the one Gene. ^.
proved so wicked and ungodly, that he slew his brother. Noe, the most just
Patriarch, had three sons, of the which one did degenerate from the piety
and godliness of his Parents, that he merited the curse not only on
himself, but also of all his posterity. Jacob the Patriarch* had twelve
sons, and but one only Jacob.
daughter, neither is it to be doubted, but that they were very well
instructed of their Parents. Notwithstanding (...) returned Dina. Gene. 3^*
home ravished, his sons became inanquellers (...) thieves and that of their
own brother. What shall I say of Heli, Samuel, and David, whose godliness are
abundantly commended in the holy Scriptures. And this calamity has chanced
chiefly to noble and worthy personages, so often (as it were by a certain
destenie) that from thence has risen this common Proverb, Herorum Herorum
filii noxae.
filij noxae. Of the noblest Parents, the wickedest children have proce(...)ed
oftentimes. And of the wisest the most fools, Therefore, what shall Parents
do? Shall they desist and leave of their godly care of good and virtuous
education? God forbid: For if children do commit any sins or offenses
through the negligence of their Parents, the same offenses before God, shall
not be imputed only to the children, but also to their Parents. Therefore it
is good for the Parents them selves, that they diligently perform their
duties, and that they bring up their children (as it is said) by (...) and
information in the Lord. And if their pains a(...)uels shall take good
effect, and have good success, and that (...) children become virtuous and
godly, they shall account it their own gain, and yield hearty thanks unto
God, which has so prospered their labors. But if it shall fall out contrary
to their expectation, that cross must be borne patiently. And parents ought
to be thankful, that they have saved their own souls: For albeit this
godly and painful education and instructing of children has gained no profit
to the children themselves: yet does it bring great and exceeding profit unto
parents before the Lord our God.


Theophilus. Seeing now almost all things have been handeled and declared,
which may seem to appertain unto the duties of godly fathers of families,
and masters of housholdes. Now it rests that I entreat you also to show us,
how moderately and patiently Christian parents ought to bear the death of
their children: For you shall find many parents that take the death of their
children very sorowfully and impaciently.


Theodidactus. Examples of all times and ages do testify that the death of
The death of children is to be ^^rne moderatly.
children is to be borne and suffered with a good and pacient mind, and this
does manifestly appear, as well by the Heathen writers, as also by the holy
Scriptures. Wherefore Saint Paul plainly writes, that we should not
mourn, saying thus: Non contristemini sicut caeteri qui spem non habent. Be
not sorrowful as as others which have no hope. Moderate your mourning, and do
not Paul.
bewail and lament for the dead after the manner of the Ethnickes, or as the
Saduces, which have no hope of the resurrection: For the godly fathers do
know and are assured that their children die in the Lord, and that they live
now with Christ in the heavens Wherefore they have no cause to sorrow and
mourn, and let them always keep in remembrance, the example of David the
Prophet which with great wisdom: and no less patience suffered the death of
his 2. Reg. ^^.
son. Whom he did not only love for that he was his only son, but because
also he had begot him of Barfabe whom he loved dearly. And as long as he knew
that the child was in grievous sickness, he besought God for the child, that
he would save it, he fasted, mourned, and put on sackloth, and ^^ent in and
lay down upon the earth, and would not be comforted by any means. But at
the last when the child was dead, and that his scruauntes durst not tell him.
For they said: behold, while the child was yet alive, we spoke unto him,
and he would not hearken unto our voice. How will he then vex himself, if
we tell him that the child is dead? But David perceiving his Servants
whyspering, and thought that the Child was dead, and said unto them, is the
Child dead? They said yea. And David arose from the earth and washed, and
anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the
Lord, and woorshipped, and after ward came to his own house, and bade that
they should prepare that he might eat. Then said his Servants unto him:
what thing is this that thou have done: Thou did fast and weep for the
child, while it was alive, and as soon as it was dead, thou did rise up,
leave of thy mourning and did eat meat. He said, while the child was yet
alive, I fasted and wept. For this I thought, who can tell, whether GOD will
have mercy on me, that the Child may live. But now, seeing it is dead,
wherefore should I fast, can I bring him again any Mourning profits the
dead nothing at all.
more? I shall go to him, rather then he shall come again to me.

Heereuppon it came, that mourning (which profits the dead nothing at all)
grew into a contempt among the godly that then were living: and with this
answer, the^ the which there could not be found a Wiser, he satisfied them
all that were about him. And also Saint. Hierome says: Vir sapiens quum
filium suum bonae indolis amittit non doleat quod talem perdiderit, sed magis
Hieronimus.
gaudeat quod talem habuerit. A wise man when he loses his son being
virtuous and of very good towardness, does not lament and mourn for that he
has lost such a one, but rather rejoices that he has such a present, to
offer unto the Lord.


Theophilus. These are notable and worthy examples without doubt, and very
effectual medicines to temper and moderate our unmeasurable, mourning, and
sorrow of heart and mind, conceived by the death of our children. Yet I beseech
you, if you haue^ any other, declare them unto us.


Theodidactus With all myhearte, Dion the son of Hipparinus, one of Platoes
De Dione.
disciples, on a time whilst he was making an Oration in a public assembly,
his son fell down from one of the lo^ts, on the pauements and so finished his
life presently. Dion being therwithal nothing moved, neither altered he his
voice, nor changed his countenance, but constantly continued, and proceeded in
ye thing which he had taken in hand. The like we read of Anaxagoras, who took
the death of his children very constantly: For when Clazomen^o had showed him
(being in De Anaxagora.
great and earnest consultation with other) that his two sons were dead,
having no more, he therwithal being nothing affrighted, nor once moved,
aunsweared the Messenger after this manner: Sciui eos mortales nat^^ esse. I
know they were borne to die. But what shall we say of Pericles his
constancy? which when he De Pericle eiusque constantia in morte libero. ^um.
had lost all his children by a common infection and odious plague, took their
death very patiently: And was the Author unto the Athenians, that by his
example they could more easily tolerate and bear the death of their dearest
friends with great patience and constancy. These examples do admonish us,
that we do bear patiently and with good mynds the death of our children. For
seeing that the heathen men have excelled in so great constancy of mind, I
pray you, what shall not we suffer, which have professed our selves to be
Christians? We (I say) which are ingraffed unto Christ, and united unto him
through that most sacred and holy baptism Angels are good Nurses unto our
children.
and know that our children have not only a Father here upon the earth, but
also in the heavens, which has prepared his Angels that they should keep
and take charge of our children in the steed of Nurses: Whereby also by many
examples he has declared and made manifest unto us, that he cares for them
and preserves them far better and in more happy state and condition, then
parents can either hope or wish: when unto them it may seem they utterly
perish and are most unfortunate. Which by the example of the Patriarche Jacob
we may plainly see: For when he mourned and lamented for his son Joseph
being lost, and as he Genesis 37. 39. 40. 41. 42, 43. 44. 45. 46*
thought was miserably devoured of the wild beasts, yet God in the mean time
did exalt and promote him unto great honor and dignity in Egypt, and made
him the instrument and mean to comfort his father and brethren and prolonged
their days, whereas other wise they were al in danger to have perished with
famine, which fell over all the Lands there adjoining. The like happened 1.
Reg. 10.
of Saul seeking his Fathers Ass, which by the commandment of GOD by
Samuel was anointed king of Israel. Read the nienth and tenth chapters of
the first book of the kings, otherwise called, the first book of Samuel.
Luke. ^.


The like was in Christ, which at the last, was found in the middle of the
Doctors reasoning and disputing amongst them, and posing them. Therefore those
Parents, more sorrowful then need* and bearing the fortune and death of their
Children too impatiently, if they behold and consider the promises of God, and
these examples, they shall easily see and learn, that these their unfaithful
sorrows and cares for their Children, are not only wicked, but also vain and
foolish: and so shall they confirm their faith, that afterward they shall
more easily perform their duties toward their Children according to their
vocation, and moderately sustain and with patience bear the fortune of their
Children, though it were accompanied with death it self. And they ought to
believe and have sure confidence, that although they were lost or dead, that
yet nevertheless the Lord our GOD has chief regard and care of them, if
they live in his fear. And thus shall they more easily moderate and qualify
their immoderate sorrows and mourninges.


Theophilus. O immortal GOD, who can sufficiently marvel, and commend the
constancy and patience of these Ethnickes: Again, if we would faithfully
believe, that our Children are so carefully kept and preserved of GOD, and that
all things depend upon his providence, we would with greater confidence
commit all things unto him, which do appertain either to the bodies or souls
of our children. And we would not be so sorrowful and discouraged, when any
adversity shall chance either to our selves or our children, but would far
exceed those Ethnickes in constancy of mind. When I read so many and so
notable things among the Philosophers of fortitude and constancy, I am
ashamed of the inconstancy of those men, which seem to be adourned and
garnished with so rare and singular erudition and knowledge of God. But now
(my good Theodidacte) I would at the last know this one thing of you, whether
is it the duty of godly Parents, to elect and choose for their sons being
once grown to man's state and stayednesse of life, godly wives, according to
the example of Abraham?


Theodidactus Godly Parents before all things shall have special regard
Parents ought to take great heed that they choose godly wives for their Sons.
and care that they join not their Sons in marriage unto Lawelesse and
unbelieving wives, without any difference but shall follow the example of the
Patriarche Abraham, which would not have his son Isaac to be coupled in
matrimony unto a wise from among the Chanaanites, giving his servant charge
after this manner: Put thine hand under my Thigh, that I may swear thee by
the Lord GOD of Heaven and earth, that Genesis 24.
thou do not choose and take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Chanaanites, amongst whom I now dwell, but thou shall go unto mine own
country and kindred, and from thence do take a wife for my son Isaac.
Without doubt this so godly an example of Abraham ought to admonish and
earnestly move us which have either sons or daughters ready to marry: to have
great care of them: For except Abraham had feared some great peril and
danger, and had known some great and secret mischief to be hid and lurking
therein, certainly he would never have given so earnest charge to his servant.
That he should not take a wife of the daughters of the Chanaanites. For it was
not to be doubted, but that some of their daughters were of good towardnes,
nature and inclination, and also tractable, which happily might have been
drawn unto Abraham's religion, but he would not have his son to adventure
and make trial of so great a danger, and in so weighty a matter. Now
forasmuch as Abraham did seek to eschew this peril, with what face, boldness
or example, dare we presume to attempt the same? But hereof (if God will) we
will treat more at large in some other place of our next book.


The second Book of the duties of Children toward their Parents.
FOrasmuch as I have already spoken, and that you have so willingly heard from
me, and my good friend Theophilus, many things concerning those duties which
are required of Parents toward their Children, now is it meet and
convenient that we proceed to the other part of this our work and purpose,
For I promised (that to the uttermost of my simple skill and slender capacity)
I would show and declare unto you those things which did apperteine to the
duties of Godly and obedient children, (that is to wit) what honor, reverence
and obedience every child owes to their Parents. But my good Amusus, before
we treat of this thing at large, I would all your children were here present,
and that you would counsel them (as I said in the beginning of our talk)
that they may be silent, and very attentive, and bring with them, pens,
incke, and paper, to the end they might note the most principal matters and
worthy examples, and so the better commit them to memory.


Amusus. Behold here they are ready, Elizabeth, Anne, Leuinus, Charles,
Frauncis, Paul, Marie, Katherine and Barbara, and according to your
commandment, I have admonished them, that they might hearken with all
reverence, and mark every thing diligently.


Theodidactus. What other thing should I wish to these your sweet children than
that ye God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob would vouch safe to bless them for
ever, and defend them, care for them, hear them, and deliver them from all
evil.


Liberi. For that you wish so well unto us (most reverend Sir) we render unto
you hearty thanks, and do humbly pray you, that you will vouchsafe to show us
our duties, that is to say, how we ought to honor, reverence, and obey our
Parents, and in the mean season, whilst you are reciting these things, you
shall find us very willing and attentive.


Theodidactus. Dear children, for that I see you are so affected to the study
of godliness and virtue, I have determined thoroughly to satisfy your most
just and lawful requests, and to show you those things which I shall think
meet and convenient touching your duties. But before I go to the matter, I
purpose to handle all things in The order of the second Book, divided into
5. parts.
order in their ^it and appointed places, and will help your wits as much as
I may, to the end you might the better and more easily understand me,
reasoning and debating the same. In the first place therefore I will treat of
your duties (that is to say) what manner of honor and obedience ye ought to
show to your Parents. In the second place, I will bring to your remembrance some
things concerning honesty, profit, and the necessity of teaching, and true
wisdom. In the third place, I will handle the shunning of certain vices, and
of the embracing of certain virtues. In the fourth place of Matrimony, and
how a young man shall contract himself therein. And in the fifth and last
place I will recite many, and that most worthy and excellent sentences
collected out of the writings of the best and purest Authors.


Theophilus. Seeing that the first law of nature is to love our Parents, and
as Ephesians. 6. Collos. 3. Exodus 20.
witnesses the Apostle, just and pleasing before God, and has a promise of
long life: I do not a little marvel, what need there should be to give
precepts unto mortal men concerning these things?


Theodidactus. It is nothing to be meruelled at, forasmuch as we are borne of
so corrupt nature, so that it shall be needful to commannd a thing in the
judgment of al men so just, that there is no man living, able to gainsay it,
which nevertheless all bruit beasts have ingraffed into them by a certain
natural instinct and working without any law given unto them. But the Lord our
God deeth know, that the corruption of our nature is so exceeding great, that
we shall altogether be injurious to our Parents, except God through his
almighty power do restrame us, and give us obedient hearts: insomuch that
he has appointed pains of death, to such as shall curse father or mother,
which he would never have done, but that he knew this perverse and
rebellions nature to be in us.


Theophilus. Oh good God, what do I hear, Is there so great corruption and
wickedness engendered in the minds of children, that to the due duties
required of nature, they must be compelled with certain prescribed laws, and
ordinances?


Theodidactus. Nay rather such is the malice, according to this saying: the
Gene. ^.
sense and cogitation of man's heart is inclined to wickedness even from his
infancy: wherefore persuade your self that you shall never do good amongst
your children without laws, orders, chiding, threatening, stripes, and
sometimes again, with fair promises.


Theophilus. Seeing that the nature of children is so vitiate and defiled, that
unto the honor and obedience which is due unto Parents, it must be allured
sometime with promises, an other time induced by laws, and somewhiles
compelled by stripes: I do earnestly wish and desire to hear of you some
places of scripture, wherein God does command children to honor and obey
their Parents, for so I trust it shall come to pass, that after you have
declared the same unto us, the sons and daughters of this our neighbor and
friend Amusus, shall become more obedient than they have been hitherto: For it
cannot be, that where the word of God is truly taught and preached, it should
not have his force and effect: according to this saying of the Prophet Esaias.
55. My word which shall go out of Esaias. 5^.
my mouth, shall not return unto me void and empty, but shall do whatsoever I
will have it, and it shall prosper in those unto whom I have sent the same.


Theodidactus. The effect and efficacy of the divine word preached and taught
unto the people, is of greater force tha^ y^ man's reason can attain unto,
wherefore with goodwill, I will here perform my duty, and will declare the
same to these children: The Lord God of his free mercy has given a
commandment unto children for the honoring of their parents, and thereunto
has joined a most sweet promise, saying: Honora patrem tuum, and matrem tuam,
vt been sit tibi, and sis Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Leuit. 19. Tob. 7. Leuit. 27.
Eccle. 3. Places which do teach young men to fear God, and to honor their
Parents. Prou. 23.
longaeuus super terram, etc. Honor thy father and mother, that it may go well
with thee, and that thou may live long in the land which the Lord God shall
give unto thee.

Every one ought to fear his father and mother.

My son make much of thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he
lives. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him
not in thy strength, for the good deed that thou she west unto thy father,
shall not be forgotten, and thy sins also shall melt away, like as the yse in
a fair warm day.

Hearken to thy father which begot thee, and contemn not thy mother when she
waxes old.

The children of wisdom are a congregation of the righteous, Ecele. 3.
and their exercise is obedience and love. Here me your father (O my dear
children) and do thereafter that ye may be safe. For the Lord will have the
father honored of the children, and look what a mother commands her
children to do, he will have it kept. Who so honors his father, his sins
shall be forgiven him, and he that honors his mother, is like one that
gathers treasure together. Who so honors his father, shall have joy of his
own children, and when he makes his prayer, he shall be heard: he that
honors his father shall have long life. Honor thy father in deed, in word,
and in all patience, that thou may have Gods blessing, and his blessing shall
abide with thee at ye last. The blessing of ye father builds up the houses of
y^ children: but the mothers curse rooteth out the foundations.


Theophilus. Of the honor and obedience of children toward their Parents, you
have showed unto me sentences worthy to be written in golden letters: wherefore
I pray you go forward, if you have any other things to communicate unto us. For
what can be more pleasant and wholesome unto our ears, and to the hearing of
these children, than the holy word of God?


Theodidactus. Because I perceive these holy scriptures and places are so well
liking unto your ears, I will proceed with the rest in order. Solomon also
promises great honors, unto obedient children, saying after this manner: O my
son hear the instructions of thy father, Prou. 1.
and forsake not the law of thy mother: For that shall bring grace Idem. 4.
unto thine head, and shall be as a chain about thy neck. And again, Hear ye
children the fatherly exhortation, and take good heed that ye may learn
wisdom. Hearken unto counsel, and receive correction, that thou may be wise
at the last. My son incline thine ear, Idem. 19.
and hearken unto the words of the wise.

And in the book of Wisdom it is written: Who so despises Sapien. 3.
wisdom and instruction, is unhappy. Saint. Paul that elect vessel, would
not with silence pass over this place, but would also admonish all children,
and would show them the ways of obedience, when in the 6. to the Ephe. he
commands children thus, Filij obedite parentibus vestris in domino, hoc enim
iustu^ est. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is meet and
convenient. Honor thy father and mother, which is the first commandment in
the promise, that thou may prosper, and live long, etc. And again unto the
Coll. Children obey your parents in all things, for that is pleasing Collos. 3.
unto the Lord.

Saint Peter also is not unmindful of this place, saying thus: 1. Petr. 5.
Adolescentes subditi estote senioribus. Young men, be ye in subjection unto
your elders. Godly children (which have any care of their salvation) ought
always to have these holy precepts fixed before their eyes, for they are full
of wonderful promises, they promise unto children long life, honor, wisdom,
and diverse other kinds of blessings.


Theophilus. By this your godly communication (my good Theodidactus) it now
sufficiently appears unto us, that unto godly and obedient children all
happiness whatsoever is to be expected: but now would I gladly know, what
manner plagues and punishments, rebellious, obstinate, and wicked children are
constrained to fear, and sustain? As blessings are offered of God every
where unto obedient children, so unto the wicked and rebellious plagues and
curses are always imminent. Prou. 20.



Theodidactus. The holy scriptures every where do speak of the malidictio^s,
threatenings and miseries of wicked and rebellious children, and a thousand
kinds of evils, as we read in Moses. Deuteronomy 27. Accursed is he which does not
honor his father and mother. And in Leuit. 27. he says, Cursed is he which
does not honor his father and mother, and all the people shall say, Amen. And
Solomon says: who so curses father or mother, his light shall be put out in
obscure darkness.


Theophilus. With these so horrible threatninges of God, wicked and disobedient
children, are to be restrained from their perverse kind of life, unto the
obeying of their Parents: For as there is nothing more true, than those
promises made unto godly and obedient children: So is there nothing more
certain, than those curses and threatninges which God has threatened to light
upon the wicked and rebellious children at the last, except they be moved with
sorrowful and hearty repentance, and that speedely.


Amusus. Yesterday you promised to declare and show unto us, after what manner
Parents are to be honored of their children, and what great obedience is to
be required of them, and that not out of the scriptures only, but also you
said, you would make the same manifest by the testimonies of the ancient
fathers and Philosophers: whereof I pray you discharge your self first of those
your promises.


Theodidactus. My good friend Amusus, I will with all my heart recite unto you,
and to your children, those sentences which I collected of late as well out of
the monuments of the ancient fathers, as also out of the decrees of the
Philosophers. For Cyrill says: Christianorum Cyrillus.
prima landabilis piet as est, vt eos qui nos procrearunt, honor afficiamus,
and labores eorum remuneremus, and omnibus viribus conemur illis otium dare and
quietem. Et si enim plurima illis reddiderimus, at certe vicissim illis
procreationem reddere nunquam possumus. The chiefest godliness of Christians
worthy to be commended is this, that we honor them which have procreated and
begot us, and that we requite their pains bestowed upon us, and endeavor our
selves to the uttermost of our power, to procure their ease and quietness. For
albeit we shall be able to requite many things which they have bestowed upon
us, yet certainly are we never able to requite again unto them our
procreation. Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom.
says: Tanquam seruus Parentibus tuis inseruito: quid enim tantum illis
reddas, quantum ab illis accepisti? non enim licet illos procreare. Even as a
servant obey thy Parents, for what thing so great can thou restore unto them,
as thou have received from them? for thou can by no means beget them again.
Liberigrati, ait Basilius, magnas efficiu^t Basilius.
parentum landationes. Thankful and obedient children, (says Basil) do
procure and accomplish the great praises of Parents.

Qualem parentibus retuleris gratiam, talem in senectute a liberis expectato.
Such duty and reverence as thou show to thy parents, look for the like
from thy children when thou art old. I will also hereunto add the saying of
Euripides. Nihil est quod magis decorum and Euripides.
honestum sit liberis, quam si e patre bono nati sint, and genitoribus dignam
referant gratiam. There is nothing, more comely and honest unto children, than
if they be borne of good parents, and that they give worthy thanks unto
their begettors.


Theophilus. You have recited unto us many and notable sentences, concerning
the honor and obedience of children toward their Parents. but before you
recite any more, it shall not be amiss to show and declare unto Amusus and
his children more plainly the signification of this word ( honor) which is due
unto parents.


Theodidactus. This word honor, does signify a true reverence and lowlynesse
The definition of this word honor.
of heart, for this outward show in vailing of the Bonnet, and bowing of the
knee or body, is nothing worth, except there be joined there withal the
inward reverence of the mind, wherein godly children do testify, that they
esteem nothing more precious and dear unto them then the love and honor of
their Parents.


Theophilus. Our unlearned youth have always supposed and thought, that true
honor has consisted in the putting of their Cappe, and making of courtesy,
and that there is none other thing due unto Parents: Wherefore we would be
right glad to hear further of you, what it is to honor Parents.


Theodidactus. To honor Parents, is to deem and judge honorably of them, What
it is to honor etc.
for that God has made us subject unto them, for by the determinate will and
appointment of God, they are to govern, and we to obey. And therefore with all
our hearts, we must submit our selves unto their wisdom, justice, judgment
and authority. And albeit they shall sometime offend and err in performing
their duties (as it is the nature of all men) yet must we pardon, excuse, and
cover their faults most lovingly and reverently. For whereas Saint Paul says:
Honor thy father and mother etc. He requires this one thing of children, that
with all their hearts, they love, reverence, and aid their parents to the
uttermost of their power, and also those to whom their Parents have committed
them, that is to say, Magistrates, Elders, Preachers, Masters, Teachers,
Tutors and such like. Therefore to honor Parents is not only to salute them
humbly, to speak to them lovingly, and to use them courteously, to put of the
cappe before them, to give them the way and upper hand in every place: But also
the holy Scriptures do Ephe. 6. Coll. 3. Heb. 12. 7. 9. Prou. 1. 4. 6. 8. 15.
17. and 29.
teach children to obey their parents, to serve them, to fear, love, honor,
and reverence them, not only in words and outward show, but in their hearts
and minds also: To follow their godly precepts and examples of life: and
patiently to take correction at their hands: To make continual and hearty
prayers unto God for the^, and to relieve and nourish their Parents in case
they fall into poverty and decay. And when they are old, to guide, lead, yea
and bear them on their shoulders if need require and in all points by
showing themselves obedient and good children, to move their Parents to be
loving and good unto them.


Theophilus. These without doubt are no light and easy things which the holy
Ghost does require of all children. But wherein does the chiefest honor of
parents consist?


Theodidactus. True honor consists in this, that we think and judge
worthily In what thing the true honor of pa. does consiste.
of our parents, that we regard them most honorably, that we yield and give
al reverence unto their authority and judgment: that we never contemn or
despise them, be they never so poor, old, and crooked, yea, if they did seem
to dote, and were very wayward, to prefer the title and name of Father and
mother, before all faults whatsoever. Neither to regard or esteem what manner
of parents, but to rejoice and be glad that we have parents. For although thou
shall be promoted to great worship and honor, yet ought thou to be
thankful to thy poor and base father, to whom next unto God thou art most
bound for the same.


Theophilus. As far as I gather by your words, it is no simple honor that
is due unto parents.


Theodidactus, Nay rather there is double honor due to our Parents and Elders,
that is to say, both an outward and inward honor: The outward which
consists in Ceremonies, and outward behavior, which we attribute unto
them, with our loving words, gentleness, and seruisablenesse: but the inward
honor, whereby we love and embrace them with all our hearts and minds, and
the law of God does require both these of children.


Theophilus. Who be called our parents in the fifth commandment?


Theodidactus. All are understood by the name of Parents, under whose
gogernment we live, such are chiefly our natural parents, then our
Magistrates, Pastors, Teachers, Tutors, Masters and Mistresses, and such like,


Theophilus. What is contrary to the honor of Parents?


Theodidactus. To contemn them, to resist their judgment and authorities, to
offend them, not to obey their commandments though they be lawful and
honest, and to leave and forsake them in their need and necessity,


Theophilus. What kind of men would God have honored before others?


Theodidactus. God would have no kind of men to be more honored then What
men are to be honored before other.
our Parents, and therefore he has placed that Commandment before the rest
of the second table: for there is none that has done, or can do so much for
us as our Parents, none that can endure and sustain so great griefs, sorrows,
and cares as they, and often do shed their tears, with most grievous sobbes
and sighings for our sakes, wherefore of very right we ought to love and
honor them.


Theophilus What fruit and profit comes unto the children, by the obeying
and honoring of their parents.


Theodidactus Very great fruit and profit surely, for Euripides says:
Quisquis in vita parents colit, hic vinus and defunctus dus charus est.
Whosoever reuereceth and obeieth his parents in this life, he is beloved of the
Lord in this life, and shall be in the life to come. And in another place he
says: Qui cupis esse senex, charos venerare parents: Quae patri facies,
filius illa tibi.

Who so desires old age to see, must honor parents fame:
For what thou do to Parents thine, thy child shall do the same.

Theophilus. As the honor which is due unto Parents is manifold, so I judge
parents are to be honored after diverse manners.


Theodidactus. You say very truly, for Parents are to be honored after three
sorts chiefly, First children shall truly love their parents with all their
hearts and mind they shall give unto them all high dignity and reverence:
they shall so esteem of them, as that no treasure in the world ought to be
more dear and precious unto them. Secondly they shall honor them with words
and good manners, showing unto them all kind of reverence that may be, they
may not curse them, nor chat or mutter against them, but rather suffer them
patiently, albeit they be more waieward, hard, and egar, than either reason or
wisdom does require. Thirdly, they must also honor them with their labor,
pains and travel (that is to say) they shall help, relieve and provide for
them, both with their bodies and goods: and in no wise suffer the^ to be
oppressed with poverty and misery when they grow aged. And children shall
do this, not only willingly, but also reverently, and with great lowliness
of mind, as though this duty and benefit, should be done to God him
self (as it is in very deed) and they ought to be most thankful unto God which
has thus preferred them to this worship and honor, and has made them able
thus to perform this duty.


Theophilus. As the honor which is due unto parents consists in many parts:
So I judge that there be many causes why children ought to honor and reverence
their parents, and elders.


Theodidactus. There be five principal causes, why children ought to honor
There be five causes of honor etc.
their parents.

First, they are to be honored and reverenced, for that God by them has
given us both body and soul.

Secondly, after we are now borne, God by our Parents does nourish us,
provide all things necessary for us, and bring us up more tenderly then the Hen
does her chickins.

Thirdly, they care and provide that we may be baptized, and ingraffed into
Christ, and so made the children of God, and heirs of his celestial kingdom.

Fourthly, when now we are grown up, and that it is time, that we should
know, learn, and understand the word of God, then the Almighty God by our
parents, does deliver unto us that most pure and excellent doctrine (that is to
say) the ten Commandments, the Simbole or Creed of the Apostles, and the
Lords prayer. And besides this, our Parents do teach and instruct us in good
manners, and such lowly and gentle behavior: to the end we might become such,
as with whom all honest and godly men would gladly have their conversation.

Lastly, they doteach, or cause us to be taught, some handiecraft, Science,
Trade or Occupation, wherewith we may honestly get our livings, in that state
and condition of life, unto the which it shall please God to appoint us: by
them we have our Country, then the which nothing is more sweet or dear unto
us: by them we enjoy the benefit of the laws of our Town, City, and Common
Wealth, then the which nothing is more to be obeyed: by them we receive and
enjoy our Patrimony and inheritance, then the which nothing is more to be
wished: Finally, what is it that we do not receive by their means? So great
pains and labor have they in bringing up their children, in framing, forming,
teaching, nurturing and adorning them, that they are not able fully to
perform their duties, would they never so feign: And these be the chiefest
causes, why God does command us to honor our Parents. Therefore undoubtedly
they are very wicked children, which do not this (as much as they possible may)
seeing they receive so great an heap of benefits from their Parents.


Theophilus. My good Theodidactus, hitherto you have instructed us, that
parents are not slightly to be honored: but also you have added heereunto,
that they are reverently to be honored, with great submission and lowlines of
mind, and to whom children ought to be obedient, not as to men, but as to God
himself. These things are not as yet sufficiently understood of these
children, wherefore you had need to explane and make manifest the same unto us
more plainly.


Theodidactus. Although this sentence has no scruple or doubt, yet with all my
heart will I gratify these young ones concerning this thing: there is a like
saying of S. Paul touching servants, to whom the Apostle speaks after this
manner: Servants obey your bodily masters, with fear and trembling, in y^
simplenes of your hearts, as to Christ Ephesians. 6. Coll. 3.
himself, not with the eye service as pleasing men, but as serving the Lord
Christ. And if servants ought to obey their masters, as the Lord God himself:
ought not children much more to reverence and obey their parents? But to the
end that these things may be the better understood, I will use a similitude
for the better capacity of children. Even as the chief master commits his
scholars unto his vssher, to teach, guide, and govern them in his absence, to
whom they owe the like reverence for the time as to their master And as the
vssher does sharply punish and correct their disobedience Parents are Gods
vicars in earth.
if they offend, so does y^ Lord God grievously punish those children which do
not obey their Parents: For he has appointed parents to be his ushers in his
steed for the training up and instructing of children. Now God is the chiefest
workmaister and vssher, and the parents are but means and instruments, by the
which god works these things. Therefore parents are to be honored, loved, and
obeyed, because God will have it so, who punishes rebels, not as contemners of
men, but as railers of his will and high majesty, wherefore I would have good
children hereby admonished, least that they sufer themselves to be drawn of
the Devil into the sin of disobedience and rebellion.


Theophilus. You give us very wise and godly counsel, but we know that there
is so great malice ingendered in the minds of children, that they fall very
often into this sin of rebellion. What remedy therefore do you think meet
to be applied to this unhappiness and crookedness of nature so vitiate and
defiled.


Theodidactus. I judge no remedy to be more effectual for this purpose, then
if they set before their eyes the fear of plagues and punishments, and that
by this means they may be brideled; and restrained from Disobedient children
are accursed of God.
these rash assaults and giddie attemptes and that they accustom themselves
to love and cherish discipline, that they may be obedient to their parents, and
to all pollitike government. And let them assure themselves that God will
punish their pride, their malapertnesse, and contempt of discipline, as we see
in Caine, which is accursed. In the sons of Samuel, and Heli, Absolon and
Siba which moved sedition against David, and therefore were destroyed. It
should be very profitable unto young men, if they would consider these
horrible examples in histories. For it is certain in the whole law there are
added promises of rewards, which are bestowed upon the obedient, as is to be
seen in Tobia which was blessed of his father, in Jesus the son of Mary which
was subject to his Parents, and obeyed them even to the death. And in John and
others innumerable of godly children. And there are also added unto the law
threatenings of plagues and punishments, which the stubborn, wicked and
disobedient children shall feel, that have contemptuously disobeyed their
Parents. For it is written: Al collusion, disobedience and rebellion, receives
just recompense of such hurt and damage, which thing at this day, many young
men have assayed and proved to their great shame and confusion: which have
contemned the obedience of Parents. Even as it happened unto Esau, which vered
his Parents in marrying ungodly wives, which entreated their Father and mother
in law very contumeliously despitefully and contemptuously: And he himself
also takes upon him in his fathers house to command most malapertly and
proudly, and expulsed his brother Jacob, for whom he lay in wait to have
murdered and slain: neither does he fear punishment nor regards the
threatenings of God, but contemns his fathers admonitions, and therefore he is
accursed.

But on the contrary part Jacob both reuerenceth his parents, Jacob.
and loves his brother: for he fears the judgment of God, and punishment
that might thereof ensue. And again also he knew and considered y^ rewards
which were promised for well doing, therefore he does his duty, that he
might call upon God with a good conscience. Furthermore also he acknowledges
that God has care and regard unto corporal blessings, and therefore prays
unto GOD and desires that he might be defended and aided against his brother,
after this manner does he exercise his faith and invocation, whiles he
studieth by all means possible to comfort and appease the sorrows and griefs
of his Parents, and at the last gives place to his brother: Therefore he
enjoys great rewards at Gods hand, he is instructed and defended in a
wonderful manner, preserved and enriched amongst his very enemies, that being
old, he saw his sonnne Joseph in floorishing and most prosperous state, which
to him was no little joy and comfort. Let children weigh and consider these and
such like examples, and let them learn undoubtedly y^ God has great care of
them, and that he will bestow upon them many corporal blessings for
performing their duties toward their Parents, Magistrates, Masters, and
Teachers: Let them also consider and call to their remembrance what great
pains and cares Parents have had in their education, and what true love they
bear toward them, and what great benefits shall redounde unto them by
their godly education and instruction. For these and such like blessings, let
them acknowledge themselves to be thankful. And let them know that GOD does
punish the unthankful as says Solomon: Non recedet malum a domo ingrati.
Plagues and punishments shall not depart from the house of an unthankful
person. Also let all godly Children Joseph.
and young men study to follow the Patriarche Joseph, and by his example
learn to honor their Parents: Who when he was sold into Egypt, and
afterward by Gods providence promoted to great honor, and high authority, so
that he was the very next unto the king, how did he provide for his father
Jacob, ^ding for him very honorably to come to him into Egypt, where he had
great entertainment of the king and enjoyed the pleasures and blessings of the
land, afterward when he was dead, with what great pomp and renome did he
carry him forth thence into the land of Chanaan, there to be buried with the
Fathers the Patriarchs: The 16. 17. and 18, Chapters of Genesis do
sufficiently declare. That noble and worthy King Solomon gave place to his
Mother, and reuerencing her, set her in the kings Seat and Chair of estate
next unto himself.


Theophilus. They are worthy and notable examples truly, which if our youth
would begin to immitate and put the like in practice, O how happy and blessed
should they be. But I pray you proceed to show us the rest, that our children
which cannot be won with precepts and good counsel, may yet suffer themselves
to be withdrawn by these and such effectual examples.


Theodidactus. The Rahabites most constantly observed and kept the precepts
An example of the Rahabites.
of their Father Ionadab, neither would they suffer themselves to be drawn
from their obedience, with any wanton or flickering inticementes, therefore
they heard this joyful voice: for that you have obeyed the commandments of
your father and have Hierom. 35.
kept al his precepts, and have done whatsoever he commanded you, thus says
the Lord Zebaoth the God of Israel: There shall not a man fail of the stock
of Ionadab the son of Rehab to stand in my sight all the days of their lives.

Isaac ready to be slain and offered up in Sacrifice, willingly Genesis 22. 37.
obeyed his father Abra.

Joseph obeyed his father Jacob, and went to his brother, who^ notwithstanding
he knew to be maruellously offended and augry with him.

Abel was a godly and obedient child, and did the things which he knew were well
pleasing to his parents Adam and Eve. God held him always in his sight, and
he walked diligently in the precepts of God: Wherefore both he and his
sacrifice pleased God.

Sem and Iaphet obeyed their father Noe, and were blessed. But Genesis 4.
Cham which derided his father being naked, was accursed Isaac because he
obeyed his Father with all his heart, obtained the blessing of his seed unto
his Father Abraham. But Ismael because he rebelled against his father, was
rejected. Let godly Examples of disobedience.
Children consider these things, and take heed that their portion be not
with Caine, Cham, Ismael, Esau, and such others, which have purchased unto
themselves the eternal curse and malediction of God, for that they would not
obey their Parents: But let them rather follow the examples of these godly
ones Abel, Seth, Sem, Iaphet, Examples of obedience.
Ismael, Jacob, and others, which for their obedience have obtained everlasting
felicity. Furthermore if we diligently search and read over y^ histories of
the holy scripture we shall find that me^ of al ages which have not obeyed the
godly and wholesome admonitions of their Parents and elders, have been horribly
punished of God.

Loath very lovingly and frie^dly admonished the Sodomites to forsake Genesis 19.
their wickedness, but because they would not obey his voice, they perished
with fire. Also Lots wife for that she would not hearken to the counsel of
the Angel, but looking back was turned into a salt stone.

Iosephes brethren for that they would not follow the counsel Genesis 37.
of their brother Ruben, that they should restore and deliver their brother
Joseph to his father, they fell into great danger.

Holophernes contemned the counsel of Achior, which he had given Judith. 13.
him, that he should deal without tyranny, he himself was slain, and his
host put to flight.

Rhoboam, for that he lightly regarded the wholesome counsel of 3. Reg. 12.
the elders lost his kingdom.

Godolias, because he despised the counsel of Iohannan, was killed Hierom. 41.
of Ismael.

Nabuchodonozor, refusing the counsel of Daniel, that he should redeem Dan. 4.
his sins with alms and other godly exercises, was turned into a beast of
the wood.

Joseph and Azarias not regarding the counsel of Machabaeus, and Match. 5.
willing and desirous to get themselves a name, lost both the name and the
thing they hoped for.

Machabaeus having with him 800 men, and his adversaries 2000. Match. 9.
when he was advertised of his fellows, that he should not fight against
them, following his own wisdom and policy, perished in the same wars,
and the rest took their flight.

Pilate, for y^ he would not his wives admonitio^s and counsels concerning y^
rostoring of Christ, but refused her good admonitio^s, sinned very grievously,
in judging Christ unto death being innocent. Behold now if they which would not
obey the counsels and admonions of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets and other holy
me^, were punished with so great plagues, and have perished so horrible: I pray
you what great euilles, what great calamities, miseries and plagues are like
to fall upon them, which do contemn and reject the most godly and necessary
admonitions and counsels of Parents, yea, and with disdain do refuse to hear
them, and make no reckoning or account at all of their words:


Theophilus. To hear the counsels and wholesome admonitions of the aged, it is
not only profitable, but also very necessary.


Theodidactus. But to contemn them, is surely a most pestilent thing, and
extreme madness. For seeing that our life is very short, the wisdom and
experience of things is to be learned of our auncientes and elders. For the
authority of elders is an holy thing, and to be had in great reverence,
wherefore it is written: Coram cano capite Leuit. 19.
consurge, honora personam senis, and time Dominum Deum tuu^. Thou shall rise
up before the hoarehead, and reverence the person of an old man, and dread thy
Lord God: That is to say, the Lord is to be feared and reverenced in the
elders. For it is a young man's part in who^ there is any sign of good
towardness, to esteem y^ counsel of his elders and to follow it. For he
that learneth of young men, to who^ is he likened I pray you? Nempe ei qui
edit vuas immaturas, and bibit vinum de torculari suo. Verily unto him that
eats unripe and sour grapes, and drinks wine out of his winepresse: But
who so learneth of his elders, Similis ei qui edit vuas maturas, and bibit
vinum vetus. Islyke unto him that eats ripe and pleasant grapes, and drinks
old wine. I would therefore advise all young men, that they join them selves
with the aged, and follow their godly counsels and wholesome documents. Bias.
Bias the Philosopher an Heathen man, teaches y^ old age is to be honored,
saying: Non est contemnendae senectus ad qua^ omnes poruenire cupimus, sed
diligenda, obseruanda, plurimumque ei defere^da. Old age is not to be
contemned, to the which we all desire to come, but to be beloved, reverenced,
and to give great authority and regard unto it: Wherefore let us hearken unto
old men, and give all reverence and honor unto them, neither let us depart
from their sides, whose steps let us follow for their great experience of
things, for their great wisdom and knowledge, let us use their counsel,
delight in their studies, that we may have the sight of them, which may fear
us from vices. Illi (inquit Diuus Ambrosius) eru^t vitae nostrae testes simul
and magistri, ab illis percipiemus viue^di norma^, loque^di modu^, virtutu^
o^niu^ disciplina^ Ambrosius.
They (says Saint Ambrose) shall be witnesses of our lives, and also teachers
unto us, from them we shall perceive the order to live, the manner to speak, the
discipline of all virtues. And this may seem true to all men, for that they
have had great experience in many things, they remember many things, they are
also for the most part wiser, and more apt to give counsel, and to government
in all things whatsoever.


Theophilus. There are many things now spoken of you, very well and wisely of
the honor and obedience of parents, but as yet these children do not
understand thoroughly what this word obedience means: wherefore I humbly pray
you, that you would also unloose this knot unto us, and resolve us of this
doubt, and other things which seem to appertain any thing to the knowledge
of the fifth commandment, vouchsafe to declare more plainly unto us.


Theodidactus. Nothing more willingly. Obedience in the scriptures generally is
greatly allowed and esteemed, and chiefly that, wherein Parents are to be
honored and obeyed: which the old Fathers not unfitly, have called the mother
of all felicity. And Samuel says: Obedientiam meliorem esse victimis.
Obedience is better than sacrifice. Obedience is a great good thing, and
contrariwise: disobedience is a wicked and outrageous evil. A disobedient
son (says a certain man) is a cruel murderer of his Parents, for that
there is no sorrow or grief in the whole course and life of men greater, than
that which arises of the calamity and wickedness of children, such as was of
our first Parents or of David, Let children consider of these things, that it
may increase in them a greater and more diligent care of obeying than
heretofore.

Saint Bernard commends this very worthily, saying thus: Bernardus.
Obedientia quae maioribus proebetur, Christo exhibetur, What obedience soever
is showed unto our elders, is exhibited unto Christ: Nay rather he says: what
thing soever man does command in the stead of God, that is not directly
against the word of God, the same is altogether to be received, as if God had
commanded it. Parents sunt vicary Christi, ergo non spernendi, sed honorandi.
Parents are the Vicars of Christ, therefore not to be despised, but to be
honored. For who soever contemns the Vicar, contemns him that placed him.
Basilius Magnus teaches, that Jesus Christ was obedient Basilius.
to his mother Mary and Joseph, even in very small things, as in fetching of
water, and bearing of his axe and such like, and thus he cries out: O example
worthy to be immitated, O wholesome The exclamation of Basil.
document: Excellens Dei filius obedit homini, propter hominis salute^, and
homo non vult obedire propter Deum and suam salutem, The excellent Son of God
obeys man, for man's health and salvation, and man will not obey for Gods cause
and his own salvation. Ah, would to God all children out of this, would
understand the honor due to their Parents, out of this I say, that they have
Christ their Captain and guider of their duties, when they tread in his
steps, and execute their duties prescribed by their Parents. Moreover also
this ought to incite and stir up all children exceedingly to the obedience of
their Parents: when they hear the whole obedience of the fifth commandment
to have been sanctified and consecrated by the child Jesus. But now we must
come to the declaration of the fifth commandment, in the which, if these
children of Amusus will show them selves willing and attentive, they shall add
unto me the greater quickness of spirit and mind in the declaring and
opening of the same.


Liberi. Reverend Master Doctor, we yield great thanks unto you, for that you
do admonish us so godly and lovingly, And if you will have us do any thing,
command it freely, and you shall find us ready to do it, and we will show
our minds unto you in the expounding of this thing, not only willing, but also
attentive and vigilant, even as our Lord God shall give unto us the measure of
his spirit.


Theodidactus. This word ( honor) comprehends two things, as it is said A
declaration of the fifth precept or commandment.
before, an inward and an outward reverence. Therefore y^ first honor (which is
commanded here) is to know the things them selves, (that is to say) that
wedlock, the ordering of a family or household, and pollitical government, were
instituted and ordained of God, and by his aid and mighty power preserved,
and that in these ordinances the presence, wisdom, goodness and love of God
does shine toward us, and acknowledging these benefits, we ought to render
humble thanks to God the Author, and beseech him to preserve and defend us,
from our adversary the Devil, the mortal enemy of mankind, which goes about
by all means he can possibly devise, t^ dissolve and break this sweet and
pleasant harmony. Unto this degree of honor belongs preaching or celebrating
of these things: That the youth may learn, that they come from god, and
accustom themselves, to make their humble prayers and supplications unto God,
y^ he will vouchsafe to preserve these his own ordinances and gifts. And it
is the part and duty of a thankful mind, willingly to obey for gods cause,
to beware of wicked and lewd examples, and of giving occasions to sin, whereby
good ordinances might be dissolved and broken, and the laws utterly
overthrown and perverted, and to conclude, by all possible means to preserve
and defend these things so needful and profitable.

The other part of honor concerns the persons (to wit) Parents, Magistrates,
teachers, and whosoever have any government over us, There is a great unlikeness
of these things. But yet all men ought to follow this rule and platform.
Parents and other governors ought to be a lively law, (that is to say) the
preseruers and mainteiners of the divine law. For who does not understand that
these persons are to be loved and honored, by and through who^ God does impart
so great benefits (to wit) true religion, godly laws, judgment, and peace
unto mankind? Such governors were, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Solomon,
Iosephat, Ezechias, Josias, Cyrus, Co^stantinus, and Theodosius. Therefore there
is an honor that does behold and respect the persons, to acknowledge this also
the gift of God, to have parents which do truly perform their duties: for the
ordinance itself or laws without a keeper, prescruer, and one to see the same
executed, are very weak and of no force, as says that Grecia^: Validares lex
est, quu^ principem habet. The law is a strong and forcible thing, when it has
a Prince or Governor. And because the preservation and maintenance of his own
order, is acceptable unto the Lord God, the degrees ordained of him, ought
also to be kept inviolable of us. Therefore this shall be y^ sum, The end of the
fifth precept.
that whosoever the Lord has set to rule over us, we do receive them,
enterteine and honor them, both with obedience and tha^kfulnes.


Liberi. Oh immortal God, how godly and wholesome things do we now hear
concerning the honoring of Parents, of whom there has been no mention made to
us at any time, It is our parts and duties therefore to pray unto God, that
these so godly precepts, and necessary doctrines do never slip out of our
minds. And for that the Lord God has now put this good thing into our minds,
that we should hear you now more willingly than heretofore: we beseech your
humanity and courtesy, that you will vouchsafe to show and declare unto us all
other things touching the honor of Parents, and chiefly the love of our elders.


Theodidactus. Plato albeit an Ethnic teaches, saying: Parents senio
confectos Plato.
pro magnis thesauris habendos esse, and amandos. Our Parents being very aged,
are to be accounted for great and excellent treasures, and to be beloved.
Cicero recites the cause wherefore we ought to love them, Cicero.
Ideo inquit parents charissimos habere debemus, quod ab his vita,
patrimonium, libertas, ciuit as tradita est. Therefore says he, ought we to
esteem our Parents most dear, for that, we receive from them life,
patrimony, liberty, and our City or country. Seneca says, Parents non
Seneca.
amare impiet as est, non agnoscere insania. Not to love our Parents is great
impiety, not to acknowledge them is madness. And S. Augustine D. August.
says: Caninum est Parents non agnoscere. It is the nature and property of
Dogs not to acknowledge our Parents. And if it be a dogged nature not to
acknowledge them, it is much more brutish to offend them, to hurt, beat, and
offer injury unto them, as there be some such in the world (the more to be
lamented.)

And Saint Jerome says, Meretur caecitatis subire supplicium, D. Hier.
qui toruo vultu parents despexerit. He deserves to have his eyes put out,
that shall look upon his Parents with frowning countenance. And Aristotle
says: Qui dubitat vtrum oportet deos venerati, aut parents Aristo. 8.
Topicorum.
honorare, non indigit ratione, sed poena. Who so doubts whether he ought to
worship the Gods, or honor his Parents, he wants not reason but punishment.


Theophilus. This obedience, this love, and this honor of Parents, has it
always bin had of such price every where, in all ages, and also amongst the
Babarians, wicked and ungodly Gentiles? Certes, if you can prove that by some
example or worthy testimony, you shall procure and encourage exceedingly these
children of Amusus, unto the honor which they owe to their Parents.


Theodidactus. There is nothing more easy, For one Aelianus declares and
plainly affirms, that there was never any nation or country so uncivil nor so
brutish, amongst who^ the honor of parents has not bin had in great estimation
and price, but they have showed themselves tha^kfull to Parents, as we may
learn by the example of Aeneas. For, after Wonderful love and honor showed
unto Parents.
that Troy was taken of the Grecians, they having some compassion of the
misery of the captives, published a common cry throughout all Troy, that
every one of the free Citizens should carry away with them some one thing
whatsoever they liked best. Aeneas igitur An example of Aeneas.
caeteris neglectis Deos paenates exportabat. Whereupon Aeneas lightly regarding
al other things, took with him his household Gods. The Grecians preceiuing the
godliness of the man, with great joy permitted him also to take with him some
one other jewel among all his possessions whatsoever he would. Ille patrem
annis and senio confectum sublatum in humeros portabat. He with speed
hoisteth up upon his shoulders his good old father well stricken in years.
They being wonderfully astonished at this his fact, left also unto him all his
possessions, confessing, that such as showed such pity both toward God and
men, and so lovingly reverenced their Parents, showed them selves the greatest
and most placable friends to nature that might be. A like example is also
recised of Valerius Valerius ^^^^.
maximus, in this wise: The Praetor sitting in judgment, delivered unto one of
the Triumuir^, a noble woman condemned to death to be executed in the prison.
And when he had sent her unto the keeper of the prison, he being moved with
pity and compassion toward the woman, did not forth with execute her, but
permitted her daughter to have access unto her mother, having great regard (as
he thought) that he should bring nothing unto her for her nourishment and
preservation, that might prolong her life, supposing that so within a little
while she should famish and pine away. And when many days were now past
over, and the woman yet Of the daughter that nourished her mother in prison.
living, he musing with himself what should be the cause, that she was
sustained so long, watched her daughter now more narrowly than before, at the
last he espied the daughter giving her mother suck of her full breasts, which
she had prepared for the same purpose, always against her coming thither,
which so rare and wonderful a spectacle when he beheld, he could not choose
but make the Triumuir privy thereof, and he went and showed the Praetor, and
the Praetor opened the matter unto the Consuls, who granted unto the woman
remission and pardon for her fact before committed, and highly commended her
for nurturing and bringing up so natural and loving a daughter.

And to the end that children might be the more excited and moved to the love
of their parents, I will show you another rare example. There is in the region
and country of Scicilia the mountain Aethna of an unmeasurable bigness,
which burning with Aethna.
continual fire, casts out such fiery flambes, and blows out such burning
stones, with such violence and forcible manner, by means whereof the neighbors
there aboutes bordering, sustain no little loss, hinderance, and peril. It
chanced therefore (in the 3510. year of the foundation of the world, after
the Babilonicall deliverance) that this Mountain threw forth such forcible
and mighty fires, that the City Cathana was burnt and consumed to dust, as
witnesses Pansania, saying: Et, arderent aruis segetes, and milliacultuiugera
cum dominis, syluae collesque virtutes. Adeo ^t quisque quod sibi charissimum
esset, conaretur ex incendio asportare, etc. The corn fields a thousand
acrees with their furniture, together with the owners, the green woods,
valleys, and hills were quite consumed and burnt to dust. So that whatsoever
any man had, that he esteemed, he did his best to conueigh and carry it out
of this dreadful and raging fire. There were dwelling in the same City two
brethren (to wit) Philonius An example o^ Philonius and Callias.
and Callias, which leaving gold, silver, precious stones, and all other
Jewels whatsoever: took up their Parents upon their shoulders (being now aged,
and there withal so weak and feeble, and therefore not able to help them
selves) delivered them from the rage of that furious Fire, to the great
admiration of the beholders.

Thus were they delivered, even as the people of Israel in the red Sea, or the
three brethren in the hot burning Oven, whom Daniel spoke of at large, to the
great praise of Almighty God. And if these natural affections of the
Ethnickes and Heathen men* which do these things without faith, and the true
knowledge of God, are to be liked and allowed, how much more of Christians,
which are baptized in the name of Jesus Christ?

A like thing happened of one Cymon an Athenian, whose love and Cymon.
piety toward his Parents was so exceeding great, that the Lord God rewarded
him wonderfully for the same (that is to say) with prosperity and long life.
For when his father Miltiades for the money which he had borrowed out of the
common treasury, was cast into prison, there to suffer famishment except he
could pay the debt and he now almost pined and withered away. Cymon to the
end that he might now deliver and redeem his father, besought the
Magistrates, that he might be kept in prison in the steed of his father,
until he could pay those thirty thousand crowns into the treasury (for so
much he ought). Cymon was received into prison, the father was set at
liberty, who not long after died, here (to man's judgment) Cymon was like to
perish for the love he bare to his father. At the last a certain famous and
worthy Citizen being very rich took to wife the daughter of this Miltiades,
who paid the money that was due for Cymon his brother in law, and so delivered
him out of that calamity, peril, and misery. There is no doubt but that it
was Gods providence, that Cymon should be delivered. For by this example, God
would show himself according to his promise, to render unto obedient and
loving children the rewards of their godliness, albeit they be strangers from
the Christian faith.


Theophilus. What child is he, with so hard and adamant an heart, which cannot
be moved and mollified with these examples? But there is one thing that I would
feign hear of you, whether this obedience, takes place every where without
any difference, and that it is due to parents in all things?


Theodidactus. I would have you to express your mind somewhat plainer, for I
do not well understand what you mean by this your demand?


Theophilus. That I may express my mind more simply unto you (reverend
Master Doctor) this is the thing I would be glad to know and understand of
you, whether we ought to obey parents, magistrates, tutors, masters, and
teacher, commanding wicked and ungodly things, or not?


Theodidactus. Surely it is a very good question, and very meet for these
children, or rather all men of what state and condition soever they be, I will
therefore willingly more at large declare the same for these childrens sakes.
First every man ought to know, that the precepts of the first table are to be
preferred before the last. Wherefore if parents, masters, or magistrates,
would drive thee from the word, or true worship of God, and force and compel
thee unto ungodliness: thou shall answer with Saint Peter. Oportet Deo magis
obedire quam hominibus. We must obey God rather then man.

There is written a notable example touching this thing, of one Mauricius,
which was sent for unto his king and sovereign Lord, at And example of
Mauricius.
a certain time, who would have had him a captain against the Christians,
answers him after this manner in few words, O King, you shall have me ready
in what thing soever is, or shall be needful, and you shall find me very
willing, but in this business (O king) I owe more duty unto my God, then
unto thee being king.

Rachel against her fathers will, stole his Idols, and hid them away Gene. 31.
August. Psalm. 70.
very warily. Saint Augustine says: Amandus genitor, sedpraepone^dus est Dues.
Our father is to be beloved, but yet god is to be preferred before our father.
And the 70, Psalm teaches, y^ in this thing only a child ought not to obey
his parents if they shall command him any thing against God: but where the
father commands that which is not against god, he is to be obeyed even as
God, because he has commanded thee to obey thy Parents. Cyrill says:
Necessarium Cyrillus.
esse liberos patribus cedere, sed vbi virtutis ratio cogit, ibi Deus
honoretur, ipsiusque amor^naturalem amorem parentum vincat. It is very
necessary that children give place to their parents. But whereas the regard
and consideration of virtue compels them there God ought to be honored,
and the love we owe to him, ought to vanquishe and overcome the natural love
of parents. D. Hieronimus ad Heliodorum Hiero.
ita inquit: Tam diu sanguinis copula^ in illis agnosce, and ius illis carnalis
propinquitatis persolue, quam diu ipsi tecum creatorem suum agnoscunt and
honorem illius illaesum obseruant: quod si a Deo te abducere, aut contra Dei
voluntate^ te impellere occ^perint, desertis parentibus Deo te co^ tunge. S.
Jerome unto Heliodorus writes after this manner, So long acknowledge thou the
coupling of sanguinitie in the^, and accomplish the law of carnal propinquitie
to the^, as long as with thee they acknowledge their Creator, and do keep the
honor of the^ pure and uncorrupted: but if they shall once go about to withdraw
thee from God or to move thee to do any thing against the will of God, leave
father and mother, join thy self to God. Solum est pietatis genus, sic in
Parents esse crudel^m. It is the only true kind of godliness, so to be
accounted cruel toward our Parents. He says in another place, Honor a
patrem, sed site a vero patre non separat, tam, diu tu sis sanguinis copula,
quam diu elle suum nouerit creatorem. Honor thou thy father, so that he does
not separate thee from thy true father, be thou so long of his kindred and
sanguinitie, as he shall acknowledge his Creator.


Theophilus. What shall children do, if they have poor, simple, and feeble
parents, not of the quickest wit, of base stock and kindred, and yet crabbed
and very wayward, are they also compelled to honor, love, and obey them in all
things?


Theodidactus. I think you doubt not of this point, yet for the goodwil I
bear to Amusus and his children, I will declare and open unto you whatsoever
may seem to apperteine to this purpose, if so be now I can call to my
remembrance, those things which heretofore I have read in good authors
concerning this matter. Although Parents The persons of pa are not to be
respected but the will of God is to be considered.
be never so poor, base, simple, feeble, etc. They ought not for any of these
causes to be destitute and spoiled of the honor given them of God: for they
ought not to behold their person (to wit) what manner men they he: but here
the will of God only is to be observed and regarded, which has willed and
commanded it so, which also to this his commandment, has added a promise,
far more excellent then all the riches in this world: For who so do truly
and unfeignedly honor their parents, there are promised unto them of God in
this world, long life, peace, health, and happy, and prosperous success in all
things. But contrariwise, who so resist the divine word of God, an unhappy
life, and that very short, is ready to fall upon them by and by, because they
have disobeyed the Lord of life. For these stubborn and rebellious wretches,
are utterly forsaken of God, and so become thieves, robbers, and murderers, to
their own shame and confusion. For with great disdain and hatred they
contemn the good and godly instructions of Parents, and will not suffer any
correction or chastisement, and so it often chances that these varlots come
very seldom unto mature and ripe age, but are cut of before their time.
Neither be they so happy, as that they fall into the hands of the hangman,
whereby they may have time to repent them of their former lives, but being
overcome with drunkenness and riot, behave themselves in such ruffianlie
manner, that in their desperate frayes, they dye of the sword, or by some other
misfortune, are slain, or else by fire or water do miserably perish. As in the
children of Heli and in Absolon, with many others has been seen. S, Gregory
D. Grego. A horrible example of a child etc.
has left unto our memory a horrible example of a certain disobedient child,
which of a wicked spirit was caught out of his fathers lap, and in his sight
torn in pieces and destroyed: Hereof let children learn to fear and love the
Lord God, and to honor their parents, and not contemn them although they be
never so poor, wayward, or deformed. Let them also keep in memory the
horrible example of Dathan and Abiron, which for resisting the Magistrates Number.
16.
were swallowed up quick and thrown into Hell. The waywardness and
wrabbednesse of parents, does not discharge the fifth commandment, as
witnesses S. Peter, saying: Non solum bonis, sed ettam discolis obedite, Obey
not only your good and wise parents, but also your wayward and foolish parents.
As also the Prophet Baruch says. 2. Vult Iudaeos malis and imp^is obedire. God
would have the Jews to obey their wicked and ungodly parents, as has bin said
before. Moses does not say honor ye, your good, wise, and rich parents, but
speaks simply without any distinction or difference: Honora parents. Honor
thy parents. But when God at any time sends wrabbed, wayward, and hard
hearted parents, this chances for our sins and wickedness: For it makes no
matter to us, whether they be worthy or unworthy, noble or base, rich or
poor: for what manner parents soever they be yet not without the great
providence of God they are our parents. But who so thinks that decript and
doting parents are not to be honored and reverenced. Let them hear now a
notable example and An example worthy to be remembered of an old man.
worthy to be remembered, of a certain householder, which had an old father
decript and bowed together with age, and therewithal doting and very childish
again, so that when the meats and things were set upon the table, he would by
and by overthrow the dishes and pottes, and power out the pottage upon the
table, to the great annoyance of the guests many times: but when this had
chanced thus very often, ye housekeeper his son began to disdain thereat, and
to take ye matter grievously, and studied which way he might find a remedy, for
this trouble, and at the last he devised a trough or hollow thing to be made of
wood, whereout he might eat his meat: And whiles the thing was in making and
preparing, the young son of this householder, began to reason with his father,
and demanded of him to what use that should serve (for he knew very well
his father had no Swine to feed therein): his father answered: that he had
made it for his graundfather, that henceforth he may dine and suppe out of the
same: Then the little child asked his father again, saying after this manner. My
good father, when you shall be as old as my grandfather, shall I be compelled to
make such a hogs trough for you also? which words so soon as his father
heard, he was exceedingly astonished, and began to sigh meruellously, and
straight way with great sorrow of mind, he threw from him the trough very
disdainfully, and began to bethink with himself what that childishe question
should mean, and rightly wayed and considered with himself unto how many great
miseries and calamities man's life was subject insomuch as after that, he ever
gave great honor and reverence unto his old father, and never was offended
after that, with the mad and doting pranckes of his father so long as he lived.


Theophilus. Alas, there be not only amongst us disobedient and rebellious
children, but also self willed, proud, and very stubborn, what shall become
of such, or how are such wont to die, for the most part, I would be glad
to hear^.


Theodidactus. Children whith do not willingly obey their Parents, fall into
the most grievous judgment and wrath of Almighty God, and for y^, most
stubbornly they do disobey and resist their parents commandments, at the last
they are compelled to obey the hangma^, will they nill they, or else by some
other kind of Tragical death, they end their days miserably as is
aforesaid. As a number of examples do witness, as this in the 4. book of the
kings. 2. the scripture says: 4. Regum. 2.
Helisaeus went up into Bethel, and as he passed on his way, the little
children came out of the City and derided that good old man, saying: Ascend
calue, ascend calue. Get thee up thou bald pa^e, get thee ^ terrible and
fearful example of the children that derided Helisaeus.
up, who looking back sees them, and curses them in the name of the Lord.
And immediately came out of the woods two fierce and cruel Bears, and they
tare in pieces and destroyed 42. of those children very lamentably, By this,
children ought to learn to fear and honor the Lord God, to reverence their
Parents, and elders, and not to deal dispitefully with them, nor for any cause
to contemn and deride them, least in like manner the Lord God be Exemplis
Cyconiae.
angry and displeased; and so destroy them in his wrath. But rather let them
follow the example of the Stork, which when their parents are so old, that
they cannot fly abroad to get their pray, to not only feed and nourishe
them, but also carry them upon their shoulders from place to place, such
affection ought we to show to our Parents. For if such and so wonderful a
natural affection be in the brute beasts and fowls, which want both
judgment and reason: what natural affection ought to be in us toward those
creatures which be partakers both of judgment and reason: and besides this,
created unto the image of the living God?


Theophilus. Now would I gladly hear of you, what manner duties of children
are required toward their Parents, which if children had always printed
before their eyes, Parents should have them a great deal more obedient
hereafter, for the ignorance of duty has been the destruction of many young
men.


Theodidactus. The chiefest care of children toward their parents is this, that
Of the duty of children toward their parents.
before all things they study to love them entirely: for as witnesses Pliny
Amor optimus discendi magister. Love is the best master to learn any thing.
For every doctrine and teaching is much more easy translated and conneighed
into the mind of the child, if he love his father: wherefore I judge and
think it convenient that children are to be admonished, that they love their
parents no less then their godly disciplines, doctrines and chidings. For
such godliness and piety of children avails greatly to this purpose, they
will hear more willingly, and give credit to their words, and will covet and
desire to be like them, they will not take it in ill part to be corrected, but
they will rejoice to be praised, and they will acknowledge that it is their
fathers duty to teach, and theirs to show themselves willing to be taught.
Moreover it shall be the part and duty of children to follow the Godly
precepts and counsels of their parents, and let them think that nothing ought
to be attempted without the express will and assent of their parents, and what
soever they know shall please their parents, y^ shall they do without delay, And
if they know what will displease them, that shall they not go about to
attempt, nor touch by any means: and if they seem to be too heard or
ungentle unto them, yet shall they bear it with a lowly and willing mind.
Again, if they can deferue to have their friendship by any means, they shall
do their best to the uttermost of their power. If they shall fall into any
grievous sickness, poverty, or extreme old age, it shall be the childrens
duty willingly to relieve and comfort them by all possible means. To be
brief, if all things chance w^ll and lu^^ily unto them, the children shall
rejoice with all their hearts: Again, if they shall see them unfortunate,
then shall the children forrow no less, then if it were their own case, and
they ought to be moved with as great pity and compassion, as though this
sickness, grief, pain, or punishment, did apperteine only to them.

Cyprian says: Sicut in senibus sobrietas, and morum perfectio requiritur,
Cyprianus de 12 abusiombus.
itam adolescentibus obsequium, subiectio, and obedientia debetur. As
soberness and the perfection of manners, is required in old men: So in young
men ought there to be seruisablenes, subjection and obedience. And Saint
Ambrose says: Honor adolescentum, est timorem Dei habere, Ambrosius.
parentibus defer, and honorem habere senioribus etc. The honor of young men,
is to have the fear of God, to give re^erence to their parents and to honor
their elders, to defend and keep their chastity, to be humble, gentle, and
shamefast, which virtues are the very true ornaments to young age: And the same
S. Ambrose says: In sembus grauitas, in iuuenibus alacritas, in adolescentibus
verecundia commendatur. In old men gravity, in childhood cheerfulness, in
adolescencie, shamefastness is to be commended. Very excellently also does
Lodouicus Lodouicus Viues.
Viues describe and set forth the duties of young men, saying: Pius quisque
i^uents nunqua^ de se magnifice setiet sed moderate and demisse. Every godly
young man will never judge and esteem highly of himself, but meanly and
humbly: For this cause let him endeavor, y^ he garnish, and adourne his mind,
with the device and imagination of honest things, with knowledge and exercise
of virtue: for says he: Alioqui homo non est homo, sedpecus. Otherwise man is
no man, but a beast. Let him be present at the divine service and word
preached, Good lessons for young men.
with great attention and reverence, and whatsoever, he hears or sees
there, he shall esteem it great, wonderful, divine, and that which far
passes and surmounteth his capacity. He shall commend himself very often
to Christ in his prayers, he shall repose all his hope and confidence in him.

He shall show him self obedient to his Parents, he shall serve them,
seek to profit, aid, and succor them, to the uttermost of his power. He
shall reverence and love the Magistrate even as his Parent, not of his body
(but that which is of greater value) of his mind. He shall reverence the
Priests of the Lord, and the true Ministers and Preachers of Gods word, and
shall show him self a diligent hearer of their doctrine: which represent and
resemble unto us the person of the Apostles, as also of God him self, He
shall give place toolde men, after a courteous manner, give diligent ear unto
them, and that for their wisdom which they have gotten by long experience,
and daily use and practice. Lastly, he shall look out godly and honest men of
the best wits and greatest learning, have them in admiration, reverence them,
wish well unto them, and desire friendship and familiarity of them, whereout
they may gain great profit.


Theophilus. Although hither to there has almost nothing been spoken of you
which may not be referred to the feminine sex, yet shall it not seem
unprofitable, if you add hereunto some matter or doctrine which may seem to
appertain to maidens only, to the end also they might be the more stirred
up, and put in remembrance of their duties, especially when they are
admonished expressly.


Theodidactus. I will very willingly take that pains, for these courteous and
honest Damsels sakes, and so much the rather for that I will draw nothing
here, out of mine own quiver or store house, but out of the Epistle of Saint
Jerome unto Leta, will I faithfully recite the things which specially do
apperteine to this purpose: wherefore provide you in the mean time, that
Amusus daughters be here, and show them selves attentive, lest we shall seem
to declare such godly matter in vain, the which now follows.

1 After this manner is the soul to be taught and instructed, D. Hieronimus
ad Leta^. Quomodo erudienda sit puella quae Christiana est futur^.
which shall be the Temple of God. Let her learn to hear none other thing,
neither to speak any thing says Saint Jerome, but that which may appertain
to the fear of God. 2 Let her not hear nor understand any filthy words, nor
merry ballades, iestes nor rimes, but let her young and tender tongue be
seasoned with sweet songs and Psalms. 3 Weigh not down her neck with gold
and precious stones, (...) beset her head with pearls, neither curle nor bushe
out her hear, nor die it into any unnatural color. 4 Let her not eat openly
(that is to say) in the feasts and banquetes S, Ierom unto Leta, how a maiden
ought to be brought up, which shall be a Christian.
of her Parents, lest she see such meats as she might desire and lust after:
Let her not learn to drink wine, wherein is all excess and riotte. 5 Let her
not delight and take pleasure in the hearing of musical instruments, Shalmes,
Sythe^^s, Lutes, and Harps, nor know wherefore they were invented. 6 Let her
appoint her self some task every day, to read some special part of the holy
scriptures chosen for the same purpose. 7 Let her learn to card and spinne to
make woollen cloth: and to handle, the wheel and distaffe, to make her linen
cloth. 8 Let her not set her mind on silks, as Taffata, Damask, Satin and
Vellet. 9 Let her provide and get such clothes wherewith cold may be defended,
not wherewith her body shall be nakedly apparelled. 10 Let her so eat, as that
she may be always an hungered, that immediately after her meat, she may
either read or sing Psalms. 11 If it chance thee at any time to walk or
ride out of the Town or City, leave not thy daughter at home without a godly
governor: for without thee she knows not, neither is she able to live, and
when she shall chance to be left alone, let her be afraid. 12 Let her not
have her secret meetings, and fellowship with foolish and light maidens. 13 In
the stead of silks, pearls and precious jewels, let her love godly books,
not gaudely garnished and set out with gold, but inwardly perfected, and
learnedly distinguished, for the better increase of her faith. 14 Let her first
learn the Psalter or Psalms of David in meeter, which may withdraw her mind
from light and vain songues, and baudie ballades.


And in the Proverbs of Solomon, which may instruct her to good and godly
life: And in Ecclesiasticus, Let her exercise her self to seek out things that
apperteine to the world. In Job, Let her follow the example of virtue and
patience. Prudens filia, viro est vice haereditatis. Eccle. 21. A wise
daughter, what she is to her husband.
A wise daughter is to her husband, in the stead of an inheritance. Also a
shamefast maid, will reverence her husband. A daughter is another possession
unto her father. If he get a good son in law, than has he found his
daughter: but if he chance of a wicked son in law, tha^ has he utterly lost
and cast away his daughter. Besides this it apperteineth to the duty of a
godly maid (which would seek for true and everlasting salvation) that also
before all things, she have the knowledge of the doctrine and religion which
has been set forth and delivered unto us from the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, and which is contained in the books of the holy scriptures. It is
necessary that she know the law, which may teach her not only what works
please ordisplease almighty God: but also thereby she may learn to know her
own sins, and be put in mind to seek for the remission of the same. And
therefore it is also needful that she know the Gospel of the son of God,
the cleanser and washer away of our sins, and the pacifier of Gods wrath, and
that she show her self faithful herein, and give credit hereunto.


Theophilus. These be good lessons for daughters in deed. But if a young man
have ungodly parents, infidels, and altogether ignorant of Gods laws; is it
not the sons duty to teach and instruct his father and mother?


Theodidactus. Yea always, albeit it be not an usual or common thing. For if
a young man being a Christian, have ungodly Parents, in who^ he would wish
and desire to have sown the seeds of virtue and true knowledge of God, he
ought to endeavor him by all means possible, gently and reverently to admonish
them, that he might draw them unto piety and the true knowledge of Christ,
that at the last, being instructed in the will of God, of wicked and ungodly
ones, he might make them godly and virtuous.


Theophilus. What young men at this day are to be deemed and judged most happy?


Theodidactus. Certes none are more happy, than those which truly perform
their duties, and to who^ it is given from their childhood to repose al hope in
one and y^ true god, and with sure co^fide^ce to depend of his only goodness
providence, which thing appears to have chanced unto David. Psalm. 71. Where
most faithfully he speaks unto God, saying thus: Quoniam tu es expectatio
mea domine, Domine spes mea a iuuentute mea. For thou O Lord God art the thing
that I long for, thou art my hope even from my youth: As though he should say,
not now only, but hitherto always through my whole life, thou art the thing I
long for, and my hope: that is to say, Seeing that I have had none other God
from my youth up, but thee alone, how shall I now not call upon thee in this
trouble: And how shall thou forsake me? Parents are hereby admonished, that
they instruct their children from their youth in such godliness, knowledge,
faith and hope of God, that they become not wicked and unhappy, but continue
blessed with God and all his holy Angels, and Saints in heaven for ever. But
this instruction (as I said) ought to be proponed and set forth unto children
even from their young and tender years.

Nam quod noua testa capit, inueterata sapit. For look what licour at the
first, the new vessel takes:
The taste thereof, when it is old, it hardly then forsakes.
And out of question nothing, sticks more surely in the minds Quintilian.
of young men, than that, that is taught them in their green and tender
years. And if we will give credit to Quintilian: Natura tenacissimi eorum
quae rudibus annis percepimus. We are the surest keepers of those things by
nature, which we have learned in our rude and ignorant years. If thou put
strong wine into new vessels, the taste thereof will continue very long. And
who can reduce dyed woolles into their pristinate color?


Theophilus. How happens it that so few inheritours left very wealthily by
their Parents: And also so few men servants and maids, have so little
happiness and prosperity in this life?


Theodidactus. Because so few at this day regard to observe and fulfill the
fifth Why children, servants and maids live oftentimes most miserably.
commandment, the breach whereof has a curse thereunto annexed: hereof it
comes to pass, that the great treasures and possessions left unto the
heirs, helps them nothing. It avails servants and maids nothing at all
to labor and toil, and to proll, filtch, and steal all their life long: For
God does not bless them for their contempt, and disobedience toward their
Parents, Magistrates, Masters, Mistresses and Dames. Hither may be referred
the examples of this present time (not to be numbered) of those which have been
left heirs of very great possessions, are notwithstanding at this present
poorer than Irus, and live in extreme misery.


Theophilus. Seeing that by many and diverse examples, and also daily experience
it Why the affections of children are more cold toward their Parents, than of
the Parents toward their children.
self can teach us, that all Parents (by a certain guiding of nature) do
truly and with all their hearts love their children (which natural effect also
appears in the wild and savage beasts.) How comes this to pass, that
the children do not love their Parents again, neither reverence nor obey
them, to whom nevertheless they are bound for all things which they have
received, yea the life it self?


Theodidactus. For that I perceive in all families y^ natural affections and
love of children The first cause of disobedience.
toward their parents, for the most part are more cold, weak, and faint, this
happens of two causes chiefly. First, the dispositions and inclinations of
children are so corrupted with the faults and ^innes of our old and great
Graundfather Adam, that they more fervently desire to be beloved than their
parents. Secondly, as ye Philosophers do judge, the parents are in the
ascendent degree: but the children in the descendent degree, and so falls out
their love. Even as a stone falls more easily downwards than upwards.
Wherefore most true is that common saying: One father with a less care and
more cheerful mind can nourish and bring up ten children, than ten children
can comfort and cherish one father: hereof it may easily be judged, how great
the love and ready good will of children is to help their parents in their
necessities. Therefore they do very foolishly, which being poor and well
stricken in years, do look for great aid and succor from their children:
wherefore if they covet and desire to take good counsel for themselves, they
shall rather earnestly endeavor to settle and repose al their whole confidence
and trust in y^ which is the fountain of all paternitie and goodness. But yet
more foolishly and unadvisedly do they which through too fond affection and
love being yet alive, do yield and deliver up into the hands of their children,
their goods, coin, and all their inheritance, wholly persuading them selves to
live more easily of the benevolence and love of their children, whom oftentimes
they find very foolish, negligent and careless, to their great loss,
hindrance, and utter undoing, with their intolerable sorrow and grief all the
days of their lives. When nevertheless Eccle. 33. sets forth unto these
old men most wholesome counsel. Filio, inquit Jesus Syrach and mulieri,
fratri aut amico, non des potestate^ super te in vita tua, non dederis alij
possessione^ tua^, ne forte poeniteat te, and depreceris pro illis. Du^ adhuc
superes and aspiras non immutabit te omnis caro. Says Jesus Syrach, give not
thy son, thy wife, thy brother, nor thy friend, power over thee while thou
live: and give not away thy goods and possession to another, lest it repent
thee, and thou be feign to beg therefore thy self. As long as thou live and
have breath let no man change thee: Melius est enim vt filij tui te rogent,
quam te respicere in manus filiorum tuorum. For better it is thy children to
pray and entreat thee, than that thou should be feign to look into their
hands says Syrach. Yet it is not the will of God, y^ they should depart this
life altogether without ye making and preparing of their last will and
Testament. But he would have us willing and ready to dispose our goods, lands
and possessions before our death, saying after this manner: In consummatione
dieru^ vitae tuae, and in te^pore exitus tui distribue h^reditate^ tuam. At the
time when thou shall end thy days, and finishe thy life, distribute thine
inheritance, possession and goods.


Theophilus. How comes it to pass, that at this day, there is almost no
duty performed unto Magistrates and Elders, nor any reverence or regard unto
Parents? You have taught us before that the infection of our corrupt nature is
in fault: do you not think, that there is some other thing that causes this
disobedience and rebellion in children and servants?


Theodidactus. Yes verily. For another cause why children do not obey and
honor The second cause why children are so disobedient.
their parents at this day, is y^ filthy slothfulnes of parents, and the
negligence, and too much carelesnes, nothing beseeming without dout, or meet
for Christians: For how shall a child keep and perform the precepts of the
second table, which is ignorant of the precepts of the first table? out of y^
which as out of a fountain issues and proceeds the duty of parents and
Magistrates, etc. And all other works of love and obedience. It were therefore
to be wished, nay rather to be performed, that children and subjects ought
diligently to be instructed in the first precepts, to ye end they might learn
to know God, to trust in him, to love, fear, and worship him, to call upon
him, to give him thanks, to honor his holy name, and willingly to hear and
learn his word: these and such like if they were truly observed, then without
doubt the good fruits of obedience should by and by follow, wherefore in these
things the greatest care and diligence must be used.


Theophilus. Notwithstanding albeit it is evident that youth is depraved and
corrupted partly with the fault of our corrupt nature, and partly made worse
through the negligence and too much cockering of parents: shall they not be
urged and pricked forward with stripes, and admonished and stirred up with
examples and reasons?


Theodidactus. The love and reverence of young men toward their parents shall
by no means neither more easily nor more aptly be provoked and stirred up
the^ if they acknowledge their parents to be the original cause of their birth,
if they acknowledge them to be the shop of their life, and to be brief, the
men, by whom we begin to be men: also we shall endeavor to honor and reverence
them with all our hearts, if we weigh with our selves the great and manifold
charges, the grievous sorrows, and cares which they have been compelled to
suffer for our sakes, for they have often spared from their own bellies, to
feed ours, broken many sleeps to quiet and pleasure us, afflicted with many
grievous cares, and weeried with labors, to the end that they might provide
and get those things y^ might do us good and are necessary to the furtherance
of our life, Besides this with their admonitions they have procured unto us the
true catholic faith in God, and also the hope and love of everlasting
salvation, y^ after this life ended, we might live with God for ever: when we
understand y^ these so great benefits are given unto us of our parents, how
shall we not love them? and reverence the^ with all our hearts at al times and in all places? this saying of Philo shall also stir up and move children very much
unto the reverence Philo.
of their parents, which says: Quod Deus est mundo, hoc liberis Parents esse
arbitror: Look what God is unto the world, I judge Parents to be the same
thing to their children: For as God made y^ that was not, to the end it might
appear: So they imitating his power as much as possible might be, do make an
immortal generation Only the ^. commandment has a promise.
and lineage by their progenies. Also it shall not a little stir up the minds
of godly children to the love of their Parents if they shall rightly weigh and
consider that never one of the commandments has any singular promise, but
only the 5. commandment. For by the name of long life is not only understood
the continuance of days, but also the tranquillity and quietness of this
corporal life. But here I am more full of words then the matter does
require: For seeing that youth do now understand y^ they receive so great
benefits from their elders, surely except they have hearts more hard then the
Adamant, they would be inflamed and incited by their own accord unto the
honor and love of their Parents, and should need no spurs nor such
prouocations and allurementes.


Theophilus. It is very true my good Theodidactus. For it were the parts of
wise and godly children willingly to be drawn to the obedience of their
parents. But what more special things are there to be devised for children,
which might more gladly and with greater affection move them to the obedience
of their Parents.


Theodidactus. For the better performing of this honor to their parents,
children ought most specially to remember (except they be altogether hard What
things do chiefly stir up children to the honor and obedience of Parents.
hearted and unnatural) y^ perils dolors and anguishes which their mothers
sustained and suffered for the^ in their travail and birth: and therwtal let
the^ diligently consider with what great pains, cares, frightes, sorrows and
charges from their infancy upwards, they are brought up of their parents, which
thing they may more easily collect and gather by the education and bringing up
of other children and infantes. In like manner they ought to remember and ponder
this one thing well, that their children shall be such to them when they are
parents, as they now show themselves toward their parents. But this as To
honor Parents is the most acceptable worship to God.
yet is but a small thing, for they ought diligently to consider that to honor
their Parents is the most acceptable woorship to God that can be, and that
what duties soever thou shall perform to thy parents, the same God judges
and estemeth as done unto himself the which also he will recompense, with many
and great benefits: when on y^ contrary part (as is aforesaid) he will punish
the impiety of children toward their Parents, with grievous maledictions,
plagues, and torments. There is a very profitable lesson concerning these
things in Eccle. 3. Which because it is somewhat touched before I will here
omit. Moreover children ought to set before their eyes, the example of Jesus
Christ the son of the living God who albeit he was the lively image of his
father, became nevertheless obedient unto his father even to the death of the
Cross. But if children when they be adopted into Sons of GOD for Christ his
sake, do desire to be made fellow heirs of Christ in heaven: surely then very
duty requires, that they also follow the example of Christ his obedience in
earth according to their several callings. For there be among the very brute
beasts, which when their Parents are well stricken in years, do by course and
turn requite them again with food and nourishment. Therefore what great
dishonestie, filthiness, detestation and villainy is it, if he which bosteth
and vanteth himself, that he is not only a man endued with reason: but also
believes y^ he is the adopted son of God, be overcome of the brute beasts
with gratitude and kindness toward their parents? Godly children ought to
study, find out and practice these and such like examples, that at the last
willingly and by their own minds they might be excited and drawn to the due
obedience of their Parents.


Theophilus. O good God how profitable and how effectual be these things which
hitherto you have declared to the obedience of parents, but yet if you have any
other things in store, which may seem meet unto you to be uttered unto us,
declare the^ here I beseech you, that the hearts of these children of our good
neighbor Amusus may the more easily be bowed, and begin to serve and willingly
obey the will and minds of their parents in all things.


Theodidactus. Al godly children and virtuous young men ought to consider and
diligently weigh, who is the Author and giver of the 5. commandment (y^ is to
wit) almighty God, maker of heaven and earth, the disposer and preserver of al
things in them contained: and yet is not this sufficient, except in like manner
they do consider, what and how great the majesty of God is, which has
commanded, saying: Honor thy father and mother etc And for that (I say) God is
the author and giver of this precept, many things hereof do necessarily follow.


Theophilus. I would be very glad to hear of you what might ensue and be
obtained hereby: for there is no doubt, but that it shall bring great profit to
the hearers, and they shall the better understand the fifth commandment.


Theodidactus. For as much as God is the Author and giver of this commandment,
The fifth commandment (...) good, necessary and profitable. ^^*
First it follows of necessity that this precept is good: for y^ God by
nature being good, cannot command that which is ill. Secondly it follows,
that this commandment is necessary that there might be a true worship of God,
in the which youth might exercise themselves* unto true piety and godliness.
Thirdly it is profitable for the rewards that therein is promised. Fourthly,
those do well and rightly, which keep the same. Fifthly we are bound to the
keeping of the same under pain of damnation. But that I may be more brief and
at the last make an end of these things, the minds of children shall be
wonderfully stirred up to honor their parents, if they rightly weigh with
themselves, what Moses means when he says: Honor thy father and mother* for
although their parents be me^, yet does not Moses say, honor the^, as they are
me^, but honor thy father and mother, as though he should say, honor the^
who^* God favors, which God has coupled together, and which are exercised
in y^ kind of life y^ pleases almighty God, In like manner he does not say,
honor thy God or thine evil father or mother, or thine hard hearted, gentle,
wayward, rich, or poor parents: but he says, honor thy father and thy mother,
without adding any Epithet, condition or quality. Therefore let children and
young men learn to reverence and obey their parents, and to hold these
vocables and titles, (father and mother) in great price and for most sacred
relics. And let them rather wish to die, then willingly and obstinately to
offend them: for parents have nothing in this life, wherein they are more
affected and delighted, then in the love of their children, and therefore most
easily offended, when they do any thing contrary to their liking.


Theophilus. I marvel nothing more ( O Theodi.) the^ why parents are moved with
so great love and delight in their children, whereas they oftentimes on the
contrary part, prove very unkind, wicked and unnatural toward their parents.


Theodidactus. There be many causes why parents are so affected toward their
children, but y^ first and chiefest cause of al is god, which has created, and
put into the minds of parents such a most perfect and true natural affection
toward their children, y^ if at any time their minds be hurt stricke^ and
wounded with sorrow and heaviness of heart for y^ calamity of Rebellious children
do stay their parents very often, not with sword, but with sorrow and
heaviness of heart.
their children, y^ same is a most present* plague and poyso^ to their lives:
so y^ they are easily s^aine and murdered albeit not with sword or other weapon,
yet with lamentation, weeping, wailing, inward sorrow grief and heaviness of
heart. I my self have seen many honest and virtuous Parents utterly
consumed and pyned away with sorrow and grief of heart for the wickedness
of their children. But youth being ignorant and untaught, do not consider
nor understand this: wherefore I think it good that they be admonished and
that with great care and diligence, least they become manquellers, and
murderers of father and mother. For they kill and murder their parents very
often before they understand the greatness of their sin and wickedness,
because they know not with what great sorrow and grief, their parents are
vexed and inwarly greened for the untowardness and wickedness of their
children, but the parents feel it, wither away, languish and are consumed,
even to the bones many times, for the very anguish of heart and vexation of
mind. Therefore it is not without cause that in the 5. commandment, the Lord
our God has used this vocable and word ( honor:) For he does not say, obey thy
parents, but honor them: he would have this name to be accounted holy: because
God know well enough the malice of our original sin, whose force and violence
is so great, that it moves and urges men to the slaugtter of their own
natural parents, as may be seen in Esau Absolon and others, (I would it might
not be seen in our time.) I do exhort therefore all young men, y^ they shun
and detest this horrible sin, and exercise their minds unto the reverence of
their parents, and that they may perform this y^ better, let the^ crave and
instantly desire the aid and assistance of Almighty god in their daily and
continual prayers.


Theophilus. I easily gather of these your words that in parents, there is a
wonderful and an incredible love toward their children, and in children there
is not only a fai^t and languished affection, but also so great malice that no
man living (^e he never so wise) is able to understand and to search out the
depth of the same, as the said examples of Esau and Absolon, do manifestly
witness*


Theodidactus. You gather of my words very wisely my Theophilus. Solon Solon*
that most wise* lawmaker being asked at a certain time, why he appointed no
pain and punishment for him, that shall kill either father or mother? Answered
that he did not think, that there was so great impiety, cruelty, and tyranny
in the hearts of mortal me^, that any one durst attempt and presume to kill
him, by and through whom he had received the beginning and entrance of this
life. But GOD to whom only all things are manifest, knowing the impiety and
wickedness of man's nature, has appointed a pain for the paracide and
murderer, saying after this maner^ Quipercusserit patrem suum* aut matrem,
morte moriatur. Who so strikes his father or mother let him die the death. And
he leaves not Exodus 21.
here but faith moreover. Qui maledixerit patri suo vel matri, morte moriatur.
Whosoever shall but curse his father or mother, shall die for it. Hereof let y^
children learn to know the malice of man's heart, and let them pray mast
earnestly unto God their heavenly father, that they may never fall into such
horrible wickedness. To this agrees Saint Augustine saying: Gratia tua and
misericor^ia ( mi Deus) August.
praeuenit me, liberans ab omnibus malis etc. Thy grace and thy mercy (O my
God) has prevented me, and delivered me from evil, saving me from all evils
past, raising me up from those that are present, and desending me from the
evils to come cutting in sunder also before me the snares of sin, taking
away the occasions and causes: and if thou had not done this for me (O my
God) I had surely committed all the sins in the world. For I know O Lord,
that that there is no sin, that ever any man has done at any time, that
another man cannot do, if his Creator d^e fail him, of whom he was made man:
but what did I not, it was only thy doing, what I have abstayned from, it was
thy commandment: And that I have given credit unto thee, it is thy grace
working in me only: for thou O Lord have governed me, that I did not commit
a dultery and any other kind of sin and wickedness, thou have given me thy
grace, and illuminated my heart with understanding. See, how truly Saint
Augustine understands the wickedness and peruersenes of man's heart, which
Solon (albeit he was accounted the wisest man among the Grecians) could not
perceive nor understand.


Theophilus. Is not God wont for the sins and wickedness of children, to
take away counsel from the aged, and often time also old men themselves?


Theodidactus. I believe it has chanced very often, and y^ almost innumerable
examples do teach and have taught us. Among others, the Prophet Ezechiel
complains in this wise, saying: Et quaerent visionem Ezechiel.
de Propheta, and lex peribit a sacerdote, and consilium a senibus. And they
seek a vision of the prophet, and the law shall perish from the Priest, and
council from the old men.

From which place may easily be gathered that God for these grievous sins,
will punish both parents and children, with unspeakable plagues, insomuch, that
he does deprive them of their visions prophe^ies, laws, and councels of their
elders, then the which plagues, there is none more cruel, none more horible.
Wherefore children ought to take great heed that they commit no grievous
offense, but diligently perform their duties, and remember that old age ought
not to be contemned, unto which we all do desire to come. Great commodities
grow unto us by ou^ elders.
But let them think that it is to be loved, reverenced, and obeyed, with all
diligence* They shall hear them, and yield all honor and reverence unto them,
neither let the^ depart from their sides, or wind themselves out of their
companies, who for their greater experience of things, greater wisdom, and
more stayednesse in life, they may follow their steps, use their counsels, be
delighted in their studies, that they may have the fight of those which may
fear them from vices. They shall be, says S. Ambrose: Vitae nostrae testes
simul and magistri, witnesses and also masters of our lives. From them we
shall receive the way to live, the order to speak, the behavior to be
conversant with others, and the discipline of all virtues. For this may seem
true unto every man, who so have learned many things by use and long
experience, do remember more then others, wherefore, they are wiser then
others, and more apt for council and government in any thing whatsoever.


Amusus. For that we have heard of you so godly and so wholesome Precepts of
obedience and honor (which is due to parents) we are very glad, and for these
so great benefits, we give you humble thanks. In the beginning of our talk
my good and reverend father, I showed my mind and will (I cannot tell whether
you remember it) concerning the instructing and bringing up of my children.


Theodidactus, I remember it, but yet it may be that I have not understood
all things fully that you would have expressed, Therefore if you would use any
further conference with me touching those things, I pray you speak, and be
not afraid.


Amusus. In the beginning of our talk, I told you, I was of this mind, that I
would very feign have almy children virtuously brought up and godly instructed
in the true knowledge, faith religion and fear of Almighty God: And you most
lovingly have been willing in all things to satisfy my mind in such sort,
that I never had any hope to hear from any man so many and so excellent
things, as I have heard from your mouth. But now I am of this mind, that I
would be right glad to have those my sons (whose wits I shall perceive neither
to be too dull nor blockish, nor altogether alienated and estraunged from the
Muses) trained up in Christ his Church, and I would be glad to have them
ministers and preachers of his word: not to the end that they should gather
and heap up to themselves great riches and so to live at their ease and
pleasure, as many do now a days (the more to be lamented) but rather that they
should endeavor (to the uttermost of their power) to deliver out of Satan's
chawes, many souls now vexed and tormented, and so gain them unto Christ.
And because also it is an excellent thing to excel in virtue, to do good to
our Country, to teach others, to know themselves, and to search out the
secrets of nature.


Theodidactus. Almighty God grant, that you never alter nor change your
mind herein: For the harvest is great, but the laborers are few, 1. Time. 3.
Ad* Titum. 3
if we respect true faith, unfeigned diligence, and pure doctrine, all which
things are to be required in the true ministers and preachers of the word,
and many other things also, whereof Saint Paul speaks unto Timothe and Titus.


Amusus. Recite here the words of Saint Paul. I pray you (except it be to
your trouble) that I and my sons may understand, what it is to be a minister
of the word of God in his Church.


Theodidactus. This is a faithful saying, says Saint Paul: If a man desire
the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. A. B. Therefore must ^.
Time. 3.
be blameles, the husband of one wife, watching, sober, comely apparrelled, a
lover of hospitality, apt to teach, not given to over much wine, no striker,
not greedy of fill thie lucre, but gentle, abhorring fighting, abhorring
covetousness, one that rules well his own house, having children in
subjection, with all gravity* For if a man know not how to rule his own house,
how shall he care for the Church of God?


Amusus. Without doubt it is a great and hard charge, chiefly to him, which
has purposed and determined in his heart to care for the Church of God,
according to the method and prescript rule of S. Paul: the greatness thereof
terrifieth both me and my sons,


Theodidactus. My good Amusus, there is no cause, why you should fear the
difficulty and hardness of this godly function: for all things are possible
with God. For Christ has called fishers, and made them rulers of his Church.
The spirit of God works effectually in the hearts of those that believe and
call upon his name: wherefore see that you power out your ardent prayers before
the Lord God, for your children, and that with great care and diligence, and
doubt you nothing at all of Gods promises.


Amusus. So I do to the uttermost of my power, and according to my slender
capacity: For he knows, which is the only searcher of the hearts and
reins, how earnestly I do desire to have my sons the instruments of the
holy Ghost, by means whereof the doctrine of the Gospel might be enlarged in
the Church of God. But is our prayers and the inuocating of God sufficient to
the going about this matter of so great a charge, as it was in the time of the
Apostles? Or be there any other means annexed for the better perfourming of
this charge and duty?


Theodidactus. Yea verily, for in the time of the Prophets and Apostles, God
The knowledge of the tongues is necessary to the study of divinity.
for the most part wrought miraculously, and in setting out his word
immediately by the working of the holy Ghost only, but now in this our age he
manifests him self more often through the gift of tongues: (that is to say)
not only in the knowledge of the Latin tongue, but also of the Greek and
Hebrew: not that the holy ghost is now made a stranger from the Doctors of our
Church, but thus has it pleased his majesty, and seemed good to his divine
wisdom, that he does not always rule and teach his Church, or make himself
manifest after one manner.


Amusus. If then I covet and desire to have my sons true divines and teachers
in the Church (as far as I can gather by your reasons and arguments) they
must excel in learning, and in the knowledge of the tongues, they must also be
well and perfectly instructed.


Theodidactus. Amusus, according to your natural inclination, so do you rightly
gather of my words. For all mankind was created to this end, that he should
perfectly know, call upon, confess, and glorify God the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: not according to our own imaginations, but according to the
doctrine which God himself has set forth unto men, and which with his own
finger he has written in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, in which
he teaches us how and after what manner he will be worshipped, which books
he has commanded al men to read, hear, and learn. 1. Tim. 4 by S. Paul
saying in this wise: At^e^de lectioni, exhortationi doctrinae. Give attendance
to reading, to exhortation, and to doctriue. And 2. Petri. 1. it is written:
Hibemus firmiorem sermonem propheticum, eui dum attenditis, ceu lucernae
adparenti in obscuro loco, recte facitis, etc. We have a right sure word of
prophecy, whereunto if ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, ye do well etc. By these places it may easily be gathered that God
would have all men read, and understand those books of the Prophets and
Apostles, and teach them unto others, and undoubtedly he will condemn all
those, which do not receive, or do contemn those holy and most sacred books.

Wherefore such as are conversant among the wise and learned can easily judge,
how profitable and also how necessary the knowledge of tongues is, and the
perfect instruction of good arts. For the Pastor which shall receive the
office of teaching in the Church of GOD, it is very meet and convenient that
he excel the sheep committed unto him in doctrine and knowledge, that he may
be able rightly to discern true from false doctrine, and y^ he may also be
able stoutly to drive away the wolves from his sheepfold, but that shall he
never do, if he shall be unlearned, and shall not be able too hold the
sum of the doctrine of the Apostolic Church.


Amusus. You have sufficiently and plainly taught us, that all men are made to
the end that the knowledge of God might shine in them. Then again you have
added heereunto (to wit) that for the comprehending of this knowledge, the
knowledge of tongues, and right instruction of liberal arts is very necessary,
and such knowledge and instruction is required in the Ministers of the word of
God, this have you showed with great and forcible arguments. And seeing the
case so stands (most reverend Theodi.) to I am now to desire and entreat you,
that you would now move and stir up the minds of my sons unto learning,
that in the study of good arts, they might be made more cheerful and willing:
which shall easily come to pass, if you will vouchsafe to show and declare
here before them some things of virtue, learning, and of the praise of godly
instructing and education: For you will scarcely believe, what great account my
children do make, both of your self, and your learned talk and conference.


Theodidactus. Albeit I do perceive the minds of your children very willing
to the study of good things: yet for that you entreat me so earnestly, I
will hear show you some things of the praise of good learning, wherewith I
may incite and move your sons (as it were with a spur, to the end they
might run the more swiftly.) But first (that I may tell you what I think) I
do not only judge, that it is meet to learn, but in a free City, I scarcely
judge any man worthy to deserve the name of a free Citizen, without learning:
for I know not among the inventions of men, whether any thing may be said or
thought more excellent.


Amusus. My good sons, force your minds hither, and prick up your ears,
and commit these worthy sayings and praises of learning unto your memory.


Filij. The Children. Here we stand all (good Father) with greedy minds,
and prepared ears, ready to receive whatsoever shall be spoken of this most
wise teacher.


Theodidactus. For that I now perceive your willingness and attentiveness, Of
the praise of learning.
there is nothing so secret in my heart, that I will not reveal and
communicate unto you. That noble Philosopher Aristotle, said: Aristotle.
Eruditione^ esse viaticu^ optimu^ ad senectutem: Learning is the best
preparation that can be got, for an old man's journey: For all other things
either forsake, or else trouble an old man. Anacharsis, tutissimum Anacharsis.
esse murum prudentiam asseuerauit, quod ea nec collabitur, nec proditur.
Anacharsis has affirmed, that wisdom is the most surest defense and
fortress, for that it can never be overthrown, nor betrayed. For there be no
Fortes or Bulwarks so strongly fenced, but with ingines, or vndermininges, or
by some other trecharie they may be taken, overthrown and spoiled: But the
decrees and ordinances of a Aristippus.
wise man are inexpugnable. Aristippus said: Satius esse fieri mendicu^, quam
indoctum, quod ille tantum pecunij; egeat, hic humanitate: nihilominus homo
est, cui deest pecunia, at homo non est cui deest eruditio. Et tamen cui deest
pecunia, petit ab obuijs, at cui deest sapientia nullu^ sollicitat vt accipiat.
It is much better to be a beggar, than to be a rich man without learning, for
that the one wants only money, and the other lacks all points to a man
belonging. He is nevertheless a man that has no money, but he is no man, that
has no manner, knowledge nor learning: And yet he that wants money, beggeth of
such persons, as he meets withal, but he that lacks wisdom, is nothing
busy in asking any man to have it on him. Diogenes lighting a candle at noone
days, carried the Diogenes.
same in his hand up and down the market, and to those that asked him what he
meant thereby? he answered, I seek a man: for he knew there was a multitude,
but of beasts, not of men. The same Idem.
Diogenes at a certain time standing in the market place where the people might
best see him, cried with a loud voice, Approach ye men, approach ye men, as
though he had had some earnest matter to say unto the people, and when they
had gathered very thick about him, and he for all that, ceased not but still
cried: approach ye men, certain of them taking great indignation at the
matter: answered, Lo, here we be, say thy mind. Then Diogenes driving them
away with a staff, said: I bad men approach, and not such dunghils and
drafsacks as you are. Cicero that Prince of Philosophers, speaks Cicero.
much of the praise of learning, saying: A wise and thriftie young man, will
judge nothing either more pleasant, or more profitable the^ learning: It
bridleth youth, it delights old age, it garnisheth men in prosperity, it is
a refuge in adversity, it causes joy, it delights at home, it hinders not
abroad, and therefore he ought to let no time slip from the exercise and
increase herein, this ought to be his study his labor, his rest, his
watchings, in these things also he ought to settle and repose his sleep. For
what honester thing can youth do, than to seek for this rest and quietness?
and to be exercised in that, which of all wise men is thought and judged
always the most profitable and pleasauntest thing:


Liberi. There is nothing more acceptable to our ears, than these most
excellent sayings, but what meant Diogenes by this his Apophthegmne, when he
sought for men?


Theodidactus. He taught thereby very excellently, that the man which has
not been instructed neither in Philosophy, nor in any other virtuous and godly
discipline, is worse than the bruit beasts. For beasts follow and obey the
motions of nature only: and man except he be formed, fashioned, and garnished
with learning and precepts of Philosophy, is carried headlong into most
beastly affections. There is no beast more fierce and hurtful than man, the
which is moved with ambition, covetousness, ire, envy, riote, and lust:
wherefore, who so provides not to have his child nurtured and brought up in
virtuous and godly discipline, even from his tender years, is neither a man
him self, nor the son of a man, nor shall be the father of a man. Diogenes
also in an other place, recites most excellent Diogenes.
ornaments and praises of learning, when he says: Eruditionem iuuenibus
adferre sobrietatem, senibus solatium, pauperibus diuitias, diuitibus
ornamentum: Learning brings to young men Ab vtili.
soberness, to old men a solace, to poor men riches, and to rich men an
ornament: For it restrains that lubrick and slipperie age, from great
intemperauncie whereunto it is naturally inclined. It mitigateth the hurtes and
displeasures of old age, with honest recreation and solace, and to poor men
it is in the stead of acompanion by the way.

Alphonsus King of the Aragones being demanded: Vtri rei plus Alphonsus.
debere se fateretur, libris, an armis: ex libris inquit, and arma and armorum
iura didici. To whether of these two things he would confess him self more
bound, to his books or to his force and puissaunce, answers, that out of
his books, he has learned both force, and also the law of martial
affairs: confessing by this his answer, that he is most bound unto his
Books.

In like manner, when at a certain time a King of Spain said: Non decere
principes viros scire literas. It is not meet nor beseeming that Princes and
noble men give them selves to learning. Alphonsus cried out saying: Eam
vocembouis esse, non hominis. It is the voice of a beast, and not of a man.


Liberi. Would to God this our age had many such kings as Alphonsus was, then
would learning flourish, and many would more cheerfully apply their minds to
study, because their Mecaenates should always be ready to assist them.


Theodidactus. Saint Bernard does exceedingly commend the instruction of good
discipline, saying after this manner: O quam compositum reddit Bernard.
omnem corporis statum, nec non and mentis habitum disciplina? Ceruicem
submit^^t, ponit supercilia, componit vultu^, ligat oculos, cachinnationes Ab
affectu.
prohibet, moderatur linguam, fraeuat gulam, sedat ira^, format incessum Oh in
what excellent order does discipline set all the state and iesture of the
body? as also the habit of the mind? It makes a man lowly, it lays down
the stately countenance, itsetleth the countenance in good order, it staieth
the eyes, it forbids great laughter, it governs the tongue, it brideleth
gluttony, it pacifieth ire, it orders thy pace and going. Seneca says:
Literas tanquam baculum repert as infirm^ corpori. Learning is like a staff
prepared for a weak and feeble body. Seneca.
When a fool in the hearing of Pithagoras said: Malle se cum mulieribus esse,
quam cum Philosophis conuersari. He had rather to be with women, than to be
conversant with Philosophers. Et sues, inquit, Pithagoras.
in coeno libentius, quam in pura aqua versantur. And swine (says Pithagoras)
had rather lie wallowing in the filthy puddles, than in the pure water.


Theophilus. Truly you have declared unto us worthy and excellent praises of
learning, to the which the very bruit beasts if it were possible might be
moved: but when must they learn, which and what manner of things are to be
learned, and how long, I pray you be not grieved to tell us in order.


Theodidactus. The Hebrews, in their Apophthegmnes do teach, that we ought to
learn from our young and tender years: Qui enim discit inquiunt, puer
existens, cui similis est? atrame^to scripto in noua^ papyru^: qui Hebraei.
vero discit quu^ senex est, cui similis est? atrame^to scripto in papyru^
bibulam. For who so learneth (say they) while he is a child, to what is he
When we ought to learn.
like? to ynke written upon new paper: but who so learneth when he is is
old, what is he like? to paper that drinks up the ynke and will not bear
it. Rambam says to Rabby, Look what thing soever is learned Rambam.
in childhood, it continues, but whatsoever is learned in old age, it is
far otherwise. And Saint Augustine says: Ad discendum August.
quod opus est, nulla aetas sera videri potest: etsi senes magis decet docere
quam discere, magis tamen decet discere quam ignorare. To learn things that
are needful, is never to late doubtless: And albeit, it rather becomes old
men to teach than to learn, yet it rather becomes them to learn, than to
be ignorant. And a great regard must be had unto young men, for the spending
of time. Omne enim tempus in quo de Deo non cogitant, hoc putate, inquit, vos
perdidisse. For think this says he, that all the time wherein you do not
think upon God, you have utterly lost. Corpus vestrum incedat in terra, anima
autem vestra sit apud Deum. Your bodies (says he) walks upon the earth,
but let your minds be lift up to God. And Ambrose says: Nullam esse aetatem
ad discendum seram: erubescat, inquit senectus, quae emendare se non posset. No
time is too late to learn: that old age may be ashamed (says he) which
cannot correct and amend it self.


Theophilus. If from our tender years we must give our selves to learning, and
again, if in our old age we ought to set our minds upon godly studies and
exercises? When shall we find a time to give our selves to rest? Et manum de
tabula tollere. And to take our hand from the table, as it is said in the
Proverb?


Theodidactus. All the godly do know the commandment of God touching Gene. 3.
labor and pains taking. Gene. 3. In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. In
the sweat of thy face, shall thou eat thy bread. Also the examples of worthy
men, do teach us, that we ought always to give our selves to labor, and
exercise, Socrates being a grave man, Socrates.
was not ashamed to learn to play on the Lute among boys, and when some of
his friends meruelled thereat, and said it was unseemly for one of his
years to be amongst children, he denied that, and said, the things wherein a
man is ignorant, it is no shame to learn, so that they be lawful and honest.

Dinus Augustinus nunc sexagenarius Graecas literas didicit. Saint August.
Augustine learned the Greek tongue when he was full threescore years of age.

In like manner Saluius Iulianus both in the knowledge of excellent Saluius.
laws, as also in perfect friendship, a most pearelesse Prince, when he was
persuaded by his friends to leave his study, and give him self to his rest
and quietness, was wont to say: E^si alterum pedem It is better to learn late
then never. Aristotle.
in sepulchro haberem, adhuc addiscere vellem. Albe^t I had one of my feet in
the grave, yet would I be willing to learn. Aristotle also does defend the
same, saying: There is no time sufficient to learn, Nunquam iuuenibus ^
discendi studio, honestisque artibus, praeclarissimisque actionibus feriandum
est. Young men must never make holy day and give over their study to learn
honest Arts, and to practice them selves in virtuous and noble exercises: but
rather most eagerly bend all their whole study to the searching and
understanding of Arts and Sciences: and who so thus does, their studies shall
adorn them, their learning shall prefer them, and the honest exercises of
good Arts, shall purchase them favor with all men. Solon Solon.
was wont to boast, who said, Se discentem quotidie aliquid, senem fieri. He
became an old man, by learning daily somewhat. Wittily said, Harmolaus.
Barbarus.
Harmolaus Barbarus: Sine labor, sine vigilijs, peruenire nemo potest ad ea
quae nos a vulgo separant. Without pains and vigilant watching, no man can
attain to those things, which separate us from the vulgar people: which thing
this verse does testify: Venture, pluma, venus, laudem fugienda sequenti.

Who so does seek for praise, in virtues School, must shonne,
Fine fare, with Venus plays, and eke the beds of down.
Therefore, the good and virtuous young man shall appoint no Seneca.
end to his studies. But he shall follow Seneca his counsel herein, saying:
Tam diu discendum est, quam diu nescias, hoc est, quandiu viuas. So long
ought thou to learn, as long as thou art ignorant, that is, as long as
thou live. Cicero also does counsel us to learn, by an excellent
similitude, saying: Equus indomitus, quamuis been natura compositus est,
idoneus tamen non potest esse ad eas virtutes and vtilitates, quae desidera^tur
ab equo: Ita neque indoctus homo, quamuis sit ingeniosus, ad virtutem potest
peruenire, quandoquidem non potest virtus sine doctrina comparari. An unbroken
horse, although he be never so well limmed, and gallantly proporcioned by
nature, yet he can not be fit for those virtues, qualities, and profits,
which from an Horse are to be expected and desired: So an unlearned man,
albeeit he be witty, can not attain to virtue, forasmuch as virtue can not
be gotten without learning and instruction.


Theophilus. Unto what end shall godly young men clea^e so earnestly to their
studies? to the end that they should purchase to them selves riches and
promotions?


Theodidactus. No forsooth: but good young men shall get learning (as teaches
The end of studies.
Lodouicus Viues) not to the end that thereby they should only get them selves
liuinges, or be promoted to dignities and high honors, but the only end of
studies shall be this, that they become wiser, and also better. And Saint
Augustine says: Homini August.
nulla est causa philosophandi, nisi vt beatus sit. It is to no purpose for a
man to study Philosophy, except to the end that he become happy thereby.


Theophilus. Which and what manner of things (my good Theodidactus) do you
think are to be learned?


Theodidactus. Aristippus says: Youths ought to learn those things, that
Aristippus.
might profit them when they are men. Every good thing ought first to be
learned, neither is that rude and unlearned age, (which is most easy to be
taught) to be exercised in superfluous and vain toies, or spend their time in
idleness and play. Antisthenes also gave very good Antisthenes.
counsel, saying: Those things ought to be prepared for our voyage, which in
shipwreck might swim forth with the owner, hereby supposing that good Arts
were had in price every where, and could not be taken away by any manner
fortune. Leontichides being Leontichides
asked what thing most chiefly ought witty children to learn, those things
says he, which shall be most profitable for them after they shall come to man's
state.


Theophilus. What vices do you think are the greatest hinderaunces and
enemies Auaritia. Ambitio.
to the study of good Arts?


Theodidactus. There are two vices chiefly to be expelled and driven away as well
from all learning, as also from the learned (to wit) Covetousness The enemies
of learning,
and Ambition, which things do altogether destroy Arts, and also do bring
into utter contempt both the learned and also learning?


Theophilus. But forasmuch as (me think) I note that for the most part
every where, rich men's children are the most unlearned, rude, and disobedient,
by which a man may easily gather, that not covetousness and ambition, but also
wealth and abundance of riches are great enemies to good learning and studies.


Theodidactus. You say very truly, For Seneca says: Siquis velit vacare
animo, aut pauper sit, aut pauperi similis. If a man would be quiet in Seneca.
mind, and give him self to some kind of honest study and exercise, must
either be poor in deed, or else he must be like to a very poor man. For
wealth has hindered and held back many from the study of Philosophy. But
poverty, is always in a readmes, and without these worldly cares. Quare
Cresos^stos, qui se studio bonaru^ literaru^ co^ secrare Idem.
instituerunt, admonitos velim, ne diuitijs abutantur, nec ijsdem nimium
confidant. Wherefore I would have these rich men (which have purposed to
dedicate them selves to the study of good letters) admonished, that they abuse
not, neither give too much confidence to their riches Hierony.
and wealth. For says Jerome: Literae marsupium non sequntur, sed sudoris
comites sunt potius, and laboris, sociae ieiuniorum non saturitatis, non
luxuriae. Letters do not seek after stuffed powches, but are companions
rather of sweat and labor, fellows of fasting, not of riotousnesse and
porredde paunches. Demosthenes, plus olei, quam vini Demosthe.
expendisse dicitur. It is said that Demosthenes spent more oil, than wine.
Whose example we ought to follow.


Theophilus To how many kinds of studies ought young men to apply them selves
at one time?


Theodidactus. Varia delectat, sed lectio certa prodest, ait Seneca. To read
diverse Authors, it brings delight,
But a stayed reading, thy pains shall requite.
Says Seneca. Seneca.
Who so determines with him self to go a journey, ought to travel by a
certain and known way, and not to wander by many by paths, for that is not to
go, as one that would cheerfully finish his journey: but painefully to stray
and wander about like an ignorant person.


Theophilus. Is not the multitude of books profitable and necessary for young
men?


Theodidactus, The same Seneca, very excellently answers this question,
saying Idem.
thus: Puto multos ad sapientiam potuisse peruenire, nisi putassent se
peruenisse. Onerat discentem turba librorum, non instruit: multoque satius est
paucis authoribus se tradere, quam errare per multos. I suppose verily, many
men might have attained to great wisdom, had they not thought themselves
there already. A multitude of books do lade a learner, but not instruct him,
And it is a more certain and sure way, for a man to give himself to read a
few authors, then to err by reading of many. When Oenopides beheld a young
man buying of many new books, Oenopides.
he said unto him. Non arcae, sed pectori. Commit not learning to thy chest,
but lay it up within thy breast.


Theophilus. If it may please you now to show us what difference there is
between a learned young man, and an unlearned, you shall pleasure these
children very much: for thereby they shall be the more vehemently inflamed to
the study of good Arts, and the more boldly seek to banish barbarousnesse, and
ignorance.


Theodidactus. Aristippus being asked wherein the learned differed from the
Aristippus.
unlearned: in the same (says he) that horses well broken do differ from the
unbroken. For as the unbroken horse by reason of ignorance what he should do,
and of skittishnesse, is nothing apt either for pleasure or profit: so the
unlearned youth which is violently led away with his own corrupt affections,
(which good education and learning, mastreth and subdueth) is very unmeet for
all companies and fellowship of life.

Plato being demanded what difference there was between a Plato. Aristotle.
The difference between the learned and unlearned.
skillful and cunning man, and an unskillful, answers, even as much as is
between a skillful Physician and his pacient. This question was also proponed
to Aristotle, who answered, Docti ab indoctis differunt, vt viui a mortuis. The
learned do differ from the unlearned even as the quick from the dead, judging
a man without learning to be rather an image than a man. And to this agrees
that wise Cato, saying:

Garnish thy mind with precepts, and tolearne do not swage:

For our life without learning, is but deaths own image.


Theophilus. Oh, what great differences do you show unto us? which if the
great men, and wealthier sort of our Cities and Towns would believe to be
true, in what price and estimation should all the learned be had and how
many Mecaenates should they find? But if you have any other things, which may
commend the study of learning, hide them not from us I pray you.


Theodidactus. I have verily, and that very notable sayings. Socrates being
asked, Socrates.
what was the most beautiful creature of all others, Hom^ (inquit) ornatus
doctrina. A man, says he, adourned with learning. He being also asked, what
was the best and chiefest learning: dedicere mala inquit. To unlearn and
forget the things that are evil, says he. It was demanded of Diogenes, what
was the most grievous and heauiest Diogenes.
burden that the earth did bear? An unlearned and ignorant man, says he.
Cleanthes sola forma indoctos a bestus differe dicebat. Cleanthes. Glycon.
Cleanthes said that the unlearned differ from beasts, only in the shape and
form. The wise Glycon say, that learning is a most sacred sanctuary. Plutarch
says: Neque in piscibus vox, nec in indoctis virtus Plutarchus.
quaerenda est. Neither words in fishes, nor virtue in the unlearned is be
sought for. Empedocles that wise Philosopher, when a certain man Empedocles.
said unto him, that he could find never a wise man in those parts where he
inhabited: no great marvel, says he, Qui enim quaerat sapientem, eum prius
oportet esse sapientem. For whosoever seeks a wise man, it behooves him
first, to be wise himself.


Theophilus. Seeing now you have sufficiently expressed and laid open unto us
the most excellent praises of the profit and dignity of learning. Now is it
a meet place (as I judge) that you show us some thing concerning virtue, as you
promised in the beginning.


Theodidactus. All children are to be earnestly persuaded unto the study of
good Of the dignity of virtue.
letters, as well of their parents, as of their teachers, but yet more earnestly
(in my judgment) they are to be moved unto virtue and godliness: For what shall
it profit to have the knowledge of many arts and sciences, if the love of
virtue and true godliness shall be wanting. Socrates was wont to persuade
young men, that they Socrates.
should behold themselves often in a looking glass, and if they seemed
beautiful and well favored, y^ the^ they shall beware, least they should
commit any thing not beseeming their beauty: if not, look what lacked in the
comeliness and favor of their face and bodies, they should recompense the
same, with the towardness of wit, and comeliness of manners. Thus did this
excellent man take occasion in every place, to exhort men to the study and
love of virtue. Also the Poet Hesiodus does approve this saying, which
persuadeth Hesiodus.
young men to spare no pains and labor, for the attaining of virtue, which
being their conducter and guide, they shall purchase to themselves, immortal
fame and glory. Wherefore they ought to keep this saying of Horace always in
remembrance.

Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam: Horatius.
Multa tulit fecitque puer sudauit and alsit. Abs^inuit venere and vino, etc.
Who so desires the wished mark, by running to attain,
must do and suffer many things with hunger and great pain.
Whiles youthful years do last, he must both sweat and suffer cold.
and eke from wine and women both, he must himself withhold.
Virtue (I say) which is so highly commended and extolled of al How we mu(...)
come to virtue.
the Philosophers, Is not gotten, says Cicero, Somno nec plumis Sardanapali
sed vigilus: nec otio, sed cura: non voluptatibus, sed laboribus. With sleeping
in down beds in the delights of Sardanapalus, but with watching: not with
ease, but with care: not with pleasures, but with labor and pain. Out of
doubt it is to be reckoned no felicity, which wants virtue, learning and the
knowledge of good arts, joined with the fear of GOD. Thou shall bring thy
self in happy state, says Seneca, if thou shall understand those things to
be good, which are mingled with virtue, and those things foul and unseemly
which are mixed with malice and other foul vices. He says also, praise a man
in that which can neither be given him, nor taken away from him: which is
neither fair house, gay and costly garments, nor any richor precious jewels,
but a mind garnished with virtue, wisdom, and perfect reason.


Theophilus. What manner difference do you put between wicked and ungodly
young men, and those that are endued with godliness, virtue, wisdom and
honesty?


Theodidactus A very great difference surely: For the godly youths indewed The
difference between the affections of the godly and ungodly.
with virtue, are wholly given to the redressing of their own faults cleansing
and purging of the imperfections of their adolescencie, and hereof they will
be very careful day and night: But the wicked and ungodly have none other
care, then how they may obey the lusts of their flesh, and enjoy their
wicked and filthy wyshes.


Theophilus. It comes now to my remembrance, how I have heard you often tell
the excellent tale of the poets concerning Hercules, which very stoutly and
with noble courage (all fond delights and pleasures set apart) sought after
virtue and renown: I heartely entreat you that you will recite it here, to
the end these youths might the rather be stirred up and inflamed unto virtue,
whose example if they endeavor to imitate and follow, it shall turn to their
great praise and profit.


Theodidactus. There is nothing truer without doubt. The Poets do show, A
tale of Hercules.
that it chanced when Hercules was young, he went forth into the wilderness,
and lighting on a forked and cross way, he stood still a good while,
doubting which way he were best to take, there stood by him two matrones (that
is to say) Virtus and voluptas, this one very fine, bravely attired, and
looking upon him with a merry and flickering countenance: that other sad,
heavy, and but homely apparrelled. And when this delicate Dame did offer and
promise unto him, that if he would choose her ways, he should have with
her, mirth, joy, wealth and the abundance of all worldly pleasures: But the
other could assure him of nothing but hunger, thirst, heat, The example of
Hercules.
cold, and whatsoever sadness, heaviness, hardness and horror might be
devised, but the end and reward of these things, shall be at the last, the
inioying of the everlasting felicity in heaven, with the sight of the Godhead,
and fellowship of the Angels and Saints. He taking the more excellent and
wholesome counsel, chose rather to follow the way of virtue, albeit for the
present time more hard, dangerous and odible: But surely there are very few
that will follow Hercules in this point.

Moreover, what the Poets do declare of Hercules, that does the holy
Scripture truly testify to have chanced unto Moses, The example of Moses.
which as S. Paul says 11. Hebraeorum: Moses when he was great, refused to be
called the son of Pharaos daughter: chosing rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming
the rebukes of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt: For he had
respect unto the the recompense of the reward. A good and faithful father of
family, and master of household, ought always to propone and set forth such
examples as these, unto his children and servants, that at the last he may
reduce and bring them into the way of virtue: but the youth which cannot be
moved by these and such like examples, are very dull, blockish, and must needs
be enstraunged from all virtue and godliness.


Theophilus. As the studies of good Arts, and virtue are so nigh kin, and so
well agreeing between themselves, that the one cannot, neither ought to be
without the other: So I judge this third thing (to wit) the study of wisdom
meet to be added unto them, without the which those two are but as dumb
images, or rather of things having no life. Wherefore I judge it worth your
labor, if you will also vouchsafe to exhort these children unto the study of
wisdom.


Theodidactus. I have no special thing that I might declare concerning this Of
the study of wisdom.
study, but I will conduct your children unto the fountains of heavenly
waters, from whence they may draw as much as they list, (to wit) unto that most
wise king Solomon which has persuaded and exhorted not only his own sons,
but also al our children in like manner, unto the study of wisdom, saying
thus: My Son, Preu. 20. 16.
incline thine heart to the knowledge of wisdom: and again, possess thou
wisdom for that is better then gold: and search thou out prudence, for that
is more precious then silver, Wisdom is much better then the engines of war.
Jesus Syrach says: Qui diligit Eccle. 9. eodem. 4. 6.
sapientiam, diligit vitam. He that loves wisdom, loves his life. If thou will vow down thine ear, thou shall receive doctrine, and if thou delightest
in hearing, thou shall be wise. A wise man shall be filled with blessing, and
shall purchase honor among the people and his name shall live for ever.


Theophilus. Surely these are worthy praises of wisdom: but I have heard
that wisdom is two fold (to wit) humane, and divine, wherefore it shall be
needful, were it not for your trouble, to show and express unto these
youths, what wisdom it is that Solomon so highly comme^deth here.


Theodidactus, It is most certain that Solomon does not commend in this
place, that humane wisdom which was known to the Philosophers: but here is
mention made of that wisdom, by the which that wholesome knowledge of the
divine mercy of God is manifested unto us, through the which, by the blood of
Christ, we do obtain remission of sins and eternal life. Of which also
Solomon speaks in the 8. Pro. which place I would were diligently read, and
carefully meditated of al godly young men, whereby might be kindeled in them
more and more the study of true wisdom and godliness. For there does wisdom
her self speak after this manner; I can give council and be a guide, equity
is mine, I have understanding and strength: through me kings do reign, and
princes make just laws, through me do princes bear rule, and all judges of
y^ earth execute judgment. I am loving unto those that love me, and they that
seek me early, shall find me. Riches and honor are with me, yea excellent goods
and righteousness: my fruit is better then gold and precious stone, and mine
increase more worth then fine silver etc. O ye The comendations of wisdom.
young men, which have but even now begun to salute wisdom at the
thrasholde, are ye not delighted and rapt with the love of this most excellent
wisdom? which both can and will adourne and enrich you with so many excellent
qualities: How can you I say hold your selves from her? which willingly
offers herself unto you laden with so great riches and jewels, which he has
purposed freely to put into your bosoms, except ye do utterly contemn and
reject her with these so excellent tresures, which comes unto you, adourned
with so great glory, that the Sun cannot be compared unto her, with all his
resplendent and glittering beams: wherefore I pray you, which of you is so
drowfie, or rather so mad, which straight way will not run to her and with
lowly and ardent request and suit, seek for her familiarity and love? which
to be short, of all the ancient Fathers and wise men from the beginning has
ever most diligently been sought, known, beloved, and commended. As the
writings also of Clement do testify, Clement.
saying: Melior est sapientia quam vires, Wisdom is better then strength. And
again, Multitudo sapientum conducit orbiterrarum. The multitude of wise men
do guide and govern the whole earth. And a little after: Omne aurum in
comparatione sapientiae arena est exigua. All the Gold in the world in
comparison of wisdom, is but as a little sand. And again: Nominem diligit
Dominus, Isodorus.
nisi eum qui cu^ sapientia habitat. And Isidorus says: Nihil sapientia
melius, nihil prudentia dul^ius, nihil scientia suauius. Nothing is better then
wisdom, nothing more pleasant then prudence, and nothing more sweet then
science.


Theophilus. How many degrees be there unto wisdom?


Theodidactus. Lactantius sets down two degrees: The first step unto
Lactantius. Two steps unto wisdom
wisdom (says he) is to understand the things that are false: but the
second is to know things that be true, then the knowledge of which truth,
there is no pleasure more joyful unto man.


Theophilus. Wherein consists the true wisdom of man?


Theodidactus. All the wisdom of man says the same Lactantius, consistetly
in Lactantius.
this, that he do acknowledge and worship the true and living God, this is our
opinion, and this is the sum, therefore I do testify, publish and denounce it
to the uttermost of my power. This wisdom have all the Philosophers sought
for all their lives long, and were never able to find, comprehend, and keep
it, which have nevertheless either retained wicked religion, or else have
utterly defaced all: And that for because they have fought God without his
word, without the which he can neither he found nor comprehended.


Theophilus. That heavenly wisdom, which proceeds from the holy Ghost,
makes us truly blessed and also makes us heirs of all Celestial treasures
and joys: in the mean season nevertheless I suppose that this humayne
wisdom, (which by civil policy and housholdly government is best
maintained and preserved) is not altogether to be rejected, but rather to be
sought and obtained with great study and labor.


Theodidactus. This humayne wisdom (wherewith the Philosophers, and all other
politic Governors are garnished and adourned) is the gift of GOD, wherefore
it is our parts not to abuse so holy a gift. Saint Augustine makes mention
of this excellent August.
pawn and token of a good will between GOD and us, saying after this manner:
Ma^or and miserabil^or aegestas non est quam egere sapientia: and qui non eget
sapientia, nulla re omnin^ egere potest, est ergo animi aegestas, nihil aliud
quam stultitia. There is not a greater and more miserable poverty, then too
want wisdom: and whosoever has that, can want no manner thing that Animi
aegestas.
good is, therefore the poverty of the mind, is none other thing then mere
foolishness.


Theophilus. By what means may wise men be truly known.


Theodidactus. Plato being demanded the same question, aunsweareth in this
wise: Sapiens quum vituperatur, non irascitur, and non extollitur, Sapientis
propr^^m.
quum laudatur. A wise man when he is dispraysed, is not angry: neither is he
proud when he is praised.


Theophilus. Young men, which by no reasons, counselles nor admonitions can be
persuaded and brought to the study of wisdom, what becomes of them at the
last?


Theodidactus. It always chances very evil to those negligent,
contemptuous, and foolish children, which never take pleasure in the knowledge
of true wisdom, for they often fall into such extreme poverty and misery,
that they are even compelled to yield themselves up into the servitude and
bondage of servants, according Eccle. 10.
to this saying of Ecclesiasticus. Seruo sensato liberi ser^^^^^. The children
that are foolish, shall do service unto the servant that Prou. 17.
is dis^^ete and wise. A discrete servant shall have more rule, then the
Sons that have no wisdom, and shall have like heritage with the brethren
says Solomon. Wise children will always be afraid least this should fall
upon them woorthily and through their ^ust deserts: For as it is the greatest
glory of children, to continue in the liberty, honor, authority, and the
possession of their Auncestoures: So also is it the greatest shame and
ignominy that can be, to be so stripped, spoiled and left destitute, of all
honor, glory, wisdom, possess^ion and inheritance of their Auncestoures,
that they must be forced to serve and obey not only the servants, but also
oftentime their very bondmen.

Let children weigh and consider these things, and let them love and reverence
the study of wisdom, that they become not the servants of bondmen, but
rather of the Lord our GOD, and let them always bear in mind this saying of
the Philosopher: Adolescentium ornatus sapientia est(...) Wisdom is the
Aristotle.
garnishing and setting forth of young men. Hitherto have A treated of the
study of wisdom, now will we speak some thing of shamefastness, which
also is a virtue that greatly becomes young men. For I judge it always
necessary for children to be instructed in this point.


Theophilus. It is a very necessary point and worthy to be heard and
embraced of all young men: Wherefore (my good Theodidactus) proceed I pray you
to declare your good will toward us in teaching and instructing these
youths, which I trust will not be unmindful of these your good lessons and
instructions.


Theodidactus. Paulus Vergerius says, that shamefastness in a Child Of
shamefastness. Paulus Ver.
is a most certain sign of great towardness and of a good nature, these
be his words: Verecundia in tenella ^tate signum optim^m: beneigitur habet,
si obiurgati erubescunt, and castigati meliores fiant. Shamefastness in youth
is the greatest sign of virtue: Therefore it is very well to be lyked, if
when they be rebuked, they do blushe* and being corrected become better*
Ludouicus (...) says* ^esporanda est(...) sa^^^ quem desur pudere male(...).
^udo. V^^es*
The (...) of him is to be dispayred* who has shaken (...)eu(...) Also Cato
was (...) to say, that he had bet(...) ^^ing in those young men that would
blushe, than those that Cato.
(...)ne and leady (...)enance(...) ag(...) the (...)* (...), (...) est. He
blusheth, there is dig(...). a(...)ne time, when he behealde a ^oung (...)
blushe(...) rebuked for his saulte, says: Confide Terentius. Diogenes.
fo(...) est color. Be of good cheer my child, this is the color and die of
virtue. Nutrie^dus est pudor, a^t Seneca, qui (...)in a^imo ^^^auerit aliquis
erit bonae spei locus. Shame Seneca.
is to be nourished, (says Seneca) which as long as it rests in the mind,
so long shall there be some place of good hope. And Saint Ambros^ ^ea^heth:
Verecundlam omnibus aetat^bus; personis, temporibus and locis aptam esse,
^^uenilesque animos maxim decere. Shamefastness Ambrosius.
is very meet for all ages, persons, times and places, but yet it chiefly
becomes youngmen.

Saint Bernarde does attribute great praises and commendacions unto
shamefastness, saying: What is more to be beloved Verecundiae ^a^des.
then a shamefast young man? How fair and excellent a pearl in the face of a
young man is shamefastness? How truly and undoubtedly is it the sign of
good hope? It is the messenger of good towardness, the rod of discipline,
the driuer away of evils, the defender of chastity, the special glory of the
conscience, the preserver of fame, the comeliness of life, the seat of
virtue, the first fruits of virtues, the praise of nature, and the ^adge and
cognisaunce of all honesty.


Theophilus. Exceeding happy should our youth be* if here they would
consider, what great commodities their shamefastness brings with it.


Theodidactus. Altogether happy (...): for shamefastness in childehoode is
not only too be commended* but also that towardness which fore she weth the
hope of an honest life to come, and of the attayning the knowledge of good
arts* in the time of adolescency. (...) Furthermore, it is said of the wise
Philosopher Seneca Puer simplicitate commendatur, iuuenis comitate, senex
verograuitate. A child is to be commended in his simplicity, a young man for
his gentleness and courtesy, but an old man for his gravity. Masters and
teachers may perceive and know the natures and towardness of their children,
Signs of good towardness in youth.
by diverse means, as may be seen in Politianus and Erasmus, both which do
describe and set forth the signs of good towardness in this wise.

1 To show them selves to their masters and teachers, not only to be
diligent, but also cheerful to learn.
2 To covet the fellowship of those scholars, that be better learned than them
selves.
3 To contend with none, except it be in learning.
4 To have a facile and quick perceiuerance and understanding of those
things, that are taught; and to keep them faithfully.
5 To follow them happily, to prouounce them diligently.
6 To be ashamed to be vanquishe ^ of others, nay ^^ther to co^et to get before
them.
7 Not to be angry, dogged or sulla^ne, when he is corrected, and to rejoice
when he is praised.
8 To promise great things unto him self by his pains, and to fear beating.

Theophilus. You shall do us a great pleasure, and a thing worth the pains to
these youths, if now you will add hereunto some thing, of the keeping company
with those that are good, and shunning the fellowship of those that are lewd
and wicked.


Theodidactus. You speak in very good season (my Theophilus:) for the company
and fellowship of those that are good, has ever saved many young men out of
many perilles and great dangers, and on the contrary part the acquaintannce
and familiarity of the wicked has undone and utterly cast a way many a one,
which if otherwise Of the fam^^le^ conversation of the good (...) evil.
they would have kept company with the virtuous and godly, they had never
degenerated, nor attempted such horrible wickedness.

Wherefore I will not here think much now to discharge my ^^^^tie in the
meant ^^^ l^^ these (...)dre a show them selves easy and willing to be taught
and in^^^^cted, for it is a thing that shall tend greatly to their profit.
Both the sacred and profane wr^^^^a have left unto us m^^^ excellent sentences
touching this matter. My son sueth Solomon, ^f sinners inti^e thee* hearken
not Pro^. ^. Eccl^. 13.
unto them. And Jesus Syrach says: Di^io^^^^ ^e soci^s fueris, quemcunque
cog^^^er is obser^^^t (...)morem Dei, ass^^^us esto e^. Keep no familiarity
with one that is richer than thy self, but if thou know one that fears
God* be always conuersaunt with him. And Saint Ambrose Ambrose.
says: Sanctorum vitac^teri^ viuendi norma est. The life of the godly, i^ a
rule for others to live by. And Isidorus says: Qui sempiternam Isidorus.
patriam desiderant, no^ solum malorum mores, sed and consortia fugiant: si
fue^^^ s(...) ^a^^ers(...) ^onorum, eris and virtutis eoru^. Who so des^r^an
everlasting (...)rye, let the^ not only shun and eschew the manners of the
wicked, but also their fellowship, if thou will be a companion of the
conversation of those that are good, thou shall also be a partaker of their
^er^ue^. It is a dangerous thing to lead a man's life with ^ wicked and
(...)dly, it is a per(...) thing to have society with those, which are of a
perverse and wicked will. Melius est ^ab^re ^a^a(...), qu^^ cons(...)* It is
better to have the hatred of the wicked and ungodly, than their fellowship,
says Solomon. As Solomon.
the life of the godly procures unto us many good things: even so the
society of the wicked brings many evils. We read also a very excellent
saying in Saint Gregory, touching this thing. Non valde (...)le est* bo(...)
esse cum bon^^: sed magis land^^i^e bonum esse cum malis. It is not a thing
greatly to be praised, to be good with them that are good, but it is a thing
more worthy praise, to be good with those that are evil. For as it is a
greater and a more grievous fault, not to be good among those that are good: So
it is a thing worthy high praise, for a good man to appear and continue in
his goodness, having his conversation among the wicked. Also Seneca teaches.
Seneca.
that it is good for us to shun and avoid the familiarity of the vulgar and
common people, saying thus: A^arior redeo, ambitiosior, luxuriosior, imo and
crudelior, and inhumanior, quia inter homines vulgares fui. I am become more
covetous, ambitious, riotous, yea and also more cruel, and discourteous, for
that I have been in the company and fellowship of the vile and baser sort of
people. Cum sapientibus consuetudinem habens, and ipse euades sapiens: Cum
malis consuetudinem habens, Menander.
and ipse euades malus: corrumpunt enim bonos mores, consuetudines malae.
Having thy conversation with the wi^^, thou thy self also shall become wise,
but if thou take pleasure in the company of the wicked, thy self also shall
prove wicked: for evil customs and the familiarity of the wicked, corrupt
good manners. In like manner, Saint What youth ought to follow and what to
shun. 2. Timoth. 2.
Paul very wisely aduertiseth Timothy what to follow, and what to shun,
saying: Iu^enilia desideria fuge, sectare ver^ iustitiam, fidem, pacem, and
charitatem, cum his qui inuocant Dominum de cord ^ur^. Avoid the lusts of
youth, but follow righteousness, faith, peace and charity, with them that call
on the Lord out of a pure heart. Peter and John and the other Apostles, do
teach the same thing, whose words I have thought good to set down also in this
place, that our children might have in readiness also, and as it were set before
their eyes what they ought to shun, and what to embrace. For S. Peter says:
Sobrij estote, and vigilate, quandoquidem aduersarius vester Diabolus tanquam
leorugiens ^bambulat, quaerens quem deuoret, ^ui re^istite fortes in fide. Be
sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil, as a Peter. 5.
roaring Lion walks about seeking who^ he may devour, who^ resist steadfast in
the faith. And S. James says: Resistite Diabolo and fugiet a vobis. Iacobi. 4.
John. 2.
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. Also S. John teaches that we must
not give our selves to the vain inticements of the world, when he says: Love
not the world, neither the things of this world, if any man love the world,
the love of the father abides not in him. Saint Paul gives us this
exhortation, saying: Flee fornication: Every 1. Cor. 6.
sin that a man does, is without the body: but he y^ commits fornication,
sins against his own body. And unto the Ephesi. he Ephesians. 4. Filthy
speech and drunkenness must be shunned.
says: Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which
is good to edify. S. Luke. 21. says: Take heed unto your selves, lest at any
time your hearts be overcome with sur fitting and drunkenness. Ephraim, teaches
young men to flee the abuse of wine saying: By wine ye spiritual eyes are
blinded, iniquity is multiplied, the venomous sweetness of lust is stirred up,
the execrable filthiness which is against nature, is invented. Wherefore S. Paul
says: Noli bibere vinum, in quo est luxuria Drink no wine, wherein is
riotousnes and excess. And it is certain, that of the superfluous drinking of
wine proceed many evils, which we may learn by the answer of Anacharsis.
Anacharsis, who being stricke^ of a drunken and an unruly youngman at a great
feast or banquet said: Adolenscens, sinune vinu^ no^ fers, vbi senueris aquam
feres. Young man, if thou caust not bear and endure wine now, when thou w^^^st
old, thou shall be compelled to bear and drink water: It was a sign of great
moderation in this Philosopher, that he imputed unto the wine, the malepertnes
and disordered behavior of this young man. For those that immoderatly shall
drink wine, chiefly at that age, to which water better agrees and is more
convenient, such very often are compelled to drink water when they are old,
by reason of their poverty, when nevertheless, the use of wine unto that age
were most meet and necessary. Also Diogenes Diogenes.
at a time hearing a fair and comely young man, using very unseemly speeches,
said: Non te pudet, qui ex eb^rne^ ^ag^^a, plumbeum educas gladium? Art thou
not ashamed to draw a leaden sword out of an Iuorie skaberd? Iuorie in time
past was had in great price, as we may read: by this he noted, that
garrulitie in young men Garrulitie is ^^proued.
is not to be suffered. And Zeno the Philosopher reproved a young man,
prattling, many things very rashly, saying unto him after this manner: Ob id
binas habemus aures, os vnicum, vt plura audiamus, loquamur paucissima: For
this cause nature has given us two ears and but one mouth, to the end we
should be readier to hear, than to speak. Socrates espying a young man
eating his meat very greedely at a feast, and dipping his bread very often
into his potage dish: My guestes (says he) which of you uses his bread in
the stead of soul, and his soul in the stead of bread? Hereupon there was a
reasoning amongst the guestes who it should be, which the young man perceived,
and began to blush, and after that, he eat his meat more leasurely* and with
greater moderation than before.


Theophilus. Verily, that young man which has purposed with him self to walk
in the ways of the Lord God, in all things, must both observe and flee many
things: but yet in my judgment, there cannot be a more foul and horrible vice
in a young man than whoredom and filthy lusts. Wherefore I beseech you, if
you have any thing that may tend to the detestation of this so horrible a vice,
disclose them unto us, that the hearts of these children may be thoroughly
terrified, and that they might not only shun so pernicious and detestable a
sin both to body and mind, but also loath it with their whole heart.


Theodidactus. Whoredom and adultery out of doubt, are two horrible and
detestable crimes, wherefore young men ought to have great care that they might
live godly and chastely, and study to preserve and keep them selves from all
wanton and filthy lusts both of mind and body, lest they provoke the
grievous wrath and indignation of God upon them, which they shall the more
easily do, if they shall always fix before their eyes, the writings and
testimonies of the holy Prophets and Apostles, and the horrible examples of
whoredom and adultery, which are set forth unto us every where in the holy
scriptures, such as these are:

Fornicatio vinum, and ebriet as anferunt cor. Fornication, wine, and
drunkenness, Os^e. 4. 1. Cor. 6. Apoc. 21.
do steal away the heart. Fornicatores and adulteros iudi^abit Deu^.
Fornicators and adulterers the Lord will judge. The portion of fornicatours
shall be in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. And Moses says: Accursed Deuteronomy. 27.
be he that shall lie and sleep with an other man's wife. And Tobias wishing
well unto his son, and counselling him, s^^eth: My son keep thee from all
whoredom, and besides thy wi^^* see that no fault be known of thee. Saint
Matthew says: Whosoever Math. ^.
looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her
already in his heart. And Paul says: Know you not 1. Cor. 6.
that your bodies are made the members of Christ? shall I make the^ the members
of Christ, y^ members of an harlot? Do ye not know, that he which coupleth him
self unto an harlot, is one body with her? and he that coupleth him self
unto the Lord, is one spirit^: And again, Be ye not deceived, neither
whoremongers, nor worshippers of Images, neither adulterers, neither effeminate
persons, nor those which defile them selves with mankind, nor thieves, neither
covetous persons, nor drunkardes, neither cursed speak^r^, neither pillars nor
pollers, shall receive the inheritance of the kingdom of God. Chrysostom
says: The r^^^e of adultery, is the The roo^e o^ adultery.
^urious beholding of a woman's face. And one of the Fathers says, That
fornication is stirred up, and lust procured, with repl^^ion of meats and
drinks, sacieti^ of sleep, idleness, and play, wan^on words, and the
curious garnishing of the body. Let wise young men have always in remembrance
these and such like places, and not suffer themselves to be polluted with such
execrable wickedness, following this example of Alexander, which when he had
gotten into his The example of Alexander.
keeping the daughters of Darius being taken prisoners, and when his friends
persuaded him, that he should* go and lie with those fair and bewtifull
women: Turpe foret, inquit, virorum victores, a mulieribus vinci, It were a
foul shame and reproach (says he) that the conquerours of men, should no we
be vanquished of women. But now will I set before you certain notable
examples concerning this vice of adultery. It is written in the third Chapter
of the Against Adulterers. Sapi. 3. 4.
book of wisdom, The children of aduouterers, they shall come to an end,
and the seeds of an unrighteous bed* shall be rooted out, and though they
live long, yet shall they be nothing regarded* and their last age shall be
without honor, etc. And in the fourth Chapter he says: The multitude of
ungodly children* is unprofitable* and the things that are planted with
whordome, shall take no deep root, nor lay any fast foundation, hereby let
young men learn, that adultery greatly displeases the majesty of God. And
let them hearken to the wholesome counsel of the Prophet* saying: I have made
a conenaunt with mine eyes, that I would not once think of a virgin, or else
let them give care to this that Job says: Auerte faciem tuam a muliere
compta, Job. 31.
and ne circumspicias speciem alienam, propter speciem mulieris multiperierunt.
Turn away thy face from a gorgeous and fine decked woman, and behold not her
strange beauty, for many have perished through the beauty of women* By these
it appears, that adultery is a grievous sin, and prohibited and grievously
punished of God, as these places of scripture do testify. Genesis. 12. 20
Leuiticus 20. Deutro. 22. Jeremy. 3. Therefore it is needful that young men
set before them the commandments of God, touching unlawful lusts, and the
horible wrath of God for the same. And again, let them consider the
punishments and plagues both of the people of God, and also of the, Heathen.
How many staughters, battles, destructions, spoils and utter ruins have
proceeded from this vice. Straying lusts were the cause of the deluge or
flood, and after the flood, the destruction of ye Sodomites. Numeri. 25. There
were slain. 24 thousand, for whoredom and aduoutrie. After that almost the
whole tribe of Benjamin were destroyed for violating the wife of the high
Priest, David also suffered grievous punishments for his adultery.

The histories of the Gentiles be very many: as the destruction of Troy. The
expulsion of the kings of the Romans. The children of Pisisiratus murdered at
Athens. Phillip of Macedonia was slain for his wicked lusts. And Alexander
perished in the midst of his delights and pleasures. The Lacedaemonians were
overthrown and destroyed. And Aristotle in his Politikes and books of civil
government has gathered together many examples, in the which he leaves to
our memory what common wealths have been molested, altered, and utterly
destroyed through lust and desire of Sovereignty. Let young men diligently
consider these most lamentable and fearful examples, and flee such like
plagues and punishments, least the fire of gods wrath consume them.


Theophtlus. Indeed you give us very wise counsel, but forasmuch as we know
and plainly understand that the nature of our children is so corrupted
through the sin of our first Parent Adam, and become more weak and feeble,
than that it is able thoroughly and altogether to abstain from such
wickedlustes, what ought we to do think you? And what counsel and remedy
do you judge meet too be admitted in this case?


Theodidactus. After true invocation and fervent Prayer unto God (which is wont
to be the only stay unto the Godly in all their temptations and perils) there
is no remedy more effectual against these vagrant and execrable lusts,
th^^honorable and holy wedlock, which God himself by his wonderful counsel
and providence has instituted. for the procreation and education of children,
and for the avoiding of filthy lust, which God would have to be magnified,
beloved, and embraced of us, when we shall come to mature and ripe years. For
wedlock is a worthy and honorable state Matrimony instituted of God. Gene. 2.
of life, preserved, fortified and adourned through the blessing of God, which
all the godly have vouchsafed to commend unto us both by their preaching and by
their examples, and is ascribed unto the very top of all good works. And it
is certain, that God does allow godly matrimony, and will be present with them
with his blessing, and will aid and help them in all their necessities, if
they pray unto him, which is manifelt by the marriage, celebrated, and
solemnized in Cana of Galilee: whereat Christ with his mother and Disciples
not only vouchedsafe to be present, but also helps the want and searcitie of
the new married couple and by a wonderful miraclehelpeth their present
necessity, yea and also honoreth the marriage with a worthy and bountiful
gift. Wherefore I do exhort all young men, which feel them selves to want the
gift of chastity, that they join themselves to honest matrimony, according
to Paul's council. Melius est nubere quam vri^ It is better Cor. 7.
to marry then to burn. And for the audyding of sor^itation, let every man
have his own wife: And God so highly esteems his own ordinance, that he
has most severely forbidden al seruent and burning love, and all vnnaaurall
lusts, and punishes them most grievously as many examples do testify, both
profane and holy, as we have already alleged.


Theophilus. By these your words (my reverend Theodidactus) we are thoroughly
persuaded that matrimony is instituted and ordained of God, honorable, holy,
and the very effectual remedy against this outraging lust, wherefore
hereafter throw this your counsel or rather the determinate will of God,
after that we shall perceive and understand these our sons and daughters to
be of type years and good discretion, we will carefully bestow them in
marriage. But before we speak any further of marriage, I beseech you most
heartily, that if so be you have any other weapons, engines, or antidotes,
against this mischief, you would communicate and impart them unto us, least our
children before marriage fall unto whoredom, and after in to adultery.


Theodidactus. There is no need that you should use this earnest entreaty, I
In his book entitled E^chiridion militis Christians.
most willingly will satifie your godly request. In Erasmus (I remember) I read
of late a worthy remedy, both profitable and necessary for all young men,
whose words are these. First the godly young man shall bethink and consider
with himself, how foul, how filthy, and also how unseemly for man this lust
and pleasure is, which makes us (being the workmanship of the divine God) not
only like to beasts, but also to swine, goats dogs, and the most savage and
brutish beasts in the world. And more then this which casts us also into
the most vile state and condition of beasts which were destinate and appointed
to the fellowship of Angels, and communion of the divine and heavenly
creatures. Besides this, let him consider how short and momentarie a thing it
is, and how corrupt, having always mingled therewithal more gal then honey:
and on the contrary, how precious a thing the soul of man is, and how holy a
thing the body ought to be, which is the habitacle for the soul. Therefore what
great madness is this, that for so little a tickling and filthy motion of so
short a pleasure, to pollute and defile both soul and body together in such
wicked and unseemly manner? to profane the temple of God which Christ has
consecrated unto himself with his most precious blood? Let him way this also,
what a heap of mischiefs this flattering plague brings with it. First it
takes away the good name, the most precious possession that a man can have in
this world, it wastes the patrimony, The fruits of wicked lusts.
it decaieth the strength of the body, it hurts the health, it procures
sickness and diseases, and that most dangerous and filthy, it defaceth the
flower of youth before the time, it hasteneth old age, it takes away the vigor
and force of the wit, it dulleth the quickenesse of the mind, it calls a man
from all honest study, and drowneth him altogether in filthiness, so that
after he gives his mind to nothing, but sluttish, vile, and filthy things,
and it depriueth a man of the use of reason, which is most proper unto him, and
what mischief or plague either to body or soul is there not, that this one
vice does not bring with it:


Theophilus. I cannot see without doubt what can more terrify these our
youths from lust and this pernicious pleasure. But now go forward I pray
you if it may please you to show us more touching matrimony,


Theodidactus With all my heart (my Theophilus) will I show unto you the
things which heretofore I have collected concerning matrimony. But first
attend and mark diligently what and how great a treasure a godly wife is, the
worthy praises whereof, Solomon very excellently The (...) of ^*goo^ ^^^^e Pro.
12. 14. 18.
deseribeth after this manner, saying: Muler diligens corona est viro suo A
loving wife is a crown unto her husband. And again* Sapiens mulier oedificat
domu^ suam. A wise woman up holds her house, but a foolish woman plucketh it
down. And in the 18. Chap. Qui inuenit mulierem bonam, inuenit bonum. Who so
finds a good wife, finds a high treasure. And Jesus Syrach says: Noli
discedere a muliere Eccle. 25.
sensata and bona, quam sortitus es in timore domini. Depart not thou from a
good and wise woman, whom thou have chosen in the fear of the Lord. And in
the same Chapter, he says: Beatus qui habit at cum muliere sensata, Happy is
he that dwells with a wise woman. And again, Happy is the man that has a
virtuous wife, for the number Eccle. 26.
of his years shall be doubled. An honest woman makes her husband a joyful
man, and she shall fill the years of his life in peace. A virtuous woman is a
noble gift, which shall be given for a good portion unto such as fear god, for
whether a man be rich nor poor, he may have ever a merry heart, and a
cheerful countenance. A loving wife reioyseth her husband, and feeds his
bones with her wisdom. A woman of few words is a great gift of God, and to
all well nurtured minds, may nothing be compared. An honest and manerly wife
is a gift above other gifts, and there is nothing to be compared unto a mind
that can rule it self.


Theophilus. These be notable praises, but where shall a man seek for suche^
one. Where shall she be found? Of whom shall a man desire a wife adourned
with such excellent virtues? For it is a bird seldom seen.


Theodidactus. So soon now as a young man shall attain to that age, that he
begin to bethink how to contract himself in matrimony, then let him not be
ashamed to fall down upon his knees daily, and with fervent* prayers and
hearty supplications desire of Almighty God to send him a godly and virtuous
wife, for as much as she is only the gift of God, according to this saying:
Domus and diuitiae Prove. 19.
dantur aparentibus, adomino proprie vxor prudens. House and riches may a man
have by the heritage of his parents, but a wise and discret woman is the gift
of the Lord.


Theophilus What things are chiefly to be respected in marryinge a wife?


Theodidactus. The Philosophers and ancient fathers (whose authority as well
for their excellent doctrine, as also for their great experience in things is
not to be rejected) have thought good that in choosing of a wife, her age,
manners, kindred, favor, and riches ought to be wayed and regarded, which
things if we shall utterly neglect and despise, then shall we purchase shame
and reproach, to our kindred, and sorrow and repentance to our selves: But if
we shall diligently observe these former things, then shall we gain praise to
our kindred, our own glory, with perpetual joy and comfort. But above Virtue
^ godliness is ^^^^ly to b^e respected in marriage.
all things, the virtues of a woman are to be respected, whose force and
dignity is such, that albeit the other things do fail, or do not fully
answer to her person, yet shall the marriage be acceptable and joyful,
therefore a sober and discrete wise is to be chosen, married, and beloved:
whose frugalitie, moderation, and soberness is joined, with honor, profit,
and pleasure: and that I might speak in a word, it is not the great dowry, or
many hundreds of pownds, that makes the happy wedlock, but virtue and true
godliness toward God and men.


Theophilus. What choice ought chiefly to be observed in bestowing the
daughters:


Theodidactus. In placing and bestowing the daughters, this choice ought to be
had, that not only the honesty of life external goods, garnishing and
comeliness is to be considered: but also the internal virtues, and faith in
God are to be sought for. For in the time of Saint Ambrose Parents had great
respect and regard unto this, that they would not bestow nor give their
daughters in marriage unto infidels: But the Bridegroom ready to be married,
before the solemnizing of the marriage should give his name to Christ, and set
forth, and show a true confession of the Christian faith. Would GOD this
order were now observed of all Parents in this our time, for then should they
bestow their Daughters much better then they do, for the most as we see the
thing was observed diligently among the Israelites. Deuteronomi. 7. Fili^s
vestras ne detis Caneuaeis, neque filias ipsorum accipietis filus vestris. Give
not your daughters in marriage unto the Cananites, neither receive you their
daughters for your sons.


Theophilus. At what age shall a man give himself to a wife? and when shall
the maid marry?


Theodidactus, Aristotle, thinks good that a maid be married at xviii.
years of age, but he affirms that a man may tarry till xxx. very well. But
she that will prove a good wife, is for the most part endued with these
three virtues: she will honor, esteem and obey both father and mother with
great reverence and lowliness of mind, she will love, cherish, and make much of
infants, she can sing well and sweetly.

Philelphus says: When a man goes about to woe his wife. Let Philelphus.
him first very warily and diligently seek to understand of the life fame,
and good report of her mother, and of such friends, as have had the education
and trayning up of her, with whom he purposes to marry: And if all things
fall out and be answerable to his desire, then in Gods name let him not fear
to take to wife the daughter of an honest and godly mother: Nor let him marry
her The end of marriage.
only for necessity sake, but for the cause of a more commodious and joyful
life to come, with who^ an acceptable society of life must now begin* not for
the fulfilling of lust, but for the propagation and increase of children. And
Aristotle says: Let him marry a maid, to the end he may teach her good
manners, and such other duties, as are most beseeming and decent for a wife,
for she will also be more tractable then a widow, when rather will look to be
obeyed, as well for that she has been before acquainted with love matters, as
also because for the most part they bring greater wealth unto their husbands*
then the maids do.

And if you would now demand of me what manner of wife is What mauner Wife
is to b^e married.
to be married, I say it is very meet and convenient, that you match not
your sons with such wives as be more Noble, and of greater birth or richer
than they, But rather follow that old and wise Proverb: Equalem tibi
mulierem inquire. Search out a woman that is thine equal. And as the Poet
says: Si vis nubere, nube pari. If thou will needs marry, then marry thy
match. For who so matcheth withfarre richer wives then themselves, they seldom
acknowledge them for their husbands, but rather account them as bondmen of
their dowry. And Menander says: Vxorem ducito ex aequalibus, ne si ex
ditioribus duxeris, dominos tibi pares, non affines, imo fugiendae sunt
pecuniosae vxores: quia pecuniosa vxor, non est vxor sed verius imperiosa
domina. Marry thou a wife from among thy familier mates, least if thou shall
marry one of the richer sort, thou gettest lords and masters over thee, in
steed of kinsmen: nay rather these rich monied wives are to be shunned: for
such as do bring with them their stuffed bags with these red ruddockes,
prove very seldom loving and obedient wives, but rather stately, Lady like and
imperious dames.


Theophilus. I pray you sir, tell me yet this one thing: Is it not good to
marry a fair wife.


Theodidactus. All young men for the most part covet to marry fair
Theophrastus.
wives: But Theophrastus is of this mind, that a man may use and enjoy a hard
favored and brown woman, with less grief and sorrow, then he may preserve
and keep his fair and well favored wife, for he accounts nothing certain
and sure unto any man, whereon both the eyes and fervent desires of all people
are wholly bent and firmly fixed. For as much as, one with favor and
comeliness, will seek to solicit her, another with his fine wit and painted
eloquence will move and provoke her, some with delicate daliance mixed with
merry conceits, will seek to allure her, and others with liberal gifts will
not stick to intic^ her: Nam pecuniae obedunt omnia. For all things obey to
money. And the fort or Castle (be it never so strong) by one mean or other
must needs be overcome and vanquished, which one every part is so besieged
and assaulted. The Poet Ennius, persuades us to marry such, as are of pure and
perfect chastity, and of comely stature, (though somewhat brown*) which also
Aulus Gellius declares and affirms, saying: Eas stat^ formae esse, quae nec
formosissima nec turpissima forma sunt, sed mediocritatem quandam habent, quae
quidem mediocritas omnibus in rebus laudatissima est. Those women are accounted
well favored and comely, which are neither the fairest, nor yet the foulest or
hard favored, but have a certain mean (as we commonly use to say, she is
neither fair nor foul, but brown lovely:) which mediocritie in all things
verily, is to be commeded and praised. And this comely stature (out of doubt)
is sufficient and best agreing for the procreation of children. For comeliness
and seemly proportion in women avails very much, even as in the men a good
countenance, a comely stature, with wisdom and discretion is to be wished,
and most acceptable unto a woman. Therefore in a wife, not beauty and
finenesse: but virtue and godliness is to be respected, as Michael Verinus
says very properly in these verses:

Sit form^sa aliis, vxor tibi si^ bona, nescis,
quam noceat castae forma pudicitiae.
Egre formosam poteris seruare puellam:
nuuc prece, nunc aura, forma petitaruit.
The fair and beautiful let be, to other wights (I say*)
the virtuous and the modest maid get thou (if that thou may.)
For beauty hinders chastity, (of this thou may be sure)
the maid that beauty does possess, chaste hardly shall endure.
For some with words will her assault, and sleights of Venus use,
and some with gold will her allure, which scarsce she will refuse.
These and many other things are to be wayed and considered in the choice of
a wife, and chiefly this, that thou chosest one like to thy self in religion,
stock wealth and comeliness: for the unlikeness of these things: is
oftentimes the occasions of contempt and continual brawling and chiding.

For Cicero in his first book of Offices says: Nihil amabilius, nec Cecero.
copulatius, quam morum similitudo bonorum, There is nothing that wins more
love, nor surelier knitteth men together, then a likeness in good conditions,
For in whom be like desires, and like minds it happens among them, that
either with other is as much delited, as with himself: And so is it brought to
pass that Pithagoras requires in amity* V^ vnus fiat ex pluribus. That many
may become Pithagoras.
one. Also it is good for a man to marry a maid, and such a one, as before
has been married to no man. For who so takes a Widdowe to wife, tyeth him
self chiefly unto two great troubles, first he must devise and labor by all
means possible, to make her forget the manners and qualities of her first
husband: secondly, he must acquaint her very warely with his own nature and
qualities, and make her to have a good opinion and liking of himself, and of
his manners, both which he shall hardly do, without great policy and
discretion.


Theophilus. You have now declared unto us the chief points concerning
Matrimony it self: Now it is needful that you show unto us whether the privy
contractes and espousalles made without the consent of Parents and governors,
ought to be accounted lawful before God and men, or not? And whether such
knottes, affiances, and betrothinges may be broken, which are done without the
good will and consent of Parents.


Theodidactus. Before all things, young men must seek to shun and abhor,
We ought not to marry without the consent of our Parents, and dear friends.
this detestable sin of disobedience (the which alas at this day is too
common) lest they entangle them selves unto marriage without the consent of
their Parents: for this is not only great disobedience, but rather very great
madness. For what is more grieffull and more miserable, than a marriage
enterprised and begun so wickedly, or a knot so vnluckely knit, that it
cannot be unloosed again all the days of our life? wherein we shall
continually be exercised in sorrow, unquietness, and brawling, detayned in
misery, misfortune and calamity, out of the which we can never wind our
selves, nor be delivered, except it be by death. Truly youth must needs fall
into great perilles and dangers, when neglecting and contemning the authority
of their Parents, they aspire and study by all means possible to attain unto
marriage, making them privy nothing at all, until the matter be past remedy,
and so begin their wedlock in sin and disobedience, which God will never
bless nor prosper: But contrariwise, if they will endeavor to keep the
commandments of Almighty God, and to honor and obey their Parents, then
he has promised to love them, and will bestow his bountiful liberality and
blessings upon them. In the mean time, Parents ought not to neglect their
duties in bestowing and matching of their children, for when the time serves,
and the occasion is offered of God, to bestow their sons or daughters unto
matrimony, then shall they not doubtfully dispute and reason about the dowry,
stock, or Parentage, and to seek a knot in a rush (as they say) or to detract
and prolong the time without just cause, but the will of God must always be
respected and obeyed, and the honor, health, estimation, and credit of the
persons must be rightly weighed and considered.

Saint Ambrose in the history that he writes of Rebecca, says Ambrose.
that it is needful, requisite, and very necessary to have the consent of
the Parents in matters of marriage, and he says further, that it is an honest,
godly, and a thing best agreeing to nature. The laws of Princes also do
severely prohibit, that no contract be made of matrimony De nuptiis tit. decimo.
without the consent of Parents. Look in the first book of Iustiniane, in the
title of marriage the 10. where he treats of this thing at large. Filij
filiaeue consensum parentum habeant, quorum sunt in potestate: Let the sons
or daughters have the consent of parents, under whose power and government they
are. For this thing ought to be, and Franciscus Barbarus.
both the civil law, and the law of nature does counsel and persuade, that
the commandment and consent of the father ought to proceed and go before the
marriage. Franciscus Barbarus is of the same mind, saying after this manner: We
do forewarne and tell you, that there can be ascribed no excellency or
worthiness unto y^ marriage, to the which the good will and consent of the
father has not been had before. The example of Cyrus may also teach all youth
what answer The example of Cyrus. King of Persia.
to make in that behalf, who (when he was moved and persuaded by certain
friends to take to wife a great and noble woman, and that with a very great
dowry and large sum of money) answered: Se non ante velle, quam a parentibus
collaudari certior esset. That he would not marry her, before he had heard
from the mouth of his Parents, that she was a meet match for him, and a woman
worthy praise and commendation. By the example of this noble King, all young
men may be admonished, that they link not them selves in matrimony, except
first they confer, and desire the good will and consent of their Parents,
masters, and governors: For if Parents at all times, and in all places be to
be honored, reverenced, and regarded, and that in the smallest things, much
more in so great and weighty a cause, the wise and prudent counsel of parents
is to be heard, followed and embraced, except a man will make no account nor
reckoning of the commandment of Almighty God

Euaristus a Bishop of Greece, judged privy contractes in Matrimony, Euaristus.
very unlawfully instituted, and ordained that the bridegroom and bride, should
be joined together of the Priest or Minister in the face of the congregation.
It is the part and duty of Parents to place and bestow their children, and
not of the children to bestow them selves at their pleasure (albeit it is
great reason that their wills and consents agree thereunto) and the ordinance
of God requires the same. Deuteronomy. 22. Abraham prepared a marriage for his Deuteronomy.
22. Tob.
son Isaac. And so did Isaac for his son Jacob in like manner And old Toby
for his son, which diverse others of the godly fathers. And as the children
have this liberty, to be willing and give their consents unto their contractes
in marriage, and that their Parents ought not to force them against their
wills: So is it not lawful for the children to contract and join them selves
in matrimony at their own wills and pleasures, without the authority and
consent of their Parents. For it is the ordinance of God* that children
honor and obey their Parents, and follow their minds and counsel in
contracting them selves unto marriage. Most gr^enously therefore do those
children offend, which contemning the authority of their Parents, enterprise
marriage without their consent* For then they do not honor them, but rather
procure their shame and reproach, which so great wickedness God will not suffer
unpunished. Daily examples do continually and sufficiently teach us, that God
is exceedingly offended and angry with these contemners of Parents, whom
Satan has rather joined together, then God: because he is not the worker of
iniquity, and to sin against the fifth commandment, is great iniquity.


Theophilus. Those privy spousages and secret contractes therefore; enterprised
and taken in hand without the consent of Parents, are not to be liked,
approved nor allowed, as far as I can gather of your words.


Theodidactus. You gather of my words very wisely, for these stolen and
privy contractes, affiances and betrothinges, are not only forbidden and
prohibited by the laws of Princes, but also by examples and testimonies out of
the holy scriptures, as we have before sufficiently proved.

Therefore let Parents bear this always in mind, that the right and
authority to place and bestow their children, is given and attributed unto
them of God: And let children know, that they (as it has been often said)
owe this reverence and obedience unto their Parents, that they seek for their
counsel, and earnestly crave and desire their good wills in these cases That
young man which is of age, wisdom, discretion, and meet to take a wife, may
not be afraid nor ashamed, to reveal his secrets, and open his mind unto
his Parents, that he would be glad (if it were his fathers pleasure) to
match him self with some honest and godly maid, and therefore humbly desires
his Parents good will, counsel, and furtheraunce in that behalf, that of many
of his familiers and acquaintance, he might choose such a one as should be
to their liking: And albeit this may seem to be some sign of lust and
unshamefastness, yet let them know and understand, that the divine clemency
does cover this in marriage, and adds a remedy unto this disease and
malladie. Therefore let children humble them selves before their Parents, and
most lowly and gentely say, (my good father and mother) let me have I pray you
such a honest and godly young man or maid, whom I love in the fear of the
Lord, and in the way of wedlock and lawful matrimony, if he or she shall
be thought worthy and meet for your affinity, kindred, stock, and
Parentage, honest and wise Parents will not deny the thing, that is in such
wise so honestly, and in such humble manner required, although the dowry,
goods, or sums of money, be not altogether answerable to their desire and
wish. And such marriages, cannot be but happy, prosperous, and fortunate,
because God with his unmeasurable and exceeding goodness does bless, favor,
and as it were with this veil and cover of wedlock does hide, keep secret,
defend and alay this exceeding heat and seruencie of lust, and also the holy
scriptures does approve, and for example brings forth the love and voice of
the Bride: after this manner does God not only pardon our filthiness and
miserable lust wherein we were conceived and borne, but also adorn and make
us more honorable, by and through lawful matrimony.


Theophilus. What is your counsel I pray you? If after the affiances and
spousalles once done, they proceed to their nuptial day and act of generation
against the will and consent of their Parents.


Theodidactus. This we ought to know and understand, that after such commixion
and coupling of them selves together, they may not be severed, nor disioyned,
neither may such marriages be broken by the authority of their Parents: for
because there is now no question of any marriage to come, and the authority of
Parents is already violated and corrupted, so that great injury should be
offered unto the woman, if she should be cast off again and forsaken. And to
conclude, I will add this one thing, that it does appertain as well to the
duty of Parents, as of Judges, for they ought to weigh and consider, where,
and in what cases the fathers may have a probable cause to break the marriage,
and where not, which causes I will leave to be discided, of the Divines, and
such as have to deal in those nuptial affairs. Beseeching Almighty God to
grant your children good success, and to bestow his blessings on them, as
well in this single life, as also in that married estate, whenever it shall
hereafter please him, to all your comfortes, and his everlasting glory, to
whom be praise for ever,


Amen.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vint^^^, by Thomas Dawfon, and
Gregory Seton. 1581.


