A TOIL FOR TWO-LEGGED FOXES: Wherein their noisome properties; their hunting
and vnkenelling, with the duties of the principal hunters and guardians of the
spiritual vineyard is lively discovered, for the comfort of all her Highness
trusty and true-hearted subjects, and their encouragement against all Popish
practices.

By I. B. Preacher of the word of God.

CANTICLES 2.15. Take us these Foxes, and these young Cubs which destroy these
vines, while our vines bud forth.

2. CHRON. 15.8. Asa made a law in his time, that whosoever would not seek the
Lord God of Israel should be slain, whether he were small or great, man or
woman.

A Maxima.

As Popery and treachery go hand in hand, whilst Popery is kept under; so
Popery and cruelty are companions inseperable, if once Popery get the upper
hand.

LONDON. Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man. 1600.

TO ALL FIRM AND FAITHFVLL LOVERS OF TRVE RELIGION and loyalty, increase of
peace, and joy in Christ Jesus.
MAnifold have been the opinions of men, concerning the sovereign good and
welfare of mankind. Different opinions about man's sovereign good. Epicures.
The swinish Epicures sought it in sensuality and carnal delights; and to
cover their shame, have bestowed great travail to disguise their lady
pleasure, and to make her go for an honest woman. Stoiks.
The Stoics placed their welfare in moral virtue, and in the right reigning
of reason: as though man were made for himself, and not for common society:
and fearing least their surmised felicity should fall to the ground, they have
sought to underprop it with health, wealth, strength, courage, measurable
pleasure, etc. The Peripateticks Peripateticks.
make two sorts of blessedness, the one consisting in action, which is politic
or civil; the other in contemplation, which they call wisdom. The Academicks
Academicks.
or Platonists mount somewhat higher, and considering that contemplation is but
a continual wrestling, sometimes against the obscurity of things, and
sometimes against the dimnes of our minds: say that felicity is, to be joined
unto God, and to become like unto him, who is the furthest end, the highest
top, and the uttermost bound of all blessedness. Thus some of them have groped
in the darkness of this world, for that which cannot be found here: and others
have soared aloft, but yet far too short in finding out that resting point,
whereat every one ought to aim. True religion the means to attain our well
fare, and what true religion is.
How the^ must we attain unto it? surely by that which they knew not, that is
to wit, true religion: which is the right rule of serving God, and of reuniting
man unto him, that he may be saved: of the which true religion there be three
especial marks, so much the more worthy of deep impression in our minds,
because many foolish ceremonies have disguised themselves in the attire of true
religion.

The first mark is, The first mark of true religion.
to worship the only God of Israel: wherein behold how Satan has tyrannized
over mankind, in making me^ forge as many gods, as they had fancies: as that
people in Afric, who worshipped that which they met first in the morning; or
the Assyrians, that worshipped as many gods as they had towns; or the
Persians, Man's vanity being destitute of Gods word.
that worshipped as many gods as there be fires in the earth, or stars in the
sky; or the Aegyptia^s, that worshipped as many gods as they had plants or
trees; or the Romans, who subduing nations, wan their superstitions, and so
became the sinck-pan of Idolatries. In a word, the devil by Gods permission so
deluded the world, that some made gods of their goods, some worshipped the
beasts which God gave them for their benefit, some builded Temples to their
passions, some made gods of themselves, some deified their kings, as the
Egyptians their king Apis, the Babylonians their Belus, the Macedonians their
Cabyrus, the Latins their Faunus, the Sabines their Saucus, the Romans their
Quirinus: what Christians will not shudder at the rememberance of such
mysteries, when Euripides could speak thus: Euripides.
Thou Neptune, and thou Jupiter likewise,
with other gods, whom faining words disguise,
If that due Justice unto you were done,
both heaven and temples should be empty soon.
Then the first chief note of the true religion is, that the true immortal
God be only worshipped, who founded the earth, and stretched out his meat-line
over it, who shuts up the sea within the banks, and boundeth the waters, who
makes light and darkness, holds back the Pleiades; and vnbindeth Orion, who
spreads out the heavens like a curtain, and makes his chambers in the
depths, who makes the winds his messengers, and the elements his servants.
This I say is the true God, who in his worship admits no collateral
companions: and as for the rest, gods in name, and not in nature, they are like
unto dog leaches, which profess but the curing of one disease only, or common
craftsmen which profess but the skill of some one mystery.

The second mark of true religion is, The second mark of true religion.
that we serve this only God aright. As for the Philosophers, they also were
pricking at this point, but so that they were always too wide or too short:
for which of them ever said that God is a spirit, and ought to be served in
spirit? True it is, they set down many moral precepts for direction of men's
manners: but when they come to the matters of God, they either speak of them
dreamingly, or deem of them ouerthwartly; yea, the services of God, invented
by man, are but so many childish imaginations, not only unbeseeming the
majesty of God, but far inferior to the discretion of a man: as gamings,
stage plays, running of horses, sword playings, wrastlings, buffetings, and
such like. Aristotle in his metaphysics, commends a certain answer of
Symonides to Hieron. King of Sicilie, which was, that none but God ought to
have skill of things that are above nature, much less then to dispose of
Religion, that is, to show the means how to surmount nature. The country
clown should show himself ridiculous, if he should take upon him to set
down how his Prince should be served: and yet is he a man as well as his
Prince, differing in state, and not in nature. What is to be said then of man,
being a worm, and less then a worm, in respect of the everliving God, if he
will needs prescribe him his service? Surely as none can see the sun, but by
the help of the sun; so none can serve God, The third mark of religion.
but by the light of his word.

There is a third mark, without the which religion (although in it self the
path to salvation) is nothing else but a book wherein we read the sentence of
our own deaths. Therefore religion must show us a means to satisfy Gods
Justice: without the which, not only all other religions, but even that which
contains the true service of God were unavailable. Indeed man's reason
perceived that some means was needful to make atonement: but what it was,
reason was too shallow to find out. The Platonists have busied themselves
about many clensings, but to small purpose: others say it must be done by
abstinence, good behavior, Jupiters mysteries, etc. Hierocles said, that
religion is the study of wisdom, which consists in perfecting and cleansing
our selves, that men may be at one with God: which perfection also, stands in
confession of sins (as he says) but alas, whereas in religion we look for
life, upon confession follows death. Then to find a planke to save us from
shipwreck, religion shows three persons in unity, of one essence coeternal,
and coequall in all respects: the Father as the ground and wellspring: the
Son as the everlasting word and wisdom of the Father: and the holy Ghost as
the bond of love, whereby the Father and the Son are linked together. The one
of these must make atonement: for God himself must be feign to step in
betwixt his Justice and his mercy, and as he created us at the first, so to
create us new again: and as he created us in favor, so now to acquit us from
wrath: and as he uttered his power and wisdom in making us, so now to utter
his wisdom and goodness in repairing us. But yet behold a mystery, this
infinite godhead is not to discharge our disobedience, These speeches are
understood by a communicating of properties, as the like, Acts 20.28
otherwise then with obedience, nor our vndesert, otherwise then with desert,
nor our pride, otherwise then with lowlines, neither is he to purchase grace
but by punishment, nor a crown but by suffering, neither life but by death.
Therefore would he abase himself that he might obey; serve, that he might
deserve, stoop down beneath himself, that he might become lowly; become
weak, that he might suffer; become mortal, that he might die. Therefore was
it behoouefull that our mediator should be God and man: man to be borne under
the law, God to perform the law; man to serve, God to set free: man to humble
himself to the uttermost, God to exalt himself above all things; man to
suffer, God to overcome; man to die, and God to triumph over death. And
sythence it pleased him of his infinite goodness to be humbled for us, himself
no way bound, needs must his obedience become a discharge for the disobedience;
his desert, a discharge of the vndesert, and his sufferings a satisfaction for
the stubburnnes of them that believe in him. Now then if religion should but
send us to the true God, what were that more then the sending of an offender to
the Judge, or a laying of stubble to the fire, considering that God is
infinitely good, and man infinitely evil. Secondly, and if in religion we should
but read the will of the creator, what have we yet found since mankind is
corrupt from his root, and rotten at the core; but our own enditements,
arraignements, and condemnations? Therefore this third note of religion, by
making satisfaction for sins by the death of Christ, is the very substance,
and in shape of it, without the which it should be altogether unprofitable. Now
all this serves first to show you the tyranny of Satan over mankind, and
the horrible darkness whereinto it is plunged, being destitute of the aid of
Gods word and his holy spirit. Secondly, how greatly we are bound to receive
our gracious calling, and to promote Gods holy religion, by which we are
brought to that sovereign good, for the which we were made and created, and
without the which having all things else, yet are most miserable: for proof
whereof have thou the authority and sovereignty of a Prince. Let Princes say
whether one rebellion of their subjects do not more vex them, No welfare to
be found in this world.
than all their honorable triumphs can rejoice them. Art thou exalted to
honor? let honorable persons say whether they be not spiteful or spited,
doing mischief, or receiving mischief, ouermating or ouermated. Honor is but
virtues shadow, a wind that makes many swell, but cannot satisfy. Art thou
rich and wealthy? Let Merchants say what wealth is worth, since sea can drown
it, fire consume it, pirates and robbers bereave us of it. To love riches, is
to do as children do, which take their greatest delight in pins and
checkstones: or as fools, which should deem the goodness of an horse to
consist in his strappings. Art thou beautiful? Let the daughters of vanity
say whether the sun does not tanne it, or a star does not blemish it, or
sickness does not waste it, or old age does not wear it. Beauty is but a
vain thing, and gladdeth more the beholders, then the hauers. Art thou strong
and healthie? Let all the world say whether man's body be not subject to a
thousand diseases, fraught with frailties within, wrapped in miseries without;
uncertain of life, sure of death. Now what are all these and the rest, but
resemblances of the apples that grow about Sodom, pleasant to the eye, and
provoking to the appetite, but vanishing into smoke, being touched with the
teeth? Therefore it is only true religion that leads Prince and people,
noble and unnoble, rich and poor to true felicity, and reuniteth them unto
God. Happy be that day, and blessed from above, in the which God gave us this
token of his favor: let that month be respected of God, and let it be the
head of the year: let all such as love their saluations, bless that day
wherein they were redeemed from the darkness of Sodom, and of Egypt, and the
day star of righteousness appeared upon them: yea let it be made the
beginning of the supputation of years, as we read that the Jews reckened
their years from the years of Iubilee, and from the finding of the law in
Iosiahs time: for then comes the true year of Iubilee, the year of freedom
and deliverance from bondage, when the Gospel which is the glad tidings of
salvation comes unto us.

Furthermore, Temporal blessings have accompanied religion.
that nothing might be wanting to make us with joy to receive Gods holy
religion, behold since the Church has begun to flourish, and to spread her
boughs throughout the whole land, the common wealth has never been endowed
with more ornaments of ^eace, never less vexed with incombe^ances of war,
never like adorned with ^ountifull blessings. Why? when our ^eighbour nations
have been infested ^ith martial horror, clattering of ar^our, thundering of
shot, when infants have been drawn out of their mothers wombes, By looking a
broad better behold your blessings at home.
and dragged from their nurses breasts, when their wives and daughters have
been ravished, their countries wasted, their cities sacked, their houses fired,
their temples defaced, with many more such spectacles of dread and horror: yet
England has remained still victorious without contention; and thou famous
London her Queen city, confident without trouble: so that now it may be
boldly auerred, that mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace
have kissed each other. Now then ye noble Lords, grave sages, valorous
captains, resolute soldiers, brave gentlemen, worthy citizens, laborious
comminaltie, show your honors, your valors, your worthiness, your trustines,
and painefulnes in promoting that which is, and ought to be your glory; rather
hazard the last drop of your dearest blood, then see her dishonored, without
whom, all your honors are but vanities. Nay, Peace and plenty, the children
of Religion.
if you receive her not as you should for her own sake, yet respect her for
her children; and think it not too much to bestow your wealth to maintain
her, your honors to countenance her, your authority to assist her, your
wisdoms to plead for her, against the profane policy of that miscreant
Machiuel, who is become a counselor amongst the greatest Statesmen of Eu^ope,
against hellish Atheism, which ^oeth about to persuade the world that ^here is
no religion at all, and especially against that common strumpet, Romish
^uperstition, who is not ashamed to bor^ow religions name: So shall you show a
^tudious zeal, and affectionate love to^ards your Prince also, whose
prosperi^ie is the pillar of your peace.

Lastly, I have in this treatise detec^ed treacherous dealings of Roman
Ca^holikes, and manifested their dange^ous proceedings to the view of every
good subject: the which I have published under the patronage of all you that
love the Gospel, whom the Almighty protect with his power, and guide with his
grace.

Yours in the Lord, I. B.

THE SVMME OF THE CHAPTERS.
The lamb standing on mount Sion is more mighty to save, then the enemy to
destroy.
A TOIL FOR TWO-LEGGED FOXES.
CHAPTER. I.
Affliction has been, is, and shall be the common condition of Gods Church,
and the lot of his inheritance. The Lamb standing on mount Sion, is more
mighty to save, then the enemy to destroy.

THey do greatly abuse themselves, which are persuaded to see the Church in so
quiet and calm estate, as to be without afflictions, either within or without,
or both together within and without; the contrary experience whereof the
histories of all ages do sufficiently declare. For if we look into her
continual course heretofore; It is Bellarmines dotage to make outward
prosperity a mark of the Church.
or consider what the spirit of God has prophesied concerning the future state
of the Church, we shall find that it has been from the creation of the
world until this day, and shall be unto the consummation thereof, tossed to and
fro with many cruel storms, subject to many afflictions and persecutions: for
proof and experience whereof, consider the estate of the Church under Adam.
Churches persecutions.
Was not righteous Abel a principal member thereof, unnaturally murdered by
the bloody hand of his elder Brother? Genesis.
Thus first arose the tempest against the boat and little bark of Jesus
Christ; the same continued under Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, under Moises, the
Israelites tyranized by Pharao, Exodus.
distressed in the wilderness, and diversely tempted before they could take
possession of the land of promise. If ever the Church enjoyed a pleasant and a
fair time of weather, Joshua.
it was under Joshua and those which then ruled the people, being most
triumphantly planted in Canaan together with the service of God: Judges.
afterward under the Judges until Samuel, for one day of fair weather ^n
whole year of stormy and foul; then behold the arc of covenant taken
captive, 1. Sam. 4.11.
Silo ruinated and all brought into an utter confusion: howbeit God pitying
his Church, raised up Samuel, by whose ministry this storm ceased, 1. Sam.
7.
and the schools of the Prophets were reformed. But this Sun was scarce up,
when horrible darkness was brought in by wicked Saul; the priests themselves
being massacred, the sorcerers restored, 1. Sam. 28.8.
the people exposed to ignominy, being no better then a body without an head;
2. Sam. 2.
until that David houlding the scepter the welfare of the Church began to
grow; as also under Solomon, 1. King 6.7 8. etc.
who furnished the Lords house ^oth within and without, with a most triumphant
magnificencey, yet this happy state is ouerturned; ten tribes against two, 1.
King. 12.
the sinagoges ruined to ^odge Iereboams calves in, the Leuits expulsed, the
poor prophets constrained ^o be hidden in holes, 1. King. 18.13.
and there to be sustained with bread and water; 1. King. 17.4.
Helias himself being brought to that extremity, that he was feign to be fed
with a Raven. Now as for the kingdom of Judah, there the faithful servants of
God had no worse enemies than the Kings and the Priests, namely under Achaz and
Manasses. 2. King. 16. 2. King. 21.
What grievous affliction did the Church sustain, when in the days of
Jeremy, the Chaldeans wasted Jerusalem, 2. King. 25.
spoiled the Temple, slew the Nobles before the princes face, put out his eyes,
dishonorably led him away captive to Babylon, leaving that populous country
admired for prosperity, a barbarous wilderness and dreadful example of misery?

To come unto the shipmaster himself, Luke 2.17.
what cold entertainment received he in this world, borne in a stable, from
thence forced to fly into the deserts of Egypt, Math. 2.14. Mark. 6.3. John
1.4.
brought up and nourished in a poor carpenters house, in a city of so small
reputation, that it is demanded whether any good thing could come from the
same? Luke 4.31.
From thence forced to retire himself unto the rock of Capernaum, Luke 9 58.
not having an house wherein to put his head; Luke 23.
afterward as a principal malefactor, crucified betwixt two thieves.

The Disciples were dealt withal much like to their Master, Acts.
as is to be seen partly in the Acts of the Apostles, Ecclesiastical
histories.
and partly in the histories of those times, wherein Nero, Domitian,
Dioclesian, and other tirants of the like disposition lived: But yet no time so
bloody, as since the child of perdition was borne, and has usurped tyranicall
jurisdiction. For the Church could convey it self into no corner of the
wilderness, but this bloudhound has found it out to pursue and persecute it:
what blood by him has been shed, and what murders committed in these latter
days, France and Flanders, England and Scotland, can sufficiently record. And
this is the way wherein the whole Church truly Apostolic being in this world,
Corint. 6.5. Heb. 11.38. Apo. 12.14.
as waifarers and wanderers hither and thither, must walk; the same being
foretold unto the last day. Churches preservation.
Yet behold the conquering lamb Christ Jesus standing on mount Sion, is more
mighty to defend, then the prince of darkness to destroy: the Lord of Hosts
cannot forsake his tabernacle; Psalm. 84.
and though the little bark of his Church be tossed to and fro amids the seas
of this troublesome world, yet he which holds the stern is able to command
both wind and sea: wherefore although from time to time it has been hoysed to
and fro with wind and waves, yet the Lord has been continually assistant to
the same; so as it has never been overwhelmed, neither can be. For proof
whereof, see how the creator in the person of him who after was made our
redeemer, and deliverer, in person did run after those two forlorn children
Adam and Eve, after they had fallen away from him through infidelity; applying
unto that deadly wound so soon as it was made a remedy of immortality, far
more excellent then that whereof they had deprived themselves and all their
posterity. Look further and behold Abraham, Genesis.
Isaac and Jacob, mightily preserved, notwithstanding the infinite and
dangerous by-ways wherein they walked, Exodus.
for the space of four hundred years amidst most profane people, multiplied
unto the number of six hundred thousand persons, beside women and children.
Look again and behold the indauntable insolency of proud Pharao vanquished
by frogs, by flies, by lice, at the shaking of the rod of one of the servants
of the Lord of Hosts. Behold afterward the Church pursued on dry land by an
huge multitude of the Egyptians, swallowed up of the red sea, which was as a
wall on either side of the people of Israel. Behold what memorable and
marvelous things did he for his people in the wilderness, how he sent bread
from heaven, how with the stroke of a small rod the most hard rocks cleave to
water, almost forty years long, this whole multitude. See and consider how it
arrived at the river Iordane, passing the river on dry ground, Joshua. 3.6.
making the high walls of Ierichoe to fall down before it, battering down,
dashing in pieces, trampling under feet thirty Kings beyond Jordan, how
victoriously they were placed in the land of Canaan, how they beat down their
enemies sometime with an ox goade, Judge. 3.31. Judge. 7.20. Judge. 15.15. 1.
Sam. 5.4.
as did Samgar the son of Anath, sometimes with pitchers as Gedeon, sometime
with the iawe bone of an ass as Sampson. God suffered the arc to be taken
prisoner, but it was to the overthrow of the Philistians Dagon: under the
reign of King Saul the Church did abide many a cold blast; but he raised up
his servant David a King and prophet to refresh the same, who left hi^
successor King Solomon, a figure of the true Solomon King of peace and eternal
son of David.

Now to pass beyond Solomon, we^ shall find the Lord no less assistant t^
his Church then before; yea even vnt^ the consummation of this world we^ shall
find the nearer the time, an^ term appointed of God approchet^ for the
execution of his promises, the more ardent affection will he show to his
Church; who although many time^ he scourges and afflicts the same, Why the
Church is afflicted.
he deals but even as the husbandma^ does with his corn, which the oftene^
it is winnowed and sifted, so much the more purer it is. Neither does he set
hi^ enemies on work to ruinate and destroy his Church, but as it were to
vnthaw his people waxen stiff, and be nummed through overmuch ease, and to
unburden his Church of a great number of villainous profane persons ^^ept into
the same. For when the Chal^^ans laid Jury waste, led the people captive unto
Babylon, insomuch as the Church seemed utterly rased; yet how captive and
prisonerlike soever they were, behold the Lord present with his Church,
behold the royal edicts for the worshipping of the God of Daniel, behold the
tirant Nabuchadnezzar, not being content to be the chiefest amongst men, made
the vilest amongst beasts; behold Babylon it self captive, Israel restored
and reestablished with great privileges, and restitution of their holy
vessels. And thus if we proceed, we shall evidently see how the Lord has bin
present with his Church in the spirit of comfort, assistance and deliverance;
how he has beaten down that great mount of the Roman monarchy, and daily
blows to ruin the beast molded upon this pattern, and seated in the temple
of God upon the very same seven hills. The declaration whereof one Chapter
cannot afford, nay the life of one man after an other can hardly perform it.
But to let pass foreign lands, and to speak of the great love that the Lord
has showed toward the Church and common wealth of England: Gods great mercies
to England.
I may truly say, happy are we, if we continue happy; and blessed are we
above al^ other people, if we be still blessed of the Lord; who, if
insurrection has been moved, has suppressed it; if conspiracy has been
intended, reueiled it; (...) treason has been attempted, confounded it; if war
by foreign foes threatened, has delivered us from it: we dwel^ still in
saftie, though threatened by Spanish tyranny; we triumph in garlands o^ olives,
though threatened to wear the wreaths of Cypres; we sing te deum with cheareful
hearts, though foreign cruelty have threatened a mournful miserere. O the^ let
us never forget the good things that he has done for us! the great kindness
that he has showed to let his Church. Tell it to your children; and them tell
it to their posterity, from one generation to another, even the good things
that the Lord has don for England under the regiment of a gracious princess:
yea tell it how by his anointed Debora he has repelled the rage of ^^in, how
by his Hester he has hanged up Haman, which sought to bring us and our
posterity into perpetual slauerie^; and how by Iael a woman he has stricken a
nail into the head of Sisera, even then when his mother and his wise ladies
had thought he had been dividing the spoil. Blessed be that people whose God
is the eternal, blessed be the Lord God which has thus blessed Egnland, and
greeted his children with so manifold consolations, Amen.

CHAPTER. 2.
The enemies of the Church are either cruel Tigres or crafty Foxes. Household
enemies are most hurtful to the health of the Church.

THe enemies of the Church of God are of two sorts either open and known
persecutours, of whom it this place I purpose not to entreat; these in holy
scriptures ar^ called by the names of Tigres, and Lions: or else they are
covert and priui^^ enemies; Cantic. 2. Math. 7. Revel. 20.
and these are called Foxes Wolves in sheep clothings, false ho^ned lambs. Of
the first kind were the Edomits, the Moabits, the Ammonits the Chaldeans, and
Babilonians against Israel; the Jews, Arabians, Saracines Turks and
Tartarians, No strange news to find Foxes in the Church. Numbers 16.
against the Christian Church. Of the second so^^ were in the time of Moses,
Chore, D^than and Abiram, who, as it is written being in the midst of the
vineyard, ^^ught to undermine the same: such were the wicked priests and false
prophets, Ezech. 22.28.
which promised peace when there was no peace, smoothered the sins of the
wicked dawbed with untempered mortar, conspiring against the law, profaning
the temple, maintayning the iniquity of the princes, opposing themselves
against the true prophets, 2. King. 22. Ierem. 18. Math. 21.41.
as did those miscreants Zedechiah against Micheas, and Hananias against
Jeremy: such were the Scribes and Pharisees, Essenians and Herodians, who
stily ventured to entrap the Lord of the vineyard, who in the person of a
redeemer came to take order for the same. And afterward, although the
principal hunters of these Foxes travailed painfully to dress and trim the
vineyard, the branches whereof were spread from East to West, and had provided
it of laborers to husband it; Foxes most troublesome to the Church.
notwithstanding, (as their histories do witness) they had always more to do
i^ the hunting of these Foxes, then against other open enemies whatsoever,
^^her within, or without the Church. If you look into the infancy of the
Church apostolic, Church apostolic anoyed with Foxes. Acts 15.
such Foxes shall you find, such namely which would match Jesus Christ and
Moses together; such Foxes, false Apostles, and false brethren were at Corinth,
1. Cor. 15.
teaching that there was no resurrection at all, or else that it was already
past, as did Himeneus and Philetus; Coloss. 2.
such were some at Colossa, which were of opinion that the traditions of men
were necessary to be observed, that the superstitious afflicting of the body,
was a religious serving of God, that difference should be betwix^ meat and
drink and days, according to the Jewish custom; 2. Tim. 2.17.
such were in Asia and in Crete, which mingled the truth with vain fables and
genealogies, who thought how such as believed might live licentiously, which
imps of Satan are by the epistle of Jude worthily confuted. Jude verse 4.
After these succeeded whole armies of Foxes, Armies of Foxes.
heretics of al sorts, some assaulting the divinity of the son of God, as
Cerinthus, Ebion, and Arrius; some his humanity, as Eunomius which taught that
Christ had a body without a soul, and Apollinaris which taught that he had a
soul without sense. Others confessing both the one and the other, but dividing
Jesus into twain, as Nestorius who taught that as Christ had two natures, so
he had not one but two persons. Others making a monster of him, which should be
neither God nor man, as did that dog Seruetus, who said that Christ was but a
figure of the son of God, and that his body was compounded of three
uncreated elements, and so confounded both natures. Others degrading him from
his office: others mingling the pure word with a million of errors: what should
I say utterly false, yea altogether monstrous.

But above all other, there is an old gray Fox, The old gray Fox.
which under the color of the Church of Rome, and because the grace of God did
sometime shine forth there, does seek continually to supplant the vineyard of
the Lord, whose cruelty, and subtlety the silly lambs of Jesus Christ have
tasted of from time to time. This old biting dog-foxe having hatched up his
cubs, and taught them their lesson, that is, to transform Christian religion
into policy, and policy into treachery; then fall they from contemplation to
practice, and are ready to trudge from one country to another, like vagrant
rogues, to what place soever it shall please the old Fox to send them. And as
amongst the Scythians he was reputed the brauest gentleman that spilt most
blood: so is he canonized for the worthiest Catholic, that can bring most
souls to confusion. So that never were the fennes of Lerna so dangerous,
never was that monster Hidra so pernicious to the near inhabitants, as are
these Foxe-cubs to the safty of the church, that is to wit, popish
schoolemasters, Jesuits in profession, Ischariots in condition, seminaries of
falsehood, straggling extrauagants, roguish pedlars of whorish merchandice; The
drift of priests and Jesuits.
whose drift is nothing else, but to reconcile simple people to the obedience
of the Pope, to power into their hearts pestilent opinions against her Majesty,
and the laws of this Realm, to sound the secrets of inward intentions, to set
discontented hearts on fire with the flames of rebellion, to feed foolish
humors with vain hope of alteration: in the mean while, teaching rebels to
practice popular behavior and to carry countenances friendly to conformity
(howsoever their eyes dazell with looking for that which comes not yet; nay,
better their eyes were out of their heads, and their heads from their
shoulders, then ever it should come: A posie sent from Rainard to his Foxe-cubs.
) else to what end serves that posie sent from old Rainard to his cursed
cubs, da mihi cor tuum and sufficit. Give me thy heart and it suffices. O
cunning old Fox! thou know full well that the heart will carry the hand
when opportunity serves; and what thy Foxlike wilines did foresee, that
experience has taught this kingdom; namely that thy cubs as they repine at
the princess saftie: so are they and still will be, the first that will set
foot in traitorous attempts.

God preserve the prince, her nobles, and the true subjects from woeful
experience: nay, God give them wisdom and courage to tie thy cubbes shorter;
else I can tell, it is an infallible maxima, Note well a Maxima.
that young cubs in time will prove old Foxes, and old Foxes if time serve, will
prove cruel Tygres.

But is it true, can the Fox strip himself out of the lambs skin, and play
the Lion in his kind? ca^ subjects hands acquaint themselves with tempering
Italian physic, and English breasts giu^ harbor unto Spanish hearts? Yea it i^
too true; and if time should turn, w^ should find the Wolves would put of
their sheep coats, and play ye Wolue in their right kind, and show their
ravenous nature by their cruel deeds; a heretofore they did when reverent ag^
was not respected, Queen Mary's days.
when flourishing youth was cropped in the prime, when women's weakness was not
spared: (but more then barbarous cruelty!) when the tender babe springing out
of the mothers womb was cast into the fire What should I range into so large a
field there yet lives many one, whose father, mother, brother, sister, kinsman
o^ friend, was through antichristian cruelty abridged of the natural date of
the^ days. Such was the calamity of forme^ times, and such are the times that
these Foxes gape after, to quench their thir^ with the blood of the lambs.

O fie upon you unnatural monsters! that seek the subversion of your own
natural prince, and country, which seek your own desolation, ruin and
misery. What mean you, uncircumcised Philistines, to labor to pull the house
upon your heads? what has bewitched you, that you should trust a trothlesse
Spaniard? I can justly compare you to that mad musition that fell to tuning of
his instrument when his house was on fire: or to the fool, that laugheth and
makes show of mirth, when he goes to the stocks. The old Fox his cognisaunce.
I know that some of you wear the mark of the beast, as a cross, an agnus
dei, or some character of the babilonish whore, whereby you hope you shall be
marked from Hugenotes, if that day should come that you look for: so bold you
are to trust a Spaniards courtesy. I can fitly apply the fable of the Lion
unto you, who being hurt by the Bull, commanded all horned beasts to avoid
the forest upon pain of his displeasure: amongst the rest the hare
understanding of this, made haste to be gone; whom the Fox meeting by the way,
asked whither she footed so fast: in sooth (quoth the hare) I neither truly can
tell, nor greatly regard, so I were gone. What is the matter (quoth the Fox?)
tush what a question is that (says the hare:) as if thou were ignorant o^ the
late proclamation of the Lion, that no horned beast should remain within the
wood. What is that to thee (says the Fox?) for thou art no horned beast. Mary
yt is true, but what if the Lion says that mine ears be horns, who the^?
Even so though you profess your selue^ to be catholics, though you have the
stamp of the beast, have your crosses, your medalls, and such like badges; yet
I will warrant you, if your purses be well lined, you shall either burn for
heretics, or pay well for the faggots: whether you can say shiboleth or
siboleth, it makes no matter, they will bear you down that you are
Ephramites; and if the Spaniards say that your ears be horns, no remedy you
must to the pot as if you were protestants. Such are the Spaniards, such are
their fruits, such is their treachery, such is their tyranny ask them of the
low countries, ask the Neapolitanes, ask the Indians, Spaniards courtesies
are unnatural cruelties.
and they can tell you of the execrable tirannies of the Spaniards, which as
they surmount al credit, so I am not furnished with effectual terms to
display them. An others cost gives a watchword to a wise man.
What these helhounds have done in the low countries, it is better known then
I am able to report: yea it is extant how they have curtalled the prerogatives,
ingrated upon the liberties: what grievous exactions they have raised, what
customs they have imposed upon all manuary trades, and mechanical faculties,
whereby gain might grow to the inhabitants of Naples: in a little more then
forty years, what realms they have dispeopled in India, which now remain as
desolate wildernesses; what millions of men, women and children they have
murdered; in so much as they have waged amongst themselves who should most
bravely broch his sword in the blowels of an Indian, Savage Immanitie.
or with one blow most lustely strike off his head, giving eight hundred Indian
souls for one Moore, tearing in pieces men and women with mankind mastiues,
broyling the Lord and nobility on gridirons with a soft fire underneath them,
that howling and despairing in lingering torments, they might end their lives.
Are not these warning peales sufficient to make you fear? d^ you look for
greater courtesy at Spaniards hands? Will you follow the Hiaenaes voice? or
dare you swallow a Spanish bait? are you so foolish to look^ for grapes on
thorns? or so mad t^ hope for mercy at the hands of merciless tyrants?
Learn learn to answe^ the^, as the Fox did the sick old Lion when he
entreated him to enter into hi^den.

Nam me vestigia terrent, omnia (...)
aduersum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
The tracks and footstepps that I spy,
makes me to doubt some train,
Since all trace forward to thy den,
but none tread back again.
But you are like affected to the Israelites, you would change both Moses an^
Aaron, magistrate and minister, you are (...) bewitched that you would change
you Samuel for Saul; nay more the^ that, you Christ for Barrabas; which change
yo^ do seek for, although you pay you^ heads to boot, if you should have you
desires. But I trust the Lord has blessed England with wise and provident
coun^^ll, who may learn by your former practices to beware of afterclaps. For
papists prove traitors apace. And so it is hie time they were provided for.

CHAPTER. 3.
The true semblance betwixt a two-legged, and a foure-legged Fox.

THe covert enemies of the Church, because they accord in condition, and a^^
like them in properties, ar^ therefore called Foxes Now amongst many, The Fox
has a foul smell.
one property is that the Fox has a foul smell. Wherein the two-legged and
foure-legge^ Foxes agree as cubs of one kind: Men lives and religions are
commonly alike neither can their conversation have (...) sweet smell, whose
religion has a loath some taste: Wherefore behold a posi^^ made first of popish
doctrines; then o^ their lives; by the smell whereof you man judge of the
soundnes of a Catholic profession. Behold I say an hotch-potc^ and miserable
mingle-mangle, if yo^ respect their religion, of al Satan's forgeries and
devilish heresies, as the^ may serve the old Fox his turn, A posie of popish
doctrines gathered out of the desert of heresies.
patched together like a beggars cloak made of a thousand shreds: Therefore
with Carpocratian heretics he is bold to set up the Image of Christ and other
Saints, with the Anthropomorphites, to paint God the Father like an old man
with a gray beard; with the Pelagian heretics, to maintain freewill, power
to justify our selves, and to fulfill the commandments; with the Messalians,
to mumble his mattens, pater nosters, and seven psalms by number upon a pair
of beads; with the Tatians, Cataphrygians, Montanists and Ebonists, to seek
sanctification in eating and not eating, in marrying and not marrying.
Whereupon the Romish faith is founded.
To be short, in many things, he is Heathenish, Turkish and Jewish: so that
whosoever is hot stark blind may behold, whereupon the Roman Catholics build
their faith: not upon the doctrines of the Prophets and Apostles, but partly
upon the scriptures sophisticated and quintessensed in a lymbecke, to serve for
a correctiue in the poisoned drench of the whore; partly upon such sayings of
the ancient fathers as serve for their turn; partly upon the scum of gen^ral
councels; partly upon the Caballa the Jewish Rabbis; partly upon the Tu^kish
Alcoran, and lastly on the pr^found divinity of Ovid and Aristot^^ In this
manner skipping like mucke y^^ from one place to an other, they pick what may
best serve for their purpo^^ even as if a man would pick rotten o^ of an
apple, with this prouiso, that a R^mane Catholic hang as fast on the
fo^^dation, as a thief on ye gallows, to w^^ on his holy mother the Church of
Rom^ which can stumble no more then a man when both his eyes are out. And this
their invincible Stratagema and P^^nopila, their strong furniture and fig^ting
weapons of war, which they v^ for the defense of their religion: when by it
may evidently appear, that the bottomless pit is open, and the diu^^ is broke
loose, and that the Pope is the porter of hell gates. Beware then of t^^
poisoned cup of the whore, Can. 2. Math. 7. Revel. 20. Phil. 3. 2. Cor. 11.13.
Romans 16.
and the wiles of such Foxes, Wolves in sheep^ clothing, false horned lambs,
maski^^ hypocrites, deceiptfull workeme^ crafty companions, cosening knaue^
(...) by dissembled zeal and palpable flat^^rie creep into men's houses, wind
themselves into men's consciences, lead away the simple captive: beware of these
scorpions with stings in their titles, who when they look most de^^^rely,
pretend greatest mischief; ^^ound the sorest, when they speak the forest;
with smooth speeches captiuate men's consciences, when they pretend greatest
liberty. Let not your hearts be deceived, there is no such vice as that which
is hidden under the color of virtue; no such arrant strumpet as she that
seeks to shroud her self under the show of a grave matrone; no such Judas
kiss as with an Apostles face, nor fawning devil as like an Angel of light;
no such enemies against the Church, as those which under the name of it, seek
the supplanting of the same.

To leave their religion, and to speak of their lives: can there be a sweet
behauior where there is no sound faith? certes no, Corporal and spiritual
whoredom companions collateral.
and therefore experience will teach thee, that corporal and spiritual whordome
(...) hand in hand: for who more hot in the service of Baal, then wicked
Iesabel? yet was she but a painted harlot. It is needless to tell you some
sweet parts played in the popedom, and to glance at the filthiness of those
chief chaste fathers and maiden priests, the smell whereof has ascended to
heaven, and annoied the Lord of hosts; yet to the end you may know the birds by
their kind, the colts by their dammes, and the young cubs, by the smell of the
old Foxes: I will give you a little taste of the unsavory manners of holy
Foxes, (holy fathers say they) whereof some have been famous and renowned
heretics, some notorious blasphemers of God, some shameless scorners, some
whore-hunters, adulterers, and sodomiticall beasts, some wretched and ravenous
helhounds, some coniurers and Necromancers, Anastasius. 2. The old Foxes have
foul smells.
as histories do declare. Anastasius the second consented to the Nestorian
heretics, which denied the humanity of Jesus Christ, and at last being
stricken by the hand of God, did void his intrals, as did the heretik Arrius
before him. Boniface the eight was in a general council holden in Paris,
Boniface. 8.
accused and found guilty of three capital crimes, namely of heresy, murder,
and symonie, and for these causes was dispossessed of the popedom: and
afterward cast into prison, desperately gnawing and devouring his hands like
to a dog ended his days, for whom the devils did wonderfully mourn and shed
many a salt tear. For on the same day was heard in the prison where he died,
called castrade S. Angelo, such horrible thunderclaps, and terrible stirs, as
if all the Popes, Abbots, Prelates, Canons, Priests, Munkes, and Friars in hell
had been singing his requiem. Pope John the foureteenth, who with an Italian
trick picked over the perch Pope Alexander the fifth, John. 14.
and afterward very featly created himself Pope, was convicted in the
council of Constance an apparent heretic, an un godly knave, an oppressor of
the poor, a persecutor of the righteous, a stay to the wicked, a pillar to the
barterers of benefices, a glass to dishonestie, a vessel full of all vice,
yea a very devil incarnate: and therefore put beside the cushion, and deposed
from his aposticall seat. What should I leave John the dog Fox, Pope Ioane the
bitch-foxe.
and spoke of Joan the bitch-Foxe from whom Monks, Friars, pole-shorn^
Priests, and the Romish spiritualty ar^ sprung. This Ioane was well content t^
be gotten with child by one of he Cardinals, and was delivered in the midst
of the street, as she was devoutly treading in procession, by the same token,
that at this day there dot^ remain an Image of stone hewn ou^ of the earth,
as their histories do report and that the Popes in their processio^ never do
pass that way, least that the like might happen unto them. Nevertheless for
the avoiding of such a foul^ chance the holy Church did ordain^ two chaires to
be hewn out of Porphy stone, where they used to feel from under, vtrum habet
testiculos. But tha^ custom is now left, for it may well b^ that they make the
matter manifest b^ the brood of their bastards. John the thirteenth, John. 13.
was in property much like to Pope Joan, who as he was descended of whores and
knaves: so was h^ no changeling, but did show full we what stock he came of,
for he was s^ vowed to incontinencie, that he maintained an open stews: the
Emperor ^^to causing a council to be gathered, ^^erin he was complained upon,
and ac^^sed of many foul things, as that he ^^d committed whordome with two
si^^rs, that he had made Bishops of chil^^en, that he had deflowred many
vir^^s, that of Saint John's palace at Late^^n, he had made an open stews,
that he ^^d offered up wine to the devils, and ^^playing at dice, had called
for aid ^his graund Captain the prince of ^^rkenes. But what can we expect at
^ir hands, who are so near linked and ^^d with that foul fiend? For is it not
^orded in their histories, that many them were Necromancers, familiarly
^^uainted with the devils? Search Car^al Benno in his books of the life and
^^ngs of Hildebrand, and he will tell you ^^t many have obtained the pope^ne
through devilish arts: as Sylue^^ the second, John the eighteenth, John
nineteenth, John the twentieth, Benet eight, Benet the ninth, Gregory the
^enth, erst called Hildebrand; who ^^pered his triacle so well, that as ^^d as
five or six Popes by the Italian dram were brought to their bane, to ye en^ he
might have a beaten path to their places. Now to speak of the same knacks i^
the popish clergy descended from the stock of such grandsires before
mentioned, it would be too tedious; nay we may not imagine that those maid
priests which daily handle a bread god, can play legerdemaine, when the seem
to give absolution.

But here the old Fox will reply, th^^ all the flowers in Priapus, that Dryad
and Naiades, and Satyrus, that is, all the flowers in hills, and dales, and many
green forest, have not so sweet a sm^^ as a Catholics conversation. For the
old Fox, Popish mortification lively depainted.
poor beast, abides the (...) brunt of the weather; his poor cu^ have such
straight rules of lives as no^ have more, some of them not eating any flesh a
great part of the year, so^^ of them eating no flesh at all, being lean as if
they had lien seven yea^ diseased in their dens of Idolatry; others going
woolward; others doi^^ perpetual penance, and whippi^^ themselves a vie, who
shall whip mo^ others utterly forswearing the maria^^ b^ed, and vowing
virginity. Thus warrant you the Fox does love mor^^fication as dearly as a
dog does a cud^^ell. Austeritie of life no true mark of the Church.
And what if your Austeritie of life ^ere as you would make the world be^eue:
yet come you not near Baals ^riestes, who cut and launced themselves, whom
notwithstanding the prophet ^lias mocketh with full mouth; no nor ^et near the
superstitious Mahome^^nes of diverse sorts.

But ye worlds deceivers, ye painted ^epulchers, ye meale-mouthed coun^^rfeits,
your priests indeed vow conti^ent lives: but O heaven! O earth! O ^^ousand
millions of rapes, adulteries, ^^cestes, fornications committed under ^is
goodly vow of virginity! You vow ^ouerty, but it is to nestle your selves in
^^llaces, and there to pamper your ^^lues at other men's charges. You ^atch in
the night: but it is to sleep in ^^e day. O what pains takes the old ^^xe to
ride on men's shoulders, and to (...) up his feet to have his pantofle kissed,
tell over so many thousands of crowns (...) come tumbling in on every side! O
that pains he takes to have the spoil and booty of so many millions of
souls so miserably bewitched? O what a mark of mortification is it in the
reuerendissimies, to have their tails carried up by their trainebearers, and to
ride up and down in their coaches with their concubines? Alas for pity, those
religious men which merit both for themselves, and for others, how ill be they
lodged in their princely chambers? poor men alas, how are they famished, when
the world is together by the ears who shall bestow most upon them, and their
hands so troubled with the gout, that all is fish that comes to net? O the
small warmth they have in their Iacobine chambers! how ill be they clothed in
their cold cassockes! O what hunger abide our English popelings, and poor
catholics, in abstaining from a piece of restie bacon, to feed of dainties
that are fetched out of far countries? how pale faced are they, in drinking
the strongest wines they can come by? a^ what great price do these Romanistes
rate paradise at, when thus they do work to be serviceable?

Here whilst we give them the challenge for seeking the kingdom of heaven in
their drunken dotages, and stinking cesterne of their own traditions: they in
the mean while most wickedly slander us, that we disioyne amendment of life
from remission of sins. And why so? because we settle the consciences of men
on him, who has paid so dear a price for them. But as touching our doctrine
compared with theirs, we will make him Judge, who shall judge us all by his
word. And as for our lives we acknowledge that we have too great cause to
humble our selves before the highest majesty. But as for them, their Sodom and
Gomor, their plaunches and swinesties of all impiety, their harbors and
lurking holes of idleness, and all manner of dissolution, yields such a
loathsome smell, as does infect both heaven and earth.

The second property of the Fox is wiliness, The second property of the
Fox is wilines.
and this is one of his inseperable accidents. To find out all his deceipts is
almost as difficult as to sound Satan's depthes: and therefore, if in this I be
too short, it is no meruel, for the Fox is full of subtletie. Amongst many his
properties of cunning compassing, The Fox woorieth aloof from his den.
this is reckoned one, yt he dare not woorie near his den, least timely watch
should take him tardie: In like sort these subtle seducers wander far and
wide, and compass sea and land, whereby to make a Catholic after their own
profession.

Secondly, Rainard raungeth in the night, The Fox raungeth in the night.
and keeps his den in the day: In like manner the two-legged Foxes dare not
abide the day light, but seek lurking holes, and wander in by-waies, marching
on like maskers with shameless frontes in stead of visors, disguising
themselves, lest wonted attire should broach their wiles, and mar their
mummings.

Thirdly, the craft of the Fox appears in this, The Fox fasteneth on the
young lambs.
that he loves to fasten and feed upon the young ones, the poor lambs of
little force to escape his cruelty: of like condition are the spiritual
Foxes, they fasten upon such as are poor in knowledge, and weak in faith,
that they may more easily pervert and draw them to error. For survey bona fide
the dealings of priests, Jesuits, Seminaries, or other seducers; see and
consider whether they read not in the steps of the old serpent: The dangerous
practices of Foxe-priestes and Jesuits.
seek they not to seduce poor simple women, that they may intise their
husbands, as Eua did Adam? Ma^ame must be recusant, and Mounsire a monthly
church-hant. The mean gen^lewoman or yeomans wife forsweares ^he Church,
Practice of papists.
and faceth out the force of ^ur laws; the good man of the house ^eepes into
the Church for fear of a ^ine, setting more by his dames pater no^ter in her
closet, then any Christian exercise in the congregation: as if our ^awes were
made to rule men, and not women, husbands, and not wives. This shuffling would
be suspected; for thus ^^ngender Foxe-cubs, who threaten fu^ure danger.

If simple men be recusants, Mark this.
and re^ounce our fellowship, many not great^y regard it; because either they
want ^uthoritie, or their purses be not well ^ined: but be not deceived, for
such little sparks may serve the Popes turn, ^y being kindled to a flame, and
that is wilines is a ware of. The Iuie cree^ing along the ground, beginning at
^he first to compass the lowest part of the oak, at the last, by getting
ground, ouerpeereth ye highest branch, pierces still the pith, sucketh the
sap, to the ruin of the whole trunk: so these subtle Foxes by insinuation,
and sugared speeches seek first to enter into the consciences of persons
inferior; hoping by daily addition, of new addicted fools to the fleshpots
of Egypt, to fortify their faction: but indeed the mark that they level at,
is to raze up the foundation of our peace, and to ouerpeare the head of her
royal person.

Fourthly, the subtlety of the Fox is herein discerned, because persuading
men unto virtue, and reuoking them from vice, The Fox is a counselor for his
own advantage.
he does it for his own advantage, and then especially seeks the spoil of
the Church. So that fitly they may be resembled unto thieves, traveling by
the hie way, and lighting into true meaning company, can talk of simple
dealing, of sober living, of the reward of the virtuous, of the punishment of
the vicious, to the intent yt unsuspected they may take their bootyat unawares;
or to the crafty gamester, who suffers the simple man to win for a while,
that afterward being greedy of play, he may lurch him as he lists: Even so
these deceiptful workmen speak some good things, but they intermeddle evil
things; they speak the truth but to scatter lies, and to root the^ in men's
hearts, as Sinen in Virgil mingled falsehood with truth, that he might more
easily entrap ye Trojans; they speak peace with their mouths, but have
conceived mischief in their hearts; they can say salve frater with Ioab, and aue
Rabbi with Judas, when their purpose is to stab with the one, and to betraie
with the other. To conclude, they are deceiptfull merchants, which utter evil
wares, and set them out with lying words to make them saileable. Wherefore as
Paul commanded the devil to silence, although he spoke truth, least that his
uttering of truth might advantage his lying, and gain credit to his kingdom;
and as Jesus Christ sharply rebuked the devil, saying unto him, we know who
thou art, teaching us not to give ear unto the devil although he tell the
troth: so let the rulers which regard the honor of the highest, labor
earnestly to hinder the course of these seducing spirits which are scattered in
our land, and to put the devil to silence in them, that his people be not
beguiled and drawn away to strange worship.

The Fox craftily disswades from religion and loialtie.
Another of their wiles is in their manner of persuasion, first, against
religion; and secondly, against loialty. Against religion by whispering into ye
ears of the seduced, Church agreement, councels consent, fathers harmony,
teachers credit, universality, antiquity, unity, apostolical traditions, all
which an alblasted Moter has trict trimly in colors, having put as it were an
new coat upon an old deformed body; as if, where the ass had put upon him the
Lions skin, the world could not discern him by the length of his ears: but
the name of God be magnified, he is discovered, and his new vernished leaden
dagger stabd in the intrals of his holy mother. My purpose in this pamphlet is
rather to discover the wickedness of English Italionates, then to dispute
against the wilful obstinacy of any Catholic champion: yet because this is
the dust that Master Allablaster, with others more, cast in the eyes of our
countrymen to put them quite out; or at leastwise, to bleare them: I will
briefly scatter it, and so proceed in my former course.

Church agreement, an old Motive to the popish faith, removed and confuted.
BY the Church they would have you to understand the Church of Rome, The
Catholics in their brags understand by the Church the Romish Church.
for her eminency; and then when they tell you that the Church agrees, the
Church degrees, the Church cannot err: all this in their language is to be
spoken of the Romish Church. Now, if this proud Moter, or any other of his
fraternity, can bring you any prophecy or promise by which this her
privilege may appear, that Rome is the mother City of the universal Church,
Urge this against a Roman Catholic.
as she was of the ancient Roman Empire; as also, yt this is her prerogative,
that she cannot err: the^ have they done some thing; but they may as soon find
Paradise in hell, as any such text in the scripture. Contrariwise she is
poynted at, 2. These. 2.3. Apoca. 17.
as by yt finger to be the seat of apostasy, by Saint Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
verse. and by Saint John in the Apocalypse; Rome the sea of Apostasy.
yea by many ancient fathers, Greek, and Latin; albeit they in their times
saw not that was before their eyes. Again, if it were lawful for men, why
should Rome rather be chosen then Jerusalem, the first and the auncientest of
the Churches, called of the prophets the city of God, Esaias 2.
from whence the word of God should go fourth into all the world, founded by
Saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles; or rather than Antioch, Acts.
where were named the first christians, and where it is apparent that Peter and
Paul lived?

Sirs, what can you say for your selves? faith sometimes flourished at Rome. And
what then? so did it at Jerusalem, at Antioch, at Ephesus, etc. But was not
Jerusalem turned into Ieruskaker? Was not Bethel, that is, the house of the
Lord, turned into Bethauen, the house of iniquity? Is not the candlestick
removed from those famous Churches of Asia, Ephesus, Pergamus, Thiatira,
Philadelphia, etc. These places are altered for wickedness, and Rome for bad
life and bad religion. And thou Rome, though sometimes faithful, art now the
Queen of pride, the nurse of ^dolatries, the mother of whoredoms, ^he shop of
heresies, Romes abominations.
where the ente^ance into Gods house, that is, the scrip^ures, wherein he has
placed his eternal truth, is forbidden unto his people, where the Church is
not only made a place of merchandise of men's souls, ^ut is changed into a
shop of more ab^ominable Idolatry than ever was amongst the pagans themselves:
where ^he true Jesus Christ is changed into a ^ead and senseless thing, having
neither head nor feet, which cannot keep ^t self from the talents of thieves,
nor ^et from the teeth of mice and rattes, which perishes of it self, if it
be not ^he sooner devoured.

But here some fauorit of popery will ^ell you, What if the Pope sit in Peter's
chair.
that the Pope sits in Peter's ^haire: answer him, that so did the Pharisees in
Moses seat, Matt. 23.
yet never ^he better, no jot the holier for all that: ^o that I may justly say
to him, as did Themistocles to a certain od Seriphia^, who objected to
Themistocles, that his ^lory received greater brightness from the renown of his
country, then from the merit of his virtues: not so said Themistocles; for if I
were a Seriphian I would not live without renown, and if thou werest an
Athenian, thou could not live without shame. In like sort say, if Saint
Peter were at Rome, he lived not like the Pope, and if the Pope sit in Peter's
chair, he lives not like Saint Peter; but even as Neanthus, having gotten
Orpheus his harp, iangled and iarred so long, that whereas he looked for the
trees to skip, he brought the dogs about his ears: even so the Pope has so
long boasted of Peter's succession, that the simple discern his doublings, and
nouices in religion, begin to epsy his Iugling.

But some man will say, is there the^ no certain visible place, Whether there
be any certain place on which to build our belief.
on which a Christian man may depend so far as to say we must believe, and
do that which is taught and commanded in such a place? Christ resolves this
demand, but answers not that it is Rome, or any other place: but says he
where the dead body is, thither the Eagle gather themselves together: and what
i^ this dead body, but Jesus Christ and him crucified, besides which, I will
know nothing says the Apostle? understanding by the name of, Christ his
person, and by the word of crucified, all his sufferings for us, until that
last cry of his which shaked both heaven and earth. Math. 27.
This concerns doctrine. Now for outward service; hear him answering to the
woman of Samaria, whose demand was, John. 4.
whether they should worship in the Temple of the Samaritanes, or of the Jews;
that for a time it was the Temple of Jerusalem, and none other which God had
chosen to be worshipped in. But says he, the time is come that men shall
worship neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem; but the true worshippers
shall worship in spirit and in truth: that is to say, they shall serve God with
a pure spiritual worship, without distinction of place. By this, I trust the
ignorant shall be able to descry what the Catholcikes mean by their Church
agreement; as also how to keep themselves vnsnared by such Moters as go about
to entangle them. As for our selves, we give the Church of God all her true
honor; confessing that whosoever has not this true ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Church to his mother, the same has not God to his Father.

Councels consent, a false challenge of a Roman Catholic, with a caveat how
councels are to be gathered and received.
THe Catholics make many a goodly Brauado, and whosoever is willing to be
deceived, may believe them upon their bare words. The ancient fathers in an
holy wisdom, have called Councels as befitted their times, for the abandoning
of heresies, and establishing of truth: such were these old Councels, the first
Nicene, the Council of Constantinople, the first Ephesine and such like, which
we refuse not but theirs are latter, and are n^ better many of them, then if
the whoremasters and whores were gathere^ together to take order for the stews
But let us consider, whether all Councels serve for a Catholics comfort Many
hundred years ago the Council of Constantinople decreed, that Images placed
in the Church should be overthrown and dashed in pieces. Councels co^demning
popish opinions.
The Council held at Eliberis in Spain in the time of Constantine decreed,
that women should not frequent vigils, that Images should be banished out of
the Church, and that nothing should be painted on the wall to be worshipped.

The Council of Gangrens, accursed them that condemned ye priests marriage.

The third Council of Carthage decreed, that the chief bishop should not be
called the prince of priests, or highest priest, but only the bishop of the
chief sea.

The Council of Hippo decreed, that the bishop of the head sea, should not be
called the chief priest; that no scripture should be read in the Church, but
Canonical.

In a Council holden at the City of Pize, both Gregory and Benet were
deposed, and Alexander the fifthe lected Pope; they notwithstanding holding
still the title of papalitie, and so a lease of Popes until the coming of
Constance.

At the Council of Basil, Pope Eugenius concluded an heretic, deposed, and a
Duke created Pope in his place.

Thus they crake much of the authority of a council, and bleare men's eyes
with so glorious a name, when as indeed their drunken superstitions by them are
utterly condemned. It is truly said of many Councels, that In nomine Dei
incipit omne malum. How councels are.
Therefore are they to be received with this caveat, tha^ they be gathered in
the name of Christ, decree according to his rule, and aim^ at his glory. So
shall they be no other wise received, then they bring the judgment of Christ;
and the Pope shall b^ put to silence, who for all show of pr^ and con, will
determine for his purpos^ wheresoever he is president.

Gerson and Panormitanus, not new protestants, but ancient fathers, being at
the Council of Basil, where it wa^ argued, what authority a Council has
decreed, that we must rather beleeu^ one simple man alleging the scripture
than an whole Council to the contrary: the thing it self is ratified in ye
great Nicene Council, where many would have forbidden priests marriage, and
only Paphnutius being unmarried, and alleging the scriptures which allow
marriage in all men, did euince the contrary.

The harmony of fathers, a false motive to popery.
IT cannot be denied, but many fathers stand hard for their Catholic ^eligion,
as father Piggius, father Hosius, ^ather Lombard, father Thomas, father ^cotus,
father Caieta^, Fathers pleading for the Romish religion.
one of the best Car^inals; father Bellarmine, father Staple^on, and many more
hireling villains, which are at the Popes pay, which al^hough in many things
they agree no ^etter then Herod and Pilate, yet can ^hey consent to degrade
Jesus Christ from his office, as well as the other did ^o bereave him of his
life: So that you ^ee what a consent of fathers here is, ^or the defense of a
Pope-holy faith*

But there are other ancients, as father Moses, father David, Esaias, Jeremy,
etc. In a word, our fathers are the Pa^riarches, Prophets, and Apostles; and
when they shall prove that we dissent from these ancient fathers, that is, our
worship, our faith, is not builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, as on the other side that theirs is; then have they spoke to the
purpose.

Now if they mean by fathers consent to bring in Augustine, Chrysostom,
Cyprian, Basil, Athanasius and the rest, with one accord to make their plea for
popery, then shameless beasts, they are convinced already by the friends
of the bridegroom, and confounded of their own consciences, if they have any
at all.

Lastly, for this point, how far the auncientest and holiest men next after
the Apostles are to be listened unto; hear Augustine himself, How far the
ancient fathers are to be harkened unto by the judgment of Augustine.
where he says. That the testimonies of Cyprian and Agrippinus, are not to be
alleged; as if it were not lawful otherwise to think; if they perhaps shall
speak otherwise then the truth does require. And in an other place he says:
That we ought not to believe the Catholic Doctors, if they shall avouch any
thing contrary to the Canonical scriptures: and confesses that in his own
books many things may be found, which without rashness may justly be censured.

Teachers credit, a popish snare to entangle the ignorant, and a bait to draw
them from searching of the scriptures.
O Foxes full of all subtlety! for hence it is that you have forbidden the
scriptures to be read in the vulgar tongue, and such as all Christians
understand; The common faith of the Catholic.
and moreover have taught ^t to be sufficient to believe what your Church
believes, without inquisition what it is, and to credit your teachers without
search of the scriptures: but pro^ided a man have a good meaning, re^erre
himself to the articles of your ^aith, kneel down before a crucifix, ^e apt
to say an Aue Maria, or a Pater ^oster; O then behold a merit by and ^y
achieved, John. 4.24. 1. Cor. 16.13. Ephesians 16. 1. Pet. 3.9.
and Gods wrath appea^ed! Is this to serve God in spirit, and ^n truth? Is this
which you teach the ^aith by which we stand, and which must ^eat back the
fiery darts of the enemies? namely, to build upon the affi^nce of Bellarmine,
Stapleton, Allablaster. Indeed if you could bring the matter to this pass,
that in stead of, Sic dicit Dominus exercituum: sic dicit Dominus Deus vester
Papa, that is, in stead of thus says the Lord of hosts, thus says your Lord
God the Pope, and in stead of, os Domini locutum est, The next way to make all
the world papists.
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Os Bellarminianum ve^ Stapletonianu^
dixit, the mouth of Bellarmine or Stapleton has said it: then is i^ likely
that all christendo^ shall be papists shortly; nay Atheists perhaps, for I am
sure of all your teachers, the Pope mus^ have the credit. And then what if his
holiness be as devoutly minded as Paul the third; Paulus. 3.
who lying on his death bed, said he should shortly understand whether there
were a God in heaven or no, whereof he had always doubted: or as John 22. who
taught that men's souls did sleep with their bodies: John. 22. John. 23.
Atheists.
or John the twenty three, who taught yt men died after the manner of beasts;
for which heresy and many more flagitious deeds, he was deprived of his papal
jurisdiction, in Concilio Constantiensi. What if the Pope were thus minded, and
so would proclaim it: I say undoubtedly all the world, as noster magistellus
Allablaster would bear us in hand, are bound to believe him. But we are
taught to search the scriptures, 1. John 5.
and to try the spirits, both by commandment and example; by the light
whereof all this your darkness has been and shall be discovered. John 4.


Universality, a false mark of the true Church.
THere are no greater deceivers in the world then they, who to discern the
true Church (members whereof we ought to be, if we will be saved) from the
false (from the which we ought to separate our selves, if we will not be
damned) stand wholly upon a multitude. For if in worldly affairs more fools
are to be found then wise: how is it then, when the point concerns
supernatural goodness and wisdom? If the adversary will not credit Christ
himself, speaking in plain terms of the broad way which leads to
destruction, through which many pass; and the narrow gate that leads unto
life which few do find; yet perpetual experience might better teach them,
then to stand upon universality, as a mark of the true Church: when the
deluge came upon the world, The greater number the worser.
whether was paucitie or multitude a mark of the Church? what was Abraham's
house in comparison of the Cananites? what was Israel (to comprise hypocrites
in the number) in respect of the whole world? what Church was the multitude a
mark of, when Christ being in the earth in his person, the rulers rejected
him, and the multitude cried away with him, away with him, crucify him,
crucify him? what multitude was the number of sixescore persons, when the
Christian Church began? To conclude, when these proud boasters of their great
numbers, shall well have counted what they are in comparison of the rest of the
world which acknowledge not the Messiah; then may they prove, if they will not
maliciously err, that the multitude is rather to be suspected, then reckoned a
true note of the true Church.

Antiquity of religion, a vain brag of Roman Catholics.
MEn, time without mind, have accustomed to commend them^^lues under the name
of antiquity, specially unto the ignorant, whose ^gnorance also they do
abuse: and ^^us it comes to pass by Gods just ^^dgment, that they who will
not suffer ^hemselues to be taught, take many ^^mes that for latter, which was
for^er, and for new which is old: such are ^^ey of whom Peter speaks, who
said ^f that time when a man spoke unto ^^e^ concerning the coming of Christ
(...) judge the world, that all things were ^s they are now since the first
fathers, which thing is false, says he: 2. Pet. 3.4.
for they should know that the world was not ^reated in such sort as now it is,
and that God has already executed an ^orrible Judgment on the corruption
^hereof. Ier. 44.17.
In like sort they reproched ^eremie, that he had mard all with his ^ew
preaching: yea, and when they ^eare Christ himself, they say what kind of new
doctrine is this, Mark. 1.17. John. 5.39.
but he bids them search the scriptures, for they speak of him. In like sort,
say these great asses that will know nothing, what new doctrine is this you
teach? where was the new Church of yours threescore years ago, before Luther
ran out, and like a fugitive fled from his mother! behold their common
language. We answer them that primum quodque verissimum. The protestants would
that the prophets, Christ, and his Apostles should end all controversies.
And we will appeal unto Moses, David, the prophets, apostles, and ancient
fathers to be tried for the antiquity of our religion, if they dare put the
controversy by them to be ended. Look what form of service was in the
Tabernacle and Salomons temple in their time; and whether it comes nearer our
service, or the Popes portuis: they read Moses and the prophets, and expounded
them, and do not we so? we have nothing touching the substance of religion,
but we are able to prove it from the scriptures for antiquity; so cannot they
their transubstantiation, purgatory, invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead,
or any such pelting trash. But as for their Mass, it is like a beggars cloak
made of a thousand patches, The Mass like a beggars cloak.
one patch being fiue-hundred, an other foure-hundred, an other three-hundred
year old. The vine which the Lord transported out of Egypt, has been a long
time in the hand not of vineyarders, but destroyers, from whom it now being
taken, restored and husbanded by the servants of the eternal, the enemies cry
out with full mouth, that all is new which is against their corruption. We here
then do protest, that in the times of our fathers there was a Church, that is
to say, a number of the children of God, as it were secret and shut up (as may
be proved by writings from age to age, that there were some who opposed
themselves against those superstitions and idolatries) which by little and
little, gat the upper hand in the West Babylon, called three hundred years
ago by one of their own Poets a temple of heresy, in the which, the Lord for
this, suffered not that baptism should be utterly taken away and abolished.

We protest further, that in our time in which it has pleased God to display
the banner of his truth, there does sti^ remain some of the elect buried, as
(...) were in the midst of this Babylon who in respect of the eternal
counse^ of God, appertain at this present vnt^ the true Church; but by little
and litt^^ as it pleases God to draw them out (...) this gulf, are actually
made membe^ of the same. Lastly we protest, that tho^^ great personages which
the Lord of h^^ goodness of latter years has raised up have not built us a new
Church, as the falsely call it, but have gathered together the poor sheep,
who were scattered amongst the Wolves.

Unity falsely pretended a mark of the Romish Church.
The Lord Jesus speaking of himself says that he came not to sen^ peace upon
the earth, Math. 10.34.
but rather division; which division is the foyling o^ Satan, the breach of
his peace, and the overthrow of his kingdom. 1. Cor. 11.16.
Saint Pa^^ says, that heresies must be, but yet f^^ the benefit of the
believers. The d^sciples followed Christ, but yet the people even then, were
divided into Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Essenians, Nazarites, and
Samaritans. Therefore if the adversaries mean to find out a Church where
there should be no division, nor diversity of opinion, let them say where it
is: If they say it is theirs, it is a loud lie: what unity is that when the
blackfriars are against the grayfryers, and the crouchet against them both,
and all for their brows? what unity is it, when Canus is against Caietan, and
Bellarmine against them both? what unity is it, Non tanta nobiscum quam secum
est contentio.
when some amongst them for their sects are called Thomists and othersome
Scotists, etc.

Truth it is, the catholics would feign have unity amongst themselves, and
therefore they, Dealings of papists to maintain their unity.
if there be any thing that condemns any point of their Popish opinion in the
books of their writers, they blot it quite out, as their dealing is to be
seen in the writings of Ferus, one of their honestest.

To be short, betwixt the iarres of the Roman catholics and ours, this is a
difference worthy your diligent observation, that ours are petty iarres in
matters of discipline, all of us houlding the foundation, which is Christ
crucified: Theirs are capital, concerning salvation it self; like unto Herod's
and Pilats, wherein both were against Christ; or like unto those of the
Stoickes and Epicures, wherein both were against Paul.

Apostolical traditions made a masking weed for popish unwritten verities.
The adversaries to gain some credit for their own speculations ring out as
loud, as they can, this word of Apostolical traditions; whereo^ they produce
diverse examples scattered here and there throughout Saint Paul's epistles: as
of the veil of women, of the order of speaking the word of God in the
assembly, of collections gatherings for the poor and alms. To give direction
for this point, it is on^ thing to make laws to tie men's consciences to, as to
say, this you must believe, and not believe, do, and not do upon pain of
condemnation: and an other thing, to have respect unto that which is requisite
for use and pra^tise, as well of the doctrine as of the dis^ipline, which God
the only lawgiuer ^ath ordained requisite: I say accor^ing to time, place and
persons, which ^eing subject to variety; yea to con^rarietie, sometimes the
Lord of the new ^ouenant, (if I may say so) could make ^o certain nor
perpetual ordinances, ^eeing this policy is accidental and not ^f the
substance, either of doctrine or government of the Church. Wherefore ^t pleased
him in respect of this, to give general commandment, that what^oeuer he
ordained should be executed ^rderly. Contrariwise, the Scribes and ^harisies
not contented to sit in Moses ^haire, that is, to deliver the doctrine and
discipline taught by the ministry ^f Moses, would needs make laws for ^he
consciences of men, and so add ^omething of their own unto the ser^ice of
God; whereupon the Lord had ^ather scandalize and offend them, then ^ubiect his
disciples unto them, shew^ng that he accounted not the usage of ^uch traditions
indifferent, but called them the abolishing of the divine ordinances, and a
leaven to be taken heed of. I speak concerning the new covenant, because under
the old, the Church being enclosed within the limits of one people, of one
country, of one holy place, the Lord not only set down the doctrine of the
service and government of the Church as touching the substance, but
particularized the ordinances according to persons, times, and places,
inuiolately to be observed, without adding to, or clipping from; and le^ this
suffice concerning the soueraignti^ of him who has written in his thighs the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords

All which if it be true, as it cannot b^ denied, then those Apostolical
traditions, and goodly unwritten verities which the new vpstart Moter Mouns^^
Allablaster, or any other birds of his fether, shall whisper into the ears of
the^^ followers, are but so many sacrilegiou^ degradations from the royal or
prophetical state of our Savior Christ, an^ a tyrannical usurpation over the
port^on and heritage of the Lord (serving the head of the Church, as Sampsons
companions served him) against the express commission delivered unto the
Apostles, against the express example of Saint Paul: and therefore their new
ordinances, unwritten verities, Apostolical traditions, in lieu of being
obeyed, are to be held accursed, and had in execration, by the ordinances of
God. Deuteronomy. 18.20. Galath. 18. though they should be taught by the Angels of
heaven themselves. Deuteronomy. 18.20. Gal. 1.8.


Hitherto for the preserving of the unlearned sort from the pestilent
persuasions of crafty companions, as creep unto men's houses, and captiuate
their consciences, whom I beseech by the care of their own salvation, to
beware of these Foxes and woorkemen so deceiptfull.

Although the adversaries would bear us in hand that the nail they do drive
at, is to bring men to their Ca^holike religion; yet experience has ^aught us,
that the principal mark that ^hey aim at, The level of popish devices.
is to move them to treason or rebellion, crimes so capital in ^hemselues, and
execrable, as barbarous ^eeds must they be, that live to do them them:
kingdom, prince, and people, lamentably miserable that live to suffer them.
And hereupon it comes to pass, that in stead of disputation to prove their
faith, they bring us dispe^sations to withdraw from loyalty; and in lieu of
reasons to confirm their religion, they bring us treasons to entrap the
Realm, Prince, and Nobles: whereof they have been already justly convicted,
though feign they would be canonized in ye popish Calendar as martyrs, and in
the array of Euangelick and Apostolic reformers.

But howsoever they would feign cover disobedience, under the cloak of
freedom of conscience; treason, under the color of religion; and rebellion,
under the shadow of a Catholic profession; yet magnified be thy name, O God
our king, and protector, who have allotted them success answerable to their
sinister meaning, taken them in the pit that they had dug for others, and
hanged them as Haman upon the gallows, whereupon they thought to have hanged
Mordecay.

The Fox is ravenous and greedy.
Another property of the Fox is, that he is ravenous and greedy on his prey:
even so these insatiable sea-gulfs under pretense of long prayer, have devoured
widows houses, The Pope like The Philistians Dagon.
and gotten to themselves the goods of this world, through counterfeit
merchandice. The Philistians Dagon was said to be like a man in the upper
parts, but from the ^auell downward, like a fish: That Dagon of Rome is
neither flesh, nor fish, but as he flesheth himself in bathing ^n the blood of
innocent martyrs; so ^he makes all fish that comes to net, by fashioning
religion as may best serve for the enriching of his coffers. And therefore it
was wittily answered of an Abbot, who being asked, Papa cuius par^is orationis:
said that he was participij par^is, and why think you? What part of speech the
Pope is.
quia partem ca^it a clero, partem a seculari, partem ab vtro^ue, that is, this
word Pope is a partici^le, that is, of the quality of those that ^ut forth
their hands on both sides the ^ish, for he pills the spiritualty and pol^eth the
temporalty, and without mean and measure part-stakes on both sides, ^o the
great woe of the world. The ex^erience of this is sufficiently tried by ^he
taxes and valuing of benefices, whereout the old Fox must have his share. To
let slip many of the scraps, which he so carefully gathers under the table of
the beneficed like a dog, only the first fruits, which the Prelates, Bishops,
Abbots, and other benefice buiers have allowed the Pope, have amounted in
France year by year (as it is reported) but to ten times an hundred
thousand crowns: and then ponder what a monstrous mass of money all other
countries, under his usurped tyranny, do bring in; for you must think they
are served with the like sauce. It is well known how the treasure of this
Realm was tra^sported, when the ambitious Prelate Cardinal Woolsey conveyed
two hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling out of the kings Exchequer at
one time, for the relieuing of Pope Clement, whom the Duke of Bourbon, after
the sacking of Rome, drew forth of the Castle of Saint Angelo, and detained him
prisoner in the Emperors army. What should (...) speak of the revenues that
are paid him, every year of the strumpets of Rome, amou^ting (for each paid a
ducate) above forty thousand ducates? What should I speak of that which is
brought him in the chamber of penance, where ^emission of sins is rated at
reasonable reckoning? What should I speak of his daily dispensations granted
for ^he grossest sins, such mercandize is daily thrist to the Romish Pilates
and ghostly fathers? But especially the polluters of the name of Jesus.
And hereby it is come ^o pass that the old gray Fox is be^ome the Lord of
the whole earth, and ^et not contented, daily coyneth new ^eates out of Satan's
forge, whereby to ^ncrease his pomp and pride. His Car^inals, Bishops, and
Abbots, are become Princes and Lords of whole countries; ^is Munkes, Friars,
and Massing priests, that with begging, what with singing ^aue raked no small
heaps together. What, call you this Peter's successor? O ^uantum mutatus ab
illo! I will never be^eeue that Peter's chair can contain so ^onstrous a
monster. Peter forsook ^he world and followed Christ, the Pope ^ath renounced
Christ and followed ^he world. Peter had neither gold nor silver, but he had
gifts and graces; the Pope has neither gifts nor graces; but he has so much
silver as he can find in his heart to shoe his concubines palf-freies
therewith. Peter would not suffer captain Cornelius to crouch unto him: the
Pope is in his ruff, rides on cockhorse, is carried on men's shoulders, treads
on Emperors necks, keeps a quoile like the Devil in every kingdom of the
world: so that now the Devil and the Pope are both one, and agree as well as
two heads in one hood. The devil promised Christ all the world if he would fall
down and worship him; the Pope promises heaven and earth to those that will
fall down and adore him.

Cruelty another property of the Fox.
Another property of the Fox is cruelty, wherein the two-legged Foxes do
far exceed the other, and of that Christendom once has had most lamentable
experience: for this is undeniable, that as popery and subtlety go hand in
hand, whilst popery is kept under; so popery and cruelty are mates
inseperable, if once popery get the upper hand. Here my loving countrymen,
though former trial has given you good cause not to trust an old Fox; yet by
gleaning a few ears out of a full sheaffe, it shall not be bootlesse to give
you a warning by others. Amongst the rest as not the least notorious, Boniface
the eight may be remembered, who reigned in the time of the Emperors Adolphus
and Albertus, Boniface 8. bears the bell for barbarous cruelty.
this proverb in those days passing of him, intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt
leo, mortuus est vt canis, that is, he entered as a Fox, reigned as a Lion,
and dyed like a dog. It came to pass on a time in the city of Genoa, that
he had in hand the Archbishop Procherus upon the day commonly called
ashwednesdaie, who being enflamed against him maliciously, because he took
part with the Gibellines, which assisting the just title of the imperial
majesty, withstood the swelling insolency of the popedom, did use him with
such cruel courtesy, as follows: that whereas he used these words to other,
memento homo quod cinises and in cinerem reuerteris; that is, remember man that
thou art ashes, and into ashes thou shall return, he casting ashes into his
face, thundered out this terrible threatening, memento homo quod Gibellinus es,
and cum Gibellinis in terram reuerteris: that is, remember fellow that thou art
a Gibelline, and with the Gibellines thou shall to the pot. Deus bone, tantaene
animis caelestibus irae? is it even so sirs? can Pope holy hearts harbor such
cruel hate? then Lord deliver us from the cruelty of two-legged Foxes. If you
read John Cario^ in his Chronicle, and other writers, you shall find how
lovingly Pope Alexander the third, used the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa,
Alexender 3. his cruelty against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.
who after he had anathematized him with the horrible curse of Simei, and
thundered his rattling excommunication against him, took him in the end within
the town of Venice, trod upon his neck even with his feet, who for the
establishing of his authority, did openly pronounce before the people this
saying in the Psalm, Super aspidem and basiliscum equitabis, and calcabis
leonem and draconem, that is, thou shall ride upon the Aspe, and the Basiliske,
the Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread upon. Likewise was Franciscus
Dandalus Duke of Venice, excommunicated and banished by Pope Clement the fifth,
Clement 5. his cruelty against Franciscus Dandalus duke of Venice.
and enjoined to a certain penance, which was that he should go ^long the
Popes palace upon his knees, with a collar about his neck ^ike a dog. Who
would think they ^ould confirm this rough cruelty, by ^laine scripture? but
yet they can, after ^he exposition of the Church of Rome: ^or wot you what is
written in the ^ight psalm? thou have put all things under his feet, sheep
and oxen, A pretty Romish commentary.
yea ^ll the beasts of the field, that is, Chri^tians, Jews, Turks, and
Tartarians; ^he fowls of the air, that is, the souls and Saints departed;
and the fishes in ^he sea, that is, the souls that are in purgatory. And this
is it, which Cardinal Poole being the Popes lieutenant at the council of
Trent, did fortify by the words of Christ, that he would make Peter a fisher
of men, which after the sense of the Church of Rome, is to be understood thus:
that he would drive all Emperors, Princes, and Potentates into the Popes net
to broyle the^, or fry them, even as his holiness should think best for his
own diet. The Lord deliver England from such fishing, least after fishing,
come frying; and the Foxes bring faggots.

But what should I speak of foreign Princes? how lycenciously and
presumptuously has he dared to control the mighty Princes of England,
infringing their liberties, and incroaching upon their prerogatives, wherein if
he were at any time withstood, he straightway cast about to depose them? As
King John was most miserably vexed by Innocent the third, King John vexed by
Innocent third.
and forced at last to resignethe crown with all his title of soueraignetie both
in England and Ireland. Henry 2. suspended from his crown.
As Henry the second was suspended from his crown, and for the space of four
days went barefoote to Thomas Beckets Tomb, dieng the rough stones with his
blood. What a solemn oration made Cardinal Poole, being sent by the Pope to
Charles the Emperor setting forward against the Turk? whose purpose was to
persuade the Emperor to turn his prepared power from inuading the Turk, and
to bend it against King Henry the eight, worse then any Turk, as he said.
What blustering storms of rebellion has that late council of Trent blown up
in christendom that cannot yet be appeased? Council of Trent of the bellows
of rebellion.
And all because the old Fox ^ath persuaded his young cubbes that ^hey may
lawfully devour the lambs, that is, the Pope has powered an opi^ion into the
papists, that if he dispense with them, The harmony of Popish doctrines and
dealings.
they may lawfully break ^romise. And herein their doctrines and dealings
jar not one jot, for what ^oe they teach? that the Pope has the ^isposition
of the crowns of christian ^rinces, that he has the right of de^iding to whom
any kingdom belong^th, that he has lawful power to give kingdoms to such as
can conquer and get them, that he has authority to ^ischarge Christian
subjects from their ^utifull loyalty to their lawful prin^es, that he has
power to give leave, ^ea blessing, reward, immortality and ^ternall felicity
to such rakehels and ^ebels, as attempt the tearing of the ^rowne from the
Princes head. And what is the practice of our papists? they savor rebellion,
they join in conspiracy with strangers to convey the crown to a forrainer,
they agree with the enemy in faction, to offer our country to a pray.

I cannot more fittly compare them, then to those kind of Scorpions and little
Serpents which Pliny and Aristotle mentioned to be in Mesopotamia, which never
hurt or harm strangers, but deadly sting the natural inhabitants: nay, of
worse condition they are the^ the serpents, for they have venom to hurt
others, but not themselves; bu^ these, to hurt their princes, their noble^ and
people, are content to hazard their own states. Far more bewitched their that
foolish fellow, who was well contented to be deprived of one of his own eyes,
so that conditionally he might deprive his companion of both. It seems to me,
that he which framed the picture of Fury as follows, meant to describe these
desperate dealings; who is painted with a sword in his hand for his greedy
desire of revenge, and desperately rusheth upon a Iaueline, murdering himself
whilst he seeks ye spoil of another.

Countrymen degenerous (if not so far alienated from loyalty, you are
unworthy of the name of countrymen) what drunkenness has covered your spirits,
that you should woo the Spaniard to work your woes, No trusting to a
Spaniards courtesy.
cruelly wish your own evil, by opening your gates ^o strangers, and
prostrating your wealths ^o the courtesy of him who has vowed your
overthrows? It is an old saying, that he blames Neptune without cause, who
having once made shipwreck, will ^enture to the sea the second time: you have
had trial of the Spaniards disposition even in Queen Mary's days, his
courting terms were but painted co^ours to deceive your simplicities; when he
spoke most fair, he meant most false^y, and when Spain began to show
^reacherous, England began to seem suspicious, whereupon in happy time ^hey
parted. If these be forgotten, take notice by your neighbor nations, and ^ook
to your own house when thy neigh^ours is on fire. What should I here re^ort out
of histories, their cruelty laid upon the Indians, which as they surmount all
credit, Beware by others harms.
so am I not furnished with words effectual to display them, sometimes raging
amongst themselves, who with one thrust of a sword should braueliest paunch an
Indian, sometimes rosting them alive with soft fires, sometimes murdering them
with mankind mastiues, sometimes a shambles of Indian man's flesh, and causing
them to eat one another.

Amongst the rest, there is a strange story of an Indian Lord, flying from the
I Will Hispaniola into the I Will Cuba, who was by the Spaniards so hotly pursued, An
holy hypocrite.
that at the last he was apprehended and tied to a stake to be burned, where a
devout fransciscan Friar began to inform him in his catholic religion,
telling the Indian noble man, that if he did believe those things he taught
him, he should go to heaven presently, and enjoy everlasting happiness; else no
way but to hell to endure perpetual torments. The Indian Lord making a pawse
at the matter, asked him whether the Spaniards went when they died to heaven
(quoth the Friar) because they die in the catholic faith. The noble man
hearing him say so, answered forthwith, that he would not go to heaven, nor
have any fellowship with s^ bloody a nation.

Mournful Mexico for the desolation of thy nobles in whom thy joy and glory
did chiefly consist, thou have warned succeeding posterity to beeware of
trusting Spanish courtesy. Mo^enzuma King of Mexico, his thousand presents
were not able to keep him from Gives and wrongful imprisonment. These
examples teach you, that ^f you let this cruel Tirant but to tread upon the
shoore, his desire will not be satisfied until he have footing with^n your
walls, and if once he tread within your walls, he will harbor in ^our
houses, and have his hands in your ^reasuries; nay, though you would give ^im
as many presents as Motenzuma, ^hey should not be able to redeem ^our feet
from the Gives or necks from ^^e Rope. A vain reply.
But some man will answer ^^e, yt these were heathenish creatures, without God
in this world; but they ^re catholics, of the Spanish faith and ^rofession. I
confess indeed that the ^panyards greatly pretend the vp^olding of the
catholic faith, but their ^eeds declare that they wholly entend ^e increase of
their private commodity. Their large proffers are but Sodoms fruit, Spanish
proffers like Sodoms fruit.
for they although goodly in show, yet being handled they fall to ashes: these
beautiful in outward appearance, touched, turn to poison, to the overthrow of
them that credit them. For look a little into the Low countries, has their
catholic religion freed them from Spanish invasion? Are not many of them
willing to entertain any religion, and to forsake al to please the King of
Spain? and are they for all this at better peace?

Their long and multiplied grieuances may teach you (unless utterly vndocible)
that the catholic religion is but a Spanish masking weed, to obtain his
purpose; and that howsoever he promises you, to set the crown upon a Popish
head; yet his captains, and soldiers shall cast lots for your lives, his
gentry and nobles for your livings, and you as many as should live, should be
slaves and drudges, evermore suspected, and distrusted, from which servitude
never to be delivered, unless your wives should conspire. Lastly, if other
nations have so felt these furies, though scarce thought to have done him any
wrong, what treacheries, what cruelties, Spanish hearts most bitter against
English men.
what villainies must we needs look for, to be performed unto us of him, whose
malice is multiplied according to the number of so many supposed received
harms, and foul dishonours. Then countrymen Italionated, or Englishmen
Spanyardized, let me thus much persuade you, that the benefit of your treason,
(if unhappily success should answer your sinister meanings) (which God
forbid) is that your country should be desolate, your selves feared or
suspected, and the garland of your peace shall adorn the heads of your deadly
foes; your stately houses shall harbor stinging serpents, a thing lamentable,
but yet a just reward of traitors.

CHAPTER. 4.
An oration from old Rainard to his Jesuitical cubbes, and extrauagant
Foxe-priests, wherein his experienced wilines directs them from curious
contemplation to treacherous practices.

Dear sons, before I take my leave and last farewell, I cannot choose but
revive the remembrance of my ancient love, not that by recounting my abundant
favors which from time to time you have tasted, I mean upbraid, but rather to
recomfort my self, whose love toward you, by nature or forwardness to fit
you to further service, is so well recompensed with diligence, to execute what
I shall give you in charge. You know sons, how I have erected seminaries, and
to what end, (which mine enemies do call bad conuenticles, no better then
cockatrices to hatch treason) in these I never thought any cost too dear, Not
causelessly.
whereby either to make your bodies fit for travail, or to help your natures
inclination with fallacious art, for the accomplishment of our purpose. And now
my sons, it is hie time that you fall from contemplation to practice, which
is to transform religious superstition, into policy; Popish practike
divinity.
and policy into treason, wherein let none of you scorn your old fathers
direction; for though your younger years be riper in art, yet my experience may
teach you in treasons to be acted. English you are, and to England must I send
you, whose Albion clifts seem to me a far off like rocks of pure Diamond,
where some right dearly love me your old father, Too many.
and from the depth of their entire affection, shall embrace you my dearest
children. And more shall, the more thou art discovered.
But the greatest part pursue me with deadly hate, tearming me no better then a
bloudsucking Canniball, a robber of Churches, Fit titles for thy Foxe-ship.
a patron of heresies, a father of falsehood, the brocher of quarrels, the
head master of mutinies, the seede-man of sedition, the infringer of liberties,
the controller of Princes, the enemy of Christ, the monster and astonishment
of nature, enchayning Christian souls in miserable thraldom, and more then
Egyptian servitude.

But the time may come when all this may be repaid, the hope whereof is unto
me, as it were a restoratiue, to revive my faint and languishing spirits, which
hope does depend chiefly upon your cunning, Two reviving cordials for the old
Fox his heart.
in compassing; and cunning consists in this which follows: first, that you
work upon such as are fit to be added to our catholic faction; and secondly
in the manner of the performance. Those that are the likeliest to be fitted to
this frame, that is, to lend an hand when opportunity strikes alarm, (I speak
not sons of those who already are devout catholics, earnestly expect, and
heartily pray for success of our cause, Who are likeliest to be framed to
popish practices.
) either are male contents, whom envy or inconstancy may make desirous of a
change; or loose professors, proculstants, who have lent their love to
voluptuous delites or prodigalities, children, whom extreme want has made
desperately minded; or wanton wanderers, whom long trauail has deprived of
natural affection.

And thus began Mahomet to strengthen his state, The Lion and the Fox iumpe in
the manner of strengthening and enlarging their kingdoms.
by joining himself with the angry soldiers of Heraclius, stirring up their
minds against the Emperor, and encouraging them in their defection: whereupon
in process of time it came to pass, that although many could not abide him
for the baseness of his birth, Mahomet his beginning.
and odiousnes of his former life; yet growing from a thief to a seditious
soldier, and from a seditious soldier, to be a captain of a rebellious host;
his Mahometicall force began to subdue mighty people. Now as you must strike
with Mahomet whilst the Iron is hot, and work those with diligence, whose
inclination you find pliable; so must your wisdom appear in the manner of
this work, wherein I would have you to propound to your selves, The old Fox
sends his cubbes to school to the Lion.
the deceitfulnes of that damned wretch before named: I would not for all this
world it were known my sons, you followed so base a pattern of a cousening
knave, for an example of Imitation. This Mahomet not only to gratify his
companions, but also the more easily to allure all nations, received all
religions, the pertinacie of Arrius, the error of Nestorius, The religion of
Mahomet.
the vain invention of the Thalmudists: therefore from the Jews he received
circumcision, from the christians sundry washings as it were Baptism, and with
Sergius, denied Christ his divinity.

Secondly, to enlarge his kingdom, he made such laws as were fit to win, The
manner how Mahomet enlarged his kingdom.
and allure the vilest, as to his Arabians, base wretches accustomed to live
upon the spoil, he allows theft, and sets a law of reuengment: Hurt him,
which hurt you, he that kills his enemy, or is killed by him, enters into
Paradise: he permits having of many wives, diuorcement for trifling causes,
promises Paradise to them that give liberally, and fight for his sake.

Thirdly, mistrusting his fall, with many bulwarks has he fenced his law,
Three bulwarks of laws mahometane.
that no way be open to subvert it. First, by commanding to kill them which
speak against the Alcoran. Secondly, by forbidding men to confer with a
contrary sect: And thirdly, by prohibiting credit to be given to any of a
contrary religion. Now sirs, why should not we prevail as well as this
deceiuer, whom for example I have mentioned to you my children? Mahomet an
example of imitation to the Pope.
have we not as wany motives, as plausible Rhetoricians to perwade? for first
as he; to allure all nations received all religions, so I your old father, have
found out such a religion as is compounded of all sorts, that all might be
pleased: and therefore our enemies have called it the trusse and budget of
heresies. Secondly, Why man's corrupted nature does so easily incline to popery.
our doctrines are as mighty to prevail as ever were the laws of Mahomet. If
their old men be covetous, their young me^ voluptuous, their nobles ambitious,
and the common sort ceremonious, The Catholics faith fit for a covetous heart.
we have such allurements as are able to win them. To the rich covetousness
with craft and cruelty, and the rest of her factours: we have coined a
purgatory the fire of our gain. For the voluptuous. For dissolute and idle to
no-things.
To feed the voluptuous, our religion admits simple fornication, and our
practice has erected a stews. To draw on the riotous, the dissolute and idle
do-nothings: we have ordained many odd holy days, half holy days, at
Rogation to carry banners, after Pentecost to go about with Corpus Christi
play, to ring at All hallowes, etc.

For such as would not see their sins.
To keep men from the sight of their sins, we have taught them to mince it,
and that the first motions are no sins, unless they go with consent, that
some are venial, and need but an asperges of holy water, or a bishops blessing.
To win ambitious heads that feign would be aloft, For aspiring heads.
you must teach that my power is to give kingdoms to such as can conquer them,
to free subjects from loyalty, and to give immortality to such as can pluck
the crown from the princes head.

For wilfully ignorant.
If the people will know nothing, to fit their humors, we teach that Ignorance
is the mother of devotion, that Images are books for lay men, that knowledge
of the scriptures makes heretics, and that it is sufficient for them, that
their faith be foulded up in our Romish Church belief, without understanding
or knowing what it is.

Lastly, least simplicity either in Church-seruice, Outward painted service of
the popish Church mere policy to steal men's hearts.
or administration of sacraments should breed contempt, we have added many
petite matters to make them more-commendable, and our followers more devout: as
in our Churches, gilded Images, altars, super-altars, candlestickes and such
like: In our massings and Church service, golden garments, costly colors,
strange gestures. Trash, warbling, numbering of beads, etc. in our priests,
square caps, bald crowns, great hoods; in our orders, crossing, anointing,
shauing, forswearing wedlock, etc. In our baptism, washing of hands, salting,
spatling, exorcising, crossing. In receiving, to come with beards new shaue^,
and an imagination of a body where none is.

And lastly, Four bulwarks of papisme.
least this our iugling should be espied, we have made as strong fences for
papisme, as ever did that wicked beast for Mahometisme: for first, we have
buried the scriptures, least, by that light, our darkness should be discovered.

Secondly, Church-seruice we have thrust upon seely people in a strange
language: Sons you know well why for Simon Magus was never detected before
Christ was preached in Samaria.

Thirdly, we have forbidden our followers to confer with the Hugenotes, for
they are always striking at us with the scepter of the word, and still cry,
to the law and the testimony, etc.

Fourthly, we have an argument drawn, a fasciculis, which we command to be
formed in a new mood and figure against such as speak against our traditions.
Vain hope, uncertain promises. Absolon a courtlike politic a pattern for
popish priests.
And what can we do more, yea what does there else remain, but that you do
all diligence, feeding your favorites with strong hope and large promises,
standing at the court gates with Absolon, the lively image of courtly
politickes, seeming to pity the peoples estate, when his ambitious humor did
greedily aspire after his fathers kingdom: Even so you my sons, tell them that
their religion is good, and their cause is good, and how I your father and
theirs do pity the^; and that if I had the disposition of the crown, plenty
should follow the scepter, and peace should follow plenty; there should be no
distrust of secret treason, nor fear of foreign invasion. But above all, see
that you nourish in them a strong persuasion of Spanish love, and an earnest
desire of Indian gold, that even as Philip made the Athenians believe, that he
pretended enmity against the Plotenses, and Olynthians, when he meant to ride
upon the back of all Grecia: so must you make them believe, that the purpose
of the Spaniard, Believe them that list.
is only to reform religion, and to pass no further. And thus there being a
conjunction of English plots, with Spanish practice, how should we but
prevail, except sons, with my elder brother Baalam, we have labored to
curse where the Lord never cursed, and detested where the Lord never detested:
and I your old father be constrained in the end, to roar with Julian the
Apostata, saying, vicisti Galilaee vicisti. I say no more unto you, but walk
closely, and keep your selves in tenebris: for your predecessors, I know not
whether to ascribe it to angry stars, the influence of the heavens, neglect of
opportunity, want of secrecy, by too great security have had so sinister
success, that in stead of supplanting a kingdom, they have broken their
necks at Tyburne, and in stead of reconciling sowles to our Romish faction,
Not so, but just reward of treason.
their heads have been united to an halter: This cruelty have they sustained
for my sake, whom therefore I have crowned with martyrdom, as your elder brother
Campion and the rest, the remembrance of whom (in whose endeavors I have
heretofore placed my hope, of effecting that whereunto I now employ your
selves) does but increase my sorrow and grief.

CHAPTER. 5.
Certain semblances betwixt the Fox, and the Lion, Antichrist, and Mahomet,
in broaching their damnable doctrines, and leuying nations to their laws.

FOr as much as the covert enemies against the Church, do most of all deceive
simple people, by shrowding their deformities under the mantle of devotion, I
have thought it pertinent to set down these semblances following, betwixt the
Pope and Mahomet, the which thoroughly pondered of every Christian man, are
sufficient to bring him to a full detestation of the Romish religion.

This Mahomet was an Arabian soldier, and took wages of the Emperor
Heraclius, to serve him in his wars. In a mutiny he was chosen to be a
commander of a rebellious host, so base a vassal was he, that the people of
Mecha who worship him at this day, condemned him to death for his murders and
robberies. Mahomets confession of himself.
Yea he confesses himself what he was, namely an Idolater, an adulterer,
given to leacherie, subject to women, in such manner as it is a shame to
report. This is that prophet without prophesying, The first semblance in their
manners.
that lawmaker without miracles, that irreligious former of religion, yt man
without God, which has by his ignorance choked the truth, and by his violence
enforced falsehood. That many of ye Popes have bin as desperate and damnable
varlets as ever was Mahomet, Some Popes as very varlets as ever was Mahomet.
the legends written by their own secretaries do bear witness. Amongst
whom, that monster Boniface the eight carries the bell: of whom themselves give
testimony, that he entered like a Fox, ruled like a Lion, and died like a
dog. Whosoever lists to rake in the dounghil of Popes, shall find some of
them to be stark Atheistes, as Paul the third, some blasphemers and
sodomitical knaves as Julius ye third, some whoremasters as John the 12. who
abused his fathers concubines, some necromancers as Syluester, who was made
Pope, auxilio diaboli, by the aid of the devil. Yea so holy are these
unerring fathers, that one being demanded, why in their suffrages they prayed
not for Cardinals and Bishops? that, says he, is to be understood, vbi oramus
pro schismaticis and haereticis, where we pray for schismatickes and heretics.

The means whereby Mahomet deceived the world, were as follows. This new
Captain many could not abide; his manners were so monstrous: besides, he was
vexed with the falling sickness; therefore to redeem himself from this
contempt, pretended a divinity in his doings, faining himself to confer
with God, and so to be ravished out of himself: and that he was no more a
prince elected through favor of soldiers, but a messenger of the Almighty.
Having laid this foundation politickely, he begins to make a mingle-mangle
of all religions: For to allure the Jews, he exalted Moses, and retained
circumcision; not to estraunge the Christians, he confessed Christ to be the
spirit, word and power of God; to please the Nestorians, he said that Christ
was not very God, nor the son of God, but that he had indeed the soul of
God.

The Fox lays a foundation for his absurdities and blasphemies, The second
semblance in the ground plot of enlarging theit kingdoms.
much like that of the Lion: for as Mahomet coosened the world, in making it
believe that he entered communication with God, when he fell into his fit of
the falling sickness: so the Pope whilst he makes thousands believe that he
is Gods vicar, as the other made his believe that he was, and is Gods
messenger, and that he cannot err in giving sentence, though he may slip as a
private person, poisoneth the Church with pestilent opinions, and draws whole
cart-lodes of souls after him into hell fire. The groundworke once laid, that
the Pope cannot err: then like to Mahomet begins he to make an hotch-potch
of heresies, as to worship Christ and other saints, with the Carpocratians; to
worship the virgin Marie, with the Collyridians; to paint God like an old man,
with the Anthropomorphits; to hold freewil, and a possibility to fulfill the
commandments, with the Pelagians; to restrain meats to days and times, with
the Montanistes, and Manichees; to condemn marriage with the Tatians and
Cataphrygians; and in many pilgrimages, prayer to the dead, Justification by
works, to show himself a right Mahometane.

The third semblance is in the likelihood of their blasphemies against Christ,
The third semblance in broaching their blasph^mies.
for Mahomet fearing I say, least that he should alienate the Christians,
confessed Christ to be the spirit, word and power of God, but not very God,
nor the son of God, and himself to be the servant of Christ: but yet so,
that in the end he prefers himself before him, and makes himself the last
refuge, for mankind to fly unto.

The Pope denies not the person of the great son of God, for then should he
not be Antichrist; but yet if you mark well how he degradeth him of his
dignities, you shall see that Christ is much alike beholden to them both, and
that every one may understand what his flatterers give him, and what he
chalengeth. Let us hear what is written. Christopher Marcellus said to the
Pope, and it pleased him well, Tues alter Deus in terris: Thou art an other god
upon earth. Again, it is written of him, Dominus Deus noster Papa, Our Lord
God the Pope. In the proheme of the Clementines fol. 3. Papa, id est,
admirabilis, nec Deus nec homo, quasi neuter es inter vtrumque. The Pope is so
named, because he is wonderful, thou art neither God nor man, but as it were a
neuter betwixt both. Again, Excepto peccato omnia potest quae Deus, except sin
he can do all that God can do. He can make holy that which is unholy, pardon
sins, justify the wicked, dispense against the old and new Testament. Again,
Omnis potestas data est mihi in terra: All power is given to me in earth. Now I
report me to all them, whose judgment is not quite perverted, whether Mahomet
ever did or could speak more blasphemously against the honor of God or Jesus
Christ, than these devilish Doctors.

But we must remember here that as Mahomet having renounced the person of the
son of God, yet calls himself his servant: So the Pope claiming supreme
jurisdiction in all causes, and throughout all countries, yet vaileth bonnet,
and stoopeth his style, calling himself seruum seruorum Dei. Of whose
shameless hypocrisy or dissembled humility, this Distich has been framed
worthy remembrance, Roma tibi quondam suberant Domini Dominorum:
Seruorum serui hunc tibi sunt Domini.
Time was o Rome when Lord of Lords,
Did yield thee fealtee:
Time's past and servants servants now
Thy Lords, and masters be.
The fourth semblance is in their laws.


For Mahomet in his Alcoran commands his followers to kill the infidel, The
fourth semblance in the likelihood of their laws.
to avenge themselves, and to take no wrong; and tells them that whosoever
kills his enemy, shall have the greater share in paradise: he permits the
having of many wives, and diuorcement for trifling causes: by which damnable
ways he has enlarged his kingdom by his successors, and partly by fraud,
partly by force has brought a great part of the world under his tyrannical
subjection.

Now see whether the Fox and the Lion agree not as well as two heads under one
hood. For as Mahomet commands to kill, and promises paradise to them that kill
most; so the Pope gives authority and power to kill the true Christians, and
promises immortality to them that murder their natural princes.

Secondly, as Mahomet commands his to avenge themselves: so the Popes
doctrine is not far short of it, when he teaches it to be the counsel of
Christ not his commandment, to love our enemies.

Thirdly, as that damned wretch allows the having of many wives, and
diuorcement for trifling causes: so the Pope although he admit not Polygamie,
yet simple fornication with him is no deadly sin. He erecteth stews and
brothell houses: yea the sin of Sodom has been allowed by some of these
maiden fathers, Joan. Rauisius Textor in his book called officina.
and gelded bishops, as by Sixtus the fourth, who also gave license to all the
generation of the Cardinal of Saint Lucie, (who was his huntsman) to use this
sodomiticall filthiness in the three hot months of the year, namely, June,
July, and August. What should I tell you, that Johannes de Casa an
Arch-prelate, and grand-captaine, writ a book in commendation of it? Of
Catholic
O shameless harlot to magnify that in writing, the only thought whereof,
ought to wound the heart with horror!

Thirdly, as Mahomet permitted diuorcement for trifling causes: so is it a
clear case yt the Pope in this point has also contradicted the doctrine of
Christ.

Lastly, as he promises paradise to the vilest creatures; so the Pope grants
his pardons de paenite^tijs iniungendis, that is, to a man before he sin; and
what is this but with Mahomet to open heaven to the basest villains in the
world?

The which intolerable beastlines of them, God has raised up diverse of their
own country to displaie.

Venalia nobis
Templa, altaria, sacra, Coronae,
Ignes, thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deusque.
Thus englished: Wares of all sort,
are here to be sold,
Buy what you will
for money down told;
Churches, priests, offerings,
altars, and crown,
We pass for quick sale,
all cities and towns,
Fire, frankencense,
dirges and pardons from pain,
Hell, Heaven, God,
the Devil, we give all for gain.
Fontana di dolor albergo d'ira,
Schola d'errori etempio d'heresia.


That is to say.

A gulf of grief,
a rock of furious rage,
And take it in brief,
a school or common cage
Of errors most strange,
fair Rome to look upon.
But mark well the change
now beastly Babylon.
O dungeon most deep
of fraud, deceit and guile.
O cage fit to keep
hot hate and vengeance vile.
Where vices prevail,
and virtue lies stark dead;
Where sin with full sail,
all states has long misled.
O whirpoole of hell,
o foul and stinking Iakes!
Such as in thee dwell,
all goodness quite forsakes.
A rare and strange world wonder
thou will of all be thought,
If Satan keep thee under,
and Christ set thee at naught.
O nest of deulish treason,
from whence all vices issue!
O enemy to reason,
and fatal foe to virtue!
O drudge to drowsy drunkenness,
and surfeiting excess!
O shroud of shifters shameless,
as whores and such like guess.
I will knit it up with this pretty Pasquil.

Roma quid est? amor est. Qualis? praeposterus. vnde hoc? Roma mares, noli
dicere, plura scio. The first semblance is in cloaking their falsehood, The
first semblance in cunning cloaking of their knaueries.
for Mahomet notwithstanding his impiety, and blasphemies, says that his
doctrine is answerable to the old and new testament; but yet so, that no man
examine his laws upon pain of death: as if one paying money, should charge
the receiver never to look upon it in the daylight; and I beseech you, who
would not suspect such pay? even so deals the Pope, for they count it
heresy for the vulgar people, to read the scriptures in a known language:
and as for them unto whom they must refer themselves, they have scarce seen
the couerings of the books, for the greatest part of them. In deed there be
some wallet brethren, who are still chattering, until their chappes be made
up: but as for the scriptures, they either are buried, or else yelled, howled,
censed, adored, clouted, and patched up in a strange language, and upon some
solemn feast day, sophisticated; provided that their laytie, neither suspect,
nor sifit them, but that they have a good meaning, and refer themselves to
their articles.

The sixth semblance is in the likelihood of their bulwarks, for the fence of
their kingdoms. Mahomet commands first, The sixth semblance in making like
fences for their falsehoode.
to kill them which speak against his Alcoran. Secondly, he forbids to
confer with a contrary sect. Thirdly, that no credit be given to any of a
contrary religion. In like sort the Pope murders them that contradict his own
constitutions. Secondly, he forbids his catholics to confer with the
protestants. Thirdly, he has buried the scriptures, least their light should
discover his darkness: and least the common people should epsy his Iugling, he
commands them not to meddle with the word of God. There needs no more to make
men grow suspicious of the popish religion, then these things well weighed.

CHAPTER. 6.
Of sundry sorts of Foxes that are chiefly troublesome to the Church of
England.

FOr the better avoiding of these enemies so pestilent and pernicious, it is
further to be considered, yt sundry sorts of them are crept into the Church, to
supplant and undermine it: for some are heretics, either denying the person of
the great son of God, or degrading him from his offices, and infecting his
word with a million of errors, of whom has been entreated before, and more
shall be spoken hereafter. Others are schismatikes, who without cause depart
away from the communion of the Church: others are hypocrites, or counterfeit
christians, reformed in name, but more than deformed indeed, who by their
scandalous manners, and wicked examples, waste and destroy the vines,
especially the young ones. Which sort of Foxes are otherwise called scabd
sheep, and are compared to leaven which sowreth the whole lump, of which the
Apostle gives us a rule, in the person of the incestuous sinner, that we
should not company together: If any that is called a brother be a fornicatour,
1 Cor. 5.11. Heretical Foxes recusant papists.
or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railour, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such an one eat not.

Of Foxes infected with heresy, which do especially disturb the church of
England, there be two sorts; the one called recusants, because they have
forsaken our fellowship; the other churchhaunts, who with false hearts frequent
our assemblies, temporizing for fear of a fine, or further penalty. The first
sort plead Baals cause with open mouth, despise the Lords temple in Jerusalem,
post from Dan to Bethel to please Jeroboam, hate our congregations, and count
it damnable to tread in our assemblies. If these Foxes were as sharply
punished, as they are easily discovered, we should not have so many Masses,
neither so many go to Mass; and yet Mass rated at so round a reckning. I
need not stand to mark out these malapart merchaunts, their practice betraies
the^, they show outwardly how they are affected inwardly; old doting dames, and
young minions, old foolish fathers, and young boys, that cannot tell why they
were borne, speak boldly for Popery in defiance of the Gospel, refuse the
Church, and check the reprouer, make a mock of the ministry, and scorn
true religion; and yet have peace and prosperity. If a prince be misused,
death is thought too small a punishment for the offender; if a man be so wicked
as to procure an insurrection, or raise a rebellion, he must loose his head for
it, and good reason: But whereas God has sovereign dominion over all, a worm
of the earth shall set himself against him, deface his majesty, rob him of
his honor, blaspheme his blessed name, yet escapes without severity of
punishment, and that is no good religion. These are those wretched people that
have sold themselves to be vassals of iniquity, and have received the stamp
of the beast in their foreheads, that are ready to lie in wait for the Lords
anointed, and have cursed David to his face. These are the sons of those
bloody fathers, that have murdered the prophets. These are the posterity of
Amelech, unworthy to live amongst Israel, which have served Baal Hamon, and
have run unto the golden calves of Dan and Bethel. These are the relikes of
Iebus, and the remnants of the Hittites, that have bin pricks and thorns in
the sides of righteous men, and will be knives to our throats if that might
come which their hearts faint in waiting for: but the same God that has
hitherto preserved us, detected their dissembled zeal, and sheathed their
sword in their own intrals, shall still continue our most gracious
protector, unless the ouerflowing streams of our sins stop the course of
his mercies, and eclipse the brightness of his favor, which hitherto has
shined upon us. Church papists.


There is an other sort of Foxes in nature, not much different from the
former, but yet not so easily described, neither are they oftentimes reputed
as they are.

A token sent from the old Fox to his young cubs.
It is not many years ago, since there came a token from the old gray Fox to
the cubs of his kind; wherein was printed the five wounds of Christ, with this
poesy, fili da mihi cor tuum, that is, son give me thy heart: whereby it
appears that either Rainard was so well disposed as to maintain
dissimulation, or else his brood were in a wrong box, for they took his
emblem in no other meaning. Therefore have they learned to temporize, and with
double hearts to halt on both sides, having one for God, and another for Baal;
one for the prince, Temporizing papists described.
and an other for the Pope; one for the Mass, and another for the communion.
The manner of these for the most part is to peep into the Church once in a
month, but preaching their queasie stomakes cannot away with, especially if
Idolatry and papistrie be discovered. I cannot more fitly compare these, than
to cunning watermen, who look one way, when they take their journey an other:
or to Cacus that notorions robber, of whom it is recorded, that he was wont to
drag beasts backward into his Cave by their tails, to the intent that by
contrary tracke of their feet, he might be freed from the suspicion of
felony: even so the popular demeanor of these hollow minded votaries, looks
one way, when their secret plots and practices tend an other; and when they
come to the Church, they do but drag backward with Cacus, hiding their hollow
hearts under show of conformity: yea howsoever these deep dissemblers in
outward appearance, show mild and gentle, promising all loyalty to their
prince, agreement to government, and consent to religion; yet trust them not,
for a Fox will show himself a Fox, when time serves his turn.

The poets wittily feign, that when Jupiter had made man, A poetical fiction
fitly applied.
being delited with such a cunning piece of workmanship, he demanded of Momus
finde-fault, what he could spy, in so fine a feature and curious frame, out of
square and worthy just reproof: Momus commended the proportion, and comely
disposition of the lineaments; but one thing (says he) I like not well, that
thou have forgotten to place a window in his breast, through which we might
behold whether his heart and his tongue did accord. If a window were framed in
the breasts of these discontented catholics, that her majesty and the
state-guiding counsel, and all the true friends of this kingdom might know
their secret intentions; or if their consciences were as deeply sounded, as
they may be justly doubted: then I know full well that many false hearts would
be found lurking under painted hoodes, and cakes of foul cancred malice, under
meal mouthed protestations; neither would it be troublesome to find out a
two-legged Fox; or if the coals of long festered choler were of that
condition, as that being heaped together in their malicious minds, they could
blister their tongues, or scald their lips, we should need no further search
to find out a Roman catholic. Howbeit although they have no windows in
their breasts, wherethrough we may see into every corner of their consciences,
how they pack and shuffle now; and (as it is greatly to be feared) mean to
cut also if Popery should get the upper hand; yea although they shroud their
wicked devises with a veil of obscurity, and contriue their cruel crafts in
tenebris: yet if that foresight and circumspection be had, which the subtlety
of such househould enemies requires, I doubt not but it shall be easy to epsy
the Woolfe, though he wander in sheep clothing, by the manner of his howling;
and the Ass, though he iet in the Lions skin, by the length of his ears.

Before I proceed further, A linsie woolsie religion.
I will here admonish that kind of our gospellers that are of a linsie woolsie
religion, common pedlars and patchers of Christ his coat, which had no seame
in deed: Who because they are better affected to the state then the former, I
would be loath to term them Foxes; and yet having no warrant for a
parti-colored profession, I may not honor them with the title of sound
Christians: you shall know them by these colors. They hold it a matter of
charity to say God have mercy on the souls of the dead: and show them their
error; then they reply, what shall we bid the devil go with them? Their aue
maria sticks close betwixt their teeth, though their Pater Noster was forgot
many years ago. They cannot be well persuaded of children dieng without
Baptism: therefore they cry out for headlong have to ye ministratio^ of this
sacrament. They will not believe that it is a sinful and superstitious thing,
to swear by the Saints, and every other creature; and when they are told that
it is a robbing God of his honor, they fall a woundering at the very first
principles of religion. Thus the Serpent gets his ground by creeping, and where
Satan cannot get an ell, he will take an ynch; hoping by little inches of
superstition, in the end, to make up an ell of Idolatry: and thus by little
and little, Popery has stolen into the Church. Those that are thus tainted, I
exhort in the fear of God to read the scriptures, and to hear his word, the
knowledge whereof, is able to purge them from these filthy dregs of the
Babilonish cup.

Having spoken of Foxes heretical, Foxes schismatic.
who most of all endaunger the saftie of the Church: it follows that we
entreat of Foxes schismatic, which of late years have peeped out of their
den, to the disturbance of our peace. These are they whom in ancient time
they called Catharists, as also the Donatist Browinsts, Brownistes.
we commonly call them: imagining a perfect beauty of a Church in this world,
and seuering themselves from all others, as if in their particular conuenticles
this perfection were to be found; in whom behold a two fould error. First, in
that from the Churches blemish, by indirect consequence, they conclude her
nullitie. Two fold error.
This is a gross absurdity. Secondly, in that these mote catchers see a mote
in the eye of an other, and will not see the beam in their own eyes; this is
blind singularity. For if they speak of manners, they should know that how
corrupt so ever they are, either in the pastor, or in the sheep, they may not
enforce this outrageous conclusion, that where such corruptions are found,
there is a nullitie of the Church, so long I say as the life of the Church is,
that is, so long as the truth is there taught. Christ his truth the life of the
church. Math. 23.2.
Of this the Lord himself is witness, speaking to the Scribes and Pharisees, so
long as they sit in the chair of Moses, that is to say, so long as they teach
the doctrine of Moses, do you (says he) that which they say, but do not that
which they do: although there be no cause, but that a man may withdraw
himself from such infectious companions: as Paul admonishes, 1. Cor. 5.11.
Psalm. 17.4. Psalm. 1.1.
as David shows by his own practice, and warns us to do the like.

Again, if they speak of imperfection of doctrine, many circumstances are to
be considered before we deprive any assembly, great or small, of the name of
a Church. In the Church of Corinth, not only touching manners, the discipline
of the Church was loosly observed; 1. Cor. 15.17.
sincerity of preaching, by an affected kind of babbling was much profaned:
but also a pro and con houlden, touching the resurrection of the flesh, an
article of such weight, that withouten it the preaching of the word should be
in vain; and yet Corinth houlds the name of a Church. The Galathians were most
of them turned aside by the false Apostles from free justification, which is
the principal ground-plat of the christian Church; and yet notwithstanding,
Saint Paul gives them the name of a Church. The like is to be seen by that
which the Apostle writes to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Jude.
also by the second of Saint Peter, and that of Saint Jude, that there were
homebred enemies, and false Disciples in the bosom of the Church; which for
all this, neither lost the name, nor nature of true Churches. But the case is
otherwise in a body rotten in the noblest parts, as the synagogs of the Jews,
which stubbornly resisted the preaching of the Apostle; from which for this
cause he disioyned the Church of Ephesus: or as that sinful assembly, that
sits upon the seven hills, Acts. 19.9. From what Church we ought to separate
our selves.
and opposes it self directly against the kingdom of Christ, whose name with
a desperate impudency, it boroweth; for which cause we have it in just
execration, following the doctrine of the Apostle. But I need not to pursue
these schismatikes, the name of almighty God be magnified, this land is well
washed from them. O Lord, show mercy still to this Church, and send us also a
strong purging pill for Popery and superstition: Then shall we see Jerusalem
in prosperity, and the hearts of thy faithful servants shall be replenished
with gladness.

Foxes called scabd sheep.
The last sort of Foxes are those which before I called scabd sheep, Saint Paul
prophecieth of these, that in the last days should come perilous times, 2.
Tim. 3.1.2.3
men should be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of
them which are good, traitors, headie, hy minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but have denied the power
thereof: these are they which give the Lord Jesus after a sort the courtesy of
Judas. Math. 26.
These are like to Simon the sorcerer, who walked with Phillip like an Apostle,
Act. 8.
but wrought with money, like a wordling: like to Achabs wife, who went most
demurely when the would speak with the Prophets. Why hypocrites are well
likened to Foxes.
And surely as in other respects, so in this these pargetted professors of
the gospel are rightly called Foxes: because as the Fox his skin is more
worth then his carcass; so their skins, that is, their outward profession,
is more worth than their conuersations. Truth it is, these after a sort have
cast off the Pope with his superstitions, The Idolatry of gospelling
hypocrites.
but they have not put upon them Jesus Christ with his righteousness. They have
renounced the Idols of wood and stone, but harbor Idols as dangerous in their
hearts, covetousness, theft, cruelty, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness and
such like goddesses. There is a mighty generation of these kind of Foxes in
this land, and these late years of scarcity and dearth has laid open the
hearts of many of them, These dear years have laid open many deceitful hearts.
who contrary to their holy professions, and to the power of religion, have
taken their advantage of the time, and made a pray of the poor without all
mercy, not caring to pass away their birthrights for Esaus soup, nor to sell
paradise for a licorous morsel. But what should I need to broach the
hypocrisy of this people, since they themselves without common care of their
holy callings, to the great shame of themselves, have cried at the market
cross? But ye Gourmandisers, Grubbers and grinders of the poor, ye crafty
priers into the needy man's extremity, to make your gain of his pain, and
your commodity of his misery, you cunning contriuers for private profit, ye
artificial forgers of dearth and famine, deuourers of men's quick and live
flesh; how long will you presume to come into Gods house, as if you were of it?
Ye false fingerers, sellers with false sleights, false measures and false
weights, terrigenae fratres, adorers of your God Ma^mon, when will you shake off
the cloak of hypocrisy? Ye tiplers and tauern hunters, ye epicurean
companions, and beastly belli-gods, ye quarrel broachers, and action
threatners; ye bellows of hell fire, which live by setting others on pleading,
which beat your brains to lengthe^ the perchment as long as you can; how long
shall the Lord suffer you to appear in his house, in which there is nothing
but peace and equity? Ye leasemongers and rent-rackers, ye enclosers and
make-beggars, never well at ease until ye have taken possession of Naboth his
vineyard; ye towne-batterers, ioyners of house to house, and land to land,
until there be no place for the poor, when will you leave to come to Sermons
for a show, and to make religion a cloak for such horrible impiety? You are
bastard children, and not the true generation of Jacob: Therefore presume not to
say that you are the sons of Abraham: for if you thus walk, the devil is
your father. It is you that have opened the mouths of our enemies, whose blind
charity lays so hard to your lame faith: you have caused the gospel to be
ill spoken of, and the name of our God to be blasphemed; the Lord reform your
hearts, and grant you greater mercy. On the other side, you that by the grace
of God are not guilty of this great contempt, be diligent, earnest, true, and
faithful in your duties toward Almighty God, who in the day appointed, shall
set you with his Angels for ever to praise him, and shall cast the polluted and
unclean out of his Church. This great God, and righteous judge save us from
the temptations of Satan, that we may cleave unto him in faith and truth. Amen.

CHAPTER. 7.
The vnkenelling of the Fox, and the duty of the terriers.

Having before declared the conditions and manners of these Foxes which destroy
the vines: it follows next in order that we speak something concerning the
vnkenelling of these Romish Foxes, which of all other are most dangerous to
the state, both of Church and Commonwealth. The which we shall perform the
better if we still compare a Fox with a Fox. Now first of all it is well
known to Foxe-hunters, that the Fox holds the strongest couerts, that he
flies from the field as a beast which trusts not in the swiftnes of his
legs, Properties of a Fox when he is in chase.
nor the strength of his body, that he wheeleth about the thickets, and though
he find none other help but a bush, he will fly to it for his safeguard: so it
is with this kind of cattle for being hunted, they run abroad here and
there, but especially fly from the fields into the woods, Whither the
two-legged Foxes fly being hunted.
enquiring where there is one that makes no conscience of his ministry, that
will be content for handfuls of barley, and morsels of bread, for tyth cocks,
and tyth sheaues to cloak a Catholics knauerie; enquiring also where there
is an untaught people, fit for all religions, and all princes reigns, and
consequently apt to swallow a bait of poisoned persuasion; that is a covert for
a Catholic, thither flock the Foxes, and feed without fear.

Again, another property of the Fox is, How the Foxes make their kenels.
to make his den in the ground that is hard to dig, as in galt, clay, or such
like earth, the passage into his earth being straight, and going very far in
before it come to his couch, having also many holes through which to vnearth
himself: Even so it is with this kind, they make their burrowes strong, they
have so many straight passages, so many muses, so many winding corners, so many
turnings, so many interturnings, and starting holes, that it is a matter full
of difficulty to find the couch of a Catholic, Hard to vnkenell a
Foxe-priest.
especially of a Priest or Jesuit: In so much as I may justly say of them, as
Caesar said of the Scythians, difficilius est inuenire, quam superare, It is
harder to find them than to foil them. For experience has taught us, that
when it has been a matter undoubted that a Fox priest has been ready to
say mass, and therefore his den has been compassed, the terriers have
winded him, and all his pretty trinkets have been found prepared for so great a
piece of work: yet in the end the Fox would not be found. Perhaps he serves
the hunters now and then, as the fish called the Cuttle serves the fisherman,
which when she is like to be taken casts forth a slimie humor like unto ynke,
and so darkning the upper part of the water, and dazeling the fishermans eyes,
marres his aim, and escapes the danger. Which since it is so, the greater
the care ought to be, that there be such godly wisdom and cunning in hunting
them, such toiles, such nets as are fit for such service, that there be such
ministers as are able to handle the sword of gods word with both, hands, that
is to say, be able to confirm the established, Great need of good Foxe-hunters.
to reclaim ye back-sliders, to confute the adversary, and if the will of God
be, to transform the Foxes into sheep; such magistrates as have a zeal to
fence and hedge in the vineyard of the Lord of hosts, from the subtle
invasions and underminings of these noisome vermin; such toils as are able to
hold both the great and little Foxes. For where blind guides are placed in the
watch tower, and the basest lives are in the highest rooms, there Foxes
indaunger the flock, and many times find more favor then stands with the
preservation of the sheep, or safe continuing state of the best affected
subjects.

Pursiuants Parators.
In this place fit occasion is offered to speak (neither may I pass it over
with silence) of a couple of terriers appointed for the hunting and vnkenelling
of these Foxes, whose true and hot hunting of them, as it is rightly to be
commended where it is to be found: so the contrary does breed great corruption
in the Church, and is much to be lamented.

For the better redressing of these deformities which are too manifest, and
bringing of these terriers into good hu^ting: it would be carefully respected
of them that have power to reform it, that they buy not their places: for this
is an approved truth, that they will sell dear in the retaile, which they
bought in the gross: that is, will suck profit out of the vilest things, and
cut men's garments off by the skirts for desire of gain: and hereby have rushed
horrible inco^ueniences both into church and commonwealth.

Again, the Fox has many wiles whereby to make these Foxe-hounds at a fault,
or to hunt counter; and especially he has a mixture made of cogworth broad
way, Vox populi.
and penimate together with a few ratle flowers called goold mary's, or
mary-goolds, which being steeped in a little devils milk, and cast into their
eyes makes them stark blind, and stops their sents: and hence it comes to
pass that popery bears such swindge, because papists can pay well, and that
adultery and fornication escape without punishment, because wantons have money.
I say no more, let this be a watchword to them whom it especially concerns

CHAPTER. 8.
The principal reasons why God suffers homebred enemies to be in the bosom
of his Church, fit to be considered of such as are not thoroughly persuaded in
this point.

IF the Christian Church be impugned by open enemies, as Jews, Turks,
Tartarians, and such as have openly renounced the person of the great son of
God, and are cut off as rotten members, men not greatly regard it: But when
such as are bred and nourished in the bosom of the Church, seek to undermine
and supplant it; those household conflicts and homebred battles are they
which trouble many in these days. Household conflictes trouble many weak
Christians.
O say they, here is so much arguing and disputing, such divisions and
diversities of opinions, that a man knows not which way to turn himself. To
help such, as without any good cause are thus put to a gaze: They must first
understand that it is the will of God that his Church shall not be free from
these inward offenses; and secondarily, know the principal reasons why he will
have it so.

Although our God, as he is the God of order and not of confusion, commends
and delivers unto us his discipline; yet notwithstanding he suffers the
hypocrites for a time to have their being amongst the faithful, until the
full restoring and reforming of his kingdom in the last day. The Church shall
not be free from offenses. Math. 13.
Which thing is taught by yt of our Lord Jesus Christ, where he resembles the
kingdom of heaven to a net cast into the sea, and gathering all kind of
fishes, etc. to a field, wherein whilst the good husbandman sows his wheat,
the envious came and scattered his tears. The Apostles also have foretold the
same, that the Church of God shall be pestered with pestilent enemies, and yt
they shall come with an efficacy of error. This know (says saint Paul) that
in the latter days some shall depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
and shall give heed unto spirits of error and doctrines of devils, which
speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned off with a
hot iron, etc. But there were false prophets, says Saint Peter, 2. Pet.
2.1.2.3.
also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you: Which
privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, that has
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. The mystery of
iniquity began to work in the Apostles time. 1. John. 4.1.2.
Thus the mystery of iniquity began to work in the Apostles times, as
appears in Col. 2. and Galath. 1. Therefore Saint John exhorts not to
believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: for many
false Prophets are gone out into the world. And why should this trouble you so
much? Do you not see that the cockle and the corn grow both in one field, the
lilly and the thorn both on one ground, the blossom and the blast both on
one tree, the flower and the weed both in one garden, the sheep and the goats
do feed both in one pasture? know you not, that in one arc were beasts clean
and unclean, and that the Apostle says, that in one house be vessels of
honor, and vessels of dishonor? then wonder not to see the good, and the bad
mingled together; but consider the reasons, give God the glory, and take heed
to thy faith.

There be two principal reasons, why the Lord suffers these household enemies
to be in the midst of his vineyard, the first is for the probation and trial of
his servants, whether they be unfeignedly coupled unto him, in the spiritual
bond of faith and of love. Deuteronomy. 13.
If there arise amongst you (says Moses) a Prophet, or etc. Thou shall not
harke^ unto ye words of that Prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams. For the
Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love ye Lord your God with all
your heart and with all your soul. And indeed it is necassarie that we be kept
in continual exercise of faith and prayer, of patience, and constancy: and
therefore is it said, that the Lord would not cast out before his people of
Israel any of the nations which Joshua left when he died, that through them he
might prove Israel whether they would keep his ways to walk therein or no?
And to this effect Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
that there must be heresies that they which are approved might be known. 1.
Corin. 11.
Where also that of Augustine is worthy remembrance, let us use heretics
(says he) not to that end to approve their errors, but that by defending the
Catholics doctrine against their deceits, we may be more watchful and wary:
because it is most truly written, there must be heresies, that ye tried and
approved may be manifested or discovered from the holow hearts amongst you. Let
us use this benefit of Gods providence: for heretics are made of such as would
err or be naught, though they were in the Church: but being out, they profit us
exceedingly, not by teaching the truth which they know not, but by stirring up
the carnal in the Church, to seek truth, and the spiritual to clear the
truth. Thus then it is apparent, that both the weaker and the stronger, the
carnal and the spiritual may profit by heresies and schisms which the Lord
suffers in his Church; the one by learning, the other by teaching: for they
shall try our faith, and our love, whether we be counterfeits, and
dissemblers; whether we will be suddenly wind-shaken; whether we will forsake
the truth, and follow falsehood; or whether faith be grounded in our hearts or
no? For like as in the time of Moses, God suffered great magitians to be in
Egypt, that he might make his own power more evident in Moses: so he
suffers heretics, as sorcerers or enchanters, to be in the Church, that the
power of prayer, of faith, of love, of zeal, might be more apparent. A crab
oftentimes carries the coat of an apple, and is not well known but by the
taste; copper has the color of gold, and is not so well tried as by the
touch: an hypocrite may lurcke under the shadow of a believer, and is not
thoroughly manifested until his faith be tried; but ye belief of Gods children
is like unto the glaze-worme which glittereth most brightly in the darkest
night, or like ye lamp that gives most light in the dark. But some will say,
alas we are no clearkes, and in these divisions and disputings, here is every
one alleging scripture for himself, what shall we do, or what course shall
we take that are unlearned? For ye better helping of you in this hazard, first
look whether every one alleges scripture or no? for that goes for
scripture many times, with the Catholics, which is no more to be found in the
book of the Bible the^ Paradise in hell. Secondly, know them to be false
teachers, which for confirmation of doctrine of faith allege any other
testimonies, over and besides the scriptures: for man's writings are no further
to be credited, then they bring warrant from the word of God, which contains
the whole counsel of God touching our salvation. If they reply, that all is
not written which the Apostles taught, answer them with that which is said by
the Apostle, who requires nothing besides the scriptures to make the man of
God complete: then compare their unwritten traditions with Gods written truth,
the light will straight discover their darkness. Thirdly, if the interpretations
be repugnant, so as one or more of them must needs be erroneous; then confer
scripture with scripture, and expound, scripture by scripture, as Christ
teaches; and lastly, refer the whole unto the correspondency of the articles
of faith, the brief abridgments of christian religion: and then if thou
bring with thee a teachable mind, and a desire to learn in humility, thou
shall not err, but find Christ in his own home, that is, in his word.

The second reason why the Lord suffers his Church to be troubled with
deceitful companions, is his proportionable justice against the unbelievers:
And that Saint Paul means when he says, that when men have no mind to obey
God and his truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
he sends them false prophets even with an efficacy and speedines of
error. The beguiling of Achab shows this evidently. Who is it, says God,
that shall deceive Achab? as if he should say, I see that he will needs be
drawn unto the bottom of hell; for the wretch was defiled with his Idols, had
perverted Gods service, was full of all stubbornnes, 2. King. 22.2.
and malice against the prophets, would receive no admonition. Therefore God
seeing him a man forlorn, sends a lying spirit to beguile him. But here
mark one thing especially comfortable to Gods children, that when God had
given Satan commission to execute his vengeance upon the unbelievers, he not
only gives him leave to punish them with loss of goods, sickness of body,
etc. but gives power to lead them into error, utterly to deceive them and to
carry them away with lies. This is apparent in the history of the trial of
Job where Satan his first commission is to touch his goods, and the second, to
touch his body: but he may not meddle with his soul. Thus you see, it stands
both with the manifestation both of the mercy and justice of God, to send
deceitful workmen into his Church.

CHAPTER. 9.
Eight reasons unanswerable, proving all perfect papists rotten-hearted
subjects to all true christian princes.

THere is a kind of people, who feign would that David should always sing of
mercy, that as it may seem by excessive clemency, our Sovereign might
nourish a serpent in her own bosom. Wherefore, although this matter has been
handled heretofore of such learned and godly men, as tender the saftie of her
Majesty, and the flourishing state of her trusty and true hearted subjects;
yet since the argument fits this place so well, I have thought good to lend my
hand to my brethren, and to prove, that no perfect papists can be sound and
faithful subjects to their christian princes. And I say perfect papists,
because that every one that is blemished or holds any one error or article
of doctrine that the Pope holds, as perhaps purgatory, or prayer for the
dead, is in that article a papist. Yet I count not every one that thus is
taynted, within the compass of false heartednes to the realm, or under the
title of traitorous papists: for many, otherwise sound subjects, are not
purged from all infections, wherewith the whorish Church has poisoned them:
wherefore the co^sequent reasons must be understood of perfect papists, whose
hearts since they be Italianated, I thus frame my first reason to prove them
rotten hearted subjects.

The first reason, proving perfect papists traitorous subjects to Christian
Princes.
ALl good subjects which obey for conscience, as every one ought to do, must
have their consciences enfomed by the word of God.

But perfect papists hate our assemblies, despise the preaching of the word,
which should direct their consciences both in duty toward God, and loyalty
toward their prince; and in stead thereof, entertain a strange worship.

Therefore perfect papists cannot be sound hearted subjects. I have heard wise
men say, that there is no knot of thieves so dangerous, as when there is a
whore in the company. There is none so arrant a whore in the world as the
strumpet of Babylon, Perfect papists the woorst knot of thieves and why.
who is an actual dealer in wicked and ungodly practices against all Kings and
kingdoms. Then whether hearts hating Gods truth, which should rightly inform
them, and carousing of this whorish cup, which does strangly enchaunt them, be
faithful to her princely person or peace of this realm, I commend it to the
judgment of all them that love our prosperity.

The second reason.
THey that believe the Pope to have the disposition of Gods sentence, Papists
believe the Popes sentence of excommunication against the Queen.
do also suppose that Queen Elizabeth is not lawful Queen of England,
because the Pope does not accept her so.

But our Romish catholics believe that the Pope has power to anathematize,
and to dispose the sentence of excommunication, and consequently hold that her
Majesty is not lawful Queen of England, because the Pope does not so accept
her. Therefore perfect papists are traitorously minded to the happy state of
England.

This reason would be deeply pondered, for since the old Fox has
excommunicated and cursed her royal person, and the young Foxes believe also
according to his distilled opinion into their minds, that he does this pro
suo iure; then this is the consequent, that all their kindness and courtesies,
all friendly countenances and conformities, all loyalty and allegiance, all
service and obedience, is but from hollow hearts extorted, and not in any true
love performed, either to the saftie of the Queens Majesty, or to the
fortifying of this land against foraine danger; because they carry no other
opinion of her and her loving people, than the Pope himself has published. In
good sooth this gear would make work for the hangeman, if it were thoroughly
sifted: for of necessity to this confession of traitorousnes must all be
driven, that mean to continue perfect papists.

The third reason.
THey that carry a countenance conformable to her Majesty's laws no longer
then it stands with the Popes pleasure, Papisty obedience but at the Popes
pleasure.
can be no true hearted subjects.

But perfect Papists obey her Majesty's laws no longer then it stands with the
liking of the Pope, as the Jesuit Heart sometimes confessed.

Therefore perfect Papists can be no good subjects.

Here let the true subjects understand, that ye Pope has powered an opinion
into his papists, Greater cause to fear then to trust them.
that Kings and princes, if he dispense with them, may break their faith and
promise: that nulla fides est seruanda cum haereticis, no faith is to be kept
with Gods friends and his foes; that Papists with liberal permission may
swear and vnsweare, if aduantageable opportunity do occur: which since that
they do believe to stand in his power to dispense withal, and that he is both
able to pardon them, and willing to reward them; yea that it is within his
reach not only to give them the kingdom of England, but the kingdom of
heaven also: then let them swear, their protestations are not worth the paring
of a rotten apple, their obedience is but at the Popes ad placitum: Whereupon
arises a good caveat, that we rather tie short then trust a two-legged Fox.

The fourth reason.
THey that receive, entertain, read and recommend such lying libels and
hart-stealing pamphlets, Papists read and recommend popish libels.
as whereby her Majesty's right is impeached, her regiment reviled, her title of
supremacy defaced, her faith defamed, christian religion nourished by her
called heretical, deuilish and damnable, and the professors thereof worse
then nullifidians and infidelious Atheists, can be no good subjects.

But this is the dealing of our perfect Papists.

Therefore the conclusion follows, that such can be no good subjects.

Many wicked and traitrous pamphlets have been scattered in this realm to
darken the glory of the Lords anointed, to weaken the good wills of her
highness loving subjects, to win worthless male-contented malicious wretches
treacherously to conspire with our sworn enemies, whereby to fortify the
Romish faction. These have and do want no favorers to scatter them in
corners, to send them to their lovers, to commend their substantialnes as
matters unanswerable, both such merchants as send them, and such brokers as
utter such Babilonish wares, are right worthy to pay their heart blood for
custom.

The fifth reason.
THey that receive pardons, Papists receive pardons to free them from loyalty.
absolutions and such like stuff to exempt, and free themselves from loyal
obedience, are but subjects in show, watching their times to work their own
wills.

But our absolute Roman catholics receive pardons and absolutions, to
acquit them from dutiful allegiance.

Therefore shake a perfect papist out of the masking weed of his pretended
conformity, and then shall you find that an heart devoutly affected to the
Romish religion, is as deeply infected with the venom of treason.

Gregory 13. Pius. 5. Sixtus. 5.
The dealings of the Popes is not unknown, of Gregory the 13. Pius 5. and
Sixtus 5. who laboring our subversion by Englands unnatural children, have
sent their pardons and absolutions to free them from subjection; a thing
abhorring from all religion, hated of the heathen, the age present loathes it,
and succeeding posterity shall be astonished to hear of such cruelties.

The sixth reason.
The Pope erecteth seminaries for the hatching of Foxe-priests, and catholics
receive them to nursing.
THey, for whose catholic good the Pope pretends the erecting of his
seminaries, and therefore receive from thence such subtle treacherous and
disloyal wretches, as infect them with poison, and persuade them to treason,
cannot be faithful and true hearted subjects.

But the Pope makes his catholics believe that he erecteth seminaries for
their good, and they also receive and entertain his Jesuits and Foxe-preists,
issuing out of those dens of Idolatry.

Therefore the conclusion follows, that such can be no good subjects.

Parsons, Campion, and Heart, Parsons. Campion.
with the rest, cast in the Popes mould and fitted for the service of the beast
that sits upon the seven hills, have wanted no entertainment in this land in
their times, although there were nothing more intended of them then this,
namely to set the subjects against their prince, and Englishmen against their
own country, as leave was given to Parsons and Campion by Gregory 13. 1580.
April 14. to interpret the Bull of Pius quintus.

The seventh reason.
THey that are weary of these days, Papists gape for a golden day.
and live inhope of another world, which in their ordinary byword they call
their golden day or year of Iubilee, can be no faithful subjects to her, by
whose gracious government these days are continued.

But the papists are weary of these days, and languish in looking for their
golden day, which almighty God send them in leaden haste.

Therefore papists can be no good subjects.

That the papists are weary of these days and times, wish the death of her
Majesty, and alteration of state and government; there needs no further
proof then their conspiracies, Believe them without further proof.
their treasons and secret attempts, their platformes and practices for
foreign invasion: whereby it is evident, that these are the days of their
grief and sorrow; and that they regard the saftie neither of prince nor
country, so they may return to the flesh pots of Egypt, and eat their fill
with peaceable freedom.

The eight reason.
THey that regard not into what subjection, slavery, shame and dishonor her
highenes, Papists regard no state, so that popery may prevail.
her kingdom and subjects be brought unto, so that their blind worship and
pageant of papistrie may be erected, can be no good subjects.

But perfect papists neither regard Majesty of the prince, nor dignity of the
nobles, nor gravity of age, nor difference of sex, nor excellency of
learning: so that popery may be set up in stead of the Gospel.

Therefore such can be no good subjects.

The desperate dealings and damnable practices of papists heretofore prove
plainly, Woeful experience.
that allegiance to their prince cannot keep them from treason; the duty of
love to their natural country cannot withdraw them from favoring rebellion
at home nor lincking with strangers abroad; that the duty of obedience of
children to parents, or of parents affection to children cannot keep them from
unnatural cruelty; that the duty of mutual love, and society betwixt the
husband and wife cannot remove them from monstrous immanitie; that the duty of
kind and natural pity cannot stay a papists hands from murdering feeble
sex, tender babes or reverent age: lastly, that the duty of familiarity in
youth, of friendship in grauer years, of continual society during all the
life passed, cannot stay a papists hands from sacrificing his dearest friends.
Nay, which is more, not only are they contented to yield their bracelets and
earerings to the framing of the golden calfe, as did Israel, nor to offer
their friends in sacrifice, as did that unnatural King of Moab in offering his
sons to assuage the ire of his angry Gods; but to make their own lives a
pray to their enemies, as did the Athenians, when they accorded by casting of
lots to give themselves to be devoured of that ghastly monster Minotaurus.

Wherefore since it is so clear a case, that the consciences of these
catholics are altogether Romish; that they hold the Popes excommunication
against our dread sovereign the Queens Majesty to be lawful; that they
yield their obedience no longer then durante beneplacito of the Pope; that they
receive and recommend such libels as deface our Church, abuse her highness
person, and all her loving subjects; that they receive pardons to exempt
themselves from dutiful obedience; that they receive and entertain the
enemies of this realm, Jesuits and seminary priests; that they look for a
golden day and long for an alteration; that they care not to conspire at home
with traitors, and to plot abroad with strangers, whereby to convey the
crown to a forrayner: since I say, this is so, then two conclusions do
follow, first that every perfect papist is a secret traitor to his prince and
country. And secondarily, that it is a safer way to trusse then to trust a
two-legged Fox. Our gracious God that has hitherto protected us, bless her
Majesty and her honorable privy counsel, that through their wisdoms, zeal
and courage Gods glory may be promoted, the undermining of these Foxes, which
destroy our vines, soundly sifted, and secret traitors sharply punished. Then
shall England less fear her ruin (which God forbid) by strangers force, when
vengeance deserved shall strongly sease on household foes; nay else may England
more suspect the weakening of her present state, by nourishing a viper in her
own bowels, then Spanish power or any else, who gnash their teeth at her peace
and welfare.

CHAPTER. 10.
Twelve reasons proving by divinity and true Christian policy, that Foxes
must be taken.

THe thing that our Catholics chiefly do aim at, is that her highness, and
her counsel may be deceived, by erronius pretense of policy, and color of
clemency, that they may lurk under the shadow, and be nourished as a Serpent
in the bosom. It is therefore heedfully to be respected, that the Church of
the devil be not maintained with indulgence, and multiplied with foolish
mercy; but that it be kept under with sharpnes of discipline and correction,
that it grow not to such rankenesse as to choke the true Church. Foolish mercy
may mar all, and clemency may be great cruelty, when it ouerfloweth to the
hazard of Gods Children. Where severity says, one goes into loosnes, their
edifying goes into destruction, custom goes into corruption, law into
contempt, mercy is laughed, and godliness goes into hypocrisy, execution of
laws against Gods enemies, and the enemies of this Church and Commonwealth, is
the mark that is leuelled at: and why should it not be hit, since divinity
and godly policy will have it so? Wherefore although this point has been no
doubt handled religiously and zealously of the learned both in preaching and in
writing: yet since it fitteth this place so well, I purpose to speak of it
briefly and distinctly, and prove that both divinity and Christian policy
require that sharp execution be used in punishing the enemies of the Church.

The first reason proving by divinity, that laws ought sharply to be
executed upon papists, and all idolatrous heretics.
God commands Foxes to be (...).
THat which the Lord commands must be don without mammering, staggering,
doubting or delay. But he commands Foxes to be taken, and execution of laws
to be done against them.

Therefore Christian Princes and Magistrates do but their duties in rooting
out such noisome vermin, as destroy the vines.

If there arise among you, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.1.2. Cantic. 2.16. Deuteronomy. 7.1.2. Galat.
5.12.
Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, which destroy the vines: when the Lord
shall have brought into the land whither thou go to possess it, etc. I
would (says the Apostle) they were cut off which trouble you.

The second Reason.
THat which the godly magistrates have done in defacing the Lords enemies, and
defilers of his worship, Presidents for Christian rulers.
that ought still to be performed of Christian rulers in the like cause.

But they have removed and destroyed the enemies of his truth, and peruerters
of his service, as their examples may be remembered.

Therefore Christian magistrates in the same cause ought to show ye same zeal.

When the golden Calfe was erected to Idolatry, Moses Moses.
willed them to arm their hands, and to sheath their swords in the intrals of
their nearest kinsmen, to make havoc of their lives; and he calls it a
sanctifying of their hands to the Lord. And how? What manner of holiness was
that? Truly even to kill the Idolaters, and to put the corrupters of religion
to death. And whom commanded he to do it? Even the Levites, even those which
ought to have been the mirrours of all pity and compassion; even the priests
which God had dedicated to himself, must be the executors of his rigor. And
upon whom? Even upon their own kinsmen. Thus the mildest man that ever was
behaved himself against Gods enemies, for he was zealous in the cause of the
highest. This was much, but Asa Asa.
did as much as he. For he put away the Sodomites, and banished the Idolaters
out of the land, he removed Maacha his mother, and took the crown from her
head, because she offered sacrifice to Priapus; and gave commandment, that
whosoever would not worship the Lord God of Israel should be slain, from the
greatest to the smallest. This was much, but Iehu did as much as Asa. For he
killed all the Prophets of Baal, and suffered not one of them to live; he
defaced the Temple of their Gods, and made a draught house of it for ever. What
wonderful things did those good Kings Ezekias and Josias in their days? The
one spared not an Idolater in the land; the other being but a young prince, was
so zealous in the behalf of his God, that he put the idolatrous priests to
death, burnt their bones and sacrificed them upon their own Altars, as the
books of the Chronicles and Kings of Judah do declare. These are good
presidents for Christian princes to follow: neither was there more need at any
time to draw the sword against prophaners of the Lords service: For there is
sprung up a mighty generation of wicked and disloyal men to disturb us, of
disobedient and untoward children to provoke us, of deceitful and halting
hypocrites to disquiet us, of Romish Baalims and straggling extrauagants, to
withdraw us from the worship of our God.

The third Reason.
Papists convicted of high treason.
HIgh treasons are in their true natures offenses against the highest Majesty;
for treason is called crimen laesae maiestatis, that is, tending either to the
destruction of their persons, or defacement of their dignities.

But the papists although they deny not the person, yet debase they the
authority of the son of God. Therefore papists are guilty of highest
treason.

How many and how horrible treasons they commit against Jesus Christ, it will
be too long to rehearse: yet because every one to whose view these my labors
shall be offered, may see how justly they are convicted, I will but glance at
some of the chiefest.

First of all therefore understand you, (I speak to the vulgar sort which do
not so thoroughly conceive of these matters) that the Apostolical Church of
Rome has degraded our Lord Jesus of all his degrees: Christ degraded of all
his dignities by the Catholics.
his dignity royal, his state prophetical, and his priesthood. In respect of
his dignity royal, we say that unto him alone it appertains to command
and forbid, John. 13.13. 1. Cor. 5.4. Apoc. 3.7.
to judge and absolve, having the keys to open, and to shut; so that it is not
lawful for any, no not for the Angels themselves to make a law to bind the
conscience, nor to establish in any point concerning the substance of it, the
government of the Church. The reason is evident, because we are forbidden to ad
or diminish any thing from the commandments of the lawgiuer, as also to make
new ordinances, Deu. 4.2.12.32 Esaias. 29.13 Coloss 2.8 1. Cor. 7.23.
and all the commandments of man in the matter of this spiritual kingdom,
are once for all declared to be nullities.

Now these traitors incroch upon his prerogatives, Papists traitors against
Christ his royal dignity. Christ more be holden to Pilate then to the
Papists. Math. 26.
by ordering the estate of the house of this king contrary to his own
express will, in eclipsing some of his laws, in establishing others
altogether new: So that Christ may seem to be much and more beholden to
Pilate, then to these kind of teachers: for he writ him king of the Jews,
though he knew not what he did, for which cause the Pharisees were angry with
him; but these write him king of the Church, yet they crown him with thorns,
and give him a reed in steed of a scepter. As for his prophetical sovereign
authority, by the spirit of whom all the ancient Prophets spak, who
afterward plenarily in his own person declared the will of his father, and
has since his ascending into heaven until he return not to teach, but to
judge, continued to declare ye same unto the world by his faithful Apostles:
how is it possible more in this point to betray him whom we are bound to hear
in pain of extermination, Papists traitors to Christ his Prophetical state
and how.
then first by falsifying that which he preached, both by adding to, and
clipping from; and secondly, by forbidding his word to be read unto all nations
and kindreds in a known language; fearing (say they) least men should become
heretics, that is, least light engender darkness, and truth lying? and what is
this, but neither to enter themselves, Math. 5. The priesthood of Christ
according to the scriptures.
nor yet to let others, and to hide the light under a bushel? The third office
which is his priesthood, consists in two principal points: In our redemption
and in his intercession; our redemption has two parts, expiation, and
sanctification. In expiation behold four special points: first, that the word
betokens a full and entire payment of all that is due unto God.

Secondly, that which is due, is death according to the sentence given by God
himself, Genesis 2.17. Romans 5.12.6 23
understanding by death not only the separation of the soul from the body
which is called the first death; Genesis. 3.19
whence follows putrefaction of the body in the grave: but the second death
also, which is the frightfull ire and malediction of God revenging with all
perpetuity sin in the body and soul of the sinner, which horrible state is
eternal in the devil and the damned.

Thirdly, this expiation betokens not the payment for one sinner, but for all
sinners, I mean the elect which have been, are, or shall be to the end of the
world, not of one sin, but of all sins: except that against the holy ghost
which is unpardonable.

Fourthly, this payment was to be offered by him, who in respect of himself
should be no way bound to this malediction, but a pledge and surety for others.

Now of sins or debts to be paid, there be two kinds; Hebr 7.22.
some original, some actual: original sin must be considered in two diverse
respects, first touching the corruption of the whole man, which is as it were
the essence of this sin. Secondly, touching that which follows it, namely,
that which makes us children of wrath, worthy of the curse of God from our
conception. This is it we teach and build out of the word of God.

In this, behold how many ways the papists play the traitors. How the
papists play the traitors against the priesthood of Christ.
For first demand of them how the fruits of this original rancour are washed
away: they will tell you by the sufferings of Jesus Christ. Wish themselves
further to declare their meaning: then the devil shows his horns, that
before appeared like an Angel; and there arises by and by a smokie
distinction out of the bottomless pit, Popish distinction of sins mortal
and venial.
of sins some mortal, some venial, whereby the glory o^ Christ his passion
is darkened. For venial sins (say they) deserve but temporal punishment,
whereof a man by some displeasance of them is washed with an holy water
sprinckle, or a Bishops blessing, or with saying a mea culpa, or by some petite
penance, etc. Thus these Catholic physicians in steed of using one purgative
remedy, without which every sin becomes deadly, cast men's souls into a
lethargy deprived of all true sense and motion: as the imperial Practickes
use the medicine which they call Narcoticall, that is to say, Popish
distinction of sins going before Baptism and after.
such as benumme and dead the diseased, until they become past feeling. They
have a second distinction of sins going before baptism; and of sins
committed after, as also between the guilt and the pain satisfactorie: Popish
distinction betwixt guilt and plain satisfactorie.
and all to this end to derogate from Christ's work of our redemption, and to
make that which proceeds from us, of some worthiness and merit, How sins
going before Baptism are pardoned according to the school of Rome, and how
after.
which they call a work of condignitie.

As for sins going before Baptism, they grant that they are pardoned
thoroughly in regard of the guilt, and the pain, and that by some means of the
virtue of the sacred water with the action it self of Baptism. But as for the
sins committed after baptism, the guilt and trespass is pardoned; the pain
satisfactorie remains to be paid partly in this life, partly after death; but
in a coin which has the Popes image and superscription: In this life by pater
nosters, Note well.
aues, pilgrimages, fastings, foundations, and other pains imposed in ear
confession: after death he must pay the remainder in purgatory. Yea but he
that is there (they say) can merit no longer, what shall become of the poor
soul then? Why he must be fetched out of the fire by prayers, and good works of
ye living: And what good works are those, Masses, Requiems, Dirges, holy water,
and such great devotions. But how many shall fetch them out? They cannot tell
that, and yet they have taxed several mortal sins at a certain number of
days and years. But what if he be come out already? Tush that is not the
loss of a requiem or mass; It shall be set upon the tale of another score to
be allowed other. But who has the bestowing of them? For, sooth the merchant
royal of pardons the Pope holy father. Cold comfort for poor papists.
But what shall become of the poor that is able to give nothing to have these
great devotions after his death? Mary he were best to merit well in his life;
for no penny, no Pater noster: unless it please the Merchant to bestow an alms
of his ouerplusse. Then if all this be sound, whereto serves the satisfaction
of Christ? O sir, wot you not why? to make all these before named pretty
trinkets available, and to send you for a season into purgatory, where as you
should have gone into hell for ever. O treason!

Besides, the spirit of lying has so controuled, and countermaunded the
obligation once made for all by Jesus Christ, that he has borne men in hand
that the same must every day be really and actually reiterated. And whereas the
supper of the Lord was ordained, True use of the Lords Supper.
first, that we should be made partakers of that mystical union of Jesus
Christ together with all his merits unto eternal life; and secondly, to
celebrate with solemn thanksgiving his only and holy sacrifice once for all
made: they instead of this have thrust in their Mass, wherein they say their
priests make a full satisfacton both for the quick and dead, Popish priests do
more by their Mass then Christ by his merits, if you list to believe them.
which Mass of theirs is of greater efficacy then the first oblatio^ which the
sacrificer himself offered upon the cross, seeing in his (as they say) the
pain satisfactorie is reserved still to be paid: but theirs makes an entire
satisfaction. O intolerable treason! Alas O Lord, how long will thou bear it?

The second point of our redemption is sanctification. The protestants doctrine
concerning sanctification.
It is also called regeneration or new birth, because by it we become new me^,
as touching the qualities of the soul. For as man made not himself at the
first, but the power of God the creator; no more is man able to make himself a
new creature, but this is by the power of him, who is made unto us
sanctification. 1. Cor. 1.30. For the bringing of this to pass, we teach that
the corruption of nature in the first Adam, is abolished in the flesh of the
high priest, the second Adam; in whom we being united by faith, fulfill the
law by merely free imputation. 1. Cor. 1.30
Secondly, the Lord Jesus Christ drawing us unto him by his holy spirit,
forms in us both to will and to do, Ephe. 1.18 Psalm. 51.12. 2. Cor. 5.17
Act. 26.18 Ephesians. 5.8
enlightening the eyes of our understanding, framing a clean heart within us,
making us from the head to the foot new creatures, bringing us out of darkness
into light, and from death unto life.

Altogether the Catholic Sophistes contradict this truth, Ephesians. 2 1.5 The
sophists absurdities touching new birth.
teaching that our nature is not wholly slaued unto sin, but only feebled by
the fall of the first man. And so they make our nature but like a lame man, and
the grace of God as a pair of crutches to establish their own merits.

Again, they say that original sin is really abolished by the water of
outward baptism with the words, and the Chrisme, etc. as much say they of
actual sins going before baptism, Note well and loath them.
in those that are of ripe discretion before they be baptized: provided always
that they be not in mortal sin. Thus first they see not our original
malady. Secondly, they sophisticate the remedy both in making a miserable
minglemangle of man's pure naturals and Gods supernatural grace. Thirdly, in
giving power to a sound of words, sprinkling of water. And lastly, in
substituting their own toies in the place of the Lord Jesus. Fie on the^
presumptuous traitors.

Protestants doctrine touching Christ his intercession.
There is yet his intercession, which is so called, because the virtue and power
of his sacrifice is always before God. Secondly, because all the prayers of
the faithful are presented in his name, in whom alone they are sanctified.
This is our doctrine. The Catholics on the other side will have their
referendaries, Christ degraded of this honor by the Catholics.
masters of requests: It is presumption (say they) to rush so boldly before the
king of kings, and therefore we must begin with the vshers of his presence, or
with the grooms of his chamber, and who be these? the greatest place they give
unto the virgin Marie, and what authority, I pray you? Roga patrem, Iube
natum. Beseech the father, command the son. And Iure matris impera. Command
by thy motherly authority. Then they muster all the saints, and have assigned
to each his sundry charge, one must be a Baal or patron over this country, and
another over the next; one over this town, and another over that; one placed
over this science, and another over that; one for the head ach, another for the
tooth ach, etc. Michael patronizeth the French, Andrew the Burgonians, James
the Spaniards, George the English, Saint Ambrose, with his staff and his whip
watched over Millayne, the three Kings over Cullin, Dionis over Paris, Goele
keeps scout watch at Bruxels, etc. Ale knights and drunkards have Martin and
Urban for their good Lord, and many a solemn peale, and drunken pull is upon
their euens for their sakes, the shoomakers have Euispin for their Baal, and
the millers Arnold for theirs, and Taylours, which love good fellowship must
have Goodman for theirs, Anthony must keep the hogs, Loy horses and kine,
and Hughe must keep the dogs. What should I blot more paper with these
dotages, you may see by this, beloved countrymen, what the Jesus Christ of the
Church of Rome is, from which the mercy of God has withdrawn us, to serve
the true savior of the elect. In a word, the papists do as they in Pilates
house did, who called Jesus Christ by the name of King and Prophet, but it was
when they bufetted and scourged him. John 19.1.2.

The fourth reason.
An horrible sin to acquit the offender.
IF he that quitteth the offender when he sees him guilty, be as much to blame
before God; as he that oppresses the innocent: then christian rulers may not
acquire idolatrous worshippers, which are the worst kind of malefactors, as
was proved in the former argument.

But he that lets the offender go with impunitie, does trespass as he that
ties the halter about the innocents neck.

Therefore christian rulers must sharply punish papists, who are idolatrous
worshippers.

1. Sam. 15.
King Saul was reproved as well for sparing Agag King of the Amalechites, as for
killing the prophets; Achab branded with the black mark of infamy, as well
for sparing Benhadad, as killing of Naboth.

The fifth reason.
IT stands not with divinity, Magistrates fervent love to religion, is made
apparent by execution of justice against Church enemies.
that christian rulers show less feruencie, and zeal for the service of God,
then papists and pagans for the worship of the devil.

But where catholics (as they desire the term) have liberty, and are not
severely punished, there christian magistrates show not so much zeal for the
promoting of the kingdom of Christ, as antichrist and heathens do for the
kingdom of the devil.

Therefore, etc.

What they have done and day lie do for the maintenance of idolatry, either
in their blind zeal, or their malicious hearts, Christendom knows too well.
Romes Pantheon, out of which was excluded the God of ye Hebrews, because he
would admit no companions collateral, should teach Christ his Church a good
lesson, which worshippeth the God of Israel: that is, to be zealous for his
honor, and to punish sacrilegious worshippers.

The sixth reason.
Rulers should more regard Gods honor then their own.
IT stands not with divinity, that christian rulers be more careful of their
own honors, then of the Lords glory.

But they carefully regard (and good reason also) that their places and persons
be respected as duty requires.

Therefore by like reason, should they advance the honor of God, and much more.

These reasons are naturally drawn from divinity, the which none may or dare
deny, who is persuaded that there is any divinity at all; the consequent prove
the same by christian policy.

The first argument proving it to be good christian policy to take two-legged
Foxes.
Impunitie discourageth the true subjects but animateth the false.
THat which discourageth the friends of the Church and gives life to the
adversaries, cannot be warranted nor maintained by christian policy.

But not to punish Church enemies, or remove secret traitors, discourageth the
true subjects and animateth the false hearted.

Therefore forbearance of household foes can be no good policy.

The second argument.
TO leave prince, nobles, Dangerous nourishing a serpent in the bosom.
and best affected subjects in danger, by nourishing a serpent in the bosom,
can be no good policy.

But by vain devise to blunt the edge of the sword of justice, or by cloaking,
qualifying, or concealing, to cause that it is not drawn against these
intestine serpents, is to endanger prince, nobles, and true hearted people.

Therefore no good policy.

The third argument.
THat mildnes and mercy, Excessive clemency causes contempt of authority.
whereby the adversary may seem to suspect her majesty's magnanimity, and
consequently to contemn her authority, can carry show of no good policy.

But the effect that excessive clemency works in our catholics, is either
to suspect her courage, or to misconster her kindness, or to despise her
sovereignty.

Therefore such forbearance can be no good policy.

The fourth argument.
Forbearance of Foxes, a means to make them forecast and fortify themselves.
TO give the enemies of a kingdom leave to forecast, and leisure to fortify
themselves; and so consequently to leave the true subjects by this means in
perpetual and needful fear of some new attempts, can be no good policy.

But forbearance of these househould enemies, gives them but leave to practice,
and time to renew their force; in so much as when one tempest by Gods gracious
providence is over past, there is fear of another.

Therefore such forbearance can be no good policy.

It is not safe trusting a traitor, but rather extreme folly to believe that
such as plot for a kingdoms conquest, can be revoked with mercy, or leave the
hold of their hope, before they be at the last gasp.

The fifth argument.
TO be confederate with the people of strange worship, Profane policy to be
confederat with people of a strange worship.
for the strenghthening and upholding of a kingdom in peace and prosperity,
is no christian policy.

But to forbear papists in hope of their assistance against foreign enemies
(if such need should press us, which God forbid) is to be confederate with
people of a strange worship. Read the 30. and 31. chapter of the prophet Esaias,
there see how the Israelites entered league with the Egyptians, and what was the
end of it. Then confer the same with our times, and consider what kingdoms,
what princes, what cities, what people have been overthrown, because they have
so confederated to their own destruction. The reason is, because God has been
out of the league.

The sixth argument.
No perfect peace by kindling of Gods wrath and swaging of man's.
TO continue a realm in prosperity by kindling of Gods wrath and asswaging of
man's anger, cannot stand with christian policy.

But by slacknes of punishment against Church enemies, Gods wrath is kindled,
howsoever man's may seem to be assuaged.

Therefore, etc.

If wicked tyrants (as one says) be only rods in the hand of the Lord,
according to that of ye prophet, O Assure the rod of my fury, and the staff of
my wrath; then should the hand rather be pacified then the rod: but if it
were possible that the rod could be pleased against the will of the hand,
then were it to be feared that the hand should cast the rod away, and take a
beetle or a mawle or an hammer or an hatchet and beat us to powder.

Many more reasons might be used to this purpose; but these I thought at this
time to allege: always for mildnes and mercy reserving a prerogative to my
gracious sovereign and her honorable council, a worthy virtue to a faithful
subject, but dangerous to a traitor. For sedition grows by suffering, and
clemency is a spur to rebellion.

I do not disallow the sweet temperature of severity with mercy: Severity
tempered with mercy.
But yet it must not be forgotten that the lives of princes, are the lives of
their common wealths, whereby they must learn that being prodigal of their
own estates, largiuntur ex alieno, as a learned man has said: they give that
which is none of their own to give. And therefore I dare avouch it, that it is
divinity and true christian policy, to punish Gods, and her highness enemies;
and that her Majesty and all christian princes in punishing of them shall
retain nevertheless (by Gods word) the names of mild and merciful
governors: for if the children will needs be so unnatural as to make their
mother smart; the mother shall show her self natural in ministering due
correction.

It is not good trusting them any longer, who have given her highness, and her
realm so many earnests of their traitorous affections, and forewarnings of
their covert confederacies: no, no, it is wisdom rather to follow the examples
of miners, which pursue the signs every way, It is wisdom to provide a
medicine before the sore.
as they spread in the ground, till they be guided to the trunk or body of
the metal: even so to follow the appearances of suspicions and likelihoods,
until it be manifest, what light made the shadow, or what fire made the smoke.
A candles end not warily snuffed, a few imbers carelessly couched, a few
sticks not thoroughly quenched, have brought many an househould to extreme woe
and misery; wisdom will not stay till the flame being fed, ouerpeere the
hiest part of the roof, but will quench it before the strongest pillars be
consumed: then look where the inconvenience lies, and let Foxes rather be
tied short, then hazard the devouring of the flock; rather slip off the
branch suddenly, then hazard the perishing of the whole body; so shall you
take a good course; then treason and treacherous practices will not be so rife,
and such queasie stomachs as cannot brook good counsel, and wholesome
exhortation; but following every disordered humor will be glad to keep
themselves within the compass of christian duty.

CHAPTER. 11.
Two principal gardiens of the spiritual vineyard, by whom the Foxes must be
taken, ministers and magistrates: wherein first of the duties of the ministers,
with an indictment found against many patrones of benefices.

THere be two principal hunters, which the Lord of the vineyard uses for the
taking of these Foxes, Ministers and Magistrates; the one by the word, the
other by the sword: By the word in reproving their false doctrine, by the true;
and in seeking to transform them into sheep: by the sword, in cutting off the
putrified members, least by their means the whole body be hazarded.

The first hunter is the Minister, whose mouth and ministry the Lord has
always used to declare his will, Ministers hunters of the spiritual Foxes.
and therefore they are called his mouth; which for this cause in the holy
scripture are diversely named, men of God, seers, prophets, planters of the
Lords vineyard, builders of his house, watchmen over his City, husbandmen,
Pastors, Doctors, Ambassadors, friends of the bridgrome dealers in the
marriage between Jesus Christ and his Church, dispensers of the mysteries of
God: whose charge is understood generally by the words of watching, and
feeding; sometime more distinctly, by attending unto the word and prayer; Act.
6.4. 2. Tim. 3.16.
sometimes by the words of teaching, improuing, correcting, and instructing;
sometimes by these words of watering and planting. Therefore the Apostle
calls not this charge a dignity, 1. Cor. 3.6 1. Tim. 3.1
but a work or business. And here orderly to proceed, let me beseech you that
are the chief fathers in our Church, preferred to your places for your
wisdom, learning and grauities, overseers of the flock bought with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ; Act. 20.
whose security in this business hazardeth the health of the Church: but
circumspection shall daunt the pride of these wicked ones that seek to bring
us into Babylon. The wicked walk on every side. The papists speak proudly and
never more proudly; young ymps that never beheld papistrie in her brauest
ruff, but have sucked poison from their mothers breasts, are not afraid to
vomit blasphemies against the almighty: let such Foxes be hunted, help to
reform this, for Gods glory; and seek the recovery of him that has troad
his foot awrie: let not careful preaching be choked through desire of
ambitious aspiring, nor common care of the Church made sleepie through hungring
after private profit: why should they sleep and take their ease, who ought to
watch both for themselves, and for others?

Again, I will speak to you, learned brethren, that having taken charge of
christian souls, properly are called hunters of the spiritual Wolves in
sheep clothing, and deceitful Foxes; see that you oppose your selves against
all thieves and robbers that seek the spoil of the Lords flock; against all
tyrants that oppress them; al hypocrites in show godly but indeed profane
persons, that give offense by their deformities: So shall you shun those
shameful reproaches, which by Gods just judgment are fallen upon many in these
days; yea so shall you shun the great curses denounced against them which
do the work of the Lord negligently; and when the prince of pastors shall
appear, you shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory.

And that you may the better perform this, beware of the love of this world:
it is like Aqua fortis, if once it catch the heart root; it will eat out all
goodness, all care, all love, all zeal, and indignation against sin. Hence
grows nonresidencie, swallowing down of steeples as easy as the hungry
does his crummes. Love of the world choakes care of painful preaching.
Hence instead of hunting the Fox, there is hunting for promotion and
preferment, hunting for the profits and pleasures of this present life, hunting
for honor and for hundreds, scratching of consciences in beating of the bushes
for many benefices, wheeling about the thickets to spy the couch of a
prebendary or a deanrie, etc. and therefore has it come to pass that some
which have had salt in them, that is understanding, knowledge, and zeal, have
lost it through the persuasion of him that said; All this will I give thee if
thou will fall down and worship me; there being now no more relish in them
then there is taste in the white of an egg: And what shall we say then of them,
that never had any salt at all in them, never any love, any knowledge, any
zeal? surely they be unprofitable servants, worthy to be cast out of the
temple of God as filth and dounge.

For what breeds greater contempt against God, or discredit to his Gospel;
what more reuiues a catholics hope to return unto Babylon; or encourages the
traitors to the accomplishment of their practices, then the blindness,
ignorance and impiety of the ministry? how comes it to pass that foolish
people retain their old liking to their fathers old faith, and young imps have
the like opinion powered into them; and consequently, as it may seem, easy to
be drawn from their dutiful loyalty to the love of a stranger; but because
they have wanted such as should rightly inform them? can the inestimable
treasury of a mighty prince be seen in the beggarlines of a base
Ambassador? can the adversary of the Gospel be drawn from falsehood, and
error by him that knows not (I had almost said believes not) the truth? can a
papist be reduced from his worshipping of idols by him, that is no better then
an idol himself? can the carnal gospeller, the wanton libertine, the
profane heart, the beastly Epicure be brought to continency, modesty and
sobriety, by such which rather bind them in the cords of iniquity? Lastly,
if to know God, and according to that knowledge to serve him, be the
groundwork of all true obedience; how is it then possible, that they whose
consciences were never seasoned with any religion, should yield either to God
or their prince any dutiful subjection? Saint Paul says that he had begotten
the Church of the Galathians; Gal. 4.9 1. Cor. 4.15.
and called himself the father of the Corinthians in regard of the
ministry, because he had begotten them by the preaching of the Gospel. Such
fathers such children, such as are the seedmen, such seed they do sow. Where
old wily Foxes, such as whose love to religion may be justly suspected, are
admitted into this great calling, there popery is sown in stead of the
Gospel; and Foxes grow up in stead of sound christians: where blind guides
are made ministers, such as have no more knowledge then idolles of wood and
stone, preachers as they call them, of idiots; there must needs be poor
knowledge of God, and suspected dutifulnes to the prince. The great hurt and
dishonor that these bring to the Church of God, no man can with effectual
words display it; nor plenty of tears lament it, all sermons, exhortations,
reprehensions, do rather aggrauate their condemnations, then work any
reformation.

We read that the Emperor Commodus was so cunning in darting, that having
gotten stones for the exercise of his hand, many citizens did assemble to see
him throw, whose dexterity was such that he never cast at wild beasts, and
missed his mark, nor gave any wound that was not deadly: It is to be wished
that every one that rebukes sin should level so straight as did this
Emperor, that never threw but he hit, never hit but he wounded; so should the
reader with the Romans neither see one monster twice galled, neither any sin
recover the first wound. If darters at deformities could wound as deadly as
they aim directly, this monstrous monster had been vanquished long ere this
day: but alas it lives, o yet it lives, and lives to nourish papisme,
atheism, and epicurisme.

If any marvel at this, how such are advanced to houlde the helm as are
scarce worthy to sit in the sincke; hoysed into Moses chair, that are more
meet to sit at Gamaliels feet; called to feed with the dugge of the Gospel,
before they themselves be well weaned; and sent to fight the Lords battles
before they have one stone to sling against Golias (that is one scripture to
resist the tempter withal:) let him understand that this is either, because
the hearts of patrones are limed with the love of this world, which makes them
not care whom they present; or many Bishops have such motes in their eyes, that
they cannot well see whom they bless.

I am loath to rake in this dounghill of buying and selling of benefices, ye
which is a sufficient testimony (if there were no more) that men have as much
true love to religion, as ever had Machiauell. Five sorts of patrones of
benefices.
There are diverse sorts that give spiritual promotions in this land, some are
our great Catholics, whose care to send good ministers into the Church, I
durst swear for them, is as great as the Fox ever had to feed the lambs.
And how can it stand with their blind religion to send good ministers into the
true Christian Church? but rather to dishonor and deface it by sending in the
basest, such as have neither Vrim, nor Thummim, neither brighnesse of
knowledge, nor vprightnes of life. It is said that Jeroboam made Israel to
sin, that is, to contemn religion: and why? because he made priests of the
basest of the people. Therefore the devil knows well, that if he can get
priests to be made of the refuse, he shall bring people to condemn preachers,
and prophesying priests, and religion. Here let our Bishops be circumspect to
sift narrowly when the patron gives the Fox for his cognizance.

There is a second sort of patrons open adorers of their god Mammon.
Mammonistes patrones described.
These are as good to Gods Church as the former. Indeed I must confess, that
when they give their spiritual promotions, all their care is to get a man of
gifts: O gifts, gifts, and nothing at all respected with these Merchants but
gifts. My meaning as no mystery, Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere for as. If you
have no gifts, the passage is plain and you must pack. Can we find, says
Pharao, such a man as this? (meaning Joseph, for his excellency) in whom is
the spirit of God, Genesis 41.38.
thou shall be over my house. And can we find such a man as this, says a
sacrilegious patron? meaning a Sir John lack Latin, lack learning, lack
conscience, whose friends can pay well, or purse is well lined, or will so
friendly part the stake. Pharao, cruel Pharao, heathnish Pharao in the
government of his Kingdom preferred Joseph for inward grace: but these
christians (for so they unworthily are called) in giving spiritual promotions
for the benefit of Christ his Church, regard nothing else but outward gain.
For when the match is made, this patron must have the tyth corn, Gleabe land;
and the house peradventure, if it be fit for a gentleman; with tith wool and
lamb, if it be from the pastures: And what shall the poor parson have (as
they call him?) forsooth a little od money, tith calves, tith geese and a few
eggs at Easter. And how then? graundmercie must the seely sheep say to the
butcher, that has cut his throat. I will say to these as Simon Peter said to
Simon Magus, Acts 8.
thou and thy gifts perish, which thou receiuedst to give so unworthily, to
the great dishonor of the Church: and he and his gifts perish, which he gave
to make a way for himself to that place in the Church, whereunto by the
judgment of his own heart there was never any ability or aptnes.

To show that honor only ought ever to accompany virtue, the heathens built
a temple to honor, and adjoined thereunto another built unto virtue, that so,
whosoever would go up into the temple of honor, should pass through the
temple of virtue: monstrous it is that christians in profession should be worse
then heathens in practice, they would enter into the temple of honor by
virtue, we by bribes. If you think this to be no sin, hear the Lord
complaining by the prophet Malachie in plain terms, Mal. 3.8.
that the taking away the tithes and offerings from that end they were
appointed unto, was a robbing and spoiling of him, yea even such a spoiling, as
he would visit with a great and grievous curse. It is no less now, so long as
authority ratifieth the same to the maintenance of the ministry, and
therefore undoubtedly will have a sharp revenge.

Balthazar escaped not the revenging hand of God when he fell to feasting and
carrusing with his princes wives, Daniel. 5.
and concubines, in the vessels of gould taken from the temple, but even then
espies the fingers of an hand writing upon the wall before his face, that his
kingdom God had numbered and finished, and weighed him in the balance and found
him too light; and therefore divided and given his kingdom away to the Meedes
and Persians. Read your sentence rob Churches.
And do you which eat the corn of the barn and drink the blood of
christian souls, that solace your selves with the spoil of the Church, think
to escape the sentence of the almighty? It is a sure thing (if you could spy
it) that the Lord has divided, blown upon it, and scattered that which by
such sinister means you have gathered together; neither shall it prosper; but
as it has been gotten over the devils back, so shall it be spent under his
dammes belly: and as it came in upon a post rolling and tumbling on every
side; so the Lord shall open the cage and it shall away again, having caught
wings like an eagle. But if perhaps you escape the sentence writing a
division here, you shall be sure without repentance of the sentence of
confusion else where.

David standing in great distress for water would not drink of the water of
Bethleem, because it was gotten with the danger of some few men's temporal
lives: See your sin soul murderers.
but you drink and eat that which is gotten with apparent hazard of life
eternal of hundreds and thousands.

Can you for conscience reply? nay the power of hell is not able to deny it.
The foul cario^ raue^ is your cognizance which flew out of Noahes Arc, and
returned not again; but was detained with the filthy stench of drowned
carcasses: even so do you which thus seek the spoil of the Church, Dulcis
odor lucri ex re qualibet, the savor of gain is sweet, if you can suck it
out of the vilest things, every baggage or garbage is good enough for you.

There is a third sort which having no sense nor feeling of this sin,
Benumbed and senseless patrones.
bestow Church-liuings not as caring for the Church, or respecting the edifying
of the flock of Christ, but as they are moved by kindred, by favor, by
affection, by suits: Your practice proves you Atheistes.
so they do bestow sufficient livings upon insufficient persons. I say, not
caring whether the people sink or swim, stand or fall, live or die, be saved
or damned. The Lord Jesus sets it down as a note of the ministers love, that
he feeds the flock: In like sort is it the patrones love to cause the flock
to be fed. Contrariwise it is want of love in the minister, if he do not feed:
and what is it in the patron, if by his carelesnes this come to pass? It is a
fault to give the calling to him that is unworthy, and no fault to give the
living unto him? In the sixth of S. Marks gospel it is said of Christ, that
going out and seeing a great multitude of people gathered together, he had
compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd: It is a
necessary consequence, that if Christ's bowels earn to see his sheep deprived of
a shepherd, that he will make your hearts ache that are the cause of this
horrible sin. I am ashamed to rehearse how the Church of god is abused by
you, who in bestowing your Church-liuings giving them not to ministers, as
ministers; but as to your sons, or your servants or your kinsmen, or to some
other that by some by-desert has gained your favors: and yet behold you would
feign seem friends to religion and pretend many good motions. But to be plain
with you, your motions are like unto the grasshoppers, yt no sooner gives an hop
upward, but down he comes again; your words may seem heavenly, but your
practice is earthly.

There is a fourth sort of patrons which profess religion, These would have
you think they love the Church, and so they do.
and yet many of the^ smutched with this blot. These go beyond the rest, in
this that they would be glad the people should be fed with knowledge and
understanding: but as the mammonist before named, cares not whom he presents,
so he may reap the profit; if he cannot compass it to make it plainly
temporal: so this patronizer makes a pause (you must think) to find one
sufficient to take the charge: These spin hypocrisy finely.
but indeed that either an harvest may quite his cost he has been at, by many
suitors; or else to get a good one as cheap as he can. It was once said,
religio peperit diuitias, sed filia deuorauit matrem: that is, religion brought
forth riches, but the daughter devoured the mother. The times are altered, and
religion mournes, because her best servants want their wages. For they never
gave so fast as now they take away, Sublatis studiorum praemijs ipsa studiae
pereunt, says Cornelius Tacitus.
and substraction is become a great part of patrons study. The conclusion like
to follow such polling premises, is the decay of learning, piety and religion,
and the bringing in of al Atheism, error and Barbarism. For they which would
study divinity above all, when they see that the Church has scarce the favor
of an ordinary ward, yea when they behold the contempt, the beggerlines,
vexatio^ and miserable want of the ministry, are glad to fall to physic, or
law, or some other trade. Genesis 48 7
What shall I say of you? You are worse the^ Pharao, for he had a care of his
priests howsoever the world went with the rest. You are not so kind to
ministers of the gospel as Iesabel that painted harlot, 1. King. 18.19. These
shall rise in judgment against you. Iud. 17.
was to the prophets of ye groves, for she fed four hundred at her table: you
are not half so religious, as Micha was superstitious, for he maintained his
priests. You show that you have less love to religion then they papists have
to superstition. The kite is your cognizance, who being greedy and ravenous,
yet mounteth aloft as though he would touch the gliding clouds; but yet when he
flies a matchless pitch, he has his eyes fixed below on the earth, spying
and prying for a carrion carcass: even so you soar aloft in your
contemplation, and in a certain counterfeit sanctimony seem to be raised and
carried above the clouds; yet so long as you can find in your hearts to play the
part-stake patrons to spoil the Church, and to seek to enrich your selves by
such robberies (they are no better) it is an infallible sign that you are
worldlings and earthly minded, seeking your own gain and private profit. For
Gods love let this be reformed, that we may know you by another cognizance. The
last and best sort of patrons are such as account them worthy of double honor
which rule well, The best sort of patrones. 1. Tim. 5.17.
that hold the labourer worthy of his hire; that no man goes to warfare on
his own charges; 1. Cor, 1, from the 5, verse to the 15
that husbandmen should eat of the fruit of such vineyardes as they themselves
planted; that sheppeheards should eat of the milk of their own flocks; that
sowers of spiritual things, which are the greater, are well worthy to reap
carnal things which are the lesser; that they which serve at the altar are
worthy to live by the altar. These for their cognizance may fitly give some
rare bird; I had almost said the black Swan: but it shall be the Eagle, for
she mounteth on hie and falls not on the ground, but to seek her necessary
food, and being satisfied straightway soareth aloft: eue^ so the minds of these
are occupied in heaven, all superfluous cares being cast apart, they indeed
wish the prosperity of Jerusalem, and the happy flourishing state of the Church.
O Lord almighty increase the number of these; and in thy mercy convert, or in
justice confound such Church-robbers as savor nothing but their own gain, as
daily endeavor to take away ye reward of knowledge and are the death of
thousand thousands of souls: stir up O Lord thy faithful servant our dread
sovereign, that with Nehemiah she may thrust out all such Eliashibs as abuse
the Church in this manner, Nehem. 13.14.
and every Tobiah linked in affinity with them, that thy servants may have
their own portions, and that thou may not be mocked; so we thy workmanship
and sheep of thy pasture, for so great a mercy, shall praise thee fer ever. Amen.

CHAPTER. 12.
The duty of Christian Magistrates, as well Sovereign as others, in hunting
and taking the two-legged Foxes.

THere be two sorts of men, which say that the charge of Religion belongs not
to the office of the magistrate. First, they which under pretense of their
anointed clergy, and privileged priesthood cannot abide to have their
abuses reformed. Secondly, they which either are infected with some heresy, or
else are willing to dally with heretics. The first sort do only require of
the magistrate to maintain and defend their degrees. The second sort holds,
that the magistrate ought only to meddle with the maintenance of public
peace, and not to regard what others believe or not believe. But the true
Church teaches that the charge of public religion does not in part, Charge of
religion belongs to the Magistrate.
but principally, and most of all belong unto the magistrate, which thing the
holy scripture approves. Moses the first general magistrate of the
Israelites, God gave the order of religion to Moses not to Aaron.
who did not represent the person of a priest, which was put unto Aaron, but of
the superior power like unto the authority of a king, did give the order of
al religion unto the people, and appointed unto Aaron and the order of the
priests what they should do, and what they should not do. Whereby it appears
that the care of the order of religion does rather belong unto ye superior
magistrate, then unto the degree of priesthood.

I know they will say, that Moses did dispose all these things at Gods
commandment. It is true: but I will be answered again, why God gave not the
commandment for order of religion unto Aaron, whom he had consecrated to be a
priest, rather then unto Moses? So then this rather shows that the charge of
the institution and governance belonges unto the magistrate; but the
institution, charge and ministration, belongs unto the priests. Again, after
the death of Moses, the charge of religion belonged not to Eleasar the Priest,
but to Iehosua the magistrate, who was of the tribe of Ephraim, Joshua. 5
and not of Leui, by whose commandment the children of Israel were the
second time circumcised, ye Ark of God carried by the priests, the altars
builded, the people sanctified, and the rest of the laws fulfilled, which
Moses prescribed. Again, Iehosua charged them to fear the Lord, Joshua. 8
and to serve him with an upright and faithful heart. Iehosua charged them to
rid out of the way all strange gods, Iehosua renewed the covenant between God
and his people, and compiled the words of the covenant into the book of Gods
law.

True it is that the office of magistracy and priesthood both were joined
together in the person of Samuel, 1. Sam. 1.
but yet he being at that time the chief man in Israel, judged and determined
as a magistrate, taught and sacrificed as a priest.

David a pattern for good magistrates, The ordering of religion by David.
and unto whom Christian rulers ought to have an eye for godliness, 2. Sam. 6
had the authority of disposing and setting forth true religion, 1. Chro. 16 1.
Cho. 22.23.24.25
he recovered the Ark of God from contempt received in ye time of Judges, and
of Saul, and placed it more comely: he appointed Priests, Levites, singers, and
doore-keepers, to minister in the tabernacle of the lord. He advised kings to
look unto their duties: Psalm. 2
And now ye kings understand, be learned which judge the land, serve the Lord
in fear, etc.

Solomon did bear the highest charge in religion, Solomon, Asa and Iehosaphat
took charge of religion.
not only in building the Lords Temple, but also in consecrating and hallowing
of the same. What should I speak of Asa, who having the charge of religion did
rid away the Idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, 2. Chro. 6 2.
Chro. 15 2. Chro. 29.30.81
etc. And of Iehosophat, who took away the hil-altars and groves out of Judah:
Of Ezechias, who following the footsteps of his father David in the beginning
of his reign the first year and first month, opened and refurnished the gates
of Gods house, commanded the priests to hear him, and to become holy, to
cleanse the Lords house, and to rid all filthiness out of his sanctuary,
appointed Leuits with cymbals Psalters and harps, according to the ordinance of
the king his father. The like is written of Josias, who used the same power and
authority in the like case. Now then since it is so clear, John. 12.18 Romans
13.1
that kings and princes are ye servants of God established in authority, and
girded by him with a bawdrier to ye end, that not only honesty of life should
be maintained, opposed to violence and dissolution; but yt the true service of
God should be advanced contrary to idolatry and superstition: Therefore they
ought with all ye power which God has given the^, to uphold ye holy ministry
and worship of God, as well in vprightnes of discipline, as purity of doctrine;
yt both may be comfortable to the word of ye Lord testified by Christ and his
Apostles, without adding or clipping or altering: and consequently bridle as
much as they can, and punish according to ye exigence of the case, the
perturbers of ye peace of ye Church. For religion belongs not to the left, but
to ye right hand of a prince; neither is there any crown so curiously wrought
or cunningly set with precious pearls, yt can half so beautify a princes
person, as to seek to promote ye glory of ye lord, and to take these Foxes
which seek to undermine his vineyard. The servants of Benhadad king of Syria,
1. King. 20 Traitors make mercy the groundworke of mischief.
what wrong soever they had offered to Israel, yet fallen into the lapse, would
revive and recomfort themselves with these words: Behold we have heard say that
the kings of Israel are merciful kings, let us therefore put sackcloth about
our loins, and ropes about our necks, and go to the king of Israel, it may be
that he will save our lives. Thus standing upon what may be, and not what ought
to be, what peradventure he would, and not what they deserved, they make mercy
the ground plot of mischief. But the king is reproved, and it is told him, thy
life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people: No less are those
runnagate ruffians to be regarded with the^ which welcome and intertaine them.
For as the practice of the one is to steal away the hearts of subjects, so the
mark that the other aim at, is to lend them their hands against their
country, if time should serve their turn. The Almighty God preserve her
Majesty, and evermore increase all zeal in her for the punishment of his, and
her enemies; that as Asa commanded all such to be slain as would not serve
the God of Israel; as Darius delivered Daniel, 1. King. 15 Daniel 6 Daniel. 4
2. King, 19 2. King, 23
and cast his enemies into the den of the Lions; as Nabuchadnezzar served him,
who by proclamation forbad any in his Dominion to blaspheme the true and very
God; as Ezechias and Josias served him by overthrowing the groves, and the
places that were set up contrary to Gods commandment: So she with David,
hating Gods enemies with a perfect hatred, may seek to root them out more and
more: and as already she has broken down the lofts, that were builded to
idolatry, overthrown, polluted, and defiled the altars, defaced the vessels
that were made for Baal, and for the host of heaven; so she may cut up the
very roots of iniquity, and expel the Cananites, that the Commonwealth of
Israel be not troubled. O let not the glozing speech of any ambitious parasite
dazzle her highness eyes, nor boulster up popery by a false persuasion to
further clemency; but let him be dishonored in a day that is not truly
zealous for the honor of his God: and let him die the death that wishes not
her Majesty's throne to stand steadie as the seat of Solomon; and you that
fear the Lord, and love his truth, say Amen. Furthermore as ye foresight of
her Highness most honorable counsel has appeared in shielding us from
foreign foes: so ought their chief circumspection to be seen in shielding us
from domestical fear. Then shall we being free in our bowels from sedition at
home, be stronger to withstand foreign power abroad.

It is not a safe thing to lay the bridle upon the neck of such dangerous
practitioners, by whom both prince, your selves, our lives, our country, our
fortunes may be hazarded in an instant: execution of discipline is a perfect
mithridate against al dangerous conspiracies, insurrections, seditions,
rebellions, and all popish policies. Correct says Bensyra a wise man with a
nod, and a fool with a club: there has been mildness and lenity showed long
enough; there has been becking and nodding, and notting long enough; but the
froward will not receive information: What remains then but an hammer, or an
hatchet, or a club, execution I mean of Justice, against these household
enemies? Your H. shall rightly propose to your selves the example of Moses, who
for the like cause hanged up the princes of the people, teaching thereby all
good rulers to make them examples in suffering, who have been the ringleaders
in offending.

Here also to you the grave sages of this land may rightly a lesson be read: I
mean the Judges placed over Gods people to judge soundly and substantially
betwixt brethren and brethren; unto whom God has after a sort lent his name
and his seat, The duty of Judges in hunting the Fox.
to teach you chiefly to regard and maintain his own honor. If it be your
duties to punish thieves, murderers, and such like perturbers of the peace of
the Commonwealth, then much more the underminers of the Lords vineyard, gross
Idolaters, hollow hearted votaries, disloyal persons, whose liberties and
prosperities in a Christian Church what can it elfe argue, but that justice is
turned into iugling? and true religion, either into heathenish prophanenes or
Romish superstition? You may not forget that Justice is pictured with a pair
of balances in one hand, and a sword in the other; to teach you that Justice
must return to judgment, whether in regarding the good, or punishing ye
evil. Improbum homine^ praestat non accusasse quam absoluisse. It is better
not to have accused, then after accusation to acquit the malefactor: but to
dally with Church enemies, presageth future danger, and in time may prove
fatal to the state. Let Moses also be your president, who punished idolaters
against God, as sharply as traitors against himself. O Lord! that a traitor
to the kingdom of Christ Jesus should find a friend in a Christian
Commonwealth; but of Judges, Magistrates, and governors, it were intolerable.
Shall a poor thief pack to Tiburne for five shillings, and one that if it
were in his hand would strangle or cut the throat of the Church, escape
scot-free? Tully truly said Magistratus indicat virum, authority declares a
man what he is, whether he love equity or briberie, justice or cruelty,
Authority tries a man.
religion or superstition. If a Lion his paws, if a Wolf his jaws will
betraie him; if he love the Church and religion he will draw the sword against
her foes; if he be an ambodexter, he cares but a little for her friends. Here
therefore I require you, that as you serve God in fear, and love his truth in
heart; that so you would promote his glory in zeal, and punish the offender
according to the exigence of the case: for as it is an horrible sin with
Pilate to judge Christ guiltless, and then to condemn him; with Festus to
approve Paul's cause, and then to leave him in prison: in like sort it is a
wicked thing in words to sentence the enemies of Christ, and indeed to turn
them loose to live at their pleasures like Foxes amidst the flock, to try what
havoc they can make of all.

I may not pretermit in this place, the great care and conscience that ought to
be in election of Magistrates in Cities, Burrowes, and Towns endewed with such
privileges. Iethro points out the properties of them which should bear rule:
Thou shall choose out amongst all the people men of courage, Exodus 18
fearing God, and hating covetousness, and them shall thou make governors over
the people. The Israelits desired God to grant unto Joshua, Joshua. 1
being newly made their governor, an heart to go in and out before them. A
necessary prayer; for what an ugly thing were it to choose Verres a thief to
inueigh against robbery; Crassus a miser to make his plea against
covetousness; Gracchus a traitor to give sentence against treason; Nero a
tyrant to declaime against cruelty, that is, to pick out such to punish sin
as are more worthy of punishment themselves, like unto the whore hunting
Judges of Samaria, mentioned by Jeremy? Ier. 5
And I would to God that such were not the election in many places where
officers are chosen, Intolerable abuses committed in many places.
as if men would pick rottennes out of an apple, where election is made a
matter of formalitie, where wealth not wisdom, riches not religion,
sufficiency to feast them, no ability to govern them, is the level of their
choice. Hence grow such swarms of Atheistes, Epicures, and Papists in many
quarters of this land, as it is lamentable to behold. For the reason why wicked
men abound, is because wicked men bear rule.

Lastly, All good subjects must be Fox-hunters.
every good Christian that desires the free passage of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, in respect whereof, all pompous glory is no better then dounghill
filthiness; and every good subject that desires the prosperity of her
Royal person, and peace of this Realm, must show forth the power both of
religion, and loyalty in this work of setting the toil wherewith to take
these Foxes. And that you may do it with alacrity and cheerfulness, do but
consider how the devil, the Pope and the Turk, have given their consentes to
supplant and undermine, or else openly to assault and invade this vineyarde of
the Lord. Let there be a sacrifice proclaimed to the Queen of Heaven, there
will be no spare of cost or travail: Young men will cut wood, children will
gather chippes, women will fetch water, old men afforde wheat, one will knead
dough, another heat the Oven, and all to sacrifice (I say) to the Queen of
heaven: Yea, there lives many amongst us, whose hearts are full of
bitterness, because they may not sing salve regina. These are they that use
wicked consultation in holy places, profane our Temples by lewd conference,
and make the house of prayer a den of thieves. Privy marks of Romish Foxes.
These are they that construe every accident to the advantage of their own
purpose. These are they that by their whispering tales would put men in fear,
when there is no cause of fear; thinking to make men afraid of scarrecrowes.
But the name of God be praised, who is unto this land, even a wall of Brass,
who as he has given us religion from heaven as a crown; so has it pleased
him to strengthen this kingdom with loyalty as a strong defense: and yet more
magnified be thy name O Lord our fortress and deliverer, who when disloyal
persons have been found endeavoring to prostitute our beauty to a stranger,
have discovered the conspiracy, and brought deserved destruction upon the
deuisers; so Lord we beseech thee still to watch over us. Amen.

CHAPTER. 13
Two Toiles whereby Foxes must be taken, 1 The word truly preached: 2 Good laws
duly executed.
The miserable end of traitors.

THe gardiens and keepers of the spiritual vineyard (as has been declared)
ought to be in continual chase of these hurtful beasts, and not to leave them
until either they be transformed into sheep, or else driven quite out, The
word of God the first toil wherewith to take Foxes.
that the whole flock be not hazarded. Now the first means to effect this, is
by pitching the haies and setting the toiles of the word of God, by the light
whereof their darkness may be discovered; as also by the fire thereof, the
chafe of their lies and falsehood may be consumed. Hereby you may see the
necessity of such a ministry as is able to handle the sword of the word with
both hands; as is able to beget his people in the faith, to confirm the
established, to strengthen the weak, to reclaim the back-sliders, and to
confute the adversary, that the enemy may no sooner peep out his head, but
the sword of the spirit may be ready to cut it off.

Ye famous Universities, eternized in Honors book for deep learning, and
fervent love to Religion; Almighty God make you still fruitful, that from
you both as sisters endowed with like privileges, crowned with like honor,
may proceed Foxe-hunters into every corner and quarter of this land. Your
children hitherto have received all chalenges of Roman Champions, and chased
this noisome vermin that have labored to poison the synceritie of our faith.
Worthy Whitakers Whitakers.
of never dying fame, small cause has Rome to vaunt her Bellarmine, or Louan
to admire her Stapleton, (ours had he not been enchanted) by thee both wounded.

Profound Fulke, Fulke.
whose truth and great travail the Church of God has tried, many a Fox have
thou had in chase, not able to abide thy hot pursuit. Who ever gave the dare,
and thou did not receive the challenge? Humfrey Humfrey.
of much reading, in thy time wast thou a chief hunter of the Romish Fox. How
often from chair of truth have thou confuted their lying falsehoods? Reynolds,
Reynolds.
as thou have Rainard the old Fox and his cubs in chase; so God, according to
his good will, give thee long life still to hunt and pursue them, that by the
fire of Gods word, the chafe of their lies may be consumed. I might take
occasion in this place to urge soundnes and synceritie, in setting this toil
of the word. For it is not decrees of Popes, nor determinations of Councels,
not Cicero his eloquence, nor Aristotle his philosophy, Gods word purely
preached, transformeth Foxes into sheep
that can convert a sinner, or transform a Fox into a sheep: but it is the
law of God truly taught and opened, that reduces men from their errors and
deformities, and brings them into the perfect path of health and salvation: I
say the preaching of the word, accompanied with the assistance of the spirit.
For it is not in man, neither in whole nor in part, to draw men unto God, to
open their eyes, to bore their ears, to illumine their minds, or open their
hearts: No, no, to fit the ground to receive the seed, to make it bud and
blossom, and bring forth fruit, is the work of the only son of
righteousness, who gives repentance, and remission of sins unto his Israel.

If the wicked and ungodly will needs be so wilful, Good laws a needful
toil whereby to take Foxes.
as to refuse the ministry of the word; then the Magistrates must pitch the
toiles of Gods laws, which are the very life and soul of the Commonwealth,
as Tully says in his Oration for Cluentius: Neither is any commonwealth more
able to use her own parts without the help of good laws, then the body of a
man can exercise the due operations without understanding: And therefore is it
said of Aristotle that the sun is not more needful to the world, then good
and wholesome laws are to the preservation of the Commonwealth. For as the
sun by his heat, and influence does nourish plants, trees, and herbs;
comfort also and give strength unto them, to exercise their several
properties: so good laws nourish and maintain the flourishing state of
kingdoms; as on the other side without these, there can be nothing else but
disorder and utter confusion. But yet it may not be forgotten, Execution the
life of the law.
that as good laws are the lives of Commonwealths: so execution is the life of
the law; for laws are better unmade then unkept: and our laws seem like to
Spiders webbes, where-through the buzzing Bees, Hornets, or horse-flies do
break; but the poor feeble flies hang fast. If this were not so, you should
have fewer Gentlemen thieves, fewer Gentlemen adulterers, fewer Gentlemen
idolaters. And who knows not that although a City were defended with walls
of Brass; yet if there want men and munition, in time they will be beaten
down: even so though laws were never so wisely made; yet if they want such as
shall urge their obedience and defend them, they will soon prove nothing
worth. Therefore the saying of Solon is worthy remembrance, who being asked
when the Commonwealth did most flourish, answered, when the people obey the
Magistrate, and the Magistrate obeys the law.

Again, for the right proceeding in judgment against heretical persons, Two
things to be reproved in an heretic:
you must consider that there be two things worthy to be reproved in an
hereticke-seducer; for a difference is to be made betwixt the seducer, the
grand Captain or Ringleader, and the poor seely wretch seduced. Now in the
seducer there is first his heresy; and secondly, the scatteringe of his
heresy, whereby he goes about to infect and poison others. These seed-men of
superstition and heretical scatterers, must be better looked unto, that the
multitude may be saved from seduction: Seducing heretics.
or else great danger will grow not only to Christ his Church by poisoning
and perverting the purity of religion; but to the state of the land, by daily
addition of strength to the Romish faction. It is too well known how fast our
Papists do increase in many parts of this land; and how daily one draws
another into the pit of perdition: surely the fault is either in the minister
or magistrate, or else in both. But this is a sure thing, that as Popery
gets ground; so the Gospel loses ground: and where superstition swimmeth,
there religion sincketh. Lastly, whether they wish the life or the death of her
Majesty's person, by whose most gracious government true religion is continued,
who are so hotly devoted to superstition; let the former reasons against all
perfect papists determine. Seduced people.
As for the seduced and poor deceived wretches, all means are to be practiced
for their conuersions: but when as once it is proved that they are not only
ignorant, but obstinately and wilfully ignorant, and that the more they be
forborne, the less they are reformed; like unto the vine that prospers with
no pruning, or the herb that withers with watering: what can remain else,
but that where mild and temperate medicines can take no effect, there be used
violent means, as sharp corosiues: and why not cauterie and incision, least
that greater inconvenience grow either by example, which gives encouragement,
or by corruption which comes by their company. Therefore the wholesome
counsel of the Poet is to be hearkened unto, where he says: Cuncta prius
tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus When incision is to be used.

Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahaetur.
To salve the sore, first try each way;
If curelesse thou it see;
Then cauterize, least sounder parts
Therewith attainted be.
For experience plainly teaches, that the Cancer consumes the Rose, the
Caterpiller eats the fruit, the sore eye infects the sound, that pitch
defiles, that leaven sowreth, that scabde sheep infecte the flock. I will
end this point, affirming thus much, that since all may in freedom do well
without fear: it were lamentable that any should have liberty to do wickedly
with favor.

I will speak a little of the miserable end of traitors, and so conclude: The
miserable end of traitors.
in reading either the book of God, or other histories, we shall hardly find
that traitors have closed up their eyes with honor. Sellam conspired against
Zacharias the King of Israel, and slew him: but within one month after, he
himself was slain of Manahem. 4. King: 15
Peka conspired against Pekaiam, but after was slain of Oseas. But what should
I light a candle at noone day? We our selves are eyewitnesses, that very
seldom traitors go down to the grave in peace. Ambitious Richard the usurper,
because he was notorious, Richard the Usurper:
shall here be remembered, who to make the way to his hautie desire of
Sovereignty, spared neither age, affinity, nor degree, until he had got the
regal diadem: and then thought he himself so surely grounded, that he might
bid defiance to heaven and earth: but see his end; he was slain in the field,
and being disarmed and stripped, was thrown overthwart an horse back, with
his face downward, and daubed with dirt, brought from Bosworth to Leicester,
and there in stead of a princely funeral, had for his Herald infamy, shame
for his shrouding sheet, and never dying obloquie for his sepulcher.

Sir James Tyrrel mounted aloft, Sir James Tyrrell. Miles Forest Iesabel
sentenceth Traitors.
for murdering the young King, was himself beheaded by Henry the seventh:
Miles Forest a cursed catife, did rot away piece meal: Iesabel although an
abominable wretch, yet truly thought that a traitorous life could seldom end
with an happy death. Had Zimri peace that slew his master? Which speech,
although it were grounded upon a false conjecture, because that burden by Gods
appointment was laid upon the house of Achab, and Iehu particularly deputed
to that charge, whereas Zimri had no commission to go so far: yet implies it
this much, that she thought treason an odious crime, and that vengeance must
needs follow it at the heels; and have we not had most manifest experience of
it in this land, within these few years? How many Jesuits in profession,
Iscariots in practice, have visited Tyburne? How many Foxe-priests have taken
their farewell at the gallows? And although Rome has lately beautified them
with the title of Martyrs, whom either male-contentednes or malice, caused to
be treacherous to their Prince: yet is it a thing evident, that rebellion not
religion; treason not truth; has brought them to the halter. The almighty God
that governs heaven and earth, still dissipate their devices, and confound
their counsels, that all such as seek by treason to supplant Englands state,
by sedition to sell her honor, or by rebellion to scatter her peace, may still
receive such just reward for their demerits, as heretofore they have done. Amen.

FINIS.

