THE GOLDEN Book of the Leaden GODS. WHEREIN IS DESCRIbed the vain
imaginations of Heathen Pagans, and counterfaict Christians: with a description
of their several Tables, what each of their Pictures signified.

By Stephan Batman, Student in Divinity.

Exodus 17. Write this for a remembrance in a Book and commit it unto the
ears of Joshua: for I will root Amalech, from under heaven, so that he shall be
no more remembered.

Psalm. 102. This shall be written for those that come after, that the People
which shall be borne, may praise the Lord.

ANNO. 1577.

To the Right Honorable Lord, HENRY CARRY, OF THE MOST NOble order of the Garter
Knight, Baron of Hunsdon, Governor of the Queens majesty's town of Berwycke,
and Lord Warden of the East Marches of England, against Scotland, his
singular good Lord and Master: Stephan Batman wishes the fervent zeal of
Gods truth, and long continuance of prosperous health, with increase of much
honor.
Calling advisedly to remembrance (right Honorable) the worthy places of
those, which by a special prerogative, and the provident goodness of almighty
God, are endued with Magnanimity, and called to the highest rooms of
Authority: I see and find that by their wise and prudent gouernmente, there is
generallye caused a public peace both abroad, among strangers, and at home
among our selves: and also I perceive and by experience do prove, that the
bayte of their cheereful countenance, allureth and wins the hearts of the
Inferiors, to the imitation and admiration of like courtesy: And as any
occasion is offered, so do they testifye and geeue out (as tokens of their good
will and obedience) some yearly fruict, more or less, to confirm and (as it
were) to seal up the vowed zeal of unfeigned duty, which they faithfully,
and heartily owe and bear unto their Superiors. Such Nobleness,
Magnanimity, Affability, and Courtesy, harbouringe within your L. breast,
has also incited and emboldened me, now to dedicate, and present, unto your
Honors view and consideration, this small Treatise of the putatiue and imagined
Gods of the Gentiles: a work, as heretofore not gathered in our vulgar tongue:
So I trust not so barrein of fruictfull documentes, but that it may seeeme
both to savor of no small pains on mine own behalf, and also to yield out
such other instructions, as may tend to sundry Godly purposes, and to the
betteringe of many others.

Wherein we Christians, now lyuinge in the clear light of the Gospel, may
evidently see, with what erroneous tru^peries, Antiquity has been nozzeled:
in what foggy mystes, they have long wandered: in what filthye puddles they
have been myered: under what masking vysors of clouted religions, they have
been bewytched; what traditions they have of their own fantastical brains to
themselves forged: and finallye into what Apostacye, Atheism, Blasphemy,
Idolatrye, and Heresy, they have plunged their Souls, and affiaunced their
believes. Whose miserable captivity, so long and so many years, under the
grievous yoke, and thraldom of our deadlye Enemy, and Capital foe Satan, as
we are most pitifullye to bewail: so are we most humblye, and incessauntlye
to praise God for our own delyueraunce from the like slauerye, for the
openinge of our eyes and understandings, and for the revealing of him self
unto us, in his most sacred and blessed word, the most perfect Touchstone,
which vnfeynedlye tries Truth and Simplicity, from Falshode and Hypocrisy,
Light from Darkness, Perfect honor from Superstition, finally God and
Godliness, from the Devil and Diuelishnes. Receive therefore (right Honorable
Lord) this poor pawn of my dutiful heart, and under the Ensign of your
noble protection shrowde it against the malicious Querkes of the Sycophanticall
Crewe, if any happen either to condemn my Enterprise, or impungue my honest
meaning: which was, and is, by showing my self dutiful unto you my Lord and
Master, to do good also (as much as in me lies) unto al others. Beseching
Almighty God to continue and increase his rich blessings upon you, and after
many and flourishing days here in this life spent, receive you among the
trowpe of his holy and heavenly Inhabitaunts, to rest with him in his blessed
Hierarchy for ever. AMEN. At Newington the 8. of September. 1577.

Your Lordshippes most humble Servant in the LORD, Stephan Batman, Minister.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.
ME tibi, teque mihi coniunxit amica voluntas,
Et firma a multo tempore amicitia.
Quam quonia^ virtus, fuluo preciosior auro,
Mutuus ac fide conciliauit amor,
Spero remansuram: quam me Iouis ira refringet,
Nec ferrum absumet, nec cariosa dies.
Cumque tuos limae non dedignere labores
Submisisse meae, verberibusque meis,
Accipe, quae nostrae iam sit sententia mentis,
Atque infucati pectoris omen habe.
Creed mihi, tua cuncta placent, tua cuncta placebunt
Quae dextrae scribis Palladis auspicijs.
Te morum candor, stylus, ingeniumque venustat,
Te decorat Pitho, Suada, Minerua, Charis.
Te pudor ingenuus, te rara modestia adornat,
Te pietas, grauitas, te polit alma fides.
E rostris quoties verborum fulmina torques,
E grato toties manat ab ore lepos.
Curas, ne Stygius lupus insidietur ouili,
Romanusue pias rabula vexet oues.
Praestigias aperis, veterum et figmenta deorum,
Et pandis verae relligionis iter.
Detegis horrendi frauds Cacodaemonis atras,
Informas Iuuenes, erudis atque rudes.
Ne dubites Batmanne igitur prodire in arenam,
Magna tibi accrescet gloria, magnus honos.
Iste tuus foetus miro splendore superbit,
Multaque in exiguo commoda fasce tenet.
Thomas Newton.

E. L. in the Authors Commendation.
HE merits Fame (I say) that takes pain,
Not for himself, but for his native Soil:
Where one alone the profit shall not gain,
But all may reap the sweet, of his sower toil.
By all men's doom, that Man must needs have praise,
Who for behoof of others, spendes his days.
Then since that all, by one, shall profit get,
What she disdaynes the trauaylle of this wight?
Not one: unless such Curres as still do set
Themselves to byte at those, who bring to light
The slye deceiptes of their ungracious Crewe,
Who virtuous men to hurt do still pursue.
Brave golden works may Jewels called be,
That fine been formde with shape of strange devise:
Such Jewels then, let not to view and see
Mo times then once, yea, more then twice or thryse:
For why? the rareness of this piece is such.
To view it still, you cannot do too much.
For proof, lo here that Jewel rare in sight,
This Book behold, that Leaden Gods contain:
And how a Bar, like glittring Gold most bright,
Those glosinge Gods depaintes in colors plain:
That every man, which does his Book behold,
For guerdon will geeue it, the name of Gold.
Certes, such a work in English never was
As this (though small) which does vain things bewraye:
What then needs he, that made the same once pass,
On Romish Curres, what they do bark or say:
No let them gnarle, and do the worst they can,
The Work is good, the proof shall praise the Man.
FINIS.
To the well disposed Reader.
Men's natures being as sundry and variable, as their Phisnomies and faces be
diverse and disagreable, small maruayle is it, though in judgments and
verdicts, they square from an unity, and iump not together in one reasonable
accord of opinion. Knowing therefore gentle reader, that there be as many
Tastes, as there be Mouths: I look not to be accounted so perfect a Cook, as
is able to season food and condimentes for every palate and appetite: but
referring the construction of my goodwil, to the considerations of such hu^gry
Stomakes, as ca^ and will feed upon and digest such wholesome (thought homely)
cheer, as is settte before them: for the other coyer sort, I profess my
self more redier to disclayme acquaintance, then willing to join with the^
in their so squemish affections. I proof of both these natured persons, I am
sure in this book to find: hoping as touching the censure, thereof, rather to
fall into the hands of indifferente welwillers and by them to be tried, then,
among the^ which (like Aesopes Dog) lying in the Maunger will neither do any
thing themselves, nor think well of others, yt sweat for their co^modyty. Which
poor labor, if I perceive to be well accepted, I shall be animated shortly to
adventure a further, paynfuller and greater Enterprise.

Fare well.
THE GOLDEN BOOK, of the Leaden Gods.
IVPITER.
IVpiter was figured sytting in Throne of Estate, with three eyes, and no
Ears, al naked from the middle upward, the rest covered: his Vysage resembling
a woman's countenance: in his right hand he held Lightening, and in the left, a
Scepter. Standing or treading upon Gyauntes: before him an Eagle, and a Page
presentinge a cup of Gold. Over his head an Angel standing on a Globe holding
a laurel Garland.

Signification.
HIs sitting in Throne, betokens his Kingdom to be durable, his three Eyes
signifies his merueilous Wisdom, by which he rules Heaven, Sea, and Earth:
his want of Ears declare him to be indifferent unto all, not barkening more to
one, then to an other. The nakedness of his upper parts, and couerture of the
nether, did purport him to be invisible unto me^, which dwell beelow, but
visible to the heavenly minds, whch are above. His womanly look and full
Breasts, intimate al things to be made and nourished by him. His Lightening
in dis right hand, does signify his power, which like to Lightening pearceth
through all: his Scepter betokens his providence, by which, as by a Scepter
he disposes with his creatures, as he thinks best. His treading upon
Giauntes does declare him to be a punisher of the^, which are at destiaunce
with him: by the Eagle is understood the Soul: for as the Eagle surmounteth
all other Birds, and is swiftest, so much does the mind surpass the Body:
by the Page, the simplicity thereof: intimating thereby, that if the Soul of
Man, be free from the querkes of dissembling fantasy, and as the Eagle
soareth aloft, so if the Soul of Man, shall be occupied with heavenly
cogitations, that then shall be enjoyed, the Cup of gold, whereby is signified
the reward of Virtue, in the presence of Jupiter.

By the Angel is signified the swiftness of well doing. By the Globe under
his feet, the small regard of worldly Uanitie. By the Garlande, the endless
crown of Immortality. The ancient Romans entitled him Optimus Maximus,
because in very deed it is better, and more acceptable, to profit many, the^
to possess great Wealth and revenue.

IVNO.
IVNO was portraicted sitting under a Raynbow, with a Crown of white Lyllies
on her head, a Scepter in her right hand, and in her left hand a pair of
Sheares, on each side a Peacocke: She had for her footestoole a Lion, her body
covered over with a fine Lawne.

Signification.
BY Juno is mente the Air, the Raynbowe betokens Rain, whereof it is a
token. Her Crown of Lyllies, signifies the cause to be in the Air, that ye
Earth does yield forth sweet Flowers: her Scepter is a representation of the
power that is geeuen to the Air, as well for preservation, as increasing of
natural things. Her Sheares in her left hand shows Hotenesse and Moystnesse
of the Air, into which two qualities it is sundered and parted. The two
Peacockes are added, because their cry does prognosticate change of Weather.
The Lion is a figure of the Sun, and the Lawne, of thynne Uapours: for the
force and virtue of the Sun is greatest, when he enters into Leo: hereby
aduertising, that the heat of the Sun draws thyn vapors into the Air,
where being congealed, by the extreme cold of the middle Region, they are
again by the scortchinge heat of the Sun resolved into drops.

The Poets feign this Juno, to be sister and wife to Jupiter. I think
because Jupiter being taken pro Aethere, and Juno pro Aere, they have most
semdlable qualities and dispositions.

Jupiter and Juno, are said to be at variaunce, because Jupiter being hot and
dry, not having his heat repressed with moystnesse, all things are burned and
pa^^^ed: again, when Iunos moystnesse is not qualified with Jupiters heat, all
things are drowned and ouerflowed: but when their qualities are with equal
temperaunce combyned together, then the Earth does yield her fruits with
great plentye and abundaunce.

APOLLO.
APOLLO was portraicted beardlesse, standing by a Bay tree, on whose top,
stood a Crow. Apollo treading on a Dragon having three heads. Upon his head,
a Crown of burning Lamps, in his left hand an Harp, and in his right hand,
a Bow.

Signifycation.
BY Apollo is meant the Sun, and being without a Beard, Lustines of youth,
which for the time is likened to the Sun, whose beauty or pulchritude, is
always one: and standing by a Baye Tree, always green, Figureth the
freshness of lustye Youth: the Bay tree was first found, growinge on the Hill
Parnassus consecrated to Apollo, whose Virtue is not to be subjected neither to
Beasts, nor Lightenings, as Authors have reported. Tiberius, as often as it
thu^dered, for his better preservation against the same, was crowned with the
Baye, called among the Latins, Laurus. By the Crown is signified Uigilancie
to ouerlooke all things betime, as also the Crow when he is sick, remedieth
his disease by eating the leaves: Apollo his treading upon the Dragon,
betokneth the crooked course of the Sun, into the twelve Signs of the
Zodiake: the three heads of the Dragon, whereof the one is a Lions, the other a
Wolfes, the third the head of a Dog, generally does represent time: and
particularlye, by the head of the Lion, time present, the head of the Wolf
time paste, as it were suddenly snatched from us: by the head of the Dog is
signified, time future or to come, because hoped time flattreth each estate
according to each vocation, to gayn, or to revenge: his burning Lamps in his
crown resemble his diverse Beams, which geeue light to the earth: His Harp in
his left hand. betokneth the harmony of ye celestial Spheres: and his Bow in
his right hand, signifies his wasting of some part of the Earth, by the Arrowe
of extreme and intemperate heat.

The Poets feygn, that Oenomaus, a king of Arcadia, counsayled by the Oracle,
learned that he should dye, when his daughter called Hyppodamia, should take
an Husband (because of a Son which should dispossess him of his Kingdom)
wherefore he instituted and ordained a Game called the Runninge of the
Chariotts, that who soever overcame him by over swyftnesse, should have his
Daughter, and whom be overcame to be presentlye slain. Having by his policy,
subdued many, he hoped so to daunt ye courage of the rest, to be advised of
buyinge love so dear, and thereby to stretch and lengthen his days to Nestors
years: But Pelops far enamoured on Hyppodamia, by ye help of swyfte Coursers,
ouerran Oenomaus Chariotts, and wan his Love, or best beloved. Apollo for joy
of his Uictorye gave him to his Marriage, his three footed stool, wrought out of
fine Gold, by Vulcan the Smyth: the Legs of the Stool were Lust, Beauty,
Strength. The Seat to sit upon, Riches.

DIANA.
DIana was portraicted, standing in the midst of Satyrs, Gods, and Nymphs
of the Seas, Ryuers and Fountaynes, with three heads and two wings, her bow
was bent, and Quiver by her side, she standing between a Panther, a Lion, and
a Ship.

Signification.
BY Diana is meant the Moon, her Guard of Satyrs, Gods, and Nymphs, be token
all forces of people under her Government: and also her light over Woods,
Seas, and Fountains: her iii. heads: the change of every Moon into Calends,
Nones, and Ides. Her wings betoken her swifte motion, because she finisheth
her course twelve times in every year. Her bow and arrows, represent the
lyuelye effect and operation of her beams, as well in quickening, as filling of
mortal creatures. She has a Pa^ther on the one fide, because the spots of that
beast when it is young, are horned as the Moon in her first quarter, and in her
ryper years, her spots wax round as the Moon in her full: on the other side a
Lion which resembles ye Sun, because the Moon has no light of herself,
but yt which she boroweth of ye Sun. The Ship warns Mariners in their
courses to have a special regard to the Moon, to the tides and Floods guyded by
her: who when the Seas in the night sparkle like Quickesiluer, it betokens
tempeste to follow, geeuing Sailors warning to prepare for Weather.

The Poets faygne that Actaeon, a man seekinge more for vain pleasure and
iolitye, then Virtue, and of the progeny of Cadinus, after much weariness in
following his hounds, suddenly espied Diana with her Dryades and Nymphs
bathing, was for his vnmanernerly viewing, tra^sformed into an Heart, and so
devoured of his own Dogs. Diana appellata est quod diem noctu efficiat, vel
quasi Duana, quod duobus temporibus maxim co^pareat, die ac nocte.

Prudentius because he allowed the Goddess Diana to be gouerner of both ye
Lights, he being also a valiant and liberal Captain, esteeming Men before
Money, and Ualiauncie before Bryberye: and being fallen into great poverty,
not able to have the funeral, of vain brauerye, with more mourning Weeds,
the^ mourning minds, was nevertheless, by the earneste prayers of his
Soldiers, by Titan and Cynthia carried into Coelum Empyreum, for an immortal
reward among the Gods for ever.

MERCVRIVS.
Mercury was portraicted with wings at head and feet, wearing an Hat of
white and black colloures: A Fawlchon by his side, in one hand a Scepter, and
in the other a Pype, on the one side stood a Cock and a Ram, and close by
his side a Fylcher or Cutpurse, and headless Argus.

Signification.
BY Mercury Merchants be meant. His wings at head and feet betoken the
expedition of Marcha^tes, which to get worldly pelf, post through all corners
of the World: the white and black colored Hat, signifies their subtilty,
which for greedines of gain, spare not to face white for black, and black
for white. By his Fawlchon is signified, goods gotten by violence, when
subtlety cannot comprehend. His Mace is a token of peace, but the knot with
two serpents, clasping each other about the said Scepter, does intimate that
no promise must be broken.

His Pype resembles Eloquence, which refreshes the mind, as Harmony does the
ears.

The Cock is said to be the best obseruer of times and seasons, warning
Marchantes and trauelers, to forsake no opportunity. The Ram is a
resemblau^ce of his office, because the Poets feign Mercury, to be
Embassadoure of the Gods: all are obedient to him, as the Flocks of sheep, are
to the Ram: the figured Cutpurse, is a proof that Mercury was a thief: and
Headless Argus, is a witness, that one Plague, bewrayes a thousand euilles.
The Poets feign that Argus the Son of Aristor, had an hundred eyes, of al
which, only two did sleep by course, so that he was not to be taken with all a
sleep: So subtle was Argus, that what fraud soever was imagined, he had
policy to defend it. Wherefore Juno enuyinge Io (her brother and husband
Jupiters Harlot) committed the keeping of Io to Argus, supposing so to be most
assured from evermore the having of Jupiters company. Jupiter to acquit Iunos
practice, commands Mercurye to take him to his Pype, and with melodious
soundes, brought Argus Eyes a sleep: by which is signified, what is he that
is so circumspect or advised, but that Flattrye or counterfeited persuasion, at
one time, or other may deceive? which work being accomplished, he stryketh of
Argus head, and sets Io, the transformed Cow, at liberty. Juno seeing this
hap, in token of her good will, sets Argus eyes into the Peacockes tail, for a
perpetual remembrance of his trusty service. A manifest show how vain a
thing reward is, when it dies with the party, from the posterity. As when
Carnalia had slain his friend Obliuios enemy, thereby receiving his deaths
wound for his labor was rewarded with a Million of Gold: what pleasure had
he thereof, beeinge prevented from the use by death, and not geeuen to his
familye.

MINERVA, OR PALLAS.
PALLAS was portraicted all armed: her countenance menacing the beholder,
having a Cloak of three colors, in her right hand a Spear, and on her left
a Christalline Target, embossed with a Gorgons head. By her stood a Green
Olive Tree, and a Dragon, with an Owl flyinge over them.

Signification.
BY Minerua is signified Wisdom, joined to Force, to qualify extremities.
Pallas Armature does purporte, that it concerns a wise man to be fenced,
as well against froward affections, as the outward enemy: Her fierce Look or
Countenance does admonish us, not to behold sin, with gentill and amiable
Countenance, but menacinge, and as it were with a Spear, to bydde and wage
Battle against it. Her Cloak of White, Golden, and Purple, colors, sets
forth Wisdom to the view of the eye. For the White, betokens Simplicity:
the Gold, the glitteringe force of Prudence, and the Purple the pearcing
brightness of modest Government. By ye long spear is also signified, ye
foresight of things to come. The Christalline Target, betokneth the warynesse
of the wise, in which as in a Glass, he sees to the bottom, the subtlety of
others: The Gorgons head warns to use Martial Law, not in fostering, but in
killing them at the first, which are known to be wylfull, and manifest
offenders. By the Olive tree is signified peace, intimating that war must
never be raised, but when peace cannot otherwise be maynteyned. The Dragon
carries a resemblaunce of prudence, for as he, among all other Serpents is
most waking. so the Prudent is circumspect in all his doings.

The Owl represents warynesse, because when all other sleep, she waketh,
and flying beholds that, which the common sort, neither do, nor can.

The Poets faygne, Pallas to have proceeded of Jupiters brain, and never to
have had any mother, because the Athenians supposed the first sorts of men
given to politic gouernmente, and wise in foreseeinge Dangers to come,
allowed the Laws, and Statutes of Jupiter, calling them by the name of his
daughter: the purpose of the Poet is, that for as much as Juno, the wife of
Jupiter was barren, for very grief shook his head encountringe the wall,
whence issued Pallas, and after gathering some courage to her self like Virago,
steppeth forth all armed, that which Law cannot win by lenitye: it must
compel by force.

MARS.
MARS was portraicted al armed, his Chariot was drawn with two horses
breathing Fire. A Wolf went befoore him with a Sheep in his mouth, and a
Cock following.

Signifycation.
His Chariot, Horses, and Armor, betoken War, because they be the chiefest
furniture thereof. The names of the two Horses are Fear, and Terror, because
where Mars inuadeth, all things are left desolate, and destroyed. The Wolf
with the Sheep in his mouth represents Mars, whose Soldiers are as great
raueners of other men's goods, as the wolf is of seely sheep. The Cock
follows Mars, either because he is a warlike Bird, or else that he is
messenger of the Suns approach, to the which Soldiers must have a vigilant
respect: unless they mind to let pass, sundry and many good opportunities.

The Poets faygne that Mars never had father, because he hated peace. Loquar
requesting of Mars the Country of the Pauperculans, he asked how they should
then live, he said by labor, then quoth Mars it is as fyt for thee, so to do,
and get that thou have not, and they shall possess that which they have: he
not contented, by the determination of the Gods, it was agreed, A good
warning to beggars of statutes penal: where by the commons are greatly
impouerished, and their good kings, never the better enriched.
thot he should not only feed of the earthes increase, but also that earth,
should so possess him, as he desired: Loquax supposing the Pauperculans
disherited: hasted the possession, where he being tied like a Dog, was forced
for hunger to eat the grass and in the same earth to be buried, that he so
greedelye had coueted.

VENUS.
VENUS was figured in a Garden of Flowers, naked, with a Garla^d of Flowers and
Roses on her head: her VVagon was drawn with two white Swannes, and a pair of
white Doves.

Signification.
HEr Garland of Roses does signify the superfluity which wantons require, and
being naked, ye shameless care of Uirginitie: The Garden of Flowers, the
variable allurementes of amorous Lovers, her Wagon betokens Pleasure: the
Swannes, stoutnesse of swift revenge, and with as great myldenesse without
attempt, whose properties been diligently to defend their own, and uses to
singe before their death, aduertising Lovers to be constante: the Doves
signify mildness, chastity, and continuance.

Tee Poets faygne, of Paris, son to Priamus, and Hecuba, how she dreamed
that she brought forth a Fyrebrande that set all Troie on fire: Priamus
molested in mind, commanded that as soon as the Boy was borne, to be slain:
but Hecuba being moved with a motherlye compassion, caused Paris to be nourished
with a Sheepeard, who in continuance of time growinge to be a man: Juno,
Pallas, and Venus, fell at contention for a Golden Apple: on which this Poesy
was written: Geeue it to whom thou lykest, if to Juno, then shall thou be
Victorious, if to Pallas, then prudente and wise to govern: If to Venus, then
Knight over the fairest Lady in the world, in Lust and Pleasure.

Paris being astonished, to whom the Apple might best be geeuen, Jupiter
espying his dismay, willed him to bestow the Apple on whom he best lyked, who
gave it to Venus.

So after sweet Meat, came sour Sauce, after Laughinge Weepinge, to the
utter ruin of the Trojans. Saylinge to Sparta he espied Menelaus wife, whose
Lecherous Lust lost himself, his Parentage, and his country.

VVLCAN.
VVLCAN was figured lympinge, with a blew Hat on his head, a Hammer in his
hand, prepared to the Forge like a Smyth.

Signification.
BY Vulcan is meant Fire, and by his blew hat the ayry firmament, by his
limping, the Reuolucions of the Heavens, which when it descends to us,
loses much of his former strength. By Vulcan is signified labor by his hatte
of blew, true dealing, by his Hammer, or Sledge, the continual toil of
Husbandrye, as well by the Plough in earing the tough earth: as by the Hammer in
forging of Metal, whose force must be prepared as well to the mayntenaunce of
the Prince, as the enriching of the subject.

The Poets faigne that Jupiter iarring with Juno his wife, fell from words to
blows. Vulcan coming to the reskue of Juno, Jupiter waxed so angrye that he
took Vulcan by the Legs, and flange him into Lemnos, whom the Inhabitants
received as sent from Heaven and learned of him, to prepare Iron for necessary
uses.

VESTA.
VESTA was figured like a Virgin, not suffering the holy Fire to be
extinguished.

Signification.
BY VEsta (Vas) the vessel of Uirginitie is signified: the Fire resembles the
Sun which makes the Earth a mother of many goodly Creatures.

In the Honor of Vesta, were ordained six Uyrgins of her name, called
Vestales, their office was to look that the Fire in the Temple never went out,
so that, when so ever by their negligence it was extinguished, they endured
such punishment, as the hye Priest awarded: But if so it happened that any of
them, did suffer themselves to be spoiled of their Uirginity, it was ordained
they should be burned quick. So zealous were the Romans not only of the
honor of their Godds, but also they held Uirginitie, for an exceeding Virtue.
The Uirgins were chosen to serve this Goddess between the sixte and tenth
years of their age, from which time till after the expiration of 30. years, it
was not permitted as lawful to mary.

NEPTVNE.
NEPTVNE was portraicted in manlye form naked, on the Sea horse most swyftlye
flotinge on the Seas, having a forke on his shoulders, the Tritones attending
on him.

Signification.
BY Neptune is signified the swift passage of Ebbes and Floods, the Manlye
form purporteth the rage of the bellowing Waves, and being naked the
readiness of Ships to be smothe, and well garnished, else is the swiftness
stayde, when the outeside is not free from all annoyes: by the forcke is
signified the furniture that good Ships must have, as well in weapon as
tacklinge, thereby to preuente both Bellona, and Cyclops Seas, and Thieves. By
the Tritones, skillful Maryners, Soldiers, and Munition.

The Poets note that Neptune road on an horse, because when Athens was
erected, Pallas and Neptune were at strife about the naminge of the City,
after many Words, the discord was put to arbitremente of the Gods: they
awarded that which of them could find out the most profitableste thing for
the life of man, he only should have the aucthoritye to name the Cyttie.
Neptune smote the ground with his Forke, and forthwith leapt out an Horse: But
Pallas smyting the Ground with her Spear, sodeynlye sprung forth a Olive
tree, which the Gods judged to be more profitable to the use of man. Pallas
obteyninge victory called the City Athens.

It was more by the favor of the Gods, so to judge it, then it was to prefer
the Olive tree, before the Horse.

An Epitheton.

Except by the Olive tree is signified Virtue and by by the horse vice: Venusta
Venus.

CERES.
CESES was figured havinge on her head, a Crown of wrythen Ears of Corn, in
her right hand an handful of Corn, and in the left the Herb Poppye.

Signification.
CEres betokneth increase of Grain, because she is called Dea Frugum, of the
frugalitie which comes of Earth and Seed. The Crown of Corn Ears
betokens the increase: ye Ears of Corn in her hand betokneth ye reserved
Seed, whereby does follow the years increase.

By the Poppie is signified the slothful or sleepye time to ensue, yt each
laborer may take heed to neglect no time: for as the Poppye is a causer of
sleep: So Sloth is a vice that loses gain. The Poppye also called
Papa-ver, Papa-ver, a frosen religion, springing to soon.
with other weeds are suffered to grow among the Corn, which must be weeded
forth, for byndring the Corns increase.

The Poets feign that Saturn, Ceres father was a great deuourer of his
Children: so said by the Figure Antithesis, for that the Earth, as she
yeldeth increase, does receive all into her again.

IANVS.
IANVS was portraicted double faced, and standing upon twelve Alters, in his
right hand he held a Keye with x and e wroughte upon it, in the left hand a
Bar, with this letter t graven on it.

Signification.
HIs two Faces on both sides, as well beehynde as before, aduertiseth wiselye
to consider things as well past, as to come, and standinge upon Twelve Alters,
admonishes Princes, and Men of Honor, to be constant in all their doings,
but most especial in Religion, as was IANVS King of Italye: so named of
Italus, from whom proceeded the name of the Country. The Keye in his right
hand is a resemblaunce of policy, to open and bring to light, the
treacherous devises of diepe dissemblers. The Letters x. and e. sygnyfye 55.
The letter t. on the bar three hundred, which Bar signified ye Fortitude of
a good prince in maynteyning Virtue and suppressing vice: By the number 355.
the days of one year, wherein no day ought to be ouerpassed, without some
exploite or good act.

The Romans in honor of Ianus, erected a beautiful Temple, which in time of
War stood wide open, and in time of peace it was always shut.

Ianus is supposed the first beginner of letters and skyll of the stars,
taught the plantinge of the Uyne. Divided the twelve Months, and sundry
Domestical skilles, for a common wealth, therefore double faced, the Face of
Government, and the Face of Labor.

SATVRNVS.
SATVRNE was portracted with a hoare head, but black bearded, and feeble
footed. He held in his hand a Sithe of serpentine form, leaninge on the
sneathe or staff. In his left hand he held an Infant, greedelye deuouringe
it, his color pale and wanne.

Signification.
SAturnus boarynesse, betokens Winter: his black beard signifies the Golden
world, in which no man was tormented with care: the earth yelding of it self
sufficient, for every man's conte^tation: his feeble feet resembled him to be
the slowest of the seven Planets, because he can finish his course in no less
then thyrtie years, his pale and yealow color, shows his complexion to be
cold and dry: his Sithe signifies time, in the which, al things are mowen
down, and wythered: his greedy devouring of the Child, betokens the wastfull
spending of things, before they come to growth whose mouths be more plentye,
then good conditions: deuouringe more at few Bankets, then their fathers got
in forty years.

GENIUS.
GENIUS was portraicted like a young man having two Wings, pouring Wine out
of a Bolle, upon an Alter.

Signification.
BY Genius is signified, the towardnes of quick wits, whereby sundry sorts
of people are found to exceed others: his Wings betoken the swiftness of the
mind, as also the readynesse, upon whom he has taken charge: he is said to
be the Son of the Immortal God, because he is joined to human form,
called reasonable: His pouring wine on an Alter, signifies the abundance of
Ayry moisture, which does force the barren earth, to yield forth each creature
and substance.

Plutarch writes that Julius Caesar had a mighty Genius allotted unto him, by
whose help, he not only achieved great Uictories in his life, but was also
revenged on his murderers after his death: for his Genius, so pursued his
conspiratours at the very heels, both by Sea, and Land, that he suffered
not one to remain on live, which either was a doer, or a conspirour of the
fact: so likewise, after the fact of Robbers and wilful Murderers, in flyinge
from place to place, they have never been at quiet, til death has finished
they deserved course.

PLVTO.
PLVTO was portraicted with a frowninge countenance, his seat was fiery:
Cerberus was his footestoole, in his right hand he held a Scepter, and in his
left, a Soul: Proserpina with hellishe Furies, attendinge on him.

Signification.
BY Pluto is mente, the insatiable gotten riches yt force possesses, his
Statelye countenance declares, that worldly Goods make men proud,
arrogant, and ambicious: His fiery Seat, betokens the violence of the Rich:
His Scepter signifies Welthye menns rule, over the Poor. The Soul which he
claspeth with his left hand, declares, that insatiable desire oppresses the
poor unto Death, and by the Furies are mente, the cares which Riches bring
with them. By Cerberus, the three mischiefs which do oppress the simple,
Flatterye, Hypocrisy and Opression: fair words to allure, Hypocrisy to
dissemble, Oppression to take by vyolence, is signified.

The Poets faygne Cerberus, to be Plutos Porter, of the City Dolor, who
receives all those that Charon brings, having three heads, the one of a
Goat, the second of a Bear, the third of a Tiger, whereby is also
signified, Lechery, Gourmandise, and Murder: diverse have framed diverse shapes,
only to paint forth the filthiness of vice, the more to terrify the folowinge
Age. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

BACCHVS.
BACCHVS was portraicted with a graunde paunch, his Charyot was drawn with an
Ownce and a Tygre, his head was horned, and crowned with an Iuye Garlande, in
one hand a Bunche of Grapes, in the other a Cup, having to his Guard an Ape
loking in a glass, a Hog, a Lion, a Wolf, and a Dolphyn.

Signification.
BAcchus Was the first that in Greece found the manner of planting Uines, and
the secret of pressinge Wines, called Liber Pater, by an Adage, the father of
liberty. In vino veritas. When men be dronken, they disclose all, as when the
Wine is in, the wit is out: al superfluous banquetinges, and Riotous excess
are called Conuiuia Bacchanalia, dronken feasts.

The Feasts of diverse spots and colors, as is the Ounce, and Tigre,
signify the sundry affections of ye dronken, and the desperate madness that
such possesses by outrageous deeds, in dronke^nes, his horns portrait the
customs of the Ancients, which used horns to drink in, in stead of
Pottes, his strayghte garlande of Iuye resembles the kerchefes of ye dronke^,
for they were accustomed to bind their head the harder, thereby to stop the
vapors from ascending into their brain. The Ape, the Hog, and the Lion, the
Woolfe, and Dolphin, bewray the affections of the Dronken: for some play the
Ape in imitating every thing, some the Hog in returning to accustomed
dronkennes, as filthy affections: some the Lion in executing of cruelty: some
the Wolf in ravening and spoiling: some the Dolphin overwhelmed in Bacchus
seas: the Ape looking in a glass, they vain flattery of deceiuable folly.

The Poets said that Semele, Bacchus mother, was a woman very bewtiful,
beloved of Jupiter. But Jealous Juno impacient thereof, devised with her self
Semeles destruction, and taking to her the shape of Semeles Nurse, she tells
her yt it is greatly to be doubted whether he who^ she took for her Paramour
and best beloved, were Jupiter in deed or no: wherefore her advise was that
Semele should desire of Jupiter, yt he would company with her in such and so
great a majesty, as he was accustomed to use with Juno, called the Queen of
Heaven. Shortly after, Jupiter resortinge to her, she desired of him to
grant her one request, who promised by an oath that she should be
satisfied. Jupiters oath was by the River Styx, Semele supposinge not to be
cyrcumuented by Juno, and chargynge Jupiter with his Oath to accompanye with
her in all his Majesty: but she by reason that she was Mortal, not able to
sustain his presence, died at the first sight thereof, and being young with
child at that instante through the cleme^cy of ye Gods, it was batched, till it
grew to a graunde paunch called Bacchus, whereby is also signified that
corruption lyketh all things that are filthye.

BONA DEA.
BERECYNTHIA or Bona Dea was portrayted, sitting in her Chariot, on her head
was a turretted, Crown, her guard with drawn Swords attending on her, her
wagon was drawn by Lions: but driven by Cocks: she holding in her hand a Key.

Signification.
By Bona Dea, is meant the worlds lower part. Earth and by the world all
things earthy, over the which the Moon has government: by the Wagon, the
swift course of all things issuing and growing forth of the same: her stately
sitting betokens the firm ground whereon is builded Cities and towns: by her
Crown so signified: wearing on her head, as on the upper face of the Earth
all Edifices framed with mountains and valleis, as Castles and Fortes: her
Guard with weapons drawn, betoken the spedy pace of workinge signs and
seasons as well in man as in beast, and al things cresce^t or growing, wherein is
worki^g the spirit of life: by the weapons are signified the sodaynnes of
death, warning every estate to take bid of time.

By the Lio^s the courage of soldiers to lose none opportunity. By the Cocks
are meant the priests of Berecynthia, Which must be vigila^t as ye Cocks to
admonish the people be time. By the Key, the openyng of ye secret and hidden
natures of al things growing in, and upon the earth: from whence ye Phisitio^
learneth to heal the sick, and the Chirurgia^ to cure the wounded: as also
the earth to be opened in the summer, and shut in the winter, when she
diminishes of her increase, by the frosen and barren season.

The Poets faigne her to be the mother of the godds, because, the Earth is the
mother of al creatures, into yt which they shall return again.

HERCULES.
HERCULES was figured in a Lions skin, and holding a Clubbe in his right
hand.

Signifycation.
HErcules apparayled in a Lions skin, signyfyeth the valiant courage of a
worthy Captain, also the Prudencie where with his mind being furnished, be
subdued his outrageous affections: the Club, signifies understanding, through
which the motions of wicked affections are repressed and utterly vanquished.

Hercules was before the destruction of Troie, in the third age of the world,
gouerner among the Lybians, and had victory over many nations, and subdued
diverse Kingdoms, a Prince of worthy Fame, a mainteiner of Virtue, and a
punisher of Uice, such a one as hated those yt chose to steal by policye,
rather then to win by prowess.

The Poets feign that the hill Atlas in Mauritania was a huyge Giant which for
the height supported the stars, and ouerco^me by Hercules, he wanne the
country and people, also in the valey of the said mountain was a pleasant
plat, the Ladies whereof were three sisters Aegle, Erethusa, Hespertusa,
commonly known by these names of Hesperides, in this valley was the feigned
tree with golden Apples, kept by a Dragon: whereby is signified, the great
riches that proceaded of so fertile a soil, and the couetus disorder of the
inhabitants, who by devouring of others, consumed them selves.

AESCVLAPIVS.
AESCVLAPIVS was portraited crowned with a Laurel, standing in a long gown, in
one hand a box of ointment, and in the other a staff.

Signification.
Aesculapius signifies Phisitia^s: his laurel crown the cure by many
medicynes: his long Gown, yt modesty that belonges to such skill. By the box
of Ointments, the readiness of Salues for bodily cure: for in Ancient times
past, the Physician, Chyrurgion, and Apothecharie was the office of one man:
and now for the most part, ye Practice of three Thieves. For learning, is
Ignorance: For Cunning, Craft: For cure, Spoil: For Life, Death. Such be the
fruictes, of disceyueable Practice: By the staff, the stay of Age, whereby is
signified, ye Learning, and Experience is stayed by counsel, thorough the
which comes knowledge of things both Good and Evil.

The Poets feign that Aesculapius was slain of Jupiter, with Lightninge from
Heaven, for that by his Art, he raised Hyppolitus from Death to Life. Diana,
seacretly loving Hyppolitus, desired Aesculapius by his skill too revive him to
his former Life: Which being done, she called him Virbius, as if she should
have said, bis vir, twice a man. Jupiter displeased for the Fact, divided
their love, by Death: replying that Phisike will not help where GOD is
disposed to plague.

FLORA.
FLora, was portraited with Flowers in her hand, of Beans and Pease, her Coat
in as many colors as the Raynebowe.

Signification.
FLora her colored coat, signifies the diverse hue yt is given to Flowers:
her Beans and Pease declare a custom of ye Romans, who esteem no more of
Baudery, then of Superstition: Which to bear Rusticall Signs in hand, that
Flora was Goddess, as well of Grain, as Flowers: Yearly in Honor of ye
same, they did Sparcle, Beans and Pease, among the common People.

This Flora was a Famous Harlot, and exceading Ry^he, Constitutinge at her
Death, the People of Rome to be her Heir: She ordained for Ever, a great
Sum of Money, to be Employed on Shows and Plays. The ordinance of a gentle
Devil, deludinge many Fools: of such force is wicked Ma^mon, that he can
make an Harlot, counted for a Gods.

Thus the Pope, and Poet, can make, both Harlot. and Thief, a Sayncte.

AEOLVS.
AEOlus was figured standinge in the Mouth of a Cave, in his hand a Tortoyse:
Under his Feet a pair of Bellows.

Signification.
BY Aeolus, is meant the Wind: his standinge in the Mouth of a Cave, signifies
the Wind to be engendered, in holowe Uantes of the Earth: his shell Fish
being a Tortoyse (whose Shel is not to be perced) betokens the force of
Winds, far to exceed the force of Murall, or Metal: And as the soft
Fish, is defended by the hard Shell from the violence of the Wind, so all
soft, and tender Seeds, are preserved, by close Earth. For that the harder
things, the higher, and greatter, by the violence of the Wind, is often
overthrown, Trees, Towers, and Hills. His treading on, the Bellows, shows
ye force of eng^ndered Winds, by thycke Uapours, combininge the Winds into
narowe rooms, as when the Air is darkest then is it thickest, and the Winds
greatest. Aeolus raygned in Aeolia, an Island in Sicilia, ye son of Jupiter,
whom Poets feign King of Winds, because he was ye first that gave knowledge
of weathers: He ruled the Isles, Lippara, Craeta, Stro^gyle, and Didyme, wherein
were certain fiery Hills, like Etna, a man very amiable to his subjects, and
Debonaire to strangers: The Savage People being taught by experieunce, of
their King Aeolus, to mark the seasons, supposed him to be the original of
Weathers, and called him the God of Wind, and Tempest.

CUPID.
Cupid was figured, under the Shape of a blind Boy, having Wings at his
Shoulders, and a Bow in his hand, pressed to Shoot.

Signification.
BY Cupid, Love is signified, and likened to a Child, because it is not able
to resist Affection: also because Love makes Oldemen, sometime Foolish as
Boys, in which foolishnes they become more Ignorant, then Children, his
Wings, betoken ye swiftnes of Love, yt although the body be stayed by force,
yet is the Mind void of victory: By his Being blind, ye fond affections of
foolish Lovers: for yt also love is as fond in chosinge, as self will
unadvised in deliueringe: If it proceade of the man, then is Beauty preferred
before Honesty: If of the Woman, then vain Bravery, before ciuell Modesty. For
as a foul Whore, delights in a personable Man, so likewise a soul Knave
takes pleasure in a fair Whore. When the Darts of such Love proceadeth, it
manifestly proves, that Cupid of cupio is Blind in deed.

The Poets feign that Cupids Bow, signified, the attemptes of Love. And the
Arrow, the force of Louinge: and the percinge to the Heart: the full consent,
of the same. Also that Cupid was Venus son, who taking upon him the Shape
of Iulus, so enflamed the Heart of Dido with Aeneas his Love, that for grief
of Aeneas Departure, she slew her self.

VOLVPIA.
VOlupia was figured like an Empress, but pale of Countenance, treadinge
Virtue under her Feet.

Signification.
BY Volupia, Pleasures be signified: she was figured like an Empress: for
that for ye most part, Men in preferringe Pleasures, submit them selves, to
their delights. Her pale Look, signifies, the fear that Wantons live in,
fearinge always least Fortune should turn her Wheel, and that Sorrow
should follow their delights: as after sweet Meat, sour Sauce. Her
tramplinge upon Virtue declares, that they cannot be but despisers of Virtue,
which will let lose the Raynes of their desiers to fleshly Appetite.

The Poets feign that Syrenes, the Daughters of Achelous, dwelled within a
certain Island between Italy, and Sicill, who with their sweetenes of Uoyce,
allured such as passed by: who no sooner obtained their company, but were
rewarded for their coming with present death. Ulysses, occasioned to pass by:
and to prevent their Whorish illusions, caused all his Sailors and Soldiers to
stop their Ears, and him self to be vound to the Maste of his Ship. By which
Policy, he escaped the peril. The Syrenes, for anger that they were
prevented, flange themselves headlonge into the Sea, whereby is described the
property of Envy, who will rather then be vanquished from doing of Mischeife,
further their pretense with their own Death.

As rust consumes Iron, so does Wrath, the Bones.

HARPOCRATES, AND ANGERONA.
HArpocrates, and Angerona, were figured in comely Apparel, holdinge their
Fingers upon their Mouth.

Signification.
THey both resemble Taciturnitie, and in being comely Apparelled sign^fieth
the grave modesty of prudent Gouerners. By the holding of their Forefingers on
their Mouths, shows also the heedefulnes, that Men ought to have, in
speakinge.

The Poets feign that the Pyes Chatteringe beetokeneth Ghestes: And Women's
Bablinge, betokens folly: for sometimes both sorts, so travail with a word,
that they hassard both life and goods.

OSIRIS.
OSiris was figured with a Basket upon his head, in the which was a Serpent
with three heads, holdinge the Tail in his Mouth.

Signification.
OSiris the God of ease or rest, figured slow pacinge, with a Basket on his
head: by his goinge is signified the careless dealinge of unthrifty
subjects, and seruau^ts, which are neclige^t in ye Affairs of their Princes,
and Masters: By the Basket the bondage of service under the which, all are
held: By the Serpent with three heads, The first of a Lion, ye second of a
Dog, the third of a Wolf. The Serpent signifies the prudence of Laws, well
to govern common Wealths: The head of the Lion, the courage of ye king: the
head of the Dog, the auctority of nobilitye, the watchful barkinge of
spirituality, to defend the oppressed from enormities: the head of ye Wolf
signifies oppression wc proceadeth from the King, from nobility, from
spirituality, from Officer in auctority: from the king when he grau^teth over
much liberty: from the Nobility, when they regard not magnanimity: from
spirituality. when they defend not fidelity: from Officer in auctority, when by
careless oppression, they consume poverty. These.iij. heads joined to on
body, signifies, the mutual accord or consanguinity in evils, which as the
Serpent dououringe herself, by beginning with her tail, so are diverse
Kindomes, by oppressinge common Wealths, made weak, and brought to confusion.
Osyris, Raygned in Aegipt, whom, Typhon, his own Brother, to obtain the
kingdom, invaded, and taking Osiris captive, murderously cut him into, 25.
pieces sendinge each piece to sundry Conspiratours of his death, supposing
thereby to have obtained their greater favors. But Isis, with the help of
Oros her Son, revenged her Husbands death, by hanging Typhon on a Gallows.
For sundry benefits that Osiris had done to the Egyptians, they worshipped him
as a God.

ISIS.
JSis was proporcioned with a Cornet in one hand and a Ship in the other.

Signification.
ISis has a Cornet in one hand, because her Preistes in their Sacrifices, did
Honor her with the Melodies of that instrument: she holding a Shipp in ye
other hand, in honor of Osiris, which for her sake had passed many and
dangerous Seas. The Poets feign that Jupiter companyinge with Io, otherwise
called Isis, Juno came upon them, one such a sudden, as for the hiedinge of
the fact, he turned Isis into a Cow, but Juno suspectinge the matter, desired
the Cow of Jupiter, and gave her to Argus to be kept. But Mercury, by the
advice of Jupiter, to set Isis at liberty, slew Argus. Juno, for revenge caused
the stout Fly, to stinge and vex Isis, who being exceadingly tormented, hied
her self from place, to place, til at the last she entered Egypt, where being
restored to her former Shape, she was Married to Osiris, and after her Death was
made a Goddess.

PAN.
PAn was figured, with a long Bearde and horns on his head, his Feet were
like unto a Goat, holdinge a Pype to his Mouth.

Signification.
BY Pan, Shepheardes are signified and neadeth no explication, because the
whole description, contains the Portrature of a Shephearde.

The Poettes feign that Midas, a Rych King of Phrygia, obtained of Bacchus, to
have any thing given him that he would wish. He therefore desired that what
soever he touched, might be turned into Gould. Bacchus granted the request.
Midas to try the truth, touched not only Timber, Stones, and Fruict, which
turned to Gold: But also his Meat, and Drinck: it repented him of his folly,
and seeinge himself so ouermatched, waxed pensive, requiringe Bacchus to take
from him his wish. Bacchus not hard to be entreated, commanded Midas, to wash
himself in ye River Pactolus, and he should be cured: he did so, and ye River,
since has had Golden Sands. Afterward, when Phoebus, and Pan, contended
whether of them two, should be judged ye best musician the hyl Tiuolus being
chose^ for judge, gave sentence on Phoebus side: but Midas standing by and not
chosen for a days man, very foolishly, preferred Pan. Phoebus espying Midas to
be a busy body, for his great folishnesse, gave him a pair of Asses ears,
but Midas so hid them, that none knew it but only his Harbor, and not
myndinge to conceal it. Nevertheless not daring to report it, he made a
Uaulte, in the which he cried, King Midas has Ears like an Ass, and after
covering the same, with Earth in such a Moist place where Reeds began to
grow, out of the which Cave, by shakinge too, and fro, be founded forth
those words, which the Harbor had infused.

CONCORDIA.
CONCORDIA was figured like a comlye Matrone holding a Chain, to the which
were fastened all kind of Beasts by couples in their kind sittinge on
Instruments: she was also likened unto the Storke.

Signification.
Concord signifies all coequalities, as well of agreeinges in Beasts, Birds,
Serpents, Worms, Fishes, Fowls, as Man and Woman, kingdoms and Nations:
Being portraicted like a comlye Matrone, shows thereby the modestye as well of
the Mind, as Apparel, to be advised in all things, her Chain also signifies
the force of a Stable Mind, in fast lyncked experience: By the Beasts
cowp^ing together, the accord that Nature yeldeth to her own kind. By sitting
on diverse Instruments, the suppressing of vain fantasy, not over much
delighting in naked comfort: for as every Instrument (how brave soever they be
in show) being found discorda^t in Note, from the true concord in Music, is
nothing worth, so Amities, Frendshippes, and Cordial dealinges between man
and man, being but to the utter show, and not from a faithful heart, is then
called Hypocrisy, and breeds dissension: For the Ancient Romans esteemed
more a small Act done in the furtheraunce of the Common Wealth, then great
shows of words called vain Boastinge without Deeds.

In that Concord is fygured among the Pagans in the shape of a Storke: it is
to be showed what her properties are, which is, every third year to cast
forth of her Neast one of her Birds, from the house or Tree, whereon she
buyldeth and breeds, as a recompense for her quiet sufferaunce: moreover when
she is old, she is fed by her Young with great diligence.

The Kings in times pass, carried in the top of their Scepter, the
similitude of a Storke, and in the lower end, the shape of the water Horse,
signifyinge thereby, to be maynteynours of peace, and brydelers of such, as
should use vyolence to any.

As the Storke is a deuourer of Serpents, so ought Kings to be destroyers of
Thieves, Murderers and Robbers: and as she is liberal in geeuing her young,
so ought Kings and Princes, to reward their Subjects, not with the Goods of
others, but with their own, and as the young Storke does feed the old, so
ought the Subjects being feed by good Laws, reward their kings with large
Treasures: for where good Laws are, there is none oppression.

Sundry other have figured Concord in the form of a Dove, or Turtle, because
that showing the Concord of faithful Fidelity, both king and Subject ought
to hold the same truly.

PROTEVS.
PROTEVS has no shape or likeness, because the Poets faygne that he was a
God of the Sea, which could turn himself into any shape, whether it were of
flaminge Fire, or of a Furious Lion, a grunting Hog, a running stream, or
any thing else, whatsoever him lysted, which thing Virgil signifies in
these Verses.

Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum,
Ignemque, horribilemque feram, fluuiumque liquentem:
Himself he straungely does transform into al shapes, and gleames:
Now like to Fire, now like to Beast, now like to silver streams.
Some think that by Proteus the diverse affections, of manns mind are
signified: for somewhyle we take pleasure, for the chiefeste felicity, when
in very deed it is but a hoggish affection: otherwhyle Anger haleth us, and
makes us more like Tygres, than men: sometimes Pride assaulteth us, and makes
us more hautie then Lions: sometime swynish affections, and then we beecome more
Dronken then Hogs: as for good cogitations, they have small or no dwellinges
in our hearts, and that is signified by the water. Wherefore, if we will reap
any profit by Proteus that is, by these our diverse affections, we must bridle
them: For the Poets faygne, that Proteus. never gave forth any true
Oracles, but when he was forced or constrayded thereunto.

ASTRAEA.
She was portraicted in a Virgins Habyte with very severe countenance and
comelye Gesture.

Signification.
BY Astraea is signified Justice. She geeueth Judges to understand that they
be of Force against the wicked, but merciful to the Penitente: as precise and
upright in Justice, as otherwise grave and modeste in Apparel.

HARPYAE.
HARPIAE were portraicted like Carmara^ts in body, but strompetlyke faced,
having long and cruel tallantes,

Signification.
BY the Harpyae shameless desperate injuries are signified, which as under
Feathers are shadowed for a season: By their whorishe Countenance, the
canckered wrath of a malicious woman, as in Dalila, Memphetica, Vasthi, Juno,
Semiramis, Cleopatra, and Philamertia: by their long and sharp tallentes,
their gredye desire, to get in possession the goods of others.

The poets faygne, yt there, are three sisters of them, whereof the first is
called Aello, which in our speech signifies a spoyler of men, by insatiable
whoredom. The second is called Ocypite A spedy conueyer or filcher, a hackney
whore, while she is in fact: she pyckes the caytiues pursse.

The third called Celeno: which signifies dark, because the doings of
whoredom love darkness and hate the light.

PARCAE
PARCAE were three sisters of destiny, whereof Clotho was figured holdinge the
distaffe, Lachesis drawing out the thread, and Atropos cutting it of.

Signification.
THe Poets feign that these three sisters betoken the felicity and state of man,
and the misery of man.

By the threedes, man's life is signified, for warning every estate to lyve
well, so long as Lachesis does draw the Threede, it gives warning that
time be diligently spent, for when Atropos comes to cut the thread, thereby
is signified the end of life, the^ is natures course ended: if ye thread be
white, it betokens felicity, if it be black, endless misery: yt is, if the
life be virtuous, it obtayneth life, if it be vicious, then follows death.

PRIAPVS.
A YOUNG man armed, having two wings, in his right hand, a vessel: powringe
forth water on a square stone, on his left arm bearinge al sorts of fruits,
in his right hand a whippe of three cords, having also a green Willow
garland on his head.

Signification.
THE young man, betokens kyndled lust, otherwise called the God of Lecherye:
his two wings, swyftnes, to accomplish carnal Venerie: the one wing is
Flattery, the other, is Force. The vessel of water poured forth on the stone,
the multitude of words tending to no virtue: the square stone, the stubburne
and hard hearted. By the holdinge of dayntye fruits, the wastful expense that
Leacherye uses by ryotous excess.

By the whip, the sharp toil of beggary, which follows the haunters of such
art: By the three cords hunger, sickness and death. The Garlande of Willowe
foresheweth the sharp time of youth, or floryshynge strength.

The Poets feign Priapus to be the son of Venus, which is Lust following
carnal desire. This Priapus was honowred for a god among the Gentiles, and
prayed unto by their women yt were barrayne, to the end they might have
children.

GRATIAE
THE Three Graces were portraited naked with hand in hand, whereof two looked
toward us and the third from us.

Signification,
BY the three graces, thankfulness, Bountefulnes and liberality is signified:
for in that one looks from us, and two toward us, we are let to weete, ye one
benefyte when it is bestowed well, will bring with him two home again.

They were portrayted naked, because benefytes must not be cou^terfaited, but
done for virtues sake. Their holding of one an other hand in hand, signifies
ye bou^tie does win and couple men's hearts together. They also were
portraited Lawghinge, because the liberalitye yt is commended, does proceed
from a cherefull and wylling mind.

The Poets feign that the first for her merry countinau^ce, was called Aglaia ye
second for her fresh color was called Thalia: And the third for her
pleasantnes was called Euphrosine, Aglaia, signifies thankefulnes for benefits
received. Thalia, plenteousnes by liberal reward, Euphrosine liberality when
need is espied.

These prefigure yt the benefits of ye mind, ought to be no less liberal then
ye proceeding liberality, which proceeds from forth of ye earth, and therefore
called Gratiae.

ORPHEUS
ORPHEUS was figured in a Philosophers wede, playing on a harp with sundry
sorts of beasts and birds about him.

Signification.
BY Orpheus is signified skilful music, as well by song as instrument. By his
Philosophers weed, the cumly gesture that belongs to handling the instrument.
By the harp, the wise sentences and sonets to the adorning of music. By the
beasts and birds the delectable minds of the simple unlearned.

The Poets feign that he was a peerless musition in so much, that at his
play, wild beasts would come about him, the birds stay their flighte, the
waters, their flowinge, the trees bow down their tops, and the mountains
hoppe, whereby is sygnifyed the delightsome pleasures in all estates.

The Poets faygne that when his wife Euridice was dead, he went to Hell, to
speak with her soul, where his sweet music so ravished the master Devil,
that he consented to let Orpheus have his wife, again, condicionallye yt she
should not look back til she were out of the infernal kingdom, which thing
she not able to refrain: he lost her again, Music is delectable to the
mind, but carnally liked, is hurt to the soul.

PERSEVS.
PERSEVS had wyngs at his shoulders, a Falchion or Percian swoorde by his side,
and flyinge Pegasus beatinge the grownd with his heels.

Signifycation.
His wings betoken his ships, by which he sailed into Asia: his sword
sygnyfieth his victory over Medusa: his flyinge horse, is a representation of
Fame, and speedy pursuit after his enemies.

The Poets feign Stheno, Euriale, and Medusa, to be three sisters. every hair
on each of their heads, to to a Snake, and all yt they looked upon, they turned
into stones, by which is signified, their blazing Beautye, to be such, and so
great, that they bereft or enamoured all that looked upon them, so far from
wit and understanding, by their alluring slights, and cou^terfeyted shows, yt
therefore they were said to be transformed into stones, because they ruled
the^ at their pleasures.

The Poets faygne Perseus, to have borrowed of Mercury, both Wings, and
Sword, and of Pallas a Target, and so coming suddenly, fyndinge Medusa
sleeping he cut of her head, and showed the same to his enemies, at the
sight whereof, they turned into Stones.

The force of Forreyne help, each Country makes stronger:
And force supplied when time does last, does prosper it the longer.
The smyling show, which treates a peace to be
Is treasons fraud: let daily prudence see.
FVRIAE.
THe three Furies, Alecto, Tysiphone, and Maegera, were portraicted with
whyppes, in their hands: their hayres hyssyng Serpents, with haggish looks
and gryeslye countenaunces.

Signification.
BY the Furies, the slynge of an evil conscience is signified: their whippes
betoken the Torments which the wicked are forced to endure: their Serpentyne
hayres, does intimate, that the Conscience does always gnawe, and byte the
heart of the ungodly. Their menacing look and countenance, does threaten the
grieslye toil in the second Life. Tullie in his Oration pro Roscio, declares
after this sort.

Nolite putare, quemadmodum in fabulis saepe numero videtis eos, qui aliquid
impie scelerateque commiseru^t, agitari et perterreri taedis arde^tibus: sua
que^que fraus, suus terror maxim vexat, suum quemque scelus exagitat,
amentiaque afficit, suae malae cogitationes conscientiaeque animi terrent. Hae
sunt impijs assiduae domesticaeque furia, quae dies noctesque parentum poenas a
sceleratissimus filijs repetunt. In English thus.

Think not (as Poets have feigned) the wicked to be singed and scortched with
Flaminge torches: it is our own guyle, that most does beguyle us, it is our
own wickedness, that does most affright us, it is our own folly, that does
most cast us down, and our own thoughts and wicked consciences that does
tormente us. These, these I say are the continual bosom Furies, which day and
night, cries for vengeance, and punishes the sins of lewd Parents upon
their wicked children.

The Poets feign by these three Furies, the diverse affections of ye mind, which
force me^ into sundry, and diverse mischiefs: the first is Anger, ye second
covetousness, the third Lust, whereof Anger desires to be revenged:
Covetousness to possess great riches: and Lust to enjoy Fleshly pleasures.

CASTOR and POLLVX.
THese were figured like two Lamps, or Cresset lights, one on the Top of a
Maste, the other on the Stem or foreshippe.

Signification.
BY the light first appearing in ye Stem or forship and ascending upward,
the Maryners hope of good luck, for wind and weather fair to ensue: But if
either lights begin at the Topmaste, Bowespryte, or Foreship, and descend down
ward into the Sea, it is a token of vehement tempest to follow.

Castor is supposed to be that light which ascends and burns clear and
bright. Pollux that which descends, and is more dymme, and styncking, like
Sulphur.

The Poets faigne, that Castor and Pollux were the two brethren of Helena, who
for their insatiable lechery, and hot burning lusts, were transfigured by
Apollo into two lights, committed to the government of Nocturna, to be
dispersed into every coast for a plague and revenge of the Trojans destruction.
By the increased lights is meant the fiery lusts: the clearness, that which
proceeds of Youth, which for a time seems delectable, and soon is
quenched. The dymme light of Pollux signifies Age, and the Lust thereof, to
be more filthy, and therefore continually banished of the Uertuous.

THe Athenians had for their God a gay Image, with a golden tongue, by which
was signified that neither Apparel nor outward comlynesse was any thing
worth, not having a Golden tongue. VVherby is signified Truth. Veritas temporis
filia.

Saying that we have spoken of many Demi Gods and Goddesses, consider well, by
the Figure followinge, of the one eternal, most mighty, most true and
euerlyuinge God, by whose divine sufferaunce, many things has passed, and
the former Ages meruelouslye darkened, by the only craft, and slye practices
of our mortal enemy Satan, the only author of al error and discord. This
Figure is set between the Heathens, Pagans, and false Christians, the more to
blemishe their foolish Imaginacions, for as before is described the Gods of
the Gentiles: so follows after the Gods of the Romish Church, to the end
that every true Christian, may the better dyscerne the light from Darkness,
and Truth from Falsehood: and co^ferring the vain imaginacions of time past,
with the true Touchstone in time present, shall easelye epsy, the broad way to
destruction, through the which too many have passed: and now fynding the
narrow way to salvation, may evermore be the redier to prepare them selves to
the Haven of Peace, which God in mercy grant, for his only son Jesus
Christ his sake assisting us with his holy spyryte now and ever. Amen.

A Figure on five Letters, of the Eternity under which is comprehended the
Hypocrysie of the Church, the losing of Satan, and the appearinge of the
Gospel.
C. is the capital letter of Christus, two V.V. endwise joined makes an X.
which is in number 10, ye figure of the Law, nature and grace so joined
togethers. called the law of the ten commandments, which being given after
creation, called DIES, stands in in.2. place: the 3 letter I. which is in
number one, representing the beginning, and ending applied to the 3 person
which is Homo, who being made in Dies, which word carries also his proper
signification, as of 4 letters 4 Elements, and then secondly the word Homo of
the same 4 letters, the 4 co^plexio^s and having life in it self for a time by
creation, generation, and procreatio^, is said to be ye, which Homo signifies,
which is man: first Earth, Water, Air, Fire: the^ Mela^choly, fleumatike,
sa^guine and choler so co^pou^ded as a living creature exceeding all other. By
the third and last figure which is one, and the first from the beginning is
made 3 by the same, as by the figure more plainly appears under ye which is
figured, Christus, Dies, Homo. cupplinge it self into humanity: works
redemption through mortificatio^, and resurrection. The hebrew Schin signifies
the conjunctions of the divine persons as the former in rede^ptio^ father, Son,
and Holy ghost by C.X.I. These bewraye false religion, Apostasy and Hypocrisy
by Christ in time among men.

The letter C, one hundred: the letter X, te^, the letter I, one: which make
one Hundred and eleven: ye two letters V V, as thus X makes an X, which is
ten: and one ten makes four V, V, V, V, which is twenty: in the whole
thyrty. The letter X turned every way, makes four tennes, which is 40. in ye
whole, 70: to 70 ad, C, XI. wc in all makes 181. The^ gather together ye Hebrew
number which is. CCC. and ye charect ^ Iod which makes 10, that is in all 491,
ad to every letter single in the square one thousand, to the number of 491,
and you shall find 5 4 9 1. from the which time being expyred, to the end
and second coming of CHRIST persecution (...) to be looked for.

Unfold me this, and tell me plain:
Whether the Gospel shall remain.
If thou say no, then have thou lied,
for truth it self the same has tried.
Satan was bound a thousand years,
His members are worse then him self.
Satan daily among men apperes,
Romes treasure is turned to pelf.
Many nations and Cities had a wonderful great delight in themselves, for that
they were consecrated unto certain Gods Athens was commended of Minerua, Delos
the Ila^d of Apollo and Diana, Cicero against Verres prayseth al Sicilia, but
especially ye mount Etna, for that it was consecrated unto Ceres, as though
it were wholly nothing else, but an house or temple of Ceres. How much more
honorable is it, for those which be Christians in name, to be the same in
deed, the children of the one and the everliving GOD, wc is blessed for ever,
ame^. For among the gentiles such regard was had unto virtue, that they
dedicated to ye virtuous, ye reward of three goddesses.

The first Strenua whereby is mente Dexterity or valiant dealinge.

The second Agenoria. which signifies virilitye or manhood tendynge to
Actiuitye and valiantnes.

The third Stimula which signifies a spur, the agility and quicknes to
virtuous exercises. Seeing therefore that the Gentiles and heathnish people in
ancient times past, have so preferred virtue, that not only they have
executed their laws by punishinge the Ungodlye: but also have left in Tables,
written, painted and graven, the substance of that which they professed for a
perpetual record of their lives and conuersations, how much more ought we
that are Christians esteem of the most divine tables given by God to Moses.
wherein was drawn by the finger of the almighty, the happy government of
man's felicitye? Also what pictures can more admonish then the graven,
written and prynted charectes and books of gods eternal word and gospel
confirmed by a glorious victory, over a tira^nous death, to behold one another
it shall suffice whether the deeds from the mind be aunswerable to the Image
of the body or not: but being found far otherwise as every man and woman,
nation and people, will deck and make comely the earthy body by washing, bathing
and curious clothing, cle^sing and brusshing ye spots of dyrt and dust, so is
it behoueful to every christian so to cleanse his mind and conscience from euel
thoughts and works, as may prepare the soul with adorned virtues before God
with more Diligence the^ ye garments before worldly and carnal princes the
neglecting whereof, provoked God almighty, first of all after man's pride began
to grow on the earth, so for to reject him from his fatherly compassion, that
his holy spirit no sooner being absent, Satan presently steps in, and so
fillinge the mind with vayn cogitations, whch presently began inuocations to
diuyls, honors to spirits, and worshipinge of creatures, nevertheless in ye
midst of the which sin, there among some remained the sparks of treue
service, by the which although outward Idolatrous, yet inward by laws, and
constitutions verteous this Strange entermixed stratageme engendered after a
time Hypocrisy which left at ye last ye act of doing Justice, and by vsyng ye
bare show, became Infideles: through the which Satan's kingdom increased, and
Gods people became few Till by the coming of our Blessed Savior many were
restored again, as by the disputation between Adrianus and Epictetus is
somewhat to be parceyued and after the end thereof shall follow the Gods of
Supersticion.

The Capital God in his right fashion.

Adrianus out of Vegetius de re militari.
WHAT matter is it, if thou unloose thy gyrdle for us, thou thy self shall not
be unclothed, regard that body by the which thou may be taught.


Epictteus It is an Epistle.


A. What is an Epistle?


E. A silent mesenger.


A. What is a Picture?


E. A glosing treuth.


A. Why doste thou term it so?


E. Because we see painted Apples, flowers, lyuinge creatures, Gold, and
Silver, and they are not the very true, and self same things.


A. What is Goulde?


E. The bond Slave of Death.


A. What call thou Silver?


E. The place of Envy.


A. What is Iron?


E. An Instrument for every Art.


A. What is a Sword?


E. The Ruler of Force, the stay of Tents in Battle.


A. What is a Fensor?


E. A manquellour without offense.


A. Who are those, that being in health, are sick?


E. They that are busy in other Men's matters.


A. How can a man labor, and not be weary?


E. By gayninge.


A. What is Friendship?


E. A concord, or agreeing.


A. What is that which in length exceadeth al other things?


E. Hope.


A. What is Hope?


E. A slumber to a Watchman: and a doubtful Chance to him that looks for it.


A. What thing is that which a man cannot behold?


E. The Mind of an other.


A. In what thing does a man offend?


E. In lust.


A. What is lust?


E. A secret stearinge of the Body to Ill: A corruptible heat, the Original
to Leachery.


A. What is Liberty?


E. Innocence.


A. What is common as well to a King as to a wretch?


E. Birth, and Death.


A. What is the best thing, and worst thing?


E. A Word.


A. What is pleasant to one, and displeasaunt to an other?


E. Bondage against liberty: prosperity to the healthy: To a King, no company:
to a Beggar, no Alms.


A. What is that which is ever?


E. Life.


A. What is Life?


E. The original of all beginninges.


A. Which is the best Life?


E. Felicity.


A. What is the most certain thing of all?


E. Death.


A. What is Death?


E. A perpetual security.


A. What is the general Death?


E. The end of all things that ever were: a thing to be feared of none that
lives well: the Enemy of life: a God over living Creatures: a fear of the
Pare^tes: a pray to the Children: the cause of making Testamentes: a Speech
after life is departed: the very last Mourninge: a forgetfulness, after a
Remembrance: the light Torch of the last Fire: a burden for a Grave: a title
of a Toumbe, and Death is the end of all evil.


A. Why are the Dead crowned?


E. It is a Witness yt they have past the bitter course of life.


A. Why are the Thu^bes of the dead bound together?


E. Because they may know themselves to be equal after Death.


A. What is the fatal fire?


E. A contentinge of the Dettour: A payment of ye debt.


A. What is a Trompet?


E. The stirringe up to battle: the warninge to fight: a mixture of Swords:
a lame^tacion of dead Corses.


A. What is a Pooreman?


E. A desert Well: whom all the Passengers behold and leave it still in his
place.


A. What is man?


E. A Man is like to a Hotehouse: the first room is warm, where the bodies
are anointed: so an Infant being borne, is first anointed: the second for
the bodies to sweat in, is Youth: so are the bodies subject, and therefore
equal to distemperatures.


A. What is man's strength?


E. Like a rotten Apple, either they falldowne when they are thoroughly ripe: Or
if they fall before, they fall hardly.


A. What is man in Age?


E. A Candle placed against the Wind: a Soiourner in Earth, the very Image of
the Law: a Stable of misery, a bond slave to death: a delayer of life, with
whom Fortune dalieth.


A. What is a Woman? Litigious:


E. A necessary evil: for unnecessary causes: a touchstone to show ye color of
Gold, and Silver: a burden to bear children of two sorts: men and women:
Bastards and Hermaphroditical children, having. 1. mother, and. 2 fathers.


A. What is a Woman. Coniunctiue.


E. The pillar of the house: the Joy of the Husband, the comfort to children,
the Storehouse of Generation, and the Augmentour of Posterity.


A. What is Fortune?


E. She is a noble Matrone yt applies herself to her seruau^ts: the next
mark without Judgment: a chance of outward goods with shines on him, on whom
it happens, and darkneth him, from whom it flies.


A. How many Fortunes be there?


E. As many as fond heads has inventions: yet said to be three: one blind
that applies herself where she list: An other Mad, that takes away again
the Gifts by her given: The third is Deaffe, that never will harken to the
Prayers of the miserable.


A. What are the Gods?


E. The very signs of our Eyes, the powers of ye mind, if thou be afraid of
the^, that is fear: If thou refrain of thine own accord, that is Religion.


A. What is Religion?


E. A Doctrine established in thy mind, unto the which is given reverence,
either good, or bad.


A. What is good?


E. That which was never Ill.


A. What is Evil?


E. That which hates good.


A. What is the Sun?


E. The light of the World, which gives and takes away the day, by the which
we know the course of the hours.


A. What is the Moon?


E. The A^der of the Day, the Eye of the Night, the Light of Darcknesse.


A. What is Heaven?


E. A high, and mighty Roof, a pured Air.


A. What are the stars?


E. The destenies of Men, safe Havens to ye Mariners.


A. What is the Earth.


E. The Barn of Ceres. A mansion place for Life.


A. What is the Sea?


E. A way uncertain.


A. What is a Ship?


E. A wa^deringe house, a dwellinge place, where thou list, the power of
Neptune, a table for the course of the year.


A. What is a Mariner?


E. A lover of the Sea, a forsaker of the firm Land, a Co^temner of Life, and
Death, a Clie^t of the Waves.


A. What is sleep?


E. The Image of Death.


A. What is the Night?


E. A rest for the Labourer, and a Gain for the Robber.


A. Why was Venus painted naked?


E. Because love is naked, and because Venus does leave those naked, whom naked
things delight.


A. Why was Venus married to Vulcan?


E. That declares all love to be stirred up by Heat.


A. Why was Venus Squint Eyed?


E. Because she wanted good Conditions.


A. What is Love?


E. A vexation of an Idle Breast, in a Child it is shame, in a Uirgin, a
blushinge secret: In a Woman madness: In a Youngeman heat: In an Oldman a
laughinge-stocke: in the mockinge of the Uice, a heinous crime.


A. What is God?


E. He which rules all things.


A. What is Sacrifice?


E. An Offeringe up of Incence.


A. What is without a Companion?


E. A Kingedome.


A What is a Kingdom?


E. A part of the Gods.


A. What is a King?


E. The head of the public light.


A. What is the Senate?


E. An Ornament of the City: The Brightness of the Cittyzens.


A. What is a Soldier?


E. The Bulwark of the Realm, the Defender of a Country: a Honorable
service, a Messenger of Might: In some Countries, a People naught set by.


A What is Rome?


E. The Fountain of the Empire: a mother of Motions: a Possessour of
substance: a hostage for Romans, a consecration of eternal peace.


A. What is Rome, since it ruled by religion?


E. The Fou^tayne of Civil dissentio^, poured into sundry Kingedomes: A
Brothell house for Whores mayntenaunce: A Sa^ctuary for Murderers, and
Thieves: A Pardon* for homicide, the Temple of Idolatry: A deprivation of
Virtue: the execrable face of al ye furies.


A. What is Victory?


E. An Enemy to War: a Lover of peace.


A. What is Peace?


E. A quiet liberty.


A. What is the Court Haule?


E. A place for Brablers.


A. What are friends?


E. Goulden Images.


A. What is a friend?


E. He that healpeth in time of necessity.


A. What are Flatterers?


E. They that catch men like Fishes.


A. What is the best ease?


E. He which does good to most: and harm least?


STEPHANVS THAT THE HOPE OF IMMORtality, has converted many from Infidelity.
OUr almighty God has made a plentiful world:

But miserable fools, makes it to seem scarce: when the hidden goods,
bewrays the Gatherers.

All things created in the World, is fructfull.

Therefore,

Man being in the World, is fruictful.

Wherein?

Either in number of Uertues, through yt which he shall live. Either in the
number of Uices, by yt which he shall dye: and this is called Gain.

A. What does a man gain by getting the world?


E. The loss of his Soul.


A. What is the loss of the Soul?


E. The excludinge from endless Joy.


A. What is Joy?


E. The Jewel of health.


A. What is health?


E. The perfection of peace.


A. What is peace?


E. The whole rest of immortality.


A. What is immortality?


E. The endless Joy called felicity, which was from beyond time, and ever
shall be.


A. By whom is mortality crowned?


E. By Immortality: who as chief Creator, chooses whom he will and leaves
what he list.


A. What is a Creator?


E. The original of all things, that ever were, is, or shall be.


A. What is his name?


E. God almighty.


A. And why?


E. Because he is the same, from who^, and in whose power, are al things in
subjection, Man, Beast, Fysh, Foul, Serpent, Worm, Flies, Heaven, and Earth,
Hell, Sin, the Devil, and Death, who sees all things before they were,
what they are, and what they shall be: who also says, seek not out those
things, which are above thy capacity, because they are not subject to thee.


Stephanus Verses concludinge these questions.
The Tiger fierce, does follow kind,
The Dove by flight, does seek her rest,
The blessed ones, does show their mind,
Although of evil be possessed.
The Haughty Rock though fast he stand,
Is subject to the quakinge Earth.
The vile surmise of wicked Man,
Is forced by kind to lose his Breath.
Strive not therefore against the Stream,
The food yealdes such as labor gleane.
Vorax the capital God of Supersticion,
SO called of deuouringe, oppressinge and consuming by taking with vyolence
the Lands and Goods of Kings, and People, by persecutinge, for the truths
profession, by killinge to suppress, and darken the verity, for ye custom
claymeth auctority, after the which follows Superiority, which being
obtained, conte^neth Equality, and so remains as highest till the almighty
frustrate such Arrogancye.

Frauncis.
ITem that he sits in the first degree, and cheifest place in Heaven, and
has his Seat in the Highest Place. that Fraunces is Christ's Chancellor,
Treasorer, his banner bearer, and counsayler, and that he bears, the wounds
like Christ: and where as Lucifer was ye highest set in the heaven, being
long since displaced, Fraunces has his room, implying, yt there is found
none like him, for he, has observed the law of the highest.

Item that the dove sent from Noe out of the Arcke, signifies the order of the
barefoote Friars: also that, in all things, Frauncis was like the son of God,
whether this be horrible blasphemy, let all that be of God, Judge.

Pope Gregory the. 9. made him a Saint.

A Confirmation.
Friar Loy saw Christ crucified goinge before, and Frauncis talkinge with him,
and that Frauncis turned the River Tiber into Oil, it may be thought he killed
a number of Fyshe, but poisoned mo Souls. an uncharitable miracle.

Of Frauncis Birth by Mistress Picha his Mother I omit, and infinite other
Fables, because he must geeue place to more.

F. Gyles.
Friar Gyles was rapt into Heaven.

Dunstane.
SAynct Dunstane, held the Dyuell by the nose with a pair of Tongues, by which
is signified the strength of holy church: in the which act, the Legende
sets forth this toy to small commendacions: as also in the Alcharo^ of the
Barefoote Friars.

Such a number of preposterous Godds are to be found: so Saincted and made by
the master Demon, yt to write them al, would contain an huge volume.

These have I set only to sharpen the minds of well disposed, the better to
consider of the rest: and therefore the more earnestly pray to God almightye,
for Jesus Christ's sake, to keep us from such servile bondage, as our
forefathers have long continued in, and daily imploye our studies and wylles
to his glory, in which so doing, our assurance shall be perpetual, which God in
mercy grant.

Item in the Relics of Rome, the Pageaunte of Popes, the Forest of Hystories,
the Secrets of Nature, and Anotomie of the Mass, are all ready touched the
supersticious Gods and Saints of Romayne factions. I therefore omit the
same, shewinge thee whyther to resort, as also the principal Authors, from
whence they were first had. Legenda Sanctorum. Brunellus. Legenda aurea,
Mystery of Iniquity. Sermones discipulora^. Catalogus gloriae Mundi. Vita
Sancti Patricij. Vita Christi. The Flower of the Commandments. Vitae Patrum.
Methodius de Reuelationbus* with many others, whereby the time present may
behold as in a Crystal Glass like true traueylinge Pilgrims, as well the
freckles of counterfeit persuasions, as also the great spots of corrupt
Religion, which being thus espied, by the aid of the three Graces, Faith, Hope,
and Charity, we may attain to the heaven of celestial perpetuity.

A Recapitulation of the Sectarian Gods, by whose Heresies, much harm has
grown, to Gods true Church.
WHen the Image of the beast, a formed shape had found, The^ straightwais he
became to give the church a wound: Which church new erected, by force was put
down By PAPA the great God, which wears the triple crown.

His Heresye was and is of the Sacrament, that ye Son of God, borne of the
Uirgin Mary, was and is, in the Sacrament of their abominable Alter, Flesh,
Blood, and Bones: also they hold, that it is lawful to have Idols in Churches,
to geeue reverence to Saynctes canonized: also they hold, yt it is no sin to
murder the professors of Gods word and Uerity, replying that there is none
other Uerity, Doctrine, or Christianity, then what proceeds out of their
Diabolical Synagogue: neither any other religion to be holden for truth, but
that which proceeds from Rome. The Popes Apparel domestical, is a purple
velvet Cappe, edged with Armine, or other rych Furs, his upper Garment, a Red
or Purple cloak, even with his elbowes, under yt which is a black silk
Uesture, and under the Uesture a white lynnen Garment, edged with Gold and hunge
with pendentes or belles, his Pontifical adourninge is a tryple Crown of
great richesse, set with Stones of peerless value: his upper Garment, is a
Cope, more worth then his Conditions: he is carried on the Backs of four
Deacons, after the manner of carrying Whytepot Queens, in Western Maygames.

Basilides.
BAsilides, the name of an Heretic, who affirmed that Christ was not
crucified, but Simon Cireneus, who, as ye Eua^gelistes write, was constrained
to bear the Cross, when our Savior waxed faint, through effusion of blood
by his scorginge. He held that it was no offense to deny Christ in the time
of persecution: he denied the last resurrection: he also affirmed, ye
Uirginitie was of no greater merit, then Marriage, but equal with it. He was
about the year of our Lord. 110.

Cataphriges.
THese Heretics, took their name of one Montanus of Phrigia, and
Archheretique, who affirmed that the Holy Ghost was geeuen to him, and not to
the Apostles. They Baptized not in the name of the Trinity: and used to
Baptyze men after they were dead. They did also condemn the second Marriage.
This Sect began in the year. 170.

Apelles.
This fellow began his Heresy in Greece, he denied the knowinge of God, as
that he knew not the God whom he worshipped, and that Christ was not very
God in deed, but a fantasy appearing unto men as a man, he was about the
year. 174.

Pharisees.
PHarisees were before Christ his coming. 125. years: they took their names
of Phares, seperating them as a people more worthy then other, taking upon
them Pharah or Pharasch of expou^ding the law of Moses and the Prophets. They
believed that god alone was only the true god, and that Christ's coming should
be profitable for them, and yet when he came, they persecuted him: they were
proud bosters of their deeds. There garments were large and wide, and on the
skyrtes of their gowns were broad gards, whereon were written sundry Charectes
in the Hebrew, and they named these, Philacteria.

Saduces.
These had their name of Zedec, which signifies rightfulnes, and called
themselves Zedechim, that is just and right. These sprang up after the
Pharesies: they believed that body and soul should both perish together, and
that neither the godly should receive any reward, for his good works, nor the
wicked should receive pain for his evil deeds, otherwise the^ in this life.
They held that there was neither hell nor Heaven, nether Angel nor spirit: and
that it was in our own powers, either to have felicity or misery. They were
enemies against the Pharisees, and yet with the Pharases agreing to persecute
Christ Jesus.

Essees
Were a kind of sect, hating marriage, they came together in great companies and
held opinion that evil souls were dispersed in the Ocean seas, there to be
tormented by the tempests.

Cerdo^.
An heretic of Cerdonia who affirmed that Christ was never borne of a woman,
and that he had no flesh, nor suffered any passion, but that he feined to
suffer: he denied God to be ye father of our lord Jesus Christ, and ye God was
known and Christ unknown: god was holy, Christ he said to be unholy: he
denied the old Testament, saying that it was the work of an other God, and not
of the universal God: which other God was the beginning of the universal
mischief: he was after Christ our lord 144 years.

Valentinianus.
THis Heretyke held that Christ did pass through the Uirgin, as the Wind
passed through a Pype.

Martion.
THis heretic was Disciple to Cerdo^, born in Cinope, a City of PONTVS who
being at Ephesus in ye time of S. John the Euangeliste, feigned that there were
2. Gods: the one the maker of the law and world, the other to be more
mighty (the father of our lord Jesus) He held that souls are saved, but the
bodies rise not again. He disalowed of Wedlock.

Sabellicus.
A Notable Heretic deniynge Jesus Christ to be any of the three persons, and
that he was not ye son of God.

Manes.
AN Herityke which affirmed himself to be like christ, and sometime to be
co^forter that was promised to come.

Arrius
THis man was a Priest in the church of Alexandria in ye year of our Lord.
320. his error was yt the Son was not equal with the father in Deity, nor of
ye same substance: but that he was a very creature: he infected a merueilous
great number with his Heresy, for yt which the great counsel of Nice was holde^
by ye Emperor Constantinus Magnus: himself being present with 318 Byshopes.
Afterward Arrius horribly finished his life: for by going to the stool, his
guts went from him, and so he died.

Donatus.
THis Heretic affirmed that any congregation with out him and his Sectaries
were not Christian and that in the church were none evil, but all good, and
that they only pertained to the Church: he was a Numidian borne, about the
year of our Lord 353.

Macedonius.
BEing at Constantinople he maintained the heresy of Arrius.

Eunomius.
An envious heretic of Arrius sect, whereunto he added, that the son was in
every thing, unlike unto ye father: and that the holy Ghost had no medli^g with
the father nor the son* he affirmed that all which held the faith yt he
taught should be saved, had, they committed never so great sin, and continued
therein: he was about the year after Christ. 353.

Pelagius
Pelagius was an other Archeheretike his opinion was, that manne is justified
by his own works and not by faith in Christ. This Atheist was about the year
of our.L. 388.

Eutices
Was an Abbot of a Monastery in Constantinople about the year of our Lord 450.
He affirmed yt Christ had but one only nature, that is to say divine or of god,
like as he was one person.

This heresye was condemned in the Counsel of Ephesin, and Eutices sent into
exile.

John A leyd
This Rustical hedge god was at Mu^ster in Westphalia by occupatiao^ Tailour
naming himself king of new Jerusalem: a ringleader of ye Anabaptists: he so
seduced the people, yt he brought them to utter co^fusio^: he denied Baptism
to Infants: he had one Gnipperdolling to his Prophet, and Cretching to his
co^paignio^, his end was to be sterued to death in an Iron cage: before this
Heretic, was borne two Swords: which betokened the Government of two
Kingdoms, Heaven, and Earth: A round Globe, with a Cross: and a Sword thrust
through the Globe, signifyinge that he was King over the whole World.

David George.
THis Blasphemous fellow, an other Heretic, naming himself to be ye Messiah,
was borne at Delph in Holland: He said that he was Godds Nephew, and talked
with wild Beasts, and Birds in their Language, receyuinge his food of
them. He said that Heaven was empty, and that he was sent to choose and
apoinct the children of God, with other vain and absurd tromperies. After
changing his name to Ihon a Bruges, he came to Basil in Swizerland, and there
after. 12. years died: His Errowre was, that by him came salvation: and after
three years, after his burial he should rise again. Ere two years were
finished he was taken up, and with his Coffyn, hanged on a Gallows.

Henry N.
THis strauagant Heretic, Henry Nicolas, otherwise called Harry Clash a
Fleming supposed, has by the healpe of others, sent forth, diverse blasphemous
Books to the great hurt of many lightbrayne Christians. And by his disciple
one Christopher Vitell, Ioyner, one altogether unlearned, sauinge that he is
somewhat erroniously, Bewitched has geeuen forth certain books here
vndernamed: naminge themselves, and their Adherentes the Family of Love. They
feign a Government of Immortality, to be by their deifyinge immortality: they
confess themselves to be tempted: wherefore they appoynct, auricular
confession, (nothing to the forgeuenes of sins): They sin til they come to
their perfection: then sinnelesse: and so able to bring other to the same,
being of their Family: They will have nothing to be disliked, yt is done by
their Elder.

The said. H. N. was first of Amsterdame and driven from thence, because of his
Errors, and went to Roterdam, and from thence to Collen: From whence proceaded
al these wicked Errors. The names of his converted ones, be of. 3. degrees. 1.
The co^minalty of the holy ones, 2. The upright understanding ones, 3. The
illuminate Elders,
The names of. H. N. his Books bearinge the name, of the Family of Love.
The cryinge Voice. The first Epistle and first exhortation. A Dialogue between
the Father and the Son. The true and spiritual Tabernacle. The published
peace upon Earth. The Euangelium Regni. The declaration of the Mass. The new
Jerusalem. The prophecy of the spirit of love. The Glass of righteousness.


Certain vpstart Anabaptisticall Errors,
That Christ took not flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary.

That Infantes of the Faithful ought not to be baptized.

That a Christian man, may not be a Magistrate, or bear the Sword and office
of auctority.

That it is not Lawful for a Christian to take an oath.

These Hellish sorts of Errors are more preposterous and wicked, the^ ye
laws or statutes of ye Paga^s, although in the respect of any co^mendatio^:
bad is ye best: for as the devil, aucthor of all mischief began to infect
the former Age with illusions, so now in these laterdayes he has almost
poisoned the remained seeds, with all abominations.

First in Delphos, then in Euboea, at Nasamone, and among the Dodonean Oaks,
through whose huyge Boughs, the whistlinge wods seemed to yield forth ye
Thondringe clamor of Deuylles: then began worshipping of formed shapes, as of
Saturn in Italy, of Jupiter in Candie, of Juno in Samos, of Bacchus in India,
and at Thebes, of Isis, and Osyris in Aegipt, of Vesta at Troia, of Palas
Tritonia among ye Aphrica^s, of Mercury in France, and Germany, of Minerua at
Athens, of Apollo at Delphos, at Chio, at Rhodes Patia, Troada Thymbria, of
Diana in Delos, and in Scythya, of Venus in Paphos Cyprus, Gnydos and Citheros,
of Mars in Thracia, of Priapus in Hellespe^tus, of Vulcane in Lypara and
Lemnos: Simon Magus at JERUSALEM, MACHOMET in Mecha, PAPA in ROME, who as the
former Pagans set up Images of their fathers to be honored: so likewise has
ye pestilent Church of Superstition mayntayned Idols, yt very ceremonies of
the heathen pagans: stocks, stones, gold, silver, and other metal to be
worshipped. This apish religion, nevertheless being espied, is suffered and of
some laughed at, but not subverted: so while the world haiteth between two
opinions, suffering ye Mo^ster to rule as him lists, all are so stained, some
with Idolatry, some with supersticio^, some with Schism, Arrianisme, Apostacy and
infidelity, yt from King to Priest, and from Priest to People, ye head is
Hypocrisy. I do most earnestly beseech thee, dear bought Creature: better to
consider of God his Benefits, and holy religion, lest he make thee partaker,
with the greater people (at this day) the Armenians, Arabians, Persians,
Syrians, Assyrians, Medes, Egyptians, Numidia^s, Lybians, Moors, Brasilians,
Tartarians, Scythians, Aethiopians, Faythlesse Christians, Romans, and an
Infinite number of Kingdoms and people, which do far surmount the army of
true Christians, and so seclude thee from his favor and Kingedome, by
harkeninge to fantasy and omitting the verity. The only good God, and merciful
father evermore pardon our offenses, and defend us from this yoke of
counterfayted carnality, both now and ever.

Banaster.
THis irreligious caytife, held an Opynion, that no man ought to fear God.
etc.

Eurynomus.
A Devil, who as the Ancient Greeks supposed, did eat and consume, the
flesh of Dead men, leauinge the bones bare: Whom they painted in a figure
terrible, having long Teeth or Tuskes, syttinge in the Skin of a Vultur, of
color between Black, and Yealow. A fit God for such Companions.

SEra nimis Vita est crastina, viue hodie.
To morowes Life is to late, live to day.
AS God is good, and best of all,
So man is ill, and subject thrall.
Ill by good, is made better,
Then man to God must be detter.
Though all be many, and one be few,
And fewste make many returnde to one,
Then many men earthy what do they show,
Since all and every stands not alone.
One is said simple, where more are in place,
The more thought the stronger, each cause to defend,
One God and one King, yet still kepes the grace;
Creation and kingdom bryngs al to an end.
The^ one from beginning which al things have made,
VVil every other so gather to gether,
That each thing in his kind clearly shall vade,
The worlds beautye begins to wither.
Then shall this summething a nothing make,
When all shall be vacant, as when he began.
Of nothing, in no place, cannot less be.
When that which was, is not, as souls shall the^ see.
FINIS.
The names of the Authors, out of whom this work is gathered.
ANdreas Theuet Aristoteles. Alex. Aphrod. Aristophanes. Apollodorus. Apul^ius.
Albertus Magnus. A. Gellius. Aratus. Beatus Rhenan. Cicero. Catullos. Cornelius
Tacitus. Coelius Rhod. Censorinus. Diodorus Siculus. Erasmus Rot. Eusebius.
Euclides. Fulgentius. Franciscus Picus. Franciscus Philel, Flaccus. Georgius
Pictorius. Hesichius. Hermes. Homerus. Hesiodus. Hel^anus. Julius Firmicus.
Isidorus. Inuenalis. Joan. Picus. Ioannes Boemus. Ioannes Baleus. Lactant.
gram. Lactant Firmian. Lucianus. Marcus Varro. Martianus. Manilius. Martialis.
Manobius. N^so. Orpheus. Propertius. Plinius. Palaephatus. Pindarus. Plato.
Plutarchus. Phornutus. Pontanus. Ptolemaeus. Politianus. Philelphus. Qu.
Fabius. Seneca. Solinus. Salustius. Strabo. Seruius. Spanhemius. Tibullus.
Theocritus. Th. Beconus. Virgilius. Valerius Maxim. Guilielmus Gratarolus.
Xenophon.
With many others.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fleete-streete, near unto Saynct Dunstanes Church, by
Thomas Marshe. ANNO DOMINI. 1577.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


