A Prymer in English, with certain prayers and godly meditations, very
necessary for all people that understand not the Latyne tongue.

Cum priuilegio Regali.



Almanake for.xv. years.
The date of the year. Ester day. Golden no^bre. Dn^icall lettre. Leap year.
W.d.xxxiiij. v. Apryll. xv. D. W.d.xxxv. xxviij. March. xvj. C. W.d.xxxvj.
xvj. Apryll. xvij. A B. W.d.xxxvij. j. Apryll. xviij. G W.d.xxxviij. xxj.
Apryll. xix. F. W.d.xxxix. vj. Apryll j. E. W.d.xl. xviij. March. ii. C D.
W.d.xlj. xvij. Apryll. iij. B. W.d.xlij. ix. Apryll. iiij. A. W.d.xliij. xxv.
March. v. G W.d.xliiij. xiij. Apryll. vj. E F W.d.xlv. v. Apryll vij. D.
W.d.xlvj. xxv. Apryll. viij. C. W.d.xlvij. xviij. Apryll. ix. B W.d.xlviij.
viij. Apryll. x. G A.

KL January has.xxxi. days. The moon has, xxx. days.
iii A The Circumcision of our lord Luke the.ij. 1 b 2 xj c God bound him
self by promise to Abraham and to his sede: to be their god: upon a condicyo^
that they would believe in him and be perfect, and he sealed the obligation with
the seal of Circumcision. Genises.xvij. 3 xix d 4 e 5 viij f The twelfe day.
Math. the ij. In this day the church reme^breth thaperynge of the star in
the cast unto ye three learned and wise men: which star brought them to
Jerusalem, read thystorye, in the second chapter of Mathewe. 6 g 7 xvj A 8 v
b 9 c 10 xiij d 11 ij. e 12 f 13 x g When it was noised yt Christ ye king of
Jews was borne. anon Herod feared him self least he should lose his kingdom
/ and the commons feared them self also, least he should not give place to this
new king now born without great blood shedynge, which troublouse fear showed
them altogyder to have little faith in their prophets, and especially in
Esaie prophesyeng his kingdom to begin, to be increased and stablyssheded
with peace in right Judgment and in due order doing all things, for
evermore. Esaie.ix. 14 A 15 xviij b 16 vij c 17 d 18 xv. e 19 iiij. f 20 g 21
xij A 22 j b 23 c 24 ix. d The co^uersio^ of Paul act. ix Saint Paul, whiles
he was in persuynge Christ, received grace, where ye may se that grace was
given him, and he was converted when he not only did not deserve it, but
whiles he faught against it and against the giver thereof / read thystory. act.
the ix. 25 e 26 xvij f 27 vj g 28 A 29 xiiij b 30 c 31

KL February has.xxviij. days. The moon has.xxix. days.
d Of the chyrchynge of women it is written in the third book of Moses called
Leuitici the.xij. chapter. 1 xj e The purifica. of our lady. luc. ij As Christ
submytted him self to the law of circumcision: so would he be brought of his
mother in to the temple fulfyllynge the law of purification also with her,
although they neded it not, for she conceived him without spote of sin
perseue ringe evermore a pure virgyne But as exposideth this place Paul in
the.iiij. chap. to the Galathians: sayng wha^ the full time was come: god sent
forth his own son made of the woman, made subject to the law, to lose and
to redeem them which were under ye law, yt we thus purchased and wo^ne by his
blood should receive ye right title of thenheritau^ce of his sons. Mathie
Apostle. actorum.i. Mathias before his election was one of the.lxx. discyples
which ever abode with their master Christ from their first calling, and
slipte not from him never to come again as some men dream. 2 xix f 3 viij. g
4 A 5 xvj. b 6 v. c 7 d 8 xiij, e 9 ij. f 10 g 11 x. A 12 b 13 xviij. c 14 vij.
d 15 e 16 xv. f 17 iiij. g 18 A 19 xij. b 20 i. c 21 d 22 ix e 23 f 24 xvij. g
25 vj. A 26 b 27 xiiij c 28

KL March has.xxxj. days The moon has.xxx.
iij d The Creation of the world Genesis.1. 1 e 2 xj f God drew forth the
light out of the darkness, and yet one is contrary to the other, God makes
one contrary of an other, of a sinner he makes a ryghtwyse man, of a troubled
soul a quiet conscience, of the seek he makes ye hole, before we feale heaven
we must taste hell, that is to say feel in our conscience ye condempnatio^
of our sin we know how sweet and how gentle is the mercy of god: we
must feale, how bitter and froward is our sinful and sturdye nature, like as
out of the darkness he drew forth the day, so out of dark false opinions and
diverse sects shall he draw forth the clear light of his true word which is
every where one like it self, before he liftede up Ada^ and Eve with his
comfortable promise: he threw the^ down with his heavy judgment Genisis.iij. 3
g 4 xix. A 5 viij. b 6 c 7 xvj. d 8 v. e 9 f 10 xiij. g 11 ij. A 12 b 13 x. c
14 d 15 xviij. e 16 vij. f 17 g 18 xv. A 19 iiij. b 20 c 21 x^j. d 22 i. e 23 f
24. ix g The salu. of our lady. Lu. i. Our lady, as soon as she, co^sidrynge
her unworthiness, humbled her self to the pleasure of god and believed his
message, by ye operation of the holy ghost was made the mother of Christ. 25
A 26 xvij. b 27 vi. c 28 d 29 xiiij. e The pasion of our savior Jesus christ
Matheu.xxvj. 30 iij. f 31

KL Apryll has.xxx. days. The moon has.xxix.
g The Resurectio^ of our lord Matheu.xxviij. 1 xj A 2 b Christ is deed for
our sins and is risen for our rightwisnes Romanorum. the iiij. Our savior
Christ took upon him to dye for our sakes: he took our sins upon him, and
let^e death and even the very pains of hell assail him, and to take their
pleasure over him: but yet could they not ouerco^me him for he was stronger,
then they and rose up from them all, and trod them under his fete, and all
this did he to make us fre from these dedly and lothely monstres that we might
be lords over them. This if we believe: lo, now are they under our fete also,
which victory to obtain, is impossyble for our own powers, for it was he
that through this victorious battle was made of his father our rightwisnes, our
holiness, our redemption as it is wryte^ i^ the first chapitour of the first
epistle to the Corinthyans, and this was the cause wherefore he took our mortal
nature upon him. and suffered his passion, and rose again the third day. 3
xix c 4 viij. d 5 xvj. e 6 v f 7 g 8 xiij. A 9 ij. b 10 c 11 x. d 12 e 13
xviij. f 14 vij. g 15 A 16 xv. b 17 iiij. c 18 d 19 xij. e 20 i f 21 g 22 ix. A
Saint George 23 b 24 xvij. c Mark the Evangelist. The epistle of Peter the.v.
chapitour. The office of an Evangelist is first to throw down and to co^founde
man, declaryng gods co^maundme^tes to be fulfilled of no man, thus leaving
every man a sinner: secondaryly to erec^e and to comfort him again declaryng
his merciful and sweet promyses. 25 vi. d 26 e 27 xiiij. f 28 iij. g 29 A 30

KL May has.xxxj. days. The moon has.xxx.
xj. b Philip and James. Math. ye.x. In the scole of the Cross, we learn to
know god. 1 c 2 xix. d Thynuencyon of the cross Christ said unto all men,
Luke the.ix. chapitour. 3 viij. e 4 f if any man will come after me: he must
forsake himself, and take his cross upon him daily / and follow me, or else
he is not worthy of me. God made man first to his symylytude and after his own
likeness, Genesis in the fyst chap. ye is to say he made him good ryghtwise,
pure, perfect, and innocent, but afterward this godly image and heavenly favor
or likeness he lost through sin, and so became like him self, yt is to say
a sinner, vnryghtwyse, filthy / imperfect, and so such children he begat, for
all the children of Adam gotten and borne by natural propagation are sinners,
when Adam was an hundred and thyrty year old he begat a son after his own
likeness and symylytude, Genesis the fyft. wherefore to do of this sinful
symylytude of our father Adam and to do upon us goddys likeness again, we
must be regenerated and borne a new (that is to say) baptized, yt which
sacrament circumcision figured: here now are we borne of god, John^ the first
chapitour, here do we upon us Christ to be like him again in the third to 5
xvj. g 6 v. A 7 d 8 xiij. e 9 ij. d 10 e 11 x. f 12 g 13 xviij A 14 vij. b 15 c
16 xv. d 17 iiij. e 18 f 19 xij. g 20 i. A 21 b 22 ix. c 23 d 24 xvij. e 25 vj.
f 26 g 27 xviij A 28 iij. b 29 c 30 xj. d 31 (...) v. d the angel. But
Elysabeth callled our lady blessed because she believed, and said the message of
the lord shall be fulfilled in the. Luke the first. 5 e 6 xiij. f The
translation of saint Thomas, presthod translated, must needs there be a
translation of ye law also, to ye hebreus the.vij. chapitour. 7 ij. g The
sunday after the feast of saint Thomas is ever relyque sunday. If the children
of Israel were as many in nombre as the sands of the sea, yet shall there be
saved, but their relyques that is to say but very few. I say in the.x.
chapitour and alleged of Paul in the nyentene to the Rhomains. 8 A 9 x. b 10 c
11 xviij. d 12 vij. e 13 f 14 xv. g 15 iiij. A 16 b 17 xij. c 18 i. d 19 e
Margrete vergyne and martyr To co^tynue a virgyne I have no co^maundme^t of the
lord. But thus is my mind as follows, the first pistle to the corinthyans
the.vij. chapitor. 20 ix. f 21 g Marie Magdalene. Luke the.viij. and Math.
xxvij. unto Marie Magdalene, Christ appeared first of all after his
Resurreccyon Mark.xvj. 22 xvij. A 23 vi. b 24 c James thapostle.j.
Corinthios.xv. and Actuum.xv. 25 xiiij. d Saint Anne. There was one Anna but not
this which came in to the temple when Christ was presented and she preched him
to all that looked for his redemption in Jerusalem. Luke the.ij. chapitour. 26
xij. e 27 f 28 xj. g 29 xix. A 30 b 31

KL August has.xxxj. days The moon has.xxx.
viij. c Peter's presonment called Lammes day, in the acts of the Apostles
the.xij. chapitour Peter was prysoned for prechynge gods word. 1 xvj. d 2 v.
e 3 f 4 xiij. g 5 ij. A The transfiguration of our lord. Matthew the xvij. 6 b
The name of Jesus, Matthew the first, the.iiij. of acts there is no another name
under heaven given to men whereby they must be saues but all only this.
actuum.iiij. 7 x. c 8 d 9 xviij. e Saint Laurence. 10 vij. f There is no heed in
any other but in this stone our savior Jesus Christ in the same chapytour. 11 g
12 xv. A 13 iiij. b 14 c Thassumpcyon of our lady. blessed is he whom thou have
chosen and taken up to the, to dwell in they house. for such one shall be
satisfied with the heavenly and pleasant goodnesses of thy holy temple, the.lx.
and.v. psalm. 15 xij. d 16 i. e 17 f 18 ix. g 19 A 20 xvij. b 21 vj. c 22 d 23
xiiij. e Saint Bartholome thapostle. Apo^^le is as much to say as lent / for no
man ought to preche but he be first called and sent of god. 24 iij. f 25 g 26
xj. A 27 xix. b Augustine Bishop and doctor The headyng o^ John^ Bap. Matthew
the.xiiij. The cause wherefore John^ Baptiste was pryso^ed and headyd follows,
he monysshed Herod louyngly and told. 28 c 29 viij. d 30 e 31

KL September has.xxx. days. The moon has.xxix.
xvj. f him charitably, supposyng to have wo^ne him saying / sir it is not
lawful for you to have your brothers wy^e. Against a great plage god sends
forth his word, he sterreth up his prechers and suffers them to be
persecuted, before the universal floode, he sent Noe to warn them before.
Before ye brennyng, and synkynge of Sodom, and Gomorre. Loath was sent to give
them warnyng, before so many grievous plages which fell upon Thegypcyons, and
Pharo before they were drowned in the red see: god sent unto them to warn
them and to exorte them Moses and Aron. The children of Israel had ever
warning before of their Judges and prophets when any afflyctyon or plage was
at hand, did not Ioell in Achabs days king of Israel give them warning of
the locustes. Then had they Helyas / and an hundred more Prophets which
Abdias did hyde.j. Regum the.xviij. chapitour. 1 v. g 2 A 3 xiij. b 4 ij. c 5 d
6 x. e 7 f The birth of our lady 8 xviij. g 9 vij. A 10 b 11 xv. e 12 iiij. d
13 e 14 xij. f 15 i. g 16 A 17 ix. b 18 c 19 xvij. d 20 vj. e Matthew Thapostle,
and Euangeliste. Matthew. ix. 21 f 22 xiij. g 23 iij. A 24 b 25 xj. c 26 xix. d
27 e 28 viij. f Michaell Tharchaungell. 29 g 30

KL October has.xxxj. days. The moon has.xxx.
xvj. A 1 v. b 2 xiij. c 3 ij. d 4 e 5 x. f 6 g 7 xviij A 8 vij. b Dionise
Ariopagite. Act. xvij. After this god sent the^ Amos and Jonas in Israel:
Amos told them of the miserable captivity of the Assirians. 9 c 10 xv. d 11
iiij. e 12 f 13 xij. g Then was there Esaias and (...) 14

KL November has.xxx. days The moon has.xxix.
d All Halows day. 1 xiij. e All soullen day. 2 ij. f as was among the
people of Israel and Judah when their miserable captivity, and soden 3 g 4 x. A
5 b Saint Leonarde. 6 xviij. c destruction hanged over their heads. For the
higher ungodliness and sins of the kings and of their subjects grew and
(...) 7 vij. d 8 e 9 xv. f 10 A Saint Line Pope. 26 viij. b telling them of
the captyuyte that was now at hand and rebuked them sore because they would
not hear but despised gods messengers, and his prechers. Read the hystory of
the kings 27 28 xvi. d 29 v. e 30

KL December has.xxxi. days. The moon has.xxx.
f 1 (...) ^ (...) last (...) Christ's (...) so many wry^^^^ and prechers
thereof there is like troble and calamyte abydyng us: hangyng over our Thomas
thapostle. John^.xx. heads? Are we not yet Israel? have we not daily / Noah
Moses / Aharon / with ye Christmasday. Math. the.ij. Saint Steven. Act. vi.
and.vij. John^ Euangelyst. John^.xxi. Thynnocentes. Matthew.ij. Thomas
tharchebysshope. Prophets? ye and Christ (...) 14 (...) ^ 15 (...) ^ 16 (...)
^ 17 (...) ^ 18 ^ c 19 xiiij. d 20 iij. e 21 f 22 vi. g 23 xix. A 24 b 25 viij.
c 26 d 27 xvi. e 28 v. f 29 g 30

(...), the ^^^her of m^^^yes, and god of all consolation, my God, my Father, I
knowledge my self unfeignedly with heart, mind, and mouth now before the to
have offended grievously thy high majesty and godnes. I knoweledge my self to
be full of sin, full of unfaithfulness and a servant unprofitable, for all thy
holy co^maundmentes have I transgressed and broken. First I have not set all my
believe, confidence, trust, and hope in the. I have not loved the with all my
heart, with all my soul, mind, and powers of my soul. Secundarely I have
divided thy honor and worshipe from the and given it to thy creatures and deed
things imagyned of my nowne fantasy I mean in the myseusyng of images. Thyrdly
I have abused thy holy name by fal^ly and deceptfully swerynge to the
hyndraunce of my neighbor: and ydely and vaynly have I used thy holy name / I
have not said ne done neither thought all things to thy glory. Fourthly / in
the saboth day I have not given my self to hearing, reading and lernyng thy
holy scriptures: nether visited the syke and poor counfortles, nor ceased
from my nowne sinful will and lust praynge at all times thy will and not mine
to be fulfilled / wherefore I ask the mercy and desire ye of forgyuenes.
Furthermore I have not honored my father and mother I have not so much set by
them / as thou co^maundest me, ne obayed them neither counforted them or help
them etc. I have slain, I have broke wedlock / I have stolen, and borne false
wytnes. Also I have coueted my neighbors house and his other goods
unlawfully / I have desired his wife, his servants, his catell etc. wherefore
I cry the mercy most merciful Father / and desire the for that love which
thou bear to they dear son, my Savior Christ to forgive me in his
blood, for when I went about to seek the to trust, to believe in the or to do
any thing to thy glory, yet would not this lust and concupiscens, this
contagiouse original poysone and flesshly dregs drawn of our father Ada^
suffer me perfectly to do that I would have done: through this natural
concupiscens I strive and fight daily against thy holy ghost in me which
unlawful lust and desire I knowledge to be a grievous sin, against thy
hyghnes if thou should judge me streytely after the law without ye which
concupiscence I can not be. wherefore I being a sinner in my self / without
all ryghtwysnes, without all goodness, all holiness, all deseruynge, am come now
by faith before the unto Christ's mercy scole and ryghtwysnes unto his goodness,
holiness, deservings and satisfactions, desiring the (o mercyful father) for
his deaths sake that is ryghtwisnes, his wisdom, his holiness, his goodness,
his merits, and satis^^ctions, may be mine and serve me for my forgyuenes and
salvation / for likewise as thou gave me him to dye for my sins: even so
believe I that thou have given me with him all his to be mine and to serve me
for my salvation wherefore glory / worship / Impery / and rule be to the (oh
Father) with the Son in the holy ghost for ever. Amen.

Forthermore, I have not given meat to the hungry / drink to ye thrysty /
lodged the harbourlesse / clothed the naked / vysyted the syke / counforted and
releefte the men in prisone / for I have not expended of how great weight
these words of thy son my savior Christ ar, neither believed him saying. In
as much as ye have done these things unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me. Math. the.xxv. But I have bestowed my gold
/ and silver after my lewd lust and concupiscence, in excess of meat and
drink, in gorgyous apparel of my body etc. where I should not have bestowed it
or else not so largely and excessiuely have bestowed it, not regarding in the
mean time to suffer the dear beloved brethren of Jesus Christ to go naked and
perysh for cold and ho^gre. Thus grievously have I sinned leuyng thy
commandments (o father) to fulfill the desire of my flesh, the word, and
the devil. wherefore I cry the mercy / my god / my father / desyryng
forgyuenes in thy blood / and for the dethes sake of thy son my savior
Jesus Christ, to whom with the be glory world without end. Amen.

Then say the one and fyfty psalm, called Miserere mei deus, the fourth among
the.vij. Psalms.

The preface / unto the reader.
Among other innumerable pestilent infections of books and learnynges / with
the which christen people have been pyryously seduced and deceived (brought up
in diverse kinds of dyffydence and false hope) I may judge and that chiefly /
those to be pernicyous / on whom they be wont in every place to pray / and have
also learned by heart / both curyously and with great scrupulosite to make
rehearsal of their sins. These books (though they abou^ded in every place with
infynyte errors / and taught prayers, made with wicked folishnes / both to god
and also to his saints) yet by cause they were garnished with glorious tytles
and with read letters promysyng much grace and pardon (though it were but
vanite) have sore deceived the unlearned multitude / one is called ye gardeyn
of the soul / another the paradyse of the soul / and by cause I will be short
look thou thy self / what diverse and glorious names be given unto them /
wherefore here needs sherpe reformation / yea and many of them be worthy to be
utterly destroyed. The same judgment and reformation is olso to be had of the
books of passions and saints lives called legendes for in these are also many
things added / whereof Satan is author / how be it sith neither time
suffycyent is given to one man / neither ye burden of this reformation of one
may be sustained. I thought it enough in this place only to have monyshed you
trusti^g that god in time coming shall add to those things both time
conuenyent and also light. Therefore here (as entryng my matter) first I will
declare after a simple and plain manner (by the which even as by a glass thou
shall know) what ye knowledge of sin is, and how we ought truly to pray
following the rehearsal of the commandments and of the Pater noster. And I
duobte not but this one prayer is sufficyent enough to them that pray how often
soever it be, or what soever they require, yea if they take but one little part
of it which so ever it be, for a good prayer stondeth not nether co^systeth in
the multitude of words as Christ says in the syxte of Matthew. But here
stondeth the pythe that thou syghe to god often from the botom of thyn heart,
for to have strenght to do his will, to fulfill his commandments, and this
syghe ought to endure contynually. Therefore I desire al persons that from
hensforth they forget such prayers as be saint Brigittes and other like,
which great promyses and perdons have falsely aduau^ced. And you shall return
unto this simple prayer needful for every Christen, whose come^ use does yet
persevere among all men, if they did understand it, and applied their minds
to it. Such virtue has the Pater noster, that the longer and the more thou
use it, the swetter and more acceptable it is, which I desire that the master
of this prayer co^ferme Jesus Christ which is blessed eternally. So be it.

IT was never ordained without ye synguler providence of god that the
multitude of Christen people should learn by heart the ten commandments,
the Creed, and the Pater noster, for truly he that understands these has
the pythe of al those things, which holy scripture does conteyne, and what
soever may be taught necessary unto the Christen, and that purely and
plentyfully, besides that so bryefly and clearly that noman can compain or
excuse him self justly, sith that (which is required to the blessed life) is
neither ouertedyous, nor yet so hard but it may be performed. Three things
there be, necessary to be known to obtain eternal life. The first is that
thou know what is expedient to be done, and what to be undone. The secunde when
thou perceyuest that thou of thyn own strenght cannest neither do, neither
yet avoid that which thou art bound to do or to eschew, that then thou know
of whom to seek, find, and receive this strenght. The third is how thou
should seek, and obtain it. And hereunto I will give the an ensample to
thentent yt thou may ye more euydently perceive it, a man which is diseased
with any manner of syckenes. First enquireth with what kind of sycknes he is
infect, and then co^sydereth he what strength he has, what he is able to do,
and what he can not do, the^ searches he for a medecyne to ley to his disease,
so that by this means he may get his health and that he may afterward be able
to do and leave undone all things as the hole. Finally, when he has found
this medecyne, he will take it, and use it / likewise the commandments of god
do teach a man to know his infirmite, that he may understand and feel, what
he can do, and what he can not, what he can leave and what he can not, so that
he may knowledge him a vicious person and a sinner, after he has knowleged him
self so, that then he may learn by faith, where to find remedy and grace
whereby he may be restored and justified and so may be able to fulfylle the
commandments. For faith pleynly declares god and his mercy showed and
given in Christ. But ye Pater noster, does teach how we should desire, ask,
and obtain this bountuous favor, as in a well ordered, meke, and faithful
prayer / which gets all these things, so that (fulfyllyng the
commandments of god) we may be saved and made blessed, wherefore (as I have
said) in these three consists the hole scripture, wherefore it is expedient to
begyne at the commandments, so that we may by them learn to knowledge our
sin and malice (as the spiritual infirmyte) which makes us feeble and weak
so that we can neither do, neither leave yt which we be bound to do, or to
leave.

The ten commandments.
THe first and most excellent table of Moses conteyneth three commandments,
and does show unto us what we owe to god, that is to say, what we ought to do
or eschew concerning those things which specially apperteyne unto god.
Therefore in the first of all the commandments we be taught what god requires
in every man's heart, and what man ought to judge and think of him / that is
that he look ever for the best of him, even as of a father, or of a special
friend and that without doubting, or any mistrust, with constant faith,
trust, and love, ever fearing to dysplease him, even as kind children fear
to dysplease their natural fathers, for very nature does teach that there is
one god of whom all our goodness spryngeth which is our socour in all
aduersyte, for this thing even the hethen did attribute and grant unto their
ydolles.

The words of this commandment ar these. Thou shall have no strange gods.
The secounde precept teaches us how we ought to order our self toward god
as consernynge our outewarde works before men and also inwardly in our own
consciences, which is that we honor ye name of god, for noman can show god as
he is in his own nature, neither to him self neither yet to any other / but
by his only name.

The words of this commandment ar these. Thou shall not take the name of god
in vain.
The third precept does show how we ought to behave our self toward god in
outward works / and in worshyppyng him.

The words ar these. Thou shall keep holy the saboth day.
Here may thou see how a man in these three precepts is taught / to order
him self toward god, in his understanding, thoughts of the heart, words,
and works, that is to say, thorough out all his life.

The secunde table. THe second and last table of Moses conteyneth seven
precepts following, and this shows us how we ought to behave our selves unto
our neighbor, both in doing and euyng undone.
The first of these does teach us what we be bound to do to the high officers
and such as be in authorite, ye which seeing that they be set to rule here, instead of god it is according that this precept be set next in place after
those three which d^ perteyne to god him self. The example of this
commandment concerning the personages be, Father, Mother, Lord, Lady,
Master, and Mastres.

The words ar these. Thou shall honor thy father and mother.
In the secunde precept of this table we learn how we ought to live with our
equales, and neighbors, and this does concern y^ person of man, that we
should hurt no man. But rather with our labor and diligence, to succurre and
promote them which is contained in these words.

Thou shall not kylle.
The third passes thy neighbors person, and shows what thou sholdest do
concerning his chyef possessions as wife, children, and kynsmen, that thou
neither defyle nor defame them. But that thou do thy diligence asmoch as lies
in the to save their honor, and dignite.

The words ar these. Thou shall not committee adultery.
The fourth entreats of thy neighbors other mouable goods teaching, that
thou take nothing from him, nor dymynyshe, nor hurt any thing that he has,
but rather to proffet, and encreace it.

The words ar these. Thou shall not stele.
In the fyfthe we are taught how to order our self concerning the name and
good fame of our neighbor, never to sclaunder him, but to help and defend
him asmoche as lies in us.

These ar the words of it. Thou shall bear no false wytnes against thy
neighbor.
Therefore it is forboden us to hurt any kind of our neigbours goods. But
contrarywyse commanded that we should encreace them. Now if we look on the
law of nature, we shall sone perceive how meruaillous, equal, good and
rightuous these precepts are, for there is nothing commanded in all these
that apperteyne either to god or to our neighbor, but that every man would
that it should be performed toward him self, if he were in the stead of god
or of his neighbor.

The two last precepts do reprove and condemn us for the wyckidnes and malice
of our nature, and teach us how pure we ought to be from all desyrynges of
the flesh and goods carnal. Here is the ghostly fight, the war, and
labor, wherein we ought to be exercysed all our life, which two commandments
are given in these words.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife, servants, maidens, catel, and
what soever he possesses.

A short conclusyon of the ten commandments.
Christ him self says in this manner, what soever ye would that men should do
to you / the same do you to them. In this is comprehended the law and all the
Prophettes. Math. vij. There is noman that for his great benefytes loves to
receive unkindness. There is noman, that will gladly suffer his name to be evil
spoken of by another. There is no noma^ which will be co^tente to be despised
of a proud man. Besides that / there is no man that loves the dysobedyence,
wrath, or unchasteness of his wife. There is no man which would be dyspoyled of
his possessions defrauded, deceived, sclaundered, oppressed. But rather all men
are of this nature that they had lever be favored, loved kyndely entreated,
helped and trusted of their neighbors, which all are commanded in these ten
precepts.

Of the transgressyon of the commandments.
Against the first precept offend they which in aduersyte use charms, and
wytcraftes, or at any time do trust to their help. They that have vowed thyr
faith to the devil. They which abuse letters, signs, hyrbes, words,
blessings, or such like. They that exercise any other kind of wytcrafte (as
there be many kinds) some use rods, some crystal stones, some clothes, and
some there be that burn milk some with charms do dygge up treasurs. These
and all such other are contrary to the first commandment.

They that co^ferre their life and works to the signs of heaven and to the
coniecturynge of sothe sayers putting observation and difference betwyxte time
and time, they that defend either them self or their catell, house, children,
or other goods from wolves, wepen, fire, or water, with any prescripte charm,
or supersticious prayer. They that ascribe their troble and aduersyte, to the
devil or other evil men. They that not louyngly and with glad heart, will,
accept prosperity and aduersyte / good and evil, and all things even as he
had received them of god / to whom we ought to give all thanks what soever
chance unto us. They that tempte god without any cause to prove what he will
do forthem, puttyng themselves in ieoperdy of body or soul. They that wax
proud of ryghtwysnes, cu^nyng or other spiritual gift. They that worshype
god or his saints, for temporal goods only or chyfly, forgettyng the
prophets of their souls. They that trust not every time and in every place
putting their co^fydence only in the mercy of god through out all their lives
and works. They that doubt in faith of the favor of god. They that regard
not ye unbelief and mystruste of other neither brings them to their poor to
believe and trust in the mercy of god. Of this place are all kinds of unbelief,
mistrust and desperation.

Against the secunde offends he that without a cause or of a custume sweryth
folyshely / he that forswereth him self / or keeps not his promise / he that
swereth or voweth to do any myschief / he that by the name of god does curse or
ba^ne / other he that folyshely tryfleth with god, wresteth (though it be in
sport) the words of scripture. He that in troble does not call on the name of
god, neither tha^keth him in all things, sweet, sower, good and evil welfare
and troble / he that seeks to be praised and honored for his virtue and
wisdom. He that falsely does call on the name of god, as heretykes do, and
which by pride have feigned them selves holy / he that prayseth not the name of
god in all things that chance unto him. He that withstondeth not all such
things as do sclaunder the name of god, and they that mysuse his holy name, or
by thoccasyon of it do evil deeds / add herunto vain glory, honor, and
pride of spiritual things.

Against the third, offends he that hears not, or teaches not the word
of god / he that prays not, and serves not god in spirit / he that will not
suffer god to have the glory of all his works / he yt puts any trust in
his works, affections, or desires / he that is not content to suffer all
things that god will put unto him / he that helps not other that they may
fulfylle these precepts, and forbyddeth not other yt would transgress them.

Against the fourth offends he that is ashamed of the poverty, or any
other worldly wretchedness or mysery of his parents / he that prouydeth not
such things as are necessary for them, as fode, and raiment. And much more
they which curse, banne, and beat them, which say evil by them, sclaunder
them, hate and disobey them. He that in his heart settyth not much by them for
gods commandments. He that does not honor them though they be cruel and
unrightful. He that obeys not to masters and officers / is not trusty and
faithful to them whether they be good or evil. He that maynteyneth not this
commandment / nor resysteth not them which do the contrary / hither confer
all the kinds of pride of disobedyence.

Against the fyfte, offends he that is angry with his neighbor. He that
says unto his neighbor Racha, in which word ar contained all kinds of
wrath and hatred. He that called an other fool, of which word spryng chekkes,
rebukes cursings, sclanderynges, judgments, mockers and such other. He that
does publyshe his neighbors offenses, and does not cover and excuse them. He
that forgyueth not his enemies. He that prays not for his enemies. He yt will
not love and do his duty to his enemy. Under this precept are contained all
the sins of wrath, hatred, manslaughter, bataylle pylage, burnynges, finally
of contention strife, chydinges, envy in the welfare of our neighbors, and
reioysyng of his hurt or troble. He that does not exercise the works of
mercy, and that unto his enemies. He that sets other by the ears, and
entyseth them to hate the one the other. He that styrreth up dyscorde among
other. He that does not reconcyle them, which be at defyau^ce. He that
withstondeth not nor preuenteth wrath, and debate, if he may.

Against the syxte offends, he that has to do with any sengle women, or is
an adulterer. He that takes any of his own kynne, or co^mytteth any such
vice He that uses persons against nature which are called du^me sins. He
that does noryshe and styrreth up his lust with uncleanly words, histories,
songs, and images. He that defyleth and corrupts him self with lokynge,
touching, or other wa^ton thoughts, wheru^to he casts favor. He yt
auoideth not ye causes, surfettyng, slouthe, ydlenes, sleep, the company of
such men and women.

He that with over gorgeous apparel, ^ deckynge himself, or with evil manners
entyseth otherto the lust of the flesh. He that does ministre house, license,
place time or help to the works of this abhomynable lust. He that defends
not an other manes chastyte with all his counsel and diligence.

Against the seventh offends he that uses theft, pyllage, or usury. He
that uses false weightes, and mesures, or that sells unlawful marchaundyse,
for other then they be. He that takes any inheritance unjustly or other
exaccion / he that delayeth, or denies the reward of works, or his detre. He
that lends not to his poor neyghbur / without taking any advantage. All
covetous men and that labor to be rich / and they that by any other means
keep and witholde other men's goods. He that lets not an (...). He that
warne^h not an (...) his hurt. He that let^eth his neigh^^urs prehemynence / he
y^ comes his neigh^ours advantage.

Against the eigh^ offends, he that in (...) does by (...) suppress^ the
truth (...) with lies (...) does hurt. ^hey which hurts (...) them ^^ateryng
double tongues / and are al ready to please such as be glad to here co^pleyntes.
He yt brings in ieopardy his neighbors life, or goods, or falcely judges
and expounds his words and works. He that gives heryng to such evil
tongues, and helps them, and does not resyste them. He that uses not his
own tongue, to defend and excuse his neighbors name. He that reproves not a
slaunderer. He that spredeth not abroad to the glory of god and commendation of
his neybours name asmoch as his wit discre^ion and reason iugeth to be
conuenye^t other men's virtues, hydyng their vices. He that holds his peace
knowing the truth, and withstondeth not them that so do.

Against the last two. The last two precepts ar ye very mark set before us
unto the which we must strive to come, by daily labor and penance trustyng in
the help of god, and in ^is favor* for our evil desires will (...) be utterly
destroyed until our flesh (...) ^ought and renewed in to another (...). The
five wits are (...) the five and syxte commandment* (...) six works of
mercy in the v. and (...).vij. dedely sins: pride in the first and second.
Lechery in the.vj. wrath and enny in the.v. Gloteny in the syxte / Sleweth in
the third, yea and in all other. Likewise the sins which are toward other /
show them selves thorugh all the commandments / for a man may offend
against all the precepts / by commaundyng, cou^sayllyng or helpyng other. The
sins wiche are called dumme / and cry for vengeance to god, are contrary to
the syxte and seventh commandments. In all these works we see none other
thing, but the love of our self which seeks his own and takes from god,
that which is gods, and from men those things that apperteyne to me^, it
gives no^hyng that it has / to god, nor to man / wherefore it may well be true
that (saint Augustyne says) the head of all sin is the love of our self. Of
this follows that the precepts commau^de none other thing but love. Again
forbede nothing but love. And that he yt keeps the commandments fulfylleth
nothing but love, again nothing but love breketh the commandments. And that
is it that Paul says, love is the fulfyllynge of all the commandments.
Even as wy^ked love (that is to say) the love of thy self is the brekyng of all
the commandments.

The fulfyllynge of the commandments.
THe fulfyllynge of the first commandment is fear, and love toward god,
with an unfeigned faith to trust constantly unto god in all things / to betake
ourselue pleynly and purely unto god in all points to mystrust and deny our
self utterly in all things whether they be good or bad / here put in what so
ever is written in the holy scripture, of faith, hope, and love toward god
which are shortly contained in this first precept.

The fulfyllynge of the secounde is. To praise, to honor, to bliss, and call
on the name of god, utterly to despise, and forsake our own name and glory /
so that god only have the praise, which alone works all things / here
takes place what thing soever is written in holy scripture of the praise of
god / of gyuyng thanks to him, of the name of god, of joy and gladness

The fulfyllynge of the third is / to betake our self holy to god / that he
alone may work in us, and do all things.

This commandment requires poverty of spirit, which should offer him self
to god as dead and not living in this world, that he may be his god / which
on him self may take both his name and work, according to the meaning of
the two foresaid commandments; herunto apperteyneth what so ever is
commanded unto us of worshyppynge god, of hearing gods word / of good
works, by which we may subdue the flesh to the spyryte, so yt all our life,
and all our works be gods and not our own.

The fulfyllynge of the fourth is, with full obedyence, and mekenes to submytte
him self to all officers, because it pleases god (as writes Thapostle Peter)
without co^tradyction, without compleynt, and without any grudgynge, herunto
apply what so ever things are written in scripture of obedyence, humylyte,
subiectyon, and reverence.

The fulfyllynge of the fyueth is / sufferaunce, mekenes, goodness, peace,
mercy, an heart that is full puryfyed with love, and swetenes, clean without
hate, wrath and bytternes not to his friends only / but also to his enemies /
yea and indyfferently to all men / hither confer all the instructions of
pacyence / gentelnes / peace / and unity.

The fulfyllynge of the syxte is chastyte / sobrenes / shamefastnes / not of
deeds only but of words and manners / yea and of thoughts. Besides that
atte^peraunce, of meat / drink / sleep / and what so ever does help ch^stite
/ hither apply all places of holy scriature, co^sernyng chastity / fasting /
sobryete atte^peraunce / prayer / watchyng / labors and in conclusyon all
things that maynteyne chastity.

The fulfyllyng of the seventh is poverty of spirit / kyndenes / liberalyte
spe^dyng of our own goods to proffet our neighbors / to live without
covetousness / and desire of riches / here gather all yt is wryte^ of
covetousness / of goods iniustly gotten and possessed / of usury / sotelty /
evil deceypte / of injury, and hurt done / of lettynge thy neighbors
proffet, or despysyng him.

The fulfyllynge of the eight is a peasyble, and hole tongue, which hurts
noma^ / but profyteth all men / which sets enemies at one / which excuses
and defends them that be noted vicyous persons and sinners. Such symplicite
and proffet is in speaking / herunto apperteyne al things which are spoken of
silence and speaking and what so ever touches / ye good name / honor / right
causes / and proffettes of thy neighbor.

The fulfyllyng of the last is the perfect and absolute pureness and despysyng
(in ye heart) of all temporal riches and pleasures which thing shall be done
perfectly in the life to come.

In all these things see thou non other thing but to love other, that is
love god and thy neighbor, which love seeks not dis own profet / but only
those things which belong to god, and to his neighbor which love yeldeth
and gives him self pleynly to every man, grauntyng the right gladly in thyr
necessyte the moderat use of all his goods and proffettes. Now seyst thou that
in all these ten commandments in a good order, and bryefly are contained
all kinds of informations, that are expedyent for man's life, which if any man
will do his diligence to keep truly / he shall never be idle, no not an hour,
but shall have occasion to do good deeds, so yt truly he shall never have need
to chose to him other straung works of man's inue^tion neither to be occupied
in such things, as in no place ar commanded and which be no thing
profyttable, neither to him self nor to his neighbor. It is evident yt in all
these precepts there is nothing written, which teaches us to serve our selves,
either to do, leave, or require of any man / that which consernyth our own
proffet, but only what we are bound to do to other (that is to say) to god and
to our neighbor. So that even blind men may well perceive that the
fulfyllynge of the commandments stondeth in love toward other, not
toward our self. For man of his own nature seeks and auoydeth sufficiently
/ that which is for (or against) his proffet / so that it needs not to move
him to it / but much rather to bring him from it. Therefore he lives best
which lives not to him self. And contrary he lives worste which lives to
him self. This is theffect that the ten commandments teach, whereby it is
manifest that there be but few that live well, ye: in that we are men / none of
us lives well. This known we must learn of whom to ask this excellent
gift, to live well, so that we may fulfill these commandments.

The Creed or Belefe.
THeffect of our Faith stondeth in three parts, as in it are rehearsed three
persons of the godly Trinite. The first is of the father. The second of the
Son. The third of the holy ghost / and to every one of these persons is
applied his operation.

This is the chyef Article of the faith, on y^ which all the other depend.

Here note two manner of beleues, first some there be which believe / that those
things be true which are spoken of god even as a man does believe those
things to be true which he hereth of the Turk / of the devil / and of hell.
This faith is rather a science / or a vain opinion then a sure trust / or
belefe. There is an other faith toward god / that thou do not only believe
these things to be true, which thou hear of god / but also trust to him
and betake / and commit thy self holy unto him / besides that / to have a
sure hope and confydence in him with the manner of a certain good presumptyon
upon him yt without doubt thou surely shall opteyne and receive of him / that
which thou hardest spoken of him / and that with such faith and co^fydence as
thou would give to no erthly man. Beyt in case yt the Turk (or any other
man) be greatly praised unto the / and that thou believe faithfully / that some
man is dyscrete / and worthy praise / yet for all that thou will not committee
thy self unto him / putting all thy trust and confydence in him. But this
faith which boldly betaketh him self to god / both in ieopardy of life and
death / knowlegynge that he is such as he is spoken of makes only a Christen
/ and obteyneth of god what so ever she desires / neither is there any false
heart that receives this faith / for this is the quyck faith which is
required in the first commandment which says thus: I am thy god / take no
strange gods / wherefore this In / is not put in vain but it is to be
observed with a notable sygnyfycatyon. For we do not say / I believe to god the
father or of god the father. But I bleue in god the father / in Jesus Christ:
and in the holy ghost / wherefore this faith ought to be had in none but in one
god / so that by this we confess also the godhed of Christ and of the holy
ghost / because we believe none other wise in the son / and the holy ghost
then we do in the father him self, For even as we have one faith in all three
persons / so all three persons are only one god.

The first part of the Belefe.
I Believe in God the father almighty maker of Heaven and Earth. That is I
forsake satan and al Idolatry / al charms wytchecraftes / and false hope / I
put my trust in noman of all the world / neither yet in my self, not in my
power, learning science, riches, wisdom, or what thing soever it be, that I
have or possess I put no confydence in any creature, whether it be in Heaven,
or in Earth. But I put my sure trust in only in one God which can not be seen
with man's iye, which can not be comprehended with man's wit, which made
Heaven and Earth, and alone rules all creatures. To him holy I submytte any
self / nothing fearyng, nor regardyng the malice of the devil, and his
fellows, for my god is above the^ all. Neyter would I put the less confidence
in god, though all men did forsake me and persecute me. Neither will I trust
him the less, because I am wretched and poor / because I am rude, and
unlearned, because I am despised and lack possessions. Another yet the less
because I am a sinner for this my faith does far pass all things (as it is
necessary and ought to do) what so ever either be, or be not, both sins and
virtues, and to be short, al things. So that she does puerely and holy fyxe
her self in god only, as the first commandment teaches and compels me.
Neither I desire any sign to tempte him, I trust faithfully unto him, although
he differ, and tarry at his pleasure I will not set or prescrybe to him any
end, any time, measure or reason / but I committee all to his will / with a
pure faith and a stable, for he is almighty, what can I lack that he can not
give and do unto me? For he is the maker of Heaven and Earth, and lord of al
things what thing can hyndre me or hurt me? How may it be yt al things shall
not turn to mine use and proffet / when he to whom all these things are
subyect and obedient, favors me and loves me? Now (sith he is god) he
knows whereunto he has ordained me, and how every thing shall be best for me
and that which he knows / he may do, and seeing he is my father, it is sure
that he will see the best for me, and that for the fatherly love that he has
unto me. When I doubt not hereof and have such trust in him, then no doubt I
am his servant, his Son, and his heir for ever. And even as I believe so
shall it be unto me.

The secounde part of the belefe.
And in Jesus Christ, his only son our lord / which was conceived by ye holy
ghost Borne of Mary the virgyne suffered under Pontius Pilatus, crucified, deed,
and buried, descended to hell, the third day rose again from death. Ascended
to heaven / syttyth on the right hand of god the father almighty from thense he
shall come to judge quycke and dead.

That is I do not only believe / that Jesus Christ is the true / and only son
of god / by everlasting and godly nature, and being from the beginning and
ever begoten: but also that all things are subdued under him / and that he is
my lord / and the lord of al creatures / made ruler of them being man /
which he him self with the father in his diuinyte did make.

I believe that noma^ may believe in god the father / or may come unto the father
/ neither by science and learning / neither by works / neither by their own
reason and wit / or by what thing so ever may be named in Heaven or Earth. But
by this and in this Jesus Christ his only son, that is to say, by the faith /
in the name, and power of Jesus Christ. I believe unfeignedly / and surely / that
he was conceived for my profet by the holy ghost, without all man's carnal
work / without a bodily father, or man's sede / and that to puryfy and make
spiritual my fynful, flesshly / unclean / and damnable conceptyon, and all
theyrs that believe in him, moved to this mercy of his own and fre will and the
will of the almighty father.

I believe that he was begotten, of the virgyne Mary without ye loss of her
pure and incorrupte virginite, so yt (according to the providence of the
merciful father) he should bliss and cleanse the sins and damnable birth of
all that believe in him / that after it might do no hurt.

I believe that he suffered passion and death for my sins, and all theyrs that
believe in him / and that he thereby blyssed all passions / crosses and deaths,
so that after they might not hurt, but be both wholesome and merytoryous.

I believe that he was deed and buried, to mortyfy and bury my sin, all sins
of them that believe. Finally that all bodily death by his death was destroyed /
so yt it is no power to hurt, but is rather made wholesome and profitable.

I believe that he went down to hell to subdue and make captyue / to me and to
all that believe / the devil with all his impery subtilete and malice / to
deliver me from hell, whereunto I was condemned / in my first father Adam /
taking awey all his power that he might not hurt me. But should rather as by
occasion be proffytable unto me.

I believe that in the third day he rose again from death / to bring me and
all that believe into a new life, and that by this deed he raised me with him
in grace and spirit not to sin after / but yt I endowed with all kinds of
grace and virtue, might serve him and so fulfylle his commandments.

I believe that he ascended into Heaven and that he has received of the Father
rule / and honor above al Aungelles and creatures And that he now sytteth on
the right hand of the Father that is, that he is king and lord over all the
goods of his Father in Heaven, Hell, and Earth / wherefore he may help me and
them that believe / in all manner of aduersytes, against all our adversaries and
enemies.

I believe that from thense he shall return the last day, to judge quycke,
whom he then shall find alive, and dead which before were buried. And that he
shall cause al men and aungelles good and evil to come before the seat of his
judgment (whom they shall se bodily) to deliver me and all faithful, from
bodily death from all evil and sins. And to punyshe with eternal judgment
his enemies and adversaries, so yt we shall be delivered from their power for
ever.

The.iij. part of the belefe.

I believe in the holy ghost, the holy christen church, the communyon of
saints, the forgyuenesse of sin, the rysynge, of flesh and everlasting
life. Amen.

That is to say / I do not only believe yt the holy ghost is very god, with the
father and the son. But also that noman can come to the father by Christ, by
his life / passion, death and what so ever was spoken of Christ or opteyne any
of these things, without ye work of this spirit, with the which spirit I
desire the father, and the son, to touch me and all faithful to stir me up
/ to call, to draw, and by Christ and in Christ to quycken me, to make me
holy and spiritual, and so to bring me to the Father, for it is he, which
with ye father, by Christ and i^ Christ works and quickens al things.

I believe yt in all the world, be it never so great, there is but one come^
Christian church, which is none other thing but ye congregation and co^munyo^
of holy men, yt is of rightuous and faithful men on ye earth / and yt this
church by this holy spirit is gadered, and maynteyneth / thorough whom also
it is governed and increased / daily by the sacraments and word of god.

I believe that noman can ever be saved which is not found agreeable and
consenting / with this congregation, in one faith in one word, in one sort
of sacraments / hope and charity. And yt none of the Jews, or Gentiles can be
saved with this church, except they reconcyle them self unto it, and come in
favor with it / conformyng them selves in all points thereunto.

I believe that in this co^munyon, or christente all the prayers / and good
works of this congregation do necessaryly help me, weigh on my side and
conforte me in all times of life and death.

I believe that in this congregation and commonwealth (and in none other place)
is forgyuenes of sins. And that without this, all great and good works / how
many soever there be of them do nothing profet to forgyuenes of sin. And
contrarywyse in this congregation / the multitude / greatness, and often
co^mytting of sins / do no thing hurt / nether let the forgyuenes of sin.
But that this forgyuenes does cotynue whersoeuer and how long / this
excellent church does endure. To whom also Christ gives his keys / and says
Mat. 18. What so ever ye lose upon Earth / it shall be losed in Heaven. Likewise
Math. 16. he says to Peter alone. In the name and stead of this only church /
what so ever thou lose upon Earth it shall be losed in heaven.

I believe that there shall be a rysynge of them that are dead / in the which
rysyng the holy ghost shall stir up al flesh, that is all men concerning the
body and flesh good and evil, so yt the very flesh which was dead
buried and consumed or by other ways destroyed shall return, and live again.

I believe that after this resurr^ction / I my self and all true Christen
people shall have everlasting life of god the Father, in the kingdom of his
welbeloue son / not for by, nor through the works of ryghtwisnes that we
have down (for all passions and martyrdomes that may be suffered in this world
are not countreuaylable to the glory / to come which shall be showed in us)
but by the grace and mercy of God, by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus
(that is to say) by his precious death and most paynfull passion, for truly ye
guerdon reward / and stipend of sin wherewith we all are manyfolde ways
poluted, by spotted and defiled is death / yea and that everlasting, but by the
grace of god it is, that we repenting of our sins, and belyuyn^e steadfastly
^is promes^es, shall have everlasting life in Jesus Christ our lord.

Amen, that signifies, yt in good ernest, and without doubt al these things
be true.

The prayer of the lord called the pater noster.
OUr father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Let thy kingdom come.
Thy will be fulfilled as well in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this dat our
daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses even as we forgive them which
trespass against us. And lead us not in to temptation. But deliver us from
evil. So be it.

A goodly interpretation or declaration of the pater noster.
OUr Father which art in heuens / look mercyfullye upon us thy wretched
children hear in earth, and give us thy grace, yt both thy holy name among
us, and al^o thrughout the hole world, may be sanctyfyed and praised thrughe
the true and pure preaching of the word of god / and also that synnefull
manner of living and all wicked and erroneouse doctrynes may cease, for by
these things thy name is dishonored and blasphemed. Cause that thy kyngedo^
may come, and be increased, that all sinners, and all those which being
blinded thorugh ygnoraunce leave in the kyngedom of satan: may come to the
knowledge of faith in Jesus Christ, that by such mean thy church may increas
and wax more and more full of people.

Cause also that the holy ghost do confyrme and establesshe us, that we may
obey thy will and pleasure, and sustain and bear the cross, as well in life as
in death, as well in prosperyte as in aduersite, that we may mortyfy our own
will, and offer it to god as a sacrifice. Give to us our daily bread. Take from
us couetuosnes and rare for the belie, that we may look for all good things
from the, and that we may receive them of the. Forgive us our trespaces as we
do forgive them that trespass against us / that our heart may be quiet, and
careless and our conscience not fered with the sight of our sins. Led us
not in to temptation. But help us by thy spirit in mortyfienge / and
subduynge, or ramynge of our flesh, that we may learn to despise the world
with all the desires; studies, and exercyses, belonging unto it, and that we
may vanqueshe / and overcome the crafty gyles of satan. Finally deliver us, o
almighty father from all evil, as well temporal, or transytory / as
everlasting / as well of body as of soul / who so ever coueteth and desyrith
these things unfeignedly / and hertely: let them say. Amen.

And let the^ believe without any doubt, that god has granted al these
things / and that their prayer is hard all ready / according to the promysse
of Christ when he said / what so ever things ye ask and desire by prayer /
believe that ye do receive it, and ye shall have it.

The prayer of the lord, called the Pater noster, where in are contained.vij.
peticions.
The preface and introduction to ask these.vij. peticions is contained in
these words. Our father which art in heaven.
The understanding of the words.
Almighty God / sith thou of thine infinite benevolence and mercy have not only
admitted us / but also taught, yea and commanded by thy only and dear son
Jesus Christ that we (trusting in his merytes and protection, he being our
in^ercessor) should believe that thou were a loving father unto us. And that we
should also call the father, though worthily and by great right thou myghtyste
have been an angry and grievous judge against us sinners which so often, and
abhomynable have done against thy godly / and most holy will / and have given
the occasyon of displeasure against us. Give us we beseech the, by the same
benevolence and mercy that we may have in our hertes sure trust (without fear)
of thy fatherly love. And make us feel this acceptable smell and swetnes /
which the most sure and chyldly trust does get unto us / that we may with
glade mind call the father / knowledge the / love the / and cry on the in all
ieopardyes. Keep us (we humbly beseech the) that we may continue thy loving
children, and not deserve to have the most mekest Father our terryble judge
nor suffer us not to be thyn enemies, which ought to be thy children and
heirs. Thou wylt also, not only symply / be called a father / but that we with
a comen voice should call the our Father.

And so with a special prayer of unity, pray for every man / wherefore give unto
us an agreynge and brotherly love, so that we may perceive every one of us,
that we are truly brothers and susters, and may pray to the as to our comen and
merciful father, every one for other, even as kind children entreat their
father one for another. Grant that none of us seek that which is his own /
or else forget other, in thy light: but yt (auoidynge all hate, envy, and
discention, as it becomes the true children of god) we may love together with
due favor so that we may say with a faithful heart not my father but our
father. Sithe truly thou art no bodily nor earthely father, whom we may se in
earth, but art in Heaven our spiritual father which dies not, neither art
changeable, or inco^stant, or such which art not able to help thy self as is
i^ an erthely and bodily father (whereby it is euydent unto us how much thou
art a better father, which teach this temporal fatherhodes country friends /
richesse, flesh, and blood / to be despised for the. Grant us to dear
father that we may be thy heavenly children. Teach us to regard, none other
thing then our soul health and the everlasting heritage, so tha^ this
temporal country / and worldly heritage (which entangleth and combreth us,
labourynge to make us erthely / and like unto it self) deceive us not, so that
we may say truly and with a faithful heart. O our heavenly Father, give us
thy grace that we may be thy heavenly children.

The first peticion. Thy name be hallowed.
O god almighty, our most dear heavenly father, thy godly name, even now in
this time in this vale of misery (alas for shame) so many ways is dishonored
and miserab^y blasphemed, applied to many things wherein stondeth not thy
honor and glory: ye and many abuse it, to their great confusyon, which
thing is so comen and often used, that this fylthy life may well be called a
sclau^der and dishonestynge of thy most glorious name. Therefore endue us with
thy godly grace, that we may avoid such things as are against the honor and
praise of thy most holy name. Make thou all wytchecraftes / and false charms
s^ortly to decay. Cause all co^iurynges by the which Satan or other creatures
are enchau^ted to cease by thy blessed name. Make that all false faith / by yt
which either we mystruste the, or put more confydence in other then is
needful, may quyckly be destroyed.

Made that all heresies and false doctrine which pretend a color of thy name
/ may suddenly vanyshe awey. Make that al hyprocrysy or faynynge of truth
ryghtuousnes, or holiness deceive no man. Make yt noman swear by thy name / lie
or deceive. Keep us from all false hope / which under color of thy blessed
name o^fereth i^ s^l^e unto us. Keep us from spiritual pride / from the vain
honor of worldly gory and name. Grant us that in all parelles and hur^e we
may call upon this thy holy name. Grant that in the straytnesse o^ conscience
and ieopardy of death we never forget thy blessed name. Grant that in our
good words and works we may only praise and magnyfy the, so that we nether
seek nor calenge to our self any name or honor but to the only / whose alone
are all things. Keep us from the most damnable sin of unkindness. Grant that
by our life / and good works all other may be moved to good, and that they
honor and praise not us, but thy name. Grant that by our evil works and
sins noman may take occasion to sclaunder thy name, or dymynyshe thy praise
keep us that we desire nothing either transitorye, or everlasting which
should not return to the honor, and praise of thy name. And if we ask any
such, here thou not our folyshenes. Make that our life be such that we may
truly be found thy children / so that this thy name father be not called in
vain or falsely in us.

To this part of prayer spiritually appertain all psalms and prayers with
which we praise / worshype, sing, give thanks to god, and fynall all the
praise of god.

The secounde petition. Let thy kingdom come.
This wretched life is the kingdom of all sins, and myschief whose lord is
the wicked spirit, chief author and ground of all malice and sin / but thy
kingdom is the kingdom of all grace / and virtue / whose Lord is thy best
beloved Son Jesus Christ / the head and beginnynge of all grace and virtue
wherefore help us most dyre Father / and take us agayn^ in to thy favor. Give
us before all things true and constaunt faith in Christ / hope (without
fear) in thy mercy / against al infirmities of our weak conscience and pure
love toward the, and all men. Keep us from in fidelyte / desperacyon and
malice / which at the last might be the cause of our destruction. Make us to
avoid the foul desire of lechery. Give us love to virginyte / and to all
clennesse. Deliver us from dyssentions / batelles / dyscorde / and strife. Make
ye virtues of thy kingdom to come and reygne within us. Give us peace /
concord / and tranquilyte / so that wrath / or any other bytternes have not
his kyngedome in us / but rather (through thy grace) the simple swetnes and
brotherly behaueour / all kind of frendshyp, good manner, gentylnes and
kyndnes. Grant us that the inordynate anguyshe / and heaviness of mind have no
place in us. But make that reioysyng and pleasure in thy grace and mercy rule
and have dominion. And to be short, that all sin may be alyenate from us,
and that we (replenished with thy grace, virtue and good works) may be made
thy kingdom, that all our heart, mind, and wits, with all our strenght
inward and outward may suffer them self to be ruled by the, to serve ye, thy
commandments and thy will, not them self, or the flesh the world or the
devil. Make that this thy kingdom ones in us begone may be increased / go
forward daily and grow. Least the subtyle malice, or slewth yt we have / to
goodness oppress us lest we look back again and fall in to ^ynne. Give us a
stable purpose and strenght not only to begin this good life, but rather to
proceed ^oldly in it and ^o per^o^me it, as (...) say^e. Lyghten mine lies
le^^te I sleep, or be weary in the good life ones begone, and so mine enemy ^o
bring me again in to his power. Grant / that we may so continue. And yt thy
kingdom which shall come / may fynyshe and perform this kingdom which ^s
begone by the. Deliver us from this perilous and synful life when it shall
please the. Make us desire the other life to come / and to despise this present
life. Give us grace not to fear death, but rather to desire it. Put from us
the love and desire or this life that so thy kingdom may fully be perfect in
us. Of this petycyon are all psalms verses / and prayers / in the which grace
and virtue is desired of god.

The third petition. Thy will be fulfilled in Earth as it is in Heaven.
If our will be compared with thine / it can never be good, but is ever evil.
Thy will is ever best specially and much to be loved and desired: wherefore have
compassion upon us most dear father / and suffer nothing to be as our noughty
wylles would have it. Give us / and teach us / true and stable patience / when
our will is let and broke. Grant us that when any man speaks / holds his
peace / does / or leueth undone / any thing contrary to our will / yt therefore
we be not wroth or angry / neither curse / compleyn, cry / or murmur /
neither judge / nor conde^pne / ye that we defend not our self. Grant that
we may mekely give place to our adversaries / and them which let our will / and
so to dysanull our will / that we may praise / say well / and do to them / as
to those which do perform thy godly and best will against ours. Endow us with
thy grace / yt we may gladly suffer all dyseases / poverty / dipysynges /
persecutions / cross / and aduersites: knowlegyng yt it is thy will to
crucifye our will. Give us grace that we may suffer iniurye and that gladlye.
Keep us from auengement. Make us that we acquit not evil for evil / neither to
avoid vyolence / by vyolence. But rather yt we delight in thy will (which
brings us all these thyges) praise the / and give the thanks. Make us that
we impute it not to the devil or evil men / when any aduersyte chaunseth: but
that we atribute al unto thy godly will / which ordeyneth all such things /
that our will may be let / and yt blessedness may increase in thy kingdom. Give
us grace that we may be glad / and merye to dye / and that for thy will we may
take our death gladly / so that by fear or infyrmite we be not made
dysobedyent unto the. Make that all our members / eyes / tongue / heart /
hands / and fete / be not suffered to follow their desires / neither that we be
at any time subdued under them / but that we (even as taken and emprysoned)
may be broken in thy will and pleasure. Keep us from all evil / myscheuous /
obstynate / hard styffe / vngentyl / and resystyng will. Give due obedyence /
perfect and free mind / in all spyryatuall things / worldly / everlasting
and transytory. Keep us from the most horyble sin of grudgyng sclaunder /
accursyng and folyshe judgment / that we condemn no man or turn any thing
to rebuke. Put from us that abhomynable evil / and most grievous stroke of
such tongues / and teach us yt if we se or hear of other any thing worthy
of rebuke / and which displeases us / that we hold our peace and hyde it
complaynyg to the only / puttyng and comittyng it unto thy will / so that with
all our mind we forgive them that offend us for whom also we be sorry.
Teach us to understand that no man may hurt us / except he do him self
much more hurt^ in thy sight / so yt we may be moved with mercy toward him /
rather then we should be provoked to wrath / rather weeping for his blyndnes.
then to think of aduengement. Give us grace that we rejoice not in their
troubles, which have resysted our will or hurt us, or in what pouertye so ever
their life dyspleaseth us / and also that we be not sorry when they prospere and
have welfare. Of this petytion are all psalms, verses, and prayers, teaching
us to pray for our enemies / and against our sins.

The fourth peticion. Give us this day our daily bread.
The bread is our lord Jesus Christ which noryssheth and conforteth ye
soul. Therefore: O heavenly father, give us this grace / that the life of Christ
/ words / works, and passions / may be preached / known accepted and allowed,
both of us / and of all ye world. Give us grace that we may have his words,
works and all his life for an effectual example and spectacle of al virtues.
Give us grace that in our passions and aduersy^yes / we may confort our self
by his passion and cross. Give us grace that we may with a stable faith
overcome our death by his death / and follow without fear this noble
capeteyn into another life. Give this grace that all they that preach may
profytably, and godly preach thy word, and Jesus Christ through all the world
and that all which have herd thy word preached, may learn Christ, and so
may be puryfied and go forth in a better life. Grant this also merciful
Father, that all strange doctrines / in the which Christ is not learned, may
be thruste out of thy church / have mercy on all bysshoppes prestes, and on
all rulers and gouerners / and generally upon all officers high and low that
they may be lyghtened with thy grace, to teach and rule well, both in word
and also example of life. Keep all that are weak in the faith. Least they be
offended by the evil example of heddes and rulers. Keep us from heresies and
doctrines of diuysyon / that we may be agreynge in one mind, sithe we use our
daily bread, yt is one daily doctrine, and word of Christ. Teach us by thy
grace, to think and have in mind, truly (and as we ought to do) the passion
of Christ / and to join it happily with our life, so yt we may come unto and
atteyne some thing / though it be but ye shadow of it. Finally give us our
daily bread / that Christ in us and we in Christ may dwell perpetually: and
may worthily bear this nam^ ^^the of Christ we are called Christ. Of this
petition are all kende of prayers and psalms / with the which we pray for our
officers, against false teachers for ye Jews for heretykes, and all other that are out of the right wey. And also with the which we pray for them that lack
conforte.

The fyfte peticion. Forgive us our trespasses even as we forgive them that
trespass against us.
This prayer has a certain condytion and sign annexed with him, which is that
first we forgive our trespasses. This don, then we may pray that god forgive
us our trespasses, before also in the third petition we prayed that the will
of god might be fulfilled, which wylleth yt we suffer all things pacyently,
not acquiting evil for evil neither seeking auengement, but that we do good
for evil, by thexample of our Father in Heaven, which makes his son shine
upon good and evil, and sends his rain upon kind and unkind.

This is now our prayer.
O Father conforte our conscience, both now, and in the day of death, which
conscience now is abashed seeing his sin and iniquite, and then also shall be
abashed / remembryng thyn hard, and strayte judgment. Give thy peace into our
hertes that we (rejoicing) may look for thy judgment. Enter not into judgment
against us with thy strayte law / for in it shall no man be found innocent
and ryghtuous. Teach us dear father not to styck / steye / or ground our
selves in our good works or deservings / but to give and submit our self
plainly and faithfully to thyn infynyte and incomparable mercy. Again, make
that we despair not for this our gylty and sinful life, but that we may judge
that thy mercy is more mighty / and stronger then our life / how soever we have
ordered it. Help and confort all men's conscience / which in the point of
death / or in any other such temptation are vexed with desperation.

Forgive them and us our dettes / conforte them / refresshe them / and be
reconsiled unto the^. Give us thy goodness for our malice as thou commaundest
that we should do. Cast down the horrible fend sclau^derer / accusar / and
encreaser / of our sins now and in the point of death / and to be short in
all straytnes of concyence. Give us grace to be ware and to avoid that by our
diffamacyon men's sins appear not ye more grievous. Judge us not after the
accusation (...) from the entysementes of the devil / that we consent not to
pride / which would cause us to set much by our self (and despise other) for
richesse / kynne / power / science / learning, beauty or any other gifts or
goodness. Keep us that we fall not in to ye sin of hate and envy / what
occasyon so ever be given to us. Keep us that we doubt not in thy faith /
neither fall in desperation / now / nor in the point of death. Put thy
helping hand our best heavenly father to them that fight and labor against
this hard and manyfolde temptation. Confort them that now do stand / and lift
them up that are fallen and be overcome. Finally fulfill us all with thy grace
/ yt in this miserable and perilus life (which is compassed with so many
contynuall enemies that never cease) we may fight bodily with stable and
noble faith / and obtain the everlasting crown.

The seventh petition. But deliver us from evil.
This petytion prays for all the euylles of pains and punyshmentes as does
the Church in the Letany.

O father (...) thy (...) punyshmentes of (...) death. (...) water and (...)
and hayle / (...) ^arthe, keps us (...) keep us (...) the (...) (...) and such
(...) keep us from all evil and (...) in all (...) glory of thy name, (...) and
fulfyllyng of thy (...)

(...) good Lord that all these (...) be opteyned of us without (...). Neither
su^fere that we my (...) but that in all these things (...) / yea be herd all
ready. And let (...) things be sure and with out (...) so may we with glad
heart (...) that is to say / stable (...).

EI^^ (...) (...) (...) table (...) one, (...) obteyneth (...) desired by it.
(...) have ye (...) we doubted (...) And we (...) promise of (...) mind that
(...) we may (...) remembrance (...) pass / that (...) (...) (...) trust and
(...) For except the (...) god, to pray. (...) that he would here our (...) all
the creatures that are (...) any thing, (...) their prayers. And (...)
perceiuest, that it is not to (...) come of ye goodness of our prayers, o^ (...)
be ascrybed to our own worthynes / if we do obtain any thing of god / but it
is to be ascribed to ye infinite goodness of god / which has long before
prevented our petitions and prayers, with his promise and commandment /
whereby he does excite and stir us to pray that at the least wise by the
reason hereof / we may learn yt he is far more careful for us, and more ready
to give or grant / then we be either to receive or else to ask. And for as
much as he does offer more benefytes and good things unto us / then we our
selves durst have been bold to wysshe or desire / that lyberalyte and
bountuousnes of god ought to inflame and to encourage us for to pray boldelye
without any mystruste or doubtefullnes.

Secu^darily / this thing also (as I have said) is requisite to a true orison
or prayer that we do not doubt any thing of the promise of god which is
both true and faythefull. For this cause pryncypally he promised, that he
shall here our prayer, and gave us commandment to pray / that we should be
assured and believe steadfastly, that he will certeynly here us and grant our
petition, as he says in the.xxi. chapitre of Mathewe, where it is red in this
wise, I say unto you, what so ever things you do ask or desire, when you do
pray / believe yt you shall receive them, and they shall be granted unto you.
And in the.xi. of Luke ask and it shall be given to you / seek and you shall
find / knock and it shall be opened to you, for every man ye asks receives
/ and who so ever seeks fyndeth, and to him that knocks / it shall be
opened, who is he among you being a father, of whom if his son shall desire
bread will give him a stone? Or if he desire fysshe, will give him a serpent /
in the stead of a fy^s^e? Or if he shall ask an egg, will reach to him
ascorpion? if you then when ye are evil can give good gifts to your sons,
how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy ghost to them that
desire him? By these and by like promyses and precepts, our mind is to be
confyrmed and stre^ghthed that we may pray boldly and with confidence, being
assured and out of doubt yt we shall receive and obteyn al things which we do
ask or desire.

Thyrdly if men vndyscretely doubt of god, when they pray, whether that thing
shall come to pass, which they desire or not, they do committee two offenses
or sins. First, because thorough their defaute it chau^seth and comes to
pass yt their prayer is of no strenghte, and is cause that they labor in
wayne, for so also saint James says. if any man asks any thing of god let
him ask with good trust, and with out any doubtfulnes, for he that doubteh /
is like to the wave of the sea, which is driven with the wyndes, and carried
with vyolence. And let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of
god, which words of saint James do plainly declare that all they which in
thyr prayers doubt to be hard. shall obtain nothing of god / because their
hertes are not assured, and quiet or at rest. But faith keeps the heart in
quietness and rest, that it may receive and take the gifts of god. The secou^de
thing wherein they do offend and sin, who so ever prays without faith and
trust is this, because they do not give credence to god, which is faithful
and true of promise but distrusteth him, as if he ware a liar. or a tryflyng
light man, and as though god either cold not or else would not perform his
promyses. And such persons taken away from almighty god his honor and name,
for that they do not believe, that he is faithful and true, and this is so
great a sin that it makes of a Christen man an infidele, and not only by
this sin god is denied, but also is forgone and lost, neither is there any
hope of health and salvation, so long as we shall co^tynue in this sin. And
if it do happen or chance, otherwh^les, that they do obtain any thing which
do pray thus without confidence and trust, that gift is given to them of god
being displeased and angry with them to the hurt and undoing both of their
body and soul, that at the least wise some honor may be had / or given to ye
holy words, which are spoken and pronounced of men being full of sin,
infidelyte, and contempt or despisinge of God.

Fourthly / neither they also are of right opinion: which suppose or wene yt
their selves may not obteyn any thing by prayer, but if they come worthily to
pray / for this is not to be considered whether thou be worthy or unworthy,
which do pray / for if we should not pray before such time that we should
think our self worthy / apt or mete, then could we never pray and for (as
we have taught here tofore) our prayer is not grounded, neither trusts upon
the worthynes, which we do bring with us: but upon the steadfast and sure truth
of gods promise / and verily if prayer do trust either in it self or else
in any other thing save only in gods promise it is vain and without fruit,
even though it seem to proceed of a devout affection of the heart and mind /
and also though ye eyes in weeping shede forth tears or drops not of water
but of blood. But therefore we do pray be cause we can not pray worthily, and
therefore we be judged worthy to pray, and to be hard because we do feel and
perceive our own unworthiness, and are bold only upon the trust of the
bountyfull goodness, and also the faythfulnes of god, how much so ever unworthy
thou felest and iudgest thy self to be, either to ask and desire, or else to
receive any thing of god, yet consydre thou this thing only that thou must
honor his name, because he is true, and that thyn infidelyte and unbelieve do
not repute and reken his faithful promyses / for a lie or leasing, for thine
own vntworthynes does nothing hyndre or let the. Likewise as it does nothing
promote or further the / if thou be worthy, but only incredulyte and lack of
faith co^dempneth the, and faith makes the worthy and also saves the, hereof
therefore thou shall dilgiently take heed and beware that thou never think, or
judge thy self worthy, either to make petition or prayer, or else to receive
and obtain that which thou desyrest, except only then when thou thynkest that
thou may safely / and surely be bold to trust, to the assured and true
promises of thy merciful god, of whose mercy thou ought to be so much the
more certain and assured for yt, likewise as he has made this promise to yt
being unworthy and nothing deseruynge it, that he will deny nothing unto yt:
eue^ so also be thou never so much unworthy, yet will he here the, and grant
the thy petycyon for to fulfill his promise, which he has made unto the. So
then nothing at all is left, which may be ascrybed to our merits or
worthynes / but all together is of right to be ascrybed, pertly to the truth
of god, whereby he performs his promise, and partly to the mercy of god out
of which (as of a founteyne) all yt promyses sprang forth / that the sentence
may be verefyed which is in. the.xxv. psalm / all ye ways of the lord, is
mercy, and truth, for his mercy we do se and behold: in these promyses
making / and his truth we do se then when the said promyses are kept and
performed and in the.lxxxv. psalm. Mercy and truth has met together /
that is to say, comes together, and are seen joined the one with yt other, in
every work or gift of god.

Fyftly that faith or belfe, whereby (...) do give crede^ce to the promyses of
god, is so to be tempered and ordered, that we do not set or appointe to god
any term, time place, or form, and manner. But let us leave all those things
to his will, his wisdom, and almighty power, being assured and out of doubt,
that those things shall come to pass and be done, which we do ask and
desire, al be it that neither the place, neither the time, neither yet ye way /
and manner by which it may be done, does appear unto us, for this is sure and
undoubted, that the wisdom of god knows and foreseeth these things far
better then we Therefore if thou give crede^ce to god, and do refer and put
al things to his will and pleasure those things shall undoubtedly be done and
brought to pass, which thou desyrest, at the least wise by miracles, if there
be none other way whereby they may be done, whereof we have an ensample in the
people of Israhell, which when they had given credence to god, and put their
trust in him, that he would deliver them from their enemy, and yet not
withstondynge there appeared no manner way whereby it might be don and brought to
pass suddenly the red see opened it self, and gave them way / whereby they
might and did pass thorough. And it did ouerwhelme / and drown their enmyes
every mothers son. In like manner Iudyth ye holy woman, when she had
understanding and knowledge that the Citezens of Bethulia had taken this
counsayll, and purpose, that they would yield up the city to their enemies,
except god would help the^ with i^.v. days, she rebuked them very sore and
said / what manner of men be you which do tempte the lord in this wise. This
is not the speech, which may provoke mercy, but rather which may provoke, and
stir up wrath and kendle ire, have you set the time of the lords mercy, and
have you appointed him a day for your will and pleasure? therefore god by a
meruaylous way and manner delivered her so that she did cut of Olophernus head,
and so drove back the host or army from the cyty as it is red in the.xviij.
chapitre of Judith. So likewise Paul says in the third chapitre to the
Ephesians. That this is the manner and custume of god to do all things far
after another manner, and much better then we can either desire, or else
understand and perceive. Thus then let us think and judge that we our selves
are far more vile and unworthy / then that we may appoynte or prescribe to
god in our prayer, either the time, or the place, or the form and manner or any
other circumstaunce. But let us leave all things to his godly will and
pleasure. And let us believe fyrmely and steadfastly / that it shall undoubtedly
come to pass that he shall here us, and grant us our petition and desire.

The passion of our savior Christ.
OUr savior Christ, at his last souper with his dyscyples upon ye thursday
before he suffered, spoke a very long and sweet sermon unto them, no less
frutfull then full of godly affectes? so that no tongue is able to express
the goodness and the affectes of it spoken so little before his death: which
heuenlye words, only saint John^ did write showing that he did not sleep
and lay his head upon his master Christ's breast in vain. This sermon
begins at the.xiiij. chapter of John^ and contynueth unto the.xviij.
chapter. where begyn^e^^ ye hystorye of his passion, which here (...) orderly
as he suffered, every (...), name, set unto their own sayenges.

The first part of the passion of our savior Christ contaynynge the
co^munycacyon of Christ with his dsicyples now going forth to the Mount
Olyuete.
WHen Jesus had made an end of his sermon, he went forth with his disciples
over a broke called Cedro^. John^ into the mount Olyuete, unto the which place
he was wont often before to go to pray, but now (his passion drawinge nyghe) he
went to pray more fervently and more effectuously and that in ye night.
Matthew / Mark / Luke. And as he was going, for that his disciples had herd
their master often before saying that he should depart from them, they began to
dyspute among them self, which of them should be hygheste to succeed their
master in like authorite, for as yet they knew not to what office they were
called. And when their ambicion began to break forth in to such manner of
contencyouse reasonynge, their master Christ (as he did sumtymes before)
commanded them to silence saying. The heathen kings bear a rule and play
the lords among them selves, and such as so rule are called great men of
authorite and power / but ye shall not be so, for he yt is greatest among you,
shall be as the loweste, and he that is chief shall be as a servant, for whether
is he greater that sits down to be served, or he yt seruyth him? is not he
that sytteth? I my self am here among you as one that mynystreth, ye are they
which have abyde^ by me in my temptacions. And I lay out for you the same
kingdom which my father laid out for me, that ye should eat and drink at
my table in my kingdom, and sit in iugdment iugdynge the twelfe tribes of
Israel (for ye are those children of whom it is prophesied in the.xlv. psalm
/ to come in the stead of the fathers, to teach ye people, whom they shall
take as princes in all the Earth) but not with stondyng I have thus promoted
you to such an high dygnyte of the which I have so often spoken unto you,
yet this same night shall ye all be sore offended, and hurt by me / of the
which hurt I have so often warned you before / for verelye ye shall fle away
from me as though ye had never seen any touch or token of God in me / but
thus pleases it my father to handle you / thus shall ye have experience how
litel power ye have to goodness, except ye have it of me / also it behooves me
to suffer such afflyction of all manner of men, even of me fryndes and famylyare
which have appointed my self to be offered in sacrifice unto my father, for the
health of as many as shall be saved. This is the same thing that the prophet
zachary prophesied on me sayng. The heard man shall be smyten, and the sheep
asktered abroad / but yet for this your fall, se that ye shrynke not away nor
despair / for I will lift you up again. And when I shall be up risen, I shall
gather you again together in Galilie, and I shall go before you as it becomes
the heard man to go before his sheep / offering my self again unto you as a
guide / a leader / and defender. Math. Mark / Luke.

But in the mean time satan our adversary shall try you sore, and excercyse
your faith, he shall te^pte you strongly / but Simon Simon take heed / for
verelye Satan has desired you to syfte you / as one should syfte whete. But I
my self have prayede for you all, as ye well know, but especyallye for the
Simon, which shalt fall more perelously and more greuouslye then other lest
thy faith faille, which thou ons co^fessested for all thy felaws, wherefore thou
tonuerted / and brought again in to the right way, conforte and stablysshe
thy brethren considering thyn own fall. Unto which things Peter answered /
I am ready said he (master) to go in to prisone with the ye to go in to death
with the. Luke. wherefore if all other being hurt by the reason of thy perell,
fail the, yet shall I abide still by the (here he felt how ernestly he should
have loved his master) but he knew it not to be the gift of the father, so to
love him and not to come of flesh and blood / which thing his master ons
testefied unto him after his sole^pne and heavenly confession) and upon this,
his master said especially unto him that he should deny him thryse / saying,
Peter, verily I say unto the: this same night / even thou shall deny me
thryse / before ye kocke shall have crowen twyse, and Peter then trusting over
much to him self, spoke with a bolder affirmation saing, if I should dye with
the / yet shall I not deny the, which thing also said the other. Math. Mar.
Luke. For as yet they were without any perell.

Wherefore their master not with stondynge he had told the^ this things so
often before yet he made mention thereof now agoyne / saying, when I sent you
without walet* scryp, and shoes, wanted ye any thynege? they answered: we
wanted nothing at all / than said he, now shall it be otherwhyse with you,
for now not I my self shall be sure, which then mynystred unto you all
things, and put you out of peril for ye shall se the ungodly so furiously take
on with me, that then a sword shall seem unto you so necessary yt if any of
you has walet and scrippe / he shall think it more expedient to cast them
away as vnfeare for our cause and rather to by him a sword / there is verily
such a violente storm now at hand, that ye shall think it needful not only
to chaung, purse, and money / scrip and living therein for a sword, but cote
also, ye and that your neithermoste cootes, which ye can not well want, for
verelye these things which are written of me, must be fulfilled at the last.
This is it written / Esaye the.liij. chapter. I shall be reputed among the
wicked and shall be haryed and tugged to death like an adversary to god. But at
last this busynes for the which the father has appointed me to dye i^ so poor
a careful and shamfull state shall have an end: but his dyscyples (as yet
nothing mystrustyng their own strenghtes, suposyng to have avoided the perel
by sword) spoke both loud and boldly. Sir / lo: here are two swerdes, think
ye not these two be sufficient for this seyrme? ye (said their master
scornynge them, they are inoughe thinkyng it no neade to bring them in to any
farther danger, whom he knew to fight with their feet, rather than with
sword (for if their enemies had espied the^ armed with any weapen to resyste,
they would have been more fearse upon them) also the time was come, yt he
would give him self wyllyngly to dye, not withstanding yet Peter kept one of
the swerdes for the glory of god, but unawares. Luke.

The second part contaynynge the prayer of Christ in the garden.
AS he was thus coming with his disciples, they came to a village called
gethsemane. Matthew / Mark where was a garden in to wiche Christ entered with
his disciples. John^. and (some of his disciples commanded to sit down at a
certain place whiles he went in a little farther to pray) he took up with him
Peter and the two sons of zebedei / whom also he had before admytted to other
secrets and had promised them in the hill to se his glory.

Before these three men, began he now to be in a greuouse anguysshe and great
heuenes of mind, saying full heavy is my mind even in to death (so would he
show him self to be very man, and to be like us his brethern in all points as
concerning temptacyons) he would verily cast out a great and greuouse
multitude of sins from his chosen, wherefore it behooved him to be so grievously
tormented not only in body but in mind, for what is the torme^thynge of ye
body, if the mind feale it not? when he was in this paynfull affliction of
mind, so that he was nyghe dead (for he was heavy even into death) he fled
unto his father, as it was his manner, and is the manner also of all saints,
whom because he would call in to his help more ernestly and with more fre
spirit at his pleasure, he went furthe a little farther from these three
disciples (although he loved the^ dearly) he went from them as ye would say a
stones cast, and there he fell down flat upon therthe and prayed, saying /
Father if it be possible, bear over this passion from me, nevertheless not my
will, but thyn be done (for he made rather his complayte here be fore his
father, then desired his passion to be turned from him) for he came in to this
honor well wyllyng / but with how heavy and tremblyng mind (for that his death
was now at hand) no man may express / here he showed his father his fervent
desire to death and how presently his nature felt it, wherefore it was showed
him thus to be his fathers pleasure, and so was he well counforted.

When he had thus prayed, that is to say when he had thus poured forth the
fervent desires of his heart (thus wounded with horroure and fear even into
death) into his fathers bosom, and that doubtless with many a deape syghe,
with sore sobbing and fervent thoughts, and thus, he stedfastlye considering
his fathers will on this manner to require of him the health of ye world he took
curage and heart unto him self and turned to his disciples, like as that man
whose mind is grievously vexed and trobled can not abide long in one place.

And when he came he found the^ all a sleep where (because Peter had answered
him more boldly than other) he challenged him first, by name saying Simon, not
one hour may thou not watch with me? where is now I pray the, that bold
spryted heart of thine, that was so ready to go with me even in to death? Awake,
awake, and fall to prayer least ye fall in to that grievous temptacion, which
hangs now over your heads, as your spirits were then al to bold, so is you
flesh now all to weak to endure long, ye should have rather prayed then
slepte, if ye had been wise. But so it behooved them to be tought by their own
folly / not only how feable is their flesh / but also how unable it is all to
gyder to any goodness / and that al strenght comes of god / not withstondynge
at this time took they full little head to their masters rebuke and challenge.
Then turned he again to prayer when he se that in his most dear chosen and
trusty there was no counforte which thing verily much more encresed his
heuenes, for so it behooved him to suffer affliction on every side.

He prayed again the same prayer that he did before, that is to say, he laid
the troble of his mind in the will of his Father desiring his consolation,
and from thense again he went unto his disciples whom he found, likewise a
sleep as before, for they could not hold up their iyes neither they thus
blamed might answer their master any thing at all. Thus again received he
affliction and heaviness of them, of whom he should have had consolation and
counforte. The third time likewise he gave him self to prayer / and prayed
somewhat longer, for he was all to tormented and in such an agony that his swet
ran done with blody dropes in to the earth. And thus when his agony and heaviness
of mind were greater then he might any longer suffer / there appeared an angel
unto him and conforted him setting doubtless before his mind effectuously that
marvelous rich saving health which he should perform and finyshe by his
passion / and also the glory of his father which thereof should be greatly set
forth and sprede a broad: so that this consolation received, he rose up and
returned him unto his disciples. And when they were yet a sleep he said unto
them after a scornful manner thus: sleep now and take your rest, as who should
say, is there such tranquilite and peace toward us that ye may sleep so
surely without fear? Oh how insensyble are ye and like stones nothing fealyng
or perceyuyng all these things which I told you before as concerning this
stormy tempest even now at hand? Arise, Arise, ons, for ye have sleapte
enough, behold the hour draws nyghe of the which I told you. Now the
son of man shall be betrayed and betaken in to the hands of sinners. Arise
and let us go mete them, he is very nyghe that betrayeth me, Matthew. Mark.

This thyrdde part conteyneth his taking, and what betyde in his taking.
Judas verelye knew this place of prayer and how often times Christ with his
disciples went thither to pray, wherefore he got him a company with the
servants of the bishops / scribes / pharisais and prestes and they came
thither with lanterns, fyerbra^des, and weapens. John^ And he being among
them (Christ yet coming on with his disciples) gave them whom he brought
with him this token / that whom he should kiss that man to be Christ and
warned them, that as soon as they had taken him / they should lead him wisely
and carely / fearing least (as he seen him do somtymes before) he should
slyppe away from them by his godly power / and he him self, should not have
satysfyed his promise, and so to have lost his money (here may ye se how deape
falls the blind ungodliness how bold she is to do yt thing which she knows
not to lie ^her power wha^ he was now come (for he went foremost in the
company) anon he stepte forth unto his master saying / hayle master, and
kyssed him / to whom Christ said / friend for what entedt ca^mest thou? Oh
Judas, betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Matthew / Mark / Luke.
Then Jesus knowing all things that were to come upon him / and now the hour
to be come to suffer them / went forth to mete these men which came to take
him saying to them / whom seek ye? they answered / Jesus of Nazareth, and he
said, I am, which word when they heard / anon both Judas the betrayer then
standing by with all his company were borne backwarde and fell down to the
ground, by the which thing the godhed of Christ was suffyciently declared to
Judas / to his company / to the mynysters of ye jews / and to his disciples /
if their hertes could have perceived ye thing which they both felt and saw
(this bright lightening of his godhed cast forth among the^, by which he
declared right clearly him self to put his life wyllyngly i^ their hands) and
that no man might have taken it from him against his will. Then he asked them
again whom they sought and to them saying we seek Jesus of Nazareth he
answered again likewise, saying I told you that I am / wherefore if ye seek
me / let these my Disciples go their ways / which thing he obtained of his
enemies / but more thoroughe his power then by their good wylles. And thus he
veryfyed his saynges which he before to his father said / I have not lost one
of them whom thou gave me, for he would keape them bodily also / Johan. Then
they that were come thither with their master, co^syderynge what was like to
fall / said to him, master, shall we smite them with the sword? for that, yt
their master had said before as concerning the sword to be necessary that
all their money, their meat, ye their very cotes ought to be changed for
swerdes, sygnyfyeng the great power and vyolente hands of their enemies to
come? they like, as yet, carnal men, gatherd of these his sayenges that they
might sley or use the sword wherefore even then said they, master, lo here are
two swerdes / but their master neither would ne mente any such defense, not
withstondynge yet here at this time, before he could answer and show them his
mind as touching this coresyng of swerdes for their other necessaryes. Simon
Peter, which pretended to love his master more feruentlye then other / having
then one of these two swerdes, had drawn it and smote of the right ear of one
called Malchus the Bisshops servant. And anon their master said / hold your
hands, and thou Peter, put up thy sword / knoweste not the proverb taken of
the law / that who so ever uses the sword without the commandment of god
must perysshe by the sword? if I lusted not to offer my self wyllynglye unto
my passion / doubtest thou to be i^ my power to obtein of my father for my help
twelve legions of angels? wylt not thou that I drink this cup which my
father has filled and myngled for me, to suffer those things which he had
decreed to be sufferde of me? how should else the scripture be fulfilled
prophesyenge of me to suffer these things. Matthew / Mark / Luke / John^. And
anon he took the ear of this maimed man and restored it to him / declarynge
again plainly by this mighty miracle his godhed / and also gyuyng an excellent
example to do good even to our enemies / Luke. Then turned he him self to the
company of his adversaries (among whom was there the ouermost of the prestes
as the rulers and the chyef heads of the temple with many other prestes)
saying unto them, ye are come forth hither with swerdes, and battes to take me
as though ye came to take a thief, ye neaded not thus strongly to have come to
take me I sat and taught daily in the temple openly / ye seeing / and herynge
me wherefore laid ye not hands upon me then? verily ye would have done it
often times before this / but who then held you? wherefore se that ye knowledge
and that ye confess me now to have come wyllyngly in to your hands / that ye
scripture might be fulfilled / or else I could now be as sure from you as I
was in the temple / but this is that same your hour, and the power of
derkenes, now pleasyth it my father to betake me to the prince of darkness
which leads you and to you which are his soudyers to fight on his side / my
fathers commandment I obey wyllynglye and gladly, that the world might se
how truly I love him and that the scriptures should be fulfilled. Then all his
Disciples forsook him and fled / Matthew / Mark / Luke. Then the sergeauntes,
the officers and servants of the Jews took Jews took Jesus and bound him,
and led him first unto Annas, for he was father in law to Cayphas which was
bishop for that year, and Cayphas was he that counceld the jews saying. It is
expedient that one man dye for the people / Johan. Also there was then a certain
young Spryngolde that followed Christ decked upon his bare with fine cloth of
raynes, which young ladde, the other boys that came with them begane to set
hold upon, but he fled a way naked from them, his clothe of raynes lef^e
behind him, for thus al alone would their master suffer for his chosen, so
that he would not suffer, not only any of his Disciples to be taken, but
brought so to pass also, that this young man what so ever he was (seeing that
he followed him) should not come in to their hands.

This fourth part contains what was said and done before the bishop
Cayphas, and Peter's denienge.
FOrthermore, when it was so y^ Cayphas was bishop, Annas sent Jesus thus
bound unto him / John^. In the mean reason Pe^er taking heart again to him
self with a another of his disciples followed their mais^er al a far, this
other disciple was well be known with the biss^ope / wherefore he was so bold
as to enter in to the Bishops court with Jesus, Peter abiding still without
the door, then this other disciple went and desired the woman that kept the
door that Peter might come in / and she seeing Peter sitting against the
light (for the vylans had made a great fire / beneth in the mids of the
hall where they sat to gyther with them, and some stood about it warming
them, for it was sumwhat cold, and Peter was with them / war^nynge him, for
he desired much to se the end) this woman that kept the door beholdynge him
ernerstly, said unto him. Art not thou also one of this man's Disciples? Thou
were with Jesus of Galile / and he answered by and by saying. I am not / I
know not this man / I wot not what thou say / Math. Mar. Luke and John^.

After this he went forth in to the enter / and the kocke crewe / Mark. But
this as yet moved him nothing at al. Also there had spied him again a
another maiden which said unto him among them all. And this man was with
Jesus of Nazareth, he denied it again, ye and that which an o^he Matthew /
Mark. So feere was his heart gone that was so ready to die with his master, for
so must men slide and fail that trust more to their own strenghte and and
power then to Christ's words, and yet was he bolder then any of the other.

In the mean season / the bisshoppe asked Jesus of his Disciples and of his
doc^rine and wherefore he was so bold to gather Disciples to him / what new
doctrine he taught them, and what thing he went about, to whom Christ
answered. I have spoken openly to the world / tho things which I taught in
the synagoges and I taught in ye temple where all the Jews came to gyder
wherefore as for the doc^rine ye may it well know, not to be ^ed^^ouse nor
derogatyue gods law / as ye cover it to be found / call hither any wytnes
not one or other but as many as herd me and ask them which herd me what I
spoke to them / lo, they know what I both ^ayde and taught, for I know well ye
would not believe me if I should testifye of my self / when Christ had
spoken these words / with so sofre sobernes and great grauyte
notwithstondynge yet one of the bisshops servants, thinking to do his master
a pleasure gave Ihesus a blow of theare / saying, thus answerest thou my lord
the Bishop? whom Christ answered again meakly. if I have spoken any hurt by
him, testify thereof, and if I speak well / wherefore do ye smite me? John^. But
now because thoure was come wherein Christ should sanctify his chosen by his
passion and with payns vnspecable, neither the sayng of the troth nor his
innoce^ce, nor yet his meke modesty were it never so great could help him. For
satan his adversary had so set them a fire and in such a furye that even like
wod dogs they ran al upon him, and the more cruelly and shamfullye that any
man could tormente him, and spitfully entrete him, the better he was there
allowed and commended of the bishop / and for that he behaved him self so
meakly / so modestly / and so ge^tly, the more they scorned him / spyttyng in
his amyable face and buffetynge him, some of them in the neck and some on his
cheakes.

Then muffeled they him and bobbed him in the face asking him, who smote the
last? who shall smite the next? For thou make thy self a prophet with
other grievous and ignomynious blasphemies they assailed him, then was he verily
among the very mad dogs, and among the boystors bulls of bashan, then
was he among the rorynge Lunatyke lions, and vnmercyful vnycorns of whom it
is written in the.xxij. psalm. Then herd he the reuylynges, and rebukes of
many men, as syngeth David in the.xxxi. Psalm. Then felre he his enemies
exceeding in nombre the hears of his head as syngeth the.lxix. psalm But
Peter when he was gone forth in to thentre after his first denyeng, and there
in thentre had denied him again, nothi^ge remembringe the crowynge of the
kocke comes me back again unto ye fire, and there he stood warming him
with other men / which said unto him. Art thou not one of his disciples? and
one of them said styfly unto him / even thou art one of them and Peter denied
it sayng I tell the (man) I am not. Luke / Johan. And within an hour after they
yt stood by him / came nere saying / surely thou art one of them even thy very
tongue bewreyth ye / for thou art a Galilen. And one of ye Bisshops servants
kynsman unto him whose right ear he smote of said unto him, did not I se the
in the gardyn with him? than began he to banne to wary / and to forswere him
self styfly that he never knew the man, and by and by whiles he was speaking
ye kocke crewe the secunde time / Matthew. Mark / Luke / Johan. And his master
which then was holden of the vilens and vexed with contynuall rebukes / and
scourgynges turned him and beheld Peter / Luke.

Upon this he remembered his masters words tellyng him before, y^ before the
kocke shall crow twyse thou shall deny me thryse wherefore (as he might welbe)
he being sore ashamed of him self and smyte^ with repentance unable to be
expressyd that he had now so often denied his master / and savior, he both
hearing and seeing him with whom he promised so manfully and swore so deuoutlye
to go even into death, went forth and wept full bytterly / Math. Mark, Luke.
Then knew he how folysshe hardelye and with how crased a confidence he
promised him so arrogantly to do that, that his master denied him to do Of
this his own fall without doubt / he had a great experience of him self,
ever after to know him self more modestly and soberly: and to bare his
brothers slydynges and tender their falls more mercyfully.

In this fyfte part are contained what were concluded in the council of the
Jews and the wretched end of Judas.
THe day now spro^ge: there came to gyder the (...) ^he folk, the chye^e
^restes and the scribes into ye Bisshops (...) and brought Chr^ste into ^monge
them. This ouermoste of the (...) with the elders and hoole co^nce^^ sought for
some false testimony and wytnes against Jesus that they might put him to death
but they could not find any thing amysse done or said of him / his
doctrine was so treue and his life so pure. At last after much inquisition
there stepte for^h two false witnesses affyrmynge, that they herd him say
these words. I may destroy the temple of god, and in three days build it up
again. And when these testymonyes like as of other things could not be found
lawful to put him to death if case been he had so said / then stert up in the
mids of them one of the chyefe prestes coveting to have trapped him in his
own answer saying. Answerest thou nothing unto thy accusation and things
laid to thy charge? thynkest thou these witnesses to be laid against the in
vain? Jesus then held his peace (for what should he have said to such
testimonies which even his enemies could not receive as lawfully) wherefore,
the Bishop then began to speak to him thus. I adjure the by the living god yt
thou tellest us whether thou be that holy anointed the son of the praised
god. Then Christ / lest it should be seen him self to bear but small
reverence to his father in whose name he was thus streatly co^iured, or to
fear them so that now bound / he durst not confess that thing which
before he being at lyberte professed and knowledged so openly and so often,
answered them / Math. Mark Luke. if I should tell you the truth / yet shall
ye not believe me / and I should ask you any thing yet will ye not answer me
ryghtly, nor yet let me go / Luke. Wherefore I think it best to hold my
tongue, as I have begone to do / but because ye shall know that I honor the
father by whose name ye adjure me / and that I so fear ye not / but I dare
tell you the troth, I answer and knowledge unto you that thou Bishop haste
hit the nail on the head and said that, that true is / but yet now for all
this shall ye never the more believe it, but ye shall se me (whom ye despise, as
but one of the sons of Adam and so ente^de ye to put me to death) sittyng on
the right hand of god / that is to say, equal with him in power to command
and to govern all men ye shall se me at last coming again in the clouds
from above judge both me^ living and them that are now dead, this glory shall
I receive of my father in short space sone after ye have put me to death /
from this day shall ye not se me other wise then sitting on the right hand of
god tryumphyng in a gloriouse estate and power almighty over all men / which
thing I have told you before this. Then concluded they all. Ergo art thou
even the son of god / Jesus onswered, ye say so, and so I am.

Then began ye Bisshope to rage and to rende his clothes saying lo, he has
spoken blasphemye / wherefore then neade ye any farther wytnes? lo, your selves
have herd now a grievous blasphemye / what think ye? They all answered saying
/ he is gylty death / Matthew / Mark / Luke. These things were done in the
council which all ye chyefe of the prestes, thelders, and scribes held erlye
in the morning to condemn Christ to death, and of this they armed their
selves and took courage to accuse him before the chyefe governor / and judge
called Pilate / Matthew / Mark.

Besides this / seeing that it perteyneth to thystory to se what end Judas
made, that betrayer, I shall here put to his departing / when Judas se his
master was lykly to be condemned to death, then began he to repent him,
then heuenes touched his heart and constrained him to bear again to the
prestes and thelders these thyrty peases of silver for the which he sold him
saying, I have sinned in betraynge this innocent blood, which answered him
saying, what is that to us? care thou therefore, for we care not, so light
regarded they yt they had bought that innocent blood, and delyuerd him to
death. Such is the Pope holiness and feigned ryghtwysnes or hipocrites. And
Judas threw down ye money and went his way, and hunge him self with an halter,
and he brast in the mids and al his bowelles fell out which thing was sprede
over all Jerusalem. Then took the chyefe prestes that money saying, it is not
lawful to put this money in to our offryng box for blood was bought and
soulde therewith. Here was a marvelous religion they shamed not, ne feared to
shede thynnocent blood, but the price thereof, durst they not myngle with
their other monye / that was offered to them, thus do hipocrites strain out a
gnatte and swalowe over a camel / wherefore these untoward, and ouertwhart
religious men cast their froward heads to gyder and bought a field of a
Potter with ye money to burye in strangers, and for this cause the field was
called i^ their mother tongue Cakaldema which is to say the blody field /
then was fulfilled the prophesy of zachary which prophesied that this man
should give thyrcyepence, the wiche money should be the price of a man bought and
soolde among them boughte of one of the Israelytes which was had in
reputacyon, they should give this money for the Potters field as ye lord had
ordained it. A marvelous thing that Christ would be sold of so dear beloved
a disciple, also it was not without a great mystery that for the same price and
for the same money Christ was sold, this field was bought to burye in the
strangers or wayfaryng men. For the very true rest and tranquillyte of our
consciences is boughte and procured as thorough Christ's death which are here
strangers going to the very heavenly city of Jerusalem that is to say to a
perpetual peace and reaste, wherefore it was well worthy that this text of the
prophet be name should be here remembered / now let us prosecute thystory of
the passion.

In this syxte part are contained what were done in the first inquisition
before Pilate, and afterward so before Herod.
AFter this, when the jews thought them self well and sufficiciently
instruct to accuse Christ. The multitude rose up from the council and
presented him unto Pilate / Luke. For they would not enter in to their town
house, or judgment hall lest they should have polluted their selves: for this
holy hipocrites and false phariseis should celebrate and keape holy their pass
over day on the morrow: here may ye se how scrupulouse was their ungodly
holiness / wherefore Pilate went forth unto them asking them wherefore they
accused this man / and they answered / if he were not a malefactor we had not
in any wise delyuerd him unto yt, with ye which answer so proudlye spoken
Pilate was somewhat offended and bad them proceed with him as they had begone,
and to judge him after their own laws / and they denied that it was lawful
for them to slaye any man. And thus was it ordained of god that Christ should
be crucified of the Gentilles as he often times before told it unto his
disciples / Johan. Then began they to accuse Christ again that he had made
sedicions among ye people thorugh his doctrine which they were about to make
appear dampnable and sediciouse saying that he forbodde tribute to be given to
The Emperor, and at last they said that Christ made him self a king, by
which sayenges they trusted to condemn him of treason / Luke. wherefore Pilate
the judge asked him now standing before him, whether he were the king of
Jews? for this matter, he thought perteyned unto his charge which was then
there deputed to govern under The Emperor. But as touching his doctrine (as a
thing nothing derogating Themperours power) he took no great head thereof
neither was he much inquisitiue / Matthew / Mark / Luke. Then Jesus asked him
/ how come it in to your mind to demand of me this question? come it of
your self or have ye herd it of any other man? for Christ would be seen (as
he was in very dead) so far and so pure from al affection or desire of any
erthly kyngedome / that no man should it suspect in him: whereupon even Pilate
his self as showing him to have not suspected any such thing in him said:
as for me, I am a Roman, nothing learned in your laws and prophe^es I know
not how, and in what manner your King Mes^ias should come, and as for me I
cannot p^rceyue any token of a kings estate in the, thine own nacyon and the
bisshoppes delyuerd the unto me, and they are the men that accuse the of this
thing / what haste thou done? Then answered Jesus, my kingdom is not of this
world, or else I might have my servants to defend me, and thus he
confessed him self to be king of heaven puttyng also Pylate out of doubt yt he
neaded nothing to fear him for his k^^gdom which he governed, of the which
kingdom the Jews accused him. John^. of this not withstondynge Pilate yet
gatheryng him to be a king concluded saying, ergo thou art a king. whom
Jesus answered saying. Thou haste said the truth. Matthew, Mark. Luke.
Johan. And Jesus showing the cause why he confessed this thing said that he
was borne unto it, and for this cause was he come^ in to the world to testifye
the truth, so yt here he delared him self to be all only both king and
savior of all the chosen, and because that the chosen only believe this verily,
he added saying every man yt is of the troth hereth my voice / John^. Then
Pilate, perceuyng him to be unguilty of any treaso as concerning The^perours
majesty whose depute he was there, went forth unto the Jews affirmynge again
that he could find no manner a cause worthy death in the man / Luke / Johan.
Upon this the chyef of the prestes stepte in, layeng sore against him accusyng
him that he should make a sedition among the people teaching and prechyng
through out all jury beginning at Galyle. And Pilate herynge the^ mind Galile,
anon asked him if he were of Galyle, and as soon as he herd that he perteyned
to Herodes jurisdiction. He sent him to Herod which was then at Jerusalem
whereof herod was not a little glade / for he was often before greatly desirous
to se him, and when he came before him, he asked him many things. But Jesus
answered him nothing, although yet the ouermoste of the prestes and scribes
stood there against him accusynge him styfly and sharply, when Jesus reputing
Herod as a dog or a swyne unworthy his words / would nothing answer him
(peraue^ture he asked him nothing concerning the glory of god) Herod
despised him and the company also with him / wherefore they scorned him and
brought him back again in a white cote to Pilate, and for this cause Herod
and Pilate, were made friends again, which before were at odds, and thus
came the kings of therthe to gyder agreynge to conspire against the lord and
his anointed / psalm the second.

This seuenthe part contains the other inquisition of the judge, his
council to let him go and how he was scourged.
When Jesus was brought again to Pilate, then he called again to gyder to
him the chyefe of the prestes and the seculer heads of the people, sayng
neither I nor Herod can find any cause of death in this man / and so he would
have corrected him a little to satysfie their minds and let him have gone /
Luke. But the^ began the high prestes to accuse Jesus of many things, and
he would answer them nothing nor yet Pilate when he bad him answer to their
accusations, in so much yt Pilate merueled greatly a^ him / Matthew / Mark.
Then were they wont in the feast of Passage to give one of the presoners to
the people to be delyuerd, and Pilate had in his custody an (...) thief called
Barrabas taken with the authors of sedition, and makers of a great fray which
also committed murder in the fraye this man as one that was odious unto ye
people, he coupled, and matched with Jesus / and when the folk after the use
and yearly custom asked one of the prisoners to be given them, he asked the^
whether they would have Barrabas let go and delyuerd them, or Jesus the King
of the Jews which is called the anointed Matthew / Mark Luke Johan. For he
knew it fulwel that they betrayed and betoke him to him of envy and malice,
then the chyef of the prestes, and the senyors persuaded the folk to ask
Barrabas Matthew* Mark. Then the comen people asked (Pilate askyng the^ whether
of these twain they would have) crynge al with one voice, let us have Barrabas
/ Matthew Mark / Luke / Ioha^. After this Pilate asking them what shall be
done with this man Jesus / which is called the king of Jews? and they cried
out again crucify him. To whom Pilate answered what hurt has he done? and
then they cried out more vehemently crucifye him / Matthew / Mark.

Then he, seeing yt by this ways he could not have his purpose, turned him to
a another way which he had conceived with him self before saying I find
nothing worthy death in this man wherefore I will chaste^ him, and so let him
go, Luke. And the^ caused he Jesus to be whipped and scourged then the vilens
of ye Jews took and led him in to the court house and gadered all ye company
about him / they put of his clothes and clothed him with a red robe and
wroth a garlande of thorns about his head they gave him a reed in his
ryghthande, and the^ made they kurtesy before him mocking him and salutynge
him saying, al hayle ye king of the Jews, and they boffetted him on the
cheake, and when they had spytte in his face, they took the reed and smote
him upon the head / Math. Mark / Johan. Thus Pilate brought forth Christ to
ye jews all to whipped, crowned with thorns, bespitted, beten, and scorged,
supposinge through such a careful and petyouse state and condition of him to
have swaged and mytigated their malycious hatered against him saying lo, I
have brought him here forth unto you that ye should know that I find no cause
gylty in him.

Then came Jesus forth among them bearing a crown of thorn and had a red
paul or mantel upon him, and Pilate said unto them behold, this is the man.
Then the bisshops and their mynystres beholding him cried out crucify him,
crucify him. To whom the judge said. Take him your self and crucify him,
for as for me I find no cause of death in him. Then said the Jews again, we
have a law and after our law he ought to dye, for he made him self ye son of
god, when Pilate herd yt, he began to be more afraid for Jesus sake least
peraue^ture he should have pre^fred any such thing / whereby it should not have
^aine in his power to have delyuerd him, wherefore he returned in to the
judgment hal saying unto Christ / of when^e art thou? and Jesus would
nothing answer^ him, for he had testefied the tro^th often y^^ugh before
confessing him self to be Chris^e and king also, but is that his kingdom
was not of this world / wherefore Pila^e neaded not to have fea^ed as
concernyge any mynishynge or hurt toward themperours power and so to have
any cause to give sentence against him wher^ore Pilate discon^ence that he
would not answer him said, wherefore speak^ste thou not ^o me? know thou
nor tha^ it lies in my power to crucifye the, or to deliver the? Then because
Pilate took so much upon him vsurpyng that which turned in to the contempre of
god* of whom it was defyned by his godly se^rete council vnab^e to be undone
that Christ at this time sho^de be be^rayed and left unto the power of derknes
(or else no man might have done any thing against him) corrected the judges
saying on this manner, thou sholdest have no power against or upon me unless
it were given the from above, now for as much as thou art here judge, and
ruler, (the power of judgment over me given the of god) thy sin is not so
great as theyrs which delyuerd me unto the moved only of hatrede without any
lawful authoryte: now of this Pilate sought ways to deliver him: but ye
jews cried saying if thou delyuerst this man / then art thou not themperours
friend, for who so ever makes him king? says against the emperor. John^.
Then insta^ted they more vehemently with great noise askyng to obteyn him to
be crucified / and the importune asking out cryenges of them and myscheuous
persuasions of the bisshops at last obtained their deuelyshe purpose.

This eight part conteyneth the condemnacion of Jesus and his ledynge forth
^o the cross. Here Pilate was ouercom with ye wicked importunite o^ the
bishops which persuaded all to their deadly purpose.
When Pilate herd these words he brought forth Jesus and sat d^wne in
judgment in a place called Lythostrotos and in Ebrue it is called Gabbatha
because it syngnyfyeth an higher place, it was then friday, the day next
before Eastern or their pass over day, in the which day they preparyd things
required for ye day and it was almost the syxth hour. Johan. That is to say,
about the end of the second part of the day, which second part begins
with them at nine of the clock in the morning contynuyng to twelve and is
called with (...) crucify him, whom they stripte out of his red robe and did
again upon him his own clothes and led him away to be crucified Matthew /
Mark / Luke / Johan. Then Jesus judged to death went his way bearing his
cross toward the place, which was called Caluaria / but in that Ebrue tongue
which they spoke at yt time which speech sauorde much of the Chalday tongue
it was called Golgatha / Johan. And as he went / they over took one Simon of
Ciren father to Alexander and Rufus, coming from the field, and they laid the
cross upon his neck to bear it after Jesus, which thing (it is to suppose)
they did because that Jesus for feablenes was not able to bear so heavy a tree /
Matthew / Mark and Luke.

Here many of ye comen people followed him with many women waylynge and
lamenting his heavy chance / and sorofull state, for the love and service that
many men yet bore unto him self not a way from every man's heart / but unto
these careful folk he turned him self back saying / oh daughters of
Jerusalem weep not ^or me, but for your own self and for your children / for
the days shall come in the which it shall be said blessed are the baren and
the wombes which have not conceived, and the breasts which have not given any
souke then shall they begin to say to ye mountains, fall ye down upon us,
and to the hills, cover us / in these words he prophesied to them the
miserable calamyte of ye besegynge of Jerusalem by the Romans and mur^her to
come upon them in which they should feale and know at last what they prayed
for the^ selves when they said his blood fall upon us and upon our children,
and he added thereto, for if they thus do to the greaue and most tree, what then
shall be come (think ye) of the dry baren bloke, by which saying he meant
this, if they should ^god sufferynge it) thus cruelly entreat him being an
innocent and just man like the most and frutfull tree (as it stands in the
first psalm) much more cruelly shall god suffer the unfruitfully nation of the
Jews to be handled which are but dry baren blocks. There were two other
malefactors led forth with him to be crucified also / Luke. And after yt they
came to the place, called Caluaria, they gave Jesus to drink vinaigre myngled
with Gal but when he had tasted it, he would not drink thereof / Matthew, Mark
/ Luke / John^. And there they crucified him with the two thefes, one on his
right hand and the other of his left hand, where this prophecy of Esaye in
the.liij. chapter was fulfilled, and he was reputed among the mysdoers.
Matthew. Mark Luke. and John^. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them for they
know not what they do. Luke.

Here Pilate set up a title upon ye cross in Ebrue. Greek. and Latyne.
conteynyng these words Jesus of Nazareth ye king of jews. Matthew. Mark.
Luke. John. But when ye Jews had red this title (for the place was nyghe
Jerusalem) the bishops required Pilate to write that Jesus should say these
words, I am king of the Jews, and not that he was ye very king of Jews, but
Pilate governed and led of gods ordinance could not change the title
which without doubt contained the very gospel of Christ by ye which he was
preached and publesshed undoubted to be the very self same king called
Messiah sent unto the Jews, and thus in the mids of his death he began to
be exalted and to enjoy his kingdom.

This nynth part co^teyneth what was done. Christ hanging now upon the
Cross.
THen these vylens / when they had crucified Jesus.iiij. of the^ took his
clothes making four parts of the^, that each of the^ might have a pease, and
as for his knytte cote which was without seem / because it could not well be
cut, they casted dyce for it that the.xxij. psalm might be fulfilled. They
divided my clothes to the^ selves, and upon my other garneme^t they threw dice.
And all this did the vilen souldyers which sat there and kept Jesus. Matthew
/ Mark / Luke / Johan.

Then stood there by the cross of Jesus, his mother / and his mothers sister /
and Marye Magdalen, and when Jesus se his mother and his disciple, who^ he
loved standing by him, he said unto his mother woman behold they son, and
so afterward said he unto his disciple / behold thy mother, and from that
hour he took the charge of her / his manner was at all times to call her woman,
because he was much more excellent and godly then was she the which bore him,
but yet would he not forgette the duty and office of the son toward his
mother. Of this may the men that lie on their death beds learn to not forget
their children wives. etcetera.

There stood the people gasyng upon him and ye goers forby reuyled him,
wagginge their heads at him saying, art thou he that destroyed the temple and
buyldeste it up again in three days? save thy self. if thou be the son of
god come down from the cross, likewise the ouermost of the prestes which the
scribes and seigneours scornynge him said among them selves. He has saved
other men, but him self he may not save. if he be the king of Israel let him
now come down from the cross, and we will believe in him, he trusted in god
let him now delyuere him if he set any thing by him, also the soldyers mocked
him / Luke. Besides all this one of the thieves, that hanged by him casted these
opprobries, and blasphemies in to his tethe saying if thou be Christ save thy
self and us also (for so behooved it him to be blasphemed of all manner of
folk) but the other thief answered and blamed his fellow saying, and fear
thou not god being in like damnacion with other? as for us we suffer worthily,
for we have deserved this death but as for this man is an innocent, and then he
said unto Jesus. Lord remember me when thou shall come in to thy kingdom And
Jesus answered him verily verily I say unto the, this day shall thou be with
me in paradise partaker of my glory / whiles all these things were a doing,
the syxte hour (which is the third portion of the day conteinyng these our
three hours i.ij.iij. drew fast to an end / and great darkness was risen over
al therthe until the nynthe hour, that is the last part of the day which
contaynethe these three of our hours four five six. Jesus cried with a loud
and strong voice saying. Ely / Ely, Lama / Sabathtany / which is as much to
say as. My god, My god, wherefore have thou forsaken me? And then some of the
standers by hearing this, said.

This man calls Helias, and some said hold your peace, let us se whether
Helias shall come and deliver him Math. Mark. After this Jesus knowing that
all things should be now ended and that the scripture should be fulfilled in
all things as concerning the prophesyenges of his passion said. I am a
thyrste / then was there a vessel brought him full of vinaigre / Johan. And
they filled a sponge with this vinaigre and hisope, and put it upon a reed and
lyfted it up to his mouth / Matthew / Mark / Johan. when Jesus then had
taken the vinaigre / he said. It is done.

For now had he brought all things to an end which were prophesied of his
death Johan. And when Jesus had cried with so mighty a loud voice, he said
father, I commit my sprite into thy hands / Luke.

And when he had said these words, he smite down his head and let go his
breath And lo, the veil of the temple was cut in two parts from the rofe to
the ground / Matthew / Mark / Luke. And therthe quaked. The stones were cut
and, broke in sundre / graves were laid wide open, and many faithful men's
bodies which had slepte did vprise, which going forth of their graves after
his resurrection came in to the cite and appeared to many men / Matthew.

Then when a certain petye captain / which stood over against him, and they
that were with him keapynge Jesus, se yt he with so loud and so strong a
voice leate go his breathe, beholdynge also the marvelous Earth quake, with the
other wonderful tokens that there now chanced, were meruelouslye affrayed and
glorified god saying. This man was ye very son of god Math. Mark / Luke.
And all the comen poor simple people that thither came to se, considering
these vnwonte and wonderful things yt thus happened in time of his death,
knocked their selves upon their brostes with great fear and reuer^ce / Luke.
Then stood al they that knew him a far and the women of Galile yt followed him
ministering unto him / among whom there was Marie Magdalene, and Marie the
mother of James the less, and the mother of one called Iose, and a another
woman called Salome the mother of the sons of zebedei, with other many
which came with him unto Jerusalem stood also a far.

This is the tenthe, and last part of the passion containing the buryenge of
our savior Christ.
THen the Jews, because it was the great Saboth eauen in the which saboth
day they should keape holy their pass over thinking it unworthy and
unseemly the bodies of such hanged men so uncomely to remain upon the crosses
especially in so solemn a Saboth day: desired Pylate that (their thyghes
broken) they might be taken away, wherefore the souldyers went / and broke the
thyghes of both the thuees / but when they came to Jesus he was dead /
wherefore they broke not his thyghes / but one of the soldyers pearsed his side
with a spear / and even by and by there gusshed forth blood and water, whi^he
thing Johan testifies him self to have had seen affirmynge it to be true,
that we also should belyue it, forther more he says these things to have been
done that the scripture should be fu^filled / saying, ye shall no^ brecke any
of ^is bones, and again a another scripture. They shall se whom they pearsed.

After this, he eueanynge upon which begins wi^h them at six of the cloak
at night (for it be as now their nyenth hour and the last porsion of the
day) there came a certain rich man, and an honest senator called Joseph a
very good man, and a just which consented neither to the counsel nor to the
dead of the Jews, borne in Arimathea a city of Jury which abode and looked
for the kingdom of god, he was one of Christ's disciples, but preuelye yet for
fear of the Jews. This man now took heart unto him, and went boldly to
Pilate and asked the body of Jesus Christ, our savior / Matthew / Mark / Luke
/ Johan. And Pilate doubting whether that he should be now dead so sone,
called unto him the petye captain askyng him whether he was yet deed / and
as soon as he knew it, he gave Joseph his body. And then came Nicodemus which
first came unto Jesus our savior be night bringynge a contection made with
myrthe and aloes about an houndred pound wayghte, and then took they the body
of Jesus and wound it in a fine clean lynen she^e with this swear and
precyouse contection well pouldred as was the manner of the Jews so to burye /
then was there a gardeyn in ye place where he was crucified / and in the same
gardeyn a new tomb or sepulcre which tomb Joseph had caused to be hewn out
of stone for him self. in ye which as yet was there no man laid. And there
because of the Jews Saboth even, and for the grave was very nyghe, they laid
in Jesus, and lated a stone upon the mouth of the grave / Matthew / Mark / Luke
/ Johan. And thus was he buried gloriously which was put to death so shamfully,
for now began he to be glorified. And now was it their saboth even in the
which day they prepared against the feast day that was at hand even on
the morrow / and this nynthe hour that is the last portion of the day was at an
end, so that it was now about six of the cloak at night.

Then followed them these women that came with him from Galile / and they se the
grave and how his body was laid there in / Matthew / Mark / Luke: Then after
this returnyd they again to their harbor and prepared sweet confections, and
oyntmentes. And on the Saboth day following they rested as it was commanded by
the law of Moses / Luke. But on the morrow after this frydaye, that is to
say, upon this great Saboth day came the ouermost of the prestes with the
pharisayes together and went to Pilate, reme^bringe that Christ (whom they now
called a false deceyuer) said that he should rise again the third day,
whereupon they desired that he would command the sepulcre to be kept until
the third day, lest his disciples should pauenture come and stele him away
/ and so bare the people in hand that he was risen from death, and then
should they be in worse case then ever they were before, to whom Pilate
granted the custodye / and that they should keape the sepulcre as well as they
could which then sealed the stone and besette armed men about it, to keep him.

Adoramus te. etc.
The verse. we worshipe the, o Christ and we honor the. Thanswer. For by thy
holy Cross, thou haste redeemed the world.

Oremus. Domine Jesus Christ. etc.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god, put thy passion, cross,
and thy death between the judgment and our souls now and in the hour of our
death, and grant us whiles we live mercy and grace, to them that depart
forgyuenes and rest, unto thy holy church give peace and concord, and to us
that are sinners, life and glory everlasting, which lyuest and reignest with
the father and with the holy ghost / ever. Amen.

Gloriosa passio. etc.
The gloriose passion of our lord Jesus Christ, deliver us from sorrowful
heuenes and bring us to the joys of paradise. Amen.

GOd sets forth his incomparable love that he bears unto us, for seeing the
whiles we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more then now (seeing
that we are justified in his blood) shall we be preserved from dampnation
through him to the Romans, the fyfthe.

A fruetfull remembrance A devout frutfull and godly remembrance of the
passion of our savior Jesus Christ.
THere are certain which when they excercyse them selves in the medita^ion
or remembrance of the pas^yo^ which Christ suffer^d for mankind / do nothing
else bu^ were wod and furious against the blind jews and Judas their gyde
through whom he was betrayed (as an innocent lamb) in to their bloody and
cruel hands (even as it is the comen manner of the^ which are wont to
lame^te and bewail the (...) o^ ^heyr friends / to accuse and cry out on
those persons which do the dead) but they nothing consider them which are the
chyefe causes of his bitter death and pas^ion. So that in rely this may better
be called a remebraunce of the Jews wickedness then of Chr^stes passion.

There are other that have gathered to gether diverse co^modityes which
spring through the dilygent beholdynge of this passion / whereof is the saying
of Albert in every man's mouth: yt it is better to remember the passion of
Christ our in once life all though it be but slenderly, then to ta^^e every
day a hole year to gyder, or ^o read over the hole Psalter of David, how be
it all their polytike means and studiouse imaginacyons, they could never
a^tayne the very use and profit of the passion of Christ. Neither sought they
any thing therein but their own private wealth / ^or some carried a^oute them
images / painted papers / carved tables / cro^es and such other tryfles. yea
and some fell to such mad ignorance that they thought them selves through
such beggary to be sat from ryre water and all other perilous ieoperdyes. As
though the cross of Christ shu^de deliver them from such outward tro^les and
not rather the contrary.

These do pituously sorrow and morn for Christ and complain that he was
innocent and gyltles put to death, even like as the women of H^^rusalem whom
Christ him self did reprehende aduert^^ynge the^ that they should lamen^e
them selfs, and their own children. Neither is it any meruell for the
preachers them selves ar sick of the same disease, which for ye most part
when they entreat this matter, ^epe (...) of the fruteful, and holesom storye
in to these their comen places: how Jesus took his leave of his disciples i^
Betania. And with what dolorous syghes his mother Marie pityed him, and such
other things / on these they babble at length and discant their plesures
rather to the weryenge then edefyenge of the audience, unto this sort may we
also adnumbre them which have defined and enstructe other what exellent
commodityes are in the mass, in so much that ye rude and ignorant people
persuaded them selves that it was sufficient if they had herd a mass / and
that they should have good luke what so ever myschefe they went a boute. And
there are some which run so far hedlyng that they affirm stoutely that
the mass which they call a sacrifice, is accept of god for the work it
self, and not for his sake that does ye mass. They consider not, that god
looks first on the person that works, and then after on ye work as thou
haste a goodlye ensample. Genesis iiij. of Abell and Cain. They consider not that
an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit. Matthew.xij. And that on a
bromble men can gether no figs. Math. vij. They consider not that the mass
was institute of Christ to make us more holy through the devout remembrance
of his passion with a pure faith / and not for any other worthynesse that it
has in it sylfe. How be it though we should grant them that the mass in it
self were as good and holy as their covetousness and belyes have feigned it,
yet truly can it nothing profit us except we use it for the same purpose
that Christ did institute it, for what does it profit us that meat, and
drink are good and holesom if we abuse them corruptynge our nature, yea or
what does it avail us that god is god, that is to say, almighty, most
mercyful / good, rightewise and alone sufficient, if we abuse his goodness and
believe not in him? It is therefore to be feared lest if thou be ignorant in the
true use of the mass that the mo thou hear the more thou offendest god
abusing his institution and ordinance.

But these are the very right beholders of Christ's passion / which consider
and mark in his passion their own sins and enormityes which were the cause
and ground of his passion and death / for they are feared and their conscyences
tremble as soon as they remember the passion, which fear and tremble ryseth
of this that they may se in the passion ye vehement wrath / and rightuous
punishment of god the father against sinners / which would not for all the
abundaunt favor that he had unto his son (...) ma^efactoures to go fre and
unpunished but that he must redeem them with his own death / which thing
Esaias.iiij. does al^o confirm saying in the person of god the father, for the
sins of my people have I wounded him, what then shall be come of us sith his
most dear and only son is so cruelly entreated? It must needs be a
marvelous / and menarrable wrath toward us which could not be pacefied bu^
through death / yea and that through the death of Christ his best beloved
son And verily if a man do mark diligently that the very son of god / the
image and wisdom of the father did suffer for our ^ransgressions / to
reconceyle us unto his father / th^re is no doubt but he shall tremble and
abhor his grievous iniquityes.

Forther more enprent this thing surely and grave it in thy heart, that thou
thy self / art one of them which on this manner do tourment and crucify
Christ, for thy sins have cast him in to those torments acco^dyng to the
words of Peter A^es. ij. where he amassed the Jews as wi^h a thonder clappe
saying unto all that were present, you have crucified him. At which voice three
thousand men were astonyed and said unto the Apostles, what shall we now do
brethren? therefore when thou seyst the nails fastened in the hands or Christ
/ thynkyng that those sharp nails are thy euel deades / when thou beholded his
brayn perced with ye croune of thorns think that those thorns are thy wicked
thoughts and sotle imagina^i^s. And where thou sent Christ pricked with one
tho^ne rem^bre yt thou have deserved to be pry^^ed a thousand ^oice more often
and greuou^y / where thou serve his hands and fere ^hrus^e through with nails
/ remebre y^ thou haste deserved with out compari^on / more cruel pain. And
surely they that despi^e the passion of Christ / shall without end iustre
most grievous torments, for ye vehement wrath and ryghtuouse punyshme^t of god
(which he well declared in that he wo^^e his only sone to dye for ou^
tra^sgre^^ions) is no feigned trifle / but the wicked and unfaithful shall
prove it in dead.

This sorrow and trembling sound saint Bernarde our of Christ's passion
saying in the third sermon of the birth or our Lord. Brethren, the tears
of Christ do engender in me, both shame and sorrow with fear, I was playenge
with out in ye streate, and in the kings secret chaumbre there passed against
me a sentence of death. The kings dear and only son herd of this, and went
forth (layenge a side his costly roobes and precious diademes) and clothed him
self in sack cloth / sprinkling ashes on his head, going barefote, weeping
and sobbing that his servant was condemned unto death. I beheld him as he
hasted out and wondered what new thing that might be. I enquired the cause and
he showed it me / what shall I now do? shall I play still / and nothing
regard his tears? Truly except I be mad or out of my wit I ought to
follow him, and morn with him sith he morneth for me. Behold ye cause of
shame, from whence springs the sorrow and fear? verily when I considre the
medecyne and remedy / then of that may I esteem the quantytye and depth of my
sin. I was clean ignorant and thought my self hole, and behold the tender
child of a virgyn and son of god almighty was delivered in to the hands of
the ungodly and commanded to be slain / that he might cure with ye precyouse
baume of his blood my festred wou^des, and corrupt nature, we must needs
knowledge and grant that those were greuouse wou^des / for the which our
Lord Christ must suffer and be wounded, if they had not been to death / yea
and that everlasting / ye sone of god should never have suffered to have
healed them. etc. Even so did Christ monishe the women of Jerusalem, weep not
for me, but for your own selves and children. He added a cause, for (quod he)
if this be done in moist wodde, what shall be done in dry, as though he
should say if this be done in me which am pure and innocent, what shall be
done in you which are hoelly corrupt and vicyat? ye may learn by this my
passion what ye have deserved which pain (except ye believe) ye can not
escape here to may we well apply the proverb / men smite the whelpe to fear
the great bandogge. Christ was smyten innocent to give us warning of our
outragyous vices and enormityes. To this well agrees the Prophet which
says that all ye nacyons of the earth shall bewail them selves upon him, he
says not that they shall be wayle him, but that they shall bewail them
selves upon him. Even so were they dismayed Acts.ij. as is before reherced /
and the church syngeth, I shall surely remember it and my soul shall melt
within me.

And in this sorrowful bewaylinge of the^ selves ought the faithful
diligently (...) exce^^^ se them selves / for on this ha^^^^h ye hole profit
and use of Christ's passion y^ a man may knew him self, that he might tremble
and repent in beholdynge his grievous enormytes / for truly except he come to
this point, the passion of Christ does no^hynge avail him. This is the pure
and perfect operation that the passion of Christ works with in us, that we
may be made like unto him, yt as Christ was greuou^ly vexed both in body and
soul / for our sins / eue^ s^ yt our conscience may scourge and torment us.
for our own wykednesses which are so many and so great yt they are sone called
to memory except we will be wylfully blind and not se yt which is most
p^sent and famylyar with us. Let us use an ensample to make ye thing more
euyde^t. Be it in case that a certain kings son were slain. And the
murtherar taken and brought to the sessions and accused before ye Judge of this
capital crime, which co^fesieth openly that he has done the dead / adding
yt he did it at thy request and that thou wast the chyefe author and setter a
work / if thou in the mean ceason were taking thy pastyme and recreacyon /
and suddenly were arested and cast in prison as accessory of this murder yea
or rather as princypall the other being but thy minister and instrument of thy
meschefe, would not even shortly thy mirth abate. thy color apale thy flesh
faynte and ^remble? Now if thy conscience did also accuse the, and testefy
against the that thou were justly enpresoned / what ragynge hell and
unquietness should thou then feale, with in thy heart? Even so or much more
shall he be altered which duly remembers the passion of Christ. For the
Jews (although execution be done on the^ as malefactors and they abiecte
from the face of god) yet were they but the mynistres of thy sin, for in very
dead thy sins nailed him to the cross and were the hole cause of his pain
and death / as we have showed before.

Now if there be any so hard and ins^sible yt they can another tremble another
yet begin to know them selves in the remembrance of this bitter passion /
they stand surely in shrode case. For it is necessary that we be made
conformable unto the son of god. that is to say, that we feale the depthe
and burden of sin other in this world or in time to come. yea and that we
quake, tremble / and taste of the deadlye panges which Christ suffered on the
cross. But surely it is a miserable and pytuous thing to begin then to feale
them / when we are in the extremyte and point of death. Therefore let every
man pray unto god yt he would vouchsaffe to give us his spyrite, and grace
which may mollyfie our indurate hertes that we may with some fruet call unto
remembrance the passion of Christ. For I think no man is so mad to suppose
that we of our own power with out the spirit of god can do other this, or any
other thing acceptable to god / for all goodness is of god and not of us.

Neither do we teach the this or any other thing to thentent that thou
sholdest think that thou were able to acco^plysh it of thine own power, but
only to monysh the often by duty yt when thou fealest thine own imbe^yllyte
thou may desire this grace of god / and through his help fulf^ll that which
is required of the. For ye cause why those men before said did vnprofytably
handle this passion, was this: they stuck hoolly, unto their own power and
natural imagynacyons nether ones desired the grace of god / and so could they
attayn to no profit. But he that remembers the passion of Christ on this
manner as we have showed (all though it be but one hours space) may well have
ye saying of Albarte verefyed upon him that he has been better occupied /
then if he had fasted every day a hole year to gether or else had red over
the hole psalter of David. yea and I dare boldly add that he has better
bestowed his time then if he had herd a hundredth masses. For this goodly
remembrance does even renew a man, and does testefye unto his conscience that
he is regenerate / and borne again / even in a manner as well as baptysme. So
that this is the pure and natural work of Christ's passion / to mortefye the
old man of sin that rayneth in our members / to cast out all hope and
conforte that we have in creatures, and so deep to bring a man in to the
knowledge of his sin that he shall come even to ye bryncke of desperation and
think that he is forsaken of god. yet it leaves him not there but it brings
him again with all consolation and conforte and shows him yt all his
outrageous enormityes ar crucified with Christ and through his death put out of
the way that they can never accuse him more / and that the fathers wrath is
pacefyed by his sons death / and we all (as many as believe that Christ's
death ha^he paid the ransom of our sin) are set at one with god and are
become his chylder so yt he is no more our judge which should punyshe us for
our iniquityes / but will be called our merciful father which forgeueth his
chyldrens transgressyons.

Now sith we can not thus fruetfullye remember Christ's passion except we be
enspyred with grace from above (for our i^pote^t and viciat nature can do no
good with out ye spryte of god) the next remedy to obtain this fruetfull
gift is to pray and desire it of god our father / and albeit he give it us
not in the same time and moment that we would have it / yet let us not despair
and cease from prayer. Paraduenture he holds it from ye to make the more
desirous of it and to set the more by it when it comes / and that thou may
know that it is not in thy power and will to have it at thy pleasure / but
this is a clear case that he will surely give it the when it shall be most
expedient for his glory and thy wealth / which time no man knows but he
alone. Therefore let us prescribe him no time / but ever submyt our wills to
his and pray that his will be fulfilled. And contrary wise sumtyme he gives
us this gift before we pray or axe it / neither gives he us at all times the
spryte to pray / but distributeth that gift also even at his own godly
pleasure, neither will he that it be bound other to time place or any person.
when he has ones received the spyryte which mollefyeth the heart and
brings him in to the remembrance of the passion / by and by his heart
trembles / he lotheth him self and knowlegeth his infyrmyte / so that the
effect of the passyo^ is fulfilled in him in a manner before he be aware.

But they that fall to their medytacyons and behold this passion being void
of this spryte which opens the heart / take great labors and are
dylygentlie occupied but al about naught: for they can another repent nor yet
perceive their own infyrmyte / which is the very end and effect of Christ's
passion. So may thou se that the first without labor atteyne the fruete
and profit of Christ's passion although it appear not outwardlye. And the
other for all their dilygente study have nothing profyted / although they seem
outwardly to have god by ye foot. And thus does god turn topse turuea / that
they which ar all day occupied in hearing masses and in reme^br^nge Christ's
passion get none advantage. And ye other which seame to do none of both / do
both in dead and obtain ye hole profit.

Hitherto have we entreated the cross, and passion of Christ by the
remembrance whereof we know our infirmityes / abhor our vices and are clean
overthrown ready to fall in to the pytte of desperacyon / and now will we
touch how our consciences thus wounded, and cast down must be lift up
again.

When a man begins on this manner to know and feale his sins and trembles
at ye hydeous sight of them / let him take good head that those trembling
mocions stycke not to long in his conscience for so should he fall in to utter
desperacyon, But even as that fear / and knowledge of sin did spring out of
Christ's passion, so must our conscience unlade her self again and lay all
on Christ's back. But beware that thou do not as the unfaithful do, for they
when they feale their sin yt their conscience biteth them / they run to
their own good works / to satysfactions pilgrimages, and pardons / and so
vex they meruelously their unquiet minds to ryd them from their burden, but
their labor is in vain. And yet has that false confidence and trust in
satisfactions so spread it self that it has founded many religious cloisters
in Christendo^, to the utter destruction of all Christianite for if I can make
satysfactio^ for my sins / the^ is Christ's blood shed in vain. Therefore
on this manner shall thou unlade thy mind and cast thy sins on Christ.
First thou must faithfully believe / that Christ suffered for they sake even
to redeem thy sins / and that he took them on his own back and made full
satysfaction for them unto his father / as Esa. says.liij. The lord laid on
him all our iniquities / and.i. Pet. ij. He bare our sins in his own body
upon the cross. And Paul.ij. Corin. v. God made him ye knew no sin, sin
for us (yt is to say a sacryfyce for our sin) that we through him might be
that ryghtousnes which before god is allowed. Now ye more that thy conscience
boyleth and ryseth against the / the more shalt thou cleave to these, and
such other comfortable sentences and put thy hole fyaunce in Christ as they
teach the / for if thou go oboute through thy contricyon and satysfaccyon to
pacefye and aswage thy ragynge conscience, thou shalt never be in surety / but
after intolerable labor and toylynge thou shall fall in to utter
desperacion. For the conscience can not be quyete when he fealeth his sin /
but estemeth it greater then that we of our own power should be able to
quench it. Notwithstondynge if he saw that Christ which is both god and man
had taken them upon him and had veynqueshed them by his death / ye and rysynge
again had tryumphed upon death / hell / and the devil: then should he soon
perceive how weak the stynge and power or sin is / for even as the pains of
his wou^des and panges of his detth do now no more remain in his body: even
so are all our sins vanyshed away like smoke. To this well agreyth the
saying of Paul To. iiij. that Christ dyed for our sins and is risen again
to iustyfye us. That is / the passion and death of Christ does open and dectate
our sins unto us and ^o does take them away / but thorughe his rysynge
again are we iustefyed and made free from all our sins / if we believe.

How be it if we feale our unbelief / that we can not be surely persuaded that
these things are true / then is ye next remedy to fall unto prayer / for this
also is in the hand of god / neither is it given to every man but some have it
more and some less for god dirstibuteth al at his pleasure. Not withstondynge
there are certain means and small paths by the which a man may have as it
were an entrau^ce in to his faith. First turn thine eyes and behold the herty
love and bounteous kyndnes of Christ which so tenderly loved the that he would
take on him self all thy sins / and louynglye enbrace the to heal thy
wounded conscience / if thou remember and think on this amytye thy heart shall
somewhat be refresshed, and so shall thy trust in Christ be the more increased
and stablyshed.

After that thou haste perceived this ferueut favor that Christ had toward
the / then shall thou sone marcke what good will the father owed the / for then
shall it appear yt Christ could not endue the with such great benefytes,
except it had been before so decred of his heuenlye father / for unto him did
Christ obey when he suffered for thy transgressions. And so shall thou se the
flaming cheryte of god the father toward the / and thoroughe Christ shall
thou be so drawn to the father that thou may perceive the saying of christ.
Ioha^. iii. God so loved ye world yt he gave his only sone for the^tent yt
none which believe in him should perysh but should have everlasting life. And
this is the true knowledge of god when we behold and magnyfye not his
puyssaunte majesty or his incomprehensyble prudence (for they make a man a
frayde of God) but rather his curtous and mercyful benevolence wherein he may
put his confidence and may be holy in god renewed.

And when thy heart is so confermed in Christ that thou begynnest with full
intent to hate thy sin not for fear of pain, but for ye love that thou
haste unto god because thou would not dyplease him, which is such a
merciful, and loving father unto the / then is it expedyent that thou take
this passion for an ensample by the which thou may order thy life. But this
remembrance is far unlike the first for hitherto have we recounted it, as a
secret mystery which should work in us and renew us through repentance, and
when we have obtained that profit, then let us considere it as an ensample or
rule to order our life and works, ever comparynge the^ unto Christ's passion
on this manner as follows.

When thou art dyseased with any sorrow or malady, then think how small y^ pain
is, if thou sholdest compare it with Christ's croune of thorn, and the nails
which perced his tender flesh.

When thou art constrained to do or leave undone any thing which thou would
not, then remember that Christ was bound and tossed from post to pyller even
as it pleased his cruel enemies.

If thou be tempted with pride and lordlynesse, then mark how unworthily
Christ was mocked / yea and crucyfied between two thieves, that he might be
reputed as one of their nombre.

If thou be assailed with wantonness, or with the lust of the flesh / then
behold how cruellye the tender flesh of Christ was scourged, torn and
most pituouslye wounded.

If thy heart boil with hate, or envy and be full set to take auengeaunce,
then call to thy remembrance how Christ with a lamentable voice did pray unto
his father for the and other his enemies, whom he might by good right have
punished perpetually.

If thou be vexed with any other afflictions what so ever they are, whether
secret or open, take them on good worth and be not dysquieted / but think
with thy self on this manner. It were a great shame if I should not suffer
patiently this small trouble / sith that Christ my lord and savior suffered
in the garden such panges yt he swette drops of blood / for what is more
shame then that the servant should take his ease and lie slugyshly in his
bed what time his master stondeth in ieoperdye of his life.

Behold / on this manner may thou comfort and stablysh thy heart with ye
passion of Christ against all vexations. And this is the true meditation and
remembrance of Christ's passion out of which the aforesaid commodytyes
spring.

Therefore they that excercyse them selves dylygentlye in it, are much better
occupied then if they herd a thousand times the storye of the passion / or
said as many masses. And these only at ye true christen which on this wise do
express in their lyte or manners the name and life of Christ as saint Paul
says: they that belong to Christ have crucyfied their flesh and
concupiscences with Christ. Neither is it enough that we cou^trefayte him in
our outward behaueoure and words / but we must do our endeueraunce perfytly
to express his passion in all our conuersacyon from ye botom of our hertes.
which thing Paul exhorteh us unto. Hebre. xij. Look unto Jesus the captain
of our faith, which for the joy that was set before him abode the cross
and despised the shame / and is set down on ye right hand of god. Consider
therefore how that he endured such speaking against him of sinners / lest ye
should be weryed or faynte in your minds. And saint Peter. i. Pet. iiij. says
for as much as Christ has suffered in the flesh / arm your selves likewise
with ye same mind. How be it the manner of this remembrance is very rare and
out of use / although saint Paul and saint Peter make often mencyon of it.
And we have changed it altogether in to an outward apperaunce and have
thought it suf^icient to behold the story of the passion painted upon the
walls. But there are very few (yea almost none) that call it to their
remembrannce for thentent to know their sins by it / or to quiet their
trembling consciences / or to order and compare their life to this ensample.

Thus ends the meditacyon and fruitful remembrance of Christ's passion /
which passes all other contemplations.
A fruetfull and a very Christen instruction for Children.
In the morning at thy up rysyng thou shalt make the (...) of y^ (...) say
(...) thus.

In to this day do I enter, all things to do: In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy ghost.

Then knele down upon thy knees, or else stondynge, say this prayer following.

WHit an humble and a contrite heart, with a soroufull, and a repentyng spirit
I sue unto the most mercyful father besechyng the of mercy and forgyuenes of
all mine offense that I have this night committed against thy goodness slepyng,
or wakyng, dremynge, or drechynge, by any manner of uncleanness of body / or of
soul that I have fallen in to, by illusion of the dyuel, or else by any other
occasion. And I thank the by thy dear son Jesus Christ that thou haste
preserved me, this night from sudden death / and all other myschyef, that
any person / man, or woman has been stryken with all by thy permyssyon and
sufferance knowing of suerty that the self same had ligthned on my head also
had not thou defended me and preserved me. And now I beseech ye blessed
father that thou will (...) me thi^ day, (...) the command (...) me grace to
walk warely among^^t thynnumerable snares of my ghostly ennemy the dyuel / and
to be circumspect and prudent, and diligently to consydre before hand, what I
shall speak / and what I go about to do / so that all my hoole life /
thoughts, words, and works may so be ordered / that in all mine interprises
thyn honor, laud / and glory / the edyfyinge of mine own soul in virtue, and
the profit of my Christian brother be only sought for and intended, through the
help of Jesus Christ our lord, which lives and raygneth with the his
father, and your bothes holy spirit world without end. Amen.

The Pater noster.
OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Let thy kingdom come. Thy
will be fulfilled as well in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day, our
daily bread. And forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespace
against us. And led us not in to temptation, but del^uer us from evil. Amen.
(...)

The Creed.
I Believe in god the father almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our lord / which was conceived by the holy ghost /
and borne of marye ye virgyne. He suffered under pontius Pilate, he was
crucyfyed, dead, and buried. He descended to the helles, and rose the third
day from death. He ascended to the Heuens, and sytteth on ye right hand of
God the father almighty. And from thence shall he come to judge. ye quycke and
dead. I believe in the holy ghost. I believe the holy church every where to be
the company or the congregation of holy and faithful men. I believe to have
forgyuenes of my sins. And that every man shall rise again. And I believe to
have life everlasting. Amen.

The Grace or Blessing of the table to be said of children standing before
it, thyr hands elevated and joined to gyder saying thus deuoutlye, and sadly.
THe ties of all things look up / and wait upon the (o lord) and thou gyuest
them meat in due time / when thou gyuest it them, then they gather it, when
thou openest thy hand then are they well satysfyed. Thou openest thy hand and
replenysshest all things living with thy blessing. Our father. etc.

O Lord god our heavenly father / bless thou us / and these thy gifts which
we here receive of thy blessing and bou^tuous goodness, thrughe thy son Jesus
Christ. Amen

After dinner.
LEt us give thanks unto the Lord for he is right good: his me^ (...) laid
forth for us at all times. It (...) gives meat unto every thyn^ (...) He
gives catel their food (...) ravens birds that call (...) lyteth not in
strong (...) his pleasure (...) But he is well (...) and trust in (...) we
thank ye (o lord god our father) by thy son Jesus Christ our lord, for
all thy benefyties, which lyuest and reignest from age to age world without
end, Amen. Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Here follows the Grace to be said before Souper.
Christ, which at his last souper, gave him self unto us, promising his body
to be crucified and his blood to be shed for our sins: bless us and our
souper. Amen. Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Here follows the Grace to be said after souper.
Honor and praise be unto God, the king everlasting, immortal, invisible,
and wise only / for ever and ever. Amen. Our father which art in heaven. etc.

GOd almighty / father of all mercy / and god of all consolation, give us grace
(...) to gyther, in to the knowledge (...) through Jesus Christ, that we (...)
mind, and one mouth (...) our lord Jesus Christ. (...) etc.

(...) before dinner, or (...)

Grace to be said before Dinner or Supper indyfferently.
HE which of his inestimable goodness fedeth every creature, him we beseech to
make holsom and holy, what so ever is, or shall be set, upon the table. Amen.

Grace to be said after Dinner or Supper indyfferently.
WE thank the o Heuenlye Father. which of thine infinite power have created
all things, which by thy unsearchable wysedom gouernest al things, which
of thy infinyte goodness fedest and gyuest strenghte to all things. Besechyng
the to grant to thy children, that they may ones drink with ye in thy
kingdom that sweet wine of immortalite / the which to all them that truly
and unfeignedly love the, thou have promised and prepared in the merits of
Jesus Christ. Ame^.

Grace to be said before Dinner or Supper indyfferently.
BLessed be thou oh god, which fedest us from our youth, which gyuest meat
to every creature. Replenyshe our hertes we beseech ye with quiet ^onscyence
and heavenly felicite, that we therewith endued may aboside in all works of
mercy, by the aid of our lord Christ Jesus / to whom, and to the with ye
holy ghost, be glory, honor and rule for ever. Amen.

Grace to be said after Dinner or Supper indyfferently.
GLory be to the o lord, glory be to the o holy, glory be to the o king. For
thou have given us meat. Replenishe us we beseech the, with joy and gladness
in the holy ghost, that we may be found acceptable in thy syghte, and be
not a shamed in the day, when thou shall give to every man after his doings.
Amen.

Praise ye the lord all gentyles: magnyfye him all nacyons.

For his mercy is spread over us: and the truth of the lord stondeh for ever.

Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in ye beginning, as it is now, and ever shall be. Amen.

When thou shall go to bed say thus.
I Lay me down to rest. In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. Amen.

Then say these two prayers following.
I Thank the (my heavenly father) by thy most dear beloved son Jesus Christ:
that this day of ^hy plentuouse rich mercy thou haste thus preserved me. I
pray the forgive me al my sins which I have this day vnryghtwysely committed
in deed / word / and thought. And that thou would vochsafe of thy gracious
goodness to keep me this night: for I comytte my self both body and soul and
all mine in to thy hands. Thy holy angel be with me / lest my dedely
adversary have entrese in to me. Amen.

O Above all Blyssed, and Almighty Lord God / my God / my Father / I thy
sinful creature and most unworthy child prestrate in my heart, before thine
high majesty, ask the mercy and forgyuenes of all my sin and iniquite that
I have this day committed against the, yea and ever sithe ye time that I was
conceiuyd in my mothers womb, unto this present hour / specially in this. etc.
(And then call to your mind what offense ye have committed that day that
cheyflyest grudgeth your conscience) And I thank the by thy dear son Jesus
Christ that thou haste preserved me from all such offenses as I have not
fallen in, and wherinto any other person through his own fault and thy
sufferaunce has fallen. In to the which I also without doubt should have
fallen had not thou with thy grace prevented me, saved me, supported me,
and sustained me. That I have fallen many ways my great fault and blame it is
/ whereof in most humble wise I ask mercy and forgyuenes of the. That thou
haste preserved me, thine exceeding goodness, mercy / and grace it is / whereof
with all my heart I thank ye. And now I beseech the most merciful father,
that thou will no more be angry with me, neither hensforth forsake me / but
that thou wylt contynually assyste me, fortify me, and strength me, be my
succoure and defense this night, and allway to my lives end against all sin
and iniquite. And that thou will also of thy abundaunt bountyfulnes refresshe
my bryttle body with conuenyent rest this night if it be thy will, so that I
may the more redely freshly and promptly with all diligence serve the to morrow
according to the stare yt thou haste set me in, and called me unto, so that
all my life may plese the, and through thyn assistence be so ordered, and
governed, that after this vayn and transitory life be ended I may finally come
to ye life that shall last for ever where thou most blessed father lyueste and
rayneste with thy Son and the holy ghost in to the world of worlds. Amen.

Then as thou dydest in the morning, say^ the Pater noster (...) and the Creed

Here follows the Matens.
O LORD open thou my lyppes: and then shall my mouth show forth thy praise.

O god bend thy self in to my help: lord haste yt to help me. Glory be to
the father / to the son / and to the holy ghost. As it was in the beginning:
as it now and ever shall be. Amen.

Praise ye the lord.

The Inuitatorie. Mathei. xj.
(...) all ye that labor and are laden: and I shall refreshe you.

COme and let us joyfully give thanks unto the lord: let us rejoice in god
our savior / let us approach in to his presens with praise and thanks geuyng
/ and sing we unto him in the Psalms.

Come unto me all ye that lobour and are laden: and I shall refreshe you

For god is a great lord and a great king over all gods in whose hands are
the hertes of all the creatures of the earth and the high hills are at his
commandment.

And I shall refreshe you.

The sea is his, for he has made it, and his hands have fashoned ye erathe
also: come therefore and let us worship and fall down before the lord which
has made us: for he is our god and we are the flock of his pasture and the
sheep whom he dryueth.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden: and I shall refreshe you

Now (the gospel preched) if ye hear his voice / se that ye harden not your
hertes / as they did in the place of temptacyon in wyldernes bytterly
murmuring and speaking against god / where your fathers temp^ed me and
provoked me to anger, ye although they se my miracles.

And I shall refreshe you.

Forty years was I at debate, chiding with ye generation / wherefore I said
ever / their hertes are gone from me, they know not my ways: to whom I swore
in my great anger that they should not enter in to the land of my rest,

Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden: and I shall refreshe you.

Glory be to the father / to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning: as it is now ever shall be. Amen.

The hympne.
Praised be god for his exceadynge favor, which has given us his sone to be
our savior.

We are sinners, vnryghtwyse, folyshe and flesshlye. Christ is our mercy
stole: rightwysenes, and wisdom verily.

We are unclean, holden under the danger of death and sin.

Christ is our holiness, our life, our redemption, and satysfaccion.

Glory be to the, o lord, borne of the indefyled virgyn, glory to the
father, and to the holy Ghost our souls surgeon. Ame^.

Domine dominus noster.
Lord / ye our lord / how wonderful reuerente and clear is thy name over all the earth: which haste lyfted up thy high magnificence above the heuens.

Ye and yt by the mouths of thy soukynge babes that connot yet speak have
thou set up the praise of thy might against thy enemies: to confou^de thy
adversary that will avenge him self.

I shall therefore look up and wonder at thy heuens: lo / these ar the works of
thy fyngers / the moon and stars / thou haste set them so goodly.

But lo / what thing is man mortal that thou thus reme^brest him? what is ye
son of Adam yt thou regardest him so greatly? Thou haste made him not much
inferior then Angels: with so great dignite and glory have thou endued him.

Thou haste made him lord of thy handy works: thou haste cast all things
under his feate.

As flocks of sheep, all herdes of neat: and also the wild beasts.

Fowls of the air and fysshes of the sea: and what so ever swymmeth in the
water. Lord, ye our lord: how wonderful reverent and clear is thy name over
all therthe. Glory be to the father, to the sone, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning: as it is now and ever shall be. Amen

Celi enarrant.
THe heuens declare the glorious majesty of god: and what are his works. One
day following another whettch co^tynually our thoughts: and one night
following another increases our knowledge. These creatures have neither speech
nor words: neither is their voices any where herd.

And yet their poyntynge and showing has taught all the world: and their
du^me speech has gone forth in to all the costs of the world.

He has fastened in them a tabernacle for the son: and he comes forth of
his clouds like a brydegrome, ye like a fresh valiant knight ^o make his
course.

From the farthest este part of the heue^s comes he forth: having his
recourse unto ye other extreme: neither is there any man that may hyde him from
his heat.

The law of God the lord is perfect / refresshynge the soul: the testimonye
of the lord is faithful mynisirynge wisdom to the unlearned.

The commandments of ye lord ar right: making glad the heart.

Tho things which god commands are plain and pure: and they lyghte^ the
eyes. The fear of the lord is pure and holy / abydyng for ever: the
pleasures of the lord are true and right in every par^e

More worthy to be desired then gold and precious stones: sweter the^ ye honey
comb when it droppeth.

And thy servant is taught and monisshed by them: that same observing of
them is a great gift

Who may attain to the knowledge of his sinful nature: pourge me fro my
secret sins.

Ye and turn thou these great sins from thy servant: lest they have
dominion over me, and then shall I be pure from every great sin.

Let ye speches of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasant and
accept unto the: lord my defender and redemer. Glory be to the father, to the
Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning: as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

Domini est terra.
THe Earth is the lords and all that is contained therein: ye round world
and all that inhabyte it.

For in the sea has he set her fou^dacions: and has build her above the
floodes.

Who shall clyme in to the hill of the lord? or who shall abide in his holy
place

An innocent in his deades, and he that is pure in heart: that has not
extolled him self proudely unto vanite, neither has sworn for any deceyte.

This man shall be fed with the blyssynge of the lord: and with the mercy of
god his savior.

This is ye nation given all unto him and seeks him: this is ye very right
Jacob. selah. O ye gates lift up your selves: ye gates everlasting be opened:
and this gloryouse king shall enter in.

Who is this king yt is so glorious? it is the mighty valyaunte lord / noble
in power, a lord excellent in strength to wage batayl O ye gates lift up your
selves: ye gates everlasting be ye opened: and the glorious king shall enter
in.

Who is this king that is so gloryous^ it is the lord of hosts, it is he,
that is this gloriouse king. Selah.

Glory be to the father / to the son / and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning: as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

The Antympe. the iij. to the Romans. All we are sinners, and have neade of the
glory of god.

The versicle. The first to the ephesians In what thing stondeth the glory of
god.

The responsorye.
In the free forgeuenes of sins of his clear mercy only.

The pater noster.
OUr father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, let thy kyngedome come
over us. Thy will be fulfilled as well in earth as it is in heaven. Give us
this day our suffycyent fode. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us. And led us not in to temptation. But deliver us
from the evil spyryte. Amen.

^ Led us not (lord) in to temptation. But deliver us from the evil spirit.
Amen.

The blyssyng
Lord we beseech the of thy blessyng.R. Blessed ar they that suffer
persecution for the ryghtewysnes of faith, for theyrs is the kingdom of
Heaven. Amen.

The first lesson. Mat. x.
LO I send you forth as sheep among wolves / se therefore ye be wise as
serpents / and innocent as doves / beware of men / for they shall deliver you
up to the counsayles and shall scourge you in their synagoges / and ye shall be
brought to the head rulers and kings for my sake in wytnes to them and to the
gentyles: but when they put you up / take no thought what or how ye shall
speak: for it shall be given you even in the same hour what ye shall say /
for it is not you ye speak but ye spirit of your father which speaks in
you.

And lord thou have mercy on us

Responsorie. John^.xvj.
These things have I said unto you because (...) to god. The (...) shall they
do unto you because they have not known the father nor yet me.

They shall excommunycate you, ye the time shall come yt who so ever kylleth
you shall think yt he does high service to god.

The blyssynge.
Lord we beseech the of thy blessing.

Blessed are the poor in spyryte for theyrs is the kyngedome of heaven. Amen.

The second lesson, Hebre. xij.
THe burden of sin cast away: let us run with patience unto the batayl
that is set before us lokynge unto Jesus the auctor and fynysher of our faith
which for the joy that was set before him abode the cross and despised the
shame / and is set down on the right hand of the throne of god. Consydre
therefore how that he endured such speaking against him of sinners lest ye
should be weryed and faynte in your minds: for ye have not yet resysted unto
bloudeshedynge stryuynge against sin. And ye have forget the consolacyon
which speaks unto you as unto children. My son despise not the chastenynge
of the lord, neither faynte when thou art rebuked of him / for whom the
Lord loves him he chasteneth / ye and he scourges every son that he
receives. But thou lord have mercy on us.

The Respont. Hebrew. the.xij
Ye ye shall endure chastenyng god offers him self unto you as unto sons.
what son is yt whom the father chastneth not.

The verse.
If ye be not under correction (whereof all are pertakers) than are ye bastardes
and not sons.

What son is that whom the father chasteneth not?

The blyssynge.
Lord we besche the of thy blyssynge. Blyssed are all men that trust in the
lord.

AMEN.
The third lesson. to ye wise man.v.
IN the last judgment when these ungodly shall behold the ryghtwise men
they shall be troubled with horrible fear and shall maruayle at their so soden
health unlocked for waylyng for the sorrowful anguishe of their mind saying
within them self being heavy and morning for the anguysshe of their mind.
These are they whom we had sumtyme in dirision, and unto lykelyhod of
opprobrious laughter: but we our self being then without our wits had went
that their life had been but madness: and so their end to have been without
honor. But now se how they are counted among ye children of god / and their
heritage is among the saints. wherefore we our self then erred and went from
the way of the truth, and the light of ryghtwysnes did not shine upon us and
the son of right understanding spronge not upon us / we were weryed and tyerd
in ye way of wyckednes and predicion: we walked hard and weary ways, for the
way of the lord we know not.

Respon. of the wise man. the.vi.
When ye were ministers of his kingdom ye judged not right ye kept not the
law of ryghtwysnes neither ye walked after the will of god. Ferfully and
shortly shall he appear unto you. For right sharp judgment shall be done
upon these that are in authorite.

The verse.
To the weak little ones is granted mercy, but the great might ones shall
suffer mighty strong torments.

Fearefullye and shortly shall he appear unto you. For righsharpe judgment
shall be done upon these that are in authoryte. Glory be to the fatther, to the
Son, and to the holy Ghost.

For right sharp judgment shall be done upon these that are in authoryte.

The song of Austen and Ambrose.
WE praise the (o god) we knowledge the to be the lord.

All the Earth might worship the, which art the father everlasting.

To the cry forth all aungelles: the heuens and all the powers therein.

To the thus cries Cherubyn and Seraphyn contynually.

Holy art thou.

Holy art thou.

Holy art thou.

Thou art the lord God of hosts.

Heaven and Earth are fulfilled with the glory of thy majesty.

The gloryouse company of the Apostles praise the.

The godly felawship of martires praise ye.

The holy congregation of faithful thrughout all the world magnyfy the.

They knowledge the to be the Father of an infinite majesty.

^hey knowledge thy honorable and very only Son.

They knowledge thy holy Ghost to be a counforter.

Thou art the king of glory O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting son of ye father.

Thou (when thou sholdest take upon the our nature to deliver man) dydest not
abhor the vyrgyns body.

Thou have opened the kingdom of heaven to the beleuers (deaths dar^e
overcome) Thou syttest on the right hand of God in the glory of the father.

Thou ar^e believed to come our Judge. Wherefore we pray the help thy servants
whom thou haste redeemed with thy prec^ous blood.

Make them to be nombred with thy saints in joy everlasting.

O lord save thy people and bliss thy heritage.

Govern and also lift them up for ever. We praise the every day.

And we worship thy name ever world withouten end.

O lord let it be thy pleasure to keep us this day without sin.

O lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O lord let thy mercy lyghten upon us even as we trust in the.

O lord I trust in the, let me never be confounded.

The versycle.
Christ is dead for our sins.

Thaunswere.
And is risen again for our ryghtwysnes.

To the Romans. the.iiij.
O God bend thy self unto my helper Lord haste the to help me.

Glory be to the Father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the begynnyge, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

Praise ye the lord.
Dominus regnauit.
THe lord is king: his majesty is gloryously deckte: the lord has armed him
self with strenghte, and has gyrte him self myghtely.

He has surely build and set fast the round world: so yt it shall not be
moved.

Thy seat was p^pared in ceason but thou thy self art of everlasting.

The floodes are risen (O lord) thy floodes have rored.

The floodes have lyfted up their stremes above the noise of the great stormy
and troubled sees.

Marvelous is the lord which has his resydence above,

Thy words are sure and faithful thy house is right fair, holy, and godly:
the secret holy place of the lord shall stand in to full long times

Glory be to the Father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

Iubilate.
Make ye melody unto the lord: all that dwell upon the Earth worship ye the
lord gladlye: come in to his presence joyfully.

Knowledge ye the lord that he is god: he has made us, and not we our selves,
we are his people and the flock of his pasture. Enter ye i^ to his gates with
thanks gyui^g: and in to his fre purches with praise singing, magnifye him
and praise his name. For the lord is right gentle, his mercy endures in to
everlasting and his faythfulnes in to all ages.

Glory be to the Father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

God / thou art my god / erly do I syghe for the my flesh desires the in
this thyrsty and wide wyldernes.

Here shall I behold the as in thy secret holy place: that I might se thy
power / and thy gloriouse beauty.

For thy mercy is more desirous then this same life: with my lyppes shall A
praise ye. Thus shall I magnyfye the throughoute all my life: in the praise of
thy name shall I lift up my hands.

Thou shalt satysfye my soul with fat delicious meat: whereupon my lyppes
shall joy and my mouth shall praise.

As soon as I shall remember my self upon my bed: I shall think upon the,
even in the watches of the night.

For thou verily art he that brings me help: and I being sure in the shadow
of thy wings, shall tryumphe joyfully.

My soul cleued unto the: for thy right hand sustained me.

These men that seek my life to spyll it: shall go down in to their graves.

Men shall drive them upon ye edge of their swerdes: they shall be hewn and
cut in to meat for foxes.

But the king shall rejoice in god and he shall glory that swereth in him,
when foul mouths shall be stopped.

Glory be to the father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost

As it was at the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

Deus misereatur.
GOd woughte favor and have mercy upon us: he might lyghten us with his
presence.

That thy way might be known every where in the earth: and thy saving health
also unto all nacyons.

The people might magnyfye ye (O God) ye all people might magnyfye the.

The Earth also moughte give again her increase: and god which is our god
might do us good.

God might bliss us: and all that inhabyte the Earth even unto the
vttermoste parts thereof might fear him.

Glory be to the father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

The song of the three children.
Praise ye the Lord all his works: praise and extol him for ever.

Ye aungelles of the lord praise the lord: ye heuens love the lord.

Ye waters all that are above heaven praise the lord: all the powers of ye
lord might praise the lord.

The son the moon praise ye the lord: stars of the yrmament love ye the
lord. The rain and the due praise ye the lord: all the wyndes of god praise
ye the lord. Fire and heat magnyfie ye the lord: winter and somer love ye the
lord.

Moystnes and ye hoar frostes praise ye the lord: the frost and cold love ye
the lord / Yse and snow might love the lord: nights and days praise ye the
lord.

The light and darkness moughte praise the lord: lyghtenynges and clouds love
ye the lord.

The Earth might praise the lord: love and extol him for ever.

Hills and Mountains praise ye the lord: all tha^ sprynge^h up on the Earth
love ye the lord.

Ye wells and sprynges praise the lord: sees and floodes love ye the lord.

Whale fysshes and all tha^ moves in the waters praise ye the lord: all
birds of the air praise the lord.

All beasts both wild and tame praise the lord: ye children of me^ love the
lord. Israel praise thou the lord: love him and extol him for ever.

Ye mynisters of the lord praise the lord: ye servants of the lord love the
lord.

ye sprytes and souls of ryghtewyse men love the lord: ye holy and meake in
heart praise the lord.

Anania, Azaria, Misaell praise ye ye lord: love and extol him for ever.

O lord thou art blyssed and praised in the firmament of heaven: thou art
praise worthy / glorious and magnified in to worlds without end.

Laudate dominum de celis.
Praise the lord ye heavenly minds: praise ye him all that are above.

Praise him all angels: praise him all his host round about him.

Praise him son and moan: praise him all bright and shynyng stars.

Praise him the most highest heuens: and ye waters that are above the heuens.

Praise ye the name of ye lord: for he made and created all things with a
word.

And has made them to stand fast in to the world of worlds: he has given
them a law which they break not.

Praise the lord all ceratures of the earth: dragons and all deape waters.

Fire / hayle, snow, yse / stormy wyndes: doing his commandment.

Mountayns and all high hills: fru^full trees, and all cedre trees.

All wild beasts and tame: all things that crepe, and fetherde fowls.

Kings of the earth and all people: princes and all rulers of the Earth.

Sengle men and maidens, old men and young praise the name of the lord: for
it is only high and spread over earth and heue^s. He shall lift up the power of
his people: it becomes his sayn^es ^o praise him, wh^che have profe^sed him:
even Israel his own people which comes unto him.

Canta^e domino.
Praise ye the lord.

Sing ye to the lord with a new dy^ie: his praise shall be in the
congregation of the saints.

Israel shall rejoice of his maker: and the citezens of Syon of their king.

They shall praise his name with trompet: sing ye unto him with taberat and
harp. For yt lord well pleased with his people: shall exalte lowlyones with
his help.

Saints shall rejoice even from their hertes and the nobles shall triumph in
their couches.

The exaltyng of god is in their throtes: and in their hands a two egged
sword.

To take vengeance upon the gentyles. and to correct the people.

To bind their kings in chains: and their most noblest rulers i^ fet^ers of
yerne. To execute judgment among them as it is written: this glory shall be
unto all that are his saints.

Glory be to the Father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

Lauda^e du^m.
Praise him that has his residence in his secret holy place: praise him that
reygneth in y^ firmamente, the sea^e of his power.

Praise him for his strenghte: praise him for almyghtynes.

Praise him with sound of trompettes: praise him with ^utes and harpes.

Praise him with tympany and taberat: praise him with organs and pypes.

Praise him wi^h soft claricimbales: praise him wi^h loud clarycymbales.

What soever thing is endued with breth^ let it praise the lord.

Glory be to the father / to the son / and to the holy ghost. As it was at
the etc.

The Antheme.
THe highest praise and greatest glory that we may give to god: is to believe
his promise: and to veryfye it with our faith which faith he does give us
also, that we might believe our sins to be forgeuen in Christ's blood.

The Chapyter Ephys. ij.
By grace are ye made safe through faith and yt not of your selves: for it is ye
gift of god, and comes not of works lest any man should bost him self of his
own dead,

Thanks be to god.
The hympne.
Praise ye the Lord omnypotente* which thrughe his benygnyte. his most dear
son has to us sent. to dye for our iniquite

We were his cruel enemies / abiecte for our transgression. how be it in
christ fyr^ we our yeis. which is our satysfaction. Glory be to the trynyte.
the father sone and spryte living. which are one god and persons three. to
whom be praise with out ending.

The versycle.
What and if we here suffer with Christ.

Thanswer.
Then shall we be gloryfyed together with him in heaven.

Romans in the.viij. chapter

Here follows the song of Zachary the priest saint John^ Baptystes father.
Benedictus.

Praised be the lord / god of Israel: for he has gracyously vysited / and
redeemed his people.

He has set up our mighty health: in the house of David his servant.

According to his promises, by ye mouths of his holy prophets of a long time
past. Promising that we should be preserved from our enemies: and from the
hands of all them that hate us.

That we would thus use and declare his rich mercy toward our fathers:
remembrynge his holy promyses.

And also to perform his oath which he swore to Abraham our father: and
promised him self to give it us.

So that without fear, we delyuerd from the hands of our enemies: might
serve and honor him.

In holiness and ryghtwysnes before him: al days of our life.

And thou (my child) shall be called the prophet of the most hygheste: for
thou shalt go before the face of the lord to prepare his ways.

To give the knowledge of the saving health to his people / through the
forgyuenes of their sins.

The which comes through thaboudant mercy and goodness of our god: by ye
which he has thus gracyously looked upon us / spryngyng from above.

To give light to them that have sytte in derknes / and in the shadow of
death: to direct our fete in to the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

The antheme.
HE that moves us to pray, has already granted us our as king if we ask in
faith, which says, all things what so ever ye shall ask my Father in your
prayer with belefe: ye shall receive

The versycle.
Father hear our prayer.

Thaunswere.
And make us to ask of the in faith. Ame^.

The coler.
O God almighty our merciful father which haste so excedyngly loved us thy
chosen children: yt thou would vousaue to give us thy only and well-beloved
son Jesus Christ our savior to suffer death for our sins: so that all that
thus believe in him, might not peryshe, but have life everlasting: we beseech
the for thy aboundaunt mercy, and for that mes^ima love, which thou barest to
thy son christ our savior, give us of thy grace / and pour thy favor in to
our hertes, that we may believe, feale and know perfectlye that thou only
art our god: our father / and to us an almighty helper / delyuerer / and a
sauyor from sin, from all the deuelyshe pours of hell, of this world, and
from death / and yt by thy sone our Lord Jesus christ. Amen

A prayer to the holy Ghost.
Come holy spirit, replenyshe the hertes of the faythefull: and kyndle in them
thy benynge love.

The versicle.
Send forth thy spirit and men shall be created a new.

Thanswere.
For so renuest thou the soul of man.

The prayer.
O God which have instructed ye hertes of the faithful men with the
lyghtnynge of the holy ghost: grant us to savor a right in the same spryte /
and to rejoice evermore of his consolation. Which lyuest and reignest in the
same spryte ever. Amen.

A prayer to the Trini^e.
Deliver us, save us, and justify us, o blissed Trinite.

The versycle.
The name of god be blyssed.

Thau^swer.
From age to age everlasting. Amen.

The p^ayer.
O Almighty everlasting god / which have given us thy servants to knowledge
the glory of theuerlastynge Trinite with a faithful knowledge / and to worship
the one god in thy almighty majesty: we beseech the that through the
stedfastnes of this faith / we moughte be defended from all aduersyties: which
lyuest and raignest one god in the Trini^e of persons world without end.
Amen.

The prime and hours.
O God bend thy self to my help: Lord haste ye to help me. Glory be to the
father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was at the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Ame^. Praise ye
the lord.

The hympne.
CUme holy spyryte to the we call. to stablish our infyrmyte. give us true
faith and hoope withal. Inflame our hertes with charity.

Our nature is sore vytiate. and neadeth regeneration. lyghten our minds
execate. O lord our consolation.

Glory be to ye trynyte. the father / sone / and spryte living. which are one
god and persons three. to whom be praise without endyng.

Deus in nomine tuo.
O God, save me for thy names sake: deliver me by thy power.

O my god, here my prayer: lysten to the words of my mouth.

For strange men are risen against me: and strong tyrauntes pursue my life /
they have not god before their yeis. Selah.

But lo, god helps me: the lord is present with them that sustain my life.

He shall acquyte evil to my awayte layers: for thy trouthes sake thou shalt
trede them down.

I shall with good will make a sacryfyce to ye: I shall magnyfye thy name (O
lord) for thou art full gentell.

For thou will deliver me from all trouble: and my eyies shall se my pleasure
upon mine enemies.

Glory be to the father, to the Son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in. etc.

Praise ye the lord, all gentylles: magnyfye him all nations.

For his merry is spread over us: and the faithfulness of the lord stondeth for
ever.

Glory be to the father / to the son / and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. ame^

Confytemini dn^o.
MAgnyfye ye the lord for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for ever. Let
Israel now magnyfye him: for his mercy endures for ever

Let the house of Aharon magnyfye hym^ for his mercy endures for ever

Let as many as fear the lord magnyfye him: for his mercy endures for ever.

When I was in a grievous straynte: I called upon the lord, and he granted to
set me at large.

The lord stondeth on my side: I shall not fear what so ever man may do unto
me.

The lord stondeth on my side with my helpers: and I shall se my desire upon
them that hate me.

It is better for one to commit him self to the tuicion and defense of the
lord: then to man's defense.

It is better to put our confydence in the lord: then in men be they never so
great. When all the gentyles beseged me on every side: well said I, in the
name of the lord / for I shall cut them away.

They compassed me in, ye they be set me round about: well said I, in the
name of the lord, for I shall cut them away.

They swarmed about me like bees: and invaded me as fearsly as fire ye dry
thorns / but they were sone quenched: for I said well, in the name of the
lord shall I cut them away.

I was cast with great vyolence redye to have fallen: but the lord sustained
and helpte me.

The lord is my strenghte and the very same whom I praise: it is he that is
my saving health.

The voice of tryu^phe / and of men joyfully publysshyng their saving help now
brought unto them is in the tabernacles of the ryghtwyse / for the right hand
of the lord has brought it so myghtely to pass.

The right hand of the lord is excellent high: the right hand of the lord
hath^ brought it so myghtely ta pass.

I shall not dye but live: and shall publesh the works of the lord.

He chastised me with grievous and ernest chastme^t: but yet he betoke me not to
death. Open me the gates of ryghtwise men: and I shall enter in at them / and
magnify the lord.

This is the gate of the lord: the ryghtewyse shall enter in thereat.

I shall magnyfye the for thou have granted me: and have brought me a saving
help The stone which the buylders opprobryouslye casted away: is made an
head corner stone.

Of the lord this is done: and this same thing is a miracle in our mind. This
is that same day which the lord has made: let us be glad and rejoice
therein. I beseech the (lord) now help us I beseech the (lord) make us now
to prospere. Well happen it to that man which is commen in the name of the
lord: we shall pray for your welthe to well happen unto you from the house of
the lord.

The lord is strong / and he will make light to shine upon us: taye your
sacrifices to be offered / even to the alters ends with cords.

It is thou that art my god / and I shall magnify the thou art my god and I
shall exalte the.

Magnify ye the lord for he is gracyous: and his mercy endures for ever.

Glory be to the father, to the son, etc.

The anthem.
Behold I have set up in syon a chosen precious stone to be laid in the
highest corner of my church and also to be in the foundacyon thereof. And he
that believes in him, shall not be shamed: to you therefore that believe, it is
precious: but to them that believe not in him, as to the buylders that reproved
this stone, it is a stomblynge stone.

The versicle.
Lord hear our prayer.

Thaunswere.
And make us to ask in faith. Amen.

The prayer.
O Father which dydest prophecy of thy son Christ by the mouth of Symeon
holding him in his arms now presented in to the temple saying to his mother
the vyrgyn mary: behold / this thy child is set up for many in Israel to
fall at him and many again to rise by him / he is set up for a mark to be
against said: we beseech the / father for the favor that thou barest to this
thy Son: suffer not us through unbelief with these blind buylders to stomble
and to fall at this stone: neither with them to reprove and to say against him
and his doctrine / but by faithful trust and true belefe in him to rise by
him: beleuyng steadfastly / that by his death his wrath is peased and through
his blood thou forgyuest us our sins / by this stone thy son our lord
Jesus Christ. Ame^

The third hour.
O God bend thy self in to my help. O lord has^e the to help me.

Glory be to the father / to the son / and to the holy ghost.

As it was in ye beginning, as it is now and ever shall be

Praise the lord /

The hympne.
LEt us reiose devout christen. putting a pare all heuenes. for christ
regards his brotherne, and furdereth all their business.

All though this vale of miserye. our troubles does increase. yet Christ does
se our penurye. which is our inward peace.

Glory be to the trinite. the father, son, and spiritelyuynge. which are
one god and persons three. to whom be praise without ending. Amen.

Ad dominum.
WHen I was in strayte anguysshe I called upon the lord: and he granted me.

Lord deliver my soul from lyenge lips: and from a deceytfull tongue.

What aua^tageth it the: or what good brings it the (o lyenge man) thy
deceytfull tongue?

Oh, sharp arowes of the strong archer: and hoote consumyng iunipere coals.

Ah less that I am thus long holden in exile among these false and cruel
folk of Meshec: and must yet dwell still with the chorlysshe nacyon of Kedar.

All to long has my soul tarried among these violent men: which hate peace.

I study for peace / but when I speak of peace to them: by and by are they
styred to battle.

Glory be to the father. etc.

Leuaui oculos.
Lift up my eyes in to the hills: from whense help might come unto me My
help comes from the lord: the maker of Heuens and Earth.

He shall not suffer thy fete to slide: neither he being thy keeper, shall
sleep.

Lo / neither will he sleep / nor yet ones wynke: that keapeth Israel.

The lord is thy keeper / the lord is thy defense: and is ever at thy right
hand.

The son shall not smite the be day: neither yet the moon be night.

For the lord will keape the from all evil: ye / he will keape thy soul.

The lord shall keep both thy out going and thy inco^mynge: from this time
unto everlasting.

Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

I was right glad when me^ said unto me: let us go unto ye house of ye lord.
Our feet shall stand fast in thy gates: O Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is builded goodly like a City: well framed together in her self.

That thither might ascend the trybes, even the trybes of the lord to
magnyfye the name of the lord: for so was it commanded unto Israel by gods
own mouth.

For their were ordend and holden seats of judgment: even the judgment
seats of ye house of dauyd, Pray ye for the felicite of Jerusalem: the lovers
of the might prospere

They might prospere within thy walls they might prospere within thy hosues.
For thy brothers and neighbors sakes: shall I now pray for thy felicite.

For the houses sake of the lord our god: I shall pray for thy welthe.

Glory be to ye father. etc.

The anthem.
THose men are not of the right Jerusalem although they are called spiritual
and of the church: apere they never so holy: which vex, trouble, and
persecute the poor simple preachers of christ's gospel and thyrste for their
blood. versicle. Lord hear our prayers.

Thanswere
And give us grace to ask in faith. Amen.

O Our merciful father which prophecyedste by ye mouth of thy sone our savior
Christ: that the time should come when men should curse / excomunicate and
chase thy flock out of their synagoges beleuyng in so doing / to do unto the
high worship in killing of them: we beseech the for thy trouthes sake / and
for the favor that thou barest to thy son: to deliver us from their hands:
and open thou their eyes that they might se their sins and repent them and
know the and thy son through the holy Ghost the spyrite of truth. Amen.

The syxth hour.
O God bend thy self in to my help: Lord haste the to help me.

Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Ame^.

Praise ye the lord.

The hympne
Love ye the lord of Israel. for his gifts celestyall. which sends his
Ghost in us to dwell. to subdue our bodies bestyall. He gives us gifts
manyfolde. he ledeth and keeps us tenderly. his is our silver and our gold.
to him be praise eternally. Glory be to the Trinite. etc.

UNto the lift I up my eyes: which rulest heuens:

Behold for as the servants eyes ar ever upon their masters, and the maiden^
^^^tyng upon her mystres, even so let our eyes be lokynge up unto the lord,
our god, until he has mercy upon us.

Have mercy upon us lord have mercy on us: for we are out of measure filled
with ignominy.

Our life is filled out of measure with scorns and dirision of these welthy
rich men: and with ignominy and shame or this arrogant and proud men. Glory
be to the father.

As it was etc.

Nisi quia da^s psalm. Cxxiiij.
Except the Lord had been with us: (let Israel now speak)

Except the lord had been with us: when these men rose against us.

Without doubt (their wrath thus kyndled against us) they had devoured us
quycke. Waters had wrapped us in with their waves: the floudes had gone over
our souls. The troublouse floude of this importune men: had run over our
souls.

But praised be the lord, which has not given us in to their tethe for their
pra^e. Our souls are delivered like the bird from the snare of the fouler /
the snare is broken and we are escaped

Our help comes through the name of ye lord: which has made the Heuens and
Earth.

Glory be to. etc.

Qui confidunt.
They that stycke to the lord shall never stacker: but shall stand fast for
ever like the mount of Syon.

And like as Jerusalem is gyrte above with hills: eue^ so closes ye lord his
people from this time unto everlasting.

He will not suffer the power of ye ungodly to oppress the land of the
ryghtwise: lest the ryghtwyse purforthe their hands to any wyckednes.

Deal thou gently with good men: and with men right in their hertes.

Them that swerve from the right way unto shrewdnes: the lord might led a
way with men given unto wyckednes.

Glory be to the. etc.

The anthem. Esaye. lvij.
THe ungodly men are like a fearse swellynge see, which can not rest but the
waves of it rebou^de with violence castyng out stynke and filthynes, the
deuelish ungodly shall have no rest (says ye lord) but here they shall be
ever vexyng ye rightwyse, and after this, they shall have a perpetual gnawynge
in their conseyence.

The versicle.
Lord here our prayer.

Thanswere.
And make us to ask in faith.

OUr merciful lord which shall say at the dreadful hour of thy last
judgment to these wicked ungodly: go your ways out of my sight ye workers
of wickedness. we beseech ye for thy paynfull passion yt thou sufferdest in thy
pure innocent soul for our redemption: let us hear this joyful voice of thy
mouth in that time of our redemption and glory. saying: come unto me ye
blyssed children of your father and receive the kyndome of heaven prepared for
you from the beginning through your sauyor Jesus Christ. Amen.

The nyenthe hour.
O God bend thy self in to my help. O Lord haste the to help me.

Glory be to the father, to the sone, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. ame^.

Praise ye the lord.

The hympne.
Praise ye our father louyngly. which gentlye has us preserved. when we
forsook him wretchedlye. and by sin had death deserved.

His mercy was so bou^tuous. yt although we thus fell. freely in Christ he
pardoned us. and by his death redeemed from hell.

Glory be to the Trinite. the father and son and spirit living. which are
one god and parsons three, to whom be praise without ending. Amen.

WHen the lord shall bring again us of Syon from captivity we shall be like
men dreamyng for joy.

Then shall our mouths be filled, with laughter, and our tongues with
triu^phe: then shall it be said among the gentyles: that the lord has
wroughte myghtely with these men.

The lord shall work myghtely with us, we shall be refreshed with great
gladness.

Bring us again from captivity o lord for so shall thou fyl us with joy as
if thou sholdeste give plentyouse floudes to the dwellers in that thyrsty
southe deserte.

They that sow with tears: shall reap with gladness.

When they went forth to sow they went weeping taking with them their seade
koddes.

But when they shall come again: they shall come with great joy bryngyng
their hands full of corn.

Glory be to. etc.

Nifi dommus. psalm. C.xxvij.
Except the lord build the house: the buylders thereof labor but in vain.
Except the lord keape the city the keapers thereof watch but in vain.

It is all in vain that ye haste your selves to rise so early: and again to
dyffer your down sitting to eat your careful bread. (except god give it
all)

For it is he that thus shall give unto his well-beloved: quyete sleep and
plentyous reieccyon with good food.

Lo children ar the heritage which ye lord gives: the fruit of the womb is
his gyfe As arrows are in the hands of ye mighty man: even so shall be the
children of thy yought.

Blessed is that man which has his quiver filled with these arrows: for they
shall not be shamed when they shall have to do with their enemies i^ judgment.
Glory be to the father. etc.

Beati omnes.
BLessed is he who so ever worshypeth the lord: which also walks in his
ways.

For thou shall eat the labors of thine own hands: and shalt have
prosperous increase.

Thy wife shall be fruitful as the vine tree within the walls of thy house:
thy children shall stand round about thy table like the plants of Olyue
trees.

Lo thus shall that man be blessed which worshypeth the lord.

The lord shall do the good from Syon^ and thou shall delyght beholding the
prosperity of Jerusalem all days of thy life. And thou shalt se thy chylders
children: and the felycite of Jerusalem.

Glory. etc.

The Antheme. Math. the.vj.
Great is the prouysyon of god for us which bids us first seek his kingdom
by fear / faith / and trust in him, and then all things necessary for our
bodies shall be cast unto us but so ye we labor in that which good is.

The versicle.
Lord hear our prayer.

Thanswere.
And give us grace to ask in faith. ame^.

the prayer.
O Our merciful father which in teaching us to pray by thy sone christ /
haste commanded us to call the, father and to believe that we are thy
well-beloved children which styreste up none of thine to pray but to thentente
that thou would hear them, gyuynge us also all things more effectuoslye and
plentuosly then we can either ask or think: we beseech the for thy sons
sake / give us grace to believe and to know stedfastlye that thy son our
savior Christ is given of the unto us, to be our savior / our ryghtwysenes /
our wisdom / our holiness, our redemtion / and ^ur satisfaction: and suffer
not us to trust in any other salvation / but in the son and by thy son
only our savior. Amen.

Here begins the Euensonge in English.
O God bend thy self i^ to my help.

O lord haste the to help me.

Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginnynge, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen.

Praise ye the lord.

Beatus vir. psalmus. j.
BLessed is that man which walks not in the council of ye ungodly: and
stondeth not in the way of / sinners and sytteth not in the seat of the
pestylent scorners.

But has all his pleasure in the law of the lord: and upon it his mind is
occupied / both day and night.

Such a man shall be like a tree planted by the river side: which will give
forth her fruits in due time / and her leaves shall not wither: for what so
ever he shall do / shall prospere.

But so shall not the ungodly: for they shall be like duste which is dispersed
with the wind.

Wherefore these ungodly shall not stand in the judgment: neither these
sinners may abide in the company of the ryghtwyse. For the lord approves the
way of the ryghtwyse: but the way of sinners shall peryshe.

Glory be to the father. etc.

Quare fremuerunt gentes. psalm. ij.
Wherefore do the gentyles thus swel and cluster together: wherefore do ye people
of the Iues thus gnaste in vain: Wherefore conspyre the kings of therthe: and
the cheyfe prestes thus cast their heads together against the lord and his
anointed. Saying let us break their bonds: and let us cast of their yokes.

But he that has his resydence in heaven derideth them: it is the lord that
scorneth them.

Then shall he thruste them down in his wrath: and in his indignacion shall
be all to trouble them.

I have constytute and ordained my king: to be over Syon my holy hill.

I shall show forth ye lords commandment: for he said unto me thou art my
Son whom I have now openly declared.

Ask of me / and I shall give the, the nations in to thy heritage: to be thine
own possessyon thrughout all the world.

Thou shall smite them together with an yerne scepter: and shall break them like
erthe^ vessels.

Now therefore ye kings / be wise and understand: ye rulers of the earth be
content to be monyshed and learned. Serve ye ye lord besely: study to give him
his honor joyfully with reverence.

Kiss ye the son / lest (he being wroth) your life perish / for his anger
shall be shot^ly kyndled

And then blessed are all men that trust in him.

Du^e quid multip..psalm. iij.
Lord / se what a sort there are that trouble me: full many there are that
rise against me.

Many there are yt think thus upon my soul: surely there is no health to be
looked for from god / unto this man.

But thou lord / thou art my help and my glory: thou liftest up my head. The
lord I called upon with my prayer: and he answered me even from his holy
hill. Selah.

I shall lie down and sleep / I my self shall vpwake me: for the lord
susteyneth me.

I shall not fear / ye thousands of folk: although they be sege me round
about.

Arise (lord) save me my god: thou shall ^yue all my enemies such a clap on
th^yr chekes that a non the tethes of these ungodly shall be broken.

It is ye lords properte to save: and thy people it behooves to be helped and
endued with thy benefits.

Non nobis dn^e. psalm. C.xv.
NOt to us lord / not to us but to thy name give the glory and praise: for thy
mercy and for thy trouthes sake.

Wherefore then should the gentyles say: where is now their god?

When our god is in the heuens: he does what so ever lyketh him.

Their images are but gold and silver: even the very work of man's hand.

They have mouths and yet speak they not: eyes and se not / ears and hear
not / nose and smell not.

They have hands and nothing feel they: feate and go not / with their throat
make they no noise.

Unto these ydols are they like that make them: and as many as trust unto them.

But Israel trust thou in the lord for he helps them and is their shylde.

Ye of the house of Aharon, se yt ye trust in the lord: for he is their help
and their shylde. Ye worshipers of the lord, se yt ye trust in the lord: for
he is to them help and defender. The lord will have us in mind / it is he
that will do good: he will do good to the house of Israel / and to the house of
Aharon. He will be benyficiall to ye worshypers of the lord: as well to ye
little as to the great. The lord might increase his good mind toward you:
toward you and toward your children.

Ye are they to whom the lord does good: which has made heaven and the earth.

The heuens / the very heuens are the lords: but therthe has he given to the
children of men

The deed in no manner of wise shall praise the lord: neither they that go
down to the place of scilence.

But we shall magnyfye and praise the lord: from this time in to everlasting.

praise ye ye lord.

The Antheme. To the romans xv.
We the which are strong (says paul) ought to bear the frailnes of them
which are weak and not to stand in our own conceytes.

The Chap. Roma. xv.
LEt every man please his neighbor unto his welthe and edefyenge / for Christ
pleased not him self / but as it is written. The rebukes of them which reuyled
that fell upon me.

Thanks be to god

BLessed be god father almighty. whihath stre^ghened his feeble flock. with
steadfast faith and bold spirit. to bear his cross burden and youke.

These ar ye last days perelous. freely Christ's gospel to profess. come
down, lord shortly to judge us. and take us from this heuenes. Amen.

The versicle.
What thing is precious in gods sight.

Thau^swer.
The death of his faithful me^.

The song of our Lady.
My soul magnyfieth the Lord.

And my spirit reioyseth in god my savior.

For he has looked on the poor degree of his hand maiden.

Behold now from thence forth shall al generations call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has magnyfied me: wherefore blessed be his name.

And his mercy is over them that fear him: throughoute all generations.

He has declared his might by his power: he has dyspersed the proud men by
the vain study of their own hertes.

He has plucked down men of power from their seats: and has lyfted up the
poor lowlyones.

The hungry men he has satisfied with goodness and them that appeared rich he
has left void.

He has taken up Israel his servant: thinking upon him to be saved for
his mercyes sake.

Like as he promised to our fathers: as to Abraham and to his seade for
evermore. Glory be to the father. etc:

The Anthem. Luke. the.j. and.ij.
Sometime the scripture with the gospel was so fre: that they were preached of
the mouths of holy women / as of our blyssed lady / of Anna pha^neles
daughter, and of ye four daughters of phyllyp / but now behold (says ye
lord by his prophet Amos) I shall send an hu^gre in to ye earth, not the
hungre for bodily fode nor thirst for water / but hungre and thirst to here
the word of the lord and men shall go from the one see to the other
co^passynge about from the north to the east seeking the word of the lord
and they shall not find it.

The versycle.
Oh lord send us the preachers of thy word.

Thanswere.
And give us grace to believe it ame^. orati.

O mercyful father which by thy word madeste all things: and by it shall
unmake again at the time appointed / and with thy fearful word dydeste cast
down Adam / with thy confortable word lytfedest him up again / also thrughe
thy word thou have declared thy will and given us the knowledge of the, by the
fathers and prophets / and at the last by thyn own son christ, sendyng him
to preach it as a thing so necessary that without it there is no knowledge of
the / no faith / no salvation / no health: wherefore we beseech the for thy
words sake / and for thy glory therein to set up thy word again and make it
be known which of so long time has been darkened with men's dreams and
thruste down with men's words and men's laws: so that through thy word /
now at the last we might know thy will from men's pleasures: and finally to
believe only thy word and do thy will / by thy Son our lord Jesus. Amen.

The Complene.
Convert nos.
Turn us to the (O god) our savior. And turn thy wrath from us.

O god bend thy self in to my help:

Lord haste the to pelpe me.

Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in ye beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen,

Praise ye the lord.

Usquequo. psalmus.xiij.
How long (lord) will thou tarry? will thou forget me for ever? how long
will thou turn thy face fro me?

How long shall I thus study musing with my self: fyllynge my heart daily
full of sorrow.

How long shall mine enemy: be thus exalted over me.

Behold and answer me lord, my god^ keep me wakyng least the slumbre of death
cume upon me.

Ye least perauenture mine enemy may say I p^uailed against hi^: for if I
fall my troubelers will rejoice. But I trust in thy mercy, my heart shall be glad
of thy help: I shall give thanks to my lord for he has rewarded me.

Iudica me.
Avenge me o God / and defend my cause from thungodly folk: deliver me from
the decey^efull and naked man.

For thou art my God and my strength: wherefore have thou put me away?
wherefore go I thus morning, my enemy oppressynge me?

Make thy light, and thy faithfulness to shine upon me: let these things led
me unto thy holy hill, and let the^ led me to thy tabernacles. That I might
ons come to ye altar of God, even the god of gladness and author of my joy: to
praise and to magnify ye with herp (god my god) Wherefore art thou deiecte (my
soul) and thus trobled in me? trust in God: for yet will I magnify him for
the help / wherewith he has made glad my face and showed him self to be my
god.

Sepe expugnauerunt. psalmus. C.xxix
GReuouslye have they vexed me even from my yonght: now let Israel speak.
Grievously have they vexed me eue^ fro my yonght: but yet they p^uaile not
against me Upon my bak these ploughme^ ploughed: and have cut forth their long
vorowes.

But the ryghtwyse lord: has cut away the bonds of these ungodly.

They shall be shamed and put to flyghte: who so ever hates Syon.

They shall be as grass that grows upon the house rygges: which is withered
before it be pulled up.

With ye which neither the reaper fylleth his hands: nor yet the gatherer
fylleth his arms.

Neither ye goers foreby so regarded them as to say ones god bless you: or we
will wysshe you in the name of the lord.

Domine non. psalm. C.xxxj.
Lord / my heart is not proud neither look I a lofte: I take not stoughtly
upon me in great matters / nether presume I in marvelous things above my
estate. But verelye I repressed and put my soul to scilence, like a weanlynge
from the mothers tear: even like a weanlynge in very dead.

Let Israel wait and trust upon the lord: from this time in to everlasting.

Glory be to the father. etc.

Israel in scripture betokens the elect children of god, which when they
are in the most extremeste affly^cion lykely to be forsaken of god and man,
then have they gods help most present (if their faith ra^le not)

The chap. ij. par. ij.
WHen we are driven to such an hard straynie that we can not tell what to do,
then only is there left us this last shyfte and present help, to lift up one
ties unto the lord. Thanks be to God.

The hymn.
WOrshype we the spirit purely. which moved Simeon the sage. In his arms to
take reverently. Our savior yet tender of age. When his father and his mother
Presented their young child Jesus. Simeon among al other / praised the lord
saying thus.

Nunc dimittis.
NOW let thou thy servant depart (o lord) according to thy promise. in
piece.

For mine iyes have seen the savior: sent from the.

Whom thou haste set forth in the presens of all people.

To be a light, lyghtynge the Gentilles and to be the glory of thy people
Israel. Glory be to the father. etc. As it was. etc.

The Antheme.
AH how fearful a judgment is it to be reiecte and cast from the lord, and
not to be called his people, which judgment is now fallen upon the Jews, which
sometime were called his people of Israel.

The versicle.
Keep us Jesus confirmed in thy word.

Thanswere.
Hold us to thy truth, and cast us not from ye. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesus, restore Israel we pray ye, ye restore ye hoole world teaching
us which the spirit of thy troth, that we allwith one mind and one assent
might ru^ne after the and gloryfie thy name. Grant us (o merciful savior)
that we might se the gloriouse taking up again of Israel, which shall be to
the world as a new rysynge again from death to life, that thus all the hooll
world might live under the alone most perfiteste herdman, and thou moughtest
raygne in us all, to whom with the father, and with the holy ghost / be glory
honor / impery / and rule, into the world of worlds. Amen.

Salve Rex.
HAyle (Jesus Christ) king of mercy our life / our swetnes / and our hope /
we salute the: unto the we cry which are the banysshed children of Eve: unto
the we syghe / sobbing and weeping in this ^ale of wretchedness: haste ye
therefore our mediator: turn unto us those thy merciful eyes. O Jesus all
praise worthy show us the presence of thy father after this out larie. O gentle
/ O mercyful / O sweet Jesus Christ.

The versicle.
In all our trouble and heuenes.

Thanswer
O Jesus our health and glory, succoure us.

The prayer.
O Jesus Christ the son of god / our redemer which deiectedest and hu^bledst
thy self from ye glorious state / and shape of thy godhed unto the shape of
our vile seruytude because thou would reconsyle us the children of wrath
unto thy father and so make us the children of grace: we beseech the grant us
that we moughte ever feel even the thy very self to be our present medyator
before our father for all ghostly gifts, whom we knowledge with perfect faith
to be our savior / which art the lively God / with the Father and the holy
ghost leuynge, and raygnynge in to the world of worlds. Amen.

Here follows the seven Psalms in English.
Domine ne in furore. the first. Psalmus sextus.
AH lord / rebuke me not in thy wrath / nether chasten me in thine anger.

But deal favorably with me o lord, for full sore broken am I: heal me,
lord, for my bones are all to shaken. My soul tre^bleth sore: but lord how
long? Turn the Lord, and deliver my soul: save me for thy mercys sake. For
they verily that are in this dedely anguysshe, can not think upon the: in this
helly pains who may praise the? I am weary with synghyng I shall water my bed
euerynyght with my tears, so that it shall swymme in them. My face is wrinkled
and dried up with care and anger: my enemies have made it full thynne with
trouble.

Avoid fro me ye workers of wyckednes: for the lord has herd my
complayntes poured out with wepynges. The lord has herd my deep desire: the
lord has received my petition. All mine enemies shall be shamed and astonyed:
they shall be put to flyghte and confounded suddenly.

Beati quorum. psalm. xxxij.
BLessed is he whose ungodliness is for given: and whose sins are couerd.
Blessed is ye man to whom ye lord rekeneth not his sin: neither is there in
his spirit any dessemlynge defayte. Whiles now I held my peace daily musinge
with my self: and other whiles cried out, my bones wasted for sorrow. For day
and night thy hand pressed me down: my moister was dried up like as one
tosted in the mids of somer. Selah. I shall knowledge my sin and shall not
hyde my wyckednes: I thought saying with my self, I shall confess my
ungodliness which is against me to the lord: and thou even straight forgauest
me my wickedness which opens her self by my outward sin. Selah. For the
which / even every saint shall pray unto the in time of besechynge: and then
if afflyccion come upon him like a great swellynge floude, yet shall it not
touch him.

Thou art my defender from tribulation: thou shall keep me, and shalt make me
glad excedyngly for my delyueraunce: Selah.

I shall instruct the, and teach the / the way whereupon thou may u^go: I shall
counsel the, and se for the right well. Se that ye be not as horse or mule,
which are vnreso^able: whose chawes must be refrayned with bye and bridle,
lest they strive against the. Many so^owes fall upon ye ungodly but him that
trusts in the Lord: mercy closes rownd about. ^e glad t^erfore in ^he
lord and retoyse ye ryghtwise: make ye merry all faithful and vpryght in her^e.

Domine ne. the second.
PUnysshe me not (lord) of indignation: nether chasten me in thy wrath: For
thy arrows are sore smyten in to me and the desease which thou have cast upon
me presses me down sore.

There is no health in my flesh for thy wrath: there is no rest in my bones
for my sins.

For my sins have pressed down my head like an heavy burden: they are heuyer
then I may bear.

My old preuy sores festred within: and now are they broken forth for mine
own folysshnes. I am depressed and sore broken I walk in contynuall morning

For a foul botche occupyeth all my thyghes: so that there is no health i^ my
flesh. I am feeble, and sore broken: I gnasted with my tethe for sorrow of my
heart.

Lord al my desires are before the: and my sorrowful syghes are not unknown
unto the. My heart trembeleth and pants for sorrow / my strength fails me
and even the very sight of mine iyes cease from their office. My friends and my
fellows stood against my wound: and my nyghe kynsfolke stood all a far. In
the mean season they yt sought my life made snares for me: and they that
hu^ted for my fault spoke desaite, why speringe to desayue me contynually.

But I / as it had been one deffe herd nothing at al: and as a dumme man
opened not ones my mouth. I was as one that herd not: and as one that had not
a word in his mouth to answer for him self.

For the Lord, do I abide: thou shall answer for me (lord my god) For I said
with my self, these men parauenture will rejoice upon me: and as soon as my
foot begin to slide, thy shall run upon me. For I am but an halting creple
ready ever to fall: my sorrow never goes fro me. I confess my ungodliness: I
sorrow for my sins. But in the mean ceason my enemes live and were strong:
even they which pursue me falsely ar encresed in power. Which acquit me
evil for good, and are against me: because I sought studeously to profit
them. Forsake me not lord: be not far fro me (my God) Speed the to help me
lord: my saving health.

Miserere mei deus. psalm. li.
Have mercy upon me God, for thy favorable goodness: for thy great mercyes sake
wype away my sins. And yet again wash me more, fro my wykednes and make me
clean fro my ungodliness. For my grievous sins do I knowledge: and my
ungodliness is ever before mine iyes. Against the, against the one^y have I
sinned / and that yt sore offends the have I done: wherefore very just shalt
thou be known in thy wordis and pure, when it shall be judged of the. Lo, I was
fashoned in wyckednes, and my mother conceived me polluted with sin. But lo,
thou would trowthe to occupye and rule in my inward par^es: thou shewedste
me wysdom which thou would to sytte in the secrets of my heart. Sprinkle me
with ysope and so shall I be clean: thou shall wasshe me, and then shall I be
whytter then snow. Pour upon me joy and gladness: make my bones to rejoice
which thou have smite Turn thy face fro my sins: and wype away all my
wyckednes. A pure heart create in me (o lord) and a steadfast right spirit
make a new within me. Cast me not away: and thy holy ghost take not fro me Make
me again to rejoice, while thou bryngest me thy saving health: and let thy
chyef gouernynge fre spirit strengthen and led me. I shall instruct cursed
and shrewed men in thy way: and ungodly men shall be converted unto the

Deliver me from the sin of murdther o god, o god my savior: and my tongue
shall triumph upon thy mercy wherewith thou make me ryghtwyse. Lord open my
lyppes: and then my mouth shall show forth thy praise. For as for sacrifices
thou delyghtest not in them: or else I had offered them, and as for brent
sacrifices thou regardest them not. Acceptable sacrifices to god / is a broken
spirit: a co^trite and a dejected heart thou shalt not despise O god. Deal
ge^tly of thy favorable beniuolence with syon: let the walls of Jerusalem be
edified and preserved. Then shall thou delyghte in the very sacrifices / in the
right burnt sacrifice / and in the oblacion of ryghtwysnes: then shall they
lay upon thy altar the very oxen.

Domine exaudi. psalm. c.ij.
Lord hear my prayer: and suffer my deep desire to come unto ye. Hyde not thy
face fro me in time of my trybulation: bow down thyn ear unto me in the day
when I call upon the, haste ye to grant me. For my days verily are vanysshed
away like smoke: and my bones ar dried up like a stone. My heart is smytte^
through like grass and is wythered away: in so much as I forsook to take mine
own meat. I was so dried up with my sorrowful and loud syghes: that my bones
cleued to my skin. I am like an destrege of the wyldernes, and made like an
owl in an old forlaten house. I lie waking and am left alone: like the
sparowe in the thacke.

Mine enemies reuyled me all day and they that chide me / used my name
opprobriously I eat earth instead of bread: and lycken my tears instead of
drink. And all is for thy indignation, and thy wrath: for when I was a lofte
thou thruest me down.

My days are vanysshed away like a shadow: and I my self am whytherd like
hay. But thou Lord, syttest still for ever: and thy memorial endures from
age to age.

Thou shall rise and have pyty on Syon: for it is time for the to favor it /
thy day appointed is now come. For ye stones of it please thy servants verily:
and they favor her soil. Even the hethen also shall worship the name of the
lord: and all the kings of therthe shall knowledge thy glorious beauty. The
lord verily shall build spo^ he shall be seen in his beautiful glory. And he
shall have respect unto the prayer of ye poor forsaken: his prayer shall he
not despise. This thing shall be written for the world to come: and for this
cause the people which are yet unmade shall praise the lord. For he shall
look forth of his high holy place: the lord shall behold therthe even from
heaven. To hear the syghes of them that are in bonds: and to lose the children
judged to death. That they might preach the name of the lord in Syon: and
his praise in Jerusalem.

When the people and the kingdoms: shall be gathered together to worship the
lord. He abated my courage in my journey: and has cut of my days. I say /
my god / take me not away in ye miooes of my days: for thy years endure
throughout all ages. In the beginning thou layedste the foundacyon of therthe:
and the heuens are thy handy work. They shall perysshe when thou shall staude
fast: and all things shall wax old like a garment / thou shall dress them
again like a garment / and they shall be changed. But thou art even thy very
self: and thy years shall never be ended. The children of thy servants shall
dwell still: and their posterite shall live prosperously and blessedly in thy
presence.

FRo my most depest paynfull troubles: called I upon the lord.

Lord hear thou me: and let thy cares be attente unto my deape desire. If
thou sholdest look narowly upon our wyckednesses (o lord) lord who might
abide the? But there is mercy with the: and therefore art thou worshypped. I
abide the lord / my soul abides him: and I tarry lokyng up always for thy
promyses. My soul wayteth for the lord: as desyrously as do the watch men
desire the day spring. Let Israel wait for the lord: for with the lord is
there mercy and plentuous redemption.

It is he that shall redeem Israel: from all their wyckednesses.

Domine exau. ye.ij. psalm. C.xliij.
O Lord hear my prayer / lysten unto my fervent besechyng: for thy trouthes
sake / grant me for thy ryghtwysenes.

Have thou not to do with thy servant in judgment / for in thy presence no man
living is reputed ryghtwyse. A cruel enemy verily persecuted my soul: he
has cast down my life in to therthe / he has set me in darkness like as men
judged to death. My spirit is sore troubled within me: and my heart wexeth
cold in my breast. But at last I remembered the days paste: I considered all
thy works and pondred in mind the deeds of thy hands.

I stretched forth my hands unto the: my soul desyrously panted and breathed
for the / I gaped for the like thyrsty earth.

Haste the to grant me o lord for my spirit faynteth: hyde not thy face fro
me / on less I be like me^ going down in to their grakes. Make me shortly to
hear of thy mercyable goodness for in the do I trust: show me the way wherein
I may go / for unto the have I lyfted up my soul.

Deliver me fro mine enemies o lord my god: for under the do I hyde my self.

Teach me to do thy pleasures / for thou art my god: thy good spirit moughte
led me in to the right way. For thy names sake lord restore me: for thy
ryghtwysnes lead my soul out of this strayte anguyshe. Ye and for thy mercyes
sake all to destroy my enemies: and shake away all that trouble my soul / for
I am thy servant Glory be to the Father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. AMEN.

The commendacyons.
The argument in to the.C.xix. psalm.
This psalm declares in how great price and reverence, the saints or holy
men have the laws of god: how ernestly they are occupied in them, how they
sorrow to se them broken and said against of ye ungodly: how they pray to be
taught them of god, and to be acqueynted and accustomed with them and to be
short, how they desire those me^ to be destroyed (what so ever they be) which
break and say against them.

Beati immaculati.
BLessed are they which live pure and innocently eue^ them I mean which live
after the law of the lord. Blessed are they which observe his testimonies:
and search them with all their heart. For they shall do no wyckednes: that thus
trede his ways.

Thou have commanded: that thy commandments should be kept with earnest
diligence would god that my life were so instruct: that I might observe thy
ordinances.

Then should I not be disapoynted: when I shall have all thy commandments
before mine eyes. I shall magnify the with a pure heart: when I shall learn
thy ryghtwise judgments. I shall observe thy ordinances: forsake me not at
any time. How should ye young man amend his living? he shall well amend it in
obseruyng thy pleasures. with all my heart have I sought ye: suffer me not to
swerve from thy commandments. In my heart have I hyd thy words: to thente^t
I would not offend ye. Lord thou art praise worthy: teach me thy ordinances
with my lyppes shall I show forth all the pleasures of thy mouth. I shall
rejoice of the way which thy testimonies teach: as upon al manner of richesse.
Upon thy commandments shall I set al my mind: and shall set thy paths
before my eyes. In thy ordinances shall I delight: and I shall not forget thy
words. Reward thy servant / that I may live and observe thy pleasures.
Uncouer my eyes: yt I may perfitly se the marvelous things in thy law. I am
but a stranger in ye earth: yet hyde not thy commandments fro me. My soul
is broken with desire: to know at all times thy pleasures. Thou shall sharply
rebuke the ungodly: cursed are they ye err from thy commandments. Take away
fro me obprobry and ignominy / for I shall obsue thy testimonies. Even ye chyef
rulers sit and speak against me: but yet thy servant is occupied ever in thy
ordinances. Also thy testimonies ar my delyght and my counselees. My soul
cleued to therthe: restore me acording to thy promyses. My life I have showed
unto the: and thou have granted me, teach me thy ordinances. Make me to
understand the ways of thy comaundementes: and then shall I think upon thy
merueiles. My soul was melted away with sorrowful thoughts: make me styffe
again according to thy promyses. Turn thou away fro me the deceytfull way:
and make thy law plesaunte unto me. The true way have I chosen: and thy
pleasures I setted before my eyes. I cleaued to thy testimonies (o lord) let
me not be shamed I shall run in the way of thy commandments: for thou
wylt ease my heart. Teach me (lord) the way of thy ordynaunces: and I shall
mark it for ever.

Give me understanding and I shall keep thy law: I shall keep it with all my
heart.

Led me by the pathe of thy precepts: for in it is my pleasure. Bend my
heart in to thy testimonies: and not in to lucre.

Turn away my eyes lest they behold vain things: in thy way quycken me.
Make fast thy promyses to thy seruante: which is addicte unto thy worship.

Turn away my shame which I feared: for thy judgments ar favorable. Lo / I
desired thy commandments: restore me for thy ryghtwisnes. Be present with me
(o lord) with thy mercy: come to me with thy help according to thy promyses.

That I might have to answer my reuylers: for I stycke to thy promyses. Suffer
not at any time ye word of troth to be taken fro my mouth: for I have
respect unto thy ordinances. And I shall observe thy law studiously / ever
world without end. I shall begin to be at large restrained with nothing:
for I have sought thy commandments. I shall preach thy testimonies before
kings: and shall not be confounded. But shall delight in thy precepts which I
have loved. I shall lift up my hands to do thy precepts which I have loved:
and shall think besely upon thy ordynaunces. Remember thy promise to thy
servant: in to the which thou haste caused me to trust. Thy promise is my
comfort in my afflyction: for it is it / that restores me. These proud
ungodly have scorned me sore: but yet I swarued not from tvy law. I remember
thy judgments which thou have done from the beginning (lord) and I was well
conforted. It kindled my heart and freted me sore: to se these proud ungodly
thus to forsake the law. Thy ordynau^ces were my songs whiles I here way
fared a stranger. In the night shall I think upon thy name (o lord) and I
shall observe thy law. This grace have thou given me: that I might observe thy
commandments. Thou art my lotte, lord: I am full purposed to observe thy
commandments. I long for thy presence with all my heart: have mercy upon me
according to thy promyses. I called to mind my ways and I turned my feate
unto thy testimonies. I hasted my self and deferred not: to thente^t I would
observe thy p^ceptes. The ungodly co^gregacio^ hyndred me sore: yet did I not
forgete thy law. At mydnight shall I rise up to praise the: for thy ryghtwyse
judgments. I associate my self with all yt worship the / and with them yt
observe thy commandments. The earth is full of thy goodness lord, nurture me
in thy ceremonies. Thou have dealt favorably with thy servant (o lord) according
to thy promise. Learn me rightly to savor and to know: for I believe thy
commandments. Before I was tamed with affliction I erred: but now I mark thy
sayings Thou art good and gracyous: instruct me in thy ordinances. These
proud ungodly framed togider their painted lies against me but I shall observe
thy commandments with all my heart. Their gross hertes are co^geled like
talowe: but I shall delight in thy law. I was happy yt thou tamedest me with
affliction: yt I might yet so be instruct in thy ordinances. Better is ye law
of thy mouth to me: tha^ thousands of gold and silver. Thy hands have
fasshoned and ordained me: give me understanding to learn thy commandments
They that fere y^ shall be glad: to se me so to cleue to thy promyses. Now know
I lord that thy judgments are right good: and that thou have scourged me of
good intent. But I beseech the let thy mercy be my comfort: according to those
words which thou promysedest to thy servant. Let me be in thy favor, and I
shall live: for thy law is my delight. Let these proud ungodly be co^fou^ded
for they go about to destroy me fautles: but yet shall I in ye mean time set al
my mind upon thy commandments. Let them yt worship the and know thy
testimonies turn unto me. My heart shall be perfyte in thy ordinances: wherefore
I shall not be shamed. My soul faynted longyng after thy saving help: but yet
I lift up my eyes unto thy promises My eyes daseled with lokyng up after thy
promise: and I said when will thou comfort me? I was dried away like a bladder
hanged in the smoke: but yet forget I not thy ordinances. How long shall thy
servant suffer these things: when will thou at last give sentence against my
pursuers. These proud ungodly dug pitfalles for me: which have no respect
unto thy law. All thy p^ceptes are faithful and true: they persecute me
unworthily, help thou me. They had almoost made an end of me in therth: but
yet in no manner wise forsook I thy commandments. Restore me for thy mercyes
sake: and than shall I keep ye testimonies of thy mouth.

O Lord, thy word stands for ever: in the heuens. From generation to
generation contynueth thy troth: thou have set the earth, and it stands
still. The time contynueth still according to thine ordinance: for all things
are at thy commandment. Except thy law had been my delyght: I had perysshed
in mine affliction. I shall never therefore forgete thy commandments: for by
them thou have refresshed me. I am thine, save thou me: for I serched thy
commandments. The ungodly wait to destroy me: but I in the mean time
shall endeuer me to understand thy testymonyes. I perceive that every thing
comprehensyble has an end: but thy commandments are incomprehensyble.

O How excedyngly loved I thy law: continually do I think thereof. Thou have
made me wiser than my enemies through thy precepts: for they are ever in my
mind. I exceded all my teachers in right understanding: for I am ever speaking
of thy testymonyes. I passed even ye senyors in true vndstanding: for I observe
and mark thy commandments. From every evil path I refrayned my feate: to
thentent I would observe thy speches. I have not swarued from thy pleasures:
for thou shall instruct me O how sweet are thy speeches in my taste: they are
sweter tha^ any honey in my mouth I fetch my understanding at thy
commandments: wherefore I hate every deceytfull path. I have sworn and shall
p^fourme in to keep thy just plesures I am febled with affliction: lord restore
me after thy promyses O lord I beseech the, let the willing sacrifices of my
mouth be accepted: and teache me thy pleasures. I my self bring my life ever in
to peril: but yet thy law do I not forget. These proud ungodly have set
snares for me: but yet I swarued not from thy commandments. I have challenged
thy testymonyes for my perpetual heritage: for they are my hertes joy. I have
bowed down my heart to do thy ordynau^ces: ye and that for ever without end.
The frantyke hard necked do I hate: and thy law have I loved. Thou art my
lurkynge place and my shield: I wait for thy promyses. Avoid fro me ye
hurtful men: and I shall keep the p^ceptes of my god. Strengthen me according
to thy promyses, that I may live: let me not shamed disapoi^ted of my hope.
Stay thou me, and I shall be saved: and I shall delight besyly in thy
ordynau^ces. Thou shall trede down all that err from thy ordynau^ces: for all
these crafty men's study, is to deceive with lies. Like rust thou rubbedest
away all those proud ungodly of the earth: wherefore I loved thy testi^onies. My
flesh tre^bled for fear of the: and I fear thy judgments. All my mind
was to do equite and ryghtwysnes: leave me not to mine unjust vexers. Delyght
thy servant with good things: leest these ungodly make me sorrowful with
their iniuryes. My eyes dasled lokyng up for thy saving help: and waytyng for
the promyses of thy ryghtwisnes. Deal with thy servant mercyably: and
instruct me with thy ordynaunces. I am thy servant: make me to understand
and know thy testimonies. It is time (lord) to do judgment: for they have
scatered abroad thy law. And therefore I loved thy p^ceptes: above gold and
precious stones. And for this I knowledge all thy commandments to be
rightwise and I hate every false path. Merueylous are thy testimonies: wherefore
my soul observes them. To come but to the door of thy scripture lyghteneth:
and gives understanding to the unlearned. I drew in my breath fayntly: for that
I labored so sore to attain unto. Behold and have thy precepts mercy upon
me, according to thy judgments: wherewith thou gouernest the lovers of thy
name. Rule my steps after thy pleasures: and suffer no iniquite to have
dominion over me. Redeem me from ye iniuryes of men and I shall keep thy
commandments. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: and instruct me in
thy ordynau^ces. Stremes of water gusshed out of my eyes: because I se men not
observing thy law. Ryghtwyse art thou (o lord): and right are thy
judgments. Thou have commanded in thy testimonies* ryghtwysnes and
faythfulnes most chyefly. My zele to thy word killed me: because my pursuers
forgot it. Thy words are purely tried, like as with fire: and thy servant
loves them. I was a little on, and an abject: but yet forgate I not thy
commandments. Thy ryghtwysnes is everlasting: and thy law is the very
truth. Than affliction and heaviness had taken me: than thy commandments
refresshed me. The beleuyng of thy promyses is everlasting ryghtwisnes: give me
understanding of this, and I shall live. I called upon the with all my heart:
grant me (lord) and I shall observe thy ordinances. I called upon the / save
thou me: I shall keep thy testimonies. I preuente ye dawnyng of the day: and
cry unto the, I wait for thy promyses. My eyes prevented the watches: that I
might be occupied in thy plesures. Hear me lord for thy mercies sake: quicken
me after thy pleasures. My pursuers laid their own fautes upon my neck: but
they are gone far back from thy law. Thou art present o lord: and all thy
precepts are the very self truth. I knew this before of thy testymonies:
for thou have stablisshed them to abide for ever. Behold my affliction and
defend me, for I forget not thy law. Defend my cause and deliver me: quicken
me after thy promyses. Health is far from the ungodly: for they regard not
thy ordynau^ces. Bounteous is thy gentylnes (o lord) quicken me at thy
pleasure. Many there are that persecute me and are against me: and yet have I
not swarued from thy testymonyes. I se these malycious men, and it irked me:
because they observed not thy sayings. Thou see that I love thy
commandments: lord for thy mercyes sake quicken me. The beginning of thy
words is troth: and the judgments of thy ryghtwysnes stands for ever. The
ouermost in au^horite persecuted me fautles: and my heart feared at thy words.
I am as glad of thy plesures as one that had found many proyes I hate and
abhor lies: and I love thy law. Seven times in the day I praise the: for thy
rightwyse judgments. The lovers of thy law shall have much felicite and
quietness and no hurt at all. I trust upon thy help (lord) and give diligence
to thy precepts. My soul observes thy tessymonyes: and loves them greatly.
I observe thy commandments and thy testimonies: for all my ways are open
unto the. Let my cryenge ascend in to thy presence (o lord) make me ryghtly to
understand thy words. Let my deep desire come in to thy sight: deliver me
according to thy promyses. My lyps shall pour forth thy praise: thou shall
i^struct me in thy ordynau^ces. My tung shall speak of thy pleasures: for all
thy p^ceptes are ryghtwisnes. Let thy hand help me: for I have chosen thy
commandments. I desired thy saving help (lord): and thy law is my delight.
My soul shall live and praise the: and thy judgments shall be my help. I am
strayed like a lost sheep: seek thou thy servant, for thy commandments have
I not forgoten.

The Antheme.
God commanded man first of all, not to taste of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, willing that it should not lie in man's will and power of him
self, to know good from evil / but ye knowledge should be given man through
gods word: to the which word he commanded us also neither to add any
thing, nor to take from it / no not to do without it that thing, which
appears right in our eyes.

The versycle.
Blessed is that man (o lord) whom thou learnest.

Thanswere.
Ye and whom thou teach with thy word.

The prayer.
O God almighty, all alone suffycyent, for us all to be helped, and to give us
all things: we beseech the for thy sone Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
glory of thy word, to puryfye our hertes with thy spirit of faith, that we
might know thy word, hear thy voice, and believe it which assures us, freely
to be made ryghtwyse by thy favor and mercy, through the redempcyon that is
in Christ Jesus, our seat of mercy through faith in his blood. Amen.

Esaye.lix.
Lo, the lord is yet alive, whose power is not so mynysshed but he may us yet
save / neither are his ears so stopped but he will us yet hear.

Praise ye the lord.
Here follows the psalms of the passion of Christ.
The argument in to the.xxij. psalm.
Here David declares him self plainly to be the very figure of Christ.
Wherefore first of all he syngeth and expresses his great deiection and down
fall: and anon after his exaltacyon / his increase and purchasing of his
kingdom / even to the uttermost parts of the land, and the contynuaunce
thereof unto the worlds end.

Deus deus meus respice. Psalm. xxij.
MY god, my god: lo / wherefore forsakest thou me? how far is thine help from
mine out cryenge? My god, shall I thus cry and call upon the all day, and yet
wylt thou not hear? shall I cry all night and never cease? Ueryly yet art
thou that holy one, which dwell in Israel extollynge the with praise.

Our fathers trusted upon the: they trusted upon the, and thou delyuerdest them.

They cried unto the, and were delivered: they trusted upon the, and were not
shamed. But as for me, I am but a worm and no man: even the very opprobrye of
the men / and an abiecte from the vylest folk.

All that se me, made but a laughyng stock on me: they mocked me with their
lyppes: and wagged their heddes at me.

Saying / this vyleyn referred all things to the lord: let him now deliver
him / if he will / for he loves him well. But yet thou art he which leddest
me out of my mothers womb: mine own refugy, even from my mothers teates. As
soon as I came in to this world, I was laid in thy lap: thou art my God
even from my mothers womb. Go thou not far from me: for my trouble draws
nygh / neither is there any man that will help. There are beset me round
about great sturdy steares: ye the fat bulls of Bashan have hedged me in.
Like a rorynge lion pantynge and gapynge for his proye: their mouths are open
upon me naked before them. I sanke away like water: all my bones shoke out of
ioynte: my heart within me melted away like wax. The moystur of my body was
dried up / and I was like a potsherde: my tung cleued to the sides of my mouth
/ thou have dressed me to my grave. For even like dogs they came about me: the
church of noyous men hedged me in / they dygged through my hands and fete. A
man might have told all my bones: and they gasyng upon me thus pytyles
entreated / took their pleasure. They parted my over clothes to them self: and
for my other cote they casted dyce. But thou (oh lord) be not far: o my
strength / haste the to come and help me. Deliver my life from the death
stroke: and my dear soul from the woodnes of these dogs. Save me from the
mouths of these lions: and defend my poor simplenes from the horns of these
unicorns. I shall sprede thy name among my brethren: in the mids of the
congregacyon I shall praise the. I say* ye that fear ye lord, se that ye
praise him: all ye of the sede of Jacob gloryfye him, and all ye of the progeny
of Israel, fear him. For he has not despised nor abhorred the troublous
affliction of the poor: in no manner of wise turns he his face from him: but
when he cried unto him he herd him. I shall praise the in the great
congregacyon: I shall perform my vows before his worshyppers. The meke men
shall eat and be satisfied / they that seek the lord shall praise him / their
heart shall live and joy for ever. The dwellers in thextreme parts of the
earth shall remember themselves and be turned to the lord: and all hethen
nations shall fall down before the.

For the kingdom is the lords: and he is lord over al nations. All the rich
men of the earth shall eat and do him homage: they shall be bowed down before
him, and descend in to their graves / for they may not prolonge any life to
thyyr souls.

But their postertie shall serve him: and shall be nombred to the lord for
ever.

And thus their chylders chylderne shall show the ryghtwisnes: which he has
given to ye people which is yet to be borne.

Dn^s regit me. Psalm. xxiij.
THe lord is my pastoure and feader: wherefore I shall not want.

He made me to feade in a full plentuous batle ground: and did drive and
retche me at leyser by the sweet ryuers. He restored my life, and led me by the
paths of ryghtwisnes: for his names sake. Ye if I should go through the mids
of death: yet would I fere none evil: for thou art with me: thy staff and thy
sheep hoke conforte me.

Thou shall sprede and garnysshe me a table / ye and that in the sight of mine
enemies: thou shall souple my heed with ointment / and my full cup shall
laugh upon me.

Ye and thy mercy and gentylnes shall follow me al my life: I shall sit in the
house of the lord a long time.

Di^n est terra. Psalm. xxiiij.
THe earth is the lords, and all that is contained in it: the round world and
all that inhabyte it. For in the sea has he set her fou^dacyons: and has
builded her above the flodes. Who shall clymme in to the hill of the lord? or
who shall abide in his holy place? An innocent in his deeds, and he that is
pure in heart: that has not extolled him self proudly unto vanite / neither
has sworn for any disceyte. This man shall be fed with ye blessyng of the
lord: and with the mercy of god his savior. This is the nation given all unto
him and seeks hi^: this is ye very right Jacob. Selah. Oh ye gates lift up
your selves, ye gates everlasting be ye opened: and this glorious king shall
inentre. Who is this king yt is so glorious? it is ye mighty valiant lord /
noble in power / a lord excellent i^ strength to wage battle. Oh ye gates
lift up your self: ye gates everlasting be ye opened, and ye glorious king
shall inentre. Who is this king that is so glorious? it is ye lord of hosts /
it is he yt is this glorious king. Sela.

Ad te dn^e leuaui. Psalm. xxv.
UNto the (oh lord) I lift up my mind: my god I trust in the / let me not be
shamed lest mine enemies rejoice upon me. For they shall not be shamed who so
ever depe^de upon the: but they shall be shamed yt wrongfully hurt innocents.
Show me thy ways lord: and wont me to thy paths. Led me forth for thy
faithful truths sake: acquaynte me with the, for thou art god my savior / of
whom I depend perpetually. Lord remember thy mercy and thy gracyous favor:
for in these things thou excellest even from the beginning. But the sins of
my youth with my ungodliness also, remember thou not: remember me according to
thy goodness and for thy mercyes sake (oh lord) Good and ryghtwyse is the
lord: wherefore he will instruct and teache sinners the way. He will make the
lowlyones to go in ryghtly and in good order: and will teach meke men his
way. All the paths of the lord are mercy and faythfulnes: to those men
which keep touch and conuenaunte with him. For thy names sake (oh lord)
forgive me my wyckednes: for it is very much. Who so ever that man be that
fears the lord: he shall teach him the chosen right way.

His mind shall enjoy good things: and his posterite shall possess ye land
as right heritage. The lord is a secret sure thing, to them that fear him:
and them shall he make to know his conuenaunte and promise. Mine eyes shall be
ever upon the lord: for he will draw my fete out of the net. Behold me and
have mercy upon me: for I am alone forsaken / full of affliction. The sorrowful
syghes of my heart increase more and more: led me out of mine anguysshe.

Behold my poor state and my heaviness: forgive me all my sins. Consider my
enemies, for they are full many: and with furyous hatred they pursue me.

Keep my soul, and deliver me, leest I be shamed: for I have put my trust in
the.

Defend me that I may live ryghtly, hurtynge no man: for of the do I depend.

Redeem and lose Israel (oh god) from all his aduersytees.

Iudica me dn^e. Psalm. xxvj.
BE judge for me (lord) for I am purposed to live innocently: and whiles I
trust in the lord I shall not waver.

Prove me (lord) and search me: try my reins and my heart / like as metal
with fire. For thy mercy is ever before mine eyes: I led my life in thy
faythfulnes.

I have not delyghted in the company of vain men: neither have I associated my
self with these holowe and subtyle men.

I hate the church of hurtful and noyous men: neither have I conspyred with
the ungodly. I shall endeuer my hands to be pure / void all disceyte: and thy
altar (oh lord) shall I go about. To sing thy praise and to show forth:
what so ever wonderful deed thou have done. Lord, dear beloved is thy house
unto me: and the seat of thy beautefull tabernacle also. Take not away my
soul with the ungodly: neither yet my life with these blody men.

In whose hands disceyte is turned and canuast: and their right hand is full
of brybes. But I live harmeles and innocently: redeem me and have mercy vp^n me.

My foot is fastened in a place well worthy for me: in the co^gregacions I
shall magnifye and praise the lord.

Dn^s illuminatio. Psalm. xxvij.
THe lord is my light and my saui^g health of whom than shall I be afraid?

The lord is the strong defense of my life: of whom than shall I be afraid?

When the noyous and harmefull men which were mine adversaries fall upon me to
devour my flesh: than shall they smite them self against the rock and fall.
Ye and if they pytche field and bend their ordinance against me: yet shall
not my heart fear.

If battle be bente against me: yet shall I trust to the promise of god.

One peticyon asked I of the lord which I will follow upon: that is / I might
sit in the house of the lord all days of my life. Where I might behold the
beautefull regaltye of the lord: and visyte his holy temple.

For he has hid me as though I were in his tabernacle in time of
persecucion: he shall hyde me in the preuy place of his tente and shall lift
me up in to a rock.

He shall give me the over hand of mine enemies, which have compassed me in:
and I shall offer joyful sacryfyces, I shall sing and play the psalms
before the lord. Lord hear my voice / I call upon the: have mercy upon me
and answer me.

My heart thought upon the: I sought to se the / it is the lord that I seek.

Turn not thy face from me: suffer not thy servant to slide in thy wrath:
hitherto have thou ben my helper: cast me not now away, neither forsake me (oh
god my sauyoure.) For where my father and my mother failed me: there the lord
gathered me to him. Lord teach me thy way, and lead me forth in the right
pathe: from them that lay awayte for me. Let them not take their pleasure
upon me which are my troublous enemies: lyenge witnesses stood together styffe
against me. Whose violence had grievously oppressed me: had I not believed to
enjoy those things which are good among the living men.

Depend and wait thou upon the lord: be thou strong / it is he that shall
strengthen thy heart / depend upon the lord.

Ad te dn^e clamabo. Psalm. xxviij.
UPon the (lord) do I call, which art my strong defense: despise me not /
neither forsake thou me: oneles I be like men let down in to their graves.

Hear my prayer: whiles I cry unto the and lift up my hands unto thy holy
temple. Pluck me not in to vengeance with the ungodly / with those which
study for shrewednes: spekyng peasably with their neighbors whiles they
nourysshe evil in their hertes. Give them as they deserve and after their
malycyous study: give them after their deeds / acquyte them their deseruynge.
For they regarded not the works and deeds of the lord: he shall therefore
destroy them / and not edyfye them. Praised be the lord: for he has herd
the deep desires of my mind. The lord is my strength, he is my buckler, in
him trusted my heart, and I was helped: wherefore my heart reioyseth and I shall
magnyfye him in my song.

The lord is their strength: and a saving power to preserve his anointed.

Save thy people, do good to thy heritage: feed and govern them / and lift
them up for evermore.

Afferte dn^o filij dei. Psalm. xxix.
Give unto the Lord ye that excel in mighty power: give ye unto the lord
honor and the praise of his power.

Give the lord worship worthy his name: honor the lord in his holy kings
hall. The voice of the lord is in the watery clouds: god whose majesty is to
be feared with reverence thondreth / the lord is declared upon great waters.
The voice of the lord is passing strong: the voice of the lord is full of
majesty. The voice of the lord smyteth together ceder trees: the lord
breaks together the ceders of Libani. He makes the mountains of Libani and
Hireion to leap together like calves: they ran together like the calves of
unicorns. The voice of the lord: casts and cutteth forth fyry lyghtenynges.
The voice of the lord makes the deserte to quake: the lord made even the
deserte of Kades to tremble.

The voice of the lord makes hearts and does to groan and to braye: and
uncovers the thycke wodes / which all makes for his praise to be said in
his temple. The lord rules over the universal flode: the lord there keeps
residence / a king everlasting. The lord mynystreth strength to his people:
the lord is benefycyall to his people, gyuynge them prosperous peace.

Exaltabo te dn^e. Psalm. xxx.
I Shall exalte the (lord) for thou have exalted me: and have not made my
enemies to rejoice upon me. Oh lord my god I have called upon the: and thou
have healed me. Lord, thou have led my soul forth of my grave / thou have
restored my life lest I should have gone down in to the pyt. Ye saints of ye
lord, sing unto him a praise: and se that ye sprede his holy memoryall.

For it is but a moment yt his wrath endures: but long is the life that
comes of his beniuolence. Weeping and waylyng comes in at the even tide: but
anon after gladness aryseth with ye morning. When all things were prosperous
about me / I thought with my self yt I should never slide. Lord, of thy good
will thou stablysshdest my kingdom like an hill: for as soon as thou had
turned away thy face, I was astonyed and troubled. The lord called I upon: to
the lord did I make my prayer. I said with my self what profyteth my life, if I
be put now in to my grave? shall the dust of my karcas magnyfye the / or yet
declare thy faythfulnes? Hear lord and have mercy upon me: (lord) be thou my
help. Thou have turned my mournyng in to joy: thou have shaken me out of my
mournyng sack and clothed me with gladness. Wherefore my tunge shall sing thy
praise, and shall not cease: (lord my god) I shall magnyfye the with praise in
to everlasting.

In te dn^e speraui. Psalm. xxxj.
IN the (oh lord) have I trusted / let me never be shamed: for thy ryghtwisnes
sake deliver me. Bow down thine ear unto me, speed ye to deliver me / be
thou my stony rock, whereupon I might sit fast / be thou my strong defe^ced
castle, wherein thou may p^serue me. For thou art my rock and my bulwark:
wherefore led thou me forth for thy names sake and take ye charge of me. Led
me forth of ye net which they have set so p^uely for me: for thou art my
strength. I betake my spirit in to thy hands: for thou shall redeem me (lord
my god) which kepest true promise at all times.

Praise ye the lord.
The prayer of the prophet Jonas, delivered out of the whales belly.
Jonas prayed unto the lord his god in the whales belly / saying: in my
affliction I cried unto the lord, and he answered me. Even from the belly of
hell I cried, and thou herdest my voice. for thou had thrown me forth in
to the mids of ye depest of the sea, and the waters closed me about, all thy
great waves and flodes went over me. And I thought, saying with my self. I
am cast out of thy sight, I shall neuermore se thy holy temple: for waters have
compassed me in, even up to my soul. The dark depthe closed me in, and the
foul stynkynge wedes of the sea covered my heed. I sanke down under the
fou^dacyons of the hills, so that the waters barred me out from therthe for
ever: but thou made my life to arise from death (O lord my god). when my
soul failed me, yet I remembered the lord, and my prayer came unto thy holy
temple. They that are given to vanite and lies, have lost their mercy from god,
but I shall offer unto the loud praise, and shall perform my vows to the
lord, which is a savior. for the lord commanded the fysshe, and anon she
cast out Jonas upon the dry land.

A Dialoge Wherein the Child asked certain Questions, answers to the same.
The question
Speak my dear child, what art thou? The answer. As concerning my first
birth / I am a creature of God endued with wit and reason, the son of
Adam: and as towchinge my new and secunde birth I knowlyge my self to be a
Christian. The question. Wherefore say, that thou art a christian? The
answer. Because I am christened in ye name of the father, of the son and of
ye holy ghost. The quest. what is Baptysme? the ans. It ia called of Paul the
lauer or water of rygeneration by the which every one that believes is received
and consecrated in to ye felawshyp of Christ's church to be partaker of life
everlasting. Quest. In whom beleuest thou? Answ. I believe in god ye father
almighty and so furthe as it stands in my Crew. Quest. What is Faith? Answ.
Faith (as says Paul) is a sure confidence of things which are hoped for,
and a certayntie of things which are not seen (that is to say) an ernest and
a fast cleuyng to ye word of the living god with an vndoubtynge trust of his
promesses, and no less fear of his thretenynges. Quest. How many gods are
there? Ans. There is but one god alone for all sufficient, which has his being
of him self, and al creatures have their being of him Quest. How many persons
then ar there in the godhed? Ans. There are three parsons, which are, god the
father, god the son, and god the holy ghost: three parsons in Trinite and
one god in essence. Quest. what is god? Ans. God is he of whose goodness, and by
whose power, I am persuaded and assured through my faith to receive all that
good is, unto who^ also I flee in all adversities and perelles as unto a
present and al alone suffecient help for me, he patiently a bydeth our
turnynge from sin, full of mercy. gentle, goad, redye always to forgive, and
suffers no sin to be unpunished and that in to the third and fourth
generation until none of that synful stock be left alive. Quest. In whom
beleuest thou? I pray tell me again. Ans. I believe I say) in god, ye father
almighty maker of heaven and erathe and in Jesus Christ his only son our lord.
etc. as it sto^deth in my Crew Quest. What meaneste thou by this first
article? A. I believe y^ he is my god, and mercyful father unto me te^deryng me
as his dear beloved child, and to be evermore unto me, an almighty helper.
Quest. what meanest thou by the second third fourth.v.vi. etc. articles?
Ans. I believe that Christ was conceived, borne, and suffered for my sins and
that he went down to hell for my sake to deliver me thense and al them yt
truly believe and that he rose to make me ryghtwyse. Quest. What thing works
this faith in the? Ans. It works in me love to god and to my neighbors as
to my self and so chau^geth me in to a new man that now I beleuynge and
knowing god to have showed so excedyng love for me, study to do his
commandments and am full heavy in my heart yt I can not fulfill them. Quest.
Why? what ar his commandments? Ans. These are his commandments first
thus says god. Exo. xx. I am the lord, thy god. Thou shall have none other
gods in my syghte. The.ij. commandment. Thou shall make ye no graue^ or
carved image, nether any similitude yt is in heaven above, either i^ therthe
beneth, or in ye water yt is benethe therthe. Se yt thou nether bow thy self
unto them nor yet serve them, for I ye lord god am a gelows god, and punish
the sin of ye fathers upon ye children unto ye third and fourth generacio^
of the^ yt hate me, and yet show I mercy unto thousa^des among them yt love
me and keep my commandments.

The third commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the lord thy god in vain: for ye lord will
not reke^ him gyltlesse that takes his name i^ vane

The fourth co^maundment.
Remember the saboth day, that thou sanctifiest it.

The fyfte co^maundment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother that thou may live long upon ye land
which the lord thy god gives the. The sixte commandment. Thou shall not
kyl. The seventh commandment. Thou shall not break wedloke. The eayght
commandment Thou shall not stele. The.ix. commandment Thou shall bear no
false witness against thy neighbor. The tenth commandment Thou salt not
covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou desire thy neighbors wife, his
man servant, his maid, his ox, his ass, or any thing that is his. Quest.
What meanest thou, by the first commandment? Answ. I know thereby that I am
commanded to believe, to trust, to cleue to the lord which promyseth him
self to be my god, to worshipe and to love him alone with all my heart, mind,
and power of my soul and that it is he only of whom al godnes is given me and
unto whom I must fle and call upon in all my troble, for he only delyuereth
me. Quest. what meanest thou by the secunde commandment. Ans. Even as the
words show plainly, for when the lord spoke unto you (says Moysed in the
fourth of deutronomie) then se ye no image or simylytude of him least ye
deceived, should make you images. The voice of his words ye herd but as for
any shap or similitude of him, in no manner of wise have ye seen, ye shall not
make you silver gods, neither golden gods shall ye make you / Exodi
the.xx.c. Also ye shall make me an altar of Earth / but if ye will neades make
it of stones, yet shall ye not hew them: for if ye set any instrument of yerne
to them, then shall they be defiled. All this (I believe) was ernestly spoken
with so many words: to avoid al karuynge and curyosite in setting forth of
images to be worshypped as gods / when Christ declarynge the same said that
the very true worshipers ar they that worship the father in spirit of truth /
for god is a spyrite Ioh the.iiij. Q. For as much tha^ as god is a spirit and
may not be imagined of our wits: how shall we know him? Ans. Faith and
trust find him when we are in parell and show him unto us, and yet this faith
to find him must he give us: for if we get us a faith of our own
fasshonynge whereby we believe and trust in any other thing then god then make
we us an ydole: for it is ye faith and trust only in our hertes that makes
other god or ydole: for if our faith and trust be right and pure, then have
we the very true god: but if it be false and feigned then must we neades feign
us a false and a lyenge god: for true faith and god ar joined to gyder with one
knotte, so that in what so ever thing thou trustest and beleauest / that same
is thy god, here now may thou well se that in these two first co^mau^dme^tes
god requires and asks all our hoole hertes, and in the third, he asks our
mouths and tongues to be used for his praise and holiness of his name. Q. Why
what meanest thou by the third commandment An. Then, take I the the name of
god in vain, when I use to confyrme a lie, or to hurt my neighbor ye and
when neither by it god is glorified nor yet my neighbor by it profited. Also
if I fle not to him for help in my trouble / nor thank him for his benefits
in my prosperity and welthe then take I his name in vain / Also if I entende
and do not all things for his names glory then take I his name in vain. Q.
What meanest thou by the fourth commandment? A. I sanctifye ye Sabbath day
when I give my self whole to hear the holy scripture taught me, or to read
it and so occeupye my mind in it, or when I give my self to any other holy
works, or (as Esaye faith) when I cease to do mine own will, or to follow
my nowne ways although they appear to me right gloriouse and good, for thus me
thinks the Prophet expounds this point of the law in the.lviij.
chapitour. And for the fulfyllynge of these two last named Precepts we pray
saying. Thy name be hallowed, and thy will be fulfilled, and not ours. Thus
may thou se these first four precepts to pertayne to ye glory of God and
to the halowynge of his name.

The Question.
Wherefore then commands he ye other six? The answer.

For our neighbors health and profit to serve them / and especially our
Father and Mother, whom next god we ought to honor, to reverence, to obaye,
to counforte, to help, and to follow their godly monycyons and instructions.

The Question.
What meanest thou by the other? An. That in no manner of wise I should hurt my
neighbor. But to do to him as I would be done unto, no not to desire or to
covet any thing of his. The Quest. why is thought then sin? The Answer.

Ye verily / for so expounds our savior yt saw in the fyfte chapitour of
Matthew saying, that who so ever casts his lie wa^tonly upon a another man's
wife desyryng her, has committed aduoutry with her alredye in his heart.
Quest. Why are we all sinners then and have we all broken gods
commandments. Ans. We are all sinners and have neade of the mercy of god: if
we were not all sinners: ye mercy of god should take none effect in us wherefore
the scripture concludes that all men are sinners: that as many as shall be
saved should be saved by gods mercy only.

A prayer for the molifieng and suplyeng of our hard hertes, the lyghtnynge of
our blind hertes and the true co^uertyng of our impenitente hertes.
O Most merciful father which by the mouth of our sweet sauyoure Jesus Christ
saydeste unto us. Math. vij. Ask and it shall be given unto you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. psalm. C.xlij. Here I
beseech the my prayer, receive my supply catyon in to thine cares for thy
trouthes sake, hear me in thy ryghtwysnes. Da. ix. For not in our ryghtwisnes
do we lay forth our prayers before the our most blessed father, but in thy
mandfolde mercyes.ij. Cor. j. Hear therefore our prayers oh father of mercies
and god of al co^solacion. Have mercy upon us thy most wretched children, and
upon me, most wretched of all / lord father I ask the mercy. Molifie and make
soft our hard hertes (ble^sed father) which be endured and hardened with the
cursed custom of sin and wretchedness, and mine most hard of al / lord
father I ask y^ mercy. Molifie them bl^^sed father with ye sweet due of thy
grace fulfill thy promise made unto us by thy prophet Hieremie. Hie. xxxvi.
Take away from us most blessed father this stonyshe heart, and give us a
flesshen heart, a soft heart, an obediet heart and a meke heart and a new
spirit put thou in to us and make us walk in thy commandments hate and
slay that thou forbyddest us, love and follow that thou co^maundest us. Iac. j.
Lyghten, oh father of light from whom all goodness does descend lyghten our
blind hertes Ephesians. iiij. blinded with error and ignorance, wrong judgment and
evil affections, and mine the most blind of all blind / lord father I ask the
merry lyghten them I beseech the with the true light of thy word that we may
know thy will, love it, and live thereafter. psalm. C xviij. for thy word says
thy prophet dauyd, is a lantorne to my fete, and light unto my paths. Lu. j.
Give us this lantorne blessed father, give us this light. Shine unto us that
sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. psalm. xij. for thou art be that
lyghteneth our lantornes, oh lord lyghten thou our derknes. psalm. xlij. Send
out thy light and the truth of thy word / and they shall led and bring us
in to thine holy mountain which is also thy tabernacle. prouer. xxj. The
kings heart is in thine hands (Oh lord) that where thou will thou may
inclyne it, for so says thy scripture. Inclyne his heart to this purpose (oh
father) that it will please him to command his prelates of his realm no
longer to keep from his people: his loving subjects the light of thy word,
the light of holy scripture, the light of the testament of thy dear son our
savior Jesus christ, the light wherein he yt walks erreth not neither
stumbleth at any stone put it in his mind lord to command that like as
through thy secret inspyratio^ other nations already have: so his people also by
his commandment may have in to their tongue truly translated thy holy
scripture wherein they may learn and perfytely know thy godly will and
pleasure, obedyently submyt them self unto the same; follow it, and express
it in their living. Da. ix. O lord god hear these thy servants prayers and
deep desires, bow down thine ears and hear. Open thine eyes and behold the
thycke derknes yt we wanderin. psalm. xxx. lyghten thy shynynge face upon thy
servants that trust in the, yt flee unto the, that cleave fast unto thy
promesses. we are sinners lord and have lived ungodly, and have justly deserved
to be deprived of thy light and to be thrown forth in to this palpable derknes
and be cause we did not know what danger we were in: we sought not unto ye to
help us out of it / but now lord god seeing that thrughe thy goodness we are
brought to feel and perceive our derknes: with deape syghes we sue unto the
for to be with thy light illumyned. Lord for thy mercy sake hear us, lord
for thy truth sake grant us, lord for thy benygnite sake come again in
grace with us. Lord for thy ryghtwysnes sake attend unto our peticion and
bring this thing to pass. But now we think I hear sou^dynge in mine ears
that fearful and over true word that thou long a go spakest by the holy
prophet Esaie.xxix. chapytour this people draws unto me with their mouths,
and with their lyppes they gloryfye me, but their heart is far from me. For
they sin daily without repentance. Romans ij. Despisinge the rich
plentifulnes of my goodness, patience and long suffringe not considering that
my benignite styrreth and calls them to repentance, but for their hardenes,
and impenitent heart they say up as it were in stoore and treasurye mine ire,
wrath and vengeance against the day of wrath and ryghtfull judgment. Truth
it is (oh lord) and ouertrue, we confess it to the which know al our
nough^^nes. Hie. xxxj. But now convert thou our impenitent hertes blessed
father which can not repent of them selves, and mine most impetent of all
impenitentes, lord father I ask the mercy convert them blessed father unto
repentance through thine almighty power. Ephesians. j. which thou shewdest in
Christ Jesus thy son, in raysynge him from death for it is no less pour to
convert a sinner, than to raise up a man from death, no not a whit les^e than
to make the whole world of naught. Convert thou us therefore oh most blessed
father which art of abilite, might and power to do it. Hier. xxxj. Convert
thou us and than shall we be truly converted, for thou art our lord god
which only will and canste do it, and if thou conuertest us, than shall we
erneastly repent and do true penance. And if thou ones show us our sins
we shall sinyte our selves on the thyes, and ever be co^fussed and ashamed in
our selves of it and else al is but very hiprocrice what so ever without thy
spirit we enforce our selves to do. psalm. lxxxiiij. Convert thou us therefore
we beseech the oh almighty father, and turn away thy wrath from us. Give us
grace blessed father to have a spiritual taste, and a gostly fealynge in our
hertes of thyn infinite goodness, mercy and exceeding kyndenes that thou haste so
many ways declared and setforth unto us i^ and by our sweet savior Jesus
Christ whom thou have geuyn up to most paynfull, and after the worlds
estymation most shameful death, for to redeem us thy most wreched servants
from everlasting death and damnation that we had deserved in our father
adam, and so innumerable ways also by our own abhomynable sin and
wrechednes, and I most wretchedly of al wretches, lord father I ask the mercy,
and to make us thy children and heyers, brethren and inheritours together with
thine only natural son our savior Jesus Christ. Grant blessed father yt we
being myndefull of this exceeding kyndenesse, may so condemn our
unkindness and our abominable sin and wretchedness hate it and eue^ abhor
it in our hertes as we should do. Grant that we may cease from it and leave
it, resist against it, and withstonde in time of temptation as we should do.
Grant that with unfeigned faith and with sure believe in thy promise we may
ask and obtain of the forgyuenes of it, with grace to amend our ungracious
lives, as we should do. Grant that we may be kind and thankefll for uthy
great benefits that we have received and daily do receive of the, and laud
the and love for them as we should do. Grant that for love of the we may
also love thine holy commandments as we should do. Grant us ghostly eyes to
se the bewty of virtue that is contained in them, and so consequently an
inward delectation, a ghostlye lust and pleasure to muse and think of them,
yea a syghyng desire with a fervent prepensed purpose an ernest will to observe
and keape them as we should do. Grant us thy contynuall assistence and aid,
with a constant determination of our mind, not wantynge abilite power nor
strenghte to persevere in them, forgettyng that good which through thy grace we
have done, never thinking that we have done enough never weary of well doing,
but ever lokynge forward contynually walking and going forth in our journey
and encreasynge in virtue even unto our lives end as we should do. And then
lord father yt thou wolt wouchsaue for thy mercy and truth sake to take us
out of this wretched world and give us possessyon of that kingdom that thou
have prepared for us from the beginning of the world there to be sure and
out of doubt never to offend thy goodness again, but to rejoice in the,
laud and praise thy mercy together with all thine holy aungelles and saints
in and by our sweet savior Jesus Christ world without end as thou haste
ordained us to do / wherefore lawde honor and glory, power, imperye and
iubilacion be unto the our above all blessed almighty god Father and Son and
holy ghost, three parsons and one god in and by our sweet savior Jesus Christ
for ever and ever. AMEN.

Here follows an effectuous prayer very needful in these last and perylous
days to be said with tears and deep syghes from the botome of our heart, the
prayer of the prophet Esaye in the.lxiij. and.lxiiij. chapitours of his
prophecyes for the restorynge of Christ's poor church scatered abroad with
persecution, forsaken and burnt.
Lord love out from heu^^ ^ behode from thy holy habitacion, and from the
seat of thy glo^^: where is thy strenghte? where is thy so^te ple^tuouse pyty
/ and ye rich multitude of thy mercyes? are al these hardened aganst me?
verily thou art our father, Abrah^^ now knows not us: neither Israel knows
us, but thou lord / thou art our father, thou art our redemer / thy name is
from the beginning, wherefore have thou made us, o lord, to (...) from thy
ways? have thou hardened our hertes least least we should fear the? Turn yt
for thy promise sake made to thy servants and for the tribes of thy heritage,
for few of thy people enjoyed the possession of their land and that but a
litell while, our enemies vane spoiled thy holy place, and trodden it under
their feate. And we were regarded so vile as thought thou had never be^
lord over us, and as toughe thy gloriose name had never ben called upon and
showed over us, I would thou would also break heue^s and come down on^ that
y^ hills might melte away at the presens as in the brennynge of a consumynge
fire, where even waterboyleth out fire, yt thy name might be known to thine
enemies and these ungodly might be shamed and troubled at thy presens / when
thou wroughteste marvelous things for us / than we looked not for them. Thou
came down and the hills wasted away with tre^blyng before thy face. And
from the beginning herd they not, nor perceived with their ears / nether with
any eye was there seen any god besides ye to have wrought such meruailes / and
yt to men which waited not for ye. Sometime thou mettest with me^^ which gladly
did rightwisnes, and thought upon yt in thy ways / but now lo, thou art angry
because we are sinners, and ever have been in sin: although we were delivered
from perils. And al we are wrapped in fylthy uncleanness: ye all our rightwisnes
is spo^ted like ye clothes of a menstruous woman. And all we are fallen away
like leaves. And our iniqities have carried us away like a whirle wind. And
there is none left yt will call or help in thy name / no not one ye will rise
up, and hold ye with prayer / for thou have hyd thy face from us. and have
dried us up in ye hand of our iniqite. But now (lord) thou art our father /
we are but clay: and thou art our potter / and all we are the works of thy
hands. Be not angry (lord) ever so sore: and remember not always our
wyckednes. Lo, behold we beseech the / all we are thy people: the ^^tees of
thy holy place are forsaken. Syon is turned in to a deser^e / Jerusalem is
desolate / the house of our holiness, and prayer, and of our glory in the which
our fathers praised ^he, is turned in to an heap of fire. And al things
wherein we delight, are turned in to wilderness. Wylt thou not (lord) be avenged
of these things? wylt thou hold thy peace, and scourge us thus ever so
grievously?

The song of Anna Hescanas wife.j. regum.ij. wherein she prayseth god, for that
he gave her a sone called Samuel, after that she had been long bareyn.
MY heart is pleasauntly set at rest in the lord: my strength to co^ceyue is
stered up through my god. Now may I speak freely to my enemies: for I am made
glad in my savior. There is none so holy as is the lord / neither is there any
so mighty as is our God, for thou art he alone. Boste not your self with many
words soundyng so to your praise: speak no stout and no vain words. For the
lord is god yt knows all: preparynge for him self what he lusts. Strong
men's bows he has broken: and ye weak are well strengthened. Men well
replenysshed are now famysshed: and y^ hungry are well satisfied. Whiles ye
bareyn is made full of children: and the temyng woman can bear no fruit. It is
the lord y^ sleeth and reuyueth: he brings men in to their graves and
reyseth them again. The lord empouereth, and he makes rich: he makes men
low, and lyfteth up again. He tereth up the ^edy from the dust, and promoteth
the poor from the dung. To set him up with princes, holdyng his glorious seat
regal: gyuyng his pencioners their desires. For the threisholdes of the earth
are yt lords: and he turns the world upon them. His saints fete he will
keep: and the ungodly shall keep syle^ce in darkness: for no man shall be strong
through his own might. His own adversaries shall fear ye lord: for he will
thondre upon them from heaven. The ryghtwyse lord shall be judge thorghout all
the earth: he will give the empery to his kings and will lift up the power of
his anointed.

The prayer of the prophet Daniel, for the re^^oryng of Christ's church,
under the figure of Jerusalem and the children of Israel being in captivity at
the Babylonytes. Daniel.^x.
Have the lord god / which art great and reverently ^o be feared keapyng
covenant and ^ercy with them that love the and keep thy commandments. We
are sinners, ye, we have committed ungodliness, and are rebel against the
declynyng from thy commandments and pleasures, for we have not herd thy
servants the prophets: which spoke in thy name to our kings, to our princes,
to our fathers, and to all the people of the land. Ryghtwysnes (lord) is with
ye, but confusion couer^h our faces, as this day well declarethe. Conversion is
fallen upon the man of Judah, upon thinhabyters of Jerusalem and upon all
Israel both far and nyghe. in all the lands in to the which thou
calledste them for their offenses committed against the lord, we dare not
look upon the for shame, neither our kings: nor our princes, nor yet our
fathers because they have so ^ynned against the. But with the lord our god are
their plentuouse mercyes and forgyuenesses: for we have rebelled against him.
And have not herd y^ voice o^ our lord god to walk in his law which he gave
before us by ye hands of his servants the prophets. but al Israel has
transgressed thy laws: and have gone back because they would not hear thy
voice: wherefore the curse and oath are fallen upon us, as it is written in ye
law of Moses y^ servant of god, because we have off^nded him he has fulfilled
his sayenges upon us and upon our judges which judged us to bring upon us this
great plage which have been done in no place under heaven as is done upon
Jerusalem. All these plages of ye which it is witen in ye law of Moses are
fallen upon us: and yet we have not prayed the face of the lord our god to be
converted from our wyckednes, that we might understand thy truth. But ye
lord hasted him to punisshme^t and brought it upon us: for the lord our god
is ryghtwyse in all his works which he has done, and yet we herd not his
vo^ce. But now (lord our god) which leddest thy people out of ye land of
Egipte from so strong a pour, and have gotten the a name (as is now well
known) we are sinners and have done ungodly: lord, for all thy ryghtwysnes
sake let thy wrath (I beseech the) cease, and thy hoote indignation also be
turned from Jerusalem thy cytte ye hill of thy holiness: for because of our
sins and ^or the wyckednes of our fathers Jerusalem and thy people are
brought in to an opprobry to all that dwell round about us. And now (our god)
hear the prayer of thy seruan^es and his deep desires, and lyghten thy
presence upon thy sanctuarye thus desolate for Christ's sake O my god, bow
down thine ear and hear, open thy eyes and behold our desolations and the
desolotion of thy city in the which thy name was wont to be called upon, for
we pour not furthe our prayers and these deape desires before them our
ryghtwysnesses, but for thy plentuouse mercyes sake. Lord hear, lord be
merciful, lord, give head. and bring this to pass, tarry not for thy nowne
sake lord god, for both thy city and thy people are called after thy name.

Prayer peaseth Gods wrath.
FOr as much as we have now grievously offended our Lord god / and the days
now begin to appear of the which Christ and his Apostles prophesyed
saying there should come perelous times such adflyctyon and persecution as
have not been seen from the beginning of the world, I can not se how we
might any other wise pease gods wrath then by contynuall fervent prayer
what thing is it, but the importune prayer of faithful me^ has obtained it
of god at ye last? what thing resysteth his wrath and vengeance more
strongly then prayer? Did not our lord say unto Moses exodus xxxij. when ye
people of Israel had so greuouly offended him / and Moses was bent to him from
vengeance taking, did he not say Moses, let me go, yt my wrath might be
cast upon the^ suffer me to destroy the? but Moses peased his haslye wrath
with this prayer saying. Wherefore, oh lord, is thy wrath thus kyndled against
thy people whom thou haste led out of Egipte in so great strenghte / and so
strong power? I beseech the let not the Egiptians say, he has led them out
craftily to slay them in the mountayns, and to quench there name for ever, let
thy wrath therefore ceasle, and be thou peaced upon the wickedness of thy people.

Remember Abraham / Isaac / and Israel thy servants to whom thou sworest by
thine own self saying, I shall multyply your sede: and increase it like the
nombre of the stars of the Heaven and all this land of the which I have
spoke so often to you shall I give to your sede / and ye shall possess it a long
time. After this prayer the lord was peased so that he powerde not forth his
wrath upon his people as he said yt he would have done. Considering therefore
prayer to be of such efficacye and virtue / and that Christ him self
commanded us to pray also in these perelous days: me thinks it necessary
that the lay people should have the prayers most conuenyent for this time,
which prayers are psalms and that i^ English yt their faith might the more
encrese and their devotion also by whose prayers ye wrath of god moughte be
peased and we might be restored in to his favor and grace. Which grant us
our father by his son Jesus Christ. Amen.

Thus ends the prymer in English with many goodly and godly prayers.
Imprented at London in Flerstrete by Johan Byddell. Dwelling next to Flete
Bridge at the sign of our Lady of pytye. for wyllyam Marshall. Cum gr^a and
priuilegio regali.
Gratia sumus seruati.

Johan Byddell. pre^ter

charitas ols suffc^t.



An exposition after the manner of a co^templacyon upon ye.li. psalm / called
Miserere mei Deus.
ALas wretch yt I am / confortlesse and forsaken of all men / which have
offended both heaven and earth. whether shall I go? or whether shall I turn me?
To who^ shall I fly for socoure? Who shall have pytye or compassion on me?
unto heaven dare I not lift up mine eyes for I have grievously sinned against
it. And in the earth can I find no place of defense / for I have been noysom
unto it. What shall I now do? shall I despair? God forbid. full merciful is
god / and my savior is meke and loving / therefore only god is my refuge he
will not despise his creature neither forsake his own image. Unto the therefore
most meke and merciful god come I all sad and sorrowful for thou only art my
hope and thou art only the toure of my defense. But what shall I say unto y^ /
sith I dare not lift up mine eyes? I will pour out the words of sorrow / I
will hartelye beseech the for mercy and will say.

Have mercy upon me (oh god) according to thy great mercy.

God which dwell in light that no man can attain / God which art hid and
can not be seen with bodily eyes / nor comprehended with any understanding
that ever was made / nether expressed with the tongues of men or angels. My
god, the / which art incomprehensible do I seek, the which can not be
expressed do I call upon what thing so ever thou art, which art in every place.
I know that thou art ye most hye and excellent thing, if thou be a thing /
and not rather the cause of all thing, if I may so call the, for I find no
name by the which I may name or express thine in enarrable majesty. God (I
say) which art all things that are in the, for thou art even thine own
wysdom, thy power and thy most gloriouse felycyte. Seeing therefore that thou
art mercyful, what art thou but even the very mercy it self? And what am I /
but very myserye? Behold therefore o god which art mercy, behold myserye is
before the, what shall thou do mercy? truly thy work, can thou do
otherwise then thy nature is? And what is thy work verily to take away
mysery, and to lift up them y^ are in wretched condicyon, therefore have mercy
on me oh god. God I say which art mercy take away my misery / take away my
sins, for they are mine extreme miserye. Lift up me which am so miserable /
show thy work in me and exersyse thy power upon me. One depth requires a
another, the depthe of myserye requires the depthe of mercy. The depthe of
sin axeth the depthe of grace and favor. Greater is ye depthe of mercy then
ye depth of mserye. Let therefore the one depth swalow up the other. Let ye
botomlesse depthe of mercy swalow up the profounde depth of myserye.

Have mercy on me oh god according to thy great mercy. Not after the mercy
of men which is but small, but after thine own mercy which is great, which
is unmeasurable, which is inco^prehe^sible, which passes all sins without
comparison.

According to that thy great mercy with the which thou have so loved the
world, yt thou would give thine only son. What mercy can be greater? What
love can be more. Who can despair? Who should not have good confidence? God
was made man and crucyfied for men. Therefore have mercy on me oh God
according to this thy great mercy by the which thou have given thy son
for us, by which (through him) thou haste taken away the sin of the
world, by which (through his cross) thou haste lyghtened all men. by which
(through him) thou have redressed all things in heaven and earth. Wash me (oh
lord) in his blood, lyghten me in his humilite / redress me in his
resurreccion. Have mercy on me oh god not after thy small mercy for that is but
thy small mercy (in comparison) when thou helpest men of their bodily euylles,
but it is great when thou forgeuest sins. and do eleuate men by thy
favor. above the top of the earth. Even so Lord have mercy on me
according to this thy great mercy, that thou turn me unto the. yt thou put
out my sins. and that thou iustefie me by thy grace and favor.

And according to the multitude of thy compassions wype away mine iniquite.

Thy mercy lord is the habundaunce of thy pytye, by the which thou lokest
gentely on ye poor and wretched. Thy compassions are the works, and processes
of thy mercy. Marie Magdalene came unto thy fete (good Jesus) she washed the^
with her tears and wyped the^ with her here, thou for gave her and sentest
her away in peace, this was (Lord) one of thy compassions. Petre denied the
and forsook the with an oath / thou lokedste upon him and he wept bitterly /
thou forgaueste him and madeste him one of the chyef among thine Apostles this
was (lord) a another of thy copassions. The these on the cross was saved with
one word. Paul in y^ furious wodnes of his persecution was called and by and
by fulfilled with the holy ghost, these ar^ lord thy compassions. The time
should fail me if I should number all thy merciable copassions, for look how
many ryghtwyse men there be, and so many ar thy godly compassions. There is
none that can glory in him self. Let them all come that are ryghtwyse other in
earth, or in heaven and let us axe them before the whether they be saved by
their own power and virtue.

And surely all they will answer with one heart and one mouth saying. Not
unto us (Lord) not unto us, but unto thy name give all the praise / for thy
mercy and for thy truths sake. For they in their own sword possessed not ye
land, and their own arm or power saved the nor, but thy right hand and
thine arm, and the lyghte^ing of thy cou^tenau^ce for thou delytedste in the^
(yt is) they are not saved for their own deservings lest any man should boste
him self / but because it pleased the so to be. which thing the prophet does
also more expreslye witness of the when he says: he saved me because he would
have me. Since therefore that thou art the same god with who^ is no alteration or
variableness, neither art thou changed unto darkness: and we thy creatures
as well as our fathers which were borne under concupiscence sinners as well as
we / and sith there is but one mediator and atonemente between god and man that
is Christ Jesus which endures for ever / why doste thou not pour on thy
plentuous compassyons upon us / as well as thou did upon our fathers? have
thou forgoten us? or are we only sinners? did not Christ dye for us? Are all
thy mercies spen^ and none left?

Lord our god I desire and hertely beseech the / to put out mine iniquite
according unto the multitude of thy compassions. For many ye and infinite ar
thy compassions / that according (I say) to the multitude of thy co^passions
thou vouchsafe to quench my sin: that as thou have drawn and received
i^numerable sinners and haste made them ryghtuous / even so that thou will
draw and take me and make me ryghtwyse through thy grace and favor /
therefore according to the multitude of thy copassions wype away mine iniquite.
Cleanse and purify mine heart yt (after all mine iniquity is put out and all
my uncleanness cleansed) it may be as a clean table in the which the finger of
god may write ye law of his love and charity with the which can none iniquite
continue.

Yet wash me more from mine iniquite and cleanse me from my sin.

I grant and knowledge oh lord thou have ones put out mine iniquite thou have
put it out again and haste washed me a thousand times / how be it yet wash
me from mine iniquite / for I am fallen again. Doste thou use to spare a
sinful man until a certain number of his sin / which when Peter inquired
/ how often shall my brother offend against me / and I shall forgive him /
whether seven times? thou answeredste: I say not seven times but seuentye
times seven times taking that certain nu^bre / for an infinite nu^bre. Since
then that a man must forgive so often shall thou in pardonyng and forgeuenes be
passed of a man? is not God more then man? is be not better then man? ye rather
God is the great lord and every man living is nothing but all vanite. And
only god is good and every man a liar, have thou not said. In what hour so
ever the sinner does repent I will not remember any of his iniquities? Behold
I a sinner do repe^te and morn for mine old preuy sores festred within, and
now ar they broken forth for mine own folyshnesse. I am depressed and sore
broken I walk in continual morninge / I am feeble and very weak I roored for
ye sorrow of mine heart. Lord all my desires are before the and my sorrowful
syghes are not unknown unto the. Mine heart tre^bleth and pan^eth for sorrow my
strength fails me and even the very syghte of mine iyes cease from their
office. Wherefore then oh lord doste thou not put away mine iniquity? And if
thou put it out according to the multitude of thy mercyes / yet wash me from
mine iniquite. For yet am I not perfeytly purefyed, finisshe thy work, take
away the hole offense and also the pain that is due unto ye crime, increase
thy light with in me. Kendle mine heart with thy love and cherite, put out al
fear / for perfayte love sends away fear. Let the love of the world, ye
love of the flesh, the love of vain glory, and the love of my self utterly
depart fro me / yet still more and more wash me from mine iniquite by ye which
I have offended agayn^t my neighbor, and cleanse me from my sin that I have
committed against god. I would have the put a way not only the fault and pain
that follows it, but also the occasion and nouryshment of sin. Wash me I
say with the wa^er of thy gracyous favor, with water of which he that
drinks shall not thyrst for ever, but it shall be made in him a fontayne of
living water runnynge in to ever lasting life. Wash me with the comfortable
waters of thy holy scriptures that I may be nu^bred among them unto whom thou
saydest. Now are ye clean for my words which I have spoken unto you Io. xiij.

For I knowledge mine inyquyte, and my sin is ever before mine iyes.

Although through the beholding of thy mercy and compassions I may be bold ^o
fly unto the (oh lord) yet will I not come as the Pharise which prayed not.
but rather praised him self, and despised his neighbor, but I come unto the,
as ye publican Lu. xviij. which durst not lift up his iyes unto Heaven. For I
also do knowledge mine inyquyte / and whiles I pondre my sins I dare not lift
up mine lies / but humbelynge my self with the Publicane I say: God be
merciful to me a sinner. My soul wauereth between hope and fear and sometime
for ye fear of my sins (which I feale and knowledge to be in me) I am ready
to despair / sometime through the hope of thy mercy / I am lyfted up and
conforted. Nevertheless because that thy mercy is greater the^ my misery I will
ever lord trust in the and will sing out thy plentuous compassyons for
ever. For I know that thou desyrest not the death of a sinner / but rather
that he were converted and that he would knowledge his iniquite and forsake his
sin / and so come to the that he may live.

My god grant me that I may live in the / for I knowledge my wickedness / I
know what a grievous burden it is, how copious / and how ieoperdious. I am not
ignorant of it / I hide it not but set it eue^ before mine eyes / that I may
wash it with my tears and knowledge unto the Lord mine vnryghtwysnesse
against my self. And also my sin which I have proudly done against the /
is ever against me / and therefore it is against me / because I have sinned
against the: and it is truly against me / for it is eue^ against my soul / and
accuses me ever before the my judge and conde^pneth me ever and in every
place: and it is so against me that it is ever before my face and stondeth but
against me that my prayer may not perce through unto the / that it might take
thy mercy fro me and hinder thy mercy yt it can not come at me: therefore do I
tremble and therefore do I morn besechyng thy mercy. Therefore oh lord as thou
have given this grace unto me to know my wickedness and to bewail my sin:
eue^ so accomplysh this thy benevolence gyuynge me a perfayte faith and drawyng
me unto thy son which has made a full satisfaction for all my sins. Give me
lord this precious gift for every good gift and every parfeyte gift is from
above coming from the father of light.

Against the only have I sinned: and have done that which is evil in thy
sight: yt thou may be justified in thy words: and may have ye victory
when thou art judged.

I have ouermoch sinned unto the alone / for thou co^maundedst me yt I should
love ye for thy self / and should love al creatures for thy sake. But I have
loved a creature more then yt / loving it even for it self. What is sin,
but to love a creature for it self? and what is that / but to do against the?
Surely he y^ loves a creature for it self makes that creature his God. And
therefore have I sinned against the only / for I have made a creature my god.
So have I cast the away / and have been injurious only to the / for I have not
offended against any creature in that I have set my trust or confidence in
it. For it was not commanded me that I should love any creature for it self.
If thou had commanded me that I should have loved an angel only for him
self / and I had loved money for it self / then no doubt I had offended
against the angel. But since y^ thou only art to be loved for thy self (that
is to say without any respect other of good or evil) and every creature is to
be loved in the and for thy sake. Therefore have I surely offended only against
the / for I have loved a creature for it self.

But yet have I worse done / for I have sinned even i^ thy sight. I was nothing
asshamed to sin before thy face. Oh merciful god / how many sins have I
done in thy sight which I would in no wise have done before mortal me^ / yea yt
I would not in any case yt men should know I feared men more then ye / for I
was blind and loved blyndnes / and so did I nether se nor ones consider the. I
had only fleshly eyes / therefore did I only fear and look on men which ar
flesh. But thou lokedst on al my sins and numbered them / therefore I can
nether hyde them from the / nether turn my back and fly from thy face.

Whether shall I go from thy spirit and whether shall I fly from thy face?
what shall I then do? whether shall I turn me? whom shall I find to be my
defender? whom I pray you but the my god? who is so good? who is so gentle?
who is so merciful? for thou passest without comparion al creatures in
gentleness. It is one of thy chyefest propertyes to forgive and be merciful /
for through mercy and forgiveness thou do most declare thy almyhgtynesse. I
grant lord that I have offended only against the / and have done that which
is evil in thy sight. Have mercy therefore on me and express thy puysaunce in
me / yt thou may be justified i^ thy words / for thou have said: yt thou
came not to call yt rightwise / but sinners unto repentance. Justify me
lord according to thy words: call me / receive me / and give me grace to do
true works of repentance. For this cause wast thou crucyfied / dead and
buried. Thou saydest also: John^. iij. when I am lyfted up from of the earth /
I will draw al unto my self / verefie thy words, draw me after ye let us
ru^ne to gether in ye sweetness of thine oyntmentes. Besides that thou
saydeste: Math. xi. Come unto me all ye ye labor / and are laden, and I will
ease you. Loo I come unto the laden with sins / laboryng day and night in the
sorrow of mine heart refresh and ease me lord that thou may be iustefied and
proved true in thy words / and may overcome when thou art judged / for
there are many that say: he shall have no socoure of his god. God has
forsaken him. Overcome lord these parsones when thou art thus judged of them
and forsake me not at any time. Give me thy mercy and wholesome socoure / and
then are they vaynqueshed.

They say / that thou wylt have no mercy on me / and that thou will cast me
clean out of thy favor and no more receive me. thus art thou judged of men /
and thus do men speak of ye / and these are their determynacyons / but thou
which art meke and merciful have mercy on me and overcome their judgments /
show thy mercy on me and let thy godly pytye be praised in me. Make me a
vessel of thy mercy / yt thou may be iustefied in thy words and have the
vyctorye when men do judge the / for men do judge the to be firce and
inflexible. Overcome their judgment with mekenes and benevolence / so y^ men
may learn to have compassion on sinners / and that malefatours may be enflamed
unto repentance, seeing in me / thy pytye and mercy.

Lo I was fasshoned i^ wyckednes and my mother conceived me poluted with sin.
Behold not lord the greuousnes of my sins / consider not the multitude but
look mercifully on me which am thy creature. Remember y^ I am dust / and that
al flesh is as wytherd hay / for lo I am fasshoned in wickedness and in sin
has my mother conceived me. My natural mother (I say) has conceived me of
co^cupisce^ce / and in her am I polluted with original sin. What is
original sin / but ye lack of original justice and of the right and pure
innocency which man had at his creacyon? therefore a man conceived and barn in
such sin is hole crooked and out of frame. The flesh coueteth against ye
spirit. Reason is slender / ye will is weak / man is frail and like vanity /
his senses deceive him, his ymagynacyon fails him his ignorance leads him
out of the right way / and he has infinite i^pedimentes which pluck him from
goodness and drive him in to evil. Therefore oryginall sin is the rote of all
sins and the nurse of all wickedness. for all be it yt in every man of their
own nature it is but one sin yet in power it is all sins. Thou seiste
therefore Lord what I am. and of whence I am, for in origynall sin (which
conteyneth al sins and iniquites in it) am I fasshoned / and in it has my
mother conceived me, sith then I am hole in sins, and enuyroned with snares
on every side, how shall I escape? for what I would that do I not / but the
evil that I would not that do I. For I find a another law in my members
rebellynge against the law of my mind / and subduynge me unto the law of
sin and death. Therefore the more frail and entangled thy godly beneuole^ce
sees me, so much the more let it lift up and confort me, who would not pytye
one yt is syke? who would not have compassion on him that is dyseased? Come
come sweet Samaritane and take up the wounded and half dead / cure my wounds
/ pour in wine and oil, set me upon thy be, bring me into the hos^ry /
committee me unto the host, take out two pence and say unto him, what so ever
thou spendest above this, when I come again I will recompense ye. Lo thou
have, loved truth / ye unknown and secret ^gynges of thy wisdom, haste thou
uttered unto me.

Come most sweet Samaritane / for behold thou haste loved truth / the truth
(I say) of thy promyses which thou have made unto mankind / them haste thou
truly loved: for thou haste made and kept them / so that thy love is nothing
else but even to do good for in thy self thou art inuariable and immutable thou
use not now to love and anon not to love (as me^ do) neither does thy love so
come and go. But thou art such a lover as does never change for thy love is
very god. Thy love therefore wherewith thou love a creature / is to do it good,
and whom thou most love / to them art thou most beneficyall. Therefore what
means / that thou love truth / but that of thy gracious mercy thou make
us promyses / and fulfyllest them for thy truths sake? Thou dydest promise
unto Abraham a son when he was aged / thou fulfilledst thy promise in old
and bareyn Sara / because thou louedst truth. Thou promisedst unto the children
of Israel a land that flowed with milk and honye / and at the last did
give it the^ / for thy truths sake. Thou made a promise to David saying: I
shall set up thy seat regal one of the fruit of thy body. and it came even
^o pass / because thou would be found true. There are other innumerable
promyses in which thou have ever been faithful because thou louedst truth.
Thou haste promised to sinners which will come unto the / forgyuenesse and
favor / and thou have never defrauded man for thou have loved truth. That
vnthryftye Son Luce. xv. that took his journey in to a far country and
wasted all his goods with royatous living / when he came to him self / he
returned unto the saying: father I have sinned against heaven and before the /
now am I not worthy to be called thy son / make me as one of thy hired
servants. When he was yet a great way of / thou saw him and had
compassion on him / and rannest unto him / falling upon his neck and kissing
him / thou broughtest forth the best garment and put a ring on his finger
and shows on his fete / thou kylledst that fatted calfe and made all the
house merry saying let us eat and be merry / for this my son was dead and is
alive again / he was lost and is now found.

Why did thou all this lord god? surely because thou louedst truth. Love
therefore (o father of mercies) this truth in me / which return unto ye from a
far cu^tre run toward me and give me a kys of thy mouth / give me those
chief garments / draw me i^ to thy house / kill y^ fatted calfe that all which
trust in the may rejoice in me / and let us eat together in spyrytuall
feasts. Oh lord will thou exclude me alone and will thou not keep this
truth unto me? if thou should look narowly on our wickedness o lord: Lord
who might abide the? But lord thou will not be so strayte unto us / for thou
love truth: ye and that with a fervent and incomprehensyble love.

Which is the truth that thou so love? is it not thy son that said Johan.
xiiij. I am the way / truth / and life? he is the very truth of whom all
truth is named in heaven and in earth / this is it that thou haste loved and
in it only haste thou delyted for thou dydeste find it pure and with out
spotte and woldeste that it should dye for sinners. Keep therefore (Oh god) this
truth / behold I am a great sinner in whom thou may keep it / to whom
thou may forgive many sins / whom thou may purifye in the blood of thy
Christ / and whom thou may redeem through his passion why (Oh Lord) have
thou given me this knowledge of thy son / and this faith of him? Because I
should se my redempcyon and not to attain it that I might by that means be
the more vexed with sorrow? God forbid. But rather that I may perceive the
remission of my sins purchased by Christ's blood / and so by his grace may
obtain it. Purge me therefore and redeem me oh lord (for thou have uttered
unto me the unknown and secret points of thy wisdom) that this knowledge may
help me and bring me unto health / for truly the Philosophers never knew
these things / they were unknown unto them / yea and utterly hyd from them.
And no man knew these things (except a few whom thou louedste entyrelye)
before thy sons incarnacyon.

The most curious serchers of ye world (I mean the wise men of this world)
lifted up their eyes above heaven and yet could not find this thy wysdom / for
thou haste hyd these things from the wise and prudente / and haste opened them
unto babes / that is / to humble fysshers and thy holy propehtes which also
have uttered them unto us. And so have thou uttered ye unknown and secret
things of thy wysdom and of thy scryptures unto me / why do I know them in
vain? I know them surely in vain if they profyt me not unto my health and
salvation. For the philosophers when they knew god by his marvelous creatures
they gloryfied him not as god neither were thankful / but vexed full of
vanities in their imaginacyons and their folysshe hertes were blinded. When
they counted them selves wise / they became foles. Wylt thou suffer me lord to
be of their number? God forbid. For thou art even mercy it self which does
never utterly forsake any man. Favor therefore lord / favor and spare thy
servant / and command him to be of the number of thy babes / that the
unknown secrets of thy wysdom which thou haste opened to him may lead him
unto the fountain of wisdom which is an hye / that thou may be praised in
the work of thy mercy which thou doste exercise toward thy seruante
(Lord) which never forsakest them that trust in the.

Sprynkle me Lord with ysope and so shall I be clean / thou shall wash me /
and then shall I be whytter then snow.

Because lord that thou haste loved the truth and haste opened unto me the
unknown secrets of thy wisdom / I am well counforted and I trust that thou
wylt not cast me out of thy favor / but thou will sprynkle me with ysope and
so shall I be cleansed. Ysope is a low herb / it is hot and of a good savor
/ which sygnyfyeth nothing else / but thy only sone our lord Jesus christ /
which humbled him self unto death: even unto ye death of the cross. Which with
the hete of his fervent charity loved us / and washed us from our sins in his
blood. Which with the redolent sauoure of his benevolence and ryghtuousnes
replenyshed the hole world. Therefore with this ysope shalt thou spryncle me /
when thou poureste upon me the virtue of his blood: when Christ thrughe faith
shall dwell in me: when thrughe love I am joined with him: when I shall
countrefayte his humylyte and passion / then shall I be cleansed from all mine
uncleanness. Then shalt thou wash me with mine own tears which flow out of
ye love of christ / then shall I syghe until I be werye / I shall water my bed
every night with my tears / so that it shall swymme in them / and then shalt
thou wasshe me and I shall be whytter then snow.

Snow is white and cold / but lord if thou spryncle me with ysope, I shall
be more whyter then snow / for I shall be thrughly endued with thy splendent
light which passes all bodily witness. And when I am enflamed with yt light
I shall forsake all my carnal co^cupiscences / cold unto worldly thiges / and
e^flamed unto heavenly

Unto my hearing shalt thou give joy and gladness and my brosed bones shall
be refreshed.

Then lord shall I pray unto the / erly (that is in the begynnyge of thy
light) shall thou hear my voice and I shall hear what ye lord god shall
speak in me for he shall speak peace for his people and shall give me peace.
Lord thou shalt give me peace for I have trusted in the / unto my hearing
shall thou give joy and glagdnesse / when I shall hear that confortable words
that marie herd. And what herd marie (I speak of that marye which sat at
the fete of Jesus mat. xxvj.) what herd she? Thy faith has saved the go thy
ways in peace. Let me also hear that the thief herd: this day shalt thou
be with me in paradyse / then shall I have joy for the remyssyon of my sins
/ and gladness for thy bounteous and lyberall promyses / shall I not rejoice
and be glad / when thou shall give me two fold for all my sins? then shall I
begin to taste how sweet the lord is / then shall I learn to be co^uersant
in heavenly things and shall say with the prophet: how great and copious is
that sweetness lord which thou haste laid up for them that fear the.
Then shall I rejoice and be glad and my brosed bones shall be refresshed. What
are the bones which sustain the flesh but the powers of our soul and
reason that bear up the fraylte of our flesh that he run not hedlonge in
to all vices / that a man fall not hole in to vanite and so consume away?
These bones I say are sore brosed / for the reason is very weak / and the
will is prone and ready to all myschyef / for even now the flesh obeys not
reason / but reason must obaye the flesh / so that I can not resist vice,
for my bones at brosed. And why are they brosed? for they have forsaken the /
the fountain of living water / and have dygged for them selves cesterns full
of chynnes which can hold no waters / for they are not filled with thy grace
without which no man can live well / for without the we can do nothing. They
trusted in their own power which is no power and therefore decayed they in
their own folysshnesses. Therefore let thy power come (oh lord) and then shall
these brosed bones be refresshed / let thy grace come and that faith which
works through love. Let thy powers and gifts assist me / and then my brosed
bones shall be refreshed / for my reason shall be mercy / my memory glad and
my will full of joy. And thus shall they all rejoice / for above their own
natural strenghte / when they goo about any good work they shall proceed and
prospere well / neither shall they leave it vnperfeyte but through thy help
shall they bring it to good pass and effect.

Turn thy face from of my sins and wype away all my wyckednes.

Why lokest thou lord upon my sins? why nu^brest thou them? why considerest
them so dilyge^tlye? doste thou not know that man is even as a flower of the
field. why doste thou not rather look in the face of thy Christ? Alas wretch
that I am. why se I the angry against me? I grant I have sinned / how be it
for thy gentleness have mercy on me. Turn thy face from of my sins. Thy
face is nothing but thy knowledge / turn away therefore thy knowledge from my
sins. I mean not that knowledge wherewith thou see and perceyuest all
things / but that whereby thou approuest and disalowest al things / wherbye
thou alowest the works of the ryghtwyse and condempnest the reprouable sins
of the wicked / know not my sins on that manner that thou would impute them
unto me and lay them to my charge. But rather turn away thy face from my
sins that through thy mercy they may be quenched / look lord on the creature
whom thou haste wroughte / look upon thine own image / for I poor wrethe have
put upon me the image of ye devil (that is sin) turn away thy face from the
image of the devil and be not angry with me / and behold thine own image
that thou may have mercy on me.

O merciful lord / remember that thou lokedste upon Zacheum which did clym
up in to a wild fig tree to se the. Lu. xix. And thou entredst in to his
house which thou would never have done if thou had looked on the image of
the devil which he had put on him / but because thou saw thine own image
on him / thou had compassion on him and beledst him. He promised to give ye
half of his goods to the poor / and if he had falsely deceived any man to
restore it four fold and he obtained mercy and health. And I bequeth my
self even hole unto ye nothing reserved. And promise to serve ye for ever
with a pure heart and will fulfill my promise al days of my life wherefore then
Lord do thou not look in thine image in me also? why do thou yet consydre
my sins? Turn I beseech the thy face from my sins and wipe away al my
wickedness / wype away al I pray ye that none remain. For it is written he yt
keeps the hole law and offends in one point is gyltye in the hole / yt is
to say, has deserved dampnatio^ / which is the pain of all sins that lead
unto death. Put out therefore all my wickedness / that none offend the /
which should bring me to condempnacyon.

A pure heart create in me oh god and an vpryghte spirit make a new within
me. For my heart has forsaken me and goes astraye utterly forgettyng his owe
health: it is wandered in to strange cuntres and ensues vanities / and his
eyes / are in ye vtmust costs of the world. I called it again / but it
a^swerd me not. It is gone / lost / and sold under sin. what now lord? what
shall I say? A pure heart create i^ me go / an humble heart / a courteous heart /
a peaceable heart / a gentle heart / a devout heart / such an heart as will
nether do an other man hurt / nether yet avenge him self when he is offended
/ but rather do good against evil, and such an heart as will love ye above all
thing / which will think of ye, speak of the, and thank ye, which will delight
in hympnes and spiritual songs and be hole conuersaunt in heavenly things
Create this heart in me (oh God) create it of no thing / that it may be of
such effecacite through grace / as nature is never able to make it. This
grace comes only from them to the soul through thy creacyon / it is the
beautye of a pure heart / it draws unto him al virtue and expels all vice
/ therefore create in me Oh god a pure heart through thy grace and make a new
an vpryght spirit in my bowels.

For thy spyryte shall lead me in to a right way / which shall purge me
from all erthy affectes and shall lift me up unto heuenlye things. The lover
and the thing that is loved are both of one nature. He that loves bodily
things is worldly / but he yt loves spiritual things is spiritual. Give me
aspirite that may love the and worship the / the most hye spirit / for god
is a spirit and they which worship him, must worship him in the spirit and
verite. Give me an vpryghte spirit not sekyng his own spirit profyt and
glory / but the will and glory of god renew an vpryghte spirit within me /
renew it / for my sins have quenched the first that thou gave me. Give me
now a new spirit that it may redress that thing which is inueterate / my
soul is also a spirit and so made of the that of her self she is right /
for of her own nature she loves the above her self and desires all things
for thy glory / so that her own natural love is right / for it comes of the
but of her own froward will it is inueterate and polluted causing her natural
love to decay. Make new therefore this spirit and this love through thy grace
that it may walk in the right way according to his nature renew it (I say)
that it may ever inflame me with heavenly love / that it may ever cause me to
sighe unto the / to enbrace the contynually and never to forsake the.

Cast me not away from thy face / and thy holy ghost take not from me.

Behold lord I stand before thy face that I may find mercy I stand before
thy benign goodness lokynge for thy favorable answer / cast me not confused
from thy face. who came ever lord unto the / and went away confused? who
ever desired thy favor / and went without it. Surely thou passeste in thy
aboundante pytye both the deservings and also the desires of them that pray
unto ye / for thou gyuest more then men can desire ye or understand when they
have it. It was never berde that thou dydest cast away from thy face any man
that ever came unto the Shall Ioh lord be the first that shall be cast away
from thy face and utterly confounded? wylt thou begin at me to co^founde
them yt come unto the? wylt thou never more have mercy and compassyon? god
forbydde. The woman of canane followed the / she cried and made piteous noise
she moved the dyscyples unto co^passyon / and thou hyldest thy peace / she
continued knocking / she worshypped the and said: Lord help me / neither yet
would thou answer. Thy dyscyples entreated for her saying: let her go for
she cries after us. But what was thyn answer lord I pray the / what dydst
thou answer: forsoothe yt she wept in vain and labored for naught for thou
saydst that thou wast not sent but unto the sheep that were peryshed of the
house of Israel. What should this woman do when she herd these words? verelye
even dyspeyre as concerning the grace yt she required: and yet dispeyred she
not / but trusting in thy mercy prayed yet again saying: Lord help me /
unto whose importunyte (Lord) thou answeredst / it is not good to take the
chyldrens breed and cast it to hounds as though thou sholdest have given
her a full answer and said depart from me / you Canaanites ar dogs / ye are
Idolatres / the precious gifts of heavenly favor perteyne not unto you / I
ought not to take them away from the jews which worship tho true and living
god / and to give them to such dogs as ye are which worship ydols and
deuyls. What shall thou now do thou woman of Canaan? thou may now be a
shamed and get the away / for the lord is angry not with the alone / but
also thy hole nacyon. Oh lord god / who would not have been co^founde and have
pyked him away at these thy words? who would not have mumbled and grudged
agaygst the? who would not have judged the to be cruel? And yet did this woman
continue still in prayer. She cast not away her confydence / she took not these
hard words heuelye / she was not angry / but she humbled her self the more
and abode still in her petycyon and said with good fyaunce: It is truth lord
that thou say / but I axe no breed / I axe not the favor that the
children should have. I am a little whelpe and desire the cromes which fall from
the childrens table. Let them floryshe and aboundde with miracles and other
gracious favors / but let not me be destitute of these cru^me of grace, yt my
daughter may be delyuerd from the fendes possessyon for the whelps do eat
of ye cru^mes which fall from their masters tables / Behold what faith / what
trust, and what humylyte was in this woman / therefore thou not dyspleased with
her importunate instaunce / but reioysynge in her excellent co^stauncye dydst
say. O woman great is thy faith / be it unto the as thou will. Why are these
things written lord god? that we may learn to trust in the, that we may humbly
and deuoutlye contynew in prayer / for thou will give it if men be greadye.
But the kingdom of heaven suffers vyolence / and they yt make vyolence unto
it catch it / for what things so ever are written are written for our learning
yt thrughe patience and confort of the scryptures we may have hope. Cast me
not therefore lord from thy face / which stand weeping and waylynge day and
night before thy face / not that thou sholdest deliver me from the bodily
oppressyon of deuylles / but that thou will deliver my soul from his
spyrytuall power and domynyon. Let me not be shamed (O sweet Jesus) for in ye
only have I trusted I have no health nor confort but in the o lord: for all
have forsaken me / even my brethren and ^hildre^ have cast me of / and mine own
bowels abhor me. I have none other helper / but only ye / Cast me not
therefore away from thy face / and take not thy holy spirit fro me. There is
no man which can say yt Jesus is ye lord but the holy ghost / therefore if I
call upon the lord Jesus / that do I in the holy ghost. If I be sorye for my
sins which are passed / if I are forgyuenesse / this do I verily by the holy
ghost. Therefore I beseech the take not fro me thy holy ghost / but that it
may be with me / and labor with me / for we wot not what to desire as we
ought to do. But the spirit helps our infirmities and makes intercession
for us / that is, makes us to pray with such sorrowful groninges as can not
be expressed with tungue therefore take not away this thy holy spirit fro me
/ that he may teach me to pray / and help me in my labor and may cause
me to continue in prayers and tears / that at the length I may find favor
before thy face / and may serve the all days of my life.

Make me again to rejoice in thy saving health / and strengthen me with a
pryncypall spirit.

It is a great thing that I desire o lord / how be it since thou art god a great
Lord / and king over all gods / he does the injury which asks small
things of the. All transytory and corruptible things ar but small in thy
syghte: but spiritual and everlasting things are great and precious. Take
away the spirit and soul from the body / and what remains but most vile
dunge / duste and a vain shadow? therefore even so much dyfference there is
between the spirit and the body / as it is between the body and his shadow /
so may I conclude that he which asks bodily things asks but vain
tryfles but he that desires spiritual things does surely desire great
things / but specallye he that desires thy saving health. What is thy
saving health but Jesus thy son? which is very god and everlasting life /
why shall I not then ask of the this thy savior / sith thou art a mighty and
most lyberall father / which gave him unto the death of the cross for me.
Now sith thou have so offered him for me / why should I be a shamed to ask him
of the? It is a great and noble present, neither am I worthy to have such a
gift / how be it, it becomes thy worthy lyberalite to give such noble
gifts / for this therefore thine ineffable gentleness I dare p^sume to come
boldly unto the and to desire thy saving health in whom I might f^lly
rejoice.

For if of his carnal father any son ask fyshe / will he reach him a
serpen^^^ And if he ask an egg / will he give him a scorpion? or if he ask
breed / will he give him a stone? Now if carnal fathers being evil and
sinners / will give unto their chyldre good gifts which they have received of
the: how much more thou heuenlye father which of thine own substance art
good / and will give a good spirit to them yt desire it of the? Behol^e thy
son which is returned from a far country sorowyng and repentyng / asks
of the, the fyshe of faith / for as the fyshe lies secret under the water /
even so is faith or such things as are not seen be asks I say a true faith
yt he may rejoice in thy saving health: wi^t thou re^ch him a serpent? will thou
give him ye venom of unfaithfulness which proceeds from ye old and crooked
serpent ye devil? I desire of the o lord the egg of hope yt eue^ as out of an
egg we hope for a chyke^ / so through hope / that thou will grant me to come
unto the syghte of thy saving health / that out of my hope may come this
wholesome sight / as the chycke does out of the egg. I desire the egg of hope /
that my soul through hope may be sustained in this vale of tears and may
rejoice in thy saving health: wylt thou give me the scorpyon of desperacio^? yt
as a scorpyon has poison in the end of her tail / so I in the last end of
my life should reserve sin / delytynge my self and taking my pleasure with
ye entysementes of this world / which seem beautyful and flateryng / even as
a scorpyon does in the face? I desire of the also (o lord) the breed of
Christ's charity by the which he does comunycate him self (even as breed) unto
all men / that I may ever rejoice in thy saving health / will thou give me a
stone / that is to say hardness of heart? God forbid. Why shall I then mystrust
for to desire and obtain great things of the o lord, seeing thou sturryst me
up and byddest me ask and knock / even till I seem importunate? And what thing
can I ask which thou shall be better co^tente with all / or else that should
be more wholesome for me then ye thou sholdest make me rejoice in thy son our
saving health?

Now have I tasted how sweet the lord is how easy and pleasant his burden is.
I remember what peace and tranquilite of mind I was in / when I ioyed in god /
and reioysed in Christ my Lord and savior / therefore am I now in more sorrow
/ for I know what goodness and commoditye I have lost / therefore will I cry
more importunatlye: Make me again to rejoice in thy saving health / restore me
again ye thing which my sins have lost. Restore me that which through my
fault is perisshed in me. Restore me (I beseech the for his sake that ever is
on thy right hand and makes intercession for us) thy gracyous favor / that
I may perceive that through him thou art pacefyed toward me that it may be
as a seal upon my heart / and that I may say with the Apostle Paul Galath.
ij. I am crucyfyed with Christ / I live verily / yet now not I / but Christ
lives in me. But because my frailtye is great / strength me with a princypall
spirit that no troubles or afflyccions may separate me from Christ that no
fear may cause me to renye the / and that no pains may make me slide from
the. My strenght is not suffycyent to resist and fight with that old serpent
and to prevail against him. Peter has taught me how great our infyrmitye is /
he saw ye with his bodily iyes (Lord Jesus) and was most famylyarlye
conuersaunt with the he tasted of thy glory in the mountain / when thou wast
transfigured: he herd the fathers voice: he saw thy manyfolde and wondrous
works / yea and through thy power did him self many miracles. He walked on
his feate upon the waters and herd daily thy mighty a sweet words: he thought
him self most fervent and hot in ye faith and said that he was ready to go
with the both in to preso^ and unto very death. And when thou toldest him yt he
sholdest deny the he believed the not: he trusted in his own strenght and
trusted more unto him self being but a man / then unto the being very god.
But when the hand maiden said unto him. Thou art of the same company / he
was afraid by and by and denied it. There came an other maid and said:
Surely thou art of the same folk: And he denied the again.

He could not stand before women, how should he then have stand before kings
and tyrauntes? And when he was yet ones more inquired of the bystanders and was
accused to be one of his disyples / he began to curse and to swear that he
knew the not / what think you he said I suppose yt he swear by god and by
the law of Moses yt he knew the not / adding such words. Think you that I
am the disciple of this Samaritane which / deceyueth the people which is
inspyred with the devil / and destroys our law? I am the discyple of Moses
/ and know not from whence this fellow is. Blyssed be God that they ceased
enquiryng any further / for else would he never have ceased denyenge the / so
that a thousand interogacyons would have made a thousand flatre negations:
yea and thousand curses and per^uryes / yet were these interogations but
words. What would he have done (I pray the) if they had scourged him and
buffeted him well? Truly he would have sought and proved all means / denyenge
/ for swerynge / cursyng and blasphemyng until that he had escaped their
hands. But thou most meke Lord lokedst back upon him and by and by he
knowleged his offense: Neither yet durst he leap in to the mids of them
and confess the to be the son of God / for he was not yet strengthed with
power from above / so that without doubt he would have denied the again if
he had seen any ieoperdye at hand / therefore as it was woste mete for him / he
went forch and wept bytterly. But thou after thy resurrecio^ appearedst unto
him and co^fortedst him and yet hyd he him self for fear of ye iewest he saw
the so gloryously ascendyng unto heaven and was strengthed by the syghte and and
confort of angels / and yet durst he not go abroad / for he had learned by
experience to know his own fragylite and had proved his weakness. Therefore
did he ratye and wait for the holy ghost which was promised. When he was come
and had filled Peter's heart with grace / then slepte he forth: then began he
to speak / and then with great power and signs bare he witness of thy
resurrection. The^ feared he neither the hye priests nether yet kings / but
reioysed in tribulacions and received the cross with all myrthe and gladness.
Therefore strengthen me lord with a principal spirit that I may contynually
rejoice in thy saving health / or else can I not bear so many assautes against
me. The flesh covers contrary to the spirit. The world assayleth me on
every side. The devil slepeth not. Give me the strenghte of thy spirit yt
there may fall by my side a thousand and ten thousand by my right hand
that I may be a sure and strong witness of thy faith / for if Peter whom
thou enduedste with so many favorable gifts / did fall so wretchedlye / what
^hulde I do lord which have nether sens thy natural presens: nether have
tastede of thy glory in the mountain: nether have seen thy gracyous miracles:
yea and have scarsely perceived thy marvelous works / and have never herd thy
voice / but have been ever subdued under sin therefore strength me with a
pryncypall spirit that I may persevere / in thy service and give my life for
thy sake.

I will instruct the wicked that they may know thy ways: and the ungodly
shall be converted unto the.

Ascribe not this oh Lord unto presumsio^ / if I go about to teach the
ungodly thy ways, for I desire not to teach them as I now am wicked /
ungodly and under ye bonds of syn^e / but if thou make me again to rejoice
in thy saving health: if thou strengthen me with a pryncipal spirit* and if
also thou set me free / then shall I teach the ungodly thy ways. Neither is
this hard unto the / which of very stones can raise up chldren unto Abraham
/ neither can my sins be impediment unto the if thou will do this / but
rather where sin is so aboundaunte / there abounds grace Paul yet
brethynge our ^^reatnynges and slaughter agayyste the dyscyples of the lord
received co^myssyon that if he ^ounde any whether they were men or women which
followed the and professed thy faith / he should bring them presoners to
Jerusalem. And forth was he going like a mad harebrayn and as a rauenyng
wolf / for to stray a broad / rau^sh and kill thy sheep. But whylles he was
yet in his journey even in the heat of his persecucion / and in actual doing
of his sin / whiles he was persecuting the and would have s^ayne thy chosen /
having no manner of preparatyue unto grace / neither yet knowledge of his syn^e /
when with her^ and will he was thine adversary / blasphemed and cursed the.
Behold the voice of thy mercyable pytye unto hi^ saying: saul saul why
persecureste me? by the which voice he was immedyatlye both laid a long and
raised up: he was laid a long and overthrown as concerning his body / but he
was raised up with ye mind / thou raysedste him up that was in the sleep of
dark ignorauncie and pouredst in thy glorious light in those yeis which were
oppressed with this blind sleep: thou shewedst him thy favorable face and
endued him with thy gracious mercy. Then was he raised as it had been from
death / he opened his yeis / he saw the and said: lord what wylt thou that I
do? and after dydest thou send a sheep to this wolf / for thou co^maundest
^nanias to go unto him: And then was he baptized and anon was he replenyshed
with the holy ghost / and was made a chosen vessel to bear thy name before
kings / nations and the chylder of Israel. And without delay he entered in to
the synagoges and preached thy name stoutlye / affyrmynge that thou art
christ / He dysputed / prevailed and confounded ye Iues. Behold lord even
straight of a persecutoure / thou made him a preacher and such a preacher
that labored more then all the other Appostles. O how great is thy powere /
if thou wylt of a wicked man make a ryghtwyse / or of a persecutoure a preacher
/ who shall forbid the? who shall resyst the? who may say unto the, why do
thou so? All things that thou would have thou made in heaven and in earth /
in the sea and in all bottomless depth. Therefore impure it not to arrogancye
if I coueyte thrughe thy power and not through mine own to teache the wicked thy
ways / for I know that I can offer nothing which can be so acceptable in thy
godly syghte / this is the most pleasant sacryfyce / and also for my for my
singular profit / now if thou chau^^^ me in to an other man / then will I
teach the wicked thy ways / not the ways of Plato and Aristole / not the
intricate and sotle proposicyons of man's wit / not the instructions of
phylosophye / not the painted words and vain colors of y^ rethorycans. Not
worldly matters and policyes / not unfruitfully ways of vanite / not ways that
lead men in to death: But thy ways and thy precepts which lead unto life /
nether will I teach them only one way but many ways for many are thy
commandments / how be it all these ways end in one / that is in love and
charity / which does so combynde the faithful hertes / that they have one
mind and one will in god. Or else may we understand by thy many ways / the
diverse manner of living / wherein every man walks according to his vocacyon:
some maryed^ some living chaste in wedowhod / some vyrgyns and so forth /
these walk after diverse ways in to their heuenlye inherytaunce / every man
chosyng one in the which he may best subdue his rebellyous me^bres. Thus will
I teach the wicked thy ways according to their capacite and co^^^cyon: And
the ungodly shall be converted unto the / for I will preach unto them not my
self / but Christ crucified: and they shall be converted not unto my praise /
but unto the / geuyng the all honor and praise / they shall leave their own
ways and come unto thine / that they may walk in them and so consequently
attain unto the.

Deliver me from bloudes (oh god) the god of my health / and my tongue shall
tryumphe upon thy ryghtwysnes.

I am sty^led in much blood / and from the depth of it shall I cry unto the
lord / Lord harken unto my voice. Tarry not lord for I am even at the very
point of death / this blood that I speak of ar my sins / for as the
bodily life consysteth in blood / even so is the life of a sinner in his
sin: pour out the blood / and the beast dies: pour out the sin
knowlegynge it unto god / and the sinner dies and is made ryghtwyse. Neither
am I wrapped in blood / but overwhelmed and drowned in bloudes / full stremes
of bloudes do drive me in to hell / help me lord lest I peryshe. Oh God
which gouernest all ^hynges / which only can deliver me / in whose hand
is the spirit of al life / ryd and purge me from these bloudes. Deliver me
from bloudes (Oh God) the auctor of my health / God in whom only consysteth
my salvation. Deliver me Lord / as thou delyueredst Noe from the waters of the
floude. Deliver me as thou delyueredst Loathe from the fire of Sodom. Deliver
me as thou delyueredst the children of Israel from the depthe of the red see /
deliver me as thou delyuerdst Jonas from the belly of ye whale / deliver me as
thou delyueredst the three children from the furnace of burning fire. Deliver me
as thou delyueredst Peter from the peril of the sea. Deliver me as thou
deliueredst Paul from the depthe of the sea. Deliver me as thou have delivered
infinyte sinners from the power of death and from the gates of hell. And then
shall my tongue tryumphe thy ryghtwysnes / that is, for thy ryghtwysnes which
I shall feale ane perceive in me through thy gracyous favor. For thy
ryghtwysnes (as thapostle says To. iij.) comes by the faith of Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe in him / then shall my tongue
tryumphe in praysyng this thy ryghtwysnes / co^mendynge thy favor /
magnifieng thy pyty / knowlegynge my sins / that thy mercy may be declared
in me which would vouch safe to iustefye such a great sinner / and that all
men may know that thou saues^ them which trust in the and delyuerest them
from extreme anguysshe and aduersite o lord our god.

Lord open thou my lips: and then my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Thy praise is ^ great thing o lord / for it proceade^h o^^ of thy fountain
whereof no sinner ^^^^keth. It is no glorious praise that comes of a sinners
mouth / deliver me therefore from blood (oh lord) ye god of my he^^he and my
tongue shall magnify thy ryghtwysnes. And then shalt thou lord open my
lyppes and my mouth shall show forth (...) praise for thou have ye kaye of
David which shertest and no man opens / and ope^est and no man shetteth /
therefore open thou my lyppes as thou openest the mouths of infantes and
sucktlynges / out of whose mouths thou have stablisshed thy praise. These
truly were thy Prophets / Apostels and other saints which have praised the
with a syngle and pure heart and mouth / and not the Philosophers and orators
which have said / we will magnyfie our tongue / our lyppes be in our own
power / who is our god? They opened their own mouths / and thou openedst them
not / neither yet stablysshedst thy praise out of thyr mouths. Thy infauntes
lord praised the and de^^pysed the^ selves: The philosophers went about to
praise them selves and magnifye their own name. Thy suckelynges extolled thy
fame and glory which they knew through heuenlye favor. The philosophers
knowing the only by natural creatures / could never perfeytlye express thy
renown. Thy saints magnified the with their heart / mouth and good works. The
philosophers only with words and their own sotle imaginations, thy children
have spread thy glory throughout all the world: The philosophers have instruct
but a few of their own adherentes. Thy fre^des with spredyng thy glory have
converted innumerable men from sin unto virtue and unto true felicyte: The
Philosophers nether knew true virtues neither yet true felycyte. Thy
well-beloved have preached openly thy bounteous gentleness and mercyable favor
/ which thou shewedst in thy dear son unto all the world. But the
philosophers could never attain to know it. Therefore out of the mouth of
infauntes and suckelynges haste thou stablysshed thy praise / for it have ever
pleased the to exalte the humble and bring low the proud / now seeing thou
do ever resyst the proud / give me true humilite that thou may stablysshe
thy praise by my mouth. Give me a chyldes heart / for except I turn back
and become as a child I can not enter in to the kingdom of heaven / make me as
one of thy infauntes or suckelynges / that I may ever hang on the teates of
thy wisdom for thy teates are better then wine / and thy wisdom better then
all richesse / so that nothing can be compared unto it / for it is to me^ an
infinite treasure which they that use are made pertetakers of the frendshyp of
god / therefore if thou make me a child the^ shall thou stablysshe thy praise
in my mouth. for then shalt thou open my lyppes and my mouth shall show
forth thy praise and shall perfeytly declare it even as thou have publyshed it
by the mouth of thine infantes and suckelinges. If thou had desired
sacrifices I had surely offered them but thou delyghtedst not in burnt
sacryfices.

My mouth lord shall show forth thy glorious fame / for I know yt this thing
is most acceptable unto the since thou say by ye prophet Psalm. xlix. ye
sacrifice of praise shall glorify me / and by ye means shall I be entised to
show him my saving health / therefore will I offer praise unto ye eue^ ye praise
of infauntes and suckelynges for my sins, And why shall I offer for my sins
the other praise the^ sacryfice? for if thou had desired sacryfices I had
surely ofred them / but thou delyghtest not in burnt sacryfices / can thou
be pacefied with the blood of calves or gootes? Will thou eat ye flesh of
bulls / or drink the blood of gootes? Other do thou desire gold which
possessest heaven and earth? other wylt thou that I sacryfice my body unto the
which desyrest not the death of a sinner / but rather that he were converted
and live?

Nevertheless I will chasten my flesh in a measure that through thy grace it
may be subdued unto reason and obey it / for in this point also if I pass
measure and bring my body so low that it is un apt to serve my neighbor and
to do that office which is appointed me of god / it shall be imputed unto me
for sin. Let your serving of god be reasonable says ye apostle To. xij. And
thou haste said also by the prophet I require mercy and not sacrifice Osee.
vi. Therefore shall my mouth show forth thy praise / for this oblacion does
honor the / and shows us the way unto thy saving health. My heart is ready
(oh god) my heart is ready / it is ready through thy grace to do all things
which are pleasant unto the: this one thing have I found most acceptable
unto the / that will I offer unto the / that shall ever be in my heart / on that
shall my lyppes ever be harpynge / if thou had desired a bodily sacryfyce I
would surely have given it the / for my heart is ready through thy grace to
fulfill thy will: but in such burnt sacryfyce haste thou no delyght / thou
made the body for ye spirit / therefore seakest thou spiritual things and
not bodily / for thou sayste in a certain place Proverb. xxiij. My son give
thine heart unto me / this is the heart yt pleases the. Let us offer unto the
an heart repenting with sorrow of our fynnes and enflamed with the love of
heuenlye things and then will thou desire no more / for with such a
sacryfyce will thou be content.

A sacryfyce to god is a broken spyryte: a contrite and humble heart thou
shalt not despise (oh god)

A broken spirit and not broken flesh pleases the (o Lord) for the flesh
is broken and vexed because he has not the carnal things that he desires /
or else fealeth in him self such things as he hates. But the spyrite is
broken and vnquyeted for his fault / because he has offended against god whom
he loves. He soroweth yt he has sinned against his maker and redeemer / ye
he has despised his blood / that he has not regarded such a good and
loving father: this broken and sorowynge spryte is unto the a sacryfyce of
most sweet sauoure which notwithstondynge has his confeccyon of most bitter
spyces / even of the remembrance of our sins, for whiles our sins are
gathered together in to the mortar of the heart / and beaten with the pestle of
conpunccyon / and made in to poudre and watered with tears / thereof is made an
oyntemente and sacryfyce most sweet which redolent offrynge thou wylt not
despise / for thou wylt not despise a co^tryte and humble heart. Therefore he
that breaks his stonye heart which is made with the most hard stones of
sin / that he may thereof prepare an oyntmente of repentance in abou^daunce
of tears / not despayrynge of the multitude and greuousnes of his sins / but
humblye offering this sacryfyce unto the: he shall in no wise be despised of
the / for a broken and humble heart wylt thou not despise oh god. Marye magdalyn
which was a notable sinner made such an ointment: and put it in the
allablaster box of her heart: she feared not to enter i^ to ye Pharesees
house, she humbled her self flat before thy fete / she was not a shamed to
weep at thy meletyde / she could not speak for inward sorrow / but her heart
melted in to tears / with the which she washed thy fete / she wypyd them with
her here immedyatlye / ye and anointed them with ointment and ceased not
kissing them. Who ever saw such a another thing? ye or who has ever herd of
a thing like unto this? Surely her sacryfyce pleased the well, and was so
acceptable that thou prefarredst it above the Pharise which in his own sight
was ryghtwyse / for it may be gathered of thy words. Luce. vij. that there was
so much dyfference between the ryghtwysnes of marye and the pharesee as there
was dyfference between these: to wash the fete with water / and to wash them
with tears: to kiss one on ye face / and not to cease to kiss the feet: to
anoint the head with oil / and to anoint the fete: with most precious ointment:
ye much more precelled she the pharesee / for he neither gave the water /
kiss nor oil. O great is thy power Lord / great is thy might which declares
it self most cheeflye in sparynge and having compassyon. Now se I well that a
contryte and meke heart thou shall not despise oh lord. And therefore endeavor
I my self to offer such an heart unto ye. Nether is it enough that I say so
outwardely / for thou art a god which searchest our hertes and raynes.
Accept therefore this my sacryfyce: and ye it be imperfect / amend thou the
defaulte which only art of power that to do: that it may be a brent sacryfyce
/ all hole enflamed with the heat of thy bounteous cheryte that it may be
acceptable unto the / or at the leest that thou despise it not / for if thou
despise it not / I know well that I shall find favor before the, and then
shall none of thy saints other in heaven or earth despise me.

Deal gentlye of thy favorable benevolence with syon, Let the walls of
Jerusalem be bylte again.

Be cause it is wreten Psalm. xvlij. unto the holy man thou shalt be holy /
and with the innocen shalt thou deal innocenlye, with the pure and chosen
shalt thou do purelye / and with the wicked shalt thou play ouertwarte: I
am very desirous y^ all men were saved / and that they should come unto ye
knowledge of the truth: which thing were very necessary for them and also for
my profit / for by their prayers, exortations and examples I might rise from
this filthy sin and be provoked daily to proceed unto better. I beseech the
therefore Oh Lord although I be a sin / that thou of thy favorable
benevolence would deal gentlye with syon: that the walls of Jerusalem
might be bilt again. Syon is thy church / for syon by interpretacyon
sygnyfyeth a footehyll / or a place where a man may se far about him. And
even so thy church thrughe the grace of the holy ghost beholds a far of
the glory of god according to the capacyte of this life / and therefore said
the apostle. ij. Corynth. iij. all we with an uncovered face beholding as in a
glass the glory of the lord / after the same image at transformed from
glory to glory as by the sprete of the lord.

Lord god how small is thy Church at this day? almost the hole world is
fallen from the, for there are many mo myscreauntes then christen / and yet
among the chryste^ how many are there which forsake worldly things and seek
the glory of the lord? surely ye shall find very few, in co^paryson of them
which are addycte to worldye things / whose god is thyr belie and glory to
their shame and confusyon. Deal gentelye Lord of thy favorable benevolence
with Syon: that it may be increased both in multitude and also in good
living. Behold from heaven and deal gentelye as thou art wont to do that
thou will send among us the fire of thy charity / which may consume all
our sins. Deal lord according to thy favorable benevolence / and do not
with us after our deseruyng / nether yield thou us again according to our
iniquities / but order us according to thy great mercy. Thou art Lord our
father and redemer / thou art our hope and everlasting health. Every man
desires goodness of the / if thou give it them / then shall they gather it: if
thou open thy hand all shall be tylled with plenty / when thou turnes^ away
thy face / then are they astonyed: when thou gatherest in their breath then are
they dead and return in to earth. And again when thou brethedst on them /
then are they created anew: and thus renuest thou the face of the earth
Psalm.C.iiij. Lord I pray the what profyt is there in the dampnacyon of so
many thousand men? Hell is filled and thy church does daily decrease. Arise
Lord / why sleapest thou so long? Arise / and dyffer not unto the end /
Deal gently of thy favorable beneuole^ce with Syon / that the walls of
Jerusalem may be builded again / what is Jerusalem (which by interpretacyon
signyfyeth the vysyon of peace) but the holy congregacyon and city of the
blessed which is our mother? Her walls were decayed when Lucyfer with his
angels fell / in to whose places are the ryghtwyse men received. Deal therefore
gentlye (Oh Lord) with Syon / that the number of thy chosen may shortly be
fulfilled / and that the walls of Jerusalem may be edefied and fynisshed with
new stones which shall ever praise the and endure euerlastynglye.

Then shalt thou accept the sacryfyce of ryghtwysnes / oblacyons and burnt
offerynges: then shall they lay upon thine altar wanton calves.

When thou haste dealt gentlye of thy favorable will and benevolence wi^h Syon
/ then shalt thou accept the sacryfyce of ryghtwysnes / for thou shalt
consume it with burning fire of thy love and charity / and so acceptedst thou
the sacrifices of Moses and Helyas. And then acceptest thou the sacryfices of
ryghtwysnes / when thou fattenest with thy grace the souls which endeavor
them selves to line rightwisly. What profits to offer sacryfices unto the
when thou acceptest them not oh Lord? How many sacryfyces offer we now a
days which are not pleasant unto the but rather abhomynable? for we offer
not the sacryfyces of ryghtwysnes / but our own ceremonies: and therefore are
they not accepted, nor regarded of the. Where is now the glory of the
Apostles? where is the valiant perseueraunce of martyrs? where is the fruit of
preachers? where is that holy symplicyte of them that used to live solitarye?
where are now the virtues and works of the christen which were in old time?
Then shall thou except their sacryfices / when thou shall deck and garnyshe
them with thy grace and virtues.

Also if thou deal gently with Syon of thy favorable benevolence / then
shalt thou delyght in sacryfyces of ryghtwisnes / for the people shall begin
to live well / to keep thy commandments and to deal iustlye and so shall
thy people be endued with thy benefytes and blessing. Then shall the oblacyons
of the priests and of the clargie be acceptable unto the / for they shall
forsake their carnal affection and endeavor them selves unto a more perfeyte
life / and so shall the ointment of thy blyssynge descend upon their heads.
Then shall the burnt offerynges of the relygyous be pleasant to the / for
they shall cast out all drousye sluggyshnes and false confydence / and be holy
enflamed and made perfayte with the burning fire of gods love. Then shall
the bysshoppes and preachers put calves upon thyn altar / for after they are
co^summate in all kind of virtue and replenysshed with the holy spirit / they
shall not fear to give their lives for their sheep. What is thine altar sweet
Jesus / but thy cross where upon thou wast offered? What signifies a wanton
calfe / but our body? Therefore / then shall they put calves on thine altar /
when they shall offer their own bodies unto the cross / that is, unto all
afflyctions and even unto the very death for thy names sake.

Then shall the church floryshe and dilate her coostes / then shall thy praise
be noysed from the last end of the world / then shall joy and gladness
fulfill the hole world. Then shall thy saints rejoice in glory and shall make
mirth in their mancyons waiting for us in the land of the living.
Accomplish in me even now Lord that / then / which I so often name that thou
may have compassion on me according to thy great mercy / y^ thou may
receive me for a sacryfice of ryghtwysnes / for a holy oblacyon: for a burnt
sacryfyce of good living / and for a calfe to be offered on thine altar or
cross / by the which I may pass from this vale of miserye unto that joy
which thou have prepared for them that love the. Amen.

To fill up the lefe we have touched certain places which we thought most
necessary to edefye the congregation of Christ.

Of faith.
FIrst dear brethren ye ought to give dylygent head that you may purelye
understand what faith is and what fruits proceed out of her / And to conclude
the sum in few words / faith is a sure perswasyon and full knowledge that
god for his truth and ryghtwysnes sake will fulfill such promyses / as he
has made unto us of his mercy and favor / which sure persuasion must be
given from god. 1. Corin. xij. For it can neither be gotten by man's power /
nether yet retained / therefore with fear and trembling perform that health
which is begone in you / for it is god that works in you both the will and
also the deed / even at his own pleasure. And se that with all mekenes ye
submyt your selves unto the vocacion of god / not seking the lyberty of the
flesh / nether yet despysyng good works / for faith does mortefye the flesh
and her works / and the spirit of god which rests in a faithful man
helps our ins^irmitie and fyghteth without intermission against sin / the
devil and the world.

The power of faith.
The power of faith is to iustefye us: that is / to dispoyle us from all our
vices and lay them on Christ's back which has pacefyed the fathers wrath
toward us: and to endue us with an others ryhtwysnes / that is Christ's / so
that I and all my sins are Christ's / and Christ with all his virtues are
mine / for he was borne for us and given unto us. Esaye. ix. Roma. viii. To
obtain this ryghtwisnes god the father requires nothing of us but that we
believe in him and make him no liar. He that believes that god of his mercy
has made us these promises and that for his truths sake he will fulfill them /
he sets to his seal yt god is true. But he that believes not or doubts of
this (as much as in him is) he makes him a liar.i. John^ v. for why sholdest
thou doubt in him except thou thoughtest yt he were a liar and would not keep
his promise which he made? Now if thou count God (which is the very truth)
to be a liar / art thou not worthy a thousand dampnacyones.

The work of faith.
Faith works by charity / for when my ragyng conscience which fealeth her
syn^e is pacefied and set at one with God thrughe faith / then remembrynge the
fervent love of god toward me I can not but love my neighbor again / for
there is no man that hertelye loves the father and can hate the sone / and
although the son be naught and unthriftye yet for his fathers sake he will
help to better him and even lament and be sorye for y^ sons wickedness.
Likewise if we hertely love god for his infinyte benefytes done unto us / then
can we not hate yt creature which he has made after his own lykenes / who^ god
the father loves so tenderly y^ he gave his own son unto the death to
redeem him / yea and whom he has adopted (through Christ) to be his son and
heir. Now all be it we se no kyndenes in this man for which we should love
him yet has god showed us kyndnes enough for the which we ought to love him
and socoure him at al times. Let us therefore love him for y^ love that god his
creatoure has showed us / and bear his infyrmitye / if he faule let us lift
him up again / and endue him with our wisdom and all our works even as
Christ has done with us / and this is an euydent token that thou love god /
when thou love thy brother.i. John.iiij. and seakest al means to help him /
these are the good works that follow faith / and are euydent tokens that thy
faith is right and pure. Thus see thou how good works / flow out of faith
through charity / and charity or love is ye fulfilling of ye hole law. To.
xiij.

Good works.
Among good works the chyef art: to be obedyente in all things unto kings /
princes / Judges / and such other officers as far as they command ciuyle
things that is ^o say such things as are indyfferente / and not contrary
unto the commandments of god / for then must we rather obaye God then men /
acts in the first chapitre although we should lose both our substance and life
thereto: To honor rulers: To promote peace: To pray for all comynaltyes. And
to apply al our studyes to profit them.

The next are: to be obedyent unto father and mother: To provide for our
householde both nouryshyng our famylye, with bodily sustenaunce / and also to
enstructe them with the word of god / and so to be their governor carnal and
spiritual.

Then must we look how we ought to behave ourselves toward our neighbors
knowlegynge yt all the gifts which are given us of god / are not given us for
our own self but for the edefyenge o^ the co^gregacyo^.j. Corynth. xij. and
if we bestow them not on that manner we shall surely give a rekenyng for them
before the lord. Emonge these ought we to have respect unto the preachers and
mynesters of the word / that they may be had in honor and well provided
for. And above all things good brethren address your selves unto that
necessary work prayer. Remember to pray for all estates / for yt is a work
that Christ and his apostles full dylygently exhorted all men unto / promising
them that they should obtain their petycyons John^. xvj. also.j. John^. iij.
if they be according to the will of god and for his glory.j. John^. v.

Here ends the exposition upon the lj. Psalm / called Miserere mei deus.
Imprented at London in Fleet street by John^ Byddell / dwelling next to Flete
bridge at the sign of our lady of pytye / for Wyllyam Marshall.

Cum priuilegio Regali.


