THE VALIANT VVELSHMAN, OR THE TRVE CHRONIcle History of the life and valiant
deeds of CARADOC the Great, King of Cambria, now called WALES. AS it has
been sundry times Acted by the Prince of Wales his servants.

Written by R. A. Gent.

LONDON, Imprinted by George Furslowe for Robert Lownes, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Little North door of Paul's, 1615.

TO THE INGENVOVS READER.
AS it has been a custom of long continuance, as well in Rome the Capital
City, as in diverse other renowned Cities of the world, to have the lives of
Princes and worthy men, acted in their Theaters, and especially the conquests
and victories which their own Princes and Captains had obtained, thereby to
encourage their youths to follow the steps of their ancesters; which custom
even for the same purpose, is tolerated in our Age, although some peevish
people seem to dislike of it: Amongst so many valiant Princes of our English
Nation, whose lives have already even cloyed the Stage, I searched the
Chronicles of elder ages, wherein I found amongst diverse renowned persons,
one British Prince, who of his enemies, received the title of Valiant
Britain, his name was Caradoc, he was King of Siluria, Ordonica, and March,
which Countries are now called, South Wales, North Wales, and the Marches; and
therefore being borne in Wales, and King of Wales, I called him the valiant
Welshman; he lived about the year of our Lord, 70. Cornelius Tacitus in his 12.
book, says, that he held wars 9. years against all the Roman puissance;
but in the end he was betrayed by Cartismanda Queen of Brigance, and so
conuayed to Rome in triumph, so that the name of Caradoc was famous in Rome at
that time: wherefore finding him so highly commended amongst the Romans, who
were then Lords of all the world, and his enemies; I thought it fit amongst so
many Worthies, whose lives have already been both acted and printed, his life
having already bin acted with good applause, to be likewise worthy the
printing; Hoping that you will censure indifferently of it; and so I bid you
farevvell.

The Actors names.
Fortune. Bardh. Octauian King of North Wales. Guiniuer his daughter. Codigune
his base son. The Duke of Cornwall. The Earl of Gloucester. Morgan Earl of
Anglesey. Pheander his son, the Fayry champion. Ratsbane his man. A Iugler.
Cadallan Prince of March, with his three sons, and his daughter Voada. Caradoc,
Mauron and Constantine. Monmouth an usurper. Gederus King of Britain. Gald
his brother. Venusius Duke of York. Cartismanda his wife. Claudius Caesar the
Emperor. Ostorius Scapula the Roman Lieutenant. Marcus Gallicus his son.
Manlius Valens, and Cessius Nasica, 2. Tribunes of the Romans. A Witch, and
her son Bluso. The Clown with a company of Rustickes. A Shepherd. An old
man.
THE VALIANT WELSHMAN.
ACTVS 1.
SCENA 1.
Fortune descends down from heaven to the Stage, and then she calls forth
four Harpers, that by the sound of their Music they might awake the ancient
Bardh, a kind of Welsh Post, who long ago was there intoombed. Fortune. THus
from the high Imperial Seat of Jove,
Romes awful Goddess, Chance, descends to view
This Stage and Theater of mortal men,
Whose acts and scenes diuisible by me,
Sometime present a swelling Tragedy
Of discontented men: sometimes again
My smiles can mould him to a Comicke vain:
Sometimes like Niobe, in tears I drown
This Microcosme of man; and to conclude,
I seal the Lease of man's beatitude:
Amongst the several objects of my frowns,
Amongst the sundry subjects of my smiles,
Amongst so many Kings housde up in clay,
Behold, I bring a King of Cambria:
To whom great Pyrrhus, Hector poysde in scales
Of dauntlesse valor, weighes not this Prince of Wales.
Be dumb you scornful English, whose black mouths
Have dimmed the glorious splendour of those men,
Whose resolution merits Homers pen:
And you, the types of the harmonious spheres,
Call with your silver tones, that reverend Bardh,
That long has slept within his quiet vrne,
And let his tongue this Welshmans Crest adorn.

The Harpers play, and the Bardh rises from his Tomb. Bardh. Who Is this
disturbs my rest?

Fortune. None, Poet Laureat: but a kind request
Fortune prefers unto thy ayry shape,
That once thou would in well-tunde meeter sing
The high-swolne fortunes of a worthy King,
That valiant Welshman, Caradoc by name,
That foylde the haughty Romans, cracked their fame.

Bardh. I well remember, powerful Deity,
Arch-gouernesse of this terrestrial Globe,
Goddess of all mutation man affords,
That in the reign of Romes great Emperor,
Ycleped Claudian, when the Bryttish I Will
Was tributary to that conquering See,
This worthy Prince suruiued, whose puissant might
Was not inferior to that son of Jove,
Who, in his cradle chokte two hideous Snakes.
Which, since my Fortune is to speak his worth,
My utmost skill alive shall paint him forth.

Fort. Then to thy task, grave Bardh: tell to men's ear,
Fame placed the valiant Welshman in the sphere. Exit.

Bardh. Then, since I needs must tell the high designs
Of this brave Welshman, that succeeding times,
In leaves of gold, may register his name,
And rear a Pyramys unto his fame;
This only do I crave, that in my song,
Attention guide your ears, silence your tongue.
Then know all you, whose knowing faculties
Of your diuiner parts scorn to insist
On sensual objects, or on naked sense,
But on man's highest Alps, Intelligence.
For to plebeyan wits, it is as good,
As to be silent, as not under stood.
Before fair Wales her happy Union had,
Blessed Union, that such happiness did bring,
Like to the azure roof of heaven full packt
With those great golden Tapers of the night,
Whose spheres sweat with their numbers infinite;
So was it with the spacious bounds of Wales,
Whose firmament contaynd two glorious sons,
Two Kings, both mighty in their arch-co^mands,
Though both not lawful in their government:
The one Octauian was, to whom was left,
By lineall descent, each government:
But that proud Earl of Munmouth stealing fire,
Of high ambition did one throne aspire,
Which by base usurpation he detaines.
Of lawful (right) unlawful treason gains.
Twice, in two haughty set Battalions,
The base usurper Munmouth got the day:
And now Octauian spurde with grief and rage,
Conducted by a more propitious star,
Himself in person comes to Shrewsbury,
Where the great Earl of March, great in his age,
But greater in the circuit of his power,
Yet greatest in the fortunes of his sons,
The Father of our valiant Welshman called,
Himself, his warlike sons, and all does bring,
To supplant Treason, and to plant their King.
No more I Will speak: but this old Barde entreats,
To keep your understanding and your seats.

ACTVS 1. SCENA 2.
Enter Octauian, King of Northwales, Gloucester, Codigunes base son, Morgan,
Earl of Anglesey, and his foolish son with soldiers. Octauian. Gloucester,
Lord Codigune,
And Noble Morgan, Earl of Anglesey,
Can the usurping name of Monmouth live
Within the ayry confines of your souls,
And not infect the purest temprature
Of loyalty and sworn allegiance,
With that base Apoplexy of revolt,
And egre appetite of sovereign might,
Counting the greatest wrong, the greatest right?
Full many Moons have these two aged lights
Beheld in peaceful wise: Now, to my grief,
When the pure oil, that fed these aged Lamps,
Is almost spent, and dimly shines those beams,
That in my youth darted forth spritefull rays,
Must now die miserable and undone,
By monstrous and base usurpation.

Codig. Thrice noble king, be patient, this I read,
The Gods have feet of wool, but hands of lead:
And therefore in revenge as sure, as slow.
What though two Royal Armies we have lost?
He that bears man about him, must be crossed:
And that base Monmouth, that with his golde^head
Salutes the Sun, may with the Sun fall dead.
For base Rebellion draws so short a breath,
That in the day she moves, she moves to death:
And like the Marigold opens with the Sun,
But at the night her pride is shut and done.

Morgan. Hark you, me Lord Codigune,
By the pones of Saint Tany, you have prattled to the King a great deal of
good Physic, and for this one of her good lessons and destructions, how call
you it, be Cad, I know not very well, I will fight for you with all the George
Stones, or the Vrsa majors under the Suns. Hark you me, Kings: I pray you
now, good Kings, leave your whimbling, and your great proclamations: let death
come at her, and ha can catch her, and pray God bless her. As for the Rebel
Monmouth, I kanow very well what I will do with her. I will make Martlemas
beef on her flesh, and false dice on her pones for every Conicatcher: I
warrant her for Case bobby and Metheglin: I will make her pate ring noone for
all her resurrections and rebellions.


Octauian. But soft, what Drum is this, The Drum sounds afar off.
That with her silent march salutes the air?
Herald, go see.

Herald. And't please your Grace, Cadallan, Earl of March
Spurred on by duty and obsequious love,
Repining at the Fortune of your foe,
Whose ravening tyranny deuoures the lives
Of innocent subjects, now in person comes,
To scourge base usurpation with his sons.

Octa. Conduct them to our presence. Enter March.
Welcome, brave Earl, with these thy manly sons:
Never came rain unto the Sunne-parcht earth,
In more auspicious time, then thy supply,
To scourge usurping pride and soueraignety.

Cadallan. Oh my gracious Lord,
Cadallan comes drawn by that powerful awe
Of that rich Adamant his soul adores.
The needles point is not more willing to salute the North,
Man ioyfuller to sit inshrinde in heaven,
Then is my loyalty to aid my King.
I know, dread Liege, that each true man should know,
To what intent dame Nature brought him forth:
True subjects are like Commons, who should feed
Their King, their Country, and their friends at need.

Octa. Brave Earl of March, I need not here delude
The precious time with vain capituling
Our own hereditary right. Graves to the dead,
Balsum to green wounds, or a soul to man
Is not more proper, then Octauian
To the usurped Title Monmouth holds.
Then once more on: this be our only trust:
Heavens suffer wrongs: but Angels guard the just. Exeunt.

ACTVS 1. SCENA 3.
Enter Monmouth the usurper in arms with Soldiers. Mon. Now valiant
Countrymen, once more prepare
Your hands and hearts unto a bloody fight.
Stern Mars begins to buckle on his helm,
And waves his sanguine colors in the air:
Recount, brave spirits, two glorious victories,
Got with the death of many thousand souls.
Think on the cause, for which we stand ingagde,
Even to the hazard of our goods and lives:
That were Octauians forces like the stars,
Beyond the limits of Arithmetike:
Or equal to the mighty Xerxes host:
Yet like the poles, our dauntlesse courage stands,
Unshaken by their feeble multitudes. The Drum beats afar off.
But soft: what Drum is this? Soldiers, look out.
Did Caesar come, this welcome he should have,
Strong arms, big hearts, and to conclude, a grave.

Soldiers. My Lord Octauian,
Backed with the Earl of March and his three sons,
Intends to give you battle.

Mon. No more, no more: fond doting Earl:
Is not there room enough within Churchyards,
To earth his aged body, with his sons,
But he must hither come to make their graves?
Drums, beat aloud. I Will not articulate.
My soul is drowned in rage. This bloody fight
Shall toombe their bodies in eternal night. Exeunt. Alarm.

Enter Cadallan wounded, with his sons. Caradoc. Rot from his cursed trunk
that villains arm,
That gave this fatal wound to reverend age.
How fares our Princely father?

Cad. As fares the sick man, when the nights black bird
Beats at his casements with his sable wings:
Or as the half dead captive being condemned,
Awaites the churlish Iaylors fearful call
Out of his loathsome dungeon to his death:
So fares it with the wounded Earl of March:
The current of my blood begins to freeze,
Touched by the Icy power of gelid death:
A sad Eclipse darkens these two bright lights:
My vital spirits faint, my pulses cease,
And natures frame dissolues to natures peace,
All by that damned usurper. He dies.

Cara. Eternal peace, free from the hate of men,
Inspheare thy soul, and mount it to the stars.
Brothers, surcease your grief, go to the field,
Cheer up the Soldiers, whilst I single forth
This bloody Monmouth, that I may sacrifice
His canceld life unto my fathers ghost,
And rid the land of this Egean filth,
His usurpation stables. Oh, it is good,
To scourge with death, that crying sin of blood.

Morgan meets Caradoc going in. Morgan. Cousin Caradoc, well, in all these
pribble prabbles, I pray you, how does our uncle Cadallan? be Cad, I heard he
had got a knock: if it be so, I pray you look that the lean Caniball, what
do you call him that eat up Julius Cesars and Pompeyes: a saucy knave, that
cares no more for Kings, then lousy beggars and Chimney-sweepers.


Cara. Why, death, man.


Morgan. I, I, Death, a pox on her: as Cad shudge me, he will eat more
Emperors and Kings at one meal, then some Tailors halfepenny loaves, or
Usurers decayed shentlemen in a whole year: therefore I pray you Cousin, have
a care of her uncle.


Cara. He is in heaven already.


Morgan. In heaven! why did you let her go thither?


Cara. It is a place of rest, and Angels bliss.


Morgan. Angels! Cots blue-hood: I warrant her, there is never a Lawyer in the
whole orld, but had rather have eleven shillings, then the best Anshell in
heaven. I pray you who sent her thither?


Cara. I cannot tell, but from his dying tongue
He did report Monmouth the bloody means.

Morgan. Monmouth! Jesus Christ! did he send her uncle to Saint Peter's and
Saint Paul's, and not suffer her cousin Morgan to bid her Nos Dhi^u? hark you,
Cousin, I Will seek her out be Cad. Farewell, Cousin, I Will make her pring pack
her Nuncle with a venshance.


Cara. Farewell, good Cousin; whilst I range about
The mangled bodies of this bloody field,
To find the Traitor forth, whose spo^ted soul
I Will send posthaste unto that low Abisse,
That with the snaky furies he may dwell,
And ease Prometheus of his pains in hell. Alarm again.

Enter at one door Monmouth with Soldiers, at the other Codigune: they fight:
Monmouth beats them in; then enter Caradoc at the other. Caradoc. Turn thee,
Usurper, Harpey of this Clime,
Ambitious villain, damned homicide.

Mon. Fondling, thou speak in too mild consonants:
Thy ayry words cannot awake my spleen:
Thou woundst the subtle body of the air,
In whose concauity we stand immured:
Thou give me cordials, and not vomits now:
Thy Physic will not work: these names thou speakst,
Fill up each spongy pore vviihin my flesh,
With joy intolerable: and thy kind salutes
Of villainy, and ambition, best befits
The royal thoughts of Kings: Read Machiauell:
Princes thus would aspire, must mock at hell.

Cara. Out, thou incarnate Devil; guard thee, slave:
Although thou fear not hell, I Will dig thy grave.

Mon. Stay, Prince, take measure of me first.

Cara. The Devil has done that long ago. Alarm there.

They both fight, and Caradoc kills him. Enter Constantine. Constable. Surcease,
brave brother; Fortune has crowned our brows
With a victorious wreath; Their Soldiers flee,
And all their Army is discomfited.
The King sounds a retreat. What is the Traitor dead?
This act has purchased honor to our name,
And crownde thee with immortal memory.
Off with his head: and let the King behold,
His greatest foe and care lies dead and cold.

ACTVS 1. SCENA 4.
Enter (...), Gloucester, Mauron with colors and soldiers. Octa. Here ends the
life and death of bloody war,
Whose graue-like Paunch did never cry, Enough:
And welcome, Peace, that long has lined exilde,
Immurde within the Iuory walls of bliss.
Ambition now has thrown her snaky skin,
From off her venomde back. Oh may she die,
Congealed, and never move again to multiply.

Enter Caradoc, Morgan and Constantine. Morgan. God please her. Be Cad, Kings,
all the Sybilles in the whole orld speak not more tales and prophesies, then
our Cousin Morgan: Look you now Kings, our cousin Caradoc, and our cousin
Constantine, break our fasts with mince-pyes and Gallymawfryes of legs and
arms. Is your Grace a hungry? If you be, I have prought you a Calves head in
wool, be Cad; it is in my Knappesacke.


Octa. Thanks, gentle Earl.


Mor. Thanks for a Pigge in a poake, it is pleeding new; and I pray you thank
our cousin Caradoc for it: for as Cad shudge me, he was the Caterer: be Cad,
he did kill her with one blow in the crag, as you use to kill Conies.


Octa. Why, Cousin Morgan, I use not to kill Conyes.


Mor. Do you not? Hark you me: you were a gteat deal petter to kill all the
Conyes in Wales, then they to kill her. Be Cad, I have known tall men as
Hercules, been wounded to death, and kick up her heels in an Hospital, by
the biting of a tame Conyes in the City: therefore your wild Conyes in the
Suburbs, that eat of nothing but Mandrakes and Turne-her-vps, mark you me now,
by Sheshu, are worse then Dog days.


Octa. Well, Cousin, you are merry.
But now, brave plants of that unhappy tree,
Whom chance of war has leueld with the earth,
And in our cause: We cannot but lament
The sudden downfall of that aged Earl.
But since the will of heaven is not confinde
Unto the will of man: his soul's at rest.
Our bounties and our love to you alive,
Shall well confirm the love we owe him dead.
And first, because your worthy selves shall see,
Our Royal thoughts adore no peasants god,
Or dunghill baseness: but in that sphere we move,
Where honor sits coequall with high Jove.
To thee brave Knight, heavens chiefest instrument
Of our newborn tranquillity and peace,
We give for thy reward, this golden Fleece,
Our Royal daughter, beauteous Guiniuer,
And after our decease, our Kingly right.
Speak, valiant Knight, will thou accept of this?

Cara. Accept of it, great King!
The Thracian Orpheus never entertayn'd
More Joy in sight of his Euridice,
When with his silver tunes he did inchaunt
The triple-headed dog, and reassumde,
His souls beatitude, from Plutoes Court,
Then your devoted servant in this gift,
Wherein such unrespected joy concurs,
That every sense daunces within his blessed circumference,
And calls my bliss, A Newyeeres gift from Jove;
And not from that which reason or discourse
Proudly from beasts does challenge, as from man.
In brief, my Lord,
Look how proud Nature in her store,
Because she has one Phoenix and no more,
Whose individual substance being but one,
Makes Nature boast of her perfection:
So is it with me, great King; more blessed in this,
Then man turned constellation, starr'd in bliss.
Her gracious answer, and I am content.

Mor. Her consent, Cousin Caradoc, I warrant her there is never a Lady in
England, but consent to give prike and praise to a good thing; go you
together: I warrant her.


Octa. How now, my Lord, do you play the Priest?


Mor. Priests! Cads blue-hood, I should be mad fellow to make Priests: for
mark you now, my Lord: the Priests say, Let no man put her asunder: that's very
good. But believe me, and her will, it is a great deal petter to put her
between; because the one is a curse, and the fruits of the womb is a great
plessing.


Octa. Now Princely son, reach me each others hand.
Here in the sight of heaven, of God and men,
I join your Nuptial hands. Oh, may this hour
Be guided by a fair and kind aspect.
Let no maleuolent Planet this day dart
Her hateful influence, against these hallowed rites.
You heavenly Pilots of the life of man,
Oh, be propitious to this sacred cause,
That God and men may seal it with applause.
So now to Ceremonies. Music, sound shrill thy note:
It Is Hymen's holyday; Let Bacchus flote. Exeunt.

Manet solus Codigune. Codig. Go you unto the Church, and with your holy fires
Perfume the Altars of your country gods,
Whilst I in curses, swifter in pursuit,
Then winged lightning, execrate your souls,
And all your Hymeneall iollity,
Now swells the womb of my invention,
With some prodigious project, and my brain
Italianates my barren faculties
To Machiuilian blackness. Welshman, stand fast;
Or by these holy raptures that inspire
The soul of Politicians with revenge,
Black proiects, deep conceits, quaynt villainies,
By her that excommunicates my right
Of my creation, with a bastards name,
And makes me stand nonsuted to a crown;
I Will fall my self, or pluck this Welshman down.
Cornwall, he killed thy brother. There Is the base,
Whereon my envy shall erect the frame
Of his confusion. Gloucester, I know,
Is Natures masterpiece of envious plots,
The Cabinet of all adulterate ill
Envy can hatch; with these I will begin,
To make black envy Primate of each sin.
Now, in the heat of all their reuelling,
Hypocrisy, Times best complexion,
Smooth all my rugged thoughts, let them appear
As brothell sins benighted, darkely clear.
Lend me thy face, good Ianus, let me look
Just on Times fashion, with a double face,
And clad my purpose in a Foxes case. Exit.

ACTVS 2.
SCENA 1.
Sound Music. Enter Octauian, Caradoc, Guiniuer, Gloucester, Cornwall and
Codigune unto the Banquet. Octa. Sit, Princes, and let each man, as befits
This solemn Festival, tune his sullen senses,
To merry Carols, and delightsome thoughts,
Comicke inventions, and such pleasant strains
As may decypher time to be well pleased.
All things distinguished are into their times
And Iouiall hours, unfit for grave designs.
A health unto the Bride and Bridegroom. Lords,
Let it go round. They drink round.

Octa. How fares our princely Daughter?
Me thinks, your looks are too composde for such a holiday.

Gui. Oh my good Lord, to put your Highness out of your suspect,
Which your weak argument draws from my looks:
It Is true, that heathen Sages have affirmed,
That Natures Tablet fixed within our look,
Gives scope to read our hearts, as in a book.
Yet this affirmative not always holds;
For sometimes as the urine, that foretells
The constitution of each temperature,
It falsely wrongs the judgment, makes our wit
Turn Mountybanke in falsely judging it:
And like the outward parts of some fair whore,
Deceiues, even in the object we adore:
My Lord, my soul's so rapte
In contemplation of my happy choice,
That inward silence makes it more complete,
By how much more it is remote
From custom of a superficial joy,
That's merely incorporeall, a mere dream,
To that essential joy my thoughts conceive.

Octa. How learnedly has thy perswasiue tongue
Discovered a new passage unto joy,
In mental reservation? True joy is strung
Best with the heart strings, sounds only in the tongue.
But where is Sir Morgan, Earl of Anglesey?
He promised us some pleasant masking sight,
To crown these Nuptials with their due delight.

Enter Morgans foolish son, Morion. Morion. Oh my Lord, my father is coming
to your Grace, with such a many of Damsons and she Shittlecockes: They smell
of nothing in the world but Rozin and Cobblers wax; such a many lights in their
heels, and lungs in their hands, above all cry, in faith.


Enter the Mask of the Fayry Qu^ene with four Harpers; before they dance,
one of them sings a Welsh song: they dance, and then the fool, Earl
Morgans son, falls in love with the Fayry Queen. Morion. By my troth, my
stomach rumbleth at the very conceit of this Iamall love, even from the sole
of my head, to the crown of the foot. Surely, I will have more acquaintance
of that Gentlewoman; me thinks she daunceth like a Hobbyhorse.


After the dance, a Trumpet within. Octa. Thanks, Cousin Morgan.
But soft, what Trumpets this?

Constan. A messenger, my Lord, from King Gederus, King of Brytayne, desires
access unto your Majesty.


Octa. Admit him to our presence.


Enter Ambassador. Ambass. Health to this princely presence, and specially to
great Octauian; for unto him I must direct my speech.


Octa. To us? then freely speak the tenor of thy speech,
And we as freely will reply to it.
Thy Master is a Prince, whom we affect,
For honorable causes known to us:
Then speak, as if the power we have to grant,
Were tied to his desire.

Amb. Then know, great King, that now Gederus stands,
As in a Labyrinth of hope and fear,
Uncertain either of his life and Crown.
The Roman* Claudius Caesar, with an host
Of matchless numbers, bold and resolute,
Are marching toward Brittayn, armd with rage,
For the denying Tribute unto Rome,
By force and bloody war to conquer it,
And either win Brittayne with the sword,
Or make her stoop under the Roman yoke.
Now, mighty King, since Brittayne, through the world,
Is counted famous for a generous I Will,
Scorning to yield to foreign servitude,
Gederus humbly does desire your aid,
To back him against the pride of Roman Caesar,
And force his Forces from the British shores:
Which being done with speed, he vows to tie
Himself to Wales, in bonds of amity.

Oct. Legate, this news has pleased Octauian well.
The Bryttaynes are a Nation free and bold,
And scorn the bonds of any forrayne foe;
A Nation, that by force was never subdude,
But by base Treasons politikely forced.
Claudius forgets, that when the Bryttish I Will
Scarce knew the meaning of a strangers march,
Great Julius Caesar, fortunate in arms,
Suffered three baserepulses from the Cliffes
Of chalky Dover:
And had not Bryttayne to her self proved false,
Caesar and all his Army had been toombde
In the vast bosom of the angry sea.
Son Caradoc, how think you of this worthy enterprise?
Yet it is unfit, that on this sudden warning,
You leave your fair wife, to the Theoricke
Of matrimonial pleasure and delight.

Cara. Oh my good Lord, this honorable cause
Is able to inflame the coward breast
Of base Thersites, to transform a man,
That's Planet-strooke with Saturn, into Mars;
To turn the Caucasus of peasant thoughts,
Into the burning Aetna of revenge,
And manly Execution of the foe.
What man is he, if Reason speak him man,
Or honor spurs on, that immortal fame
May canonize his Acts to after times,
And Kingly Homers in their Swanlike tunes
Of sphearelike Music, of sweet Poesy,
May tell their memorable acts in verse;
But at the name of Romans, is all war,
All courage, all compact of manly vigor
Totally magnanimious, fit to cope
Even with a band of Centaures, or a host
Of Cretan Minotaures? Then let not me be bard:
The way to honor's craggy, rough, and hard.

Octa. Go on, and prosper, brave resolved Prince.

Car. Fair Princess, be not you dismayed at this;
It Is honor bids me leave you for a while.
'Twill not long be absent. All the world,
Except this honorable accident,
Could not entreat, what now I must perform,
Being ingadgde by honor. Let it suffice,
That joy that lives with thee, without thee dies.

Guin. Sweet Lord, each hour whilst you return, I Will pray,
Honor may crown you with a glorious day.

Cara. Then here I Will take my leave; He kisses his hand.
First, as my duty binds, of you great King.
Next, of you, fair Princess. He kisses her.
Come brothers, and Lord Morgan, I must entreat
Your company along.

Mor. Fare you well, great King: our Cousin ap Caradoc and I, will make Cesars,
with all her Romans, run to the Teuils arse a peake, I warrant her. Exeunt.

I pray you look unto her son there: be Cad, he has no more wit in his
pa^es, then the arrantest Cander at Coose fair. Exit.


Octa. Come, daughter, now let us in.
He that loves honor, must his honor win. Exeunt.

ACTVS 2. SCENA 2.
Enter the Bardh, or Welsh Poet. Bard. Thus have you seen, the vali^nt Caradoc,
Mounting the Chariot of eternal fame,
Whom, mighty Fortune, Regent of this Globe,
Which Nauigators call terrestrial,
Attends upon: and like a careful Nurse,
That sings sweet Lullabies unto her babe,
Crowns her beloved Minion with content,
And sets him on the highest Spire of Fame.
Now to Gederus, King of warlike Brittayne,
Oppressed with Roman Legions is he gone,
Spurred oh with matchless resolution,
And in the battle, as your selves shall see,
Fights like a Nemean Lion,
Or like, those Giants, that to cope with Jove,
Hurled Osla upon Peleon, heaped hill on hill,
Mountain on mountain, in their boundles rage.
But in the mean time dreadlesse of treacherous plots,
The Bastard plays his Rex, whose ancient sore
Begins to fester, and now breaks the head
Of that Impostume malice had begot.
Now Cornwall, Gloucester, twins of some Incubus,
And son and heir to hells Imperial Crown,
The Bastard Codigune, conspire the death
Of old Octauian. Those that feign would know
The manner how, observe this silent show.

Enter a dumb show, Codigune, Gloucester, and Cornwall at the one door: After
they consult a little while, enter at the other door, Octauian, Guiniuer, and
Voada, the sister of Caradoc: they seem by way of entreaty, to inuit them:
they offer a cup of wine unto Octauian, and he is poisoned. They take Guiniuer
and Voada, and put them in prison. Codigune is crowned King of Wales. Bardh.
The treacherous Bastard, with his accomplices,
Cornwall and Gloucester, did inuit the King,
Fair Guiniuer and beauteous Voada,
The sister of renowned Caradoc,
Unto a sumptuous feast, whose costly outside
Gave no suspicion to a foul intent.
And had Cassandra (as she did at Troy
Foretell the danger of the ^re^ian horse,
That Sinon counterfeyted with his tears,)
Presaged this Treason; like to some nightly dream
Of some superfluous brain begot in wine,
It had been only fabulous, and extinct
Even with the same breath, that she brought it forth,
Like some abortiue Oracle, so beguiles
The Sirens songs, and tears of Crocodiles.
At this great banquet, great Octauian
Was poisoned, and the wife of Caradoc,
Together with his beauteous sister led
Unto a loathsome prison, and the Crown
Invested on the head of Codigune
The envious Bastard. Here leave we them a while:
And now to Bryttayne let us steare the course
Of our attention, where this worthy Sun
That shines within the firmament of Wales,
Was like himself, thrice welcomed, till the spleen
Of that malicious Gloucester did pursue
In certain letters, sent to Goderus King,
Whose sister he had married, his defame
Wales lost, in lively Scenes we will show the same.

ACTVS 2. SCENA 3.
Exit Bardh. Enter Gederus, King of Bryttaine, Prince Gald, Caradoc, Lord
Morgan, Mauron and Constantine. Good. Once more, brave Peers of Wales, welcome
to Bryttayne.
Herein Octauian shows his kingly love,
That in this rough sea of invasion,
When the high swelling tempests of these times
Oreflow our Bryttish b^^ks, and C^sar's rage,
Like to an Inundation, drownes our land,
To send so many warlike Soldiers,
Conducted by the flowers of famous Wales.
Now Caesar, when thou dare, we are prepared.
Britains would rather die, then be outdared.
But soft, what messenger is this?
Enter a Messenger with a letter. Speak Messenger, from whom, or whence thou
come.

Mess. From Wales, my Lord, sent in all post-haste,
From noble Earl of Gloucester, to your Grace,
With this letter. Gederus reads it.

Mor. From Wales! I pray you, good posts and messengers, tell us, how fares
all our friends, our Cousin ap Guiniuer, ap Caradoc, ap Voada.


Mess. I know them not. He strikes him.


Morgan, Cads blue-hood, know not our Cousin? I Will give her such a blow on the
pate, I Will make her know her cousins. Cads zwownes, he had best tell her, he
knows not her nose on her face. This fellow was porne at hogs Norton, where
pigges play on the Organ. Posts call you her? Sploud, were a simple Carpenter
to build house on such posts: not know our Cousins?


Gederus. This letter from our brother Gloucester sent,
Intreates me, not to trust the gilded outsides
Of these strangers. We know our brother well:
He is a man of honorable parts,
Judicious, upon no slight surmise,
Gives us intelligence, it shall be so.
We Will trust a friend, before an unknown foe.
Prince Caradoc, you with your forces lie upon you hill;
From whence, unless you see our Army faint,
Or discouraged by the Roman bands,
There keep your standing. A Drum affare off.
Hark, Roman Caesar comes: now Brittaynes fight,
Like Brutus sons, for freedom and for right. Alarm.

Exeunt Gederus and his company. Caradoc, Mauron, Constantine, and Morgan
(...). Cara. Disgraced by letters? shifted to a hill?
Fond King, thy words, and all the treacherous plots
Of secret mischief, sink into the gulf
Of my oblivion: memory, be dull,
And think no more on these disgraceful airs,
My fury relisht. King,
Set punies to keep hills, that scarce have read
The first material Elements of war,
That wink to see a Canoneere give fire,
And like an Aspin, shakes his coward joints,
At musket shot. Within these noble veins,
There runs a current of such high-borne blood,
Achilles well may father for his own.
These honorable sparks of man we keep,
Descended linially from Hectors race,
And must be put in action. Shall I stand,
Like gazing Figure-flingers on the stars,
Observing motion, and not move my self?
Hence with that baseness. I that am a star,
Must move, although I move irregular.
Go you unto the hill, in some disguise.
I Will purchase honor by this enterprise. Exeunt. Alarm.

ACTVS 2. SCENA 4.
Enter at the one door Gederus, and Prince Gald: at the other, Claudius, and
common Soldiers. They fight. Claudius beats them in. Then enters Caradoc, and
pursues Claudius. Presently enters Caesar and Caradoc fighting. Claud. Hold,
valiant Bryttaine, hold thy warlike hands.

Cara. Then yield thy self, proud Roman,
Or by those gods the Bryttaines do adore,
Not all thy Roman host shall save thy life.

Clau. Then soldier, (for thy valor speaks thee so,)
Know, that thou have no common prisoner,
But such a one, whose eminence and place
Commands officious duty through Rome:
Then if thy inward parts deserve no less
In honors eye, then thy mean habit shows,
Release me, that a public infamy
Fall not upon me by the scandalous host,
Whose Critic censure, to my endless shame,
Will run division on the chance of war,
And brand my fortune with black obloquy:
And by my honor, that the Romans hold
As dear as life, or any other good
The heavens can give to man, the battle done,
I Will pay my ransom in a treble some.

Ca. Know, Roman, that a Bryttayne scorns thy gold.
Let Midas brood adore that Deity,
And dedicate his soul unto this saint:
Soldiers have mines of honorable thoughts,
More wealthy then the Indian veins of gold,
Beyond the value of rich Tagus shore:
Their Eagle-feathered actions scorn to stoop
To the base lure of usurers and slaves.
Let painful Merchants, whose huge riding ships
Tear up the furrows of the Indian deep,
To shun the slavish load of poverty,
Gape after massy gold: the wealth we crave,
Are noble actions, and an honored grave.
I Will take no money, Roman:
But since thou seem no counterfeit impression,
But bear the Royal Image of a man,
Give me some private token from thy hands,
That Is generally known unto thy friends,
That if by chance I come to Rome,
I may be known to be your friend.

Claud. Here, worthy Bryttayne, take this golden Lion,
And wear it about thy neck: This when thou come,
Will quickly find me out. Soldier, adieu.
Caesar is bound both to the gods and you. Exit.

Enter Prince Gald. They sound a retreat. Gald. The Roman Eagle hangs her
haggard wings,
And all the Army's fled; all by the strength
And opposition of one common man,
In show, not far superior to a Soldier,
That Is hired with pay, or pressed unto the field:
But in his manly carryage, like the son
Of some unconquered valiant Mermedon.
Sure, it is some god-like spirit, that obscures
His splendor in these base and borrowed clouds
Of common Soldiers habit. All my thoughts
Are wrapped in admiration, and I am deep in love
With those perfections, only that my eye
Beheld in that fair object. Thus have I left the field,
To interchange a word or two with him.
And see, in happy time he walks alone.
Well met, brave soldier: may a Prince be bold
To ask thy name, thy nation and thy birth?

Cara. Fair Prince, you question that you know already.
I am not what I seem, but hither sent, He discloses himself.
On honorable terms, to aid this King;
Which he unkingly, basely did refuse,
And in reward of this his proffered good,
Ungratefully returned (what other Kings
With princely donatiues would recompense)
My service with injurious contempt:
But I, in lieu of this disgraceful wrong,
Have done him right, and through the jaws of death,
Have brought a glorious triumph to his Crown,
And hung sweet peace about his palace gates.
True honor should do that, which envy hates.

Gald. Fair Map of honor, where my reason reads
Each nauigable circle, that contains
My happy voyage to the land of fame:
Say, virtuous Prince, may Gald become so blessed
To follow thy fair hopes, and link his soul
In an united league of endless love:
Nor scorn a Princes proffer: for by heaven,
What I intrude, thy virtue has inforst,
And like the powerful Loadstone, drawn my thoughts
To limne out virtue: for exactly done,
By artificial nature, to the life,
In thy fair model shaddowed curiously,
How like Pigmalion, do my passions dote
On this fair picture! will you accept me Prince?

Cara. Most willingly, kind Prince:
And may as yet this Embrio of our loves
Grow to his manly vigor: it is love alone,
That, of divided souls, makes only one.
Who then adores not love, whose sacred power
Unites those souls, division would devour?
Come, gentle Prince, let us go see our friends
I left upon you Hill, to keep our forts,
And thence to Wales, where double joys attend
A beauteous wife, and a most constant friend. Exeunt*

ACTVS 2. SCENA 5.
Enter Morion, the foolish Knight, and his man Ratsbane. Morion. Come,
Ratsbane: Oh the intolerable pain that I suffer for the love of the Fayry
Queen! my heels are all kybde in the very heat of my affection, that runs
down into my legs: me thinks I could eat up a whole Brokers shop at a
meal, to be eased of this love.


Rats. Oh master, you would have a villainous many of pawnes in your belly.
Why, you are of so vveake a nature, you would hardly digest a Seruingmans
Livery in your belly, without a vomit.


Morion. I assure thee, thou fayest true, it is but gross meat. But Ratsbane,
thou toldst me of a rare fellovv, that can tell misfortunes, and can conjure:
prithee bring me to him. I Will give him somewhat, to help me to speak with the
Fayry Queen.

Whose face like to a Butchers doublet looks,
Varnisht with tallow of some beauteous Ox;
Or like the aprons of some Pie-corner Cooks,
Whose breath smells sweeter then a hunted Fox:
Whose eyes, like two great foot-balls made of lether,
Were made to heat the gods in frosty weather.

Ratsb. Oh, happy that man, that has a bedfellow of these amiable parts. Oh
master, if her visible parts be such, her invisible parts are able tomake an
Italian run mad: he loves an armful. But master, see, here is the man I told you
of.


Enter the Iuggler and his man. Iuggler. You know my mind, sir, be gone.
I have observed this Idiot, and intend,
To gull the Coxecombe: therefore I did translate
My self this day into this cunning shape.
I often have heard the fool strongly persuade
Himself, to be the Fayry Queens chief Love,
And that by her he shall subdue the Turk,
And pluck great Otoman from off his throne.
This I will work on.

Morion. Sir, and't shall please you, I come to know some of that excellent
skill, the world has blisterde mine ears with.


Iug. Sir Thomas Morion, for so are you called,
Darling unto the beauteous Fayry Queen;
Your fortunes shall be such, as all the world
Shall wonder at Pheanders noble name:
For otherwise, so are you also named.
I know to what intent you hither come:
You come to see your Love, the Fayry Queen.
And talk with her here in this silent place,
Her nimble Fayries, and her self do use
Often to repair: and long it will not be,
Ere she com hither: but thus much you must know
You must not talk to her, as to a Queen
Of earthly substance: for she is a pure
And simple spirit, without Elements:
Wherefore, without any mortal thing
That may annoy her most immortal sense,
You must go, humbly creeping on your hands,
Without your Doublet, Rapier, Cloak or Hose,
Or any thing that may offend her nose.
And see, see, yonder she comes; if you will speak with her,
You must do as I tell you.

Enter the Fayry Queen. Morion. Oh help me quickly;
Come, Ratsbane, uncase, my love is come.
He strips himself, and creepes upon his hands, with his man. Great Queen,
thou sovereign of Pheanders heart,
Vouchsafe a word unto thy Maiden Knight,
That bows his guts unto thy mighty face.

Fayry Q. Follow me this way.

She falls down. under the Stage, and he follows her, and falls into the
ditch. Morion. Help, Ratsbane, help, help.

Rats. Help? why, where are you? I thought you had been in the hole by this
time; Come, give me your hand. You follow the Fayry Queen?


Mor. Come, come, say nothing: we will go home like fools as we came.

Come, my clothes, my clothes.


Rats. Cods lid, clothes! Now we may go home worse fools then we came. Sfoot,
this cunning Rascal means to set us a hay making. Sfoote, we are fit for
the Doggehouse, we are flayde already.


Mor. Well, we may go home with the naked truth. Its no matter, A man's a man,
though he have but a hose on his head.


ACTVS 3.
SCENA 1.
Enter Codigune, Gloucester, and Cornwall with Soldiers up in Arms. Codig. Now
friends and fellow Soldiers in just Arms,
Prepare your selves against the haughty foe,
Who, as we hear, marches not far from hence.
What we have done, by force we will make it good,
Or seal our bold attempts, with death and blood.

Glost. King, keep your own; maugre all opposition,
If he come hither to demand your right,
And with his rebel troops disturb the peace
Of what both gods and men have made your own,
Maintain the quarrel with your awful power,
Be it right or wrong; behave your self like Jove,
And strike with thunder his base insolence:
Discourse not what is done, nor how, nor when.
Only Kings wills are Laws for other men.

Enter a Messenger. Codig. What tidings brings this sweating Messenger?

Messen. My Lord, Prince Caradoc, returned from Britain,
Is with his Army marching hitherwards.

Cod. He comes unto his death. Now, Codigune,
Banish al timorous thoughts: think what thou art;
A King. That word is able to infuse
Boldness, as infinite, as that we call
The worlds first mouer. Why, the name of King
Were able to create a man of stone,
With more then animal courage, to inspire
Dullness, with nerued resolution.
Then, Codigune, like Atlas, on thy back,
Support thy Kingdoms Arch, until it crack.
March forward. Exeunt.

ACTVS 3. SCENA 2.
Enter Caradoc, Gald, Mauron, Constantine, Lord Morgan, Earl of Anglesey, with
colors and Soldiers. Cara. I was not wont, dear friends, to be so dull.
I am all lead, as if my subtle soul
Had left his lodging in this house of clay.
Each empty corner of my faculties,
And understanding powers, swell with dreams
And dire presages of some future ill:
Ghastly and fearful specters haunt my sleep.
And, if there be, as Heathen men affirm,
Some godlike sparks in man's divining soul,
Then my propheticke spirit tells me true,
That some sad news attends my steps in Wales.
I long to hear what mischief, or what good,
Has happened, since I parted from the King.

Enter Morion. Morion. Oh father, father, ffoot, I sweat, as if I had been
buried in a Tun of hot graynes.


Morg. Come you Coxecombe, leave your proclamations and your preambles, and
tell her the naked truth.


Morion. My Father knows all.

Indeed, father, the naked truth is, that the Fayry Queen robbed me of all my
clothes: you might have seen me as poor as an Open-arse. But I can tell you
news; the King is poisoned; Lord Codigune crowned; The Lady Guiniuer, and the
young Gentlewoman imprisoned.


Morgan. But hark you me, son Morion; is all this true, or invented of her
own foolish pates and imaginashions?


Morion. Why, I pray you, father, when did you hear a Gentleman of Wales tell
lies?


Morgan. Her tell her true in that; it is the prauest Nation under the Suns for
that Hark you me, sons; be Cad, it is a great teale petter to be a thief,
then a liar, I warrant her.


Gald. What, Royal Prince, can chance predominate
Over a mind, that, like the soul, retaynes
A harmony of such concordant tunes?
No sudden accident should make to jar.
This tenement of clay, in which our soul
Dwells in, until the Lease of life indures,
Of learned men was well called, Microcosme,
Or, little world: over whose mortal parts
The stars do govern, whose immortal power
Sometimes begets a fatal birth of woe;
Sometimes again inuerts their sullen course
To unexpected Revels, turns our Critticke hours
To Cricket merriment; yet is there means that bars
Their hateful influence. Wisdom rules the stars.
You have lost a Father: Use the Athenians breath,
Grave Solons; No man's happy until death.

Cara. Oh, loving Prince, thus the Physician speaks
To the disordered Patient: thus healthful Art
Conferres with wounded Nature. It Is a common trick,
Men being sound, give Physic to the sick.
Fair Prince, misconster not my discontent;
I grieve not, that Octauian is deprived
Of life; but that he has exchanged
His life, for such a miserable death.
What villain, but a prodigy of nature,
Engendered by some Comet, would have forced
His aged soul to wander in the air?
Bearing a packet of such ponderous sins,
Would crack the Axel-tree of heaven to bear.
And not have given him liberty to pray?
But I am armde with patience. First with words
We Will seek to conquer; and if not, by swords.
March round; I hear their Drums.

ACTVS 3. SCENA 3.
Enter Codigune, Gloucester, Cornwall, with colors and soldiers. Codig. Now,
Caradoc, what is it thou can demand?

Morg. Cousin Caradoc, I pray you hold her peace a little.

Codig. I Will hear no mad men speak.

Morg. Cads blu-hood, take her for Bedlems, and mad men's?

He offers to strike him. Cara. Be patient, Cousin. Codigune, in brief,
I come to claim my right, that thou vsurpest,
And by sinister means, black as thy sins,
Have basely stolen: surrender first my wife,
My sister, and the Kingdom of Southwales;
Or by the gods, to whom I stand obliged,
In sacred bonds of Orizons and thanks,
For life and motion: if thou refuse to do it,
Or move that blood boyles within my veins,
At the memorial of thy hellish sin,
I Will tear the Crown from off thy cursed head,
And either die my self, or strike thee dead.

Cod. Caradoc, thou claymest South Wales of us.
Nor that, nor wife, nor sister shall thou have;
But if thou long'st for any, ask a grave.
The high-swolne pride of Majesty and love,
Brooks no competitors; its thus decreede,
Who shares with them, must for the booty bleed.
Each Planet keeps his Orb, which being resigned,
Perhaps, by greater lights would be outshinde.

Car. Sweet Patience, yet instruct my tongue awhile
To speak the language of a temperate soul.
Codigune, mark what I Will offer thee:
Since that the wrongs, which basely thou have bred
Cannot be reconciled, but by the death
Of millions, that must suffer for us two;
And we the authors of what wars and blood
Shall in her frantike outrage lavish out:
(For it is a thing that honour'scornes to do,
That multitudes should perish for us two:)
Thou art a man, if actions like thy words,
Be but proportionable, that disdaynest
To fight with crauen baseness all on ods:
Nor do I think thy honor so profuse,
That guiltless men should bleed for thy abuse:
Then, if thou dare: And once more to augment
Thy Bastard courage, again, I dare thee fight,
Even in a single Monomachy, hand to hand:
And, if by chance (as man is naught but chance)
Thou conquerest me, I will become thy slave,
Confirm my right to thee, and to thy heirs;
And if I overcome, do thou the like.
How say thou? vvilt thou accept this offer?

Cod. It pleases me, and here in sight of heavens,
By all my hopes of immortality,
I will perform what thou have bravely spoke.
I love thee for these honorable terms,
And will as fearelesse entertain this fight,
As a good conscience does the cracks of Jove.

Cara. Then as we are, Soldiers, begirt us round,
And let no man disturb the Combatants,
Till one, or both, fall to our mother earth.
For thus be well assurde, the cause being right,
Immortal spirits do for justice fight. Alarm.

They fight at Poleaxe, Codigune is conquered. Glost. Now, Gloucester, fly and
hide thy head with shame.

Morg. Cads blue-hood, peat out her praynes, for calling her Bedlems.

Cara. Rise. I Will spare thy life.
Revenge sufficient for thy damned facts;
For to a seared conscience these do well,
Long life, men's hate, and a perpetual hell.
Yet, that thou may live, to atone thy soul
Unto the angry heavens, I freely give
The Kingdom of North Wales for term of life,
To thy dispose; only reserving tribute to my self,
In just acknowledgement of me and mine.

Cod. Know, Caradoc, since by the chance of war,
I must be forced to render up that right,
That like a slave I might have kept by might,
I scorn thy gifts, and rather choose to live
In the vast wilderness with fatal Owls,
Free from the malice of base buzzard Chance,
And there in hushed up silence rauing go;
Then earth, except be hell, no place so low.
Then with high alms, Aside.
I Will to the Romans, and there plot, pell mell.
Vessels that once are seasoned, keep their smell.
Welshmen, farewell; and Caradoc adieu;
Under the heavens, we have no foe but you. Exit.

Cornwall. Now Royal Prince, since happy victory
Has set a period to a bloody fight,
Cornwall, in humble manner, here presents
Himself and service to your Princely Grace.

Cara. Cornwall, although thy actions not deserve
The least respect of us, in taking part
With the aspiring Bastard, and the rest
Of his adherents; yet we do omit
All former injuries, and reunite
Cornwall unto our love.

Corn. Then Princes, join with Cornwall, and inthrone
True honor and deserts; with what is her own.
Ascend your Chair, fair Prince.

The Trumpets flourish, omnes. They crown him. Omnes. Long live Caradoc, King
of Wales.

Cara. We thank you Princes. This being done, we will see
Our beauteous Queen and sister both set free.
Enter Gloucester solus. Now, Gloucester, in this still and silent wood,
Whose unfrequented paths do lead thy steps
Unto the dismal cave of hellish fiends;
With whom, a Witch, as ugly to confront,
As are the fearful Furies she commands,
Lives in this solitary uncouth place;
Begin thy damned plots, banish that threadbare thought
Of Virtue,
Which makes us men so senseless of our wrong,
It makes us bear the poison of each tongue.
No, Gloucester, no; he, whose meek bloud's so cool
To bear all wrongs, is a religious fool:
Or he that cannot finely knit revenge,
Like to Aracne, in a curious web,
May wounds still fit a Nightcap for his head.
Since I am forced to fly with foul disgrace,
And since of gods or men no hope I find,
I Will use both hell and Fiends to ease my mind.
Here dwells a famous Witch, who, with her son,
As black in art, as art it self is black,
Both memorable for their Magic skill,
That can command stern vengeance from beneath
The center of the earth, for to appear
As quick as thought. To her I Will tell the tale
Of my revenge, and with the golden Chimes
Of large rewards, inchaunt her hellish ears.
And see: their monstrous shapes themselves appears.

ACTVS 3. SCENA 4.
Enter the Witch and her son from the Cave. Gloucester. Thou famous Mistress of
the unknown depths
Of hels infernal secrets, oh what revvard
Shall a dejected, miserable man,
Chased from the confines of his native land,
By vvrong oppression, and insulting pride,
Disgrace, contempt, and endless infamy,
Give, for redress from thy commanding art?

Witch. Gloucester, I know thee well, although disguisd:
Thou come to crave our help, for thy revenge
Against Caradoc, who now has vanquished
The Bastard Codigune in single fight.
Know Gloucester, that our skill
Commands the Moon drop from her silver sphere,
And all the stars to veil their golden heads,
At the black horror that our Charms present.
Atlas throws down the twinkling Arch of heaven,
And leaves his burden at our dreadful spells.
This pendant element of solid earth,
Shakes with amazing Earthquakes, as if the frame
Of this vast continent would leave her poles.
Neptune swells high, and with impetuous rage
Dashes the haughty Argosey with winds,
Against the Crystal battlements of heaven.
The troubled air appears in flakes of fire,
That, till about the airs circumference,
We make the upper Region
Thick, full of fatal Comets, and the sky
Is filde with fiery signs of armed men.
Hell roares, when we are angry, and the Fiends,
As schole-boyes, tremble at our Charming rod.
Thus, when we are displeased, or malcontent,
Both hell obeyes, and every Element.

Gloucester. Thou matchles wonder, work but my revenge,
And by the triple Hecate, and the powers
Your Charms adore, I Will load you with a weight
Of gold and treasure, till you cry, No more.
Invent, great soul of art, some stratagem,
Whose fame may draw him to these dismal woods.
No danger can out-dare his thirsty soul
In honorable enterprises: he is a man,
Should hell oppose him, of such dauntlesse metal,
That were but fame the end of his atchieuement,
He would as boldly cope with it, as with things
Of common danger.

Witch. Then Gloucester, hark: Here in this dismal Grove,
By art I will create a furious beast,
Moved by a subtle spirit, full of force
And hellish fury, whose devouring jaws
Shall havoc all the borderers of Wales,
And in short space unpeople all his Towns.
Now, if he be a man that seeks for fame,
And grounds his fortunes on the popular love,
Or Kinglike do prefer a common good,
Before a private loss; this famous task,
Whose fearful rumor shall amaze the world,
Will egg him on: where being once but come,
He surely meets with his destruction.
Son, to this purpose, straitway to thy book,
Enter the Cave, and call a powerful spirit by thy skill,
Command him instantly for to appear,
And with thy Charms, bind him unto the shape
Of a devouring Serpent, whilst without
We do awayte his coming. Exit Magician.
Thunders and Lightning. Now whirle the angry heavens about the Pole,
And in their fuming choler dart forth fires,
Like burning Aetna, being thus enraged
At this imperious Necromantike art.
Dis trembles at our Magical command,
And all the flaming vawtes of hells Abisse,
Throw forth sulphurous flakes of scorching fire.
The iangling hell hounds, with their hellish guizes,
Dance damned rounds, in their infernal rage.
And to conclude, earth, water, air, and fire,
And hell grow sick, to see man's art aspire.
A general envy makes them male content,
To see deep art command each element.
See, Gloucester, see, thinks he, this monstrous shape
Enter the Serpent. Will not abate the courage of his foe,
And quell the haughty pride of Caradoc?

Gloucester. Yes, mighty Artist, were he thrice inspirde
With more then humane courage, he may as soon
Conquer those matchless Giants, that were set
To keep the Orchard of Hesperides,
Or match the labors of great Hercules.

Enter the Serpent. It thunders. Witch. Go shrowde thy horrid shape within
this wood,
And seize on all thou meetst. Come, Gloucester, in,
And here awhile abide within this Cave.
Thy eyes shall see what thy vexed soul did crave. Exeunt.

ACTVS 3. SCENA 5.
Enter Ostorius Scapula, Marcus Gallicus, Manlius Valens, Cessius Nasica, and
Codigune in Arms. Ostorius. Now, valiant Romans, once more do we tread
Upon the bosom of the Bryttish ground:
And by the gods that do protect great Rome,
We Will now acquit great Cesars foul disgrace,
Or die like Romans in this forray ne place.

Marcus. Me thinks, it is a shame to Rome and us,
That have been counted famous through the world,
For matchless victories, and feats of arms,
That such a petty Island should repulse
So huge an army of the Roman strength,
Able to sack the spacious walls of Troy,
To level Babels pride even with the ground:
An I Will, that in respect of Cesars power,
Is like the Center, to the ample heavens;
A point, unto a large circumference;
Small atoms, to the body of the Sun.
Sure, this Welshman works by Magic spells,
Or, it is impossible, if he be a man,
Composed of flesh and blood, sinews and nerves,
He should out-dare so puissant an host.

Codig. Great General, that which he holds, is mine;
And though infor'st by violence and wrong,
From that which Nature left my heritage:
Yet, since I see such hopes, so fayrely sprung
From such an honorable head, as Rome,
Whose fame for honor, cheualry and arms,
Out-shines all Nations with her glorious rays:
This Caradoc, whom men do causlesse fear,
Is of condition insolent and proud,
Ambitious, tyrannous, speckled with every vice
The infectious time can harbor. Say, we confess him bold,
And of a courage that grim visag'd death,
The object of true valor, cannot daunt;
Though Proteus-like, he came in thousand shapes,
What Is he, comparde to numbers infinite?
Or that Imperial Rome, whose Eagle eyes
Have gazed against the sun of matchless tryumphs,
Should basely fear a weak and silly Fly?
This Welshman is all superficial,
Without dimensions, and like a mountain swells,
In labor only with great ayry words,
Whose birth is nothing, but a silly Mouse;
Actions without their measure or their weight.
Then, Romans, derogate not from the worth,
That time in ancient Chronicles records
Of your eternal honors got in war.
But if you prize your honors more than life,
Or humane happiness, here is a noble cause
Of wrong and usurpation, to erect
A statue to your dying memory.
Then on, great General, wave the Roman Eagle,
Even to the Tents of haughty Caradoc,
And with my blood I Will second this brave fight,
Or hide my shame by death in endless night.

Ostor. Bravely resolved* Ere long, assure thy self,
We Will seat thee in thy ancient dignity,
And force to Caesar homage, and to Rome:
And, though we fear not one particular man,
Yet, for because we truly are informed,
That Caradoc is strong and puisant,
For ten days we intend to make a truce,
And in the mean time to make strong our host:
Which if he do refuse, the time expired,
To render up thy right, which he detaines;
War, like some gnawing vulture shall attend
Unto their final ruin, and their end.
And to that purpose, Marcus Gallicus
Shall as a Legate both from Rome and us,
Instantly give them knowledge: the time's but short:
And till the date's expirde, prepare for sport. Exeunt.

ACTVS 4.
SCENA 1.
Enter Caradoc, Guiniuer. Voada, his sister, Mauron, Constantine, Gald, Lord
Morgan. Cara. Now, beauteous Queen and sister, though our tedious absence
In warlike Bryttaine, has been the cause
Of your imprisonment, yet, at our return,
The gods in justice have repayde the wrong,
Done to your beauties by base treachery,
And forced that damned instrument of sin,
To hide his bastard head in endless shame.
Then, Royal Queen, (for that is a style befits
The royal virtues of such peerless luster)
Ascend your Throne, vvhilest equally with me,
You part, with full applause, your soueraignety.

A flourish. She is crowned. Omnes. Long live Queen Guiniuer, Queen of
Cambria.

Guin. Thanks, Royal Lord. Oh, may these smiling stars,
That kindly have conioynd each others love,
And of two bodies lovingly made one,
Crown all thy actions with a gracious look,
And make thee fortunate in peace and war.
Not all the treacherous complots of that Fiend,
Restraint of free air, close imprisonment,
Could with their strange appearances imprint
Such feeling Characters of sudden woe.
As your great conquest does create new joy,
And exultation of your dangers past.

Cara. Thanks, gentle Love. Now sister Voada,
The duty and the care that ever since
My reason could distinguish, and that fraternall love
Nature imposed, that many Moons and years
Have been imployde unto the good I owe
Thy riper years, shall in this minutes space
Be full discharged: Therefore, thrice noble friend,
I give unto thy hand an Orient Pearl
Of more esteem, then that, which at a health
Great Cleopatra did carouse in wine,
To Roman Anthony. Love her well, sweet Prince;
Let it suffice; part of our Royal blood
Runs through the channels of her Azure veins,
And that she is our sister.

Gald. Right noble Prince, when Gald in lieu of this
So Kingly and so rare a benefit,
(In whom the mirror of bright Excellence
So clear, and so transparantly appears)
Forgets to honor thee or her in love,
May he live branded with some heavy curse,
Worse then oppression of the widows right:
Or when I shall forget to offer up
A sacrifice of my immaculate love,
Unto thy beauteous altar, let me have
A base deformed object to my grave.

Voada. And Princely Lord, may no delightsome gale
Of sweet content blow on this mortal state
Of what I now possess, if from my heart
The deep impression of my love depart.

A Trumpet within. Cara. Cousin Morgan, look what Trumpet's this.


Morgan. I warrant her, it is for more knocks on the pate. Romans call you her?
Be Cad, scuruy Romans, that cannot let her alone, in her own Countries. I Will
choke some of her with cause bobby, or drown her in hogsheads of Perry and
Metheglin.

He goes to the door. Enter Marcus Galicus. I pray you, from whence come her?


Marcus. From Rome.


Morgan. From Rome! And I pray you, what a pox ails her, that you cannot
keep her at home? have you any Waspes in her tails? or live Eeles in her
pelly, you cannot keep her at home? Hark you me: I pray you, how toth M.
Caesar? toth he need era parbour? Look you now: let him come to Wales, and her
Cousin Caradoc shall trim his crowns, I warrant her.


Marc. I understand you not.


Morg. Cads nails? Cood people, does Morgan speak Hebrews or no? Understand
her not?


Cara. Now, Roman, for thy habit speaks thee so:
Is it to us thy message is directed?

Marc. Yes, Prince. And thus the Roman General says,
If within ten days space thou will resign
Thy Kingdom to the heir, Lord Codigune,
From whom thou do detayne it wrongfully,
Thou shall have peace; but if thou do deny,
Stern war by force, shall force it presently.

Morg. Hark you now, Cousin, Cads blue-hood, if you had beat out her praynes,
you had peene quiet. Shesu, more troubles and fexashions! what a orld is this?


Cara. Dares that damned Traitor open his hellish throat
Against our right? Or is it your Roman guize,
To back black Treasons and conspiracies?
Ambassador, return unto thy Lord:
Within these ten days he shall hear from us. Aside.
But by the gods that do uphold the frame
And fabric of the world, lest it should fall
Upon the head of that damned murderer,
It shall be to his cost. Come, let us a way.

Enter a shepherd running hastily. Shep. O mighty King, pity thy peoples
wrongs,
And cease the clamors of both young and old,
Whose eyes do penetrate the gates of heaven,
To look upon the tragical mishaps,
And bloody spoil of every passenger.
Our sheep devoured, our shepherds daily slain,
All by a furious Serpent, not far hence,
Whom less, great King, you do prevent in time,
A timelesse massacre ouerruns your land,
And danger waits, even at your Palace gates,
And your selfe's as incident to death,
As every common Hynde it has devoured.
Therefore delay not, mighty Sovereign.

Cara. A Serpent? where? when? how came it thither?
I Will not demurre, Shepherd, lead on the way.
I Will follow thee. There Is danger in delay.
Come, Cousin Morgan, go along with us.
Princes, farewell awhile.

Morgan. Cads blue-hood, fight with Teuils. I warrant her, some Ambassadors
from Belzebubs shortly. Here Is a great teale of sturies. I pray Cad please her
from T^uils. They are a great teale worse then Marshall men, and Bum-Bayly.
From all of them, Cood Lord deliver her. I come, Cousin.


Guiniuer. Good Angels guide thy dangerous enterprise,
And bring thee back, with conquest to thy friends.
Some powerful Spirit houer over the head
Of my dear Lord, and guard him from the rage
Of that fell Monster. Come, Princes, let us away.
A woman's fears can hardly stint or stay. Exeunt.

Manet Marcus Gallicus. He looks after Voada. Marcus. I have not seen a
beauty more divine,
A gate more like to Iunoes, Queen of heaven.
I cannot tell; but if there be a Cupid,
Arrows and flames, that from the sacred fires
Of love and passion, that fond men inspires
With desperate thoughts, kindles our vain desires:
Then in this breast their local place must be.
Oh Love, how powerful is thy Deity,
That binds the understanding, blinds the eye!
Yet here is an object for the eye so rare,
Deceyt can never beguile, it is so fair.
This chase I Will keep, and either win the game,
Or lose the golden Fleece unto my shame. Exit.

ACTVS 4. SCENA 2.
Enter Shepherd, Caradoc, Morgan. Cara. Now, shepherd, are we yet within the
ken
Of this fell monster?

Sheph. Not yet, my Lord: and yet, me thinks, this place should not be far.


Cara. Then here we will stay: it may be, being hungry,
The dreadful monster now will seek his prey, Enter old man.
And range toward us. Come, let us walk about.

Old man. Stay ventrous Prince, and from an old man's hand,
Receive the means, that sacred heavens decree,
To rid thy Land from this perplexity.
No force of sword can conquer hellish fiends,
By black enchantments made to take thy life:
Thou may with greater ease cleave rocks asunder,
Or with thy hands break Adamants in twayn,
Which naught but blood of Goats can mollify,
Then pierce the skales of this infernal Monster.
About thee take this precious sovereign herb,
That Mercury to wise Ulysses gave,
To keep him from the rage of Cyrces charms.
This precious herb, maugre the force of hell,
From blackest sorcery keeps sound and well.
Farewell, great Prince. Exit.

Cara. Thanks, gentle Father. And see, the Serpent comes.
Enter the Serpent. Caradoc shows the herb. The Serpent flies into the
Temple. Caradoc runs after. It thunders. Now Caradoc, pursue this hellish Fiend.
He drags the Magicians out by the heels. Cursed Imposter, damned Inginer of
plots,
As black in cursed purposes, as night,
When by your hellish charms, she mournes in black
And sable vestments; tell me, thou son of darkness,
Where that Inuentor of mischievous ills
Gloucester remaynes.

Bluso. There in that cave: but he is fled from thence,
And being frantike with the horrid sight
Of fearful apparitions, in despair
Runs up and down these solitary Groves,
Where shortly Furies, with their devilish haunts,
Will lead him to a sad and violent death.

Cara. Were thou the author? tell upon thy life.

Bluso, No, Prince: for in this horrid Cave
There lives my aged mother, deep in skill
Of Magic Exorcismes, as the art it self
Exceeds the boundless depth of humane wit.
With her the Earl conspirde, to draw you hither
By this invention.

Cara. Rise, come forth, thou ugly Hagge, from thy dark Cell. He plucks the
Witch out by the heels.
Cousin Morgan, throw her into the flames
Of the burning Temple.

He carries her, and throws her in. Morgan. I warrant her. By shesu, it is a
hot whore.


Cara. On this condition do I give thee life,
That first, if such an hellish art as this
May serve to virtuous uses, then direct
The scope of all thy skill, to aid poor men,
Distressed by any casualty or chance,
And specially our friends.

Bluso. This Bluso vows to keep inviolable.

Cara. Come, Cousin Morgan, Kings in this are known,
That for their subjects lives, neglect their own.

ACTVS 4. SCENA 3.
Enter a company of Rustickes bearing the body of Gloucester. Cara. How now, Sirs,
what heavy spectacle affronts our eyes?


Clown. Come, my masters, every man his part, he shall be examined, ere we
part with him.


Neighb. It Is fit, neighbor, for he that has no more care of himself, what
will he have of another fellow?


Cara. Whose body is that, my friends?


Clown. It Is not a body, Sir, it is but a carkase, sir, some Gentleman it seems;
for if he had been a poor man, that labors for his living, he would have
found somewhat else to do, and not to have hangde himself.


Cara. Alack, alack, a wretched case.


Clown. Nay truly, never bestow pity on him, that could not pity himself.


Bluso. It Is Glosters body, noble Caradoc.


Cara. A Traitors body, then heavens justice shown.
That in contriuing mischief for his own.

Mor. If his head were taken from his shoulders, 'twere very well, and poale
his head on a high cragge.


Clown. You may poale his head here, if it please you, but truly it is not
worth the labor, for it is a fleece of the lovvzest hair that ever was hanged.


Morg. You are a prattling Coxcombe, I would have his head mounted on a poale,
for all false knaves to see and behold.


Clow. Why sir, you may see it now, and the rest shall see it hereafter.


Mor. The rest sir, mercy upon us, do you reckon me a false knave? by S.
Dauie, I will melt a stone of tallow from your kidneyes.


Cara. Nay, good Sir Morgan.


Morg. Pray you Cousin, let me go.


Clow. Let your Cousin, let him come, you shall have diggon of Chymr^de, I
warrant you.


Morg. Hark you, hark you Cousin, he speaks British, by shesu, I not strike
him now, if he call me three knaves more. God please us, if he do not speak
as good British, as any is in Troy-walles. Give me both your right hands, I
pray you, let us be friends for ever and ever.


Clown. Sir, you shall be friends with a man of credit then: for I have a
hundredth pound in black and white, simple as I stand here: and simple as I
stand here, I am one of the Crowners quest at this time.


Omnes. I, for, simple as we all stand here, we are no less at this time.


Clown. And it may be, as simple as we are here, if we say, he shall be buried,
he shall, and if we say not, it may not be neither.


Morg. But he is dead, whether you will or no.


Clo. Not so, for he died with my good will, for I never wept for him.


Morg. And his body shall be dust, whether you will, or no.


Clo. It may be not neither, as in our wisdoms we shall conclude, perhaps
we will burn him, then he shall be burned to ashes.


Mor. By S. Dauies, it is very true.


Cl. For anter, not so neither, we will sell him to the Apothecaries for mu^mey.
For anter not so neither, it may be we will hang him up for the Crows meats, and
then he shall be turned to that that falls upon their heads, that has no new
clothes at Whitsontide.


Morg. Hold your tongue there, I beseech you.


Clo. You must take it as it falls, and as the foolish Fates, and so the quest
decrees.


Car. Leave it to themselves, they cannot dispose too ill of the remainder of
so black a villain. Our hidious work is done. Exit Caradoc and Morgan.


Manent Rusticks. Clo. My masters, and fellow questmen, this is the point, we
are to search out the course of law, whether this man that has hangde himself,
be accessory to his own death or no.


1. Nei. It Is a hard case burlady neighbors, to judge truly.


2. Nei. Sure, I do think he is guilty.


Clo. Take heed, your conscience must be vmpler in the case. I put this point
to you, whether every one that hangs himself, be willing to die or no?


2. Neig. I, I, sure he is willing.


Cl. I say no, for the hangman hangs himself, and yet he is not willing to die.


3. Neig. How dos the hangman hang himself?


Cl. I mary dos he, sir; for if he have not a man to do his office for him, he
must hang himself: ergo, every man that hangs himself is not willing to die.


1. Neigh. He says very true indeed: but now sir, being dead, who shall
answer the King for his subject?


Clo. Mary sir, he that hanged his subject.


2. Nei. That was himself.


3. Neighb. No sir, I do think it was the halter that hangde him.


Clo. I, in a sort, but that was, se offendendo, for it may be, he meant to
have broke the halter, and the halter held him out of his own defense.


1. Neigh. But is not the Ropemaker in danger that made it?


Clo. No, for he goes backward, when it is made, and therefore cannot see
before, what will come after; neither is the halter in fault, for he might
urge the halter, nolens volens, (as the learned say) neither is he in fault,
because his time was come that he should be hanged: and therefore I do
conclude, that he was conscious and guiltless of his own death: Moreover, he
was a Lord, and a Lord in his own precinct has authority to hang and draw
himself.


2. Nei. Then neighbor, he may be buried.


Cl. Of great reason, always he that is alive must die, and he that is dead
must be buried.


2. Neigh. Yet truly in my conscience, he dos not deserve to be buried.


Cl. Oh, you speak partiously neighbor Crabtree, not deserve to be buried? I
say, he deserves to be buried alive that hangs himself.


3. Neig. But for his clothes neighbor.


Cl. His clothes are the Hangmans.


2. Neigh. Why then he must have them himself.


Cl. This is a shrewd point of law, this might he do now, because he would save
charges, and defeat the Hangman: this must be well handled, did he make a Will?


3 Neigh. No, he died detestable.


Cl. Why then, they fall to his right heir male, for a female cannot inherit
no breeches, unless she wears them in her husbands days.


1. Neigh. But where shall we find him?


Cl. It Is true, well then for want of issue, they fall to the chief mourner; I
will be he to save you all harmeles, I will take his clothes upon mine own
back, I will begin with his cloak, do you take every man his quarter, and I
will follow with dole and lamenration.


2. Neigh. Then thus the verdit is given up.


Clow. I, I.


3. Neigh. Alas Neighbor, how mournfully you speak already


Clow. It is the fashion so to do.


Clown. Bear up the body of our hanged friend,
Silk was his life, a halter was his end:
The Hangman hangs too many (graceless else)
Then why should any man, thus hang himself?
If any ask, why I in tears thus swim?
Know, I mourn for his clothes, and not for him.

Exeunt. ACTVS 4. SCENA 4.
Enter Bardh, or Chorus. Bardh. Thus have you seen a man, whose daring thoughts,
Even hell it self, the treasury of terrors,
Whose very shapes make Nature look aghast,
Cannot outface. Now once more turn your eyes,
And view the sudden mutabilities,
That wait upon the greatest favorite
That ever Fortune fauourde with her love,
Stern Caradoc, virtuously returned,
Hoping to see his beauteous Queen and friends,
His sister Voada, whom he had left
With treacherous Cornwall, who villain-like betrayed
The Town and Voada, as yet a maid,
Unto the hands of Marcus Gallicus,
Son to the Roman General, who, as we saw,
Was far inamor'd of that warlike Dame,
And to the Roman Band conducts her safe,
Whilst Gald, her husband, flies to save his life,
And in disguise, seeks the Magician forth,
Entreating him by prayers, sighs and tears,
To help him by his Art, whilst Caradocs fair Queen,
Together with her daughter, made escape,
And fled unto her Lord, who being enraged,
His manly courage doubled his resolve,
The Roman host pursuing of his Queen
And her young daughter. Who, when Caradoc espide,
Armed with a strength invincible, he fought
In single opposition against an host:
Which famous battle, because histories,
Above the rest, to his immortal fame,
Have quoted forth, willing to give it life
And everlasting motion, with the rest
Shall be in lively Scenes by him expressed. Alarm.

ACTVS 4. SCENA 5.
Enter Caradoc in haste, Guiniuer, her daughter, and Morgan. Morg. Cads
blue-hood, Cousin, take her to her heels: was never in such tanshers. Will her
not stir? why look you now, the Romans come upon her with as many men, as
Mercers keep Wenshes; or Wenshes decayed shentlemen. Hark you: I Will call her
Cousin Mauron, and our Cousin Constantine, and come to her presently.


Cara. Damned Cornwall, may thou sink to hell for this,
Wrackt by the Furies on Ixions wheel,
And whipped with steel for this accursed treason. Alarm.

Enter the Romans with their Soldiers. Ostor. Yield thee, proud Welshman, or
we will force thee yield.

Cara. Art thou a Roman, and can speak that language,
The mother tongue of fugitives and slaves?
No, Romans: spare these two; and if I fly,
The Roman host shall bear me company.

They fight, sometimes Caradoc rescueth his Wife, sometimes his daughter, and
kills many of the Romans, and at last, they beat him in, and take his Wife
and Daughter. Ostorius. Come, Lady, you must go along with us.

Guin. Even where you will, if Caradoc survive,
My dying soul and joys are yet alive. Exeunt.

Enter Caradoc disguised in a Soldiers habit. Cara. Fashion thy self, thou
great and glorious light,
To my disguise, and mask thy sub till sight,
That peepes through every cranny of the world;
Put on thy night-gowne of black foggy clouds,
And hide thy searching eye from my disgrace.
Oh Cornwall, Cornwall, this thy treacherous act,
That has eclipsed the glory of great Wales,
Shall to succeeding ages tell thy shame,
And honor sound, to hear of Cornewals name.
The gods with forked thunder strike thy wrong,
And men in shameful Ballads sing thy fact,
That basely thus have recompenst thy King.
But curses are like arrows shot upright.
That often times on our own heads do light:
And many times our selves in rage prove worst.
The Fox never better thriues, but when accursed.
This is a time for policy to move,
And lackey with discretion, and not rage.
My thoughts must now be suited to my shute;
And common patience must attend the helm,
And stere my reason to the Cape of hope.
At York the noble Prince Venusius dwells,
That bears no small affection to our self,
To him I Will write a letter, whose contents
Shall certify the affairs concern my self,
Which I my self in this disguyse will bear,
And sound the depth of his affection,
Which if but like a friend, he lend his hand,
I Will chase the Romans from this famous land. Exit.

ACTVS 4. SCENA 6.
Enter Gald in a Shepherds habit, and Bluso the Magician. Gald. Dear Bluso,
thus far have my weary steps,
Through passages, as craggy as the Alps,
Silent and unknown ways, as intricate,
As are the windings of a Laborynth,
Searched out the uncouth Cell of thy abode.
The Roman host have seizd my beauteous wife,
And with the rude and ruggy hand of force,
As Paris kept bright Hellen from the Greeks,
Denying ransom, more like Canibals
Then honorable Romans, keep her still.
And never more shall Gald enjoy the sight
Of his souls flourishing object, till thy skill,
Exceeding humane possibilities,
Work her enlargement, and my happiness.

Bluso. Fair Prince, I were ungrateful unto him,
That next to heaven, preserved, and gave me life:
And more, by solemn oath I am obliged,
In forfet of my soul, and hope of bliss,
To use the skill I have, to virtuous ends;
Amongst the which, this is the capital.
Then doubt not, Prince, but ere this night be spent,
She shall be free, and you shall rest content.

Gald. Thanks, learned Bluso, this thy courtesy
Has bound Prince Gald, in endless bonds of love,
To thee, and to thy art. Now stretch thy spells,
And make the winds obey thy fearful Charms.
Strike all the Romans with amazing terror
At our approches: let them know,
That hell's broke loose, and Furies rage below.

ACTVS 4. SCENA 7.
Enter Venusius, Duke of York, with other attendants, and his wife Cartamanda.
Venu. I long have mist those honorable wars,
Which warlike Rome against the Bryttaines hold:
But since we hear, and that by true report,
And credible intelligence from many,
Who lately have returned from the Camp,
That Wales and Rome begin fresh bleeding war,
I do intend with speed to see the Army,
And pay my love, as tribute unto Rome.
But yet I grieve, that such intestine jar
Is fallen betwixt such an heroike Prince,
As is the King of Wales, and powerful Rome.
The Romans do in multitudes exceed,
He, well instructed in true fortitude,
A Graduate in Martial discipline,
And needs no Tutour: for in pupil age
He was brought up in honors rudiments,
And learnde the elements of warlike Arts.
Then much I muse, why Caesar should begin,
That scarce has ended with the Bryttish wars;
Or who is the Author of these firebrands
Dissension thus has kindled.

Cart. It may be, noble husband, the desire
Of Principality and Kingly rule,
As yet is boundless and vncircumscribde:
But if our reasons eye could see our selves,
That Is nearest to us, and not like prospectiues,
Behold afar off, great men were themselves:
Or, if like Philip King of Macedon,
Whose boundless mind of sovereign Majesty
Was like a Globe, whose body circular
Admits no end, seeing by chance, the length
Of the impression, which his body made
Upon the sands, and only by a fall,
Wondered, that such a little space contayn'd
The body, when the mind was infinite,
And in this Moral plainly did foresee
The longitude of man's mortality.
But soft, what Souldiour's this?

Enter Caradoc disguised. Cara. And't please you, Madam, from the King of Wales,
I bring this letter to Venusius,
Your Royal husband.

Venu. Come, soldier, prithee let me see:
I long to hear from noble Caradoc. He reads it.

Carta. Say, soldier, came thou from Wales?
What news betwixt the Welshmen and the Romans?

Cara. Madam, a glorious victory to Rome,
The Town of Gloucester vildely being betrayed
By Cornewals complots and conspiracies,
Even in the dead of night: and to augment
His Treasons to the height of his desert,
Even in the absence of his Lord and King,
Whilst Caradoc, at his return, in rage,
Though single, and inuiron'd round with foes,
Fought like a Lybian Lion: But to conclude,
Not Hercules against a multitude.
And thus at ods was forced to flee the place.

Venu. Soldier, come hither, where is Caradoc?

Cara. In Wales, my Lord, and stays for your reply.

Venu. Soldier, I wish, if wishes could prevail,
Thy princely Master were with us awhile,
Till all these clouds of black contention
Were either ouerblowne, or else dissolved.
Fame has not left a man, more fit for talk
Or disputation in bright honors schools,
Then is thy noble Master. When I behold
His noble portrayture but in conceit,
Me thinks, I see the real thing it self
Of perfect Honor and Nobility,
And not fantastically apprehend
Only the ayry fictions of the brain.
I now repent, that thus long I have spent
My honor and my time, in ayding Rome,
And thus far have digrest from Natures laws,
To aid a forrayne Nation against mine own.
Were but thy Master here, he soon should see,
He has his wish, and Wales her liberty.

Caradoc puts off his disguise. Cara. Then know, kind Prince, that thus I have
presumed,
To put thy honored love unto the test,
In this disguise, and with auricular boldness
Have heard your tale of professed amity.
And noble friend, then here stands Caradoc,
Who now is come petitioner to thy aid,
Betrayde unto the Romans by a villayne.
And whilst by dint of sword I fearelesse past,
Through the Legions of the puissant host.
My Queen and daughter they have prisoners taken,
Whose memory quickens my dangers past,
And adds new fuel to my bleeding soul.
Then, if thou be not verbal, but thy tongue
Is with a single string strung to thy heart,
All Wales shall honor thee and thy desert.

Venu. Brave Prince, as welcome to Venusius,
As sleep to wearied Nature. But now the time
Fits not for frivolous complements. Awhile
Repose your self with me, where you shall be
As secret, as men would keep their sins
From the worlds eye, whilst in the mean time, I
Prepare my forces. Wife, view this noble Prince:
This is that man, that, in despite of Rome,
This nine years space has bravely waged war,
And now by Treason's forced unto his friends.
Then, wife, as thou do tender our regard,
Respect this Prince, and keep him privately,
Until I do return. Farewell, noble Prince. Exit.

Carta. Welcome, great Prince. Here think your self secure,
As in a Sanctuary, from your foes.
My husband oftentimes has worn out time,
Discoursing of your worths superlatiue:
And I am proud of such a worthy ghest.

Cara. Lady, I shall be troublesome: but ere long,
I hope once more to meet this traiterous host,
And seal my wrongs with ruin of my foes.
Fame wrongs the Romans with these noble styles
Of honor, and vnseconded deserts.
These attributes are only fit for men,
That God-like should be qualified with hate
Of such infectious sins as Treasons are.
Weake-pated Romans! what fidelity
Can be in Traitors, who are so unjust,
That their own Country is deceived in trust?
Come, Madam, will you show the way? Exeunt.

ACTVS 5.
SCENA 1.
Enter Bluso the Magician, and Gald. Gald. Now, Bluso, thus far have we by
thy Art,
Even to their private lodgings, fearelesse past
Invisible to any mortal eye.
But, Bluso, tell me, are we yet arrived
At our expected Haven?

Bluso. This is her Chamber: here will we stand unseen,
And yet see all that pass.
It Is almost dead of night: and now begins
Sleep, with her heavy rod to charm the eyes
Of humane dullness. Here stand we yet awhile,
And in this silent time observe the love,
The Roman Generals son bears to your wife,
Who long has borne the siege of his hot lust:
And now behold, like bloody Tarquin comes,
Enter Marcus Gallicus, with a candle in his hand, and his sword drawn. Being
non-suted, to satisfy the heat
Of his insatiate and immoderate blood,
That boiling runs through his adulterous veins.
A little while give way unto his practice,
And when we see a time, prevent his purpose.

Mar. Night, that does basely keep the door of sin,
And hide gross murders and adulteries,
With all the mortal sins the world commits,
From the clear eyesight of the morning Sun:
Thou, that never changest color for a sin,
Worse then Apostasy, stand Sentinel this hour,
And with thy Negroes face veil my intent,
Put out thy golden candles with thy fogs,
And let original darkness, that is fled
With Chaos to the Center, guard my steps.
How hushed is all things! and the world appears
Like to a Churchyard full of dead.
Deaths picture, Sleep, looks, as if passing bells
Went for each vital spirit, and appears,
As if our souls had took their general flight,
And cheated Nature of her motion.
Then on, unto thy practice: none can descry
Thy black intent, but night and her black eye.
He goes to her bed upon the Stage, and looks upon her. Behold the local
residence of love,
Even in the Rosy tincture of her cheek.
I am all fire, and must needs be quenched,
Or the whole house of nature will be burnt.
Fair Voada, awake: it is I, awake. He awakes her.

Voad. Am I adreamd? Or, do I wake indeed?
I am betrayed. Fond Lord, what make you here
At this unseasonable time of night?
Is It not enough that you importune
Each hour in the day? but in the night,
When every creature nods his sleepy head,
You seek the shipwreck of my spotless honor?
For shame forbear, and clear a Romans name,
From the suspicion of so foul a sin.
Perhaps you will say, that you are flesh and blood.
Oh my good Lord, were you but only so:
It were no sin, but natural instinct:
And then that noble name that we call man,
Should vndistinguisht pass, even like a beast.
But man was made divine, with such a face,
As might behold the beauty of the stars,
And all the glorious workmanship of heaven.
Beasts only are the subjects of bare sense:
But man has reason and intelligence.
Beasts fowls die with them: but man's soul's divine:
And therefore needs must answer for each crime.

Marcus. Thy speeches are like oil unto a flame.
I must enjoy thee. If thou will yield to me,
I Will be thy friend for ever: but if denide,
By force I will attempt, what by fair means
I cannot compass. Besides, thou art my captive,
And standst a suter for thy liberty.

Voada. I, for my body: but my soul is free.

Gald. I can no longer hear these arguments.
Come, Bluso, help me to convey her hence.

They tumble Marcus over the bed, and take her away. Mar. What Fury has
deprived me of my joy,
And crossed my blood, even in the heat of lust?
What, is she gone? Oh all you sacred powers,
Remit this sin, vnacted, but by thought:
And by those heavenly patrones of chaste minds,
Virtue, like to my soul, shall wholly be
Diffused through every member. Thus powers above
Do, with unknown means, scourge unlawful love. Exit.

Enter Cartamanda with her Secretary. Carta. Already I have posted to the
General,
To tell him, Caradoc is in our hands,
And bid him make haste: for this, ere the day,
A woman's wit shall serve for to betray.
And see, he comes. Welcome, thrice-honoured Lord.
Enter General with his Army. Warily, Soldiers; there his Chamber is,
And he not yet abed. Beset him round.
What wars have mist, a woman shall confound. Exit.

The General draws the Curtains, and finds Caradoc a reading. Ostorius. Now
Caradoc, thy life is in our hands:
Behold, thou art in girt with a whole host.
And could thou borrow force of beasts and men,
Thou could by no means escape.

Cara. What! Soldiers in every corner set?
The Roman General. I am betrayde.
Inhospitable woman, this with your sex began:
The Serpent taught you to betray poor man.
When God, like Angels, man created first,
God man him blessed, but woman most accursed.
And since that time, the chiefest good in women*
Is to beguile most men, and true to few men.
Yet Romans, know, that Caradoc here stands,
In bold defiance, were you like the sands.

Ostor. Assault him then.

They fight, and Caradoc beats and overthrown many of them. Ostor. Hold,
noble Welshman.
Thou see it is impossible to escape,
Had thou the strength of mighty Hercules.
If thou will yield, I vow by all the gods
That do protect Caesar and mighty Rome,
By all the honors that the Roman power
Have won, since Romulus did build their walls,
Because thou art a man unparalleled,
Of honorable courage, I Will engage
My life for thine to Caesar for thy freedom.
Caesar himself admires thy fortitude,
And will with honor welcome thee at Rome.
He is a King, whom baseness never touched,
And scorns to pluck a Lion by the beard,
Being a carkase. Speak, will you trust our oath?

Caradoc flings down his Arms. Cara. I take thy word, great General.
And think not, for any fear of death,
I prostitute my life to Cesars hands:
But for I know, Caesar is like a King,
And cannot brook a base mechanicke thought:
But for to see those famous towers of Rome,
This golden Lion shall enlarge me soon.

Ostor. Then, Manlius Valens, you shall bear him thither;
And for your guard, take the nineth Legion,
Surnamed, The valiant: and by the way,
At London stays his daughter, wife and brother:
Let them to Caesar bear him company. Exit Caradoc.
Farewell, brave Prince. Now Romans once again,
Seeing the Welshmens glory is eclipst,
Let us provide to meet Lord Morgan,
And Lord Constantine,
Venusius, and the rest that gather head,
And seat Prince Codigune in what is his right,
That now have gathered strong and fresh supply.
This battle shall add honor to our name,
And with triumphant Laurel crown our fame. Exeunt.

ACTVS 5. SCENA 3.
Enter Venusius, Constantine, and Lord Morgan, with Soldiers in Arms. Venu.
Thus, noble Lords, Venusius armed comes,
In love to Wales, and that much wronged Prince,
Who now at York, lives private from his foes,
From whence we now will call him, and awake
His ancient courage, that long time has slept,
Upon the downy pillowes of repose.
Good Angels, guide us: this our latest strife
Shall set a period to our death or life.

Constable. Me thinks, right noble Lord, yet I presage
The horror of this battle we intend,
Will cost a mass of blood; nor do I stand
Firmly resolved: and the least spark of valor
Turns to a Flame of Magnanimity.
Oh, were my brother Caradoc but here,
Our minds were made invincible, all our thoughts
Were fixed on warlike Music, or any thing
Beyond a common venture. And see, in time
Our princely brother, and our sister comes.
Enter Gald, Bluso, and Voada. Welcome, dear brother, how escapte you danger,
And purchased such a happy liberty?

Gald. All that I have, I freely do ascribe
Unto this learned man, whose secret Art,
Beyond the strain of deep Philosophy,
Or any natural science under heaven,
Possessed me of this Jewel of my soul,
And through the Roman host invisible,
Conuayde us both safe, as you see we are.

Morgan. Hark you me, you remember our Cousin Caradoc and Morgan, do you not?
Give me your hands. Be Cad, I shall love the Teuill, til breath's in her pody,
for this trick. Be Cad, he has done more good then any Justice of Peace this
seven years, for all her stocks and whipping posts. Hark you me now.


Constable. Hark, hark, the Romans march to us with speed*
Now Royal Princes, think on our vilde disgrace,
Their Treasons, falsehoods, and conspiracies;
And double resolution whet your rage.
Oh Caradoc, there is nothing wants but thee,
And now too late to buckle on thy Arms.
If in this bloody skirmish I survive,
Triumphs shall crown the glorious brow of Wales.
Bastard, begot at the back door of nature,
Cornwall the author of these bleeding wounds,
That many a wretch shall suffer for their wrongs.
Behold, we come armed with a triple rage,
To scourge your base indignities with steel.
Noble Prince Gald, here in our brothers stead,
Conduct our Army forth as General.
Romans, come on, your pride must catch a fall.

ACTVS 5. SCENA 4.
Enter Ostorius, Marcus Gallicus, Cessius, Codigune, Cornwall with Soldiers.
Ostor. Now Bryttaines, though the wrongs done to this Prince.
And to our selves, deserve a sharp revenge;
Yet, for we pity the effusion
And havoc that these cruel broils intend,
Once more in peace we crave this Princes right,
Which your weak Army can no way detayne.
Perhaps you stand upon the idle hopes
Of Caradoc: Know then, you are deceived:
For he is our prisoner, and to Rome is sent
With Manlius Valens to the Emperor.
Then yield your selves, or try the chance of war.

Gald. Then so we will, base Romans.
Henceforth, in stead of honorable names,
Succeeding times shall brand your slavish thoughts,
With the black coals of treasons and defame.
Princes, since now you know the worst of all,
Let vengeance teach your valiant minds to mount
Above a common pitch, inspire your souls
With the remorselesse thoughts of blood and death;
And this day spit defyance in the face
Of treacherous Rome, and think on this disgrace.

Codig. Stay, Prince, and let me speak.


Gald. Some Cannon shot ram up thy damned throat.
Peace, hell-hound, for thou singst a Ravens note. Alarm.

They fight, and beat in the Romans. Enter at one door Gald, and at the other
Codigune. Gald. Well met, thou Fiend of hell: by heaven I Will die,
Or be revenged for all thy treachery.

Codig. Weak Prince, first keep a diet for a time,
To add fresh vigor to thy feeble limbs,
And then, perhaps, we will teach thee how to fight.

Gald. Villayne, the heavens have strength enough against Treason.


They fight. Gald kills Codigune. Enter Cornwall at one door, and Morgan at
the other. Morg. Cad please her. Cornewals, be Cad, you are as arrant a Knave,
as any Proker in Longlanes. Hark you me, I Will fight with her for all her
treasons and coniurations.


They fight, and Morgan kills Cornwall. Morg. Fare you well, Cousin
Cornwall, I pray you commend us to Plutoes and Proserpines, and tell all the
Teuils of your affinity and acquaintance, I thank them for our Cousin Gald.


Enter at one door the Roman Standard Bearer of the Eagle, and at the other
door, Constantine. Constable. Lay down that haggard Eagle, and submit
Thy Roman Colors to the Bryttaines hands:
Or by that mighty Mouer of the Orb,
That scourges Romes Ambition with revenge,
I Will pluck her haughty feathers from her back,
And with her, bury thee in endless night.

Standerdb. Know, Bryttaines, threats unto a Roman breast,
Swell us with greater force, like fire suppressed*
If thou will have her, win her with thy Arms.

They fight, and Constantine wins the Eagle, and waueth it about. Constable.
Thus, not in honor, but in foul disgrace,
We wave the Roman Eagle spite of foes,
Or all the puissant Army of proud Rome.

Enter Marcus Gallicus. Marc. Proud Welshman, redeliuer up that Bird,
Whose silver wings thou flutterest in the air;
The Veruels that she wears, belong to Rome,
And Rome shall have, or I Will pawn my blood.

Constable. Roman, behold, even in disgrace of this and thee,
And all the factious rout of treacherous Rome,
I Will keep this Eagle; win it if thou dare.

They fight, and are both slain. Enter Gald, Voada, Venusius, Morgan. Gald.
Sound a Retreat. This day was bravely fought.
Cornwall and Codigune, whose infectious breath
Engendered noisome plagues of blood and death,
With all the Roman host is put to flight.
Thus by the hand of heaven, our peace is vvonne,
And all our foes sunk to confusion.

ACTVS 5. SCENA 5.
Enter first the Pretorian bands armed; they stand in rows: then enter Mauron,
Guiniuer, her daughter Helena, and Caradoc bound: they pass over the Stage.
Then enter Caesar, the Empress, with the Senate. Caesar. Now famous Rome, that
lately lay obscurde
In the dark clouds of Bryttish infamy,
Appears victorious in her conquering Robes,
And like the Sun, that in the midst of heaven
Reflects more glory on the teeming earth:
So fares it with triumphant Rome this day.
Bring forth these Bryttish Captives: Let them kneel
For mercy, and submit to Cesars doom.

Enter Mauron, Guiniuer, her daughter, and Caradoc: They all bend their knees
to Caesar* except Caradoc. Caesar. What Is he that scorns to bow, when Caesar bids?

Cara. Caesar, a man, that scorns to bow to Jove,
Were he a man like Caesar: such a man,
That neither cares for life, nor fears to die.
I was not borne to kneel, but to the Gods,
Nor basely bovv unto a lump of clay*
In adoration of a clod of earth.
Were Caesar Lord of all the spacious world,
Even from the Articke, to the Antarticke poles,
And but a man; in spite of death and him,
I Would keep my legs upright, honor should stand
Fixed as the Center, at no Kings command.
Thou may as well enforce the foming surge
Of high-swolne Neptune, with a word retire,
And leave his flowing tide, as make me bow.
Thinks Caesar, that this petty misery
Of seruill bonds, can make true honor stoop?
No, it is enough for Sicophants and slaves,
To crouch to Tyrants, that fear their graves.
I was not borne when flattery begd land,
And eat whole Lordships up with making legs.
Let it suffice: were Caesar thrice as great,
I Would neither bow to Rome, him nor his seat.

Caesar. So brave a Bryttaine has not Caesar heard.
But soft; I am deceived, but I behold
The golden Lion hang about his neck,
That I delivered to a valiant Soldier,
That ransomlesse releast me of my bonds.
Great spirit (for thy tongue bewrayes no less)
If Caesar may entreat thee, kindly tell,
Where, or from whom had thou that golden lion,
That hangs about thy neck?

Car. From Caesar, or from such another man,
That seemed no less in power then Caesar is,
Whom I took captive, (and so Caesar was)
And ransomlesse sent back unto his Tents.
Then, if in all he like to Caesar be,
Caesar, I am deceyu'd, but thou art he.

Ce. But he that took me, was a common soldier.

Car. No, Caesar: but disguised I left my troops,
Being forbidden by the Bryttish King,
To fight at all, and rusht into the host,
Where, from thy hands I took this golden Lion.

Ces. Thy words confirm the truth. For this brave deed,
And kind courtesy showed to Caesar in extremes,
We freely give you all your liberties,
And honorably will return you home
With everlasting peace and unity.
And this shall Caesar speak unto thy Fame,
The valiant Welshman merits honors name.

Flourish. Exeunt. Enter Bardh. Bardh. Time cuts off our valiant Welshmans
worth,
When longer Scenes more amply might have shown*
But that the Story's tedious to rehearse,
And we in danger of impatient ears,
Which too long repetition might beget.
Here leave we him with Caesar full of mirth:
And now of you old Bardh intreates to tell,
In good or ill, our Story does excel.
If ill, then go I to my silent Tomb,
And in my shrowde sleep in the quiet earth,
That did intend to give a second birth.
But if it please, then Bardh shall tune his strain,
To sing this Welshmans praises once again*
Bells are the dead man's music: ere I go,
Your Clappers sound will tell me I, or no. Exit.

EPILOGVE.
We are your Tenants, and are come to know,
Whether the Rent we paid, has pleased or no.
If not, our Lease is void: but it is your Lands;
And therefore you may seal it with your hands.
FINIS.

