The Dirige.
BLessed is he that considers the pore, the Lord shall deliver him in the
time of trouble.

Thou shall preserve him and keep him alive, he shall make him to prosper upon
earth, and shall not deliver him to the will of his enemies.

The Lord shall refeesh him when he lies sick upon his bed, yea, thou make
his bed in all his sickness.

I said Lord be merciful unto my soul, for I have sinned against the.

Mine enemies speak evil upon me: when shall he die, and when shall his name
perish.

Though he came into se, yet mened he falshed in his heart ^^apyng myschife
vpp^^ him self.

^^l they that hate me, ru^ne in together against me, and ymagined evil
against me.

They have given a wicked sentence upon me, when he lies, he shall rise up
no more.

Yea, ene^ mine own famylier friends who^ I trusted which did eat my b^^d has
lift up his hele against me.

But be thou merciful unto me (O Lord) raise thou me up, and I shall reward the^.

By this I know thou fauorest me, that mine enemy shall not triumph over me.

^hou have holden me, because of mine innocence, and set me before thy face
for ever.

O blessed be the Lord God of Israel from henseforth and evermore, so be it, so
be it (...) Heal my soul Lord, for I have sinned against the.

Quemadmodum desi.
Like as the heart desires ye waterbrokes, so longs my soul after the o God.

My soul is thrustye for God, even for ye living fou^tayn, when shall I come
and behold the face of God.

My tears are my meat day and night while it is daily said unto me, where is
no we thy God.

Now when I think ther^pon I pour out my heart (...) self, for (...) ^ld^
(...) immortalitee.

But when this corruptible shall put on incorrupcio^ and this mortal shall put
on immortalitee, then shall that word be fulfilled which is written. Death
is swalowed up in victory

Answer We shall all be brought before the judgment seat of Christ where
every one of us shall give accomptes for him felf unto God.

Versicle. And he shall reward every man according to his deeds.

^ion. Where every man shall give account.

(...)
I Would not brethren that ye should be ignorant concerning them that are
fallen a sleye, that ye sorrow not as other do which have no hope, for if we
believe yt Jesus dyed and rose again. Even so they also which sleep by Jesus
shall God bring with him, for this we say unto you in the word of the Lord,
that we which live and are remayninge in the coming of the Lord, shall not
come yer they which sleep, for the Lord shall come down from heaven with a
shoute and voice of the Archaungell and with the trompe of GOD, and the dead
in Christ shall arise first, then shall we which live and remain, be caught
up with them also in the ^es to mete the Lord in the a^^e, and so shall we
ever be with the ^orde. Wherefore comfort your selves one another with these
words.

(...). Now is Christ risen from the dead and is become the first fruits of
the^ that sleep, for by one man comes death, and by one man the resurrecion
of the dead, for as they all die in Ada^, so shall they al be made a live in
Christ but every one in his order

Versicle. The first is Christ, then they that belong unto Christ when he
comes.

Repetition. Every one in his order.

(...) Now Christ Ie^^s, we most humbly beseech and thou which art come to
redeem wretches from sin and thraldom, wilt the^ cast away the^ who^ you have
so derely redeemed.

(...) O Lord deliver me from everlasting death at ye dreadful day when heaven
and earth shall be altered, whiles you shalt come to judge the world.

The a^ My bruised.

(...).
Miserere mei deus.

Anth. My bruised bones Lord shall be refreshed. Hear my prayer.

(...)
Te decet hymnus.
THou (O God) art praised in Sio^, and to the is ye vow performed Thou
hear the prayer, therefore comes al flesh unto the.

Our misdedes prevail against us, oh be thou merciful unto our sins.

^lessed is the man who^ you chosest and receiuest unto ye, that he may dwell
in thy court: he shall be satisfied with the(...) his web.

While I was yet taking my rest he hewed me of, and made an end of me in one
day.

(...) thought, I would have lived unto ye morrow, but he bruised my bones like
a Lion, and made an end of me in one day.

Then chattered I like a swalowe, and like a crane and mourned as (...) dove.

I lift up mine e^^^ into ye hight O Lord (s^^^ I) violence is done unto me, be
thou su^^tie for me.

What shall I speak or say that he may do this that I may live out all my years,
yea, in the bitterness of my life.

Verily (Lord) men must live in bitterness, and al my life must I pass over
the^, for thou raysest, me and wakenest me, but I will be well content with this
bytternes.

Nevertheless my conversation has so pleased the that you would not make an
end of my life, so that thou have cast my sins behind thy back.

^or hell prayseth not the death does not magnify ye ^hey that go down into
the grave praise not thy truth, but the lyuinge:yea, the living acknowledge y^
like as I do this day, ye father tells his children of thy faythfulnes.

Deliver us (O Lord) and we will sing praises in thy house all the days of our
life.

(...). From ye gates of hell, Lord deliver them.

(...). Let every spirits give praise unto the Lord

Ps Laudate dnm de celis.

Ver. From the gates of hell.

Answer. Lord deliver their souls.

An^. I am the resurreccion and life, he yt believes in me, yea although he
were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall
not se everlasting death.

Psalm ^^ Benedictus dns.

Lord have mercy on us.

Christ have mercy on us.

L^^de have mercy on us.

Our father. And lead us not. But deliver us.

The ^^^^ Psalm
Exaltabo (...)

coming of thy son our Lord Christ, we with all other faithful people may
be graciously brought unto joys everlasting, which shall come to judge both
the quick and dead. By Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprynted in London by Richard (...) dwelling within the circuit of the
late (...) prynter to the Princes grace*

()

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendu^ solum


