THE TACTIKS OF AELIAN

Or art of embattailing an army after ye Grecian manner

Englished and illustrated with figures throughout; and notes upon ye Chapters
of ye ordinary motions of ye Phalange by I. B.

The exercise military of ye English by ye order of that great General Maurice
of Nassau Prince of Orange and * Governor and General of ye united Provinces
is added

At London for Laurence Lisle and are to be sold at his shop at ye sign of
the Tigers head in Paul's Church yard

The Peerlesse Macedon, chvlde of triu^pha^t vict^ Presents his arms, his art
of war, G'fortu^e unto (...)

war is a necessary school of necessary knowledge (...)

Gelius Sculpvt

Woudrichemy in Hollandia



MY^IFICENTIA REGIA 1715 GEORGIUS D.G. MAG. BR VR. ET ^^^ REX FD.


TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY CHARLES, ONLY SON OF HIS MAJESTY, PRINCE OF Wales,
DVKE of Cornwall, York, and Albany, MARQVISE of Ormont, EARL of Chester, and
Ross, LORD of Admanoch, and KNIGHT of the most noble order of the Garter.
HOw much the Graecians excelled all other Nations in the Sciences called
Liberal, is better known in general, then needful at this time particularly
to be rehearsed to your Highness. The Romans themselves albeit otherwise
ambitious, and out of measure thirsty of honor, and challenging to themselves
the highest degree of gravity, constancy, greatness of mind, wisdom,
faith, and skill of war, contended not herein, but freely left them the
possession of that praise unquestioned. For war it is not my purpose at this
time to make comparison, or commit the two Nations together. The controversy
is already moved by other, and hangs undecided in the Court of learning. Thus
much, me thinks, I may truly affirm, that the Graecians were the first, that
out of variety of actions, and long experience reduced the knowledge of Arms
into an Art, and gave precepts for the orderly moving a Battle, and taught,
that the moments of victory rested not in the hands of multitudes, but in a few
men rightly instructed to manage arms, and trained up in the observation of
the discipline of the field. In which regard they had almost in all Cities
amongst them Masters of Arms, whom they called Tacticks, which delivered the
Art Military to such, as were desirous to learn. Out of whose Schools issued
those chiefs of war in number so many, in skill so exquisite, in valor so
peerless, in all virtues beseeming great Generals so admirable, that no
Nation of Europe even to this day has been able to match, much less to
ouer-match their fame, and glory. And the time was when the Lacedaemonians
exceeded the rest in Martial skill, and were thought to be the best Soldiers
of Greece; by means whereof they advanced themselves to the Principality of
Greece, which they held with such reputation, that an enemy by the space of
500 years was not seen within their Territory. Till at last growing insolent,
and surfeiting of, and being not able to brook their own fortune, they sought
to oppress, and with wrong and force to possess the City of Thebes, and
stirred up Epaminond as a The ban by birth, and from his tender years
nourished by his fathers care in the study of Philosophy, and the science of
Arms, to oppose against them, who in two battles, the one at Leuctra, the
other at Mantinea so broke their forces, that from that day forth they were
never able to recover their wonted authority, and power in the field. Philip
the son of Amyntas King of Macedonia, being but a private man, was delivered
as a hostage to the Thebans, and brought up in the same house and learning with
Epaminond as. He afterward became King of Macedonia; which being of it self
but a poor kingdom, and before his time sometimes kept under by the
Athenians, sometimes by the Lacedaemonians, sometimes by the The bans, and
finding it at his entrance to the Crown harried, and spoiled by the Paeonians,
and forced to pay tribute by the Illyrians, by erecting a new art, and
discipline of war, to which he exercised, and enured his Macedonians, he not
only freed his Country from the Barbarous nations, but also overcame the
Graecians, accounted the only Masters of arms till that day, and caused
himself to be declared General of Greece against the Persians: against whom
after he had made his full preparation, he resolved to go in person. But being
prevented by death, he left the succession of his kingdom, and execution of his
designs to Alexander his son, whom he had before curiously instructed in the
discipline of Arms invented by himself. The same Alexander (being about 20
years of age) after he had vanqu^shed Darius in 2 great battles in 12 years
ran through, and subjected the spacious, rich, and flourishing kingdoms of
Asia, even as far, as the East Indies, and with terror of arms made the whole
world to tremble at his name. His kingdoms were after his death divided
amongst many Successors, who by the same Art military easily maintained the
possession of their conquests. This Art is it, that I at this time present
unto your Highness. It was comprised in writing by many, and yet none of their
works attained our age, but only that of Aelian; who has in a small volume so
expressed the art, that nothing is more short, nothing more linked together in
coherence of precepts, and yet distinguished with such variety, that all
motions requisite, or to be used in a Battle are fully expressed therein.
Aelian lived in the time of Adrian the Emperor. How much the book was of
ancient time esteemed may appear by this alone, that Leo a succeeding Emperor
setting down Martial instructions for the government of his Empire,
transcribeth whole passages out of Aelian, and whenever he cites, or names
the Tacticks, he gives still the first place unto Aelian. How be it the
practice of Aelians precepts has long lien wrapped up in darkness, and buried
(as it were) in the ruins of time, until it was revived, and restored to
light not long since in the united Provinces of the low- Countries, which
Countries at this day are the School of war, whither the most Martial spirits
of Europe resort to lay down the Apprentiship of their service in Arms, and
it was revived by the direction of that Heroical Prince Maurice of Nassau,
Prince of Orange, Governor, and General of the said Countries, a Prince borne
and bred up in Arms, and (beside the completenes of his other eminent virtues)
for skill, experience, judgment, and military literature comparable to the
greatest Generals, that ever were. I have of late adventured to take from
Aelian his Greekish cloak, and to put him in English apparel, that in that
habit he might attend your Highness, and be ready with his service, in case he
were thought worthy of employment. He had before for his Patron Adrian, an
Emperor, and Ruler of the Roman world. Now he humbly craves your HIGHNESS
favor for his protection, who as in Princely descent, and succession of Royal
blood you are far superior, so in virtues worthy of your birth, and years,
and in all hopeful expectations are you nothing inferior to Adrian. It may
please your Highness to regard him with a gracious eye, and to esteem the
Presentor of him your faithful bedesman, that will not cease to pray to the
mighty God of hosts, to give you conquest over all your enemies. From my
Garrison at Woudrichem in Holland the 20 of September 1616.

Your Highness most humbly devoted, IO: BINGHAM.

THE TACTICKS OF AELIAN or art of embattailing an army after the Grecian manner.
THE Grecian art of embattailing an army (most mighty Augustus Caesar Adrian)
the antiquity whereof reaches back to the age wherein Homer lyved, has been
committed to writing by many, whose skill in the Mathematics was not reputed
equal with mine: whereby I was induced to think it possible for me so to
deliver the grounds thereof, that posterity should rather regard and esteem
my labors, then theirs, that before me have handled the same argument. But
weighing again mine own ignorance (for I must confess a truth) in that skill
and practice of arms, which is now in esteem among the Romans, I was by
fear withheld from reviving a science half dead, as it were, and since the
invention of that other by your ancestors, altogether out of request and
unregarded. Notwithstandi^ng coming afterward to Formie to do my duty to the
1 Emperor Nerva your majesty's father, It was my fortune to spend sometime
with 2 Frontine a man of Consular digni^tie, and of great reputacion by reason
of his experience in military affairs: and after conference with him
perceiving he imparted no less study to the Grecian, then to the Roman
discipline of arms I began not to despise that of the Grecians, conceiving
that Frontine would not so much affect it, if he thought it inferior to the
Roman. Having therefore in times past framed a project of this work, but yet
not daring then to publish it in regard of 3 your majesty's incomparable
valor, and experience, which make you famous above all General^s without
exception, that ever were: I have of late taken it again in hand, and finished
it, being (if I deceive not my self) a work both worthy to be accounted of,
and of sufficiency, especially with such as are studious of the art, to
obscure the credit of the ancient Tacticks. For in respect of the perspicuitie
I dare boldly affirm, the reader shall more advantage himself by this
little volume, then by all their writings: such is the order and method, I have
followed. Howbeit I durst scarcely offer it to your majesty who have been
General of so great wars, least happily it prove too too slender a present,
and altogether unworthy of your sacred view. And yet if your majesty shall
be pleased to think of it, as of a Greekish Theorie, or a various discourse
it may be, it will give you some little delight, the rather because you may
therein behold 4 Alexander the Macedons manner of marshalling his fields. And
for that I am not ignorant of your majesty's more weighty affairs, I have
reparted it into chapters, to the end you may without reading the book in few
words take the sum of that, which is to be delivered, and without loss of
time find the places you are desirous to peruse.

Notes.
THe Tacticks] As Taxis in a general sense signifies order, so Tacticos is as
much, as perteyning to order: but specially taken, it signifies parteyning to
order of a battle, or to the embattailing of an army. Here of the art of
embattailing an army is called Tactice, and he, that is skillful, and
experienced in that art. Tacticos ( Veget. prolog. lib. 3.
Vegetius names him magistrum armorum) and the books written of the art,
Tactica. And that this is the true signification of the word may appear by
Xenophons Cyropaedia, where the art Tactick is distinguished from the art
Imperatory, or art of a General. He induces Cyrus, in a discourse with his
father speaking thus: Xenoph. cyrop^d. lib. 29. B.
In the end you asked me what my master taught me, when he professed to
teach the art Imperatory. And when I answered, the Tacticks, you smiled, and
asked particulerly, what the Tacticks availed without provision of things
necessary to live by? what without preservacion of health? what without
knowledge of arts invented for the use of war? what without obedience? so
that you plainly showed, that the Tacticks are but a small portion of the art
Imperatory, or of commanding an army. Thus Xenophon: making a difference
between the art Imperatory, and the art Tactick. And in other place he
speaks yet more particulerly: Xenophon cyrop. lib 8 c. 227.
Cyrus, said he, (...) (...) it not the duty of a Tactick to enlarge only, or
to stretch out in (...) the front of his Phalange, or to draw it out in depth,
or to reduce it from a winge to a Phalange, or to countermarche readily, the
enemy showing himself on the right, or left hand, or in the rear, but to
divide it, when need is, and to place every part for most advantage, and to
lead it on speedily, when occasion is of prevention. Yet sometimes in a gener
all signification books entreating of the whole art of war are called
Tacticks: as the Constitutions military of the Emperor Leo are entitled
Tactica Leonis, perhaps of the best part, because the Pl^t. in Philopaement.
art of embattailing an army has always been esteemed the chiefest point of
skill in a General. Howbeit Aelian in his title of this book takes Tactice
in the streighter ^ infra cap. 3.
signification: as appears by the definitions, he alleges out of Aenaeas
and Polibius: of whom the first defines the art Tactick to be a science of
warlick motion; with whom also Leo. cap. 1.
Leo agrees: the other, to be a skill, whereby, a man taking a multitude
serviceable, orders it into files, and bodies, and instructs it
sufficiently in all things apperteining to war. Which two definitions
comprehend in few words the argument of the whole book. For first Aelian
intreatcth of levieng, and of arming men, then of filing, next of joining
files, and making bodies, after of ordering the whole Phalange, or battle,
further of motions requisite to affront the enemy, whersoever he gives on,
whether in front, flank, or rear; lastly of marching, and of the sundry forms
of battles carieng with them advantage of charging or repulsing the enemy in
your march. He; that will further under stand the bounds of this art, let
him read in the 21. chapter of Leo the 58. section.

1 The Emperor Nerva your majesty's Father] The Emperor Nerva here mentioned
was not Nerva Cocceius, who succeeded Domitian, but Vlpius Traianus, who was
also called Nerva, because he was adopted by Nerva Cocceius, and succeeded in
the Empire. And where Aelian terms him Adrians father, indeed Adrian
pretended, he was Traians son by adoption. But Dio and ^pat tionem in
vit^Adriani.
Dio plainly denies it, and Spartian says, some reported he was adopted by
the faction of Plotina (Traians wife) by substituting one to speak with a
faint voice, as if it had been Traian upon his deathbed, whereas Traian was
before departed this world. This is agreed, that he was Cousin german once
removed to Traian, and that his father dieng, he (being but ten years old)
was ward to Traian (then a private man) and to one Calius Tatianus. 2 To spend
some time with Frontine] Frontine here mentioned was the same that wrote the
book of Strategemes, now extant, and commonly joined in one volume with
Vegetius. He was a man curious in the search of the Grecian discipline, as
may be seen by his own preface to his books of Strategemes: and by the
testimony of Aelian, and in the first chapter of this treatise, is reckoned
amongst the T actick writers. Veget lib. 2. (...). ^.
Vegetius reports he was much esteemed by the Emperor Traian. He lived also
in great reputation in the time of Vespasian: at least if it be he, that
Tacitus speaks of in the life of Julius Agricola. And yet it might be he
very well, there being noe more then twenty years, and certain months
betwixt the reign of Traian, and the reign of Vespasian in whose time
Frontine is reported by Tacit. in vita Ag^colae.
Tacitus to have over thrown the Silures in Britain. Aelian in the next
chapter calls him Fronto. Of one Fronto, that was Consul in the third year of
the reign of Traian, I read in Dio in vita Ne^vae.
Dio ^whose saying is reported to have been: That it was ill to have an
Emperor, under whom noe man might have liberty to do any thing, but much
worse to have an Emperor, under whom every man might do what he list. But
this Fronto was not Aelians Fronto. He was called Marcus Cornelius Fronto;
this (that Aelian speaks of) Julius Frontine. And yet it is noe wonder that
Frontine in latin should be called Fronto in Greek, it being usual for the
Graecians to vary, and deflect a little from the property of the latin names.
3 Your majesty's incomparable valor and experience] That this praise given
Adrian is not altogether without cause, may appear by that, which Spartian. in
vita Adriani.
Aelius Spartianus writes in the life of Adria^. His words have this meaning:
After this, taking his journey into France, he was bowntifull to all, as he
saw cause. From thence he passed into Germany, and being rather desirous of
peace, then war, yet he so exercised his soldiers, as though war were at
hand; teaching them to endure pains and hardness, himself giving an example
of military life: gladly also using Camp fare, as namely lard, and cheese, for
meat, and water mingled with vinegar for drink, in imitation of Scipio
Aemilianus, and of Metellus, and of Traian the author of his preferment and
rising, bestowing rewards upon many, honors upon some, to encourage them to
bear such things, as seemed harshe in his commaundes. And surely it was he
next Octavius, that vpheld military discipline (declyning now through the
remissness of former Emperors) by ordering both the places of Command, and
the pays; never suffering any man to absent himself from the Camp, but upon
just cause: measuring the worth of Tribunes not by favor of the soldiers,
but by their own desert; exhorting, and exciting all the rest by example of
his own virtue, whilst he often marched twenty miles on foot, being fully
armed, broke down banqueting howses, and galleries, and vaults for
coolness, and arbors, wheresoever he fownd them in the Camp; and was seen
in a plain garment usually; wore a baudricke not garnished with gold, buttons
without gemmes; scarcely allowing an ivory handle to his sword; visited his
sick soldiers in their lodgings, himself chose out the grownd to encampe in:
made noe Captain, but a man of a strong body, no^ Tribune, but with a grown
beard, or of age, that by prudence, and years was able to sway the weight of
the place: nor suffered him to take ought from the soldier; removed all
d^licacies; and lastly reformed their arms, and baggage. He had besides
consideration of the age of soldiers, allowing none younger, then was
befitting virtue; nor elder, then stood with the laws of humanity, to be
conversant in the Camp, contrary to old custom, and usage: and gave himself
to have particular knowledge of them all, and what their number was.
Furthermore he was careful to understand the controversies betwixt soldier
and soldier, and searched with great attentiveness into the revenues of the
Provinces, to the end to supply, what was wanting; endeavoring notwithstanding
above all neither to buy, nor feed ought, that was not for use. Wherefore when
he had fashioned his soldiers to his own example, he passed over into
Britain, where he corrected many things, and was the first, that drew a wall
along by the space of eighty mile; wherewith he divided the Romans from the
barbarous people. Hitherto Spartian. I have recited the history at large,
because I might represent the picture of an excellent General. 4 Alexander the
Macedons manner.] That this book comprehends the Macedonian discipline of
arms, I will show hereafter, as particulers offer themselves. In the mean
time let this suffice for an argument, that Aelian doubts not to affirm it
to Adrian, a Prince excellently learned in the Greek language; and as by
reason of his skill he was able to discern, so by his authority he would
have censured so gross an escape, if it had been otherwise, then Aelian
reports.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Chapters of the Book.
THE Authors, that have written Tacticks; of this book, and of the profitt of
the art. Chap. 1. The praeparation of warlike forces, and how they are to be
armed. Chap. 2. The framinge of a Phalange, and definition of the art Tactick.
Chap. 3. What a file or decury, is and of how many men it consists. Chap. 4.
The order and parts of a file or decury. Chap. 5. Of joining files. Chap. 6.
Of a Phalange: the length, and depth thereof; of Ranking, and filinge. The
division of the Phalange into wings, The place of the armed foot, of the
light armed, and of the Horse. Chap. 7. The number of the armed foot, of the
light armed, and of the horse. Chap. 8. The names of the several parts, and
the Commanders of the several parts of the Phalange, and of the numbers
under their Commands. Chap. 9. The precedence, and dignity of places in the
Offices of the Phalange. Chap. 10. The distances to be observed betwixt
soldier, and soldier in opening, or shutting the Phalange. Chap. 11. The
arming of the Phalange. Chap 12. The worth the file-leaders, and next followers
should be of. Chap. 13. Of the Macedonian Phalange, and the length of the
soldiers pikes. Chap. 14. The place of the light armed, and the number of
every file of them. Chap. 15. The names of the bodies of the light armed. Chap.
16. The use of the light armed. Chap. 17. The fashion of horse battles; the
Rhombe, the wedge, and the Square. Chap. 18 Why Rho^bs were first brought into
use, and of the diverse forms of the^. Cha. 19 The place of horsemen in the
field, and the number of the usual horse-battaile, and the degrees and names
of the officers of the horse in general. Chap. 20 The diligence to be used in
choice, and exercise, of the best forms of battles. Chap. 21 Of Chariotts;
the names, and degrees of the Commanders. Chap. 22. Of the Elephants: the
names, and degrees of their Rulers. Chap, 23. The names of the military
motions expressed in this book. Chap. 24. Of turning, and double turning of
the soldiers faces, as they stand embattailed. Chap. 25. Of wheeling, double,
and treble wheeling of a battle, and of returning to the first posture. Chap.
26. Of filing, ranking, and restoring to the first posture. Chap. 27. Of
Counter march, and the diverse kinds thereof, with the manner how it is to be
done. Chap. 28. Of doubling, and the kinds thereof. Chap. 29. Of the
broadfronted Phalange, the deep Phalange, or Hearse, and the uneven fronted
Phalange. Chap. 30. Of Parembole, Protaxis, Epitaxis, Prostaxis, Entaxis and
Hypotaxis. Chap. 31. The manner how the motions, of the wheeling, Double, and
Treble wheeling of a battle are to be made. Chap. 32. Of closing of the
battle to the right, or left hand, and to the midst. Chap. 33. The use and
advantage of these exercises of arms. Chap. 34. Of signs of directions, that
are to be given to the army, and their several kinds. Chap. 35. Of Marching;
of diverse kinds, of battles fit for a March; of the right Induction, of
the Coelemboles, and of the Triphalange to be opposed against the Coelemboles.
Chap. 36. Of Paragoge or Deduction. Chap. 37. Of the Phalange called
Amphistomus. Chap. 38. Of the Phalange called Antistomus. Chap. 39. Of the
Diphalange called Antistomus. Chap. 40. Of the Phalange called Peristomus.
Chap. 41. Of the Phalange called Himoiostomus and of the Plinthium. Chap. 42.
Of the Phalange called Heterostomus. Chap. 43. Again of the horsebattaile
called the Rhombe, and the foot halfe-moone to encounter it. Chap. 44. Of the
horse battle Heteromeres, and the broad fronted foot battle to be opposed
against it. Chap. 45. Of another kind of Rhombe for Horsemen, and of the
Epicampios Emprosthia to encounter it. Chap. 46. Of the foot battle called
Cyrte, which is to be set against the Epicampios. Chap. 47. Of the Horse
battle, which is square in ground, and the wedge of foot to be opposed
against it. Chap. 48. Of the Foot battle called Plaesium, and the
Sawefronted foot battle to encounter it. Chap. 49. Of overfronting the
enemies battle, and overwinging it, and of Attenuation. Chap. 50. Of the
leading of the Carriage of the Army. Chap. 51. Of the words of command, and of
certain Rules to be observed therein. Chap. 52 Of silence to be used by
soldiers. Chap. 53. The manner of pronouncing the words of Command. Chap.
54.
The Authors that have written Tacticks; of this book, and of the profitt, of
the Art. CHAP. I.
HOmer the Poet seems to be the first, (at least we read of) that had the
skill of imbattailing an army, and that admired men endued with that knowledge,
as appears by Mnestheus of whom he writes.

His like no living wight was found, nor any age did yield,
To Marshall Troops of horse, or bands of foot in bloody field.
Concerning Homers discipline military, the works of Stratocles, and of1
Frontine a man of Consular dignity, in our time are to be read. 2 Aeneas
perfected the Theorie thereof at large publishing many volumes of warfare,
which were abridged by 3 Cyneas the Thessalian. Likewise 4 Pyrrhus the Epirote
wrote Tacticks, and his son5 Alexander, and Clearchus, and Pausanias, and 6
Euangelus, and 7 Polibius the Megapolitan (a man of great learning, Scipioes
companyon) and Eupolemus, and 8 Iphicrates; 9 Possidonius also the Stoic set
forth the art of war, and many other, some in Introductions, as Brion, some
in large Tactick volumes. Al which, I have seen, and read, and yet think it
not much to purpose to mention perticulerlie; being not ignorant, that it has
been the manner of those writers for the most part, to apply their style
not to the ignorant, but to such as are already acquainted with the matters
they entreat of; as for the impediments, which presented themselves to me,
when first I gave my mind to the study of this art, as namely neither to
happen upon sufficient Instructours, nor yet to find light, or perspicuitie
enough in the precepts delivered: I will endeavor, as much as I can, to remove
out of other men's way. And as often as words shall fail to express my
meaning, I will for plainenes sake, use the direction of figures, and
pourtraicts, adjoining thereby the view of the ey, as an aid, and assistance,
to the understanding, and withal retain the terms of ancient authors, to
the end, that whosoever shall follow this book for an introduction, being
therein exercised both to the same words; and also to the usage of things
expressed in them, may grow as it were acquainted, and imagine himself no
stranger, when he comes to read their works. By which ways by me
prescribed, I make no doubt, they will easily be understood. Now that this art
of all other is of most use, may appear by Plato in his book of laws where
he says: That the Cretan Law giver so contrived his Laws, as if men were always
praepared to fight. For all cities have by nature vnproclaimed war one
against another. Which being so: what discipline is more to be esteemed, or
more avaylable to man's life, then this of war.

Notes.
IT seems by this Chapter, that the Authors, that have of ancient time
written Tactiks, have been many: and those not of such kind of men, as have
given themselves to study, and contemplation alone, but of such, as besides
their knowledge in good letters, have been actors in war themselves, and
(which is more) principal actors, some of them Generals, other the next
degree to generals. Howbeit there is none here mentioned by Aelian, whose
works are extant. Where by may be esteemed the inestimable loss, these later
ages have suffered in being deprived of such excellent monuments. I hope, I may
so term them without offense, though I have not seen them. For what but
excellent, can proceed from men of such excellency in their profession? such
as the most part of those were. Yet, for some of them, I can say nothing, as
finding little remembrance of them in ancient writers. Of this kind are
Eupolemus, Stratocles, Hermias, Clear chus, Pausanias: albeit such names may
often be found: The rest are specially mentioned, and much commended. Of
whom I will set down, what I find.

1 Frontine a man of Consular dignity] I have before noted some what of
Frontine. We have of his, as it is thought, other works, besides his
stratagemes: But this book of Tacticks, whereof Aelian speaks, we have not.
I will only add the relation of Vegetius lib. ^. cap ^.
Vegetius towching Frontine, who writes thus: Cato the elder, albeit he had
been both invinceable in arms, and often General of great armies, believed
yet he should more profit his Country, if he laid down in writing the
discipline of war. For valiant acts are but of one man's age, but things
written for the profit of the state endure for ever. Many other have done the
like, but especially Frontine: whose industry herein was greatly approved by
the Emperor Traian. 2 Aenaeas perfected the Theory.] Aenaeas is mentioned by
Polyb. lib. 10. page 615. ^.
Polybius in his 10. book, where he discourses of signs to be made by beacons
of fire, in case an enemy approaches to any part of our Country. His books
were entitled Commentaries of the office of a General as Polybius says; and
Aelian here calls them books of the office of a General, the title being
all one in effect. Of these books none have reached to our age, but one alone,
which compriseth precepts of defending a town besieged, and some 5. or 6.
years ago came first to light, and priuitie: that worthy man Isaac Casaubon,
the learned ornament of his Country, (and of England so long, as he lived
there) being the setter forth. And it is adjoined to his edition of Polybius.
These books Tactick of Aenaeas were abridged (as Aelian says) by. 3. Cyneas
the Thessalian] Plutarchin the life of Pyrrhus tells us what Cyneas was.
Plutarch in Pyrrho.
There was, says he, in the Court of Pyrrhus a Thessalian, a man of great
understanding: and who having heard the orator Demosthenes, seemed alone of
all, that then were esteemed eloquent, to renew in the memory of the hearers
an image and shadow of the vehemency and vigor of his utterance. Pyrrhus held
him in his Court, and made use of him, in sending him in embassages to people
and Cities. In which embassages he confirmed the saying of Euripides.

What ever force can do, with trenchant swoordes:
The same, or more, is wrought by pleasing words.
Therefore was Pyrrhus wont to say, that Cyneas had gained more Cities with his
eloquence, then himself with arms. By occasion whereof he did him great
honor, and employed him in his principal affairs. Cicero. epist. (...). lib. 9
(...). 1^.
Ti^lly speaks of his works: your letters, (says he to Papyrius Paetus)
have made me a great General: I was altogether ignorant of your so great skill
in military matters. I see you have read the books of Pyrrhus and Cynaeas. I
therefore purpose to follow your counsel: this yet more, to have some few
ships in a readiness upon the seacoast. They say, there is noe better
armor against Parthian horsemen. But why sport we? you know not, with what a
General you have to do. I have in this my government fully in practice
expressed Xenophons institution of Cyrus: which before I had worn a pieces
with reading. Pyrrhus and Cynaeas, he names, as two principal Authors of
warlick discipline: And where he adds Xenophon, who, though he be not named
by Aelian amongst the Tactick writers, deserves yet not to be pretermitted,
having been both a great Co^maunder, and besides written largely of military
matters, whose works also are now exta^t; let us see, what he says of him in
another place. Epistel. ad Qf^at lib. 1. epi. 1.
Cyrus, says he, is written by Xenophon, not according to the truth of an
history, but for a pattern of just government. Whose wondrous gravity is by
that Philosopher matched with singular Courtesy, which books our Africanus,
(and that not without cause) was never wont to let go out of his hands. And
of Africanus he reports the like in his Tuscul. questi. lib. 2. 146.
Tusculan quaestions.

4 Pyrrhus the Epriote wrote Tacticks.] Pyrrhus the K. of Epirus was of
ancient time esteemed one of the be^ ^eneralls, that ever was. What Livv.
decad. 4. lib. 5 87. ^.
Anniballs judgment was of him Liuy reports, and Plut. in Pyrrho.
(...) in the life of Pyrrhus. And Antigonus being demanded, whom he thought
the greatest general, then living, answered Pyrrhus. And where other Kings
imitated Alexander the great in purple apparaile in number of gardes about
their persons, in carieng the neck a litleawry, and in speaking loud, he
alone repraesented him in exploictes of arms, and in deeds of prowes, says
Plutarch. Plutarch. in Pyrrho.
Plutarch says likewise: Towching his skill in the art military how to order
a battle, and how to bring his men to fight with most advantage, a man may
draw proof sufficient out of the books, he wrote; of which books Tully spoke
in the last paragraph. 5 And his son Alexander.] Pyrrhus had by his first
wife Antigone a son called Ptolomey, by Lanassa, another called Alexander,
and by Bircanna, the third named Helenus. Plutarch. in Pyrrho.
All which albeit by race and inclination of nature they were Martial, yet
brought he them up, and from their birth framed and enured to arms. And the
report is, when upon a time one of them, yet a child, asked him to which of
them he would leave his kingdom, to him, answered Pyrrhus, who shall have the
sharpest sword: Just lib 18, 655. A.
Justin also makes mention of these three sons. Ptolomey was slain at
Sparta, as Lib. 25, 667. D
Justin would have it. Plut. in Pyrrho.
Plutarch says he was slain in the way betwixt Sparta and Argos. Justin. lib.
2^. 668. C. Athenaeus Dipnoseph. lib. 3. 73. B.
Alexander reigned after his fathers decease, in the Realm of Epirus. That he
wrote Tacticks, I have not read, but in Aelian only. 6 And Evangelus] Plutarch
discoursing of the studies of Philopaemen has this in effect: Plutarch in
Philopaement.
He took noe delight to hear al kind of discourses, nor to read al books of
Philosophy, but such only, as might profit to the daily increase of virtue;
And he read not willingly other passages of Homer, then such, as he thought
had some efficacy to move a man's heart to prowes. But amongst, and above al
other readings, he speciall^ affected the Tacticks of Euangelus: and like wise
the histories of the exploits of Alexander the great. This is al I find of the
Tacticks of Evangelus. I guess notwithstanding, he was a choice author because
Philopaemen had him in such esteem; of whom the same Ibid.
Plutarch writes: That Greece bore him singular affection, as the last
virtuous man, which she brought forth in her old age, after so many great,
and renowned Captains of ancient time; and always augmented his power, and
authority, as his glory increased. In which respect a Roman, praising him,
called him the last Grecian; meaning that after him Greece bred noe great, nor
any personage in deed worthy of her. 7 And Polybius] It is the same Polybius,
whose History, so much as is extant, that excellent learned man Isaac Casaubon
translated into Latin, and set forth 1609. For his life and worth resort to
the preface of the same Casaubon to Polybius his history. He had been in
Achaia, his own country, General of the horse. Afterward being in
displeasure with the Romans, he lived long in prison at Rome: and was for his
worth finally released by intercession of the greatest men of Rome: and became
companion to Scipio Africanus the younger; with whom also he was at the siege
and destruction of Carthage. His Tacticks, whereof Aelian speaks, are
perished with other of his works. Yet are there many passages dispersed here,
and there in his history, which argue his extraordinary skill in matters of
war. And it may seem, that Aelian has taken much from him both for matter,
and words. 8 Iphicrates] Who will read of Iphicrates, let him go to Emilius
Probus ^n vita Iphicratis. Xenoph. histor graec. lib. 6. 587. B. c* Diod sicul.
lib. 15 479. Polyaen. lib ^. in Iphicrate. Justin. lib 6. 631. B. c.
Aemilius Probus, that writes his life. His acts are also declared by
Xenophon, and Diodorus Siculus, and Polyaen, and Justin and diverse others, as
they were incident to their general histories. He was esteemed one of the
best Generals of his time: and was called out by name by Darius King of Persia
to be general of the Graecians, his mercenaries, in the war, he had
against the Egyptians: His fame and aestimation was so great with Alexander
the great, that when his son (whose name was also Iphicrates) with other
Graecians were taken prisoners by him, for that they came ambassadors into
Persia to Darius, he not only spared him for the love of the City of Athens,
and for the remembrance of his fathers glory ( Adrian. lib* 2. 42, c.
the words of Arrian) but held him about him in honor so long, as he lived,
and after his decease sent his relics to Athens, there to be interred by his
friends, and kinsfolk. 9 Posidonius the Stoick] Posidonius in his time was a
Philosopher of high renown, and of the sect, that were called Stoics. Tully
cites him often in his works. In the second book of Tusculan quaestions he
recounteth, Tuscul. question lib. 2. 146.
that Pompey the great, on a time coming to Rhodes, was desirous to hear
him. But understanding he was extreme sick of the gout, he forbore not
notwithstanding to visit him being a most noble philosopher: whom after he
had seen, and saluted, and used with honorable words, and told him, he was
sorry, he could not hear him discourse, you may, if you please, quoth
Posidonius: and I will not suffer pain to be cause, that so great a man seek
me in vain. Then, as he lay in his bed, began he gravely, and copiously, to
dispute, that nothing was good, but that, which was honest. And when
firebrands, as it were, of torment towched him to the quick amiddest his
disputation, he broke forth often into these words: Sorrow, all this is
nothing: Though thou trouble me never so much, I will not yet confess, that
thou art of thy self evil. So Tully. Plin. natural* hist. lib 7, cap ^0 page*
115,
Pliny likewise tells, that Pompey, after the war of Mithridates, going
into the house of Posidonius, a man famous in Philosophy, forbid his serieant
to knock at the door (as the manner was*) and the serieants bundles of rods
( says he) were submitted to a door by him, to whom East and West had
submitted themselves. The same Cicero. de natura deor lib, 2, ^7,
Tully attributes to this Posidonius the invention of a Sphaere, whose
particular conversions did work the same in son and moon, and the other
five planets, that is wrought by the motion of heaven every day and night.
The preparation of warlicke forces and division of them, and how they are
armed. CHAP. II.
I will then begin with such 1 preparations as are absolutely necessary for
service in war, the forces whereof are of two sorts, the one Land forces,
the other ship forces. Land forces are such, as fight on land: Ship forces
such, as are ordered for fight in ships upon Sea, or Rivers. But the order
of Sea service I will reserve for another place, and entreat now of things
pertaining to Land service. The levies then for land service are either of
those, that fight, and manage Arms, or else of those that fight not, but
remain in the camp for necessary uses. They fight that stand ordered in
battle, and with arms [assaile or] repulse the enemy. The rest fight not, as
Physicians, merchants, servants, and other, which follow the camp to minister
unto it. Such as fight, are either footmen, or Riders: footmen properly, that
serve on foot. Of Riders, some use Horses some Elephants. They, that use
Horses, are carye ^ither one Horseback, or else in Chariotts. And these are
the differences in general. But in special the foot, and Horse receive many
other divisions; only the Elephants, and Chariotts, never vary. Footmen then
are reparted into three kinds, one being Armed, another Targettiers, the third
light, or naked. 2 The Armed bear the heaviest furniture of all footmen3
using according to the Macedonian manner large, round, Targetts, and 4 long
Pikes: 5 The Light contrariwise bear the lightest, having neither Curace, nor
Grieve, nor long, or round Targett of any weight, but 6 flieng weapons only
as 7 Arrows, 8 Darts, 9 Stones either for hand, or sling. To this kind is
referred the 10 armor of the Argilos, who has his furniture like to the
Macedonian, but something lighter. For he carries 11 a little slight Torgett,
12 and his Pike is much shorter, then the Macedonian Pike: which manner of
arming seems a mean betwixt the light, or naked, and that which is properly
called heavy: as being lighter, then the heavy, and heavier, then the light:
and that is the cause, that many place it amongst the light.

The forces of Horse (which we distinguished before from Chariotts) as being
ordered in Troops, are either 13 Cataphracts, or not Cataphracts. They are
Cataphracts, that cover their own, and their horses bodies all over with
armor. Of not Cataphracts, some are Launciers, some Acrobolists. 14 Launciers
are such as join with the enemy, and fight hand to hand with the Lance on
horseback. Of these, some bear long Targets, and are therevppon called
Targetiers: Other some Lances alone without Targets, who are properly called
15 Launciers, and of some Xestophori. 16 Acrobolists on horseback are such as
fight a far of with flieng weapons. Of these, some use darts, some bows. They
use darts, whom we call 17 Tarentines. Of Tarentines, there are two sorts;
for some throw little 18 darts a far of, and are termed Darters on horseback,
but properly Tarentines: others use light darts, and 19 after they have spent
one, or two, close presently with the enemy like the Lanciers, which we spoke
of, and fight hand to hand. These in common speech are named light horsemen. So
that of Tarentines some are properly called Tarentines, whose manner is to
darte a far of. Some light horsemen, who join, and fight hand to hand. 20 The
horsemen that use bows are termed Archers on Horseback, and of some Scythians.

These then are the differences of such as are in the Camp, the kinds of
Soldiers being in number nine: Of footmen, armed, Targetiers, Light armed, or
naked: Of horsemen Lanciers, Darters, Archers, Cataphracts: And lastly
Chariots, and Elephants.

Notes.
IN this Chapter the kinds of Soldiers are distinguished according to their
several arms borne in fight. And therefore of foot some are called armed,
because they bear heavy arms; other light-armed or naked, because they wear
no defensive arms, other some Targetiers, because their chief defense rested
in a slight target, wherewith they covered their bodies. The horse also have
their appellation, as their arms are. And some are Cataphracts, because
themselves and horses were armed completely, other Launciers, for that they
used a lance: other some Acrobolists, by reason they fought with flieng
weapons a far of. The first thoughts of a Prince, or State, that is resolved
to put an army into the field, ought to be to provide arms. Arms are the
security of their own soldiers, the terror of the ennemy, the assured
ordinary means of victory. The antiquity of arms is all one with the
beginning of war. For when of ancient time mighty men puffed up with pride,
and led by ambition, sought by violence to enlarge their empire, and to bring
under subjection their bordering neighbors, they were enforced to fly to the
invention of arms, without which noe victory could be obtained. Since, arms
have been taken up for defense also, necessity, the mother of arts, inventing
a means to withstand ambition. As Antalcidas well objected to Agesilaus being
wounded by the Thebans; you are well rewarded for your labor, quoth he, since
you would needs teach the Thebans to fight, that had neither will, nor skill
so to do. For the Thebans being put to necessity of defense grew warlick
through many invasions of the Lacedaemonians, says Plutarch, in Agesilao.
Plutarch. Who were the inventers of the several pieces of armor, and of the
diverse kinds of weapons used in old time, may appear by the relation of Plin.
natural histor. lib. 7. ^56.
Pliny in his natural history. This is certain, that the most warlick nations,
and most victorious have always sought to have advantage of their enemies by
advantage of arms. The end of arms is either to defend, or assault. Hence are
arms divided into two kinds: Defensive, and Offensive. Defensive are those,
which are worn to resist the force, and charge of the enemy. Of this sort are
the headpiece, gorget, curace, vambrace, gantlets, tases, greves, and target.
For whereas there are eleven parts in man, the wounds of any of which bring
with the^ undoubted death (as some (...). Paral ^. Page 57.
authors write) the brains, the two temples, the throat, the breast, the
belly, the two muscles above the two elbowes, the other two above the knees,
and the privy members pierced with a thrust: the headpiece serves for the
defense of the brain, and temples, the gorget for the throat, the curace for
the breast, the vambrace for the muscles of the arms, the tases for the
privities and belly, the greves for the muscles above the knees, and the target
for further assurance of the whole body, being moveable against all strokes,
and profers of the assailants. Offensive arms are such, as men endeavor to
wound, or kill withal: as flieng weapons of all kinds, arrows, stones out of
slings, or the hand, swords, pikes, partisans, iavelines, and the like. Plut.
in (...).
But as defense, and security of a man's self is more agreeable to nature, then
to hurt an enemy, so are the defensive arms preferred before the offensive, in
that they bring safety to him, that bears them, where as the other are
employed in annoieng the enemy only. The Poets set forth their bravest and
valiantest men always best armed for defense. So Achilles in Homer, and Aeneas
in Virgil, are armed to point with arms wrought by Vulcan, to the end to
remain vntowched amiddest the storms of their enemies weapons. The Grecian
Lawgivers punished that soldier, that in fight cast away his target: not him,
that lost his sword or pike. Plutarch. in Agesilao.
Plutarch writes, that at such time as Epaminondas assaulted Sparta (the most
warlicke City of Greece) there was in the City a Spartan named Isadas, who was
the son of Phoebidas, he that surprised the Castle of Thebes called Cadmaea,
and thereby stirred up the war betwixt the Thebans, and Lacedaemonians, and
ruinated the principality of the Lacedaemonians in Greece. This man being in
the flower of his age, and personable, and large of lymmes, ran forth of his
house all naked, his body anointed with oil, without apparaile or arms,
except a sword in one hand, and a Iavelin in the other; and breaking through
the throng of those, that fought on his side, came to hands with the enemy,
and overthrowing some, and killing other some, continued the fight, till the
enemy was repulsed, and at last returned into the City without wound. The
chief magistrate understanding hereof rewarded him with a Crown for his valor,
but yet fined him at a hundred Dram has i^ it 6 oboles that is about (...)
(...) sterling Iul Poll. x. lib. ^. cap. ^ 43^.
drachmes, for that he durst ve^ter to fight without arms defensive; judging
it a (...) almost impossible, that a naked man should escape with life fighting
against the armea^andes of so many valiant enemies, as the Thebans were.

In arms was required, that they should be strong, that they should be
fit, that they should be comely; strong to protect, or annoy, fit to set
close to the body and be manageable, comely to grace him, that bears them.
That defensive arms ought to be strong, may be showed by the end of arms;
which is to save harmless against arrows, darts, and other offensive arms
of the enemy. If they fail of this end, they are of noe use; it being better
to be unarmed, then carry arms, that will not defend. Without arms you have
the body free, and at liberty: carieng arms, though never so light, they must
be a cumber to you, and some what hinder the motion of your body. Arms
therefore ought to be sufficient to resist the weapons of the enemy. The
inconvenience of defective and weak arms is well noted by Vegetius. Vegetius
lib. ^ cap. 20. A cataphract is the just and full armor of the font.
Hereafter we shall see what that armor is.
From the building of the City of Rome, says he, till the time of the
Emperor Gratian, the foot armed their bodies with Cataphractes, and
head-pieces. But when field exercise through negligence and sloth was given
over, armor began to grow heavy, because it was sieldome put on. They made
suite therefore to the Emperor first, that they might leave of their
Cataphractes, then, their headpieces. So our soldiers encountering with the
Goths, were oftentimes wholly defeated and slain by the multitude of their
arrows. And a little after: so comes it to pass, says he, that they, who
without arms, are exposed in the battle to wounds, think not so much of
fight, as of running away. Yet must we not imagine, that those soldiers
fought in their ordinary apparaile only: I incline rather to the opinion of
Stewechius in Veget^um page 5^
Stewechius, who holds, that they took themselves to their military
coats, called in Notitia (...) (...), etc Occident. in fine.
Notitia vtraque, Thoracomachi: and to their Targets; This Thoracomachus was a
garment invented long before Gratians time, and worn under the armours of the
soldiers, and was a kind of felt, but being noe proof against arrows, and
their targets not sufficient to cover their heads, and whole bodies from
arrows, They were obnoxious to the shot of the Goths, and receyved those
overthrowes, Vegetius speaks of.

The matter whereof strong arms were made, I find to be diverse. Some were
forged of Steel: as the armor of Goliath, and the headpiece of K. Saul. For
it is not there set ^ Samuel cap. 17 verse. ^.
down, what his curace was of, Notwithstanding it is likely, it was of the
same matter, of which his headpiece was made. When I say these armours were of
Steel, I follow therein the judgment of Tremelius and Iunius, who so
translate it; and with them also agrees Vatablus. For the old translation
has, that they were of brass: I have not elsewhere read of steel armor. And
it may be, that the old translation had an eye upon the usage of ancient
time, wherein the matter of arms was principally of Brass. Homer reports,
that the armor of Homer Iliad. 6
Diomedes was of brass: and Pausanias, that all the Pausan. in lacon^cis 16^
Heroes (that is the ancient worthies about the time of the siege of Troy) had
their armor of Brass. Athen d^pnoseph lib 14. 627 A
Alcaeus the Poet in describing his armory says, the rest of his arms were of
brass, as his headpieces, his greves, his Targets, only his Curaces were of
linen. Pausan. (...)
Pausanias reports al so that the sword of Memnon was of brass, and the head
of the spear of Achilles, and Pisanders axe, and the head of Meriones his
shafte. Livy lib 1, 27 C
Servius Tullius in sessing the City of Rome, appointed the chiefest and
richest Citizens to arm themselves with headpieces, greves, Curace, and
buckler alofbrasse. The Xeno in Re^. (...) 685 E
targets of the Lacedaemonians were of brass also by the institution of
Lycurgus. So that brass was much used in arms in the oldest times. And where
Alcaeus speaks of his linen Curace, I find that Curaces of linen were in
request also eve^ in those times. Homer affirms that Homer ^ Iliad
Ajax Oileus had a linen Curace. (...) Prob. in Iphicrate.
But afterward Iphicrates the Athenian held them so good that he gave them to
his soldiers to wear, instead of their usual arms made of iron, and brass
And Xenophon armeth Xenoph. Cy^o. lib 6, 169. 3
Abradates the K. of Suse with a linen armor, adding that it was the manner of
that Country* And Plutarch says, that Plutarch. in Alexandro.
Alex. the great, after he had gotten the victory against Darius in Cilicia,
found emo^gest the spoil a line^ armor, which he afterward used in the
battles, he fought Patrie Paral.
Patricius is so confident in the strength of a linen armor of his own
device, that he doubts not to prefer it before well tempered iron. What his
invention is, he keeps to himself* for fear the Turk should have
intelligence of it, and so Christianity be driven to an exigent. Al men know,
that the temper of an iron armor may be such, as will resist the violence of a
musket shot, and that at a near distance. Neither is this temper the
invention of our days. The like has been of ancient time. Plutarch. in
Deme^io.
Plutarch writes, that Demetrius be sieging Rhodes, was presented with two
iro^ armours brought out of Cyprus, either of the weight of 40. pownds. The
maker of them, whose name was Zoilus, desirous to show their strength, and
firmness* caused one to be set up at the distaunce of 26. paces, and be
shot at with an arrowe discharged out of a Catapult. The armor hitte
remained vnpierced, nothing appearing upon it, but the rasing, as it were, of a
pe^knife. And that a Catapult is of more violence, the^ a mus^et, the effects
thereof declared in history make plain. Whether a linen coat be of that
resistance, or not, has not been yet tried. Nay the contrary has been tried.
For Alexander at a siege of a City of the Mallians (as I take it) was sore
wounded with an Indian arrowe through an armor of linen. Whose armor I would
judge to have been not of the stenderest, and weakest, but of the surest
kind. Yet is it not to be passed over that Iustus Lipsius alleges out of
Nicetas Choniates concerning a linen armor of Conradus of Monferrate: Just.
(...) (...) ^ dial. 6 ad Poly
Conradus, says he, fought then with out a target, and in steed of a Curace
he had on a woven weed made of flax, soked in sour wine, well salted, and
often-folded. It was so sure against outward force of strokes, being fulled
with wine, and salt, that it could not be pierced with iron or steel. This
invention our age has not been acquainted with; whether it be the same, that
Patricius aims at, let experience judge. That antiquity practiced it in
wool, Pliny witnesses, who writing of wool and woollen garments says: Plin.
na^al. lib. 8. caq. 48.
Of wool wrought and pressed together by it self alone (I think as our
hatters work felt) a garment is made; and if you work it with vinegar, it
cannot be struck through with a sword. This wool so wrought, he calls
coactam: which in Caesar, as I take it, is called Subcoactum. Caesar's words
sound thus: Caesar de bell* ciui^ lib. 3
Pompey, although he had noe purpose to hinder Caesar's works with his whole
army; nor yet to hazard battle, sent notwithstanding archers and slingers, of
whom he had great store, to convenient places; and by them many of our
soldiers were wounded; and a general fear of arrows fell upon them; and
well nigh our whole camp made themselves coats and cases of either felts
(subcoactis) or quilts, or leather, thereby to avoid the danger of flieng
weapons. But we will leave Patricius to his fancy, and add an example out of
Xenophon of arms used by the Chalybes, a nation inhabiting the Chaldaean
Mounteines. Xenoph. de ex ped. Cyr. l. 4. 3^8 B These wings came down from
their showlders toward their el^ bows.
The Chalybes, says he, were the most valiant nation, that the Graecians
passed through, and such as durst come to hands with them. They used linen
Curaces reaching down to their bellies, and* in steed of wings, they had
roapes thick woond, and fastened together. The strength of roapes thick woond
together must, noe quaestion; be great. Caesar confirms it. Amongst other
defenses, which his soldiers devised for assurance of a Turret against the
Engines of the Marsilians, he says: Caesar de belle civil. lib. ^
They made four stories of Cables fitting the length of the walls of the
Turret, and four foot broad, and fastened them hanging downward to the
beams sticking out of the Turret on those t^ee parts, which lay toward the
enemy; which kind of covering alone, they ^ad in other places made trial,
could be forced or strooken through by noe missiue weapon, or Engine
whatsoever. This, I have heard, was the device of the Spaniards in 88. to
defend their ships against the fury of our artillery. Whereof I may infer,
that if Cables combined together be of such assurance against Engines, roapes
thick laid and fastened together must be a strong defense against a sword. To
end with the matter, whereof arms were made, I find likewise, that the Xenop.
de exp* Cyri. l. 4* 340 A
Macrones used, in steed of Curaces, coats made of hair. And thus much of
the matter of Arms.

Besides, arms should be fit for the body, and for the strength of him, that
bears them. When 1 Samuel c. 17. v. 38
David was to fight against Goliath, K. Saul, seeing him without armor, caused
his own headpiece and curace to be put upon him. David assayed to march, but
finding these arms to heavy, was feign to leave them, and to go against
Goliath unarmed. Saul was the cap. 9. v: 2
tallest man of his nation, David but mean of stature, and to put armor
proportioned to a large body upon him, that is a great way less of members* is
as much, as to deliver him bound to his enemy. Xenophon amongst other causes,
why the Lacedaemonian horse were beaten by the Thebans at the Leuctrian
battle, alleges this for a maine cause* Xenoph hist. brec. li. 6, 596 D
That the richest men kept and furnished out horses, and as often as musters
were taken, the man, that was to serve, showed himself, and answered to his
name, and receiving horse and arms, such, as were given him, was so led
against the enemy. They were beaten, says Xenopho^, receiving horse and arms
at al adventure, not knowing, whether they were fit for service, or not.
Whether arms be to big or to little, they hurt a like. To little, they pinche
the bearer, and make him not able to endure labor; because he is in pain: To
great, by their slap and loose hanging about the body, they hinder the motion
of those parts, that are to be employed in fight. Being fit they differ
little from ordinary apparaile, except it be in weight: which inconvenience is
easily remedied by use, and practice. Cicer^ Tuscul* quest. lib, 2
Tully writes of the Roman soldier, that his continual use of arms was
such, that he noe more reconed his target, sword, headpiece, and other arms
to be burdenous unto him, the^ his shoulders, arms, and hands; and said that
arms were part of a soldiers body, being so fitly made and borne, that need
requiring, they could throw down their burdens, and use their ready arms in
fight, as the members of their bodies. Yet must care be had, that their weight
exceed not the strength of him, that bears them. For who will be able to
centin^w long in fight, that beside the labor of fight, is charged with a
burden more, then he can well bear? The proof is plain in beasts, which how
strong soever they be, faint and tire under to much weight. (...) cap. 12
Alian after, speaking of the length of pikes, gives this rule, that they be
noe longer then a man may well use, and wield in handling. To much length
makes them to heavy, and unfit to be managed; whereby they rest unprofitable
to offend the enemy. In this property of fitness those arms and weapons are
comprehended, which are of most use in the field. For as in all other arts
things of greatest effect are always praeferred, so is it in war. There is
great advantage in arms, which is the cause that one kind has been preferred
before an other: Aemilius Probus gives a notable testimony of skill in matters
of war to Iphicrates, of whom he writes thus: Aemil prob in Iphicra and
Diod. (...). (...). 15, 480
Iphicrates the Athenian invented many things in war. He changed the arms
of the foot: For whereas before they used great targets, short pikes, and
little swords, he gave them little round targets, called Peltae, that they might
be fitter for motions, and encounters, and doubled the sise of their pikes, and
made their swords longer. He likewise changed their Curaces, and instead
of iron, and brass, brought in other wrought of linen, where by he made them
nimbler at all assayes. For lessening the weight, he brought to pass, that
they as much covered the body, and yet were very light, and fit for use. Of
these targets, which Iphicrates invented, the names of Peltati (Targetiers)
sprung: of whom we shall hear more in this chapter. And yet we must not
hereof conclude that Iphicrates changed all the armed foot into Targetiers*
(for the Athenians had still their armed, notwithstanding this invention of
Targetiers, as Xenoph. hist. (...). l (...). 52^ D
Xenophon testifies) but where as the Athenians before had noe targetiers of
their own people, (as I conjecture) Iphicrates brought in this kind of
armor: and so of the armed, he made some targetiers, and left the rest to the
arms, they bore before: judging it more profitable to have both Targetiers,
and Armed of their own people, then armed alone. (...). in PhiloPoly^* l. 6 in
Phi lo^m ^ Pau^an* in A^ (...)
Philopoemen also the brave Achaean General taught his Contrymen instead
of long targets and Iavelines to take arownd target (called Aspis) and a pike
after the Macedonian manner, and to arm themselves with head-pieces, Curates,
and greues; and to settle themselves to a staid, and firm kind of fight, in
lieu of concursory, and peltasticall encounters, and by this means brought
the^ to be valiant, and brave soldiers, and victorious in their fights against
their enemies. Polyb li 2. 118 C and 120 c and lib ^. 26^ E and lib. ^ (...) ^.
c.
Polyb. discoursing of the Gaulois and Spanish swords of ancient time, says,
that the Gauls sword was so fashioned, that it served only to strike with,
and but for one stroke: after which it so bowed both in length and breadth,
that unless the point were rested upon the grownd, and the blade rightened,
you could not strike with it the second time. But the spanish sword was both
for thrust and stroke, having a strong point, and a stiff and sure edge to
strike withal on either side by reason of the firmness of the blade. This
difference the Romans espied, and being excellent imitators of all things,
which were best for use (though they were enemies from whom they took them,)
made choice of the spanish sword, and after Annibals time caused their foot
to use noe either. Suidas in mac^
Suidas witnesses it: The Spaniards, says he, in form of swords far
excel all other nations. For their swords both have a strong point, and an
edge on either side, that enters deep in striking. Which caused the Romans, to
lay down their own country swords, and take the spanish form from them,
that followed Anniball. The form they took, but the goodness of the metal,
and exactness of the temper they could never atteine unto. The Romans then
rejected the french swords, as of small use, and imitated the spanish, because
they were fit for service. Xenophon describing the nations, which followed
Croesus against Cyrus, their manner of arming, and order in battle, tells
of the Xenoph. Cyr. lib 6 Copides were swords a little bending at the points,
like fi^hes Curt. l. ^ ^ 375
Egyptians, that they were armed with targets reaching down to their foot,
with long pikes, and with swords, which they call Copides, and for order,
stood a hundred in depth, and brings in Cyrus deriding this manner of arming,
and order, to his soldiers, saying they were a like armed, a like embattailed.
For their targets, said he, are greater then is fit for action, and for
fight, and being raunged a hundred deep, it is manifest, they will hinder one
another in fight, except a few. Polyb lib 17 page 763 C
Annibal, after his first victory against the Romans, armed his Africans (his
best and most trusty soldiers) with the armor of the slain Romans; because
he fownd it better, then his own; and Pyrrhus used not only the armor, but
the Italian soldiers also: and raunged them a cohort and a Merarchy, alter
natiuely one by another. And Plutarch in Lu cu^o
Mithridates after his experience in his first wars with the Romans, that
as well in arming, as in manner of fight, they excelled all other nations, left
the arming of his own Country, and brought in the Roman sword, and target,
and reduced all as near, as he could unto their discipline. So then strength
and fitness are required in arms. To them is comeliness adjoined. The shield
of Achilles how was it bewtified with pictures and Stories by Vulcan? and that
of Aenaeas, coming out of the same forge, how glorious was it? To say nothing
of the brave arms of Hector, Agamemnon, Diomedes, Glaucus, Turnus, Mezentius,
and other. Plut* in Alex.
Alexanders arms were very rich. He had a Sicilian Cassock gyrded upon a
double linen Curace the spoil of Issos: his headpiece was of iron ^ining like
pure silver, the work of Theophilus; about his neck was an iron gorget besette
with precious stones. A sword he had of wonderful temper and lightness, the
gift of the Citiean King. He wore a baudricke of prowder work, then the rest
of his armor, the work of the elder Elicon, and the honor of the Rhodian
City. Xenoph. Cyrop lib 1, 8 C
And Cyrus the elder, that lived before Alex. time, had arms provided by his
Grandfather Astyages both very fair, and fit for his body. Xenoph Cyrop lib
^, 1^9 B
Abradates the Susian king had his headpiece of gold, and vambraces, and
bracelets about his wrests, and a purple Coat, and a plume of hyacinthine
feathers. Neither did this bravery rest amongst the Princes alone. The
soldiers of Cyrus Xenop. Cyrop lib 7, 172 B
were furnished with the same arms, that Cyrus himself bore, with scarlet
coats, Curaces of brass, brass helmets, white plumes, swords, and every one
a darte. They differed only in this that their arms were gilded, Cyrus his
arms shined, and had a reflection, as it were, a looking glass. And Curtius
lib ^ Silver-targetiers.
Alexan. hearing of the rich armor, the Indians bore, to make his own
soldiers equal with the^ in bravery, whom they exceeded in valor, caused
their targets to be plated over with silver (whereof they were after called
Argyraspides) and their horse-bittes to be made of gold, and adorned their
Curaces, some with silver, other with gold. This might seem pomp and
superfluity in a young King, were it not that the like was done by other the
greatest Generals of ancient times. Plutarch in Caesare.
Caesar may serve for an example for all, whose soldiers how gallant and brave
they were, Plut. testifies in his life. The Romans otherwise much addicted to
frugality, allowed yet liberally ornaments to the honoring of worthy
soldiers, rewarding them for their service, Plinius histornat lib 7 cap 28
Polyb lib ^, 4 (...) B, C
with rich trappings for horses, chains of gold, bracelets, crowns of gold
and other honors: which they wore not only in the field, but at al other
solemnities and meetings in the City. And for every common soldier they
provided plumes of purple, or black feathers, every one of a cubit long. Of
which plumes Polyb. gives this judgment: Pluimes, says he, being added to
the rest of the armor makes a soldier seem twice as great, as he is; and
beside the fair show, they make, they are terrible to the enemy in fight. A
man may seem as light, as a fether, that discourses of plumes, and fetches
ornament from feathers. Yet may I truly affirm, that the use of plumes is very
ancient, and that the Romans borrowed it from the Graecians, and the Graecians
from the Herod. li. 1. 34
Carians, who were the first inventers of them. As much is testified by
Polyen. li. 7 in psammench. 1.
Polyenus: He says that Tementhes K of Egypt going to the oracle of Ammon
about the state of his kingdom, had answer to beware and take heed of Cocks.
Psammetichus, that sought the kingdom, had Pigretes a Carian to one of his
familier friends* and learning of him, that the Carians were the first that
inve^ted Plumes to their helmets, and eve^ then continued the use of them, and
contecturing that the meaning of the Oracle was not of Cocks, but of men,
that, wearing some ornament on their heads, had a resemblance of Cocks, waged
a multitude of Carians against Tementhes, by whose help he overthrew Tementhes
in battle, and possessed himself of the crown of Egypt. Now for the true end
of soldiers ornaments I will only add one example. Philopoemen the Achaean in
reforming the abuses crept into the Achaean State with great judgment ( I will
use the words of Plu in Philop. Poly^ li. 11. ^29. ^.
Plutarch,) reduced to order their delicacies and superfluities. It was not
possible quite to take away the sickness of vain and idle desires, wherewith
they had of long time been possessed, delighting in excess of apparaile, in
rich dies of coverlets, and carpets, striving one with another, who should be
most sumptuous in bankets and feastings. But by little and little beginning to
turn their thoughts from unnecessary expenses to a love of comeliness in
things, that were profitable and honest, he brought them at last to leave the
expenses of the body, and to show themselves gallant, and brave, in soldierly,
and warlick furniture. A man might therefore have seen the shoppes full of
silver and golden cups cut a pieces, of curaces gilded with gold, of
silvered targets, and bittes; the places of exercise fraught with colts then
first backed for service, and with young galla^ts managing their arms; and in
the hands of women head-pieces adorned with divers-coloured trymmings,
horsemens coats, and soldiers cloakes curiously embellished with flowers. For
the very sight of these things both increases Spirit, and stirs up desire,
and engenders an undaunted boldness, and alacrity to dangers. In other
shows to much lavashing brings in effeminatenesse, and works a
remissness of mind, the sense with vain pleasings and ticklings subverting,
as it were, the vigor and force of the understanding. But in these the Spirits
are much heigthened, and exalted. As Homer brings in Achilles at the very
sight of his new armor ravished and inflamed with a desire to be doing with
it. Thus garnishing the youth he exercised and hardened them to labor and
warlicke motions, making them thereby to undergo with desire whatsoever they
were commanded. So far Plutarch. Out of whose opinion it follows, that
Bravery of arms raises the spirits, stirs up desire to fight, makes the
soldier bold, and cherefull to perils, and as Polybius holds pleases the
sight, increases stature in show, and is a terror to the enemy. Yet ought
there therein a mean to be sought, and rather an assurance followed, then
vain gazing and ostentation. Antiochus being to fight with the Romans gathered
a mighty army together. And seeing them glitter with gold and silver, and with
all excess of bravery, as the manner of the Asiaticall people was, took so
great delight therein himself, that calling Anniball unto him, he showed his
troops, and demanded, if he thought not that Army sufficient for the Romans:
yes quoth Anniball, though they were the most covetous people in the world.
Anniball with good reason derided the vain show fitter for a mask, then a
field, which he assured himself, would fall into the Romans hands to be
spoiled. Mithridates committed the like error in his first war against the
Romans. For, as Sophisters are wont for the most part, says Plutarch. in
(...).
Plutarch, he was in the beginning vain glorious, and conceited by proud
warring against the Romans with weak forces, but yet set out with pomp, and
bravery to the outward view: But being foiled to his shame, and weighing in his
mind, he must take up second arms against them, he sought to reduce his
forces to a true kind of arming, and fit for the service, he intended.
Rejecting therefore multitudes, and confased threatenings of barbarians, and
furnitures of arms gilded, and set with precious stones, as being a pray
for the conqueror, and noe assurance for him, that wears them, he brought in
the Roman swords, and caused long heavy targets to be framed, and chose
horses, rather that were already managed, and made fit for service, then
those, that were richly trapped and garnished. So far Plutarch. The soldiers
care therefore ought to be first for surenesse, then for fitness, lastly sor
comeliness and ornament in arms. If the two first fail, the last avails
little, and will prove rather a burden, then a defense. And thus much of arms
in general: Now follow the particulers of arms, as they are in Aelian.

1 Preparacions absolutely necessary for warre] The preparacions, whereof
Aelian speaks, are so necessary, that without them noe war can be made or
continewed. For purposing to fight by water you must have ships, by land, you
must have foot, and horse. For which, if you provide noe arms, you put them
into the field not to fight, but to be slaughtered. The manner of fight in the
field is not of one sort. Some time celerity is needful, to attempt or prevent
the enemy: sometime a slow and sure proceeding, lest, with to much have, we
be overtaken our selves Therefore the diverse arming of soldiers, ought to be
such, that they may serve for all occasions, and uses, and that we may employ
always to service such, as by reas^ of their armor, shall most fit our
purpose. Wherefore Plutarch in Pelonida. Polyen. l. 3 in Iphier 22 Leo ca. 20.
19^
Iphicrates fittly resemble^ an army to a man's body: calling the heavy-armed
the body, the light-armed the hands, the horse the feet, and the General the
head: and as, if any of the rest were wanting, the army should be lame, and
halted, so if there want a General, it is unprofitable, and of noe use. The
heavy armed are the body, which give life and food, as it were, to the rest:
and to which the rest being distressed, retire. The light-armed are the hands,
which upon every occasion being put out to grype and ^ake hold upon the enemy,
are drawn in again, when it is expedient. The horse, a^ feet, move with
celerity: the General is the head, that rules, that watches, that cares for
the rest, directing the times of their motion, and of their rest. So then the
whole force of the field consists of horse, and foot. And the foot are
reparted into three kinds.

1 Armed, Targetiers and light-armed] These several kinds of soldiers were
used by all the Graecians especially by the Thucyd. lib. 4. 3. 5. B. C.
Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and Thebans, who were the mightiest and the most
warlick people of Greece. Alexander had them in his army against Darius.
Arrian. li. ^. 3^. ^.
When Alexander, says Arrian, came to the place, where Cyrus (with whom
Xenophon was) encamped, and saw the streights of Cilicia possessed with a
strong guard, he left Parmenio with the heavy-armed, to stay behind, himself
about the first watch taking with him the Hypaspistes, archiers and Agrians,
marched on toward the streights in the night. The armed were left with
Parmenion, himself took with him the Hypaspists ( targetiers) archers, and
Agrians: Arrian. li. 1. 1^ E.
These Agrians were darters on foot. The like is to be found in diverse other
places of Arrian. Plutarch. in Pyrr^o.
Pyrrhus also, that followed the Macedonian manner in arming his soldiers,
had the same division of arms. Polyb li. 4 ^ 3^ ^
And Philip King of Macedony son of Demetrius. Appion in Syriac 107. D.
And Antiochus, that warred against the Romans. 2 The armed bear the heaviest
furniture] This heavy furniture appears not by description of the arms,
which Aelian gives them: which are a Macedonian target, and a pike only.
A^milius Probus in vita Iphicrat.
Iphicrates, besides the target (less, then the Macedonian target) which he
armed his Targetier withal, gave him both a pike and a linen ^urace: So that
if the Macedonian armed bore no^ more then a Target and a pike, his arms
should be lighter, then Iphicrates his Targetier, who had a target, a pike, and
a linen Curace. It has been the manner of some Nations to bear targets alone
without Curaces. So did the Egyptians in Xenoph Cyr. lib 7 1-^ ^
Xenophon: So the Gauls in (...). in Pho cicis 648
Pausanias. There are again, that have born Curaces without Targets: as
Phorcys the Phrygian in Homer: of which kind of Curace, because it some what
resembles the Curaces of our time, I will rehearse the description out of
Pausan in Pho cic 660
Pausanias. There lay upon the altar, says he, a brazen Curace, the form
whereof agrees not with the use of our times, but of old it was common. It had
two plates of brass, one fit for the breast and the belly, the other to cover
the back. That before, was called gyalon (the hollow part) that behynd
Prosegon (because it was added to the other.) They were fastened together with
buttons behind. It seems to be a sufficient defense for a man's body without
a Target. Therefore Homer makes Phorcys the Phrygian to fight without a
target, because he wore such a Curace. But yet, that it was not the manner of
Gya^othorax.
the Macedonian armed to bear pike and target alone, may be plain many ways.
First Polyen li 4 in Philipp. 10
Polyen gives them headpieces, and greues, and targets, and pikes. Then doubt
I not but they were as well armed as the rest of the Graecians, within whose
Panoplia Curaces were comprehended as Ad Ephesians. cap 6 v 14
S. Paul testifies rekoning as parcels of the Panoplia, a Curace, a target,
and a headpiece. Now that the Macedonians had also their Panoplia (full or
complete arming) is to be fownd in Diod Sicul. lib 17, 619 and 615
Diod. Siculus. Where also Choragus the Macedonian (whom Q Curtius calls
Horatas) is said in the fight betwixt him and Dioxippus to be fully armed. Leo
cap 6 25 and 35 37
Leo describes the Panoplia of the Macedonians after this manner. Alexander,
says he, armed his Macedonians with a large target, a sword, a head piece,
greues, vambraces, and a long pike. Philopaemen (as is before rehearsed)
reducing his Achaeans to the Macedonian arming, brings them to Curaces, head
pieces and greues. The names also, that are attributed to the Armed, show, they
were otherwise armed. Plut. in Timol.
Plutarch calls them Pephragmenos, and Cataphractos (as having their bodies
all armed and oppos^th them to Euzoni light or naked:) And by Veget. ^ 1 ca. 20
Vegetius, the armor it self is named Cataphracta, because the whole body is
covered there with. Xenoph. Cyr. 167 C
Xenophon terms them Thor^cophoros bearing Curaces.) These are the strength
of the battle, and a Veget. li. 1 cap 20
strong wall or rather a fortress of the field* to whom the light-armed, and
Diod Sicul. lib 18
the horse also retire in time of need. As long as they stand the field is not
lost; being defeated the rest can make noe resistance. Being armed with a
single target without other arms, they incur the same danger, that the Romans
in Gratians time did, who for want of Curaces were entierly destroyed with the
arrows of the Goths. Wherefore, it seems, Alian here points at the
principal arms only of the armed Macedonian. For after ward discoursing of
the light-armed, he says, they neither had Curace, nor grieve, nor long or
round target: implieng thereby, that the armed had them all. So Livy lib 9. 243
C
Livy, comparing the arms of the Romans and Macedonians together, says noe
more, then, that the Macedonians were armed with a round target and a pike, the
Romans with a long target, and a darte, called Pilum; when himself had Livy lib
1. 27 C
before declared, they had headpieces, Curaces, and greues. 3 Using targets
after the Macedonian manner] Targets were of two sorts, round targets, and
long targets. Long targets were called Thureo, and were in form like a door*
from whence they had their name. For Thura signifies a door. These the
Romans, and Gauls used, albeit some what different in form. The cap. 12
round had eight full handfulls in diameter, as Alian says, and were termed
As^ides Long targets were much disliked by the Graecians. Cyrus in Xenophon
derideth them, as both hindering the sight, and being unwieldy: Polyen. li. 6
in Philopoe.. ^ and P^ut. in Philopoe.
and Philopoemen changed them into round targets following the Macedonian
manner. The targets of Philopoeme^ Pausan. in Ar. cad 4^4.
Pausanias terms Arg^lican targets; It may be because they were first used by
the Argiues in the battle betwixt Pausan. in Corinthiacis 1^1 and Pli^nat
hi^. l. ^ cap. 56
Acrisius Danaes father, and Praetus, who contended about the kingdom of Argos.

Of what matter these targets were, is a quaestion. Some take them to have been
made of other matter, and covered over with brass: and that otherwise the
soldier should not have been able to have born them for the weight. I deny
not, that in ancient time some targets were plated with brass: the rather,
because I find, that Alexander to match the Indian pomp covered the targets of
his soldiers with plates of silver. But, that the ordinary Macedonian target
was so covered, I deny. cap. 12
Aelian after calls them chalce ( brazen) not epichalce ( covered with
brass.) Polyb. l 2, (...) B and lib. 4, 331 ^ and 332 C
Polyb. says, that the Macedonians in the time of K. Philip the son of
Demetrius were called Chalcaspides ( Brazen targetiers) not epichalkitai, by
which name, as Hesychius has, they were called, that had their targets covered
with brass. So likewise Plu^ in Aemili^
in the time of Perseus. And the Megapolitans, who imitated the Macedonian
manner of arming, are termed Chalcaspides Polyb. l. 2. 150 B and 332 D lib. 4
in Polybius: I have showed, that the Lacedaemonians had Xenop de rep. Laced 68*
^
brazen targets by the institution of Lycurgus: and that, in the time of the
Heroes almost all armor was made of brass. Pausan in Boeotici^ 56^
The targets of the Lacedaemonians that were slain at the battle of Leuctra
were brass, and to be seen in the time of Pausanias: and the brazen target
Pausan. in Corinth. 123
of Pyrrhus, Which he left at Argos, being there slain, was kept in the temple
of C^es. As for the weight, it is not so great but it may become ligh^ enough
by use, and exercis^ we see iron targets in use at this day, and not hard to
be borne. And albeit the weight be not for every man's strength, yet since it
has been, and is, the manner to make choice of soldiers, and to fit them
with arms according to the ability of their bodies, I see noe reason, but the
stronger sort might well bear them. Another sort of targets there was which
differed from the Macedonian not so much in form of roundnesse, as in matter,
and manner of carieng. They were made of wicker, and borne in the left hand as
our bucklers, which we used not long since; and Xenoph. de X^. Cyri 352 A
some covered over with hides, some not. Xenoph. Cyr. lib 2, 40 B
Xenophon says, that Cyrus the elder armed the Persians with these wicker
targets: and reko ning up the nations, through whose Countries the Graecians
passed in their return out of Persia, and describing their arms, Xenop. de
Xpe. Cyr lib. 4. 336 B
reports that the Chalybes, Taochi, and Phasians had targets of this kind.
Now, that they were borne in the left hand, is clear by the same Xenoph.
Xenoph. Cyr^. lib. 7, 177 E.
He writes thus of the fight betwixt Cyrus and Craesus: The Egyptians and
Persians encountering together, the fight was hard, and sharp: and the
Egyptians as well in number as in arms, had the advantage. For they fought with
stiff, long pikes, and their large targets better covered their bodies, then
Curaces, or wicker targets, and being borne on their shoulders availed to
joint-thrusting foreward. Serring therefore their targets close, they
advaunced, and ran on. The Persians were not able to endure the shock, by
reason they bore their wicker targets at the arms end, but retiring by little,
and little, and giving, and taking blows, they maintained the fight till they
came to the Engines. So far Xenophon. Out of which words a man may plainly
understand the manner af bearing these wicker targets, which by reason of
lightness might easily be held out at arms end. And as the Egyptian target,
which reached down to the foot, must needs be heavy, and therefore had ^eed
of the shoulder to support it, so was it with the brazen targets of the
Macedonians, which were also weighty, by reason of the matter, they were made
of. These therefore were likewise carried on the shoulder. Plutarch witnesses
it in the life of Aemilius. And the same Plutarch rehearses that Cleomenes the
King of Sparta taught his Lacedaemonians, in steed of a spear, to use a pike
with hoth hands, and to bear their^ targets upon the strappe not by the
handle. The words are obscure, and need light, which I will give as shortly,
as I can. I find three words amongst the Graecians, all perteyning to (...).
a target. They are those Telamon, ochane, or ochanon, and porpax. Telamon in
this sense (for it signifies otherwise a band is by all confessed to be the
broad strappe, which is fastened to the handle of the target, and holds the
target being cast about the neck, unto the back. Of Ochane, and porpax is some
variance. Suidas in Ochano.
Suidas says that Ochanon is (...). The hold of the target Hesychius (...)
Ocha^o.
Hesychius calls it the Porpax of the target, and the band, (...). Of Porpax
(...) in (...).
Hesychius says it is the handle of the target, and takes Porpe i^ the same
sense, making it the thing bearing up the targett into which the hand and arm
to the elbow is thrust. Suidas in Porpax.
Suidas says, Porpax is it, that they hold the target by; which is called
ochanes: and again, that some take it for the band of the target; other some
for the middel iron that goes through the target, on which the soldier takes
hold. So that both Hesychius, and Suidas agree, that Ochanon and Porpax are
sometime alone, and signify the handle of the Target. In which sense Herodotus
(...) ^, 34
Herodotus and Pausan. in (...) ^40
Pausanias take Ochanon also. Hesychius further interprets it for the band of
the target ((...)) which signification better agrees with the meaning of
Plutarch, who makes an apparent difference betwixt the^, reporting that
Cleomenes taught the Lacedaemonians to carry their targets, by the Ochane, not by
the Porpax. When he says by the Ochane, be means by the strappe, by which,
being fastened about the neck, the target is thrown over to the back, and
rests upon the left shoulder. That, which I say, will better appear, if we
mark, what the Lacedaemonians did before, and what Cleomenes advises them
unto. Before they carried a spear in the right hand, and a target by the handle
in the left, so that both their hands were full. The spear was not able to
match the enemies pike (for Plutarch. in vi ta Cleome^
Cleomenes had often to do with the Macedonians and Achaeans, who both used
pikes) and pikes, the Lacedaemonians could not wield, with one hand; So then, to
give them liberty of both hands, he counseled the^ to carry their targets at
their backs by the strappe or Ochane ( which was the Macedonian manner) and
not to hold them any more by the Porpax or handle; and so to free their left
hand, to apply both to the menaging of a pike. This I take to be the direct
meaning of Plutarch: Cleomenes then persuaded them to leave their spears, and
take pikes. And left the target in the left hand might prove an impediment to
the use of a pike, he thought best they should carry them at their back by the
Ochane. To carry them then by the strappe at the back is to give free use to
the left hand, without which a pike, specially a long pike, such as Cleomenes
advised them unto, cannot be wielded: as experience will teach any man, that
list to make trial.

4 And long pikes.] Pikes for the most part have been called by two names by
the Graecians; Doru, and Sarissa. Aelian names them Dorata both here, and in
other places of this book. Xenoph de exped. Cyr lib. ^ (...), c
Xenophon, speaking of the weapons of the Chalybes, says they had Dorata of
15. cubits long; armed with iron at one end only. Tet is Doru taken for a
spear oftentimes, as in that place of Plutarch Plut in (...).
last recited where Cleomenes persuaded the Lacedaemonians to change their
Dorata (spears) into Sarissas (pikes.) The like recounteth he of Pl^. in
Philo.
Philopoemen, who changed the spears of the Achaeans into pikes, calling the
spears, Dorata, the pikes, Sarissas. And even in this place Aelian terms
them not Dorata simply, but with addition of Perimekestera, of a longsise. And
after describing the arms of the Peltastes he says their spears (Dorata)
were much shorter then the pikes (Sarissae) of the armed. Properly the pike of
the Macedonian is termed Sarissa; if sometime Doru, some other word is added to
avoid the ordinary signification of Doru; as Doru macron Xenop. de exp. Cy^.
in Xenophon, Doru perimekes in Aelian. Yet deny I not, but it may be called
Doru of the matter. For Doru signifies wood of any kind: and by consequent
the wood, a pike is made of. But, as I said, the Macedonian pike is properly
called Sarissa. What the length of this pike was, Aelian will show in the 14.
Chapter. And for the wood it was made of, I take it to have been Corneil. For
I find that the Macedonian horsemans staff was of that wood. Arrian. lib.
(...) 15, ^
Arrian confirms it, saying: And now the Macedonians had the better both by
reason of the strength of their bodies, and experience in war, and also
because they fought with Corneil lances against Iavelins. For I assent not to
the translater of Arrian who turns Xystois Craneinois into Corneil darts,
where it should be Corneil lances. For in that place Alexander is reported to
have fought with a lance, and to have broken it in fight, and to have asked
another of Aretes, one of the Quiries of his stable, who had also broke his,
and fought with the truncheon, and to have taken the lance of Divarates the
Corinthian, and returned presently to the fight, and therewith overthrown
Mithridates the son in law of Darius. Besides it is said, that the
Macedonians had the advantage in weapons; Take it thus, that they fought with
darts against Iavelins, what advantage had they? especially being come to the
shock: Darts are used a far of. At hand noe man fights with them, unless
he have noe other weapon. I think noe man will deny, but that a Iavelin in
closing is more advantageous then a darte. And that Xyston signifies a lance
Aelian himself testifies in this Chapter calling the launciers Doratophori,
or Xystophori. The Macedonian then had his horsemans staff of Corneil. Whi^
Pliny nature. hist. li. 16. cap. 4^
Pliny affirms to be a sound and a fast wood. If his lance: a man may
^bably conjecture, his pike also, which exceeded the lance in length and
thickness only. We at this day prefer the Ash before all woods for
toughness; lightness and beauty; especially if the vain run through to
the end. Notwithstanding I find in Aurel. Cicut^ de disciplina mil. lib. 2* 21^
Cicuta a knight of Venice, an old soldier, and one that followed the Emperor
Charles the fifth in his wars of Africa, that the opinion of his time enclyned
rather to Fur, both for lightness, and strength. I have not seen the
experience: therefore leave I the judgment to trial. We have then out of
Aelian that the armed, had both target and pike, that one man should at one
time use both target, and pike in fight, against the enemy will seem
incredible in our days. Yet used the Macedonian soldiers both; at one instant
they both charged their pikes, and covered themselves with their targets
against the flyeng weapons of the enemy. The manner was this: when they closed
with the enemy, they charged their pikes with both hands, and with a slight
wryeng of the body, and lifting up the right shoulder, whirled their target,
hanging at their back, upon the left shoulder, that stood next the enemy in
the charge: and so covered all their body to the middle, and beneath. I have
touched it in the practice of Cleomenes. It appears more plainly in
Plutarch, describing the battle betwixt K. Perseus, and the Consul Aemilius.
He has this: Plutarch. in Aemilio.
The enemy approaching Aemilius issued out of his Camp, and fownd the
legionary Macedonians, bearing now the heads of their pikes stiff upon the
targets of the Romans, not suffering them to come up to the sword: which when
he saw, and saw with all the other Macedonians casting about their targets
from behind their shoulders, and receiving the Roman targetiers with their
pikes abased together at one signal, and likewise the firmness of the
battle shut up, and serred, and the roughness of the front (the pikes
lyeng out before) he became astonished, and affrighted, as having never before
beheld so fearful a sight. Which passion, and spectacle, he afterward
oftentimes recounted to his familier friends. This ioy^ing of targets in the
front is called Synaspismos: whereof we shall have occasion to speak
heere-after. 5 The light.] They had diverse names given them in the Greek
history. Sometimes they are called Polyb 13, 263
Euzoni, because they so girded up their apparaile about the^, that b. Athen.
dipnosoph. li 5, 194, D. Xenop^. de exp^d. Cyri. lib. ^, 306, B.
they were light and fit for motion: Sometimes (...). in (...). ^35.
Askeuoi, because they bear no military furniture of defense: Sometimes
Xenoph. de exped. lib. 3. 30^, B and lib. 4, (...), C
Elaphroi because they resemble (as some think) a heart in lightness, and
swiftness: Sometimes Xenoph. Cyro. lib. 7. 189, C.
Gynnietae (naked) because they were without defensiu^ arms: Sometimes Psyloi
(naked or light) as they are here termed by Aelian, and by Appian in Par. 144,
Appian, and the other, that I cited. 6 Flyeng weapons onely] The light-armed
are divided into three kinds, Archers, Darters, and Slingers. Which three
kinds were of much use amongst the Graecians, and they bear only flieng
weapons. Xenoph. Cyr. lib. 7, 188, 8,
Xenophon testifies that Cyrus the elder had them: Xenoph de exped. lib. 3 306
B, and lib 4, 326, A
And the Graecians in their return out of Persia: Arrian. lib, 1, ^1, E.
Alexander had them in his war against Darius: and Plutarch. in Py rho
Pyrrhus in his war in Italy, Sicill and Greece: (...) fan, in Ph^cicis 648.
The Graecians against Brennus King of the Gauls: Thucyd. lib. 4, ^15, B,
Both the Athenians, and The bans at the battle of Delos. 7 Arrowes] Archers
have always been of special esteem for the field, and preferred before the
other kinds of light-armed. Many nations have been commended for their skill
in shooting. Amongst the Graecians the Cretans were (of a^ncient time) sole
archers, Pausan. in At- (...). 40,
as Pausanias witnesses. Yet was not their service aequall with the service
of the Persians. For Xenophon confesses, that the Persian bow overreached the
Cretan a great way: and that the Rhodians with their sling owt-threw the
Cretan bow. Of the Carduchans a people, through whose Country the Graecians
passed at their return out of Persia Xenoh de exped Cyri. lib. 4. 322, C.
Xenophon writes thus: They carried noe other arms, then bows and slinges.
They were excellent archers; and had bows well nighe three cubits long;
arrows more, then two Cubits. When they shot, they drew the string,
applieng their hand some what toward the neither end of the bow, setting
their left foot foreward. With their arrows they pierced both targets, and
Curates. The Graecians putting thonges to the midst of their arrows sent
them back at the enemy in steed of Darts. The same in effect is reported by
Diodor. Sicul. lib. 14, 411.
Diodorus Siculus. Of the Parthian horsemen, Appian says: When Crassus
commanded the light-armed to disband, and go to the charge, they went not
far, but meeting with many arrows, and being sore galled with them, they
retired straight, and hid themselves amongst the armed, and gave beginning of
disorder, and fear, repraesenting to the sight of the rest, the force, and
violence of the shot, that rent all arms, they fell upon, and made way
as well thorough bodies, that had the best, as the worst furniture defensive:
giving mighty and violent strokes from stiff and great bows, and forcing out
the arrowe boisterously with the compass, and bent of the bow. Plutarch. in
crosso.
Plutarch has the very words, that are in Appian. The Indians also were good
archers, albeit not much praised by Q. Curtius, Curtius lib. 8 358.
He says: their arrows were two Cubits long, which they deliver out of
their bows, with more labor, then effect: for as much as the arrow, whose
whole efficacy is in lightness, becomes altogether unwieldy by reason of the
weight. And yet he tells, that Alexander, at the assault of the principal
City of the Mallians, was struck thorough his Curace into the side beneath the
pappes with an Indian arrowe: with whom Plutarch in Alexand Diod. ficul. lib
17 ^14
Plutarch and Diod. Siculus accord. Arr. 16 129 E
Arrian adds the wound was so deep, that his breath was seen to issue out
together with his blood. The Goths and other people of the north, that invaded
the Roman empire, had their chief victories against the Romans by the help of
bows, and arrows. Veget. lib. ^. c. (...).
Vegetius (before alleged) speaks it plainly: So our soldiers, says he,
unarmed both bodies and heads, encountering with the Goths, were oftentimes
wholly defeated, and slain, with the multitude of their arrows. I may not
pretermitte the praise of our nation in this skill. Our own stories testify,
that the great battles, we gained against the french, were gained by the
ioint-shooting of our archers principally. And that the English have heretofore
excelled in archery and shooting, is clear by the testimony even of Strangers.
A^rel. Cicuta de discipline. mili. lib. 2. 206.
Cicuta (whom I named before) commending the use of bows, as necessary for the
s^rvice of the field (and that long after gunnes were invented) praeferreth the
English before all other, and sets him down, as a pattern for other to
follow. And Patrie. Parall. part secuqda li. 3 page 37.
Patritius, disputing of the violence of arrows, doubts not to affirm, that
an English arrowe with a little wax put upon the point of the head, will pass
through any ordinary Corslette or Curace. Howsoever the credit of bows is
lost, at this present, with many great soldiers, yet have they of ancient
time been highly prised. Veget. lib. 1 (...). 15.
Vegetius says; how great advantage good archers bring in fight, both Cato in
his books of military discipline does show evidently, and Claudius, by
augmenting the number of archers, and teaching of them the use of their bows,
overcame the enemy, whom before he was not able to match. Scip^o Africanus
(the younger) being to give battle to the Numantines, that before had forced a
Roman army to pass under the yoke, thought he could not otherwise have the
better, unless he mingled chosen archers in every (...) And Leo (...). ^. 5. ^
Leo the Emperor in his Constitutions military has this Constitution ^ongest
other: You shall comm^un ^ all the Roman youth, till they come to forty years
of age, whether they have mean skill in shooting, or not, to carry bows and
quivers of arrows. For since the art of shoo ting has been neglected, many,
and great losses have befallen the Romans. And in another place: Leo cap. 11.
5. 49.
you shall enjoin the Commanders under you, in winter to take a view, and to
signify to the Turm^ches (Coronells) now many horse, and what kind of arms
the soldiers, under their commaundes, stand in need of, that necessary
provision be made, and the soldiers be furnished in time convenient. But
specially you are to have care of archers; and that they, who remain at home,
and have vacation from war, hold bows and arrows in their howses. For
carelessnesse heerin has brought great damage to the Roman State. So Leo.
This of old time was the opinion of the Romans concerning archers. How we
are fallen out with them in our days (the skill of the bow, being a quality
so commendable, and so proper to our nation) I know not, unless fire-weapons
perhaps have put them out of countena^nce. And surely it may not be denied,
that the force of fireweapons of our time does far exceed the height of all
old inventions for anoyeng the enemy. And, when I have given them the first
place, I will not doubt to give the second to bows and arrows being so far
from casting them of, that I would rather follow the wisdom of the Graecians;
who albeit they esteemed arrows the best flieng weapons, yet thought it not
amiss to hold in use slinges, and darts- Every weapon has it property; and
that which is fit for one service, is not so fit for another. The
fireweapons have their advantages; They have also their disadvantages. Their
advantage is, they pierce all defense of armor, and lighting upon a place of
the body, the wound whereof endaungereth life, they bring with them certain
death. Their disadvantages are, they are not always certain, sometimes for
want of charging, sometimes through over charging, sometimes the bullet rolling
out, sometimes for want of good powder, or of dried powder, sometimes because
of an ill dried match, not fit to coal, or not well cocked. Besides they
are somewhat long in charging, while the musketier takes down his musket,
vncockes the match, blows, proynes, shuttes, casts of the pan, castes about
the musket, opens his charges, charge, draws out his (...) stick, rams in
the powder, draws out again, and puts up his skowring stick, lays the musket
on the rest, blows of the match, cocks, and tryes it, gardes the pan, and so
makes ready. All which actions must necessarily be observed, if you will not
fail of the true use of a musket. In rain, snow fogges, or when the enemy
has gained the wind, they have small use. Add that but one rank (that is
the first) can give upon the enemy at once. For the rest behind, discharging,
shall either wound their own Companions before, or else shoot at randon, and
so nothing endaunger the enemy, the force of a musket being only availeable at
point blanck. Contrary wise the disadvantage of arrows is in the weakness of
the stroke; which is not able to enter a Curace, that the foot or horse now
use. Yet can noe weather be found, where in you may not have good use of
bows: rain, snow, wind, hail, fogges, hinder little (especially the string
of the bow being not to wette) may rather profit Because in them you can
hardly discern, much less avoid, the fall of the arrowe. As for quickness
in delivery the bow far excels the musket. A good single archer is able
to give five shot in excha^nge for one of the musketier; and that with such
certainty, that you shall not hear of an archer that misseth the delivery of
his arrow, where the musketier, often fails by reason of the accidents and
impediuients before by me rehearsed. Join that a whole squadron of archers,
being embattailed, may shoot at once together: which only the first rank of
musketeers may do. And make the case there were a hundred musketters, and a
hundred bowe-men each digested into ten f^les, each file containing ten men,
the bow men shall be able to shoot at once a hundred arrows (all their
arrows) for ten bullets given by the musketeers, namely those ten of the first
rank discharging alone. It must not be pretermitted, that the bow and quiver
both for marching, and all service, are lighter and of less labor to ^se,
then a musket, which is noe small advantage in arms and fight. To conclude the
bowe-men may be placed behind the armed foot, and yet in shooting over the
Phalange anoy the enemy before joining, and (...) (...) (...).
all the time of fight, even whilst they are at pushe of pike; where the
musketier, there placed, must either idly look on, or else playeng with his
musket, most of all endaunger his own friends. Neither is the force of
arrows so weak, as is immagined, noe not in the arming of our days. For the
pike albeit he have his head and body covered, yet are his legs, and feet,
his arms, and hands open to wounds: any of which parts being wounded bringes
a disability of service. To say nothing of his face, and eyes, before which the
showers of arrows falling like a tempest without intermission, must needs
breed a remediless terror, and make him think rather of saving himself,
then offending his enemy. The musketier being also unarmed is as subject to the
shot of arrows, as the archer is to the shot of the musket; and the arrow
touching any vital part, as much takes away life, as does the musket. Lastly
a horseman for his own person (I must confess) is safe enough from the
danger of arrows by reason of his armor but his horse, being a fair and
large mark, and having neither barbe, nor pectorall, nor ought else to hide his
head or breast, how can he escape wounds? Witness our fields in France,
where our Archers always beat the french horse, being barbed, and better
armed, then our horse are, at this day. And for the bloody effect of bows the
story of Plutarch is worth the rehersing. He, in the life of Crassus has thus:
(...) (...) (...)
The Parthians opposing the Cataphracts against the Roman horse, the other
Persians galloping here and there dispersedly, and troubling the face of the
field, broke up from the bottom, hills of sand, that raised infinite dust,
whereby the Romans lost their sight and voice: and thronging together, and
thrusting one another were wounded, and died not a simple, or quick death,
but tormented with convulsions and panges of grief, walllowing up, and down,
in the sand to break the arrows in their wounds, or else endeavoring to
pluck out the hooked heads, which had pierced veins and sinews, renting a
fresh themselves, and adding torment to torment: so that many died in this
manner, and the rest became unprofitable. And when Publius Crassus desired them
once more to charge the Cataphracts, they showed their hands nailed to their
targets, and their feet fastened to the grownde, whereby they were unable
either to fly, or fight. These wonders did the Parthian bows, which
notwithstanding were not to be compared to our ancient English bows, either
for strength, or far shooting. And that we may not seem to rely upon
antiquity alone. Patric* (...) mil. part. ^. (...)
The battle of Curzolare (commonly called the battle of Lepanto) fought in
our days betwixt the Turks, and Christians by sea may serve for an experience
of the service of bows and arrows. In which there died of the Christians by
the arrows of the Turks above sieve thousand, albeit they were in galleyes and
ships, and had their blindes pretended to save from sight, and mark of the
Turks, where as the artillery of all sorts of the Christians consumed not so
many Turks: notwithstanding the Christians had the victory. Now then for us
to leave the bow, being a weapon of so great efficacy, so ready, so familiar,
and as it were so domestical to our nation, to which we were wont to be
accustomed from our Cradle, because other nations take themselves to the
Musket, has not so much as any show of reason. Other nations may well for
bear ^at, they never had. Neither Italian, nor Spaniard, nor French, nor
Dutche, ha^ these five hundred years, been accounted Archers. It was a skill
almost appropriated to our nation. By it, we gained the battles of Cressy,
of Poitiers, of Agincourt, in France: of Navarre, in Spain: By it, we made
our selves famous over Christendom. And to give it over upon a conceit only
(for noe experience can say that our bow was ever beaten out of the field by
the musket) will prove an immitation of Aesops dog, who carieng a piece of
flesh in his mouth over a river, and seeing the shadow in the water, snatched
at the shadow, and left the flesh* I speak not this to a base the service of
muskets, which all men must acknowledge to be great; I only show, there may
be good use of bows, if our archers were such, as they were wont: which is
not to be dispaired, and will easily come with exercise. 8 Dartes] The names
of darts are diverse in the Greek Story. A Darte is often called Acontion: and
thereof comes Acontizo, to throw a darte, and darters are called Xenop. de
(...)* Cy: 1. lib. 3. 306. C
Acontistae. So does Aelian here term a darte. Sometimes a darte is termed
Palton of the verb (...) signifieng to shake or make quiver. The word Palton
is much used in Arr. lib 15, F
Arrian and Xenoph Cyrlib. 19 D. lib. 4. 100. B and 108 C
Xenophon especially, when they speak of the Persian darts. Yet Diod Sicul.
lib. 17 572 and lib. 1^ 4^ v. Iul Poll. 1. 10 c. 3^. page (...)
Diodorus Siculus names the Persian darte Saunion: which name also is given to
a Grecian darte by Plutarch, and by the same Diodorus. Sometimes a darte is
named Doration: Doru, as I said, being a Spear, and Doration according to
Suidas, a little spear, or darte. Aelian uses the word in this Chap. Lonche,
albeit it properly signify the Xenoph. de exped Cyri ^. 5. 35^ A. lib de ^ne
991 ^
head of spear, or darte, yet does it sometimes signify the darte it self, So
is it taken in Xenoph. de exped. Cyri lib. 5. ^52. C
Xenophon, when he tells, that flieng weapons began to walk on all sides,
(...), (that is darts) arrows, and stones out of slinges, and some out hands,
And Diodorus Siculus has Diod. Sic^l li. 17 607* and 615.
(...), to throw darts, even in the acts of Alexander. Yet we find that
spears were also cast under that name, and Xenoph. Hist. gr^c. li 5 575 D.
Xenophon says, that the Thebans cast Dorata against the Lacedaemonians. The
Darte has been in use amongst all nations. The matter, fashion, and force of
the Roman darte may be seen in Veget. li. ^ ca. 15.
Vegetius, and in Lips. ad Polyb. lib. 3. dialogo ^.
Lipsius his Commentaries ad Polybium. The manner of the darting of the
Macedonian armed appears in the fight betwixt Choragus, and Dioxippus before
by me mentioned: where we find that Choragus cast first (...) C^ lib 9 4^
(Lanceam says Curtius) at Dioxippus, when he thought him with in his reach.
But the darters, here spoken of, are of the light-armed. Such were the (...)
li^ 1. 7. A D. and (...) D. and lib ^. 61. C
Agrians in Alexanders Camp, who in all attempts of speed were employed by
Alexander, and served to purpose by reason of their lightness. The darte of
the Grecian was a slender shaven piece of wood, about three foot long, armed
at one end with a head of iron with a sharp point, to the end to pierce,
whatsoever it should fall upon. For the length, I give, it differs not from
the Roman darte in Polybius: Polyb. li* 6. 468. E
and Xenophon seems to affirm it, when speaking of the arrows of the
Carduchans, Xenoph de exped Cyr^ lib. 4 ^22 D. and Died (...). lib ^4. 41^
he says they were longer, then two cubits, and adds, the Graecians sent
them back again at the enemy instead of Darts. About the midst of these
darts they fastened a thong, which was called (...), wherein, inserting their
forefinger, they launced the darte with more facility. Xenophon witnesses it
in the same place, and ^n another place he says, Xenoph de exped. Cyr^. lib.
5. (...) 7 A.
Xenophon commanded the targetiers to march with their fingers in the
thonges of their darts, the archers with their arrows nocked, the slingers
with their scryppes full of stones, that they might be ready to let fly, when
they were commanded. These darts were forcible enough to pierce armoures of
that time, and that with them alone Xenoph. Hist. graec li^ 5 5^9
Iphicrates overthrew and distroyed a whole Mora of the Lacedaemonians, which
people were accounted the best armed, and the most valiant of the Greeks,
before the Macedonians came in credit. 9 Stones.] There are here mentioned two
manner of throwing stones, the one with the sling, the other with hand alone,
The stones, thrown with the sling, fly with much more violence, then the stones
thrown with the hand: and, being cast with a skillfull and strong arm, they
reach a greater way, then a man would think. And yet not so far, as bullets
thrown out of a sling, which by Xenophons report outreached the Persian
arrows. I have before touched the story: I will now lay down Xenophons
words. Xenoph. de exped* Cyri. lib. ^. ^06. B
The Graecians (those ten thousand, that returned out of Persia under the
leading of Cherisophus, and Xenophon) had not marched far, before Mithridates
appeared again with 200. horse, and 400. Archers and slingers, which were very
nimble and light. He came close up to the Graecians as a friend. Being near,
some of his horse, and foot began to shoot, other to sling, and to wound the
Graecians. The rear Commanders of the Graecians were hardly bested. Yet could
they do nothing to anoy the enemy. For the Cretans shoot not so far, as the
Persians, and carieng noe armor of defense, they were feign to hide themselves
with in the body of the armed; and the Darters were not able to reach the
slingers of the enemy. Xenophon therefore having the rear, thought good to
charge and follow the enemy. But he was not able to overtake them, (for the
Graecians had noe horse) and the Barbarian horsemen, shooting backward in
their flight, wounded many of them, that gave the chase. To remedy this
inconvenience Xenophons advice was to provide horse as many, as they could. And
hearing, that there were many Rhodians in the Camp, skillful in slinging,
whose slings reached twice as far, as the Persian sling (for the Persians
used stones, that filled the hand the Rhodians leaden bullets) he likewise
advised to arm them with slings, and use their service. The next day the
Graecians furnished out 50 horse, and 200. slingers. And when Mithridates
showed himself again with a thousand horse, and four thousand archers, and
slingers, and came up to charge, both the Rhodian bullets light amongst his
troops, and the 50 horse issuing forth fell upon the enemy and put him to
flight, and slew man^ of the foot in the chase, and took eighteen horse. We
may here note two kind of slinges one with the stone, the other with the
bullet: and besides, that the Rhodian sling with the bullet overreached both
Cretan, and Persian bow: which was yet afterward more plainly declared,
Xenoph. de exped. Cyri lib. 3. 309 C
when Tissaphernes charging the Graecians with his Persian archers, the Rhodian
slinges so terrified him, that both himself, and his troops with drew. And
allbut he followed a far of, yet durst he noe more approache, but suffered
them quiety to march all that day, and many other afterward. In this art of
slinging, allthough many nations labored, yet were there very few, that
excelled. The I d* ^ 20 v 16
Bible makes mention of seven hundred Gybeonites, whose skill was excellent
in sl^nging. Of other nations none might compare with the L^v d^ad 3. ^ 8. 207
Baleares: of whom Diodorus Siculus writes thus: Their armor is three
slinges, whereof they have one about their heads, another about their waste,
the third in their hand. In war they cast greater stones, then any other,
and with such force, that they may seem to be sent out of a Catapult.
Therefore in sieges and assaults of Cities they wound the defendants of the
walls, and in the field break targets, and head-pieces, and all defensive
arms. They aim so certeinely at any mark, that they seldom fail in
hitting. The cause is their continual practice from their childhode, their
mothers continually enforcing them to sling, even when they are yet children.
For setting up bread upon a post, as a mark, they are not allowed to eat,
until they hitte it, and have it given them by their mothers to eat. So
far Diodorus Siculus: with whom Veget l. ^. c. 16
Vegetius agrees. The same Veget. lib. 3. c. 14. in ^ine.
Vegetius says that slinges were made either of flax, or of hair, The form
was that it had two ends, the one fastened to the hand, the oth^ ^o let slip,
being broadest in the midst, lest the stone should fall out. Diodorus has
before expressed with what force a stone went out of a sling. Veget. l. cap. 16
Vegetius adds, that they are more violent, then any arrowe: piercing
head-pieces, Curaces, and other arms. The same Veget. l ^. c. 23
Vegetius limiteth the space of their reach to six hundred foot: and says,
that slinges at that distance were seen often to hitte the mark: and
attributes as much to archers. Onesand. ca. 19
There are, that affirm, that a leaden bullet sent out of a sling will melt
with the vehement motion of the air. Let the credit be with the reporters.
We have not fownd that experiences in our pieces, which notwithstanding force
out their bullet with fire, and that with greater violence, then any hand
sling can do. For stones to be cast with the hand see Veget. I 2. c. 23
Vegetius. Polybius commends the use of them. 10 The armor of the Argilos]
What this Argilos should mean, I see learned doubt, and I have little to say.
Whether it come as a diminitiue from (...) ( swift) or from a City of Thrace,
called Argilos, or from any other original I will not affirm. Here if the
text be not corrupted, and the word crept in, or exchaunged by the negligence
of some copier, it must signify a targetier. Which Aelians description makes
evident. That there was such a Ctty in Thrace you shall find in Thucy I 4. 32^
C and l 5. 356, D
Thucydides. And that the Thracian foot for the most part were Targetiers, I
remember, I have read in Xenophon. But then a quaestion may again arise, seeing
the inhabitants of that City were not called argiloi but argilioi (for the City
it self was called Argilos) why the Targetier should be called Argilos, and
not Argilios. The change is not great. Many such mistakings are to be fownde
in transcribing of Copies. But I think rather there is an error in the text;
and that for two causes. First because Aelian dividing the foot into three
kinds, Armed, Targetiers, and light-armed, and discoursing of the armed and
light-armed expressly by name, not so much as names the Targetier, but under
the name of Argilos. Then for that Li^ a^ Po^yb l. 3. dialogo. 1 in ^ne.
Lipsius (whether he had another copy of Aelian, I cannot tell) citing this
very place of Aelian, cites other words, then here we find. The Targetiers,
says he, ( out of Aelian, as he praetendeth) use, as it were, a middle kind
of arming. For their Target, called Pelta, is a little light Target, and their
pikes come much short of the Pikes of the armed. Unless happily Lipsius have
borrowed the words out of Suidas imagining them to be Aelians, and so cites
them under his name. For I find them in Suidas in the explication of military
appellations* but I find them in noe editition of Aelian, that hit herto has
been printed. 11 A little slight target called Pelta] The form of this little
target is diversely expressed by diverse Authors. Scholiast. Thu cyd. lib 2, 118
The Scholiastes of Thucydides gives it a Tetragonall or fouresided shape:
with whom also iumpeth Su^as in Pel^e
Suidas, Hesychius in Pel^e.
Hesychius says, Pelta is a little target having noe circumference, meaning, I
think, it is not round. He says also it is a Thracian weapon: to both which
significations Suidas agrees. The Thracians used these kinds of Targets, and
often sent these Targetiers to serve the Graecians. Thucyd. lib. 2. 118 C
Nymphodorus (seeking to make a league betwixt the Athenians and Sitalces King
of Thracia) promised to procure Sitalces to send them an army of horse, and
Peltasts (Targetiers.) Xenophon speaking of the Thracians, that assaulted his
lodging, tells, that Xenoph. de ex^. Cyri. lib. 7. 410 B
after the Trumpet sounded, and many of his soldiers came to his aid, the
Thracians fled casting, as their manner was, their Targets (Peltas) at their
backs. Xenoph. hist. Graec li ^ 486 B
When Dercyllidas invaded Bithynia, Seuthes the K. of Thracesent him horse and
Peltasts (targetiers) to his aid. But the Pelta, that Aelian here mentions,
was round. Suidas in In^ce.
Suidas in the words, before alleged by Lipsius, as out of Aelian called this
target Aspidisce: that is a little Aspis, such as the Macedonians bore, which
were without all quaestion round. The invention of this Pelta is attributed to
Iphicrates the At henian. Diod. sicul. lib. 15. 408. Aemilius Prob. in Iphicrat
For whereas the Athenians before his time used large round targets (aspides)
which were not so easy to be wielded, being heavy, he provided them little
targets to make them light, and quick for all service. He altered not the form
of the roundnesse, but diminished the weight, in abating of the breadth. Aemil
u^ Prob^ in Iphicrate.
Aemilius Probus says, he made them bear little targets (Peltas) in steed of
large round targets (Parme,) where upon they were ever after called
Peltastae. The invention therefore of this kind of Target is attributed to
Iphicrates. For the little targets of other forms were long before the age of
Iphicrates. Xenop. de exped Cyri. lib. 1, 263 C
Cyrus the younger had Grecian Targetiers in his army: Xenop. ibid lib 5. ^47.
A and lib. 3 312 C and li. 4. 341 D. E
and the Graecians at their return out of Persia: and likewise Xenoph histo.
g^aec li. 2 47^. E
those, that joined with Thrasybulus to recover Athens out of the hands of the
thirty Tyrants. All which were before Iphicrates time. ^psius Ana^est in ^.
Comment. in Polyb.
Lipsius takes the Pelta to differ little or nothing from the Parma velitaris
of the Romans, which doubtless was round. Polyb. lib. 6. 471. C
Polybius says, the Roman horse-mens targets (Parme) were like to Cakes named
Popana, which according to Suidas in Popana.
Suidas were broad, round, thin Cakes. 12 And his pike is much shorter] If
it be as Diodorus Siculus and Aemilius Probus report, that Iphicrates was the
inventer of the arms of the Targetier, the pike should be little shorter, then
the Macedonian pike. He gave them little targets for great Targets, and doubled
the length of their pike, and sword. If the length of the pike were doubled, I
cannot see, how it should come much short of the Macedonian Pike. But it may
be, they were long at first, and that afterward use, and commodity brought
them to a less sise, to the end the soldier should be nimble and ready at
charges. But had the Peltast noe other arms, then are here mentioned? He
had. And Aemil. Prob, in Iphicrat.
first he had a linen Curace for lightness sake, and then a sword of double
length to his former sword. Further he had darts: Xenophon tells Xenoph de
ex. pe^ Cyri. lib. 1. 270 D
that, in the battle betwixt Artaxerxes and Cyrus, Tissaphernes charged the
Grecian Targetiers, who divided themselves into two parts, and plied his
horse with darts as he passed through them. The same Xenophon afterward
tells of the Targetiers under his command, Xenoph ibid 1. 7^, 7, B
that he directed them, to hold their fingers in the thongs of their darts,
and be ready to throw, when he gave a sign: Xenoph. histo. graec. lib. 5. 529
And that these very Targetiers of Iphicrates with their darts and other
missiue weapons destroyed a whole Mora of the Lacedaemonians without coming
near or closing with them. Yet Leo cap 65. 37
Leo gives the Targetiers noe more, then targets, and spears (Dorata.) But in
that (as in many other things) I make noe doubt, he follows Aelian, whose
words also he well nighe reteynes, as well in this place, as many other. In
pervsing the story of Alexander (in Arrian, the most faithful histoaian of his
deeds) I find noe Targetiers by the name of Peltastae in all his army. The
names of Armed, of archers, of Darters, of slingers I meet often: but not of
Peltastae. Which made me once doubt, whether Alexander ever used them or not.
Since upon better consideration I am induced to think, though the name in the
story fails, Yet the kind of soldiers, so armed, and so appointed, as
Aelian describes, may easily be found: and that under the name of
Hypaspistes. Which name albeit most usually signify him, that carries another
man's Target, yet is it also applied to soldiers, that are neither light, nor
heavy-armed, of which kind the Targetiers were, as a mean bet wixt both. That
Hypaspistes signifies noe heavy armed, may be evident by the words of
Arrian. Arr. lib. 1 ^1. ^
Alexander, when he saw the streights of Cilicia possessed with a strong
guard, left Parmenio behind withal, that were heavy armed, himself about the
first, watch taking the Hypaspistae, and the Archers, and the Agrians (who
were darters, as I have showed) led on in the night toward the streights,
purposing to fall upon the w^che, before he was looked for. He left all the
heavy-armed with Parmenio, and took the Hypaspistae with him. And in another
place he says: Arr. lib 17. A.
Alexander commanded the Hypaspistae first to pass the river, and after them
the Macedonian armed. He distinguishes the Hypaspistae from the armed. And
straight after: Arr. lib. 1, ^, ^
Three days after Alexander understanding that Cleitus and Glaucias were ill
lodged with their army, and neither held watch, nor had cast a trenche for
their own security (for they imagined Alexander marched away for fear) and
that their Camp was stretched out to a needless length, secretly repassed
the river a little before night, leading with him the Hypaspists, and the
archers, and the Agrians, and the Phalanges of Perdiccas and Coenus. And in the
same book at the assault of Thebes, when Perdiccas had engaged himself and
brought Amyntas with his troops in the same danger, Alexander loathe to leave
them in hazard, advaunced with the rest of his army, and gave a sign to the
archers and Agrians to enter the trenche, the Agemata (Livy translateth them
legions) and Hypaspists he held without. So that in all these places he
distinguishes them from the heavy armed, and makes the Hypaspists one, the
heavy-armed another. I might allege other passages out of the same author, but
these will suffice. That they were not of the light armed may be proved by the
same places of Arrian. Where they are always distinguished from the archers
and Darters, There targets make them unfit for slingers, and mention of
slingers I find in other places. The very name she weth that they carry
targets, and the great Etymologicon allo weth them spears beside their targets
Whereby they are clearly exempted from the light armed ^t remains then, that
they be the peltastae, which Aelian here speaks of, especially since they
were armed with target and spear, which arms he gives to his targetiers,
and to no other, except it be to the armed. 13 Cataphracts] The horsemen are
divided into two kinds, Cataphracts (complete armed) and not Cataphracts.
Cataphracts are those, that cover themselves and horse with armor. Not
Cataphracts, that fight with lances, or with flieng weapons. Livytermeth f
Live. decad. 4, lib. 5.
Cataphracts (Loricatos) because they wore curasses The other sort are either
launciers or Acrobolists. Acrobolists came not to the shocke, but plied the
enemy a far of with flieng weapons. The Launciers closed, and charged the
ennemy with their lances. The word Cataphrasso ( to cover with arms) gives
name to the horsemen Cataphracts: and as the horsemen are called Cataphracts,
so is the furniture of horse and man called Cataphragma. How they were armed
Aelian sh^weth when he says they cover themselves and their horses with armor
yet was it not always, that the whole horse was armed. Xeno^h Cyro. lib. 6. 164
A
For Xenophon speaking of the Persians in the time of the elder Cyrus, says,
they armed there horses with frontl^ts and pectoralls and covers for there
thighs. As much he says of Xenoph de exped Cyro. lib. 1. (...) D.
the six hundred horse that followed Cyrus the younger against Artaxerxes,
sauinge they wanted cover for there thighs. The horsemen themselves he gives
great Curasses, and cuisses, and head-pieces. So it appears that the horse
were not all over armed, but only their heads their breasts and there
forethighes. Yet P^utarch speaking of the Cataphrast^ in the time of Lucullus,
says, their legs, and thighs were unarmed. Concerning the Parthians Suidas,
I know not out of what Author, has thus: The Curasse of the Parthian horsemen
is made in this manner: The part before covers his breast, and thighs, and
his hands to the fingers end, and his legs. The hinder-part, his back, and
neck, and all his head. There are buttons made for the sides, with which both
the parts being fastened, it mak^th the whole horsemen seem, as if he were
made of iron. The iron neither hinders the stretching out, nor the gathering
up of his limbs, it is so exactly fitted to the nature, and sise of all parts
of the body. Likewise they arm there w^ole horse with iron, except his hoofes,
because their own armor would little avail, in case their horse miscarried.
Cu^tius discribeth the form in the Persian horsemen, whose furniture, he
says, was made of plate fastened together in continued dependances of scales
of iron Appi in Parth. 143 D
Appian speaking how the Parthians seeking to terrify Crassus, and his army,
upon the sudden cast away the couers of their armor, and both themselves
appeared in shining curasses, and head-pieces the Ma^gian iron of which they
were made darting forth a flashing, and dispersed twinkling light, and their
horses glistring in brazen, and iron furniture. Yet does Appian in the some
pla^e note, that the bellys of these horse, was not armed. Appian in Par (...)
143 D. and Plut. in Crasso.
For the french horsemen, says he, that followed young Crassus, when they
perceived, how little they prevailed with their staves against the sure, and
vnpierceable armor of the Parthians, lighting from their own, and creeping
under the Parthian horses, stroke them into the bellys, and they impatient of
pain and flinging here, and there, and treading under foot, as well their
riders as their enemies, died in the place. Plutarch has the like. The
Cataphracts, beside their armor of defense, had a lance, or horsemans
staff, to fight with all. (...). in (...).
Plutarch affirms it: Lucullus, says he, after he saw Tigranes his
Cataphract horsemen (who were of most acount) defended, as it were, by a hill,
that had the ground above plain, and broad, and the ascent (which was about
four furlongs in length) not very hard, or steep, commanded the Thracian,
and gaul horsemen, he had, to give upon the flank, and to put by the
lances with their swords: For the only strength of the Cataphract is his
lance, and it alone he is able to use either in defense of himself, or
annoying the enemy: being by reason of the weight and harshnes of his
furniture like a man shut, and locked up in a wall. Hitherto Plutarch.
Likewise the Part^ian Cataphracts, albeit they used bo^e, and arrows yet they
had also lances, with which they came to the shocke with the enemy. (...)
(...) (...).
When the army of Anthony (says the same Plutarch) saw the Parthians ready
to give on, the armed turning their faces about toward the enemy, took in the
light armed, and shutt them up with in their battles: themselves kneeling upon
one knee, h^ld out their targets before, the second ranks with their targets
covered the heads, and vpperparts of the foremost, and the following ranks did
the like one for another, the figure was like the tyling of a house, and
represented a show worth the seeing, and was the surest defense that might be,
to make the arrows glaunce of, without harm doing. The Parthians imagining
this kneeling proceeded from weariness, and faintness, laid aside their
bows, and taking in hand their lances, ran upon the Romans, who giving a
iointe showte sprung up presently, and striking them with their darts, slew
the first, and put the rest to flight. By these two testimonies the lance of
the Cataphract is clearly proved. In what manner the Cataphracts came to fight,
Nazarius (cited by Stewechius) shows plainly in a Panegyric of his. The
Cataphracts, says he, Stewechius in comment. ad. 22. capu^ lib. 8. vege^.
in whom^ was the principal strength of the field, use this discipline in
charging. After closing their files, they keep an equality in moving forward
to charge, and being free from wounds, they break without difficulty any
strength of battle opposed against them. They are said to be free from
wounds, because both themselves and horses (especially before) are covered with
sure arms. Their moving must be slow, because of the weight of their arms,
which slownesse was recompensed with the violence of their charge, which
neither horse, nor foot was able to resist. And Appian in Parthicis 14^. A.
yet they had another inco^venience, in that, being overthrown, or slipping,
or falling to the ground, neither hors^ ^or man, were able easily to raise
themselves again. Such was the weight of their armo 14. Launciers are such]
Launciers, says Aelian, join with the enemy, and fight hand to hand with the
lance. And did not the Cataphracts so? They did, but their armor differed
much. The Cataphracts both horse, and man, were all over armed. The horse of
the Launciers was not armed, and himself, albeit he were armed, yet not so
armed, but that many parts of his body were bare of arms. And his armor came
much short of the complete. Arrian says that the Macedonians being launciers
were not able to encounter with the Scythians, who were Cataphracts, both
because of their number, and also of their manner of arming. And as the
Launciers armor was not so ^eauie, as the Complete, so was it more heavy,
then the armor of the foot. Xenophon seems to signify so much, telling of
himself, that taking the targetiers of the front, and some out of the midst of
the hollow square battle, and three-hundred chosen men, that Cherisophus had
with him in the front, he marched away with all speed to seize upon the top
of a certain hill. XenoPh. de ex^ (...). Cyr. ^. 3. 312. E
And exhorting his soldiers to haste, you may well, quoth Sotridas, the
S^cionian, talk of haste, that are on horseback. I, in the mean time with
this heavy target, am scarce able to march. Xenophon hearing this, straight
dismounted, and disranking ^otridas, took away his target, and with it on his
shoulder continued his have in marching. By chance he had on at that time a
horsemans armor, where with although he were overpressed, yet slacked he
nothing of his pace. The rest of the soldiers beating and reviling Sotridas
compelled him both to his target, and place again. At last they gained the
hill, they purposed, and made the enemy abandon the nether ground. Xenophon
was (...) overpressed with the horsemans armor. If it had been but equal in
weight with a foot man's, he might, as well have endured it, as the rest.
Plutarch shows likewise the Plutarch in (...) lop^m.
weight of the horsemans armor. Philopaemen, says he, willing yet to give
more strength to the Kings party (he means Antigonus, the guardian of Phillip
afterward King of Macedonia) and to come to hands with the enemy that was
already in route, lighted from his horse, and in a horsmans Curace, and heavy
armor, wrestling hardly, and laboriouslye on foot with the ground, that was
rough, and full of brooks, and ditches, he was strooken through the thighs
with a darte: the stroke being not daungerors, but forceble, so that the head
passed through both his thighs. Hence both the heaviness of the Launciers
furniture may be seen, and that Philopoemens thighs were unarmed, through
both which at once he was wounded with a darte: And so the Launcier not so
surely armed, as the Cataphract. The arms, that the Launcier bore are
described by Polyb. lib. 6. 471. ^
Polybius speaking of the arms of the Roman horsemen; who writes thus: The
armor of their horsemen is at this day like the Grecian. Of old they had noe
curaces, but fought in short gowns girded to them. By reason whereof they were
ready, and active to alight from, and get up quickly, on their horses. But
their fight was dangerous with the enemy* because they wanted arms. Their
staves had two incommodities. For, being made slender and quivering, they
neither could touch the mark, they aimed at, and most of them, shaken with the
motion of the horse, fell out to be broken, before the head touched, or
fastened upon any thing. Join, that, having no iron point at the butt end,
they served but for one stroke only, and that at the first. And yet the head
being broken of, the remnant of the staff was of noe use. The targets they
had, were made of oxe-hyde in form like to cakes named Popanae, which are used
in sacrifices. And they were neither fit to encounter the enemy, by reason
they had noe stiffnesse or fastness in resistance, and being resolved, and
soked, or putrified with rain, they could not be any thing worth. Finding
these inconveniences by experience, they quickly changed for the Grecian
armor; In which the first stroke of the head of the staff is certain, and
works the designed effect, by reason of the form, which is not quivering,
but stiff and sturdy: and likewise turning foreward the butte end, which is
armed with a sharp point, they might therewith fasten a sound, and forcible
blow upon the enemy. The like may be said of the Targets, which both in
charging, and defending, have a sure and vnfailable use. Which they noe sooner
saw, then imitated. For the Romans, if any other nation, are good to change
their fashions, and to choose that, which is best, wheresoever they find it.
The Launcier then had a Curace, a headpiece, a lance, and a sword for his
arms, and this was general in Launciers; but some had besides a target, and
were therefore called targetiers. The Launciers were called in greek
Doratophoroi, or Xestophoroi: two several appellations in show, but
signifieng in deed but one thing, the one being derived from the matter, the
other from the form of the lance. Art. counfo^deth Xyston and Doru. ^b 1. 15.
F.
Doru, as I said before, signifies wood: and because all the Launciers arms
excepting the lance, were of other matter, then wood, the lance was called
Doru, ( of the wood) and the Launciers Doratophoroi. As for Xyston, or Xeston (
for they signify one thing) it comes of the verb Xuo, or Xeo to shave, or
polish (as our ioyners do) and the lances, being made of wood shaven, or
polished, are named Xysta, or Xesta, of the form (as I said) that is given
them by shaving, and the Launciers, that bear these lances, Xestophoroi, or
Xystophoroi. And here I am once to note for all, that we are not to press
words according to the proper signification of their primitiues, from whence
they are derived. For considering there are more things, then names of things
(as Logicians say) the most copious language, that is* cannot give proper names
to all. Hereof come the words of diverse significations. And howsoever names
seem at first rough, and strange, use, and custom makes them smooth, and
gives them passage. As the coin of a Prince is current by the stamp, he
sets upon the mettalle, what mettalle so ever it be, fine, or base. 16
Acrobolists] The word imports such, as throw aloft, or from alofte. Ballo
signifies to throw: Acron, the highest, or the uttermost. By common usage
Acrobolizo is taken for to dart, and by consequent to skirmish a far of.
Because such as cast flieng weapons, as darts, and stones, and the like, came
not to steadfast fight, but lay aloof, and only threw their weapons at the
enemy, and of so doing are called Acrobolists. Acrobolismos in Polybius is
interpreted Skirmishing. And Diordor. Sicul. lib 15 468.
Diodorus Siculus joins Acrobolismos, and a short meddley in fight together,
Xenop. de exp. Cyri lib. ^ ^09. C
which Xenophon terms Acrobolisis by another word flowing from the same
fountain. 17 Tarentines] They are so called of a City in Italy Tarentum by
name, the inhabitants whereof, that were horsemen, used this manner of fight.
But he makes two kinds of Tarentines; one, that ever fought a far of with
darts, and never came to hand with the enemy, the other, that after a dart or
two cast, came close up, and fought hand to hand. Live. decad. 4. lib. 5 92. C.
Livy speaks of a third kind of Tarentines, who used in fight two horses at
once made fast together, and one being weary, leaped upon the back of the
other. 18 Some use darts a far of] Of the manner of fight of these horsemen,
the passage of Xenophon is worth repeating. Xenoph Hist. graec. li. 7 617. C
After these things done, says he, the aid of Dionysius (which he sent the
Lacedaemonians) arrived, being more, then twenty Gallyes. They brought French,
and Spaniards, and above fifty horse. The next day the Thebans, and their
confederats, embattailing their army, and filling the^ ^ith the whole plain
even to the seaside, and to the hills, that lay about the City (of Corinth)
destroyed whatsoever, might serve to any use. The horsemen of the Athenians,
and Corinthians, seeing the strength, and multitude of the enemy, came not
near unto them: but the horsemen of Dionysius, albeit few in number, galloping
here, and there, dispersedly, and putting spurrs to their horse, charged them
with their darts, and in case the enemy followed, they returned with all speed,
and then turned again, and threw darts afresh. In doing these things they
used to alight from their horse, and rest themselves, and if any of the enemy
singled out to fall upon them, leaping quickly again to horseback, they
fled: and being pursued any distance from the army, as soon as those that
pursued them retired, the Tarentines followed, and plied them with their darts,
and put them to great distress: forcing the whole army to advance, and
retire, as they list themselves. So far Xenophon. Another example I will add
out of Livy of the Numidians, whose manner of fight is all one with the
Tarentine manner. Live. decad. (...) lib 5. 85. B.
In Liguria says he, nothing worthy of memory was done a long time. At the
end of the year all things were brought to extreme hasard. For both the
Consuls camp, being assaulted, was hardly defended, and not long after, when
the army was ledd through a forest, the way whereof was straight, and
narrow, the Ligurians possessed themselves of the mouth of the straights.
Through which when the Consul could find no passage, he turned about his
army, and purposed to reduct it, the way he came. But the mouth of those
straights was likewise possessed by a part of the enemies forces. And now the
remembrance of the Desaster of Caudium presented it self not only to the
minds, but even almost to the eyes of every man. There were wellnigh eight
hundred Numidian horse at that time in the camp. The Commander of them
promised the Consul to break through on which side, he pleased; only he
desired to know on which side most hamblets, and villages were. Upon them, said
he, I will fall, and set the houses on fire presently, that, that fear may
compel the Ligurians to forsake the streights, they hold, and run several
ways to defend their own. The Consul much commended the man, and laded him
with hopes of promises. The Numidians up to horse, and began to ride here and
there, before the enemies gards, provoking yet no man. Nothing at the first
sight was more contemptible. The horse, and men, were little, and lean. The
horsman vngirded, and unarmed, saving that he carried darts; the horse without
a bridle galloping deformedly with a stiff neck, and a head thrust out at
length. They purposely augmenting this contempt slid from their horses, and
dallied, and sported, to bring the enemy to a gaze. Wherefore the enemy, which
at first were intentive, and ready for a charge, became gazers on, and the most
part unarmed themselves, and set down upon the ground. The Numidians rode up
nearer, and then back again, and by little, and little, got to the skirts of
the forest; as if their horses, being resty, had carried them forward against
their wills. At last, putting spurs to they broke through the midst of
their enemies gards, and entering into a larger field, they set fire on all
the houses next the way; then burned they the next village, and wasted, and
filled, all things with fire, and sword. The smoke first scene, then the cry of
the people affrighted, lastly old men, and children, flieng for succor, raised
a tumult in the camp. Therefore without counsel or command every man of
himself ran to the defense of his own, and in amoment both the enemies camp
was forsaken, and the Consul, delivered from his siege, came to the place
intended. By these two examples the kind of fight, that these darters one
horseback maintained, may he perceived, which was Polyb. lib. 3. 225. B.
not to come near the enemy, but to keep a loofe, and let their darts fly.
Besides not to observe any order in files, or ranks, but straglingly to gallop
the field, seeking by their disbanding to toll the enemy out of his strength,
and so to work their advantage. And albeit in the second example, the
Numidians used not their darts, yet they would have done it, if need had
been; and you shall find in other places of Live. decad. 3. li. ^ 52. C. and
Polyb. ^b. 3. 224 B.
Livy, and Polybius, they did usually, as also in Caesar de bent. (...) African.
415
Caesar. 19 After they have spent one or two] These darters on horseback
differ from the other before mentioned, because at the last they join, and
fight hand to hand with the enemy; which the other did not. And what fight they
with all? not with lance; for then should they be Launciers, of whom we have
spoken. But they fight with battel-axes, swords, and such other short weapons.
Suidas affirms it, alleged by Arcer in no^is ^d A^ian. page 7.
Arcerius: These, says he, at first cast light darts a far of, and
afterward approaching, join with the enemy, fighting with battell-axes, or
swords; which kind they call light-horsemen. 20 The horsemen, that use bowes] I
need not allege any thing to show that the Scythians were good archers. It is
known to any man, that is not ignorant of History. I will only note, that in
flieng from the enemy, they harmed as much, as in falling on. For as they fled
they turned half their bodies backward, and shot at him, that followed, and
expected noe such thing. Of which fashion of fight Plutarch gives this
judgment. Plutar. in Cras. and App^an in (...) c. 114 C.
The Parthians, says he, in their flight shoot backward, and do it best of
all other, except the Scythians; the invention being witty, both to save
themselves by that defense, and also to take away the shame of flight. That
which Plutarch attributcth to the Scythians and Parthians, Xenoph de exp ^.
Cyri. lib. 3. ^06. D.
Xenophon says, the Persians used also, both for manner of fight, and flight.
The framing of a Phalange, and definition of the art Tactick. CHAP. III.
But seeing every Phalange contains an uniting of bodies, offices of
command, orders in place, a Convenient number of men, and words of Direction
as well for daily exercise, or trayning, as for true fights, It seems
necessary to deduce every of these things into perticularity. The first 1
labor therefore in the art Tactick is for a General out of a multitude, that
comes to hand confused, to choose the fittest men, and dispose them into
convenient places (that is to order them into files, and bodies) and of the
whole number to proportion a 2 reasonable levy, and fitting the service in
hand. 3 For to dispose and enable an Army, skillfully to march, to encampe, and
to embattaile, is a matter of no small consequence. In as much as we often find
mighty Armies through their disorder to have been defeated by 4 a handful of
men well disciplined and exercised. Wherefore Aeneas defines this art to be a
science of warlike motion: Polybius, To be a skill whereby a man taking a
multitude serviceable orders it into files, and bodies, and inst^teth it
sufficiently in all things pertaining to war.

Notes.
1 THE first labour] After provision of armor follows choice of men. What
men, and out of what climats, and of what profession, and of what age, and of
what constitution of body, and of what education, are to be chosen, because
Aelian refers to the discretion of the General, not setting down any
particular, I will likewise pass over, noting only some places, where he,
that is disposed to seek, may find the circumstances of choice of soldiers.
Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 1. 32. A. B. Polyb. lib. 6. 406. C. Et Lips. ad Polyb. lib.
1. Dialogo. 2. 3. 4. 5. Veget. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Et Stewechius ad
haec omnia cap. 31. 2 A reasonable leuy and fitting the service] Levyes are to
be made according See Leo cap. 4. 47 and cap. 12. 3 4.
to the war, which is undertaken. The enemy is not always of one strength.
Sometimes the forces, against which we are to lead our army, are more,
sometimes less. The Romans, if the number of enemies were not very great, used
but polyb li. 1. (...) B. Polyb. lib. 3. 257. C.
a Consular Army; which consisted of two legions of Romans, and of as many
foot of their Allies; when greatest, only joined two Consular armies
together. And for Allies their foot, as I said, was equal with the Roman
foot, their horse were treble as many, and the Romans having three hundred
horse to a Legion, the Allies had nine hundred. Yet in case of great Polyb lib.
6. 467 C.
necessity, we read, that the number of the Legions was increased in a
Consular army. Polybius reports that, a little before the battle of
Cannae, the Consuls Lucius Aemilius, and C. Terentius, had allowed in their
army, which they led against Anniball, eight Legions, which never was done
before. Diod. Sical. lib. 17. 571.
Alexander the great being to invade the Kingdom of Persia, which for wealth,
multitude of men, and largeness of Territory, was esteemed the richest,
mightiest, and greatest Empire at that time in the world, had not in his army
above one and thirty thousand foot, and five thousand, and odd, horse. Veget.
li. 3. c ^
Armies composed of multitudes are neither fit to be guided, and commanded,
nor yet to be provided for. And he that trusts to multitudes, esteems not
greatly the valor of his soldiers* (...). lib. 4. cap. ^.
Xerxes said, he was not foiled by the Graecians through default of number,
but because he wanted men. As it is folly to leuy more men, then is needful,
so is it rashness, or Xenop. in Agesilao.
rather madness to put a few soldiers to hasard against forces, that exceed
in number, and valor. Briefly all levies are to be tempered with
consideration of persons, times, places, and other circumstances. 3 For to
dispose and enable an Armie] Here are set down in a word, as it were, the
principal heads of the art of war, Marching, In camping, and embattailing;
to which heads all other may very well be referred. And of these three Aelian
handles in this treatise but two, namely embattailing, and marching: of
embattailing, so much, as pertains to forming of a common Macedonian
Phalange; of Marching, no more, then belongs to embattailing in a march, that
is to ordering of your men in that figure, which shall yeald most advantage
against the enemy, that meets you; excepting that he shortly touches the
marshalling of baggage in your march. The other considerations of marching, as
laying, or avoiding ambushes, sending out to discover, when to march by night,
when by day, how to deceive and avoyde the enemy lyeng near, remedies against
horse, against shot, against multitudes, passages of mountains, of woods, of
rivers, of plains, of dry, and sandy places, these, I say, and such like, he
touches not in a word. And for the skill of encamping, which comprehends the
seating of your camp, and provision of all things belonging thereto, as also
the siege, and defense of Cities, and fortresses, he likewise passes it over
with silence, as a thing not incident to his purposed discourse. 4 A handful
of men well disciplined and exercised] What exercise does for the making of
good soldiers, experience of former times will teach. It has been the manner
of all famous generals to bring their soldiers to perfection by exercise.
Veget. lib. 2. ca. ^3.
Vegetius says very well, It is not length of life, or number of years, that
teaches the art of war, but continual discipline and meditation of arms.
Let a soldier serve never so many years, so long, as he is unexercised, he
shall be still a raw soldier. The knowledge and science of arms makes a
soldier, which is not gained but by action. As long as a soldier handles not
his weapons, he is noe Actor, but a looker on. For as all abilities in arts
(which are called Habits) arise out of a number of actions precaeding, so can
noe man atteyne to a perfect knowledge of arms, till he have with care, and
diligence, employed his study and labor therein, and upon the foundation of
practice raised the frame of sound and perfect skill. Noe man is naturally
borne a soldier. One may more incline to war then another, but the skill
comes not without industry and pains. Plut. in Pelop.
Plutarch says, that it is neither Eurotas nor the place betwixt Babyx and
Gnacion, that brings forth valiant and warlicke men, but they are to be
fownd in all places, where youth is bred up in shame of vice, and boldness to
undergo peril for virtues sake. Eurotas was a river near Lacedaemon; Plut in
Lycur.
Babyx and Gnacion two rivers with in the same City. The Lacedaemonians were
accounted the most valiant people of Greece. And Plutarch speaks this of the
victory, which the Thebans had against the Lacedaemonians; The Thebans, which
till that day had noe reputation of valor; but afterward by exercise, and use
of arms, under Epaminondas, and Pelopidas, became the bravest soldiers of
Greece: Not unlike was the saying of Pyrrhus to his muster-master: choose you,
said he, good bodies, and I will make them good soldiers. The strength of the
body is requisite in a soldier to undergo the labors of war; Veget. li. 1.
ca 1
but exercise it is that gives the perfect skill, and the desire to handle
weapons. Therefore Cicet. in Bruto ^22.
as Demosthenes, being demanded what was the first and principal thing in the
art Oratory, answered Action, what the second, Action, what the third, Action:
So may we truly say, that in the art military exercise is not only the
first, second, and third, principal thing to make a soldier, but also all in
all. Aelian speaks not of exercise but in General: what particular exercise
is fit for a soldier, he, that desires to know, let him read. Xenoph.
Cyrop. lib. 2. 42. B. C. and lib. 3. 77. C. D. Veget. lib. 1. ad caput. 9. ad
caput. 19. and lib. 2. caput. 23. 24. Just. Lips. comment. ad Polyb. lib. 5.
dialog. 14. Leo. caput. 7. Patric. Parallel. part 2. 139. Now for the
victories, that have been obtained by a small number of men well exercised,
against a multitude unskillful, and untrained, I need, say nothing. Histories
are plentiful witnesses therein. I will only recite one example wherein the
difference may be seen not between skillfull, and unskillful, but between
skillfull, and skillfull both enured to labor, and both brought up under the
same practice, and discipline of Arms. At what time, after the death of
Alexander the great, his chiefest Commanders fell at odds amongst
themselves; and sought every man to establish himself in the possession of his
Conquests, it chanced, that Antigonus, and Eumenes came together in two sundry
battles. In the first Antigonus had in his army above 28000. foot, 8500.
horse, and 65. Elephants; Eumenes less foot, 17000. in all (but amongst them
3000. Argyraspides, who had served in all Alexanders battles, and were
invincible, and strok a great fear into the enemies hearts) and about the
number of horse, his enemy had, and So. Elephants: Diodor. sicul. lib. 19. 6. 7.
When the foot came to join, says Diodorus Siculus, the fight continewed a
good while, and at last, many falling on either side, Eumenes his foot had the
better by reason of the valor of the Macedonian Argyraspides. They, albeit
they were stricken in years, yet in regard of the manifold perils, they had
been in, excelled in courage, and skill of fight; in so much that no man was
able to withstand them. And therefore being but 3000. in number, they were
notwithstanding set against the enemy, as the strength of the whole army. In
the other battle he speaks of their age. Diodor. Sicul^ lib. 19. 693.
At that time, says he, the youngest of the Argyraspides were noe less, then
60. years old, or thereabout; the most of the rest about 70. and some were
elder, al of the^ vnmatcheable in skill and readiness of fight, and strength
of body; such was their dexterity, and courage gathered in continuance of
dangers, which they had passed. Afterward rehearsing the battle, he says:
The Argyraspides serring themselves close, and with lively force falling upon
the enemy, killed some, and put other some to flight. And fought against the
whole Phalange of the enemy with irresistible fury, not loosing one of their
own men, and yet through skill and manhood slayeng of the enemy above 5000.
and routed their whole foot, which in number were many times more, then
themselves. Thus writes Diodorus Siculus of the old practiced Macedonians:
who yet fought not against strangers, or raw soldiers, or such, as were
newly brought into the field, but against men of their own nation, that had
long handled arms, and won many victories, and been instituted, and trained
in the same discipline and course military, that they themselves had been
before: Such difference long practice, and experience wrought in the one
against the other.
What a file, or Decury is, and of how many men it consists. CHAP. IIII.
TO order into files is r to make files. A file is a number of men beginning at
one Leader, and contineuing in order of followers to the last man. The number
of a file is diversely given, 2 for some allow it eight, some twelve, and some
sixteen men. We for this time will retain the number of sixteen, both because
that number is proportionable to the indifferent length of a Phalange, and
also, if use require at any time to double the depth thereof, and to give it
thirty two men, or to lessen, and contract it, and make it but eight; neither
of both shall hinder the service of the light-armed behind, 3 for whether they
use Darts, or slings, or Arrows, they may easelie with their flieng weapons
overreache the depth of the Phalange.

Notes.
NExt after arming, and choice of soldiers, it follows to put them in order
for service, that is first to file them, then to band them (which is joining of
files) and lastly to embattaile them, which is to make a Phalange. Of these in
the following chapters.

1 To make files] The Tacticks have not expressed the precepts of this art all
in the same words. A file is here called Lochos, the signification whereof is
diverse. Sometimes it is taken for an Polyaen lib. 3. in Iphicrat. 24 and lib.
4. in Alex. 21.
Ambushe, and Lochan signifies to lie in Ambush: it signifies beside a number
of men, that are of one body, as it were, and under one commander, who is
called Lochagos, and Lochizo is to set in files. The number of this body has
been diversely taken. The Thebans Lochos Hieros first instituted by Polyaen.
lib. 2. in Gorgida.
Gorgidas, or as other say by Athen dipnos. lib. 43. 602.
Epaminondas, consisted of three hundred men. The Lochos of the Plut in Pelop.
Lacedaemonians of five hundred and twelve. Xenophon in his return out of
Persia tells, that the number of the Xenoph. de exped Cyri lib. 4. 341. D
Lochoi of the Graecians, which he led, was almost a hundred armed men. And
when they chose extraordinary men to preserve the Plaesium (a hollow form of
square battle where in the Graecians marched) from breaking, they appointed
Xenoph. de exped. Cyri lib. ^. 310. B
six Lochoi, of a hundred a piece, for that purpose, and Commanders to lead
them. And after he reckons seventy men to a Lochos. And in the first book
of Cyrus his expedition, he tells Xenoph. de exped. Cyri li. ^ 24^ E. 249.
of two Lochoi of the armed of the Regiment of Menon, that were slain by the
inhabitants of Cilicia, and counted them a hundred men. Cyrus in the same
Xenophon commands his Lochos to be made of twenty four men. But the
Lochos, that Aelian here speaks of is a less number, namely sixteen, which
was the file of the Macedonians, as appears by Arrian lib. 7. 16^ D.
Arrian, and Polyb. lib. 17. 764 D
Polybius. Albeit Arrian calls it not Lochos, but Decas; and Polybius the
depth of the battle. This number of sixteen was used by the Graecians also
before King Phillips time, as appears by Xenoph. hist graec. li. 4. 5^5. E.
Xenophon in his history of the Graecians. And likewise by Thucyd. lib. 6.
(...). B
Thucydides, who reports, that the Siracusans were so ordered against the
Athenians. Leo says it was the manner of the ancient warriers to make a file
of sixteen, and calls it a Tetragonall number. 2 Some allow it eight, some
twelue] The Lacedaemonians made the depth of their battle sometimes eight
men (for a file is it, that measures the depth of the battle) and so fought
with their enemies. Thucyd lib. 5 page 392. A
Thucydides witnesses as much: the Lacedaemonians* says he, were not always
ordered in depth alike, but as their Lochagoi (they were commanders of five
hundred and twelve a piece) thought good, commonly notwithstanding the depth
was of eight a piece. Xenoph histo graec. 489. D
Xenophon also writes, that Dercyllidas the Lacedaemonian, being to fight with
Tissaphernes, and Pharnabazus, ordered his Phalange into eight. The same
proportion was held by Xenoph histo. graec. li. 6 586. G
Mnasippus the Lacedaemonian against the Corcyraeans, and by Polyaen. lib 2. in
Clearch^.. 9.
Clearchus the Lacedemonian against his enemies. Xenophon says, that
Thrasybulus the Athenian, salieng out of Pyraeum against Pausanias the
Lacedemonian King, ranged his men into eight. His words are: Xen^. hist. grae*
l* 2 477 C. D
When Thrasybulus and the other armed saw these things, they quickly gave aid
to their own people, and put their armed in order eight deep. Pausanias
being hardly laid unto, and retiring four or five furlongs, commanded the
Lacedaemonians, and their Allies, to resort unto him, and there casting his men
into a deep Phalange, led against the Athenians. Out of which words we may
note, that the Lacedaemonians observed not always that order of eight deep,
but varied according to place, or other circumstance. Yet ordinarily they gave
but eight to a file, or to the depth of their Phalange, as Thucydides
witnesses before. Xenoph hist. graec. lib. 2. 472. C. D.
The same Thrasybulus with his accomplices entering the base City of Athens
called Pyraeum to free his country from bondage of the thirty tyrants, having
but a few with him, possessed the court, which led to the temple of Diana,
called Munychia, and being assaulted by the garrison of the Lacedaemonians,
ordered his armed men into ten deep, and the light armed behind them. The
tyrants, and their followers stood in battle fifty deep. Xenoph. hist.
graec. li 6. 596. C
At the battle of Leuctra the Lacedaemonian armed were twelve in depth, the
Thebans fifty. Air. lib. 1. 6. D
Alexander the great leading his army against Clitus, and Glaucias, the way
being so narrow, that no more then four might march in front, made the depth
of his army a hundred and twenty. Xenoph de exped. Cyri lib. 7. 359. D
And the soldiers that Xenophon brought back out of Persia, when they
purposed to sack Byzantium, put themselves without command in order of fifty
deep. In the text is fifty deep, but the margent has eight: which I take to
be the truer reading, because Xenophon says, the place was fair to set a
battle, being void of building, and having an even plain. And it was not
the manner of the Graecians to make a Phalange fifty deep, unless there were
extraordinary occasion. Thucyd. lib. 4. 315. C
In the battle of Delos betwixt the Athenians, and Thebans, the Thebans were
five and twenty in depth, the Athenians but eight. The same Thucyd. lib. ^ 458.
A
Athenian were eight in depth against the Syracusans. So that the depth of
eight was much used among the Graecians. How-be-it I find not, that they called
a file of eight by the name of Lochos. Xenoph Cyro^ lib. 3. 78. A* and lib 2*
43. A, C
Cyrus the elder made his files of twelve men, and the leader thereof he
called (...), and (...), and the file it self decas, which in signification
albeit it importe ten, yet we must retain the word, as it is used, and not
fly to the original of the Etimologie, as I noted before upon other occasion.
But Aelian makes his file of sixten. His reason follows. 3 For whether they
use darts etc.] The file being sixten in number, the soldiers therein every
one having after-distance from other three foot, take up in the whole depth
forty eight foot, and being doubled to thirty two men, they take up ninety
six foot, which amounts to thirty two yards. That bows and slings easily
out reach this distance, appears by Vegetius, before by me alleged, Veget.
lib. (...) cap. (...)
who says, they stroke their mark six hundred foot of, which in our account
by scores, is ten score. Of the darte a man may rather doubt, which
notwithstanding with an exercised arm is sent much further, then thirty two
yards. Lips ^d Polyb. lib. 5. 242.
Lipsius writes, that a dart was usually cast four hundred foot, which
amounts to a hundred thirty three yardes, or as we in shoting measure it,
six score and odd. The reason why Aelian placed the light armed behind we
shall see beer after in fit place.
The order and parts of a file or Decury. CHAP. V.
'THE best man of every file is the first in place, and he, that leads the
file, who is also called the file-leader, the Commander, and the fore-stander.
The last man of the file is called the Reare-Commaunder, or bringer-vp. The
whole file it self is termed 2 a verse, and 3 a Decany, and of some 4 an
Enomoty. Yet there are, that hold Enomotia for the fowerth part of a file, and
the Commander of an Enomoty they call Enomotarcha, and two Enomoties they take
for a Dimery, and name the Commander thereof Dimerites, so that the half file
is said to be a Dimery, 5 and the Commander Dimerites. This man is the last
of the file. He, that stands next behind the file-leader, is named a
follower, and the next after him a Leader, and the next after him again a
follower. So that the whole file consists of Leaders, and followers placed
successively one after another. 6 It behooves the file-leader to be more
sufficient, then the rest of the file, and next him the Leader of the
half-file, or bringer-vp. They define a file to be a Row of followers placed
according to their worth successively after a file-leader.

Notes.
1 THE best man of every file.] Why the file-leader ought to be the best man
of the file many reasons may be given first because he commands the rest.
And as in all other things he that is to rule, and govern another, ought to
have more knowledge, then he that is commanded, and governed, so is it in
matter of war. Further, as his skill, so his valor, ought to be most: that
his example may encourage and incite the rest. Which is the cause, that other
commanders also are placed in front, and in the eye of the soldiers that
their valor and forwardnes may bread an honest emulation in the soldiers to
do, as they do. Besides, the first place is most beseeming him, that best
deserves, and the more valiant a man is, the more he desires to show it in
the face of the enemy, thereby to win himself honor, and reputation.
Furthermore, he may do best service in the front, by entering into the enemies
battle, and making way for the rest. Not unlike a sword, whose edge makes
speedy passage into the thing, it cutteth, and draws after it the rest of the
iron, be it never so blunt. In the front, the rank of the file leaders give
the push to gain the field. Which reason I think lead Plutarch in Pclopida.
Gorgidas the first institutor of the Theban Hieros Lochos, not to make an
entire troop thereof apart, but to place it man by man in the first rank of
the Phalange. Lastly the sight of the file leaders, being the choice of the
army, both for stature, and resolution (for Aelian cap. 13
so Aelian would have them) Leo ca. 4*. 73
breads a terror in the mind of the enemy. Who, seeing such gallants in the
front, have cause to imagine that the rest of the army, which they see not, is
like to those they see. And, being never so valiant, they had rather have to
do with weak, and relenting then stout, and resolute adversaries. As at the
battle of Cannae Live. decad. 3* 51
Annibal answered one, that brought him news, that the Consul had commanded
the horse men to alight, and fight one foot, how much rather would I, quoth
he, he had delivered them bound into my hands. I have heard many hold
opinion, that the manner of the Graecians, to bring their best men first to
fight, is contrary Cap. 5. The ordering of a File
4 Enomoty

3 Enomoty

2 Enomoty

1 Enomoty

Dimerites

2 Dimery or half File

1 Dimery or half File

ye File-header

ye birnger up and 4 Enomotarcha

2 leader

1 follower

1 leader

2 follower

2 leader

1 follower

3 Enomotarcha

2 follower

2 leader

1 follower

2 Enomotarcha

2 follower

2 leader

1 follower

ye Fileader and first Enomotarcha

to the institution of the Romans, who held the Triarij (their eldest, and
best soldiers) in the rear, and brought them not to join, till both the
Hastati, and Principes were beaten, or retired. But if we consider the
diversity of both their embattailings, we shall see noe great difference, or
at lest we shall see, that the reason of placing their-best men was not much
different. The Graecians in framing their fourfold Phalange made in length
an even front of a 1024. files. The files were 16. deep. and the best men
therefore in front, because being placed in the midst, or in the rear, there
would have been no use of their valor, and the Phalange might have been
broken, before it had come to their turns to fight. The Romans contrary-wise,
in ordering a Legion, made many maniples, and gave the front to the Hastati,
the midst to the Principes, the rear to the Triarij. Now the Triarij being
ordered in the Rear, might at the beginning be brought to fight in Front, if
need were; being noe need, they kept their place, till their Generals found
it fit to call upon them. So then this is the difference. The File-leaders of
the Graecians had the Front, because otherwise in so deep a body, as the
Phalange was, they could not have come to fight: The Triarij might always have
been employed in Front, in flank, or in the rear, as pleased the General.
And that the Romans also in their several Maniples placed their best men in
Front, I cannot doubt. There stood the Centurions, which were the leaders of
the Maniples, and in reason were to be seconded with the hest men under their
command. Caesar de bell. civilly lib 3.
C. Crastinus may serve for an example who being noe Centurion, but an
Evocate, in the battle of Pharsaly betwixt Caesar and Pompey, bid his
Manipulers (they were of the Maniple, which he once commanded) to follow
him, and said he would make his General give him thanks alive, or dead. Yet
must I confess, that the front was not the proper place of the Evocates. But
he chose the front, and held it a place worthy of his valor. It is said of
Salust. de coniur. Catilinae.
Catiline that, when he fought with C. Antonius, he placed in the front of
his army, all the chosen Centurions, and Evocates, and besides of common
soldiers such, as were best armed. Livius decad. 1 lib. 8. page 214. A
Livy speaking of a fight betwixt the Romans, and the Latins, and describing
the form of the Roman battle, after he had limited the place of the
Hastati, and Principes, writes thus of the Triarij. After the ensigns ( he
means the Standards of the Legions) not the Ensigns of Maniples, were ten
other Maniples; whereof every one had three Ensigns. The first Ensign led the
Triarij, old soldiers of tried valor, the next the Rorarij, not so well
esteemed for strength in either age, or deeds, the third the Accensi, a troop
of lest trust, which was the cause, that they were cast in the rear. The
Accensi were put in the rear, because there was noe great opinion of their
valor; the Triarij had the front, because they were old soldiers, and had
been sufficiently tried. So then in dividing of their army into small
bodies, or battailions, the Romans differed from the Graecians: in placing the
best men of their maniples in front, they observed the same manner, that the
Graecians did in placing their fileleaders in the first rank of the Phalange.
2 A verse] I have translated stichos a verse. The more usual signification is
a row of any thing placed orderly. Xenop. in Occo^om. ^ 30. C.
So Xenophon applies it to trees, which were planted orderly one after
another; and Eustat in Iliad
Eustathius to the standing of d^uncers one after another in depth even as our
soldiers are placed one after another in file. Iul. Pollux. lib. 4. cap 16.
Julius Pollux also acknowledges, that there were files, and ranks in Choro,
that is in daunces upon the stage. Suidas. in verbo. (...).
But Suidas says it was commonly taken for a line, which was read from the
left to right hand. And to say the truth a verse, as we read at this day, and
as they read, when Aelian wrote this treatise, rather resembles a rank then a
fi^e; because in a rank men stand side to side, as words do being placed in a
line. Yet because the word is received by use in that other sense, we must
like wise admit the same. 3 A decury] This in Greek Aelian calls Decania,
a word, which in this sense I find in no other Author, then in him, and in
Suidas* Xenop Cyrop
Xenophon calls it Decas: so does E^y melogico^ magn in strat.
Vrbicius and Arrian. lib. 7. 164. C.
Arrian, and likewise Hesychius. Leo cap. 4. 63. 69.
Leo calls it decarchian and Akian. 4 An Enomotie] The word comes from
omnymi to swear, not of omos a shoulder, as Robortellus, and Patricius
immagine; of whom the first translateth it in latin Intergutio, the other in
Italian Spalaggione, as it were a backing; Upon this conceit, Patricius
paralle* m^t. part. 14 173 and part 2. 154.
I think, because in a file the whole number stands one at the back of
another. Suidas in Enomotia.
Suidas says: Enomotia is a body military amongst the Lacedaemonians of 32
men, and is so called, because they take their oath together, not to forsake
the place assigned them in battle. With whom agrees the great Etymol magnu^
in Enometis
Etymologicon; and Hesye. i^ Enomotia.
Hesychius likewise; who terms it a body military, that takes an oath and
swears by the sacrifice, which is offered at such time, as they go into the
field. And surely you shall not find the word Enomotia applied to other
soldiers, then the Lacedaemonians, or else to them, that the Lacedaemonians
commanded: until it was afterward taken up by the Macedonians. And I^l Pollux
lib 1. cap. 10.
Julius Pollux expressly notes, that Moira, and Enomotia, are proper
appellations of the Lacedaemonians, given to certain of their military
bodies. Albeit both the text be corrupted in Pollux, having Eunomotia for
Enomotia, and the interpreter has worse translated it, re^dring Enomotia,
military discipline, and Moira a duty. As the Lochos is great, or little, so
is the Enomotia. The Lacedemonian Enomotia was 32. men, the Lochos being 512.
but the file of Aelian being 16. and the Enomotie noe more, then the fourth
part of a file the Enomotie must contain noe more then four men. One of every
of these four must be a commander; who is called Enomotarcha, or the
commander of that Enomotie. So that in the whole file, consisting of 16. there
ought to be four Enomotarchas. Where they should stand in the file, is a
question. Patricius makes the file-leader the first Enomotarcha, the fifth man,
the second, the ninth man, the third, and the 13 man the fourth; excluding the
bringer up, whom notwithstanding he acknowledges to be the second man of the
file, and in dignity next to the file-leader. I am of another opinion; and yet
allow the places of the first, fifth, and ninth, but think the bringer-vp
ought to be the last Enomotarcha: Arr. l. 7. 164: C
Arrian confirms my opinion: who writes thus: Alexander returning to
Babylon, found Prucestes newly come out of Persia, bringing with him 20000.
Persians. Then commending the Persians for their obedience in all things to
Prucestes, and Prucestes for his care, and diligence, in ordering them, he
reparted them into bands according to the Macedonian manner. Over every file
he appointed a Macedonian file-leader to command, and next a Macedonian
dimaerite, and a Decastater, so called of the pay he had, which was less
then Dimaerites, and more then the common soldiers; then twelve Persians, and
last of all the file a Macedonian, who also was a Decastater. So that in the
whole file there were four Macedonians, three, whose pay was more, then the
common soldiers, and a fileleader the fourth, and more over 12. Persians. So
Arrian. Out of which words we may learn first the number of the Macedonian
file, which consisted of 12. Persians, and 4. Macedonians, in all 16. the
number, that Aelian requires in his file. Next, that the Enomotarchs, or
commanders of the four parts of the file, were likewise 4. Lastly that the
bringer-vp was one of the four by express words of Arrian, which is contrary
to the opinion of Patricius, and whereas Arrian terms the third Enomotarch.
Decastateros of the pay* he received, it is to be understood, that Stater was
a piece of coin, of the weight of four dragmes of Athens whereof the
Enomotarch had ten by the month. The dragme was of value seven pence sterling,
and the Stater, containing four dragmes, two shillings and four pence
sterling; and ten of them were valued at twenty three shillings and four
pence. Which was the pay of the second Enomotarch, and of the bringer-vp, as
Arrian affirms. 5 And the Commander Dimaerites] About the Dimerite Arrian,
and Aelian, differ. Suidas leaves the matter uncertain, saying the Dimerite
is commander of the half-file, but points not out, which is he. Arrian
distinguishes the Dimerite from the bringer-vp, and gives a greater pay to
the Dimerite, then to the bringer-vp. The bringer-vp, he says, was noe more
then Decastateros, where as the Dimerite had a greater pay. But Aelian twice in
this chapter affirms, that the bringer-vp was the Dimerite, and adds he
ought to be the second man of worth in the file. And that the place of the
rear is not much inferior to the front, Xenop. Cyro^ lib. 3 82. D
Cyrus teaches his bringers-vp in Xenophon in these words; You have a place
says he no less honorable, then they, that stand in front. For being in the
rear, and seeing and encouraging them, that behave themselves valiantly, you
make them more valiant, and the remiss and backward you incite, and spur on,
likewise to do as well, as the rest. Leo. cap. 4.. 71. 72.
Leo appoints two Officers to a file, the file-leader, and the bringer-vp,
and so makes the bringer-vp the second person of the file. The rear being
then the second place of the file, I conceive no reason, why, as the
file-leader commands the one half of the file, so the bringer-vp should not
be the Dimerite, and command the other; and I rather assent to Aelian, that of
purpose describes the particulers of this art, as he finds them set down
in the ancient Tacticks, then to Arrian, that, writing the history of the
deeds of Alexander, stumbleth by chance upon these things not greatly incident
to his narration. Yet may there be a reasonable construction of both their
meanings, if we consider the several respects of the offices of these
Enomotarchs. For the middlemost Enomotarch may be termed the Dimerite in
regard he stands in the head of the second half-file, and in doubling the
front and some other motions leads it: the bringer-vp because he absolutely
governs it, and sees that directions, given by higher officers, be
executed. 6 It behooves that the file-leader be more sufficient] The
file-leader and bringers-vp ought to be the most sufficient, because they have
the whole government of the file, the one in the front, the other in the
rear. Therest are under them, and to be called by the names of leaders, and
followers. But yet is there a further disposition of the file, which, as I
find it in Leo ^a. 4.. 6^
Leo, I will set down. His words sound thus: over the other sixteen you are
to appoint a file-leader (as he is termed) resolute, and fit for service, and
eight of these sixteen, that shall be found fittest, you shall place in the
front, and rear, of the file, four in the front, namely in the first, second,
third, and fourth place, other four in the rear, in the sixteenth, fifteenth,
foureteenth, and thirteenth place, that the front and rear may be strengthened
with four men a piece. The weaker are to be placed in the midst of the file.
This counsel, or rather precept, of Leo has this reason. The front, and the
rear, are the principal places the enemy commonly gives upon. The front we
always turn against the enemy, if we can. The rear the enemy seeks to
attache, and by it to distress us, if he can. The flanks for the most part
are secured by the horse, and light*armed. For Leo places the light*armed, and
horse in the flanks. So these two places, being most subject to the violence
of the enemy, require extraordinary care, and assurance. As for the weakest,
which are in the midst, they never come to strike stroke, but after the front,
and rear, are broken, Leo ca 4. 14
In another place he writes to this effect: your Contubernies ( the soldiers
that cabin together) you shall order according to five men, or to ten, or to
four, or to eight, or to sixteen, as you shall find most convenient, that
being bound one to another with mutual acquaintance, they may fight one for
another in battle and be more valiant against the enemy. But you shall do
more wisely, if when you are to join, you place brothers by brothers, and
friends by friends. For when he, that fights, has an entierly beloved friend
standing next behind him, he must of necessity hasard himself with more
egernesse for his friends sake. And the other being ashamed not to requite one,
that sustaines such danger in his behalf, will hardly be brought to forsake
his friend so well deserving, and first betake himself to his feet. The same
is the advice of Onosander, and was much practiced in ancient time. The Lochos
Hieros, or Holy-band, of the Thebans (whereof I spoke before) consisted all of
friends, that had bound themselves one to another in friendship. With this
Holy-band Plutarch in Pe lep^da.
Pelopidas gave the first disgraceful overthrow to the Lacedaemonians, that
ever they had. Of this band Plutarch. ibib.
Plutarch writes, that it was never beaten until the battle of Chaeronaea,
when Philip the father of Alexander vanquished the Athenian, and Theban forces
both together. After which battle Phillip surueying the dead bodies, and
coming to the place, where these three hundred lay, all close mingled one with
another, and strooken through with the Macedonian pikes, he wondered greatly,
and hearing that it was the band of lovers, and beloved, wept, and said, evilly
may they perish, that suspect any filthiness in deed, or suffering, to have
been practiced amongst such men. Cyrus the elder had his Homotimos nourished up
together, and Alexander his Hetairos; whose extraordinary service appeared in
all their battles. Diod. Sicul. lib. 1. 34.
Diodorus Siculus writes of Sesoosis the Egyptian King to this effect: at the
birth of Sesoosis his father did a magnificent and royal deed. For gathering
together all the children of Aegipt, that were borne the same day, and setting
over them some to nourish and govern them, he gave the same education, and
institution, to them all, conceiving that they, that were brought up together,
and partakers of the same liberty, would become the best affected, and most
assured fellow helpers in war. This was the judgment of Myris, the father of
Sesoosis, King of Aegipt, in providing assured assistance to his son for the
conquering of the whole world, which by certain blind prophecies was promised
him. Now what little trust their is to be given to men, that are not
acquainted one with another, Pompey that great Captain of the Romans shows
in his epistle to Domitius: Cicer. ad A^icum li. 8. epist. 20
For men, says he, are not quickly to be assembled hither by musters, and if
we had them, you are not ignorant how much they may be relied upon, being
unacquainted to fight against old Legions. Yet has Leo another mixture in his
files. For he would have the old, and new soldiers put together in one file.
Least says he, the old being by themselves alone, prove weak, and of small
force, and the young disorderly, having little experience. For the one, albeit
old, yet are well acquainted with service, the other albeit young, and
valiant, yet are unskillful.
For the Enomoties, dimerie, and file, see the figure.

Joining of Files. CHAP. VI.
1 Joining of Files, is when one file is laid flank-wise to another, the
Leader of the second file to the Leader of the first, and the follower of the
second File-leader to the follower of the first, and so the rest. Every man
that ranketh Cap. 6. Joining of Files
1 File

2 Files Joined

4 Files Joined

The Flank

The Front

is called Parastates, as for example the Leader of the second file, to the
Leader of the first, and so their next followers, and the rest. As often then,
as the second file, the third, the fourth, and so the rest are laid flank-wise
to the first, it is named Joining of files.

Notes.
1 Joining of files is] A file of it self will work little effect against an
enemy. For what can a man alone in front do? Cyrus in Xenop* Cyrop. lib. ^ 167.
Xenophon wishes, that, where as the Aegiptians stood a hundred in depth, they
had been in depth a thousand, for so, says he, we should have the fewer
hands to fight against. The rank brings the multitude of hands to fight. And
it is held, that the more hands are with convenience brought to fight, the more
is his advantage, that brings them. This is done by joining fil^s together,
out of which joining, ranks spring, and ranks the more they increase, and
extend themselves in length, the more hands are ready to encounter the enemy.
Now, as it was said in the former chapter, that files consisted of leaders, and
followers, from the first to the last, so is it in this chapter said, that
ranks consist of side men from one end of the length of the Phalange to the
other: Few, or many men, placed side to side in a right line make a rank; as
in two, or three files joined together, there are sixteen ranks of two, or
three men in a rank. And the two or three file-leaders make the first rank,
their followers the next, and so the rest until you come to the sixteenth.
The like falls out in more files. Etymol. magn. in the word Stratos.
Vrbicius says that the file-leaders make the front (as they term it) of the
Phalange, which they call also the first rank. And further, he says, they,
that run in an even line betwixt the two wings, the right, and the left, are
said to be Parastatai, or sidemen. Likewise: the last rank is called Oura, or
the rear, and the commander Ouragos, the bringer-vp. So Vrbicius agreeing with
Aelian. Now, out of these two chapters, is a clear distinction of the names of
soldiers, that by reason of their posture, or place, in battle make the
diversity of files, and ranks. They, that make files are Protostatai,
first-standers, and Epistatai, after-standers; which are by us commonly called
Leaders, and followers. For these two says Aelian make the file from the
beginning to the end. Parastatai side-standers, or, as we term them, sidemen,
make the ranks. And if you measure the length of the Phalange, you do it by
number of men in the rank, if the depth by number of men in the file.

Of a Phalange, the length, and depth thereof: of rankinge, and fi^nge; the
division of the Phalange into wings: the place of the armed foot, of the
light-armed, and of the Horse. CHAP. VII.
1 THE whole body of the multitude of files is termed a Phalange: whose 2
length is the first rank of file-leaders, and is named, the front, the face,
the edge of the battle, the rank, the mouth, the Commanders, the
fore-standers, and the head of the files.

As much of the Phalange, as stretches backward from the front to the rear, 3
is named the depth. The bearing straight forth of sidemen in length, whether
they be Leaders, or followers, is ranking. And the standing of Leaders and
followers directly in a line in depth, is filing.

A Phalange is divided into two whole parts beginning at the middle section of
the front, and houlding on clean through to the uttermost part of the depth;
whereof the one half is called the 4 right wing, and head, the other half the
left winge, and tail. 5 The two fold section it self, that divides the
length, has the name of the Navell, and the Mouth. 6 The Light-armed are
placed after the Phalange of the Armed, and behind them the Horse. Yet if
occasion require, both light-armed, and Horse are otherwise disposed, as after
in this discourse will appear.

Notes.
THE whole body of multitude of files is termed a Phalange] Joining of files
makes ranks, and a sufficient number of files, and ranks together, make a body,
which is called a Phalange. For that name is given to any entire body of an
indifferent greatness, compacted, and united for fight. Hesychius deriveth the
original of the word Apo tou pelas allelois inai; from the standing of the
soldiers in battle near one to another. Suidas in the same sense, albeit
he differ a little in words, says, the Phalanges are so called apo tou pelasai
anchi, of approaching one near to an other. The great Etymologicon goes yet a
little further, and says, that Phalanges are as it were Palanges para to pelas
kai eggys einai, as it were Pelangys. These are the conjectures about the
original of the name. Which of them is truest, is not greatly to the purpose.
It is enough to understand, in what sense the word Phalange is commonly taken
amongst Tactick writers, who, as I said, in a general signification call any
great body of armed gathered together, and united for fight, a Phalange. So
Caesar de bell. gall lib. 1.
Caesar names the battle of the Heluetians, into which they cast themselves,
when they fought against him, and likewise the battle of Ariovistus, a
Phalange. So speaks Xenoh. de exp. Cyri. lib 3. 306. E
Xenophon of the Plaesium, or square holow battle, into which the Graecians,
that went with Cyrus the younger into Persia, fashioned themselves at their
return out of Persia. And the same Xenoph. hist. graec. li. 3. 499. ^
Xenophon says, the horse of the Graecians, when they were to encounter the
Persians, ordered themselves four in depth, in form of a Phalange. And Arrian
lib. ^. 1^ ^
Arrian, that the Persians at the River Granicus were ordered in a long
Phalange, and Xenoph. histor. g^aec. lib. 5. 8^. A
Xenophon again discoursing how Iphicrates exercised his navy, when he
expected to fight with the Lacedaemonians, says, he sometimes lead in a wing
(that is in a large depth) sometimes in form of a Phalange, in a broad front.
The first inventer of the Phalange is thought to be Pan the general of
Bacchus his army. Polyaenus says: Polyc^. l b. 1. in Pan. 1.
Pan was the commander of Bacchus his army. This man was the first that
invented the order of a battle, called it a Phalange, and parted it into the
Right, and left wing. For which cause Poets feign, that Pan carries two horns
upon his head. Besides he was the first, that by slight, and cunning cast a
fear upon his enemies. For when Bacchus, incamping in a hollow forest, was
advertised by his spies, that an infinite number of enemies were lodged one the
further side, he began to be afraid. But not Pan: who commanded the same
night the army of Bacchus to give as great a shoute, as they could. The Rocks
and hollownesse of the forest rendered it again double to the enemy, and made
show of a greater army, then Bacchus had. Where with the enemy falling into a
fear fled forth with. In honor of this strategeme we feign, that Echo is
Pans love: and the causlesse night-feares, which fall upon Armies, were
attributed to Pan. So far Polyenus about the inventer of the Phalange. The
number of the Phalange is not always one. It may consiste of ten thousand,
twenty five thousand, or as many, as you list, Polyb. lib. 2. 150 A.
Antigonus the King of Macedony had his Phalange of ten thousand. Polyb lib. 5.
408 C.
Ptolomaeus King of Aegipt, of twenty five thousand. Polyaen lib. 2. in
Cle^rcho.. 3.
The ten thousand Graecians that went with Cyrus into Persia are called a
Phalange. What number the Helvetians, and Ariovistus, had in their Phalange,
is not preciselie set down by Caesar. Caesar. de bell. gall. lib. 1.
Yet it seems by Caesar, that the most part of the fighting multitude of the
Helvetians cast themselves into a Phalange; and those of Ariovistus likewise:
But Aelians Phalange is restreyned to a certain number, as the next following
Chapter will teach. 2 The length whereof] The length of the Phalange is to be
accounted by the rank not by the file. The file is but sixteen men deep. The
rank from the point of one wing to the point of the other conteyneth a
thousand, and twenty four men in Aelians Phalange. So that the files being
short in comparison of the ranks, it is reason, that the length of the Phalange
be measured according to the rank, not to the file. Suidas in Mechos.
Suidas agrees with Aelian saying, that the length of the Phalange is the
first Syntagma (the first rank) of file-leaders, which is ordered in a right
line, stretching from one wing to another, and is called the face, and the
mouth, and the front, and the edge, and the first-filing, and the first
standers of the battle. The next row, lyeng Parallel to this, is called the
second rank, and the third, the third rank, and so the rest. The length is
termed in Greek Mecos, to which is opposed the depth, which is named Bathos.
Neither is there in true account any other dimensions in a Phalange, besides
the length, and the depth, which are in this chapter mentioned by Aelian. Other
names are given in Greek writers sometimes, but they signify either the one,
or the other. 3 Is named the depth] As the length runs along by front from
one wing to another, so the depth bears backward from the front to the rear.
The depth is properly called Bathos, as I said. Di^d. Sicul. 25^ 575.
And Bathera Phalanx, is a deep Phalange. And Arrian lib. 1. 3 C.
Arrian says, Alexander ordered his Phalange es Bathos, in depth. And Polyb.
lib. 1. 35 A.
Polybius, that the Romans made their battle much shorter then before, but
much deeper, Bathyteran. And as it is called Bathos, for the most part, so is
it by Leo cap. 4.. ^ and cap. 14.. 108. and cap 7. 54. cap. 12. 40. 46. 47.
Leo called also Pachos. For the depth of a file is by him termed depth, or
Thicknes, Bathos etoi Pachos, in two several chapters of his Tacticks; not in
respect of the file it self, which is no more then a long line, as it were,
and carries neither Thicknes nor breadth, but in respect of the Phalange, the
depth whereof is measured by the file. And in the fourth, the twelfth, and
fourtenth chapters he terms the depth of the Phalange it self (Thicknes)
Pachos alone with out adding Bathos; showing thereby, that Pachos also
signifies the dimension of the Phalange from the front to the rear. But where
some are of opinion, that Platos, breadth, ought to be read in those places instead of Pachos, Thicknes, they persuade me not to be of their mind. after
cap. 50.
For Aelian himself gives an Attenuation, or Thinning, (which he calls
Liptysmos) to the Phalange: and that cannot be understood, unless there were
in it a kind of Thicknes before. And to make it more plain, he says, that
this Leptysmos is, when the depth of the Phalange is gathered up and from
sixteen men it becomes a less number. So that the Thicknes of the Phalange is
the full sixteen, which is also the depth, and making of it Thinner is to
lessen the depth. To a Place Platos is fittly attributed, a Place being only
superficies, which consists of longitude and latitude. So Polyen. lib. 4. in
Alexand.. 21
Poliaenus speaking of a valley, wherein an ambush was laid to entrap
Alexander, says, the length stretched far out, but the breadth, Platos, was
narrowed to four furlongs. The name of Platos is likewise given to a place by
Polyb. lib. 1^. 664 D.
Polybius* But to say the truth Platos in a Phalange rather signifies the
length, then the depth, as appears by Aelian after in the four and forty
chapter. And Leo ca. 7.. ^2
Leo calls the front of the Phalange Platos, and when he would have the
front enlarged, or doubled, he gives this word of direction Platynon pros ta
amph^tera mere, enlarge the front on both sides. 4 The right wing] That which
in the English tongue is called a wing, is termed in Greek Keras a horn. We
in our wars of ancient time divided our armies into three parts, The
vantgarde, the battle, and the reare-warde: and, when we came to fight, set
them for the most part in an even front, the battle in the midst, on the
right hand, the vant-garde, which was called the right-wing, on the left, the
reare-warde which was called the left-wing. Properly enough for our
embattailing. For the battle is, as it were, the body, and the vant-garde,
and reare-warde, are the wings, which in a manner stick out from the body, and
whereby the body is supported: that, that we call wings, the Graecians, and
Romans called horns in the battle. The word Keras signifies a point bearing
out from the height, or ends, of any thing. It is used for the top of Rocks,
and for promontories, and such like; And in a Phalange it properly signifies
the two points (the right and the left) of the wings. The English word wing I
am feign to retain, because it is familiar, and in use. Aelian here will have
the wings to stretche out from the middle section to either point (the right
and left) of the Phalange; under which appellation must fall to the right wing
the whole space, that begins at the middle intervall, and runs along to
the corner of the battle on the right hand, to the left, all that is
comprehended betwixt the same space, and the left corner of the battle. 5 The
tw^ ^fould section] In Greek it is named Dichotomia: because it parts, and
divides the Phalange into two even parts, beginning at the front, and
stretching out to the rear. And Aelian in the tenth chapter of this book*
names it Apotome. But here he speaks of no more intervalls, or partitions,
of the Phalange, then of this one in the midst. I would think there should be
more. Onosander e^. ^o. ^o. ca. ^06
Onosander says: let there be certain intervalls in your battle, that if
your enemy advance, your light-armed after they have spent their missiue
weapons, and before the Phalanges join, may retire leasurely in the
intervalls, and without disorder come behind to the rear. For it is not safe
for them in retiring to fetch a compass about the whole army, or to turn in
again on the outside of the winge. For the enemy, hasting to come to hands,
would easily prevent, and intercept, them in the midst; so that they neither
should be able to break through the armed, already closed for fight, and
falling upon their own weapons, they must needs disorder their own people,
every man after other seeking to find a way through them to escape the danger
he is in. Thus much Onosander; from whom we may learn, both that their
ought to be more sections in the Phalange, then one, and that the institution
of them had this chief end, to receive the light-armed in their spaces, after
they had skirmished with the enemy, and were by them forced to retire. I may
add, that Aelian placing the lightarmed in the rear of the Phalange if you
give but one section unto it, it will be as hard for them, to advance, and
s^rue, before the front, as it will be to retreat after their service done.
It seems, that Leo ca. 4.. 58
Leo gives three intervalls to the Phalange of the ancient Tacticks. He
says* they opposed the bodies of the armed against the enemy, and divided them
into four parts, the right, and left, and the middle-right* and middle-left
part. Making so many parts, the parts must be distinguished (as I collect) by
intervalls, which ought to be one after the first body of the right-wing,
another after the second, which is the middle section, the third after the
third. And this Third section is bounded with the fourth body, which makes the
point of the left-wing. For if the Phalange were whole, and entire, without
more intervalls then one, how could there be four parts? For esteeming them
by Phalangarchies, without leaving spaces between, it could not be said,
there were but four parts of the Phalange, considering, that as well the
Merarchies, Chiliarchies, Pentecosiarchies, Syntagmataes, are parts of it, as
the Phalangarchies. But being distinguished by partition of intervalls, the
four Phalangarchies become four parts, namely the right, left, middle-right
and middle-left: as Leo here terms them. The same Leo ca. 4.. (...)
Leo speaks after more plainly, enioyning his general to separate, and
disioyne Diachorizein the whole number of his army into four parts. For, as
Choris signifies a part or severed, so Diachorizo, being derived from it,
signifies to put asunder, or set a part. Suidas in the word Phalangarchia.
Suidas is yet a little more clear. A Phalangarchie, says he, is two
Merarchies of four thousand and ninty six men. This as some say is the
section, Apotome, of the wing, as other, it is a Meros. Of ancient time it was
called Strategia, and the commander Strategos, but now he is termed
Phalangarcha. Suidas makes the wing to have a partition or section, and says,
some call a Phalangarchie by the name of this section, Before we heard out of
Aelian, that the wing (right or left) did stretche out from the middle section
to the outward most point of the battle on either side. And as the middle
section divides the Phalange in two parts, which are called wings, so this
section (spoken of by Suidas) being in the midst of the wing divided the*
wing into two parts. To call a Phalangarchie (which is a body consisting of
four thousand and ninty six men) a section, is, I confess, an improper
speech, but tolerable notwithstanding, considering that the whole fourefolde
Phalange is composed of the four Phalangarchies, and that the section of the
right-wing begins at the left hand file, or inward point of the right hand
Phalangarchie, and ends at the right hand file of the second Phalangarchie.
And we are not to expect the same exactness of speech from soldiers, that is
common to men skillfull in the liberal sciences. Soldiers, that profess
action, have their end, if they be understood of those, they command.
Arti^tes are contemned* that clothe not the precepts of their arts with
elegant, fit, and exact terms. Seeing then the beginning of the section of
the wing is at the flank of the first Phalangarchie on either side of the
Phalange, we may after a sort term the Phalangarchie a section of the wing,
because it boundeth the section. At least by this place of Suidas we may
gather, that there was an intervall in either wing, which in reason ought to
be in the midst of the wing, and to lie betwixt the two Phalangarchies. For
so many there are in one wing. Polyb. lib. ^ (...)* 631. D.
Polybius tells of Philopaemen, that, fighting against Machanidas the Tyrant
of Lacedaemon, after he had placed the light-armed, the Lanciers, and
Illyrians jointly in one front, he added in the same right line the Phalange
distinguished into bodies according to Merarchies and divided by several
distances. I translate Speiredon distinguished into bodies, because Speira
signifies a military body amongst the Graecians, and is by the Graecians,
that wrote the Roman history, used sometime for a Legion, and sometime for a
Cohort. And it seems that Spiredon is here by Polybius put in the same sense
that Eis Speiran is by Plut. in Philopaemen.
Plutarch: who mentioning the reformation touching affairs military, wh^h the
same Philopaemen brought in amongst the Achaians, writes thus * their manner
and form of embattailing was not usually parcelled out Eis Speiran, that is
(as I interpret it) in several bodies, but using a Phalange, which had
neither protension of pikes, nor closing of targets in front (as the Macedonian
manner is) they were easily foiled, and broken, by the enemy. The meaning of
Plutarch is (as I conceive) that the Achaians in former times used to order
their Phalange in a continued length without intervalls which Philopoemen
reformed, and taught them to make divisions by intervalls; And the practice of
Philopoemen is the best interpreter of his own counsel to the Achaians. This
practice Polybius sets down to be the division of his Phalange Kata tele
speiredon en diastemasi into bodies distinguished by intervalls according to
Merarchies. Polybius also, to show, what bodies they were, uses the word
Tele, which I translate Merarchies, having my warant out of Aelian before cap.
^.
Aelian: who says a Merarchie consists of two Chiliarchies, and contains
two thousand and forty eight men, and a hundred and twenty four files; and
adds, that it is of some called a Telos, and the leader a Telarch. A man may
doubt seeing Philopaemen made an intervall betwixt every Merarchie, whether he
made seven divisions, or no: For in Aelians Phalange there are eight
Merarchies, betwixt every of which if a distance were, there must needs arise
seven intervalls. To clear this doubt we must understand, that the Phalanges
of the Graecians were not always of the same number, as I noted before.
Aelians, and the Macedonian Phalange, consisted of sixteen thousand and odd.
Antigonus had but ten thousand. Demetrius eleven thousand. Other had more, the
Laced^monians less, and likewise the Graecians for the most part. And it
seems, the Phalange of Philopaemen was no more, then eight thousand, and
odd, in which number there are but four Merarchies. As Aelians Phalange
comprehending sixteen thousand and odd, wherein are four Phalangarchies, has
likewise three divisions by Phalangarchies. And yet in this Phalange of
Philopaemen, if you account the file to have but eight men (as the most
Graecians used in their files to have) these four Merarchies will possess as
much ground in front, as the Phalangarchies of Aelians Phalange do, the file
being sixteen. Neither is it new to figure out the bodies greater, or less,
according to the number of the Phalange. Leo exp. 4. 62. 63. 64. 65.
Leo commands his General, when the number will not reach to sixteen
thousand (the number of the old Phalange) to hold notwithstanding sixteen men
in a file, and to divide his Phalange into four equal parts by intervalls,
excepting some few, which he would have reserved for other uses. To conclude
Aelian him self seems to acknowledge more sections, then one, when in the
tenth Chapter of this book he speaks of the middle section mese apotome.
For this word middle being a relative, can not be understood with out two
other at least, which are placed on either side. And all the figures, that I
have seen, of a fourefold Phalange allow three sections, and no more, that is
to say, one in the midst, and the other two in the wings. What the distance
and dimension of these sections ought to be, I find not set down. But, if I
might have leave to conjecture, I would think, they ought to be large enough
for a troop of horse, framed wedge-wise, after the Macedonian manner, to pass
through; the last rank whereof being fifteen (as appears in the twenty
chapter of this book) and the horse placed in the rear of the light-armed it
is needful, if upon any occasion they were to be drawn through to serve in
the front, the distance of the section should be sufficient to give them
passage with out disorder. And I am the rather confirmed in this opinion,
because I see the intervalls betwixt the Roman maniples so proportioned, that
the Principes might pass through those of the Hastati, and the Triarij through
those of the Principes. But I proportioned out the intervalls to the horse, not
to the light-armed, for that the light-armed ^ay be divided into several
bodies without inconvenience, but any breaking of the horse-wedge breeds a
confusion in the whole troop. Yet where a troop of horse may find way, there
may a Centurie, or Colors, of light-armed find also way. 6 The light-armed
are placed after] Aelian cap. 3^
The light-armed were diversely placed, sometimes before the front of the
Phalange, which kind of placing is afterward called Prataxis, sometimes on the
wings, and it is called Hypotaxis, sometimes betwixt the files of the armed
fronting in a right line with them, and it was called Entaxis, sometimes in the
rear after the Phalange, which was called Epitaxis, All these are spoken of by
Aelian hereafter in this book. Aelian cap. 4^.
There is another kind of placing the light-armed, when they are thrown into
the midst of the battle* being hollowed for that, and other purposes. Hereof
Aelian likewise treats in this book here after. And albeit the most usual
embattailling of them has been in the wings, yet the bestowing in the rear
according to Aelians mind has also advantages. First it concealeth their
number, which because they are shaddowed with the pikes standing before, can
hardly be discerned. Then it is easy from the rear to draw them to any
place of service without disorder, be it before, on the wings, or behind the
rear. Further, it will not be easy for the enemies horse to charge them, the
armed standing before for a sure defense. Lastly, from the rear they shall be
able at all times to anoye the enemy, before the battle ioynes; as soon as
the battle ioynes, and all the time of fight. Neither does this manner of
embattailing want examples of the old history of the Graecians. Xenop Cyrop.
lid. 6 167. B. ^
The embattailing of Cyrus the elders army, in Xenophon, has the light-armed
in the rear. I will set down the effect of Cyrus words at large because they
contain the ordering of an army to fight according to the judgment of
Xenophon. Cyrus then being to try a battle with Craesus thus directs his
Commanders: you, says he, Araspes take your place in the right wing, as you
now do, and you the other Myriarches, as you are acoustomed. For when the
fight is once a foot, noe Chariot may change horses; and command the
Taxiarches, and file-leaders, to order their files every one divided in two
parts Phalange-wise, that is each half fronting one with another in a right
line. A file contains four an twenty men. Then said one of the Myriarches,
do you think Sir, that we shall be able, in this order, to encounter so
deep a Phalange, as the enemies? Cyrus answered, the Phalanges that are deeper,
then may with their arms reach the enemy, are they fit think you either to
annoye the enemy, or profitte their frindes? For my part I could wish those,
that are ranged 100* in depth, to be in depth a thousand. For so should we
have the fewer to fight with all. The number, that I give for the depth of the
Phalange, I doubt not, but will entirely serve for use, and maintain a joint
fight in every part. The Darters I will place after the armed, and after the
darters the Archers. For who will set them in front, that confess themselves
unable to maintain a fight hand to hand? How then will they hold their
grownde, if they be set before the armed? but being in the rear, some with
darts, other with arrows, sent over the heads of the armed, will greatly
endammage the enemy. And it is clear, that wherewithal soever an enemy is
endamaged, with the same a man's own fide is eased, and relieved. You therefore
order your selves, as I have appointed. As for the captains of the Targetiers
I will have them, and their files, stand likewise next the armed in the Rear,
and after them the Archers. And you the chief Commander of the Rear enjoyne
the other rear Commanders every man to have an eye to those under him, that
they do their duties. And let them sharply threaten the negligent, and in
case any man treasonably forsake his place, punish him with death. For it is
the work of Commanders both with word, and deed, to encourage those, they
command, and to make the cowards more afraid of them, then of the enemy. This
is your charge, but you Euphratas, that command over the Engines, see that the
beasts, that draw the Engines, and Turrets, follow the Phalange as near, as
may be. And you Daouchus, that have the charge of the baggage, come with your
many next after the Turrets, and let your Serieants severely punish them, that
have to much before or come to slowly after. And you Carduchus, that rule the
wagons, wherein the women are, order them next the baggage. For all these,
coming in the rear, will both breed an opinion of multitude, and give us
means to lay an ambush, and will force the enemy, purposing to encompasse us,
to fetch a larger compass; which the larger it is, so much the weaker must
he be. And you Artabasus, and Artagersas, each of you lead next after these,
the 1000. foot you command a piece. And you Phranuchus, and Asiadatas, order
the Chiliarchies of horse you command not with the Phalange, but set them by
themselves a part behind the wagons; and when you have done it, repair to us
with the rest of the commanders. But you are to be in a readiness; as if you
were first to fight. And you the commanders of the Camel-riders place your
selves after the wagons, and do what Artagersas shall bid you. And you the
Commanders of the Chariots, after lotts are cast, let him, whose lotte it is,
range himself, and his 100. Charriots, before the Phalange; the other two
hundred, one of them is to follow, the Phalange on the right side, wing-wise,
the other on the left. So far Cyrus. I have rehearsed the words at large,
principally to show that the light-armed in ancient time were placed sometimes
behind the Phalange; and yet further also, to represent the manner of
embattailing an army, which was then usual. For here have you set down the
place of the Myriarches, and of the other commanders, which was in front, then
the place of the pikes, of the light-armed, of the rear commanders, of the
Engines, of the baggage, of the wagons, wherein the women were, of the gards
for the baggage, both horse, and foot, of the Camels, and of the Chariots. And
albeit many of these particulers agree not with our manner at this day (for we
have neither Engines, nor Camels, nor Chariotts, nor slings, nor darts, nor
arrows) yet is the reason of war alike in all, and in our placing also the
fitness of service principally to be respected. The place of the horse is
here omitted by Xenop. Cyrop. lib. 7 172. C. and page 175. C.
Xenophon, which may be supplied out of the seventh book, where Chrysanthas
General of the horse is said to stand on the right wing of the Phalange with
half the horse, Hystaspas on the left with the other half. But to return to
the placing of the light-armed, the same Xeno^. Cyrop. lib. 7 179. ^.
Xenophon testifies, that it was the Egyptian manner to order their
light-armed behind, and that in the battle betwixt Cyrus, and Craesus, the
Egyptian archers, and darters, were with drawn swords compelled by the
reare-commanders to shoot, and east their darts. Xenoph. Hist. (...). li. ^.
472. D
Thrasybulus in his fight against the thirty Tyrants set his armed in front,
and in the rear his targetiers, and darters, without armor, and those that
cast stones. And it seems by the words of Xenoph hist. (...). li. ^2. 473. C
Thrasybulus to his own side. that the Tyrants did the like; The Tyrants,
says he, have brought us to a place, in which by reason of the steepness
they must ascend, and can neither cast stone, nor dart, over the heads of
their own people, that are embattailed before. Where we contrariwise,
whether we throw jauelins, or darts, or stones, shall easily reach, and
wound many of them. The stones and darts of the light-armed were to fly over
the front of the battle, and that could not be unless the light-armed were
placed behind; I will add one example only out of Plutarch to show the
service of the light-armed in the rear. Plut. in Sylla.
Plutarch discoursing of the battle fought betwixt Sylla, and Archelaus, the
General of Mithridates, at Cheronaea, has thus: Afterward the foot forces
came to join, the Barbarians holding out, and charging their long pikes, and
endeavoring with locking their targetts close together, to maintain the
order, and closenes of their Phalange: The Romans on the other side, casting
away their darts, and drawing their swords: put by the enemies pikes in
choler, to the end they might come quickly up to them. For they espied, opposed
against them in front 15000. of the enemies slaves, that were en^ranchised by
Proclamation of the Kings generals: and enrolled amongst the armed. And when
the Roman Armed could hardly break them, by reason of their depth, and fast
knitting together; and of their bouldnes in daring (contrary to the nature of
slaves) to abide the danger of the encounter, the arrows, and darts cast in
abundance from the Rear, made them show their backs, and fall in a route.
We find here, that the light-armed from the rear effected that, which the
Armed could not. These slaves endured the shocke, and could not be broken by
the armed, and yet were defeated with Arrows, and darts, from the Rear: Now
for the distance that should be betwixt the bodies of the light-armed, and
betwixt them, and the rear of the armed, Aelian says nothing: I make noe
doubt, but there ought to be as great (if not greater) as in the sections of
the armed. For we must understand, that the sections, that served to sever the
Phalangarchies one from another, must run through the light-armed in depth to
the rear. And by them are the Epixenagies to be divided a sunder, as the
Phalangarchies are: with Epixenagies answer the Phalangarchies for number of
files, albeit not in number of men. Likewise there ought to be, a greater
space in rank, and file, then the armed had* For the handling of missiue
weapons, require more liberty of place, then the managing of a pike or sword.
A dart can not be sent for ciblie without running two, or three, steps in
the delivery of it. A sling being thrown, and circled about the head, before
the stone, or bullet, can be forced out to any purpose, will not suffer a
near stander by. In bows, and arrows, is the like reason, if they be used as
they ought. Besides the light-armed, in their fight are tied to noe certainty
of order, or ground, but fight dispersedly: So that the more ground they
have, the fitter they are for service. In which respect a large intervall
croswise betwixt the armed, and them, should serve to purpose it having liberty
for their motion forward, and backward, as occasion should require. 7 And
behind the^ the Horse:] I have not read in any greek historye, that the
horsemen in a set battle, have been ranged behind the light-armed. The
usual manner was to place them in the Leo cap. 4. ^*
wings So did Alexander before he passed the River Arrian lib. 1. 1^ F and 14 D
Granicus: so Arrian li. ^. 3^ Curt. lib. 3. 6^
at Issos, so at Arri li. 3. 59. ^
Gangamela: So did Diod. Sicul. lib. 19. 6^5 686.
Antigonus, against Eumenes, and Eumenes against Antigonus: So Diod. Sicul.
lib. 19 ^16.
Ptolomeus against Demetrius, and Demetrius against Ptolomeus: and in brief all
the Macedonians, and the Graecians, before the Macedonians were accounted of
for matter of arms: unless some special cause moved an alteracion. And, as I
showed out of Xenophon, before all their times. Xenop Cyrop. lib. 7. 172. C.
and 175. C.
Cyrus albeit, he set the light Armed in the rear, notwithstanding he
beestowed the horse in the wings: Alexander having passed the River Ister as
long as he marched in the corn land, placed his horse behind his i Ar^ian
lib. 1. ^* D. E.
Phalange, when he entered the Champeigne, he set them on the right wing: and
lastly cast his Phalange in to a Plaesium: and ordered his horse before. In the
Corneland, they followed (for fear of an Ambushe) In the Champian they marched
on the right wing, because on the left, the Phalange was secured by the River;
before the Plae^ sium, that, being over-layde with the multitude of the enimye,
they might have a sure retreat to the foot. Arrian lib. 2. 3^. B Curtius lib.
^. 64
The same Alexander, when he was to fight the Battle of Issos with Darius,
as long as he was in the streights, marshalled his horse after his foot. But
in marching forward, coming to open ground, when he might give full length to
his Phalange, he placed his horse on both the wings. But the reason of setting
them behinde-was in the streightnes of the place: and he being incerteine how
near the enemy lay, was loathe to put them to hasard, before they had liberty
of ground to order themselves, and might have assistance of the foot. For
otherwise it was an ordinary matter in marching (as it is the manner also at
this day) to dispose the horse half behind, and half before. I will content my
self with one example. When Xenoph. hist. graec. lib 45 1^. C.
Agesilaus retourning out of Asia, passed through Thessalie, the Thessalians,
allies of the Thebans, followed him, and sought to endammage his army to
their uttermost. He had before disposed his march into a Plaesium, with the
horse half in front, and half behind, now when the Thessalians ceased not to
molest him, by falling upon his rear, he sent to the rear all the horse of
the vantgarde, excepting those, that attended his person. Either party prepared
them selves to fight. The Thessalians holding it not sure with Horse alone to
encounter armed foot: Turning about their faces, began leasurely to retire,
and the Lacedaemonians slowly to follow, Agesilaus, perceaving the error of
both, sent the best of his horse, that were about him, commanding them to
signify to the rest, that they together should go, and charge the Thessalians
with all speed, and give noe respite to them, to turn their faces. The
Thessalians contrary to their expectation being hottly charged, some fled,
other some turned about toward the enemy, other some indevouring to turn,
were surprised by their enemies, that by that time were come up to their
flancke. Now for the reason of Aelians placing the Horse in the rear, I have
noe more to say, then, that from thence they might be soon drawn to all
places, front, flank, or wheresoever the enemy is like to distress us. For it
has been the forecast, of all generals to fashion their battails according to
the figure the enemy has before chosen. Examples are so plentiful, I need
not allege many. Only I will remember one latin story of placing horse in
the rear. L. Lentulus, and L. Manlius Acidinus in Spain being to fight with
the Illergetes, and Ansetans, and other Spaniards, that had revolted from the
Romans; in this very kind of placing horse in the rear imitated, and got
the advantage of, and defeated their enemies. Livy Ce^b 3. lib. 9 227. A.
Livy has the story, and writes thus in effect: The next day at the rising of
the son the Spaniardes being all armed, and set in order, showed their The
like was done by M. Valerius the Dictator against the Hetr^ ^cans. Live decad.
^. lib. 19* 262. C.
battle, about a mile from the Roman camp. The Ansetans were in the midst
the Illergetes held the right winge, other obscure people of Spain the left:
Betwixt the wings, and the middle part, they left broad intervalls, to And by
L Papyri^ Cor against the ^ammit (...) decad. 1 lib. ^. ^. C.
give passage to their horse: (when time should be) to send them through to
charge. The Romans Embattailed after their wonted manner, Only then imitated
the enemy, in leaving open ways, for the horse betwixt the legions. And by
Sylla against (...) (...). li. 2. ca. ^
Lentulus imagining that party, and none other, should have use of their
horse, that first possessed these intervalls of the adverse battle,
commanded Cornelius the Tribune to give direction to the horsemen, presently
to charge through* the foot on both sides came to blows, and the fight was
hard, when the Roman horsemen passing through the Spaces, and falling upon the
midst of their enemies at once disordered the battle of foot and shut ^p
the ways against the Spanish horse; by which means, after noe long fight, the
enemy was utterly defeated. Where Livy says the Romans embattailed after
their wonted manner, his meaning is they ordered them selves in Maniples, or
Battallions, as we now term them (for that was their wont.) But when he
adds, they imitated the enemy in leaving open ways for the horse, betwixt
the legions. We must understand that a legion was thus embattailed: Livy
de^ad. (...) lib. ^ 213. C.
First they divided their legion in to thirty Maniples, ten of the Hastati:
ten of the Principes, and ten of the Triarij. The ten maniples of the Hastati,
they set first in an even front, leaving so much distance, or void ground
betwixt every Maniple, as a Maniple it self took up in standing. At a
reasonable space behind, were the Principes placed in as many maniples: but
so that their maniples stood directly behind the void spaces of the
Hastati. And against the bodies of the hastati, they left likewise spaces in
the Principes to the end. the Hastati being overlaid, might retire within those
spaces: or else themselves might advance against the enemy, through the
intervalls of the Hastati. Lastly at a larger distance behind these were the
Triarij set, and divided with spaces betwixt every maniple, which spaces were
great enough to receive the Principes, in case they retired also. Now the Horse
being ordered in the rear after the Triarij, if from thence, they had gone to
charge the Enemies front, through the spaces of the Triarij, they must of
necessity, have fallen upon the Maniples of the Principes who were set
directly against the intervalls or spaces.

To give therefore free passage to their horse, the Roman Generals removed the
maniples of the Principes from their ordinary place, and bestowed them, in a
right line, after the maniples of the Hastati, and made an open lane, (as it
were) from the rear of their battle to the front. So that nothing hindered
the horse, but they might freely fly up to, and fall upon the enemies front.
And yet I take not Aelians meaning, to be, that the Horse set in the rear,
should during the time of the fight still remain there. For so would noe
great service be had of them. But he placed them there the rather to avoyde
confusion in ordering the foot. And that after their embatteling, they might
be led from thence to any place, front, or flank, or wheresoever they might
yield most use. For in the fifteenth and twentieth chapter, he would have both
light-armed, and horse so placed, that they might answer all attempts of the
enemy. And in his caution following, he says, if occasion require both horse
and light-armed, may be otherwise placed. That they were usually placed in the
wings, I have before showed. The examples declare they were placed in the rear
sometimes:

Of placing in the front there are also examples. Xenoph. hist* graec. li 6.
596. A.
The Lacedaemonians at the battle of Leuctra against the Thebans placed
their horse before their Phalange, and tried their fortune with them, and were
beaten, before the foot joined: (...) in v^ta Alexand Arrian lib. 1. 14. F.
The Persians at the River Granicus, esteeming their Horse to be their
chiefest strength, opposed them upon the bancks against Alexander, that was to
pass over, and embattailled their foot behind the horse. And Alexander
encountered them first with his Horse, before his foot could get over: One
example more I will add to show the reason, why Horse are sometimes placed
before the front of the Phalange of foot. Plutar^h in v^ta (...) D^od. Sicul.
lib. 1^. 64^
Eumenes being to fight against Craterus and Neoptolemus, both great
generals, that had served under Alexander in all his wars, ordered the fight
thus: Because he vnder-stood, that their Army confisted of twenty thousand
foot, the most part Macedonians renowned for their valor, and skill in
fight (In whom they set their greatest trust) and of more then two thousand
horse; and knew his own foot, albeit they were as many in number, yet all to
be ramasses of diverse kinds of people, and that his own horse were five
thousand, with exceeded the enemy both in number, and valor, he determined to
hasard the battle upon his horse, before the two Phalanges of foot should
come together: Advancing therefore with his horse far before his foot, he
took the right wing himself, and gave the left to two strangers, to
Pharnabarus a Persian the son of Artabazus; and to Phoenix a Tenedian:
Craterus stood in the right wing of his own horse, and placed Neoptolemus on
the left. And seeing the enemies horse coming forward, with great fury
charged them first, and fought bravely. But his horse failing under him, he
fell to ground, and it being not known, who he was by reason of the medly,
and throng of those, that gave back, and fled, he was trampled under foot,
and ended his life after a strange manner. By his death the enemy took
courage, and encompassing their adversaries on all sides, made a great
slaughter, and the right wing, after this manner, with might overpressed, and
put to the worst, was feign to fly for succor to the Phalange of foot. In the
left winge Neoptolemus stood directly against Eumenes, and the mutual sight
of each bredde a great emulation betwixt the generals, and a fervent desire
to come to hands. And being easily known, both by their horse, and other
marks, they flewe one upon another; and out of their single fight made away to
a consequent victory. And first they assailed one another with swords, and
after fell into an unlooked for, and wonderful Monomachy, for being
transported with anger, and mutual hatred, quitting the raines of their
bridles, with their left hands they each seized, and took hold upon the body
of other, which hapening, and the horse continuing their careare, and
springing from under them, they both fell to the ground, neither of them could
well arise by reason of the sudden, and violent fall, and of the heavines of
their armor. Yet Eumenes got up first, and prevented Neoptolemus, stricking
him on the ham. The wound was wide, and his strength of footing thereby
failed, and so lay as one, that had noe use of his leg, being not able to
raise himself because of the hurt: notwithstanding, courage over coming the
weakness of his body, he lift up himself upon his knees, and hurt his
adversary in the arm, and thighs, giving him three wounds. But none of the
wounds were mortal, and they being yet warm, Eumenes with a second blow
hitting his neck, slew Neoptolemus outright. Whilst these things were a
doing the rest of the horse fell together. Many were slain on either side:
some therefore falling, other being wounded, at the first the danger was
equal. Afterward, when the death of Neoptolemus was openly known, and that
the other wing was put to flight, every one shifted for himself, and made
toward the Phalange of foot, as to a strong wall of defense to save himself.
This was the issue of the battle. Wherein Eumenes, placing his horse before
his foot, because he held them his strength, and with the trieng the hazard
of the day, showed himself, both in council, and action, a great general.
And Craterus on the contrary side, albeit highly esteemed amongst the
Macedonians, as one, that had with great sufficiency served Alexander in all
his wars, yet failed in judgment, in that he chose rather with his horse to
encounter the stronger part of his enemies forces, then with his Macedonian
Pholange (which Eumenes himself feared) to try his fortune. For as it is a
point of forecast to know a man's own advantage, and use it: So it is noe
less judgment, to know wherein the enimye is stronger, and avoyde yt.
Eumenes did both; for he used his own horse, which were his strength, and
brought to pass, that Craterus his Phalange did him noe good, in as much as
they never came to fight. Craterus failed in both, in that he neither brought
his Phalange to fight, nor yet provided sufficiently to encounter Eumenes
horse; which exceeded his in valor, and number; so appears both, that horse
were placed before the front of the foot; and also the story gives the
reason, why they were placed there.


Of the number of the armed foot, of the light-armed, and of the Horse. CHAP.
VIII.
NOw are we to lay out, what number the armed-foote, the light-armed, and the
Horse ought to be, and how particulerly ordered, and how upon occasion the
Battle may speedely be transformed into diverse shapes, and forms, and what
discipline used for the motion of the several parts of it. We cannot with any
probability set down a precise number of forces to be levied. For as much as
every man is to proportion his levy according to the importance and quality
of the war in hand. This yet must not escape us, that such a number is to be
chosen, as will fit 1 the diverse shapes, and transmutations of our Troops. As
if in case we were to double, or to multiply, and manifoldly enlarge the
length of the Phalange, or else to lessen, and draw it up into a narrower
room. For this cause choice is made of a number, that may be, reparted into
half continually, till you come to one. Hence is it, that most Tactick writers
would have 2 a Phalange to consist of sixteen thousand, three hundred, eighty,
and four armed foot, and of 4 half so many light-armed, 5 and of half as many
Horse, as light-armed. For 16384. may be reparted continually into half, till
you come to one. Therefore for proof, and Examples sake this numbers is
admitted. And where we have allotted sixteen men to every file, the whole
mass will arise to one thousand, twenty, and four files.

Notes.
THE Chapter before spoke of the parts and dimension, of the Phalange, and of
the place of the armed, the horse, and light-armed. This treats of the number
that goes to the Phalange. In choice of which number, Aelian says
consideration is not so much to be had of multitude, as of fitnes for
service. For such a number as cannot aptly be disposed of for fight, is rather
means of confusion, then of order without which noe fight can be mainteyned:
Therefore such a number is to be chosen as will serve.

1 The diverse shapes, and transmutations of our Battaile] Every motion in the
battle makes not a Transmutation, or diversity of shape. In turning of faces
to the one hand or other there is noe other shape of the Phalange, then was at
first: As a man turning his face any way, the same proportion of lineaments
remains that was in him before, So likewise in countermarch or wheeling after
the Countermarche, or wheling is done, every soldier if he keep his right
distance, and remain in file and rank, has the place he had before: And so
noe transfiguration of length or of depth follows. The motion then, that
Aelian means to make Transmutation, are Doublinges: For whether you enlarge
the length, or depth, of your Phalange; you straight induce another shape. A
long fronted Phalange, and a Hearse differ much in form. If you will make of
the ordinary Phalange a hearse, you are to double your files so often, as your
think convenient for the length of your hearse. Then if from the Hearse, your
would return it to the first form, you are not to cease doubling Ranks, till
you have gained that form: likewise if of your ordinary Phalange, you would
make a long fronted Phalange, your ranks are to be doubled, and by continuing
your doublinge, you may draw out what length you will. And contrariwise, by
due doubling your files again, you come to the first form: How much you
double your Ranks, So much you take away from the depth of your Phalange; as
on the other side, doubling of your files, diminishes the length. For the
purpose, your Phalange is sixteen deep, double your Ranks; the depth has but
eight men; double it once more, and it has but four. So is the Phalange
consisting of four ranks, and every rank, has four thousand, and ninty six
men in it: But the length is four times as much as it was. In like manner
doubling your files (which in Aelians Phalange are a thousand, and twenty
four) the first doubling loses five hundred, and twelve files and so many
remain; the second seven hundred, and sixty eight, and two hundred fifty six
remain; and so many men have you in a rank. But where the Phalange was but
sixteen deep, now in the second doubling it is become sixty four deep: If
you please to reduce it to the first form, two doublings of ranks will
suffice. Here we must understand that doubling ranks, is not to make twice
so many as they were before, but to give twice so many men, to every rank, as
they had before by insertinge the even ranks into the odd; as the second into
the first, and the fourth into the third, and the sixth into the fiuth, and the
eight into the seventh, etc. The use of doubling I will show in my notes upon
the twenty nine chapter of this book. Aelian therefore would have his
Phalange, of such a number as may be reparted continually into half, till you
come to one; which number he says to be sixteen thousand three hundred, and
eighty four. And yt arises out of the Multiplication of one by two so still
doubling the product, till you have made up the full number, of sixteen
thousand, three hundred, and eighty four. And as the Multiplication by two
begetts this number, so it being divided by two continually, it may be
reduced at last to one: which is the thing, that Aelian aims at. For the
numbers, that have not equal division by half, leave some supernumerary men in
the Phalange: (which) in doubling will disorder both files, and Ranks: Every
man acquainted with the low country military exercise at this day, knows,
that when there is an uneven number of files, the odd file supernumerary
brings a difference, and cannot be doubled in the sort as the rest are: As in
five, seven, nine, eleven, several bodies of files. Two, six, eight, ten, may
well be doubled, and become two, three, four, five files a piece: but the
fifth, seventh, ninth, eleventh, must be severed from the rest of the doubled
files; and serve to noe purpose, being not matcheable in depth with the rest
after their doubling. The same reason is of ranks: Now when Aelian says, that
this number in a Phalange may be divided by half and reduced at last to one,
we must with all understand, that the file of the Phalange in such division,
ought to be either of eight, or sixteen men a piece. For noe number under
eight, except four, or two (which fit not the depth, of a Phalange) nor
betwixt eight, and sixteen, is divisible by half, till you come to one. Noe nor
above sixteen except it be produced out of the duplications of sixteen. A file
of 12. comes nearest. And of that number was the file of Cyrus in Xenophon.
Such a file notwithstanding by division of two stays at three, and can descend
noe lower. Ten was the old file of the Graecians, and it was called Xenop.
Cyrop. lib. 2. 43. B.
Decas. And albeit after ward upon better consideracion they enlarged the
number of the file to twelve, yet they retained the name of Decas still. But
ten receives but one division, and goes down ward noe further then five. The
uneven numbers under sixteen cannot be divided at all. Unless by fraction. As
thirteen, which if you will divide by half, the quotient will be six, and
there remains an odd man over: of which number, if all the files of the
Phalange should be, you should have a thousand, two hundred, and sixty, which
will receive noe more, then two doublings without a fraction. If then the files
be above sixteen, and under thirty two, you cannot divide them continually by
half, but you must sail of the manner, that Aelian speaks of. As for the
number of sixteen thousand, three hundred, and eighty four, albeit of it self,
it is diuisible by two till you com^ or descend to 1, yet we must not consider
it apart, as an abstract by it self, but as it numbreth, and is applied to the
Phalange. In which respect, it gives a 1024 files of 16 deep, which files
will still hold out the doubling, till you come to one file. 3 A Phalange to
consist of 16384.] Aelian (out of the most Tactick writers as he professes)
will have the Phalange of sixteen thousand, three hundred, eighty and four
men. I have noted before that a Phalange may be more, or less, than this
number. But I take this to be the number of the Macedonian Phalange. Appian. in
Syriacis. 107. B.
Appian seems to testify with me, thus he says: Antiochus whole army
consisted of 70000 men. Of which the chiefest strength was the Phalange of
Macedonians, containing 16000 men, ordered according to the form, that Philip
and Alexander had before used. He placed them in the middle, dividing the
16000, into 10 equal parts, in every of which parts was 50 men in front, and
32 in depth, and upon the flanks of every part 22 the show of the Phalange was
like a wall, of the Elephants like turretts: hitherto Appian. I have translated
He Phalanx, He Macedonon according to the word, the Phalange of the
Macedonians, where the right meaning is, the Macedonian Phalange. For it
consisted not of Macedonians, but was armed, and ordered, after the Macedonian
manner. For how was it possible for Antiochus to wage, and have in his service
16000 Macedonians, being never himself King of Macedonia, and the King, that
then was (namely Philip the son of Demetrius) was his enemy, and in league
with the Romans? Besides Appian has in express words: the Phalange was armed,
and ordered, according to the institution of Philip and Alexander: whose manner
Antiochus might well retain, considering he was lineally descended from
Seleucus, the successor of Alexander in the kingdom of Assiria: And Seleucus
had been in the service of Alexander in the whole conquest of Persia. Live:
Decad. 4 lib. 7. 141. A.
Liuy says also, they were armed after the Macedonian manner. Whereby a man
may infer, they were no Macedonians: He speaking of the same battle (which
was the battle of Antiochus against L. Scipio) has thus: The Kings army was
mingled of sundry nations, and diverse with dissimilitude of arms and aides.
There were 16000 foot armed after the manner of the Macedonians. They were
called Phalangites. This was the middle of the battle, and in front divided
into 10 parts, which parts were distinguished by placing 2. Elephants in each
intervall. The battle had 32 rancks in depth. It was the principal strength
of the Kings forces, and both with the other show, and also with the Elephants,
which were eminent amongst the Armed only, brought with it great terror. Liuy
says the 16000 were armed after the Macedonian manner, and were called
Phalangites; Appian, that there were 16000 ordered, and distributed according
to the ordinance of Philip and Alexander. Liuy, and Appian, both agree, that
there was 10 parts, and every part severed with intervalls, and had 32 men in
depth, which is the Macedonian file once doubled. Livy speaks not of the
number of the length of the Phalange. Appian says plainly there were 50 in
front, of every of the 10 parts, which amounts to 500: for 10 times 50 makes
500. Now if you multiply the length of the Phalange which is 500 by the depth,
which is 32, you have the 16000, whereof Liuy and Appian spoke. But yet rests
a doubt, in the difference betwixt both these authors, and Aelian. Livy, and
Appian, both giving but 16000: Aelian 16384 to the Macedonian Phalange. For
Livy, we are not much to insist upon him, who being a Roman (we may probably
conjecture) was half a stranger, in the Art Tacticke of the Graecians, and
that, which he wrote, he had from others; perhaps no better skilled in the same
Art than himself. Appian was a Grecian (for so those of Alexandria in Aegipt
accounted themselves, after Ptolomy the first had established that Crown in
his family) and as his history shows, well acquainted with the order the
Graecians held in embatteling their armies, and therefore we may the better
rely upon his authority. Who albeit he first affirmed the Phalange was of the
number of 16000, yet after in numbering the depth and length alone, he finds
16000: and further expounding his own meaning he shows, there were more upon
the flanks of the ten parts, into which the Phalange was divided. His words
import: That Antiochus divided his Phalange into 10 equal parts, giving every
part in front 50 men, in depth 32; which being multipliea together, make up the
16000. He adds; And in the flank of every part he set 22. If the meaning be,
he set 22 upon each flank of every part, the parts being 10, and the flanks
20, the number will arise to 440, where Aelian allows no more than 384. But
if 22 were added to one of the flanks of each division, which also being
collectiuely taken are flanks in the plural number, we shall come short and
find no more than 220. Yet whether sense of both you admit, it is plain, that
Appian attributes more, than 16 thousand, to that Macedonian Phalange. And it
may be, there is an error in the number of the 22, and that it ought to be
written 32. For if Antiochus had given 32, as he gave 22, to one flank of
every part, and set 32 upon the uttermost flanks of every winge to strengthen
them, of the 12 times 32 had arisen the just number of Aelians Phalange; which
number is the fittest, for use, and for division of the Phalange in all
doublings. The armed foot then, according to Aelian, ought to be, 16384. The
light armed. 4 Half so many] The armed amongst the Graecians, were accounted
the strength of the field, which was the cause their number was greatest. For
you shall not find in their battles for the most part, that the light armed
amounted to half the number of the armed: The fact of Cyrus shows what
account he made of light armed: Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7. 188. B.
Xenophon reports it thus: He led with him the Lydians, those whom he saw to
take delight in Arms, horse, and chariots, and willingly do, what they were
commanded, he gave arms to, of those whom he saw followed him against their
wills, he gave the horses to the Persians, that were his first companions in
Arms. All that followed him unarmed, he exercised to the sling, because he
reckoned that weapon most servile of all others. How much you increase the
number of the light armed, so much you diminish the number of the armed, and by
consequent so much weaken your field. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 6. 167. C.
For the light cannot maintain any stable fight, but in case of danger they
are forced either to show a fair pair of heels, or else retire to the armed
for succor: Yet serve they for many uses joined with the armed. And the
proportion that Aelian sets down, namely to have half as many of them, as
there are armed, stands to good reason, and use. The Romans notwithstanding,
were more sparing in their light armed, and allowed not above the 4th part of
them, or little more, to the armed. The Legion contained (says Polyb lib 6 468.
B. C.
Polybius) 4200 footmen. Of these they chose 600 Triarians, 1200 hastati, 1200
Principes, (which come to 3000) and the rest Velites, which were 1200. And the
Velites were the same in effect amongst the Romans, that the light armed
amongst the Graecians, albeit their arming somewhat differed. Aelian before
showed, that the Grecian light armed had no manner of defensive armor, but
offensive only, as bows, darts, or stones. Polyb lib 6 468 (...).
Polybius describes the Arms of the Velites to be a Sword, a Parma, (which is
a small Target,) and darts; the sword a spanish sword, the Target a little round
Target, a foot and a half ( for so Casaubon corrects Tripedon) in breadth;
the darts in the steal 3 foot long, and a finger thick, and the head almost
a foot long. And Livy Decad. 4. lib. ^. page 16. B
Livy mentioning the skirmishes, that fell out betwixt the horsemen of King
Philip of Macedonia, and Sulpitius the Roman Consul, compares both their
Armies together, telling that either party had their light armed joined to
their horse, and that coming to fight, the Romans had the better. So (says
he) neither the Kings horse, unaccustomed to a steadfast fight, were able to
match the Roman horse, nor yet the foot skipping and leaping here and there,
and almost half naked in their kind of Arms, to be compared to the Roman
Veles, having a Target, and a sword, and being armed sufficiently both to
defend himself, and assail his enemy. The number then of Aelians light armed,
ought to be 8192, and these being ranged behind the armed 8 deep (so they are
fittest for service) will make 1024 files, as many as the armed did. 5 Halte as
many horse, as etc.] The horse are in number 4096, and proportioned to the
foot (comprehending the light-armed) as 1. to 6. The armed foot, and light
armed together make 24576: the horse 4096. And this was Diodor. Sicul. lib. 17.
571.
Alexanders proportion, when he moved first against Darius. For he had about
30000 foot, and 5000 horse, or not many more, as Diodorus says. Justin. lib.
11. 639.
Justin gives him 32000 foot, 4500 horse. Yet this number held not always
amongst the Macedonians themselves; I mean Alexanders Captains, that
possessed his kingdoms after his death. The reason may be, that in Civil
wars they made their levies, not as they would, but as they could. Diod.
Sicul. lib. 18. 644.
In the battle betwixt Eumenes, and Craterus, ( I spoke of that battle
before) Craterus had ^0000 foot, and 2000 horse; Eumenes had 20000 foot, and
5000 horse. Craterus the proportion of 1. to 10; Eumenes of ^* to 4. Diod.
Sicul. lib. 16. 649.
Antigonus fighting against Eumenes in Cappadocia, had in his Army above 10000
foot, and 2000 horse; Eumenes had as before. Antigonus horse were to the
foot, as 1. to 5. Diod. Sicul. lib. 18. 651.
The same Antigonus fighting against Alcetas, the brother of Perdiccas, had in
his Army 40000 foot, and more than 7000 horse; the proportion well nigh of 1.
to 6; Alcetas had no more than 16000 foot, and 900 horse, failing much of
Aelians number. Diod. Sicul. lib. 19. 685.
Antigonus in his second battle against Eumenes, had 28000 footmen, and 800
horse, which is 1. to 3. and half; Eumenes had 35000 foot, and 6000 horse,
very near Aelians proportion. Many other examples are to be read in Diodorus.
But (as I said) these are Ramasses proceeding not of choice, but of necessity,
which forced them to take such, as came to hand; as it always falls out in
soddaine leuies. And it seems the number of horse (allowed to the foot by
Aelian) was King Philips proportion; considering Alexander used it Diod Sicul.
lib. 16. 510.
after he received his army from Philip, who by praemeditation, and
fore-choice, had gathered it together with intent to invade Persia. And yet 1
find Diod. Sicul. lib. 16. 555.
that Philip himself, when he fought against the Athenians and Beotians at
Cheronea, had more than 30000 joote, and 2000 horse; which is 1. to 15: and in
diverse other fights differed from Aelian in the number both of horse, and
foot. But the question is not, what was done, but was best to be done. And the
number that Aelian speaks of, suites his Phalange best. For Philips device
being to cast the horse into wedges of 64 horse a piece, and into 64 troops;
the greatest rank of each wedge being 15, will in the rear equal the front of
the armed, and of the light armed; not in number of files (for the files of the
foot were 1024. and the greatest rank of the horse, no more than 960) but in
quantity of place giving to the horse, standing in their order of 6 foot
betwixt man and man, the 128 cubits of surplusage toward the difference of the
horses bodies, and toward the small spaces that are to be left, betwixt Troop,
and Troop. Polyb. lib. 6. 472. C.
The Romans allowed a far less rate of horse to the foot. In a Legion,
according to Polybius his account, there were of Citizens 4200 foot, and 300
horse; of allies, and confederates 4200 foot, and 600 horse. In a Consular
Army were 2 Legions of Citizens, and 2 of Allies, which came to 16800, a number
not much differing from Aelians Phalange of foot. Of horse 600, Allies 1200;
in all making 1800; which comes much short of 4096, ( the number Aelian
allows to his Phalange) and holds proportion of about 1. to 9. The reason
of this difference, may appear in the fact of Diod. Sicul. lib. 18. 643.
Eumenes; who not much trusting his forces of foot against the Macedonians (
accounted the best soldiers of that age,) prepared himself a sufficient
number of Horse with them to make a counterballance against the Macedonian
foot. And it has been the manner of Generals of ancient time, if they
trusted their Foote-forces, to make the less account of Horse: if they
distrusted them; to increase the number of their horse.

The Romans trusting to their foot, required the lesser number of horse. The
Grecians had the greater number of horse, both for the cause before recited,
and further because they had continual war with Barbarians, that placed
their confidence in horse; as the Persians, and the inhabitants of the lesser
Asia.


The names of the several parts, and of the Commanders of the several parts
of the Phalange, and of the numbers under their commands. CHAP. IX.
THe files are ordered into bodies, which have every one a proper name. For two
files they call 1 a Dilochie of thirty two men, whose Leader is termed
Dilochita. Four files 2 a Tetrarchy, and the Leader thereof Tetrarcha having
charge over 64. men. Two Tetrarchies 3 a Taxis of 128. men, and 8. files, and
the Leader thereof has the name of Taxiarcha. Two Taxies go to 4 a Syntagma
of 16. files, and 256. men; and the Leader thereof is called Syntagmatarcha. A
Syntagma of 256. men is called of some a Xenagy, and the Commander Xenagos. In
every Syntagma of 256. are five 5 superordinary men, viz: 6 An Ensign, 7 a
Rear commander, 8 a Trompetter, 9 a Sergeant, and a 10 Crier. This Syntagma
seems to have 11 a Tetragonall form of 16. men in length, and 16. in depth.
Two Syntagmaes make 12 a Pentecosiarchy of 512. men, and 32. files, the Leader
whereof is named Pentecosiarcha. Two Pentecosiarchies make 13 a Chiliarchy of
1024. men, and 64 files: and the Leader is called Chiliarcha. Two Chiliarchies
are called 14 a Merarchy of 2048. men, and 128. files, whose Leader is named
Merarcha. Of some this part is called a Telos, and the Leader thereof Telarcha.
Two Telarchies make 15 a Phaiangarchy of 4096. men, and 256. files, the
Commander whereof is called Phalangarcha. Yet some call it a Strategy, and the
Commander Strategos. Two Phalangarchies 16 a Diphalangarchy of 8192. men, and
512. files. There are that term this part 17 Meros and it is one of the
wings. Two Diphalangarchies make a fourfold Phalange consisting of 1024. files,
and 16384. men. So have you in the whole Phalange of armed foot two wings,
four Phalangarchies, eight Merarchies, sixteen Chiliarchies, thirty two
Pentecosiarchies, sixty four Syntagmatarchies, one hundred twenty eight
Taxiarchies, two hundred fifty six Tetrarchies, five hundred twelve Dilochies,
one thousand twenty four files.

Notes.
Hither to have been showed, the manner of arming, and leuying of Soldiers,
filing, and the parts of files, joining of files, and ranking, the local
form, and parts of a Phalange, the number of the armed, light-armed, and
horsemen requisite to a Phalange. This Chapter contains, as it were, the
matter, of which a Phalange is compounded; that is the several bodies
Military, ordered, and joined together, to make up the perfect form of it.
These bodies are many, and arise ou^ of joining files by doubling Cap. 9. A
Pentecostarchy of 32 files 512 men
Dilochites. 16

Tetrarch's. 8

Taxiarch's. 4

Syntagmatarch's. 2

Petecosiarch's. 1

Cap. 9. A Phalangarehy of 256 files 4096 men
Cap. 9. (...) (...) of 64 files 1024 men.
Cap. 9. The Rear
A Dilochy of 2 files 32 men

Dilodnte of Commdnder of 2 files

A Tetrarchy of 4 files 64 men

A Tetrarch or Commander of 4 files

A Taxis of 8 files^128^men

A Taxiarch or Commander of 8 files

A Syntagma of 16 files^256^men

The Rear commander of Bringervp

A Syntagmatarch or Commander of 16 files

A Sericani

still their number, and have every one a several Commander. The least is two
files joined together, which is called a Dilochy; And because there are in
Phalange 1024. files, there must also be 512. Dilochies, which consist of two
files a piece. If you double this body of two files, and make thereof a body of
four files, it has an other name, and is called a Tetrarchy, of which
Tetrarchyes there are 256. in a Phalange. Double again these 4. files, and
make 8, the body is called Taxis. And these eight files, being doubled bring
out the Syntagma of 16. files; which is a square number of men, 16. in the
front, and 16. in the flancke. And so proceeding still in 6. doublings more,
you come at last to the fourefold Phalange containing the number of 16384. men,
and 1024. files. Now as in the Phalange there are 10. bodies out of these
doublings, the Dilochy being the first, and the fourefold Phalange the last: So
does Aelian, appoint for every body a Commander, who albeit they severally
command, each his own troop, yet are they subordinately one under an other,
the lesser under the greater, till at last the souerainty of the command rest
in the General of the Army. Xenoph. Cyroped. lib. 8. 203. A.
The Dilochites are directed by the Tetrarches, the Tetrarches by the
Taxiarches, the Taxiarches by the Syntagmatarchs, the Syntagmatarches by the
Pentecosiarches, and they by the Chiliarchs, over whom are Merarches, and over
the Merarches the Phalangarchs, and over them the Commanders of the wings, or
Diphalangarches, and the sovereign of the Army or General is the highest,
and last. The number of these Commanders a man would think were to no great
purpose being in all (the 2. Diphalangarchies therein comprised) 1022, besides
the file Leaders, which standing in the heads of their files, amount but to
two men more; that is to 1024. For so many (as I have said) are the files of
the Phalange. But if the conueniency be observed, it will not seem
impertinent. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 3. 85. C.
For all the Leaders being in front, (therefore are they called Leaders,
because they precede, and the rest follow,) it makes both a gallant show, and
that rank being as it were, the edge of our battle, not only serves to hew
a sunder, and rent a pieces the forces of our enemy; But also stands as an
assured bulwark of defense before the rest of the Army, that follows. And
it is well noted by Leo cap. 4. 13.
Leo, that the multitude of Commanders (in orderly divisions) both signifies,
that there are many worthy and valiant men in the army: And is a means to
keep the Soldiers in greater obedience, and to give undoubted effect to all
directions. Of what quality and disposition, those Leaders ought to be, you
may see in the Leo cap. 4.
fourth Chapter of Leos Tactickes. Only I will add, that as they are higher
in dignity, so ought they in virtue and valor exceed those, that are under
their command.

1 A Dilochy] Consists of two files; for so signifies the word Dilochia: and
the Leader Dilochia.
is called a Dilochite. 2 A Tetrarchy] Of four files; and the Leader is called
a Tetrach, one that has the command of four files. And here I must once more
admonish, that in the words of diverse signification, we must not weigh, what is
the proper signification, but how they are used in this Art, and book.

For the word Tetrarch signifies sometimes a King: as Hesychius has: and
Cicero in orat. pro Deitaro.
Deiotarus in Tully is called a Tetrarch, and Luc.
Herod in the Gospel; who both are commonly known for Kings. Thessaly
likewise was divided into 4. Principalities, Thessaliotis, Pthiotis,
Pelasgiotis, and Astiotis; whereof every one was named a Tetrarchy. Only the
difference is, that a Tetrarch being a King, or a Governor, signifies him,
that has the government of the fourth part of the land, (for a Tetrarchy is
the government of the fourth part) But a Tetrarchy in Aelian signifies a body
military consisting of four parts (4. files) and the Tetrarch commands not
over one alone, but over all the 4. parts.

3 A Taxis] As the word Tetrarchy is diversely taken, so is Taxis likewise. For
sometimes it imports Order in a general signification, as I noted before:
Sometimes the Polyb lib. 3. 225. B. and lib. 11. 639 E.
order of a battle: Xenoph. d* exped. lib. 4. 325 B ex Cyrop lib. ^. 202. C.
sometimes a company of any kind of Soldiers, foot, or horse: as Taxis
Peltastarum, Taxis Equitum; Sometimes a single Phalange, as in Arrian lib. 2.
35. F.
Arrian mention is made of Taxis Ooeni, Taxis Perdiccae, and Taxis Meleagri
etc. who were Phalangarches, as the story shows. i Sometimes for all the
armed, as Taxis Phalangitarum: Sometimes a rank of men standing embattailed,
as in Thucidides, who discribing the battle of the Lacedaemonians, says the
front (which he calls the first rank teen proteen Taxin) consisted of 448.
But in a more special signification it is taken for a band of Soldiers. And
in that signification the number varieth. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 2. 43 D.
In Xenophon, h Polyb. lib. ^2. ^66 B.
it comprehends a hundred men: What the number of the Athenian Taxis was, I
find not delivered by any Writer. That they had Taxiarchs Poly^. lib. 3. 10 in
l^ hicrat.
Polyenus shows plainly. And if a man with leave might guess, I would
imagine their Taxis consisted of 250 men: For I find in the same place of
Polyenus, that they had Chiliarchies, Pentecosiarchies, Taxies, and Lochagies.
I have before showed, that Lochos in Xenophon is made sometimes of above 100.
men. Out of which may be inferred with probability, that Taxis, being the next
degree above the Lochagie, has the double number, or more; The rather because
a Chiliarchy having in it a 1000. the Penticosiarchy must have 500. and by
likelihood the Taxis 250. as being the next office under the Pentecosiarchy.
But whatsoever the Taxis of the Athenians, or of other people was, Aelian
makes his Taxis up with 128 men, and 8. files; which is a double number to the
Tetrarchy. With whom Suidas agrees, giving 2. Tetrarchies to a Taxis: and
says it consists of 128 men. The Commander of the Taxis is called a Taxiarch,
as the Commander of the Tetrarchy is a Tetrarch. Here I am to note by the way,
that the Interpreter of Xenophon translateth Taxiarcha, the Commander of a
Cohort; where Taxis in the straighter signification cannot be taken for a
Cohort because a Cohort differs much in number, having in it at the least
500. and odd men, where the Taxis, when it is greatest has no more then 128.
And Polyb. lib. 11. 641. C.
Polybius says plainly, that spira is the Greek word, that fully expresses
the Roman Cohort. 4 A Syntagma] The word comes of Syntasso, or Syntatto, to
place together; and a Syntagma is a body compounded of many parts artificially
put together. Polybius calls a Cohort Syntagma, lib. 11 641. C.
But it may be taken for anybody in the army. Diod Sicul lib. 13 391.
Diodorus reports of Dionysius the elder That after he had divided his whole
Army, (which had in it 30000) into three parts, he employed two against the
Carthaginian Camp in diverse manner: himself took the Syntagma, or third
part, which consisted of mercenary Soldiers, and led against that quarter of
the camp, which had the Engines. Cap. 31.
Aelian also uses the word diversely; For he calls the whole army by the
name of Syntagmata, in the plural number, and sometimes Syntagma in the
singular. And further gives the same name to a file; Suidas in m^cos.
Suidas likewise discribing the length of a Phalange, says, it is the first
rank ( Syntagma) of file Leaders, which stretches forth in a right line from
winge to winge. Whereby appears that which the Logitians affirm, (which I
touched before) that there are more things then names of things: And that fit
names cannot be given to all. The names that have been given by antiquity, to
express the several bodies of the Phalange, are to be retained by us, as
proper enough to signify the thing they meant. Neither are we to vary from
them, unless we our selves can invent better. The Syntagma that Aelian here
mentions, is framed of two Taxies, that is of 16. files, and of 256 men. The
Commander of it is named a Syntagmatarch. And where he adds, it is called of
some a Xenagy, we are to understand that Suidas in Xenagos and Iul. Poll. lib.
1. cap 10.
Xenagos was he (amongst the Grecians) that had the command of a band of
strangers, (as he that levied strangers was called Polyb. lib. 1. 33. B.
Xenologos) and the band it self was called a Xenagy. Why the Syntagma should
have the appellation of Xenagy, I cannot divine; unless the reason were,
because it was about the number, whereof strangers made their companies, that
served amongst the Graecians. And I think, and shall till better information;
that the body of the light armed called a Xenagy mentioned hereafter, had that
name likewise for the same reason. Now of all the bodies in this Chapter
mentioned, there is none that comes so near the companies used at this day,
as does the Syntagma, for (excepting that our numbers differ, and are in
diverse places more, or less) the offices of each are alike. You have in the
Syntagma a Lieutenant, or Rear Commander; so in our Companies. In the
Syntagma, is an Ensign, and an Ensigne-bearer; the like in our Companies. In a
Syntagma is one Sergeant, our Companies have more. The Syntagma had a trumpet,
and our Companies for the most part have two drums. We only want a Crier,
which every Syntagma amongst the Macedonians had. What the use and place of all
the Officers was, I will straight discover. 5 Five superordinarie men;] Namely
the Ensign the Reare-commander, the Trumpetter, the Sergeant, and the Crier of
whom we last spoke. That which I translated, superordinary, is in Greek
Ectactoi. Suidas in Ectactos.
Suidas gives the reason, why they were so called: because says he, they were
not numbered as part of the battle, that is ordered in files and ranckes.
Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 3. 78. A.
As Xenophon says of Miriarches, Chiliarches, and Taxiarches, and other
Commanders (whom Cyrus called to him) that they were not recounted amongst the
military numbers, and might depart from the Phalange without altering the
form thereof. In the files they could not be, because they should so increase
the number in the files, and make one longer then an other, and hinder
doublings, and other motions, besides the deformity, they should bring in, in
making the battle uneven: And a file of themselves they could not make. The
like disorder would they bring in the ranckes, where they could not
conveniently stand, unless some body filed with them, being much short of a
file of themselves. Besides their employment is to stir here and there apart,
as they are commanded: where they of files, and ranckes never move single, but
jointly, as shall seem good to their Commander. And albeit these five be
removed from the battle, yet remains the battle without them entire of it
self, and in perfect form, as though there were no need of them, when
notwithstanding their use is otherwise so needful that although the battle
may be, it cannot well be without them. An Ensigne] Our use is to call the
Ensigne-bearer an Ensign for breuities sake; As a Drummer, a Drum, a
Trumpetter, a Trumpet; and that not absurdly. A distinction will easily appear
in common speech, by the application of words of circumstance to the one, or
the other. The end why ensigns were divised appears in. Diodor. Sicul. lib.
1. 54.
Diodorus Siculus; he giving diverse reasons, why the Egyptians ( whom he
accounted the ancientest of men) were carried away with superstition of
worshipping Beasts, after the manner of the Country, has amongst other words
these in effect: A second cause the Egyptians give, because of old time being
in diverse conflicts thorough disorder in their Army, vanquished by their
borderers, they had recourse to the invention and bearing of Ensigns in their
troops. They say therefore, that preparing images of the beasts, they now
worship, and fastening them to the ends of long staves, the Commanders caused
them to be borne aloft; by means whereof every man knew of what troop he was.
And seeing this good order auailed much to victory, they conceived, that the
beasts were the cause of their safety. In recompense whereof they ordered, that
none of these beasts should be killed, but be honored with religious care and
worship. Ensigns were then devised for readiness to direct soldiers in
particular, whither to resort in time of fight. Caesar. de bell. gall. lib. ^*
Caesar's practice agrees hereto: he telling of his own soldiers disorder
has thus: Whatsoever part they came into by chance, and to what Ensign
soever, there they stayed, least in seeking their own they might happily lose
the time of fight. And Veget lib 2 cap. 13.
Vegetius enlarges the cause wruing thus: The ancient warriors perceiving that
in time of fight the order, and embattailing of an Army was quickly brought in
route, and confusion, to avoid this inconvenience, divided the Cohorts into
Companies, and appointed an Ensign of every Company. So that in the Ensign
was written, of what Cohort and of what number in the Cohort the Company was.
Which the soldier seeing, or reading could not estray from their Companions,
though the tumult were never so great. Leo cap 6. 18 19 20.
Leo also makes this the use of the Ensign: We command also, says he, that
the heads of the Ensigns of every Company or Band be of one color, and that
the silk of every Turme, or Drunge, have a color by it self. And to the end
that every Company may with ease know their own Ensign, other marks and
tokens are to be added to the heads of the Ensigns, that according to Turmes,
and Drunges, and Companies, they may be known. But in any case, let the
Ensigns of every Turmarchy be different one from an other, and clear to be
discerned, that the soldiers may know them even at a far distance. His
meaning, as I take it, is, that every great body, or regiment should bear in
their Ensigns a several color, and that the Companies of that body should
likewise hold themselves to the same color in their Ensigns: So
notwithstanding that (as the use is at this day) the Ensigns of every Company
should have a several mark to be known by, besides the color in general.
For so both the Regiment may be quickly discerned, and one Company with
facility be distinguished from another. What the form of the Ensign was, we
may out of the former place of Diodorus see: The Egyptians, says he,
counterfeating the shape of those Beasts, which they worship, fastened the
Portract to the end of long staves. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7. 172. D.
Xenophon testifies the like of the Standerd of Cyrus. Cyrus (says he)
commanded his army to cast their eyes upon the Standard, and to follow it with
equal pace, and in order. The Standard was a golden Egle stretched out upon the
end of a long staff. Which Standard is at this day the Standard of the Kings
of Persia. The Ensign was nothing else, but the figure of some beast advanced
high upon the end of a long staff. As of an Egle, of a Wolf, of a Horse, and
such like; and sometimes they added pieces of colored silk fastened under
these images to make a greater difference betwixt the Ensigns. Whether our
Ensigns at this day, made of many else of Taffaty, or the ancient Ensigns of
the Graecians (I may also add of the Romans, for they observed the same form)
are the better for use, I will not now dispute. I may notwithstanding freely
say, that the stronger reason weighs for the Ancient. For besides the
authority of such excellent wits, as they were, and so exquisite in their
inventions, the reason of the lightness is to be preferred: Besides the wind
has no such force over them, and they neither hinder the Soldiers, that stand
next by entangling, nor by flapping in their faces, nor take away the sight of
such things as are to be observed and regarded in the field. For the matter
whereof the Ensign was made, Lipsius ad Polyb. lib. 4. D^. log. 5.
see Iustus Lipsius in his Commentaries to Polybius. As for the armor of the
Ensigne-bearer (especially the Ensigne-bearer of the armed) I take it (for I
have no authority therein) that he had the same defenfiue Armor, that the
Soldier which fought under the Ensign had (excepting the Target) both to
assure himself from the flying weapons of the light armed, and from the pike
and sword of the armed, in case the battle were entered and pierced as far,
as the Ensign. For it was no reason, he should carry a Target, lest both his
hands should be bound, the right with the Ensign, the left with the Target;
and so he have no use of either against the enemy. And in the left hand I would
give him a spear, or ^auelin, (not a pike, which cannot be weilded with one
hand) for his own defense, and to offend the enemy. Which weapon, I have read
Ensigns of ancient time did bear. What the Ensigns place was, whether in
front, or in the midst of the Battatle, I see it controverted. Patric. Parall.
Patricius absolutely affirms, that the Ensigns were placed in the midst
of the front, and had 8 files on the right, and p^rt. 2. lib. 10. cap. 3.
8 on the left, to the end they might be seen, and followed by all. That
Ensigns were first invented to be a mark of several bodies military in an
Army, I have before showed. But it follows not thereof, that they were placed
in the front in time of fight. For being in the middle, they no less gave
notice, what the body was, than in the front. The reason of following is of
less force; Inasmuch as the Soldier well knows whom to follow, though he
had no Ensign at all, the Commander always with his motion giving him
direction, when to advance forward, when to turn his face to the right, or
left hand, when to countermarch, when to double, and when to use all other
motions military. And the Commanders were therefore called Leaders, because
they went on before, and the Soldiers followed after. So that the Ensign, in
regard of following, need not to be set in the front. Leo cap. 7.. 53. and
cap. 14.. 65.
Yet in exercising the troops, and in marches, I find, that the Ensign was
in the front, together with the Captain, Crier, Trumpeter, and Guide. But I
take the reason to be, because being in the midst, and having neither file,
nor rank with the rest, they might happily bring a confusion, and be a
hinderance to the changes, and diverse figures of the Battle. When the time of
fight was, the Ensign retired to his place, that is to the midst. For so Leo
cap. 7. 33.
Leo interprets himself in his precept of closing files: which must be done,
says he, not only by File-leaders in front, Commanders of five, and
Bringers-vp in the Rear, but in the midst also, where the Ensign stands.
And I rather agree to Leo herein, because I see, it was the manner of the
Romans also, to place their Ensigns in the midst of their Maniples. Lipsius
ad Polyb. lib. 4. Dial. 3.
From whence came the appellations of Antesignani, Soldiers that stood before
the Ensigns, and Postsignani, that stood behind. Besides the Ensign being in
the front, the Ensign bearer may soon get a clap, who falling the Ensign
goes to ground, and is in danger of loosing, which was the greatest disgrace
among the Romans, that might befall. Lastly, postea c. 20.
Aelian himself in plain words places the Cornet of horse far from the
front. For speaking of the ordinary Horse-troupe, he says it is to consist of
64 horse, the first rank of 15 horse, the 2 of 13, the 3 of 11, the 4 of 9;
descending still, and diminishing 2 horse in every rank, till you come to one.
He adds; he shall carry the Cornet, that stands in the second rank next
the ranke-Commander on the left hand: which rank is the second rank, himself
declares, making the rank of 15 the first, the 2 the 13; which is the 7th
from the front, and next the rear but one. If the Cornet have no place in
front, why should the Ensign, considering both serve to one use, and the
reasons of seeing, and following are equal to both? And albeit Suidas in
Ectactos.
Suidas place the Ensign, the Crier, the Trompet, and Sargeant, before the
Battle, the Lieutenant in the rear, he is notwithstanding to be understood,
of the times of marching, or of exercise, which I noted before. For what should
that Rabble of unarmed (being 4. in every Syntagma, and in the whole Phalange
256.) do in the front in the time of fight, but only pester the chosen of the
Army: who therefore have the front, that they may make speedier way into the
enemies battle? 7 A Reare-commander] Was the same that a Leutenant is with us.
He commands the Soldiers in the Rear, no less then the Syntagmatarch in
the front, and had his place in the Rear. What the duty of a Reare-commander
was, I have showed out of Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 6. 167. E.
Cyrus words in Xenophon. And postea cap. 14.
Aelian afterward sets it down most plainly. He was armed, as the rest of
the armed of the Syntagma, namely with Pike, and Target, and with such other
arms, as I have described in my notes upon the second Chapter. 8 A Trumpet.]
The invention of the Trumpet is attributed to Tirrhenus Hercules son. But the
different use of these officers is worth the noting out of Suidas in E^os.
Suidas: The Crier, says he, serves to deliver directions by voice, the
Ensign by signal, when noise takes away the hearing of the voice: the
Trumpet by sound, when thorough thicknes of dust a signal cannot be discerned:
The Sargeant to bring such things, and dispatch such messages, as his
Syntagmatarch commands. So that these officers were held all necessary for a
Company, the one supplying the defect of the other, and serving for use when
the other failed. The Trumpet then was to be used according to Suidas, when
neither the Crier, nor Ensign could do service. With the Trumpet was the
signal given for the Camp to remove, for the Camp to lodge. By the Trumpet
the Soldiers were taught their time to fight, their time to retreat. The
Trumpet set and discharged the watch. From the Trumpet came the measure of the
March, and the quicknes, and slownes of Pace. In brief, the Trumpet did all
the offices, that the Dromme does with us at this day. Whether the Trumpet or
Dromme, are of most use in the field, I may not now dispute. Only I will say
that the Graecians and Romans the most expert and judicious Soldiers, that
ever were, held themselves to the Trumpet, and never used the Dromme. The
Dromme was first invented by Bacchus, who, as Polyen. lib. 1. in B^ccho. 1.
Polyenus reports, fighting against the Indians, in stead of Trumpets, gave
the signal of Battle with Cymballs and Drommes. From him it came to the
Indians, who used it altogether, as Curtius lib. ^. 372.
Curtius notes in the battle betwixt King Alexander the Great, and Porus. The
Dromme of Parthians is described by Plutarch. in Crasso
Plutarch in the life of Crassus; and by App. in Parthicis 143. C. D.
Appian. Leo cap. 18.. 113.
And Leo says, the Saracens, who invaded Christendom, and infected the Turks
with their superstition, ordered their fights by the Dromme. From this Eastern
Asiaticall people it was brought into Europe; and now the general custom is
among stall Europaean Nations, that the foot have Drommes in the field, the
horse Trumpets. And yet for the Trumpet, I cannot say, that all the Graecians
held themselves precisely unto it. Plutarch in Lyt^rgo.
Plutarch much commends the Lacedemonian manner of joining with the enemy,
and writes it is in this sort: When the King has offered the Goat (that was
the Lacedemonian sacrifice, when they were to give battle) he straight
commands all the Army to crown their heads, and the Flutes to sound the
measure of For this measure s^e Iul. Pollux lib 4. cap. 10 2.
Castor: And himself withal begins the Pae^n ^ a hymn pr^ to Apollo. ^l.
Pollux. lib. 1. cap 1.. 33.
Paean; (the song they used when they were to charge) and advances first
against the enemy. So that it is a brave, and no less fearful thing to
behold them pacing according to the measure of the Flute; neither dissoluing
their order, nor showing any astonishment of mind, but mildely, and joyfully
approaching the danger of conflict, dividing out their March to the sound of
the instrument. For it is not likely, that men so demeaning themselves, can be
transported with fear, or choler. Nay rather they must needs have a settled
mind full of hope, and assurance, as if God were present on their side: thus
Plutarch. Out of whose words it is clear, that the Lacedaemonians used no
Trumpets in fight, but Flutes, and made them their instruments to dance, as it
were, the measures of war by. For they used an easy, T^. lib. 5. ^03 A.
and slow pace, framed Poly^. lib. 1. in Procle.. 1.
to the cadence of the sound; which may well be resembled to the solemn
measure, in dancing. Athenaeus dipnosoph. lib. 12 517. A.
Athenaeus rehearses out of Herodotus, that the Lydians used the like. But he
adds; that the Cretans made choice of the Harp for their instrument of
war; as though it had been peculiar to that nation. Pausan in Laco^s. 193.
Pausanias testifies the like of the Lacedaemonians. Polyb lib. 4. 289. E.
Polybius goes not so far, but affirms only that the Cretans, and
Lacedaemonians in stead of Trumpets brought in Flutes, and measures into the
war. And if it were so that the Lacedaemonians used Harpes, it is like, they
took them from the Cretans. For I find in Plutarch in Lycurgo.
Plutarch, that Lycurgus brought many of his laws from Crete, and had great
familiarity with Thales the Cretan, whom he also sent to Lacedemon, to make an
ouerture for the establishing of his laws, that were then newly finished. Yet
Diod. Sicul. lib. 15. 475.
Diodorus Siculus reports, that the Lacedaemonians used also Trumpets in their
Battles. He writing of a fight that was betwixt the Thebans, and
Lacedaemonians under the leading of Agesilaus; uses these words in effect:
There was a strong fight betwixt them a long time, and at first Agesilaus had
the better; but afterward, when the Thebans issued out of the City at all
hands, Agesilaus seeing the multitude, caused the Trumpet to sound a retreat.
The sign of retreat here, was given by Trumpet, and it seems the
Lacedaemonians had the use both of Trumpet, and Flute. Polyen. lib ^ in Procle 6
1. Pausan in Lacom^s. 93.
Of the Flute in pacing toward the enemy to join battle; of the Trumpet in
all other military signalls, such (I have before noted it) as the rest of the
Graecians gave by Trumpet. The place of the Trumpet in the time of the Battle
was within the Phalange by the Ensign. Thucyd. lib. 5 393.
Thucydides places the Flutes of the Lacedaemonians within the battle, where
they can find no room, unless they stand by the Ensigns. And albeit Polyen.
lib 1. in Procie.. 1.
Polienus says, the Flute led the Army, and went before, yet that is to be
understood in the march. For in case of a March, or exercise, Leo cap. ^. ^.
Leo also gives the Trumpet place by the Captain in front. When the fight
comes, he retireth himself to his place in the Battle with the rest. 9 A
Sergeant.] The word Hyperetes signifies a Minister, ( which is all one with
the French word Sergeant, as appears by the interpretation of our Law it
self, wherein the Sergeants, next degree to Justices, are called seruientes ad
legem. I reteyne therefore the name of Sergeant, because it is familiar amongst
soldiers. And a Sergeant has the same office in our War that Hypenetes had
amongst the Graecians. What his duty and service should be, is declared out of
Suidas in Ectactos.
Suidas. There were of these officers, as well among the horse, as the foot,
as appears in Xenophon. Cyrop. lib. 7. 191. A.
Xenophon. The estimation and worth of their places is expressed by the same
Xenophon. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 2. 44. D.
Cyrus held the Sergeants in war, says he, worthy of no less honor, than
See Suidas in the word Kerux.
messengers, and Ambassadors in peace. He conceived that they ought to be
trusty, skillful in matter of war, understanding, quick, swift, industrious,
and void of fear; besides endued with all qualities requisite in the best
sort of men; and that they were to accustom themselves to refuse no manner of
service, but willingly undergo whatsoever is laid upon them by their
Commanders. These Sergeants attended their Commanders in Marches, and other
times, save only when Battle was to be joined, and always expected his
command. During the fight, they retired to some place, where they might be
ready at call; for (as I said before) they could have no place in front. 10 A
Crier.] Concerning the office of a Crier, Suidas has taught us, that he was to
deliver the Commanders pleasure by voice. Leo. cap. 4.. 16.
Leo calls him Mandator, from the Latin word, because he signified to the
soldiers, Mandata, the commandments of the Captain. In exercise he stood at
the head of the Troop, taking from the Commander the words of direction, and
making, as it were, proclamation of them to the Soldiers; and served often,
when neither Trumpet, nor signal might be given; he was otherwise also of
great use. For in all business which required distinct signification of any
sudden alteration in the Army, the Crier had his part alone. Xenoph de exped.
Cyri lib. 2. 277. ^.
Xenophon tells in the Graecians return out of Persia, that Clearehus their
General led them not against the enemy, both because their courages began to
fall, and also because they were all the day fasting, and it grew somewhat
late. But yet he turned not out of the way, lest he might seem to fly; but
holding on right forward, he came with the vantgard, to the next Villages by
sunne-set there quartered; The very timber of the houses of some of those
Villages was broken down, and carried away by those of the Kings army. The
first therefore lodged themselves reasonably, the last being be-nighted every
man took up his lodging as it fell out, and made a great noise, calling one
after an other, so that the enemy heard it. Whereby it came to pass, that the
next of them fled out of their tents. This appeared the next day, for neither
was there carriage-beast, nor Camp, nor smoke near at hand to be seen. The
King also was terrified as it should seem, with the access of the Army.
Which he declared by the next days work. Yet in the process of night a fear
seized the Graecians themselves: and the tumult, and hurleburly was such, as is
wont, when men are possessed with fear. Clearchus in this distress commanded
Tolmides the Elean (whom he then had with him, the best Crier of those times)
after silence, to make proclamation, that the Commanders signified generally,
that whosoever could bring forth the Author of this tumult should have a About
a 176 pounds ^arling I^l. Poll* lib. 9. cap. 6. 430. 437.
talent of silver for his pains. After this proclamation made by the Crier the
Soldiers perceived, that their fear was vain, and that the Commanders were
in safety: Hitherto Xenophon. By which narration may appear, that the Crier
performed that, which neither Trumpet nor other signal could do, the terror
rising in the night (which is the time of confusion and disorder) and neither
could the Trumpet give any certain sound to remedy the peril, nor any other
signal be discerned by reason of the darkness; and this service was done by
the Crier amongst his own folk. His service against the enemy is declared in
the fact of Xenoph. ^istor. G^aec. lib. 2. 474.
Cleocrytus the Athenian Crier who after the fight, betwixt Thrasybulus and the
30. Tyrants (wherein Critias and Hippomachus were slain) with a proclamation
to the Citizens, reconciled them to Thrasybulus, and was cause that the Tyrants
were deposed, and had their authority abrogated by the people. The like
service was done by a Crier in the behalf of the Graecians against the
Persians, about the time of the battle of Plataeae. The story is this:
Diodor. Si^: lib. 11. 260.
When the Graecians under the conduct of Leotychides, the Lacedemonian, and
Xanthipus the Athenian, had gathered a fleet of 250. Galleys together to the
end to deliver the Ilanders, and the Cities of the Continent of Asia the
less, out of the servitude of the Persians, they sailed out of Delos. The
Persians then remained at Samos. But hearing of the approach of the Graecians,
they left Samos, and put over to Mycale a City of Ionia. And because they
perceived their ships unfit for fight, they drew them on land, and fortified
the place, where they landed, with a wodden wall, and a deep trench.
Nevertheless they sent for foot forces, from Sardes, and other the next
Cities, and assembled to the number of a 100000 men; And made provision for all
things necessary for war, the rather, because they suspected the Ionians
would revolt. Leotychides having put his fleet in order, sailed toward the
Barbarians, that were in Mycale, and dispatched away before a ship, wherein
was a Crier, who had the shrillest voice in all the Army. Him he commanded to
sail up close to the enemy, and to proclaim aloude, that the Graecians
having overcome the Persians at Plataeae, were now come thither to deliver and
set free the Grecian Cities of Asia. This was done by Leotychides to the end
to disseuer the Asian Graecians from the Barbarians, and to raise a tumult in
the enemies Camp. Which also came to pass. What service could be of more
importance, then to set a division betwixt the enemies? It was done by the
voice of a Crier. More examples I could allege, but these may suffice. The
Criers place was always to attend the Commander in the head of the Troops,
unless in the time of fight; at which time his voice could not be heard but
ga^e place to the noise of Trumpets and clashing of armor. 11 A Tetragonall
forme] That is of four equal sides, or four square; But we must understand
(which Aelian after teaches) that there are two kinds of Tetragonall, o^
square bodies military, one in number, the other in figure. In number, when the
front, and flancke of the body have either of them as many Soldiers, as other;
as the Syntagma has 16. in front, and 16. in flancke. In figure, when the
number of the front is greater, then the number of the flancke, and yet front
and flancke stretch out an equal Aelian. cap. 18.
length of ground; as in the squares of horse, whereof Aelian speak^ to
hereafter. This last square is at this day called a square of ground, because
the space of ground, which contains the length of the front, stretches out
justly as far, as the space of ground, which contains the deepth of the
flancke. It is caused by the difference of distance, which is betwixt the
Soldiers in front, and betwixt the Soldiers in flancke. In front, being
closed to fight, the distance betwixt Soldier, and Soldier, is but a cubite;
that is a foot, and a half. The distance betwixt soldier, and soldier, in
flancke is two cubits, or three foot, which proportion will give no more, then
half so many men in flancke, as in front, and yet maintain the trueness and
evenness of the sides of the figure; that is the length of the line, which
measures the front, and flancke, shall be all one. 12 A Pentecosiarchie] The
word is a command of 500, and that was sometimes the number. In the Macedonian
Phalange, it comprehends a 512 men. The cause of difference is the difference
betwixt the file of the Macedonians, and the file of the ancient Graecians
(whereof I have spoken before) the odd 12 men coming in by the fifth doubling
of 16. And the number being so near 500, though somewhat above, the name of
Pentecosiarchie is still retained, because it was then in use, and no other
more fit could be found. 13 A Chiliarchie] The command of 1000 men according to
the name; Aelian gives it a 1024, from the doubling of 512. The Tribunes of
the Roman Legions are by the Greek Historians termed Chiliarchs; yet is there
a great difference; for the Chiliarchs have no more command, then over their
Chiliarchy consisting of 1000 men, and sometimes of more, as here in Aelian of
1024. But every Tribune had in his turn the command of the whole Legion. And
again there being 12 Tribunes, to every Legion (which at first had in it 3000,
afterward 4000, then Plutarch. in Romulo.
5000, and in the time of Salust. in Iugurtha.
Vegetius 6000 men) how should a Tribune be called a Chiliarch and be a Leader
of a thousand, there being in the legion but* 6000 men at the most, and yet 12
Tribunes; so that every one could not have, above 500 for his* command; and in
Polybius time, (the Iegion being c Veget. lib. 2. cap. 2.
but 4200) not above 300 and odd. But the Roman manner of war and ordering
of troops, differed much from the Graecians; and the Graecians in tearming a
Tribune a Chiliarch, took the next word, and most significant amongst them to
express the charge of a Tribune. Our Coronells, for their command, of a
Regiment come nearer to the Grecian Chiliarchs; yet ours differ in that they
have Companies in their own Regiments, which the Grecian Chiliarchs had not,
and where Quint. Curt. lib. 5. 166.
Q. Curtius says, that the Chiliarchy was first instituted at Babylon by
Alexander, as a reward for service, it seems to be otherwise. For as I find
this in no other Author, so find I, that Chiliarchies were long before
Alexanders time. Xenoph. Cyro^. lib. 2. 43.
Xenophon reports, that Cyrus to give encouragement to his soldiers to be
valiant, promised to the Taxiarchs to make them Chiliarchs, to the Lochagi to
make them Taxiarchs, to the Decharchs to make them Lochagi, to the Pempadarchs
to make them Decarchs; Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 4. 88 B.
And that Cyrus made Chrysanthas a Chiliarch of horse in regard of his worth,
and forwardness in service. And afterward he calls Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 6.
168. C. D.
Phranuchus, and Asiadatas, Chiliarchs of horse, and A^tabasus and Artagersas
Chiliarchs of foot: Polyen. lib. 3. in Iphicrate 10.
Polyenus witnesses that in Iphicrates his time the Athenians had Chiliarchs,
and Pentecosiarchs, so that the institution of Chiliarchs could not be referred
to Alexanders being at Babylon, considering it was ^n use before; And Arrian.
lib. 3. 64. C.
Arrian reporting the same story, says not, that Alexander first brought up
Chiliarchies there, but that he ordained two Lochi in every horse troop (where
to that day there had been none) and two Lochagi to command them. Indeed Diod.
Si^ul. lib. 18. 653.
Diodorus Siculus, writes thus concerning a Chiliarch. Antipater, says he,
lying upon his deathbed declared Polyperchon Protector of the Kings (being the
eldest of those, that had served Alexander in his wars, and much honored of
the Macedonians) and his own son Cassander the Chiliarch, and second man in
authority. The place and institution of the Chiliarch first grew to name and
honor under the Persian Kings. So writes Diodorus of this Chiliarchy which
Antipater bestowed upon his son Cassander. Which notwithstanding seems much
to differ from the common Chiliarchy of the Phalange, whereof Curtius speaks.
For Diodorus says, he was next to Polyperchon in authority. Where in the
Phalange there were many Commanders, namely, the Merarchs, the Phalangarchs
etc. above the Chiliarchs. Add that he says, the institution of this
Chiliarch came from the Persian Kings, when the Chiliarchs of the Phalange had
their beginning from the Graecians, and were ordinary in Phalanges, as I have
showed. Lastly where Diodorus reports, that it had the increase and
advancement of honor from the Persian Kings, he shows plainly, it was not
Alexanders invention. And the same Diodorus speaking of the death of Ochus King
of Persia tells, that he was poisoned by Bagoas his Chiliarch in the time of
the reign of Philip, Alexanders father. This Chiliarch then I take to be the
same, that the General of an army is with us. And I can hardly be persuaded,
that Antipater wouldbequeath a less place to his son Cassander. 14 A
Merarchy] The command of a part or half; for a Phalangarchy consists of two
Merarchies. So that a Merarchy is half the Phalangarchy, and contains, 2048
men. This part is also called Telos, of which I have spoken in my notes to the
seventh Chapter. And yet the word Telos is not alone used in bodies of foot.
For Thucyd. lib. 1. 33.
Thucydides speaking of the fight by sea betwixt the Corcyraeans, and
Corinthians, tells, that the Corcyraeans gave the right wing to ten Athenian
ships, and having of their own a 100 and 10 ships, divided them into three
Tele, every of which was commanded by one of their Generals: so that Telos
there signifies not a certain number of ships, but a part of their fleet
divided into 3: and the Co^manders of the Corcyraeans are called Strategoi. 15 A
Phalangarchie] The command of a single Phalange. Of this kind were the Arrian.
lib. 1. 14. ^* and 35. E and 60. A.
Phalanges in Alexanders army (as I take it) which were led by Caenos, by
Perdicas, by Craterus, by Amyntas, by Ptolomy, by Meleager, and other, as
Arrian has; Before Philip and Alexander gathered those forces together,
wherewith Persia was subdued, the armies were of smaller number amongst the
Graecians. Neither was it in many Cities might to raise 4096 men; which go to
the Phalangarchy of Aelian: If any did, they might well call it an army
(Strategia, and the Commander Strategos) and the name of Strategos, or General
was usually given to him, that commanded in chief over an army (though small)
sent out by any City to war. So then, as the General was called Strategos,
a Phalangarchy might also be called Strategia. I have before noted, that the
sections of the Phalange are limited, and laid out by the Phalangarchies. And
where there are 3 sections in a Phalange, the middle section is in the midst of
the 4 Phalangarchies* 2 Phalangarchies lying on the one side, and 2 on the
other. The 2 other sections are one betwixt the 2 Phalangarchies of the right
wing, the other betwixt the two Phalangarchies of the left wing, for betwixt
every Phalangarchie was a space or section. 16 A Diphalangarchie] The command
of two Phalangarchies; this was one of the wings. Aelian gives it no Commander
ordinary, neither do I remember, that I have read Diphalangarchs of
Diphalangarchia, as Phalangarchs of Phalangarchia, Tetrarch* of Tetrarchia. Yet
was there one, always that commanded the winge, appointed to that place
extraordinarily; So Diod. Sicul. lib. 16. 155.
Philip, at the battle of Cheronaea (where he overthrew the power of the
Athenians, and Thebans, and their Allies) took the one wing to himself, and
gave the command of the other to Alexander his son being then but young. And
Arrian. lib. 1. 14. D.
Alexander at Granicus commanded himself the right wing, and appointed
Parmenio to the left. So in the battles against Darius at Arrian. lib. 2. 35.
E.
Issos in Cilicia, and at Arrian. lib. 3. 60. B.
Gaugamela in Syria. 17 Meros] Meros is a part by division, coming of the
verb, meiro to divide. And as before, Amerarchie, was half a Phalangarchie,
so here Meros is half the fourfold Phalange. Each then signifies half, but
to distinguish them, the one is called a Merarchie, that is a Command of
half, the other Meros, that is half: A distinction sufficient to know the one
from the other. Two of these Meros make the Phalange containing 16384 men. And
these are the bodies military, which Aelian in this Chapter describes, and
which were in use amongst the Macedonians. The other Graecians used other
bodies in their armies. The Xenoph. de rep. Lacedem. 686. A.
Lacedaemonians divided their whole city, into fix bodies, horse and foot;
every one of which was called Mora, or Moira. Their General was one of their
Kings, for they had always two. Every Moira, had a Polemarch ( not much
differing from our Coronells) four Lochagie, eight Pentecosteres, and sixteen
Enemotarchs. What the number of the Moira was, is uncertain, by reason of the
secrecy the Lacedaemonians used in their government, as Thucyd. lib. 39 C.
Thucydides says. Plutarch Plutarch. in Pelopida.
reports, that Ephorus the historian, gives 500 men to the Moira,
Calisthenes 700. Polybius and others 900. Diod. Sicul. lib. 15. 473.
Diodorus Siculus, agrees with Ephorus, and allows but 500 to the Moira. And
Xenoph. hist. Graec. lib. 4. 528. C.
Xenophon numbreth the Moira of the Lacedaemonians, which Iphicrates, defeated
hard by Corinth, to have been about 600 men. Scholiast. in Thucyd. lib. 5. 392.
See the scholiastes, of Thucydides, for the exact number of these bodies. The
Polyen lib. 3. in Iphicrat. 10.
Athenians had their Chiliarchs, Pentecosiarchs, Taxiarchs, and Lochagie, as I
have said before. And with them were the Lochagi last, where with the
Lacedaemonians they were next the Polemarchs, but the number of the Lochos was
not alike, as I have likewise showed before. Cyrus in Xenophon Cyroped. lib. 2.
43. A.
Xenophon has these orders military, Myriarchs Commanders of ten thousand,
Chiliarchs of a thousand, Taxiarchs of a hundred, Lochagi of twenty four,
Decadarchs, called sometime Dodecadarchs of 12, Pempedarchs of six, which are
also called Hexadarchs. E^ymologic: magn: in voc^ Strat^s.
Vrbicius differs not much from Aelian, save only in the number of the file,
and the Officers of the file. For where Aelian has sixteen to a file,
Vrbicius has but ten: and Vrbicius allows but two Commanders to the file,
the File-leader, and the Bringer-vp Aelian four; the four Enomotarchs. For
the number of the Officers, in the Phalange they agree. And yet the names are
not all one. Aelian begins with a Dilochite commanding two files, thirty
two men, Vrbicius with the Lochagos, who likewise commands two files of his,
and five men more, namely 25 men. The next in Aelian is a Tetrarch over
sixtie-foure men, in Vrbicius a Pentecontarch over fifty men. Vrbicius has
next a Taxiarch, a Syntagmatarch, a Pentecosiarch, a Chiliarch, a Merarch, a
Phalangarch: And so has Aelian. The next in Aelian is a Diphalangarch,
Commander of 8192 men; Vrbicius terms him a Myriarch that is the Leader of
ten thousand men. The Tetraphalangarchy is last in both. But Vrbicius assigns
no more, then 16 thousand to his Phalange, Aelian 16 thousand 384. Julius
Pollux thus divides his bodids, a Myriarchie, a Chiliarchie, a Taxiarchie, a
Hecatontarchie, and a Lochagie. What a proportion Leo makes, is to be seen in
the fourth Chapter of his Tacticks. Because, he has a mixture of the Roman and
Greek Orders, I remit the Reader to the book.

So then Aelian has in his Phalange of armed (besides the two Diphalangarchs)
1020. Officers.
Dilochites 512. Tetrarchs 256. Taxiarchs 128. Syntagmatarchs 64.
Pentecosiarchs 32. Chiliarchs 16. Merarchs 8. Phalangarchs 4. 1020.

I have set down the figures of all the bodies described by Aelian as far,
as the Phalangarchy. The rest would have been troublesome to insert as
requiring more paper, then would stand with any reasonable proportion; neither
are they greatly needful. For two Phalangarchies joined in an even front, and
in a convenient distance, will figure out a Diphalange; four in an even front
with a like distance will make the fourefold Phalange. So that thereby the
form of it will appear.


The precedence, and dignity of place in the offices of the Phalange. CHAP. X.
1 THe best of the Phalange Commanders is placed on the right wing, the second
on the left wing, the third in valor in the right hand next the second
Phalange toward the middle section. The fourth on the left hand next the first
Phalange toward the middle section likewise. So the first and fourth Phalange
have Commanders of the first, and fourth worth: The second and third Phalange
have Commanders of the second and third worth. Now we will show by
demonstration, that the first, and fourth worth, and valor, are equal to the
second, and third; So that the Commanders in each wing are of valor alike.

2 The Leaders also of the several Merarchies are thus disposed. The first
has his place in the head of the first Phalange on the left hand: The second
on the right hand of the second Phalange: The third on the left hand of the
third Phalange: The fourth on the right hand of the fourth Phalange. Also the
Leaders of files in every Tetrarchy are so placed, that the Leader of the first
file has pre-eminence in valor and place; the Leader of the fourth file
stands next him: Then the Leader of the third file, and the Leader of the
second file last. For then are Dilochies of equal valor when the first
Dilochie has the first, and fourth Leaders, the second Dilochy the second, and
the third Leaders in valor and reputation. For it appears in the
Mathematics, that, when there are Analogies, or answerable proportions of
four magnitudes propounded, that, which arises of the first, and fourth, will
counteruaile that, which arises of the second, and third magnitude. And
because there are four Tetrarchies in every Syntagma, we may give the Leaders
of the Tetrarchies place according to the same proportion, as to place the
Tetrarch of the first Tetrarchy on the right hand, giving him the first place
of worth; on his left hand the Tetrarch of the fourth Tetrarchy in the fourth
place of worth. Then again next him the Tetrarch of the third Tetrarchy in the
third place of worth, and on his left hand the Tetrarch of the second Tetrarchy
in the second place of worth.

In like manner are the greater commands also to be proportioned.

Notes.
THe former Chapter was of the Officers and of the bodies of the Phalange; this
is of the place of every one, according to his worth. And first we are to
note, that all the Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 3. 85. C.
Commanders were placed in front of those, that they commanded; to the and they
might direct, and lead them as occasion should require. For Xenoph. Cyrop. lib.
8. 203. A.
Xenophon says of Cyrus army, the Decadarchs, or file Leaders, had care of the
files, the Lochagie of he Decadarchs, the Taxiarches of the Lochagie, the
Chiliarchs of the Taxiarchs, the Myriarchs of the Chiliarchs: So in the
Phalange of Aelian the file Leader had the command of his file, the Dilochites
of the file Leaders, the Tetrarchs of the Dilochites, the Taxiarchs of the
Tetrarchs, and so the rest, till you come to the General, who cared for all,
directed all, and under whom all the Commanders were. The General ^ath been
placed sometimes in the right winge, sometimes in the midst of the Phalange.
Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 18.
Vegetius says, that the General of the Army is accustomed to be in the
right winge betwixt the horse, and the foot. He adds, this is the place,
which governs the whole battle, from whence the salying out is most direct,
and free. Therefore he stands betwixt both, that he might both govern
horse, and foot with counsel, and with authority exhort them to fight.
Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7. 176. B.
Cyrus in his battle against Cresus, took his place in the right wing,
betwixt the right hand point of the battle, and of the horse, that were
ranged in the wing; Alexander the great, in his battles took the same place;
Platarch. in Timol.
Timoleon in his fight against the Carthaginians placed himself in the midst
of the battle. Diod. Sicul: lib. 20. 743.
Diodorus Siculus, says, that, it is the manner of the Scythians, that the
King should stand in the midst of the Phalange. The like does Arrian. lib. 2.
36. C.
Arrian affirm of the Persians, and says, that Darius had that place. Leo
cap. 4. 65. and 67. and cap. 12. 66.
Leo also gives the midst of the battle to the General. And there places
the battle over which he would have him to command.

1 The best of the Phalangarchs] This ordering of the Phalangarchs the best on
the right hand wing, the second on the left, the third next him in the left
wing on his right hand toward the middlesection: The fourth in the right wing
on the left hand of the first toward the middlesection thus, 2 3 4 1

comes out of a Geometrical proportion, which proportion gives law to the
ordering of the rest of the Commanders. The rule is this: 4. Magnitudes which
equally exceed the one the other being compared together that which arises of
the first, and fourth, is equal to that, which arises of the second, and
third. As 2. 8. 14. 20. each exceeds the other, 6. The addition of 2. to 20.
begets an equal number to 8, and 14. added together. So is it in all other
numbers, that have the same equality of excess one above an other. Out of
this rule of proportion, Aelian deriueth the giving equality of strength in
the Leaders to every body in the Phalange. For Leaders and Commanders are (or
ought at least to be) chosen by worth, and valor: and the preferments of the
field have been held the due reward of virtue. Say then the Phalangarchs are
preferred to their places according to their worth, and that the first
Phalangarchs is most worthy, the second next him, the third next, the fourth
least deserving of the four. If you should place them, as their worth is in a
rank successively one after an other, the best before the first Phalangarchie
in the right wing, the second before the next Phalangarchie in the same wing,
and leave the other two Phalangarch's to command the left wing, the
disproportion would b^ great; the third and fourth not being able to match the
worth of the first, and second. But if you place the best Phalangarch before
the first Phalangarchie on the right wing, the second before the second
Phalangarchie of the left wing, the third Phalangarch next him before the third
Phalangarchie on the left wing, toward the middle Section; the fourth before
the fourth Phalangarchie of the right wing toward the same Section, the valors
of the Commanders, will be equal in both wings. For as in the number 1. 2. 3.
4. one and 4. make 5, as many, as is made by joining 2 and 3 together; so the
worth of the fourth Phalangarch joined to the worth of the first will arise as
high in true valuation, as the worths of the second and third joined together.
And where the Phalangarchie on the left corner of the left wing is called the
second, and the next Phalangarchie standing in the same wing the third; it is
to be understood that it is second in dignity, not in succession of number;
for the fourth Phalangarchie in dignity stands in place and number next the
first; and the second Phalangarchie has the last place of the whole Phalange.
Their places then are after this manner according to Aelian.

2 b f c 3 g 4 d e a 1

For the understanding whereof, you are to note, that

a signifies the first Phalangarchie. b the second Phalangarchie. c the third
Phalangarchie. d the fourth Phalangarchie. e the Section of the right winge. f
the Section of the left winge. g the middle Section. 1 the place of the first
Phalangarch. 2 the place of the second Phalangarch. 3 the place of the third
Phalangarch. 4 the place of the fourth Phalangarch.




2 The Leaders of the Merarchies] As the Phalangarchs so are all the other
Commanders of the several bodies placed by four, and the same observation to
be had, of the dignities of the place, that was in the Phalangarchs: and these
4 Merarchies ( for Aelian speaks of no more than 4,) must stand thus.

P2 M2 M3 P3 P4 M4 M1 P1

P, stands for Phalangarchs. M, for Merarchs.




Robertellus confesses he finds these Merarchs so placed in a written book,
and it is the true placing. The figures, he sets down out of his own wit
(as he terms it) carry with them no savor of Aelians proportion. Patricius
likewise seems to have mistaken this proportion in the figures he has set
down, of which not one is right. I will refer the Reader to their books,
admonishing him only of the mistaking. But Aelian places here but 4 Merarchs;
what order shall be for the other four? I have always thought Aelian
defective in this place, neither could I hitherto find any man, that has
brought light to clear the doubt. Patricius that purposely discourses of this
place of Aelian, speaks of bestowing 4 Merarchs only, as though the rest
were to be thrown away from the Phalange. Robortellus seeking to bestow all 8,
bestows them indeed, but not according to Aelians proportion, which
notwithstanding he would seem to follow. His figure is this.

P.1. M.8. M.4. M.3. M.6. P.3. P.4. M.5. M.2. M.1. M.7. P.2.

The right wing

The Middle.

The left wing.



The proportion is his, as I said, and not Aelians. For Aelian placed the first
Merarch in the right wing; he places him in the left; Aelian the second in the
second Phalangarchie, he in the fourth; Aelian the third in the left wing, he
in the right; Aelian, the fourth in the fourth Phalangarchie, he in the first.
The rest are so iumbled together, as though any thing else had been sought
for, rather than proportion. I take not upon me to overruled any doubt; but if
amongst the rest I enterpose mine opinion, I hope, I shall not incur just
blame. Thus then: seeing Aelians meaning is by evenesse and worth of number of
both wings to find out the worth of the Commanders of both, if I so distribute
them, that the number of the one side shall counterballance the number of the
other, I cannot much stray from Aelians meaning. The figure following will do
it.

P.1. M.5. M.1. M.4. M.8. P.4. P.3. M.7. M.3. M.2. M.6. P.2.

The right wing

The Middle.

The left wing.



In this figure I have observed precisely the place, that Aelian gave to the 4
Merarchs. The first stands on the left hand of the first Phalangarch; the
second on the right hand of the second Phalangarch; the third on the left hand
of the third Phalangarch; the 4th on the right hand of the 4th Phalangarch. The
rest I have added, and divided according The whole wing.
The right w. The left ^* 1 3 5 7 1 3 4 2 8 6 4 2 23 23


the placing of the first: So that the number that arises of the addition of
both wings, is alike, and the proportion held. In all the rest of the bodies,
where there is a Command over 4, the keeping of the proportion has no
difficulty. So every Phalangarch commands over 4 Chiliarchs; every Merarch
over 4 Pentecosiarchs; every Chiliarch over 4 Syntagmatarchs; every
Pentecosiarch over 4 Taxiarchs; every Syntagmatarch over 4 Tetrarchs; every
Taxiarch over 4 Dilochites; every Tretarch over 4 files; In all which the
Commander, which has the right, has the first place, he that has the The
Merarchs alone.
5 7 1 3 4 2 8 6 18 18


point of the left hand, the second place; he that stands on the right hand
next to him, the third place; the last place is his, who stands next to the
Commander of the right point on the left hand. And for the place of the
Phalangarchs, and of 4 of the Merarchs, and the file-leaders, and of the
Tetrarchs, they are laid out by Aelian. The rest appear by these, and are to
be squared by the same rule of proportion, as Aelian admonished.


The distances to be observed between Soldier and Soldier in opening and
shutting the Phalange. CHAP. XI.
WE are now to speak of distances both in length, and depth betwixt Soldier,
and Soldier, as they stand ordered in Battle. The distances vary in three
sorts. For first they are placed in thinner distance for some special causes.
And a Soldier so placed takes up 1 4 cubits. But in 2 Densation or closing he
takes up 2 cubits. 3 In Constipation or shutting, one cubit.

Densation then, or closing is, when we draw wide distances close together, and
by sidemen, and followers (that is both in length and depth) gather up the
body of the Phalange: so notwithstanding that the soldier yet has liberty
to move, and turn about.

Constipation, or shutting is when the Phalange by sidemen gathers it self
yet closer together, then in Densation; so that by reason of the nearenesse
there is left no Declination, or turning of faces either to the right, or left
hand.

The use of Closing is, when the General leads the Phalange against the
enemy. Of Shutting when he would have it stand fast (and as it were locked up,
and serred) to receive the charge of the enemy.

Seeing then there are 1024 File-leaders in the front of the Phalange, it is
plain that 4 in their ordinary array they take up in length 4096 Cubits 5
(that is ten furlongs, and ninety six cubits) In Closing five furlongs, and
forty eight cubits. In Shutting two furlongs, a half, and four and twenty
cubits.

Notes.
AFter Soldiers are armed, and distributed into bodies military, the next care
is to be had of their Moving. For as a man, let him be never so well
proportioned, and strong, if he pace disorderly, and either set too great
strides, or reele here, and there, or so mince, and tread out his steps, as if
his legs were bound together, grows hereby deformed, and not only loses
his comeliness, but his actiuitie withal, and possibility to perform any
thing by strength: So is it of an Army, that has either too great distances,
or is thronged up, or pestred too close together. Caesar d^ bell. gall. lib. 2
Too much thronging binds, as it were, the soldiers hands, and takes away
the use of his weapons, as on the other side Plutarch. in Philopoemene.
falling one loose from another, and standing or moving too far asunder,
makes the Battle weak, and disiointed, and subject to the enemies entry,
and easy to be broken. The mean betwixt both was brought in by King Philip,
King of Macedonia, who first constituted, and raised the Macedonian Phalange,
and invented the distances of opening and closing the same; imitating the D^dor
S^c: lib 16 51^.
serring of Targets (called Synaspismos) practiced by the old Heroes at Troy.
Out of his discipline sprung the distances mentioned here by Aelian: which are
of three sorts; The first are large distances of

1 Four Cubits] Which amount to six foot. For a Cubit contains a foot and
a ha^fe. This Pol^b lib 12 664 C. Leo cap 17. 61.
distance was used in marching, or else in solemn pompes and shows. And the
soldier having a pike of Pol ^. lib. 17 764 A.
14 Cubits or 21 long, whereof one half lay forward on his shoulder, and the
other half backward, it was requisite he should have a reasonable large
distance, both in file and rank, Leo cap 7.. 54.
to the end, that in turning this way, or that Cap. 11.
The first distance ordnary 6 foot in file as much in rank

The Rear

The second distance called Closing and foot in file as much in rank

The third distance called or serring and foot in file shoulder to shoulder in
rank

way, or that way, or moving out of his place (for no man in his march, can
always hold his rank) he offended not his next neighbors therewith. This
distance our exercise at this day calls open order. The next distance is of
Two Cubits] Or three foot. The name of it in Greek is Pycnosis, that is
thickning. In Leo it is called Sphinxis, ( knitting together) in our modern
exercise Order. And it is, when from the distance of 6 foot, we draw our
Phalange both by file, and rank, so close, that the soldiers stand but 3
foot one from an other every way. This distance is used, when the Army
approaches near to the enemy (and only comes not to charge) that it may be
ready to shut, and lock it self for the charge, which is performed in the
last distance of One Cubit] A foot and a half. This is called Synaspismos,
joining Target to Target. For, as I before showed, the pikemen of the
Macedonians used also Targets with their pikes, and in charging the enemy
closed so near in front, that their own Targets touched one another. This
kind of fight Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7. 178. A. It is called by Thucydides,
Synciifis, Thucyd. lib. 5. 393. B.
the Aegiptians used in Xenophon ( which he calls locking together of
Targets) and by means thereof had the advantage against the Persians. The
Parthian horse likewise coming to charge Crassus with their staves: Appian. in
Parthicis. 144. A. 164. D. C.
After they perceived the depth of the locking of Targets, and the setlednesse,
and stedfastnes of the Roman Phalange, they retired, and durst not come to
hands with them. And Diod. Sicul. lib. 17. 575.
Diodorus Siculus writes that Alexander besieging the City of Halicarnassus,
there was in the City, and in service of Darius one Ephialtes an Athenian, a
man of great valor, and strength of body; He by the permission of Memnon
General of Darius Army, determined to make a saly. And taking to him 2000
mercenarie soldiers, all chosen men, and giving brands flaming with fire to
one half, and reserving the rest for fight, he opened the gates, and fell out,
throwing fire upon the engines of battery, which soon caught a mighty flame;
And marshalling the rest into a thick and deep Phalange, himself led on, and
was the first that fell on the Macedonians coming to aid, and to quench the
fire. Alexander advertised hereof speeded to the medley; and ordered first the
Macedonians in front, after them other choice men, for seconds; and in the
third place men of extraordinary account for their prowess, himself leading
them on sustained the enemy, which seemed irresistable, and sent others to
slake, and put out the fire, and to preserve the Engines. The fight was hot,
and albeit the Macedonians found means to quench the fire, yet had Ephialtes
the better in the fight; who both himself killed many with his own hands, and
the towers from the walls furnished with many Catapelts annoyed grievously the
Macedonians. In so much that some falling in the place, other-some forsaking
their ground by reason of the number of Engine Darts that fell thick amongst
them, Alexander himself was reduced to extremity. Here the old soldiers of
the Macedonians; although otherwise freed from such service in regard of their
age, having of a long time followed the wars with King Philip, and gained
many a battle, were by this occasion tolled out to succor; and as they
excelled the younger sort in greatness of spirit, and military experience, so
meeting with the run-a-waies, they bitterly reviled, and taunted them for their
cowardice; Then Synaspisantes
serring themselves close, and joining their Targets together, they repressed,
and held the enemy short, who now seemed to have the victory in his hands.
Finally killing Ephialtes, and many other, they drove the rest into the City. A
memorable service of the use of Targets, and of the Synaspisme of the
Macedonians, which was not used, but when they either gave upon, or received
the charge of the enemy. And the Targets so knit together served for a wall (as
it were) to the whole Phalange, and by them the soldier was defended from the
missiue weapons of the enemy, and his body covered even from the peircing of
the sword. Synaspismos then, or shutting, is that aistance in the Phalange,
which brings the sonldiers Target to touch one an other, and is limited by
Aelian to a cubite (that is a foot and a half) betwixt sidemen, and sidemen
in the front. What distance the followers should have, Aelian sets not here
do^ne in plain words; but implies, that they should hold their 3 foot still,
in that he says the Phalange in constipation gathers the sidemen closer,
then in densation, but speaks nothing of followers. Polyb. lib. 17. 764. A.
Polybius teaches it more plainly; who gives them three foot distance from
the Leader, both according to the Macedonian and Roman discipline, and that for
the use of their arms: with whom Aelian also agrees Aelian. c. 14.
afterward. In what manner the Targetiers made their closings, and how their
Targets were cast from the back, where they hung, to the left shoulder, I have
before noted in the second Chapter, and therefore think it needless here to
repeat. Now for the ground, that a Phalange takes up in each of these orders,
Aelian shows it in the words following, allowing the Phalange. 4 In See
Polyb. lib. 12. 664. C. Leo cap. 17. 91.
ordinary array four thousand cubits] The Phalange in open order, says Aelian,
takes up 4096 cubits of ground. This is to be understood in front, or length;
for in depth it has no more, then 64 cubits; every soldier (which are in
number, 16 in file) possessing 4 cubits of ground in his open order; A cubit
is the part of the arm, which reaches from the elbow to the middle fingers
end, and is as much, as a foot and a half. In front then, there being 1024
File-leaders, we most alott to each of them four cubits, of ground; to the
thousand 4000 cubits, and to the odd twenty four 96 cubits. For four times
twenty four makes 96. which together comes to 4096 cubits, and to six
thousand one hundred forty four foot. 5 Ten furlongs and ninty six cubits]
Where this space is squared out by ten furlongs, we must understand, that a
furlong conteines Suidas in Pl^thro.
four hundred cubits, and 4096 being divided by 400 the quotient is 10:^ that
is ten furlongs and 96 cubits, as Aelian says. Which measure of ground the
Phalange of Armed takes in open Order. Of these furlongs Suidas ibid. and Leo
cap. 17. 89.
seven and a half go to a mile, by which account the front of the Phalange of
armed in open order takes up one mile, a quarter, and 346 cubits, measuring it
by feet it amounts to 6130. In closing (which is named Order, and is the next
distance) because the soldier is allowed but 2 cubits, that is half so much,
as in open Order, the dimension will not exceed five furlongs, 48 cubits; that
is 2048 cubits in all, which amounts to half a mile, half a quarter, and 173
cubits, in feet, 3072. In shutting 2 furlongs and a half, and 24 cubits; that
is a quarter of a mile and 274. cubits.
The arming of the Phalange. CHAP. XII.
THe Phalange is to be armed with Target and Pyke. The best Taget is the
Macedonian target made 1 of brass, and 2 somewhat hollow, and having 3 eight
handfulls in Diameter. The Pyke ought to be 4 no shorter then 8 cubits; and the
longest no longer, then a man may well use and wield in handling.

Notes.
IN the second Chapter of this book was handled the diversity of arms, used
in the Phalange. This sets forth the choice, that is to be made for matter
and fashion, and what sise is best of pike and target. For the other armor of
the armed ( whereof I spoke, in my notes to the second Chapter) is (no
question) to be fitted to the body of him, that shall bear them. He gives
then to the armed a target, and a pike, the target the Macedonian target, the
matter whereof was first of brass. I have showed, that the Macedonian target
was of brass, and that they were called by reason of the bearing such targets
Chalcaspides Brazen-targets. I am induced to think, that, as Philip borrowed
many other things in war from the Lacedaemonians, so he borrowed this kind of
target from them. For they by the ordinance of Lycurgus, were enjoined to have
no other matter in their target, then brass. Xenophon de rep. Laced. 686. A.
Xenophon gives a reason why they were made of brass. For Lycurgus was of
opinion, says he, that such a Target was most fit for war, because it is
soon brought to shine, and it gathers not rust easily, two great commodities
in arms. For albeit the chiefest considerations be surenesse, and strength,
yet is not the beauty to be neglected, which shining does principally set out.
Plutarch. in Crasso.
Besides that it dazeleth the eye of the enemy, and strikes an amazedness
into his mind. Xenoph. in Agesilao. 659. B.
Xenophon much admireth Agesilaus, that he so armed, and clothed his army,
that they seemed to be nothing, but brass, and nothing, but scarlet. The
brass he speaks of, were the brazen targets of his soldiers, which covered
the most part of the body, and were chiefly the object of the eye, without
that, that any other weapon was at that time of Brass. Therefore, as I said, I
am of opinion that the brazen Target came from the Spartans to the Macedonians.
The Brazen-targets Aelian would have 2 Somewhat hollow] If they should bear
straight out without any bowing, besides that they were uneasy, they would lie
kicking out from the body, and not cover it much. The arm, or shoulder, that
is inserted into the Target, is bowing. And the target somewhat bowing fits it
for ease, and slopeth more toward the body to cover it, and is more pliable to
be carried. But the hollownesse ought not to be much. He would have it also 3
Eight hand-fulls in Diameter] The Diameter in a circle is a right line, which
is drawn from one side of the circumference to the other passing thorough the
Center, or middle point of the circle, dividing the circle in two equal parts.
Here the Diameter of the target is taken for the exact breadth of the target,
which ought to be, according to the Macedonian manner, eight handfulls, or two
foot, that is 32 fingers. For four handfulls go to a foot, and four fingers
to a handful. Leo cap. 6. 38.
Leo gives it three Spithams, that is 36 fingers, if he mean the great Iul.
Pollux lib. 2. cap. 4. 32. calls it a spanne.
Spithame, which is of twelve fingers. And the less comprehending a handful
he cannot mean. For so should the breadth of the target be no more, but three
handfulls, a breadth insufficient to cover any man's body. Whether of them is the
better will appear in trial. The Diameter that serves to cover the body from
the upper part of the neck to the middle part of the thigh, is enough in these
round targets. That, which is more, is rather troublesome, then fit for use.
And I am of Iphicrates judgment in targets, that performing the covering of
the body, they should be as light, as may be, least the shoulder be
ouer-laden with unnecessary weight. In which regard I prefer the Target of
Aelian, before that of Leo; Aelians reaching up to the height of the neck from
the middle of the thigh; Leos carrying a handful more in breadth, which in the
circumference grows to a good proportion of weight and greatness. 4 No
shorter than 8 Cubits] That is 12 foot. Short pikes against long have a great
disadvantage. With the long pike a man is able to strike, and kill his enemy,
before himself can be touched, or come in danger of a shorter, the pike
keeping the enemy out so far, as the length is. The experience of the
battle of Patricius Parel. part. secun: lib. 3. cap. 8.
Sorano, shows it; where Vitellozzo Vitelli discomfited the Almaines only
with the advantage of pikes an arm longer than theirs. Against long pikes,
this policy was used by Cleonymus the Lacedemonian King, as Polyen. lib. 2 in
Cleonym. 2.
Polienus tells. Cleonymus besieging Aedessa, and having overthrown the wall
of the City, the pikemen of the City sailed out, whose pikes were each 16
cubits in length. Cleonymus closed his Phalange in depth, and commanded the
file-leaders to lay away their pikes; and when the pikemen of the enemy came to
charge, to seize upon their pikes with both hands, and hold them fast, and the
followers to pass thorough by the file-leaders sides, and maintain the fight.
The file-leaders laid hold on the pikes, and the enemy strove to recover them
out of their hands. In the mean time, the followers passing thorough the rank
of file leaders to the front, slew the enemies pikemen, and got the victory.
This was Cleonymus device against long pikes, which notwithstanding derogates
nothing from the length of pikes more, than from shortness. For the same policy
might have prevailed as well against short pikes, as long, each, as soon as the
enemies have seized upon them, growing to be of no use. But that the longer
pike is to be preferred before the shorter, I have showed before by reason: and
the reformation of arms made by Iphicrates amongst the Athenians, and by
Philopomen amongst the Achaians, will be warrant enough so to hold. In the
length notwithstanding ought to be a reasonable consideration, that it exceed
not the measure of his strength* that shall bear the pike.
The worth that the File-leaders, and next followers should be of CHAP. XIII.
THE File-leaders (as the Commanders of files of the Phalange) are to be the
choice and flower of the Army, and to excel the rest as well in stature, as in
experience and martial sk^ll. For this Rank knitteth and binds in the
Phalange, and of all other yields greatest use. For, as a sword taking to the
edge as a weight, and sway, the swelling iron toward the back exhibiteth
thereby more violence in piercing, so in a Phalange the Rank of File-leaders
is the edge it self, and the multitude of after-commers is the swelling, and
sway, and increase of weight.

Consideration must be had likewise of those that follow in the second Rank.
For their Pikes reach jointly over the front, and being next in place they are
always ready for use. And the File-leader falling, or being wounded, the next
follower stepping to the front in his place, holds together, and preserves
the tenor of that Rank unbroken.

Furthermore, we are to order the third and the rest of the Ranks according to
reason* and as the valor of our soldiers shall require.

THis Chapter shows how the Soldiers are to be ordered in every File:
whereof, because I have before spoken sufficiently in my Notes to the fifth
Chapter; and the words of this Chapter carry no difficulty, or obscurity with
them, I will forbear to treat any further.

Of the strength of the Macedonian Phalange, and length of the Soldiers Pikes.
CHAP. XIIII.
THE 1 Macedonian Phalange has of enemies been thought irresistable, by
reason of 2 the manner of embattailing. For the Soldier with his Arms
stands in close order, or shutting, when he is ready for fight, 3 occupying
two Cubits of ground. And the length of his Pike is sixteen Cubits according
to the first institution, but in truth it ought to be fourteen Cubits;
whereof the 4 space betwixt the hands in charging takes up two Cubits, the
other twelve lie out from the front of the Battle. Those in the second Rank,
that stand next to the Leaders (loosing four Cubits in the Phalange) have
their Pikes reaching over the first Rank ten Cubits. Those of the third Rank
eight Cubits, of the fourth Rank six cubits, of the fifth 4 cubits, of the sixth
2 Cubits. 5 The Pikes of the other behind cannot attain to the first Rank.
And seeing five or six pikes are charged over the first Rank, they present a
fearful sight to the enemy, and double the strength of the soldier standing
fortified, as it were, with five, or six Pikes, and seconded with a maine force
at his back, as the figure shows. Moreover they that are placed after the
sixth Rank, albeit they push not with their pikes, yet thrusting on with the
weight of their bodies, r'enforce the strength, and power of the Phalange, and
leave no hope for the File-leaders to fly, or shift away. Some would have the
hinder pikes longer, then the foremost, that they of the third, and fourth
Ranks might bear out the heads of their pikes equally with the first.

6 The Superordinary Lieutenant of every Syntagma must be a man of
understanding, ouerseeing the soldiers of his command, that they file, and
rank; and if for fear, or other occasion, any forsake their ground, he is to
compel them again to their places; and in Closing to put them (when need
requires) as near up together, as they should stand. For it is a great
strength, and assurance to the Phalange, to have some principal Commander not
only in front, but also in the Rear of the Battle, for the causes before
mentioned.

Notes.
THE strength of the Macedonian Phalange, which consisted principally in the
Appian. in Syriacis. 97. E.
protension, and charging of pikes, and knitting together of Targets, is here
set down. The whole Chapter seems to have been taken out of Polyb. lib. 17.
763. E.
Polybius, who handles the same argument, and almost with the same words, but
that Aelian, and he differ about the number of Cubits, which the Pikes take up
reaching over the front of the Phalange.

1 The Macedonian Phalange, has been thought to be vnresistible] The strength
of the Macedonian Phalange appears no way better, than by the conquests it
has made. King Philip was the inventer of it; and by that invention raised the
kingdom of Macedonia from the poorest, to the powerfullest, and greatest
kingdom of Europe; and (that I may use the words of Diod. Sicul. lib. 16. 510.
Diodorus Siculus,) finding the Crown, at his coming to it, in bondage to the
Illyrians made it afterward Lady of many great Nations, and Cities; and
purchased to himself, to be declared General of Greece. And first
overthrowing the Illyrians, P^onians, Thracians, and Scythians afterward let
upon the kingdom o^ Persia to break it, after he had enfranchised the (...)
Cities of Asia. And albeit death intercepted him, yet he left such forces to
his son Aleander, that he needed no other Allies to overthrow the
Souera^gnety of Persia. After his death (...)
Alexander ^ooke his langdome, and Army, and with it encountering, and v
inquishing Darius in two great Battles, run thorough Asia like a flash of
(...) ren^ing a pieces a^, that res^ted, or stood in his way, and laid the
foundation of that kingdom, which (albeit afterward divided) continued long in
his Successors. Neither was the experience of their invinciblenesse against the
barbarous people only, but as much against the Graecians, who ^ill Philips
time were esteemed the chief masters of Arms in Europe. This is clear by the
victories, the Macedonians obtained against the renowned Cities of Greece both
jointly and severally. (...).
Philip overthrew the Phoceans, albeit the Lacedaemonians, and Athenians joined
with them. The same (...).
Philip at Cheronaea defeated the power of the Thebans, and Athenians joined
together. (...).
Alexander took and sacked the City of Thebes, that about that time was
acc^unted the mighttest City of Greece. (...)
His Lieutenant Antipater foiled the Laced^nians (...) batt^ile, and ste^ their
King Agis. (...)
Antigonus Tutor of King Phi^p the son of Demetrius, broke an Army of the
Lacedaemonians and Peloponesi^ (...) (...), and chased out of Greece Cleomenes
the last brave King of Sparta. (...) they were not beaten in the field by any
Nation, but only by the Romans. And yet the judgment of (...)
Polybius, does in this also prove it self good. For where the Romans had
these victories against the Macedonians, he assigns this to be the cause,
that the Phalange at the time of the fight had not the proper place, nor means
to use it own power in the encounter; so long as the Phalange has ground
enough, and can meet the enemy with a right front, he holds it not possible
to be foiled, being divided, and in places uneven, he is of opinion, and
experience has taught* it may easily be put in a route. (...)
Plutarch compares it for strength (so long as it is one body, and
maintains the Synaspisme jointly) to an invincible beast; being dis^euered,
he says, it loses the force in the whole, and in every man particular, both
in regard of the manner of arming, and also because the violence o^ it consists
rather in knitting of all parts together, than in particular of any man's
valor. Three battles (to praet^rmit aiuers skirm^shes,) I find the Romans
(...) with, and th^em (...) the Macedonians; One against King Philip, the son
of Deme^us; an (...) against Antiochus; the third against Per^eus the so^e of
King P^lip. (...)
For I pa^ over those, wherein they were beaten by Py^hus, (...) wor^. (...)
Philip (...) (...) Phalange, and not using the whole together but fighting
against the Romans with the right winge only, yet had the better, and w^ too
^ard for that part of the Roman Army, that joined with him; but the other (...).
win^ coming into the field fit rather for a march, than a fight, and not
being able to order themselves Phala^ge-wise, were soon defeated, and the
Roman victorious, fell upon the r^re o^ the right win^ (where Philip was, and
had now gotten the victory) and so (...) the field Antiochus unskillful in
true ordering of a Phalange, truste^ (...)
(...) (...) (...) horse than his Phalange, and being to fight with L: Scipio,
where he (...) (...) given full scope, an^ ext^nded the front of the Phalange,
by making it 16 deep, (...) contrary-wise narrowed it* (...) out the depth
into 32: whereby he lost the advantage of matching the ^ront of the Romans, and
after his horse were beaten, gave facility to the enemy of (...) on it all
sides. (...)
Perseus joining ^attaile with Paulus Aemi^us* (...) long (...) the Phalange
continued in the right figure* slew many of the Romans, an^ forced them to
retire* but following on too eagerly, he came to uneven, and rough ground,
wherein the Phalange being disseuered, left spaces, and breaches for the Romans
to enter and defeat it. So long then, as the Macedonian Phalange had fit
ground, and the right property of embattailing, it stood fast against the
Romans the greatest soldiers that ever were, being in their hands, that k^ew
not how to use it (as a sword in the hands of a child) it yielded to time and
fortune. The cause of the strength of the Phalange is assigned to be 2 The
manner of embattailing]* Which consists principally in ordering of Target, and
pike; in closing of the Targets by Synaspisme, and in joint charging of the
pikes; which lying out thick from the front, besides the horror of the sight,
give almost an impossibility to enter the Phalange. I have alleged the
judgment of Plutarch. in Aemilio.
Aemilius concerning the sight presented by a Phalange, when the Pikes lie so
charged out of the front. Polyb. lib. 17. 764. A.
Polybius thinks nothing can resist the force thereof. Livy Decad. 5. lib.
573. C.
Livy, albeit many times more than partial to the Romans, yet in the
selfsame fight between Perseus and Aemilius gives his judgment thus of the
Phalange: The second Legion (says he) in^inuated it self into the middle
empty place, and so broke asunder the Phalange. Neither was there any more
evident cause of victory, then the fights in diverse places at once, which first
troubled the Phalange in turning many ways, and afterward plainly disioynted,
and scattered it; whose forces being united and rough with charged pikes are
intolerable. If by giving on in diverse places you constrain it to bring about
the pikes immovable through length and weight, it entangleth it self with
confused crossings. If at one time you charge it both flank, and rear, they
fall asunder like a ruinous building. As then they were compelled many ways to
answer the Romans, and so to break their battle into many parcells. And the
Romans upon the first opportunity of a breach straight ways conveyed in
their troops, who if they had met the enemy in front, had run upon the
pikes, as in the beginning it happened to the Pelignans, being too forward to
come to hand, and could not have resisted the Phalange fast shut, and serred up
for the encounter: thus Livy concerning the Phalange. Who albeit a Roman,
holds the same opinion that Polybius does. Livy decad. 4. lib. 1. 18.
And in another place telling of Philips encamping, ^e says, he was lodged in
a woody plot, which was unfit for the Phalange, especially of the Macedons,
which unless it cast the pikes, as it were, a muniment before the Targets,
(and that cannot be, but in open ground) is of no great use. So then if Pikes
may be charged out before the Targets, the Phalange is of great use. But, that
I may not seem, to rely upon bare opinion, let us hear by an example, or two,
the experience of the Pike, and Target of the Macedonian against the Roman
arms. Livy decad. 4. lib. 2. 30. C.
When T. Quintus Flaminius the Rom: Consul had driven King Philip, and his
army from the streights near Antigonia, seeing that the enemy kept himself
with his strength, and absteined from the field, he determined to try the
Cities of Thessaly; and having won some by force, some by fear, he came
before Rhage, and besieged it. He found the siege longer, and more difficult,
then any man would have thought. And the enemy made his resistance, that way,
the Consul would hardly have believed, he could. For he imagined that all his
labor should be in throwing down the walls. If once he found passage for the
Army to enter, there would after be nothing else, but flight and slaughter, as
is wont, in wonne-Cities. But after that part of the wall was thrown down
with the Ram, and the Army entered the City by the breach, it was the
beginning of a new and fresh labor. For the Macedonians, that were there in
Garrison, being many, and chosen, thinking it also a glory to them, if they
could defend the City, rather with arms and valor, than with walls, serring
themselves close together in a deep Phalange, when they perceived, that the
Romans began to enter the breach drove them out, the place being cumbersome,
and hard to make a retreat. The Consul much offended therewith, and thinking
that shame concerned not only the delay of winning one City, but also the
state of the whole war, (which for the most part depends upon moments of
small matters) purging the place which was heaped up with the fall of the
halfe-ruined wall, advanced a Tower which in many stories was stuffed with
multitudes of armed men, and sent besides Cohorts under their Ensigns to
break with maine force (if it were possible) the body (they call it the
Phalange) of the Macedonians. But the kind of weapons and fight was more
aduantagious for the enemy, than for the Romans; especially in that place,
which was narrow, and straightened with the small space of the overthrown wall.
When the Macedonians, serring themselves close, had charged pikes of a great
length before their front, and the Romans, after their darts thrown in vain
against the Iestudo compacted, as it were, of the thick knitting together of
the Targets, had drawn their swords, they could neither come up close, nor cut
a sunder the pikes. And in case they cut the heads of, or broke any, the steal
amongst the rest of the whole pikes filled up the room with their sharp
fragments. Join that that part of the wall, which was yet whole, secured the
enemies flanks on both sides; neither needed they much ground in retiring or
advancing to charge, which things are wont to cause the breach of array. There
also fell out a chance which increased their hopes, and spirits. For the Tower
being driven on upon a rampire, that was not well rammed underneath, but had
loose earth, one of the wheels sinking deeper into the ground than the rest,
made the Turret to nodd, and lie of one side, that both the enemy believed it
would fall, and they within it were put in a pitiful fear. When nothing
succeeded well, the Consul was evil appaide, that the Macedonian soldiers,
and kind of Arms, might seem matcheable to his, and seeing no great hope of
speedy winning the City, and that the place was unfit to winter in, raised his
siege. So here the Macedonian soldier is not only equalled, but also
preferred before the Roman, and that only by reason of his armor, the Pike
and Target. An other experience fell out in the battle betwixt Perseus, and
Aemilius, whereof I spoke in this Chapter. The story is this: Plutarch. in
(...).
The Romans coming to join battle with the Macedonians, and not able to come
up to them by reason of the length, and joint out-bearing of their pikes. There
was one Salius a Captain of Pelignans, who took the Ensign of his Company
from the Ensigne-bearer, and threw it into the Macedonian Phalange. The
Pelignans ran in heaps to the place (for it is not lawful, nor honest, for
the Italians to forsake their Ensigns) where the medley brought forth
wonderful effects. For the Pelignans fought with swords to put by the pikes,
and to press them down with their Targets. And seazing upon them to pull them
out of the hands of the Macedonians. The Macedonians contrary-wise,
maintaining their charge with both hands, and striking such, as approached
near, thorough the bodies, arms and all, neither Target nor Curace, being
able to sustain the violence of the blow, turned topsy-turuy the bodies of the
Pelignans, who not with reason, but with the rage of wild beasts* threw
themselves desperately upon wounds, and upon certain, and fore seen death. So
the foremost falling, the followers began to slack. And yet they sled not, but
retired to the mount called Olacrus. I will out of Appian join a third
experience in the battle of Antiochus Appian* in Syr^cis. 109. B.
against L. Scipio, which I likewise touched before in this Chapter. As soon,
as the Horse, and Chariots of Antiochus were put to flight by the Roman
horsemen, and by Eumenes, his Phalange of foot being destitute of horse, first
opened, and received the light-armed, (that had all this while fought in the
front) into the midst of it. Then after-ward again closed. And when Domitius
Scipio's Lieutenant, encompassed it round with horse and light-armed, which he
might easily do, by reason it was thrust up into a thick Plinthium; it was
driven to great distress; being neither able to charge the enemy, nor yet to
countermarch in so great depth, as it carried. It grieved them much, that their
long experience nothing auailed them to annoy the enemy, and that
notwithstanding they were subject to arrows, and darts at all hands. Yet,
bearing out a multitude of pikes on every side of their square, they called the
Romans to come to handy blows, and still made a countenance, as though they
meant to charge, keeping themselves for all that within their Ranks, as being
footmen, and heavy armed, and the rather, because they had to do, with an
enemy on horseback. Besides they were loath to break the thicknes of their
battle, which form they could not now alter. The Romans also, durst not
approach them, and come to sword, fearing their experience in war, and
closeness of array, and desperation. But running about here, and there, plied
them with arrows, and darts, whereof none was thrown in vain, falling
amongst a troop so closely put up together, that they could neither avoid,
and decline any thing thrown, nor give way, albeit they saw it coming. At
last being weary, and irresolute what to do, they retired easily, with a
threatening countenance notwithstanding, and in good order, and not delivering
the Romans of fear, who durst not yet come near, but sought to annoy them
aloof; till the Elephants placed in the Macedonian Phalange, being affrighted,
and not to be ruled by their Governors, troubled all, and gave occasion of
flight: hitherto Appian. Out of these three examples, the truth of that, which
Aelian says, is to be seen, that is, that the Macedonian Phalange can not be
forced, or resisted by an enemy, (taking with all Polybius his caution) if it
be in the right posture, and figure, and have such ground, as is fit. The
Romans the best soldiers of all antiquity were repulsed by it at a siege,
forced to retire in a battle, durst not come near it, after they had gained
the field of the rest of the Army. And the Consul Aemilius, a man that had
seen much service, and fought many a battle, and was one of the best
Generals of that time, confessed, he never saw so fearful a sight, as when
he beheld the Phalange advancing into the field, the bodies joined, the Targets
serred, and locked together, darting out fire like lightning, the front rough
with couched, and charged pikes, and armed with iron, and threatening present
death to him, that durst approach. 3 Occupying two Cubits of ground] We may not
take it, as though the soldier betwixt file, and file had two Cubits, or three
foot of ground. For we learned before that in locking up the Phalange, the
distance between man, and man in front was but a Cubit. But it is to be
understood between rank and rank. For Polybius says, that the soldier
ought to have room for the use of his weapon, which cannot be, without
granting him three foot behind, the pike being sometimes to be pushed
forward, sometimes to be drawn back, sometimes otherwise handled, as
occasion of fight shall require.

The length of the Pike is 16 Cubits] a Sixteen Cubits, which is twenty See
Leo cap. 5.. 3. and cap. 6. ^. 3^.
four foot, is a great length for a Pike, and it verifieth the words of Livy,
that the Macedonian Pike is vnwealdy, by reason of the length, and weight; yet
do we read of pikes of that length. The Po^yen. lib 2 (...) (...) (...) 2.
Ae^essans had such. The (...) (...) dc (...) (...) (...) lib. 4 (...). ^.
Chalybes pikes were about 15 cubits long. (...). l. 17 704. A.
But 16 was the length at the first, the Maccdonians brought it to 14, which
they took to be a sufficient length against the enemy, and easier for the
Pike-man to bear and handle.

4 The space in charging betwixt the hands taking up two cubi^s] Herein is a
difference between Aelian, and Polybius. Aelian would have no more, then 2
cubits lost in charging; Polyb. 17. 764. A.
Polybius says 4. are lost, and with Polybius agrees Leo. But the cause of
the difference ariset^ out of the form of the pike, and of the manner of
holding it f L^o ^ap 6. ^ 39.
in the charge. If it be held at the butt end with the right hand, and
supported toward the armed end with the left, as the manner in charging is, it
cannot loose above two cubits, and Ae^an is in the right. But if, in holding
it, you set the right hand 2 cubits from the butt and, then must 4 cubits of
necessity be lost. Whereof 2 rest behind the right hand, the other two are
taken up by the space betwixt both hands. Our manner of charging is at this
day* to take the butt end in the right hand, and in so doing we loose but two
cubits. But it seems our pikes are not made in that form, they were in
Polybius time. In Polybius age they had wei^hts at the but: end to make the
sharp end the lighter, as the heavy pummell lightereth the sword in handling.
Pol^b l. 17. (...) A.
This weight was called (...). Pollu^ (...) (...) l. 4 (...) (...). ^.
secoma, as it were a counter-weight to the heaviness, and length of the pike.
Neither do I read any thing elsewhere then in Polybius, concerning the
counter-weight of a pike. To the handle of an Oar* I find in (...) (...)
di^noso ^. lib 5. ^04. A.
Atheneus, that lead was added, to make the part standing out from the ship
more light. But yet Polybius, and Aelians opinions may well agree, and in pikes
that have counterweights at their ends (the hold for charging being taken two
cubits from the butt end) there may be lost four cubits, where the other sort
being held at the butt end it self, loose but 2 cubits. 5 The pikes of the
other behind, cannot reach to the first ranke] How shall they bear their
pikes then? Polyb. l. 17. 764. D
Polybius shows, what the manner was. Those ranks, says he, that stand
behind the fifth, can help nothing to the fight in front. And therefore they
charge not their pikes low, but bear them toward their forestanders
shoulders, the points somewhat erected to secure the battle from above,
intercepting by their thick lying the missiue weapons, which flying over the
front, would otherwise fall upon their heads, that are placed toward the rear.
Polybius says the manner was, (neither to charge, nor order their pikes, but)
to bear them forwards stoping toward the shoulders of their companions
before. Yet by bearin them so, what security they could ^ue from the missiue
weapons, that came aloft, I cannot yet conceive. An arrow, dart, or stone,
unless it hit just on the midst of the pikes, would do as much, and
sometimes more, harm by glancing, then if it had not touched them at all.

Some would have the hinder pikes longer] The opinion of them, whom Aelian here
speak^th of, has little reason to ground upon. For either the pike of them
that come in the five rancks behind, especially the two last, must exceed in
length, or else the fileleader^ pikes in shortness, both which are ^like
vnprofit^ble. If they be too long, they cannot be weilded* if these too short,
the enemy shall reach the file-leaders, and not the file-leaders the enemy.
The measure of the longest pike was 16 cubits, which yet for aptness and use
was by the Macedonians reduced to 14. Say then the sixteenth rank carries
pikes of 16 cubits; two of the cubits according to Aelian, are taken away in
handling, other ten by reason of the distance of the five former ranks. Four
cubits alone remain, and reach over the front. If the file Leader in the front
shorten his pike to four cubits to make an even extention, he shall not come
near the enemy by ten cubits, who in pushing will reach home to him. For what
length soever, is taken from the file-leader in front the same is given to the
enemy, that pusheth with him. And he shall be able to wound the file-leader,
and not the file-leader him, especially the pikes differing in so great a
proportion.

6 The superordinarie Lieutenant of every Syntagma] I have before noted the
duty of a Lieutenant of the Syntagma, and it is here well expressed by Aelian.
He, that desires to see more touching the same, let him resort to Xenophons
Cyropaedia: lib. 3. 28. and lib. 7. 178. B. and to Leo, cap. 14. 79.
The place of the light-armed, and the number of every file. CHAP. XV.
THus much of ordering and marshalling the armed-foote. I will add a word, or
two, of the light-armed, or naked. 1 The General is to place the light-armed
so, that they be ready for all attempts of the enemy, sometime in front,
sometime in flank, sometime in the Rear, according to occasion or necessity.
For our purpose let them be thus ordered: We will frame also of them 1024 files
as many, as the Phalange of the armed contained; So that the first file of the
light-armed be placed directly behind the first file of the armed, and the
second file behind the second, and so the rest. 2 Yet shall they not be
sixteen to the file, but half so many, namely eight; so that in 1024 files
there shall be eight thousand, one hundred, ninety two men.

Notes.
1 HItherto all things concerning the arming, filing, embatteling, number,
command, distance and precedence of the armed are declared; and likewise, of
the arming of the light and somewhat of their place. Now follows the filing,
ranking, and place more exactly, and their manner of embattailing, with their
sever all bodies, and commands.

1 The General is to place] I have spoken somewhat before of the placing of
the light. I will now only add a passage of Leo tending thereunto. Leo cap.
14. 69.
Leo says thus, you shall range the Archers behind the rear of every file
according to the number of the file, ( that is four light for twenty six
armed, proportioning an Archer for every four armed. Or if it be needful, you
shall order them within the files, an armed, and an Archer. Sometimes without
the wings of the battle; that is within the Horse. Oftentimes without the
Horse a little distance, with a few Targetiers, to defend the uttermost flanks
of the Horse. And this is to be done, when you abound in multitude of
light-armed. But those, that use small darts, and iauelins, and such like are
to be placed, either in the rear of the armed, or in the wings of the
battle, and not in the midst. The slingers are always, to be set in the
wings. Thus Leo places his light armed. But Aelian here (as before in the
seventh Chapter) designeth their place in the rear, but so, that he leaves
it to the Generals choice, and to the occasion of service to place them, as
most befitteth. Being set behind, as Aelians order is, they must answer the
armed in number of files, and be directed by the files of the armed for their
standing; that is every file of the light-armed is to order it self in a right
line after a file of the armed in such manner, as the armed are before
embattailed.

Aelian in the beginning divided the foot into three parts, Armed,
Targetieres, and light-armed. To the armed he has given place, and makes the
Phalange to consist of them, the light-armed he rangeth in the rear of the
armed, what shall become of Tagetiers? for he speaks not a word of placing
them. By that I read in Arrian I would think, they were placed amongst the
light-armed, and next to the armed. First because Aelian says, many number
them amongst the light. Then I see the Hypaspists placed betwixt the Horse, and
the armed in Alexanders fields, at Granicus, at Issos, and at Gaugamela; Lastly
Leo in the passage before recited, when he placed the light-armed without the
Horse, he joins Targetiers with them, for their safeguard. b Cyrus likewise
places them next the armed in the rear; and after them the Archers.

2 Yet shall they not be 16.] The file of the light-armed is less in number,
then the file of the armed. For if they should be 16 in file, the number being
but half to the armed, they should not be able to make above 512 files, and
breeding there by a disproportion both in placing, and corespondence one to an
other, not equal the length of the Phalange. Besides standing eight in file,
and in the rear, their flying weapons will be sent with more force against,
their enemy; In as much as the hindermost of them are nearer the enemy by
twenty four foot, which the last eight in a file of 16 deep take up. And
missiue weapons, the less their compass is, when they are sent against a
mark, with more violence they pierce. As they hurt not greatly, if the
distance be too far, from whence they come.
The names of the bodies of the light-armed. CHAP. XVI.
THeir names and degrees are these. Four files of light-armed are called 1 a
Systasis of 32. men. Two Systasies a 2 Pentecontarchy of 64 men. Two
Pentecontarchies 3 a Century of 128 men. In every Century ought to be 5
Superordinarie men: an Ensign, a Reare-commander, a Trumpetter, a Serieant,
and a Crier. Two Centuries contain 256 men, and are called 4 a Psylagy. Two
Psylagies a Xenagy of 512 men. Two Xenagies a Systremma of 1024 men. Two
Epixenagies a Stiphos of 4096 men. Two Stiphos an Epitagma of 1024 files, 8192
men. These ought also to have 8 Superordinarie men, whereof four should be
Epixenagies, the other four Systremmatarchs.

Notes.
AS the armed were distinguished, and severed* into diverse bodies in the
Phalange, so are the light-armed, in whom there ought to be no less order,
then in the armed. A multitude undigested brings with it disorder, and
confusion. Neither can any service be expected from them, who by apt divisions
are not cast into bodies fit for service. We have before spoken of the names of
the bodies of the armed, and noted, that they were not imposed with such
propriety* that they could be applied to no other thing. At the first war was
made, and men fought (as wild beasts graple together) led with fury, and rage,
and not with skill: and he prevailed that was the strongest. Experience taught
there were advantages in Time, in Place, in Order, in instruments of fight, in
placing of men, and CAP 16
A Systasis

A Pentecontarchy

The light Armed

The Front

in other circumstances. Hence sprung the Art of War, the diverse forms of
weapons, and the figures of Battles. For the speedy framing whereof, the
smaller bodies were invented, of which they confist. In building of a house,
you first bring timber together, and other matter, and then of it frame walls,
doors, windows, rafters, beams, and the roof, which must be all conjoined
together, before the fashion of the house will appear: So in an Army the
provision of men was first requisite, which being found, and brought together
by Leavies, were armed, and after ordered into several bodies; and these being
compacted together, set out the frame and fashion of the Phalange. And as all
things newly invented, stand in need of names to a^scerne them from other
things; So names were given unto the bodies not proper, and fit; but such as
Military wits thought convenient enough to signify the things they meant. I
have noted it before in the names of the Tetrarchy, Taxis, Syntagma, and other,
and it will appear again in this Chapter.

But here I may not praetermit the curiosity of the Graecians in their
appellations, and their plenty of speech, apt to give diversity to things,
that are diverse. For where there are bo^es, amongst armed, and light-armed,
which consist of the same number, and therefore, as it seems, might well
enough have been comprehended under one name, they notwithstanding to avoid
confusion, and for perspicuities sake have thought good to call them by sundry
names. Thirty two armed men are called a Dilochi; 32 light armed are a
Systasis; 64 armed are a Tetrarchie; 64 light armed a Pentecontarchie; 128
armed a Taxis; 128 light, a Hecatontarchie. Our tongue will not afford such
variety. For albeit in common speech we distinguish the kind of soldier; yet
confound we the name of the body, and of the command. A certain number of
Pikes under a Captain we call a company of Pikes; So many shot under a
Captain we likewise call a company of shot. The Captains, one a Captain of
Pikes, and the other a Captain of shot. A company of Curacers of horse, we
call a troop of Curacers; as many Argoleters, a troop of Argoleters. The
Commanders of either of them we term Captains, the one of Curacers, the other
of Argoleteres. But let us come to particular explication.

1 Asystasis] It comes of Synistemi to stand together: and asystasis is a
standing together; which word albeit it may be extended to any kind of people
assembled, and standing together; yet it is here appropriated to soldiers; and
more particularly to 4. files of light armed, consisting of 32 men, 8 men going
to the file. 2 A Pentecontarchie] The command of 50 men. And so it was used of
old. But the Macedonian, gave 64 men to this command, and yet retained the
name, because it was familiar, and well known. 3 A Century] Aelian calls it
a Hecatontarchie, the command of a 100 men. The name was usual before the
Macedonians time, and it contained 100 men. But the Macedonians gave it 128
men. This was answerable to the Syntagma amongst the armed, and had the like
officers. Yet whether it had a Captain, or no, may be some doubt; the rather
because Aelian in this Chap: names no Commanders, but Systrematarchs, and
Epixenagies; and those he would have super-ordinary. For my part, I think they
had Centurions also. For as every body of the armed had a head, so I would
think it requisite also amongst the light-armed, especially seeing there was a
Bringer-vp, and other officers belonging to a Company; which unless they had a
Commander, would become unprofitable. For if there were no Captain, to whom
should the Crier, or Trumpet, or Sergeant of the Centurie resort for direction?
Add, that the light were often drawn to the wings, to the front, or other
places of service, which could not be done without Leaders. For to put a
Systrematarch, or an Epixenagie to lead a Century, were to leave the rest of
the Centuries under them without a Commander. Besides, the Macedonians were
very particular in their commands, and left no body without a heads which is
the cause of the multitude of Commanders in the Phalange. But they are not here
mentioned. No more are the (...) ^ap 20.
Commanders of the horse in the division of the bodies of the horse, and yet I
think no man will doubt, but the horsem^n had Commanders. (...), I find in
the Grecian history, Captains of the light-armed often named. Xenoph. de
exp^d (...). lib. 1. 270. D
(...) is said to be Commander of the Targetires, in a fight the Graecians had
against the Persians. Xenoph de exped. lib. 4. 322 D
Stratocles commanded the Cretan Archers in the return of the Graecians out of
Persia. Arrian. lib. ^. 9. C.
Eurybates Captain of the Cretan Archers in Alexanders army was slain by the
Thebans at the ^ege of Thebes. Arrian. lib. 2. 55.
When Antioch^s the Captain of the Archers was dead, Omb^io was chosen in his
place. Mention is made also in Arrian. lib. 1. 23 B.
Arrian of Clearchus the Captain of the Archers. And when Aelian calls the 4
Systremmatarchs, and the 4 Epixenages superordinary (Ectactous) he might have
said as much of all the other Commanders. And he says expressly of the offecers
of the Centurie, that they were superordinary (Ectactoi). 4 A Psylagi] The word
is a body of light-armed. Which word, if it were taken, as it naturally
signifies, is common to, and comprehends all the bodies of the lightarmed,
whereof Aelian speaks in this Chapter. But here it is restrained to a body of
light-armed, which compriseth 256 men, and 32 files, and so it is to be taken.
A Xenagie] That is, a command of strangers. Aelian before says, that a
Syntagma was by some called a Xenagie. I have given my opinion there of the
original of the word, which I need not to repeat here; This only I will
note, that of all the bodies of the light-armed, no one has a common name with
the body of the armed, but only the Xenagie. And Aelian gives also that body
of the armed an other name, calling it a Syntagma. The Xenagie has in it 512
men, and 64 files. A Systremma] Polyb. lib. 1. 47. B.
It signifies a conglobation, or trouping together. Proper names are wanting
for these bodies, and therefore such taken, as might at any hand signify the
thing meant. In continuance of time use has gained a passage, and made them to
be accepted as proper enough. The Systremma contains 1024 men, and 128 files.
There is nothing to be found in Aelian of the Chiliarchie of the light-armed;
Yet does Arri^n. lib. 9^. C.
Arrian mention 2 Chiliarchies of Archers in the Army of Alexander. An
Epixenagie] A command above a Xenagie; As afterward in the command of the
horse, there is an Ephipparchie above a Hipparchie. The word is improper and
hard enough, but when it is received by use, what should we seek for more? It
contains 2048 men, and 256 files. A Stiphos] It is derived from steibo, to
thicken, and in penury of an other name, this body of the light-armed is called
Stiphos, because they are thickened, and thronged together. There is in it 4096
men, and 256 files. An Epitagma] Is the last body amongst the light-armed. The
signification of Epitasso is to place behind. From thence comes Epitaxis,
placing the light-armed in the Rear, which word is after used by Aelian.
Epitagma is derived from the same (...) cap. 3^.
fountain; and it is called Epitagma, not of placing behind, (for sometimes
they were placed before, sometimes in the flank) but it was the best name they
could give to the whole light-armed. And yet it may be, that because all the
light-armed in ancient time were placed behind, the whole mass was called
Epitagma, as being placed after the armed in the re^re. The Epitagma has in it
1892 men, and 1024 files, for so many lightarmed attend the Phalange. Eight
superordinarie men] Why these eight men should be superordinarie more than the
rest of the Commanders, I conceive not yet. If Aelians meaning be, that these
alone shall command the light-armed, history and practice of ancient times
convince the contrary. Besides where he names four Epixenagies, it agrees
with the number, that are in the Epitagma of light. But where he adds four
Sistremmatarchs more to make up the number of the eight Superordinarie, it is
hard to know, which four he means, considering there are eight Sistremmas
in the Epitagma.
Now because the fi^es of the light-armed are in embattailing to be marshalled
to the files of the (...), I thought good to set down, how the bodies of both
agree, by comparing them together i^ files not in number of men. For in number
of men they cannot well agree, because the file of (...) armed has more, then
the file of the light-armed. And the number of the armed in gross is 16384, of
the light-armed but 8192. And I will first begin with the Systasis, because it
is the least body of the light.

The bodies of the armed, The bodies of the light-armed. A Tetrarchie A
Systasis, 4 files. A Taxis A Pentecontarchie, 8 files. A Syntagma A
Hecatontarchie, 16 files. A Pentecosiarchie A Psilagie, 32 files. A Chiliarchie
A Xenagie, 64 files. A Merarchie Asystremma, 128 files. A Phalangarchie An
Epixenagie 256 files. A Diphalangarchie A Stiphos 512 files. A
Tetraphalangarchie An Epitagma 1024 files.

The use of light-armed foot. CHAP. XVII.
DArters, Archers, and all other, that use flying weapons, are good 1 to begin
the fight 2 to prouok the enemy, to break and shatter armor, 3 to wound,
annoy, and beat down a far of; 4 to disaray the enemy, 5 to repulse their
horse, 6 to beat in their light-armed, 7 to discover suspected places, and to
lay Ambushes. Lastly these first undertaking the Skirmish, and continuing it
with the rest, and seconding them, and serving 8 for speedy, and
farre-of-attempts, work many, and great effects in fight.

Notes.
THe arming, place, filing, bodies, and command of the light-armed are hitherto
handled: Now follows the use, and service they perform in the field. And
first we are to think of the body of an army, as of the body of a man, that
is compact of several parts: Of which some parts are of more use then other,
some being able to perform their function without (...) help of the other,
some except the other help, can do nothing to purpose of themselves. The parts
of an army are like. The armed are the strength of the field, and are the
refuge for the rest in extremity. The light joined with the armed, work great
effects (those which Aelian speaks of in this Chapter and many more) without
them they cannot so much as maintain a place in the field. Xenoph. Cyro^. lib.
7. 188. C.
And as Xenophon says, Let them be never so many in ^umber, yet dare they not
stand or abide a few armed. In which respect, a place fit has always been
sought for their service, to secure them from the access of the Horse, or of
the enemies armed. Which place was either behind the Phalange ( as Aelian here
would have it) or else in the wings betwixt the Horse, and the armed, or if
they skirmished loose before the front, and chanced to be pressed with the
enemy, they retired into the interualls, and conveyed themselves behind the
Phalange in safety. Leo cap. 14. 105.
Leo says, if there be any place of strength, it will much help the
light-armed. For after their flying weapons spent, re^iring thither, they will
be in more security, as a steep rockie place, or the bancke of a river, or a
high hill, or such other. Our stories report, that at the battle of Agincourt
in France 200 English Archers were bestowed in a meddow fenced with a deep
ditch; from whence they so gauled the French horse and foot, that they were a
great help to the victory. The like happened before at Poitiers, where that
brave Prince of Wales eldest son of Edward the third, having to fight with
the whole power of France under the leading of their King, gave safeguard to his
Archers, with hedges, and ditches, and other strengths. So that the
French-horse having no access to disorder them, were overwhelmed with the
tempests, and storms of their arrows, and such a victory obtained by our
nation, as might ma^ch the most renowned of all antiquity. To say nothing of
the invention which Henry the fifth used against the horse of France for
securing his Archers. The story says, he devised stakes of two yards long,
and armed both ends with pikes of iron, the one to stick into the ground, and
the other to gall, and enter the horses bellies, in case they came to charge
our Archers home. By means whereof he carried the famous victory of Agincourt.
This for the assurance of the light armed, when they come to fight, without
which assurance, their service would be weak, and scarce worth the having.
Their service then according to Aelian has many particulars. And they are good
to

Provoke the enemie] If the enemy be in a wood, a fen^e, a hill, a fort, a
town, or other place of strength, that admits no access, the manner has
been to send out the light army to show themselves, and with a Brauado to
towle him out of his advantage, and bring him into the field, where he may more
easily be dealt withal. Examples are plentiful, but I will content my self
with a Macedonian example. Arrian lib.
Alexander leading his army against the Triballs, that had hid themselves in a
wood, commanded his Archers, and Slingers to run out, and to shoot, and
sling amongst the Barbarians to see, if he could towle them into the plain.
The Archers, and Slingers spared not to let fly, and the Triballs being
wounded with arrows, threw themselves out of the wood with all speed, to fall
upon the unarmed Archers. Alexander presently commanded Philotas with the Horse
of upper Macedonia to charge the right wing; on which part they cast out
themselves furthest. And Heraclides, and Sopolis with the horse of Botti^a, and
Amphipolis the left, himself stretching out in length the Phalange of foot,
and setting the rest of horse before the Phalange, led against the midst of the
enemy. As long as it was but a skirmish, the Triballs had not the worst. But
after the Phalange close serred came up roundly to them, and the Horsemen
charged them no longer with darts, but pressed, and ouerbore them with their
horse, they fled thorough the wood to the river. To begin the fight] Leo cap.
14. ^04
Leo agrees. If, says he, we have light-armed enough, let them, before the
army join, send their darts, and arrows at the enemy, and (...). ^ecad. 5.
l^b. 2 39. B.
after the fight of the armed is begun plie the flank with their missiue
weapons, that at ouce both their flanks may be assaulted. It has been and is
now the ordinary course to begin the fight with the light-armed. And because
we shall read of no bat^aile almost wherein it was not so, I will forbear
examples. To wound a farreof] The light serve to great purpose, if the General
desire not to come near to fight, but seek to annoy his enemy a far of
without danger of his own folks (...). (...). 4. l^b. 8. ^61. B.
Liuy tells of Cn. Manlius Volso, that being to make war against the Gallo
Graecians, that fled into the mountains, and awaited the Romans there, and
sought to defend themselves, by advantage of the place, he prepared great
plenty of darts, arrows, bullets, and small stones for Slinges: and leaving
his legionari^ soul^iers behind, led his light armed, against the enemy, that
possessed certain straights, by which his army must pass. After some fight
the Gallo-Graecians being not sufficiently armed, to d^fend their bodies from
the missiue weapons, the light-armed of the Romans forced the passag^. And
following them even to the Camp, where their Companions came to their aid
they first drove them into their Camp, and after the Legionarie Soldiers
coming up, they won it. I have before rehearsed the history of Iphicrates,
who with his Targetires (that came seldom to hand blows, but plied the enemy
with dar^s a far of) overthrew and slew a whole Moira of the Lacedaemonians.
The Acarnans, likewise with this kind of fight, much encumbered Agesilaus, that
made an excursion into their Country. The story is this, a Agesilaus having
taken a great prey, in the territory of the Acarnans, e Xenoph hist. Graec. lib
4. 513. D.
rested that day, where he had taken it, being busy in selling of it. In the
mean time many Acarnan Targetieres assembled themselves together, where
Agesilaus was encamped upon the side of a mountain, and with darting and
slinging, they forced his Camp to descend to the plain, themselves in the
mean time being free from hurt. The next day Agesilaus led away his army. The
passage out of the place was straight, by reason of the mountains lying about
in a circle, which the Acarnans possessing, plied the Lacedaemonians with darts,
and stones, from the higher ground, and sometimes descending to the skirts of
the hills, they pressed the army so, that it could not move forward. And when
the armed, foot, or horse, fell out upon them, they profited little: For the
Acarnans retired immediately, to their strength. Agesilaus perceiving it would
be hard for his army to wind out of those straights, so long as the enemy so
hung upon them, resolved to charge those on his left hand. For the ascent on
that side was more easy, both for his horse, and armed foot. Commanding
therefore, his men to charge, the armed (of 29 years of age) first fell on,
and the horse after them upon the spur. Himself followed with the rest. The
Acarnans therefore, that were descended, and busy a darting, were quickly put
to flight, and many slain in seeking to remount the hills. But their armed
foot, and most of their Targetiers, stood imbattailed on the top, and from
thence both threw other missiues, and lanced Iauelines, wherewith they wounded
horsemen, and killed some horse. But being ready to be charged by the
Lacedemonian armed, they fled, loosing some 300 in the flight. These
light-armed then, as long as they can keep aloof from the enemy, annoy them
sore by wounding (as Aelian says) a far of; as soon as the armed come up,
they are glad to quite their place, and save themselves by flight. 4 To
disarray] So long as a battle remains in order, no victory is gotten
against it. Breaking of array, and disbanding, are companions of flight, and of
forsaking the field. The armed, that are to endure the efforts of the light
armed, must either keep still their order, and suffer themselves, to be
knocked down, and slain, as they stand, or else provide for themselves, by
flight, or by yielding. For the light-armed effect with their missiue weapons
the one, or the other. An Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7. 178.
example may be seen in the Egyptians in Craesus his battle, who after the
defeat of the rest of the army, maintained yet the fight, and yielded not to
Cyrus, though he had now the victory. Cyrus at the first charged their backs
with his horse, and being not able to break them, was feign to command his
Archers, and darters, to shoot and cast their darts at them: wh^rby the
Egyptians after many wounds, and loss of their people, were finally
constrained to yield. A like example is before alleged Appian. in (...) 109. ^.
of Domitius the Lieutenant of L. Scipio, who with missiue weapons alone forced
the Macedonian Phalange to scatter, and take themselves to flight. 5 To repulse
their Horse] The light armed alone, without a sure retreat to the armed, or
else some place of strength, can d^e little in repulsing of horse. I have
showed before in the ^ exploite of Crassus into Persia, how the lightarmed were
beaten in by (...).
the Persian horse, and by the show of wounds, they received, and with their
fear, discouraged the armed. The like happened in Plut in Ant.
Antonies retreat out of Persia, the lightarmed being feign to shroude
themselves from the Persian horse within the Phalange of the armed. Be they
never so many, without some such assurance the horse will soon ouerrunue them;
having this assurance their service much afflicts horsemen both in wounding
them, and in killing their horse. Therefore L^u. decad. 4. lib. 1. 26. A. B.
of ancient time it was usual to mingle horse, and light armed together. For
the enemies horse so charged, cannot be able to resist both. A notable example
is in (...) de (...) (...).
Hirtius: Caesar, says he, having a journey in hand, and but a small number
of Horse, and legionary Soldiers, was in his way set upon by the enemy
abounding in store of Horse, and of light armed Numidians amongst them. And
when the Soldiers of Caesar fell out to charge, the enemies horse galloped
away, and the foot stood fast, till the Horse with a full carreare returned to
the rescue. This kind of fight troubled Caesar much, and would have troubled
him more, had he not recovered hills, that were not far of, and by that
means shaken of the molesting enemy. And for repulsing horse there is no
better means for the armed foot, then with the light armed to line that part
of the battle, where the horse shall be about to give on. 6 To beat in the
light armed] The light armed being nimble and quick, and seeking always
advantages by changing of ground, can never be forced by the armed foot, (who
are charged with heavy furniture, and by reason thereof can make no speed) to
seek succor in the battle of their armed. Either they must be beaten in by
the horse, or by the contrary light armed, as Aelian has here. The Horse are
commonly to encounter with Horse, and the light-armed with light-armed, amongst
whom the greater number prevails, their skill, and arms being alike. For the
fight being a far of, many will sooner wound, or kill a few, then a few many,
says Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 2. 39. E.
Xenophon: If the fight be at hand the better armed, or better minded will
drive the other out of the field. The L^u de^ad 4. lib. 1. 16. B.
Roman Horse, and the light-armed, were too hard for the Macedonians, and
chased them to their Camp. And that happened by reason their armor was fitter
to close, and to fight at hand. So our Archers at the battle of Cressy
compelled the Genua crossebowes to forsake the field, the english bow being
better in use, then the Genua crossebowe. When they have made the contrary
light armed to quit their place, they are at liberty themselves to serve, where
most advantage may be had of their service. 7 To discover suspected places, and
lay ambushes] Suspected places are such for the most part, as ambushes are laid
in. Ambushes are of two kinds, being laid either to endamage the enemies
battle in the field, or to hinder, and disapoint his march. The places, such
as are removed from sight, and had need of special discovery. As woods,
mountains, forests, rocks, banckes of rivers, caves, hills hollow, and deep
ways, and the like, The most part of which are rough, and intricate, and
scarce passable for the heavy armed, and horse. But the light armed* that are
not encumbered with weight of arms, and able quickly to advance, or retire, are
fittest to lie close in such places, or to search if the enemy be lodg^d
there. For the first kind of Ambushes we read, that both heavy armed, and
horse have been^ employed. The wars of Anniball in Italy afford plenty of
examples herein. For the other, which is to b^set or discover ways, there are
none so fit, as the light armed, whose quicknes, and expedition, gives then
advantage to assault their enemy with their missiue weapons, though the ground
be never so unequal, and means to view any place suspected without almost any
danger of their own. (...) Cap 18 The Square
.9.in Front

.3. in Flank

8. in Front

.4. in Flank

.10. in Front

.5. in Flank



8 For speedy and far attempts] A heavy armed man is not fit for far or
sudden attempts; he is armed for a firm and steadfast fight, and not for
concursations. Alexander, whenever he was to use expedition, took with him
the horse and light-armed, leaving the armed to come after. Arrian. lib. 1. 7.
D.
So did he, when he oppressed Clytus, and Glaucias in their camp* Arrian. lib.
2. 31. E.
so when he possessed himself of the streights of Cilicia; Arrian. lib. 2. 31.
F.
so in preventing of the burning of Tarsus; Arrian l. 3. 64 E.
so in seeking to take the straights of the Vxians, Arrian. lib. 3. 65. D.
and the gates of Persia Arrian. lib. 4. 99.
and the rock of Aorne. The same has been the manner of other Generals, as
I have noted in other places. For when Celerity is requisite, who so fit to be
employed, as they who have nothing to hinder their speed? The Targetiere had
but a light target, and a sp^are; the lightarmed but their arms. And what are
they? bow, and arrows, darts, and slings, which have no weight in them.
Polyen. lib. 3. in Iphicrate 2.
Which was the reason also, that in victory they were employed in giving cha^e
to the enemy, that had lost the field. The armed used to follow in good order
of bat^ell, the slaughter, and execution was delivered to the light armed, and
horse. Wherein notwithstanding the counsel of h Xenoph. de exped. Cyr. lib. 1.
265. B. lib. 7. 416. A. B.
Iphicrates was held good; take heed ( said he, to his light-armed) of
ambushes, and spare not to press hard upon the rear of those, that fly, till
you come to rivers, or straights, or ditches. For it is dangerous in such
places to hinder the enemies flights, least fear turn into desperation.
The fashion of Horse-battailes: and first of the Rhombe; the Wedge, and the
Square. CHAP. XVIII.
THose, that have written before me, have diuersely framed Horse-battailes,
some of just squares, some longer in flank, then in front, some like a Rhombe,
some like a Wedge, but none of them have (if I may speak freely) expressed
fully their own conceits. Therefore to make all things clear, and better to
be understood, I will set down the several figures of each several kind.

1 It seems the Thessalians whose power was great in Horse, were the first,
that used the kind of battle 2 fashioned in form of a Rhombe (the invention
whereof is attributed to Jason) as fittest for all encounters; The Horsemen
thus ordered being ready to turn their faces every way with speed, and not
easy to be surprised in flank, or in the Rear. Because the best men stand
in the flank, and the Commanders in the Angles, as namely the Captain of the
troop in the front, and in the right, and left Angles those, that are called
Flanke-commanders, and the Leiutenant in the Reare-angle.

3 The Scythians, and Thracians have used Wedges, and likewise the Macedonians
by the ordinance of King Philip. For this kind of battle was held of mor
exact use, then the square, because the Commanders are placed in a circle; and
consisting of a narrow front, it makes ready passage thorough any distance,
and an easier wheeling and returning to the first posture, as having no such
troublesome windings about, as has the Square.

4 The Persians, and Sicilians, and most Graecians made choice of Squares,
being of opinion they were more easy to frame, and fitter for ioint-mouing of
the Horse, and more effectual in use. For they are sooner in order being
digested into files, and ranks, and in this order alone all the Commanders
fall upon, and charge the enemy with one maine force. Those are best Squares,
that double the number of the length to the number of the depth. As when there
are eight in length, and four in depth, or ten in length, and five in depth.
These in number are of unequal sides, but in figure four Square. For the
length of a Horse from head to tail compared with his breadth requires more
men in rank, then in file [to make up the Square] Some allow thrice as many in
length, as in depth, and think by that means a perfect square may be formed:
because for the most part, the length of a Horse seems thrice as much, as the
breadth betwixt his shoulders. Therefore they give nine in front, and three in
flank. For a multitude of Horsemen yield not the same advantage behind, that
foot do, when in the depth of the Battle they jointly thrust on; in as much
as the Horse help nothing to the setlednesse of fast resistance, being neither
able to thrust those forwards, that are before, nor yet to link, and knitte
with them, and so to make one weight, as it were, of the whole body; and in
case they press upon the foremost, by disordering, and distempering their own
Horse, they annoy themselves more, then the enemy. Therefore it always falls
out, that when there are as many Horse in length, as in depth, a Square of
number is made, but the sides of the figure are unequal, the depth exceeding
the length in proportion: but when the figure of the Troop is Square, the
number of the sides and front, is unequal.

Notes.
IN the second Chapter of this book, the army was divided into two kinds,
footmen, and Riders. Footmen again into three, armed, Targetieres, and light
armed. Of these three is hither to treated. Riders follow, who either used
Horses, or Elephants. Horses either alone, or else in Chariots. Of these Aelian
treats severally hereafter. For the arming, and place of Horse in the field,
he has sufficiently spoken already. The following discourse is: First, of the
manner of embattailing horse (wherein he sets down the diversity of usage
in ancient time) Then of Chariots, and lastly of Elephants. P^n natural.
histor. lib. 7. cap 56.
That a horse is a kind of beast, that loves man, and is most faithful unto
him Pliny testifies. The use of him is for carriage, and for service in the
field. And in the service of the field an army without horse, is in a manner
no army. Iphicrates (as I have said before) comparing an army to a man's body
resembles the horse to feet. And as the body has no power of moving, or
rather removing, the feet being lame, or taken away* so is the army slow, and
unfit for expedition, that is destitute of horse; and may be well resembled to
those beasts, that creep upon their bellies, whose greatest have is with
little speed. The horse do great service in the field of themselves alone; and
are principally employed in matters that require quickness in dispatch.
Therefore are they fit for discoueries, either of the enemies country, or of
his camp, or of his march, or of other things, whereof the General desires
to have notice. And not for discoueries alone, but to spoil, and destroy,
whatsoever the enemy has growing, to make prey of his Cattle, burn his
houses, kill his people, surprise his places of strength, and to ^mbarre him
from doing the like to us; to bring and convey provision for our Camp, to shut
in the enemy, that he go not out his camp for like causes, to hinder the
enemies march by falling on the rear. Briefly all expeditions of celeritie
are for the most part delivered to the horse alone. Especially as long as they
are in such places, as give them liberty to go on, or retire at their
pleasures. Yet are they often joined with the light armed, as I have showed.
They often join likewise with the armed. Diod. Sicul. lib. 16. 512. Pol. lib.
3. 266 A. B.
And if they may come to charge the enemies battle in the flank, or rear,
at such time, as our armed charge in front, they ^ndanger all. But for
employment alone against the armed foot many examples of former times show,
how weak there force is. Hirtius de bell. Af^ican. Xenoph. de exped. Cyr. lib*
3. 309. ^. Plut in Anton. Appian in Par. 164.
And how little they prevail (especially against armed, that are practiced in
fight, and resolute Soldiers) The examples I have quoted in the margent make
the matter clear. For further confirmation I will set down Xenophons opinion,
which all be it, it were delivered concerning the Persian horse, that came
against the armed foot of the Graecians in their return out of Persia* yet the
reason stretches to all horse in general. His words sound thus: Xenoph* de
exped. Cyr. lib. 3. 302. B. C.
If any of you faint in mind ( said he to the Graecians) because we have none,
the enemy many horse, let him consider, that ten thousand horsemen are no
more, then ten thousand men. For no man was ever slain in battle by biting,
or stroke of a horse: Men they are, that perform, whatsoever is done in fight.
As for us (the foot he means) our mounting is much more firm, and steadfast
then theirs. They hang upon their horse, and are in fear not only of us, but
to be shaken of and thrown to ground. We contrariewise have stable footing,
and shall be able both with great assuredness to strik, and direct our aim
with more certainty. One advantage the horsemen have, they may more securely
run away. Hitherto Xenophon. And so much is summarily spoken of the service
of horse.

1 The Thessalians, whose power was great in horse] The Thessalians inhabiting
about the mountain Pelius were the first, that fought on horseback, and were
therefore called Centaures. When they watered their horses in the river Peneus,
the horse heads stooping to drink made the unskillful multitude, who saw the
bodies of men joined to the shoulders of the horse, conceive, that the upper
part was man, and the neither Ox. For it should seem, horse were not so well
known then, as Oxen* with which they labored and plowed their land. The Poets
therefore fained, that they were monsters compounded of two diverse natures, man
and ox, or bull; and that Centaurus, the beginner of the race was begotten by
Ixion upon a cloud, which was figured like Juno. Howbeit Seruius gives a
better original of the name, saying, that certain servants of a Thessalian
King seeing their masters Neat, raging with the Brimse (a fly that biteth
cattle) got a horse back, and pricking them with goades, reduced them to
their stables; and that they were after called Centaures, Para kentein tous
taurous, of pricking the neat. The great Etymologicon gives yet an other
beginning of the name. For where I have said that Centaurus was begotten by
Ixion upon a cloud, which was figured like Juno, with whom Ixion was in love:
The Etymologicon says, the son of Ixion, and of the cloud was called
Centaurus: Apo tou ton patera autou kentein ten auran. But Diod* Sicul. lib. 4.
189.
Diodorus Sicul. reporting the history of the Centaures, speaks not of
Centaurus, the father of the race but says notwithstanding, that they were
bred of a cloud, and that the Nymphs brought them up, and that they were the
first horsemen, and therefore called Hippocentauri which gave occasion to the
fable, that they had two natures. It is generally agreed, that these Centaures
were Thessalians, and that they were the first horsemen, that are mentioned in
any history. And as they were the first, so by reason of their long practice
Xenoph. hist. Graec. lib. 7. 644. D.
they were accounted the best, the most valiant, and the most expert horsemen
of all Greece, even to the time of Philip, son of Amyntas King of Macedonia,
who conquered all Thessaly (says Just. lib. 7. 633. C.
Justin) not of desire to make himself rich of the prey of that Country, but
to win to his army the strength of the Thessalian horsemen. Whose service he
used afterward in all his war. Neither did they less service to his son
Diod. Sicul. lib. 17. 573. and 594.
Alexander, in whose greatest Plutarch. in Alexand.
battles their virtue clearelie appears, and is especially commended by
histories. Plut. in Pyrth.
Pyrrhus, also, principally by their valor, put the Romans to flight. Plutarch.
in Agesilao.
Agesilaus returning out of Asia toward his Country led his army through
Thessalie, and being much encumbered in his mareh by the Thessalian horsemen,
that were his enemies, he charged them Xenoph. H^st. graec lib 4. 518* A.
and ouerthrewe them, and pleased himself maruellously therein, because with
troops of horse, which himself had raised, and disciplined, he had
overthrown the Thessalians, that were ( says Xenophon) so highly renowned for
horsemanship. 2 Fashioned and form of a Rhombe] There are three kinds of
horse battles mentioned by Aelian, the Rhombe, the Wedge, and the Square. And
the square is either a just, square, or longer in flank then in front, or in
front then in flank. The Rhombe was the invention of the Thessalians, and in
that form they usually fought. But where he makes Jason to be the inuentor of
it, he afterward expounds his own meaning, attributing the invention to
Ileon the Thessalian (from whom also it was termed I Will) but the chief
practice to Jason. Euclyde defines a Rhombe in this sort: f A Rhombe is a
square figure, that has the sides equal, but the angles not right. b Euclyd.
lib. 1. definit. 31.
That is, the four sides of the square are of one, and the same length, but
the points, which make the angles, are two of them stretched out in greater
length, and become more sharp, two of them brought narrower together, and made
more blunt, then the right angles of a Tetragonall square. See the figure. It
is the same figure in a battle, that at this day we call the Diamond
battle, which is sometimes practiced amongst the foot for show, and evercise
sake, but amongst the horse I have not seen it practiced. And as the square
goes to charge with all the soldiers, that stand in one of the sides, that is
with the front, (for the front is but a side of the square) so the Rhombe
charge with one of the points, which is the front of the Rhombe. Whether of
them is of most use in the field, I am not to determine. For the square stands
the practice of our days, besides the usage of the Persians, Sicilians, and
most Graecians, as Aelian says. For the Rhombe the Thessalians alone (which
notwithstanding were acknowledged the best horsemen of Greece) unless we allow
the Wedge for a parcel of the Rhombe, (a Rhombe being but a double Wedge, as
making two wedges, when it is divided in two) and then have we for the Rhombe
not only the Scythians, and Thracians (both nations very good Horsemen) but
King Philip Amyntas son, and Alexander the great, and his successors. Either
of both forms have their reasons. For the squares they, that use them, held
opinion (as Aelian says) that they were easier to frame, and fitter for joint
moving of horse, and sooner in order of file, and rank, and that the
Commanders jointly charged the enemy, which in no other form could be done.
For the easiness to frame I see no great difference, only custom, and use,
must in every for me, yea in the squares themselves make the horseman ready to
know, and take, and keep his place. The same may be said for the joint moving
of the horse. Now to file and rank is common to the square with some Rhombes,
and as soon done in the one, as in the other, the number of the troop being
once known, and every horseman having his place assigned, and the form
resolved upon, into the which it must be cast. For where there are 4 kinds of
Rhombes, one, that fileth, and ranketh; an other, that fileth, but ranketh not;
the third, that ranketh, but fileth not; the last that neither fileth, nor
ranketh (as Aelian teaches in the next Chapter) The first will find no more
difficulty, of fi^ing, and ranking, then the square, the two next albeit the
one rank not, the other file not, yet the want of filing, or ranking hinders
no more the readiness of framing them, then the use of filing, and ranking
helps the other. The fourth is rather curious then profitable, as I take,
neither do I find^ example of it. And it may be truly affirmed of it, that
the square is much easier to be fashioned. We shall have occasion to speak of
the last three in due place. Touching the joint falling on of the Commanders, I
confess the advantage is great. For when the best men (such as the Commanders
ought to be) altogether fall upon the enemy, they are very like to put hard to
them. And as it is a great part of skill to bring many hands to fight, so is it
no less, to bring the best hands to fight. Many hands make light work, the
best hands sure work. Now for the Rhombe Aelian alleges these reasons.
First, that it is fittest for all encounters, because the horsemen are ready to
turn their faces every way with speed. Then, that they cannot be surprised in
flank, or rear, having the best men in their flanks, and the Commanders in
every point of the Rhombe. And cannot the square turn faces every way? They
can, but not with the same advantage. For the Rhombe, which way soever faces
are turned, remains in the first form. And whether it be to the right, or
left flank, or to the rear, it keepeeh still 4 even sides, and the men of
most service in the sides. Besides that one point always affronteth the enemy.
Not unlike a Calthrop, which howsoever you cast it to the ground, has one
point bearing right up to wound the horses feet: But the square in turning
faces to either flank alters the form of the front. In a broad square, the
front at the first was longer than the sides, faces being turned to either
flank the sides become longer, than the front; contrariwise in the Hearse*
battle. Besides in such turning of faces the square leeseth the advantage of
embattatling, the Commanders, that stood in the front, standing now in one of
the flanks, and being not able to charge the enemy jointly, (the greatest
advantage of that form) and so the front being without Commanders, is subject,
and in danger of surprise, where the Rhombe, which way soever faces turn, has
as many Commanders in the front, as at first. But let us take the horse square
in full strength with all Commanders in front; whether shall that form be
better, than the Rhombe? I dare not affirm it. For where there are two kinds
of fight; One with maine force, the other with slight, and Art; in the first I
will prefer the square, in the last the Rhombe. The square for slaughter and
violent overthrowing, the Rhombe for piercing, and artificial breaking the
enemies battle, which last amongst great Commanders has always been
accounted the best kind of winning. In the square all the Commanders fall
jointly upon the enemy, and because they are supposed to be the chief of the
Army, in all likelihood they will overthrow the foremost, and slay many. Yet by
reason of the length of their front, they stick man to man, and can make no
far entrance, and the victory hangs doubtful, till they have slain the
most of them, that resist, and so make the rest to fly. The Rhombe
contrary-wise, being narrow, and pointed in the front, first forces a passage
with the point, which makes way to the rest that follow, and then without
great labor piercing further, and further, breaks the adverse battle, and
disperseth, and puts them to flight, and after does execution at pleasure.
Neither can I make a fitter resemblance, then by comparing the 2 figures, one
to an axe, the other to a wedge, both instruments used for dividing solid
masses of wood. For the axe, albeit sharper, than the wedge, yet having the
edge drawn out in length, can not by any strength be driven far into the
wood, but by doubling many strokes, and by much labor comes at last to
divide it. The wedge contrary-wise, though not so sharp, being once entered,
insinuates it self more by little, and little with the narrownes of the point,
and maintayning the hold it first got, at last forces it asunder, though it be
never so tough. So is it in the square, and Rhombe: whereof the square
begins, and ends with violence; the other uses first cunning, and
mildenes, as it were, to enter: being once entered renteth a pieces, and
disparteth all that stands in the way. The manner of our times allows not
of Rhombes; Experience of former times highly prized them. I will insist upon
the Thessalians alone, who are accounted the inventers of the Rhombe, and
fought always Rhombe- wise. Polybius had seen their service, and been
General of the Horse in his own country, and therefore able to judge. He
gives this censure of them; Polyb. lib. 4. 278. B. C.
that in troops, and being imbattailed, they could not be resisted: to fight
man to man in single combat, they had neither will, nor courage. What then
should be the reason, they should be so powerful in troops? No other, then
the form of their imbattailing, which form was the Rhombe here mentioned by
Aelian. In this form they commonly beat the Grecian, and Persian squares, and
gat the reputation of the best horsemen of Europe. 3 The Scythians and
Thracians used the wedge] The Rhombe is of 4 sides, the wedge but of three: and
half a Rhombe makes a wedge, as will be showed in the next Chapter. The wedge
was used by the Scythians, and Thracians, and whether King Philip of Macedonia
borrowed it of them, I am uncertain. But I rather incline to think, that his
The ban Master taught him as well the wedge, as other forms of battles. The
cause of my conjecture is, for that I find that his Diodor. Sic: lib. 16. 510.
fellow scholar Epaminondas beat the Lacedemonian horse at Mantinaea in that
form. Xenoph. hist. Graea. lib. ^. 646 B.
Xenophon recounteth the story to this effect: The enemy (they were the
Lacedaemonians) ordered their horse like a Phalange of armed in depth, without
mingling foot with them: But Epaminondas made a strong wedge of horse also
(for before he tells the Theban armed were cast into a wedge) and joined some
foot with them, conceiving after he had cut in pieces the horse, he should not
miss of ouercomming the other forces of the enemy. And so going to charge he
was not deceived of his hope. Thus Xenophon. Of joining horse and light armed
together, I have spoken before: And that they were light-armed, that Epaminond
as joined to his horse, Diod. Sicul. lib. 15 page 502.
Diodorus Siculus shows. By Xenophon then it is plain, that not only the
Scythians, and Thracians, but the Graecians also, when they thought it
convenient, used the horsewedge, and that Epaminondas ordered both foot, and
horse in a wedge. And considering King Philip was brought up in Epaminondas his
Fathers house, and made partaker of the learning wherewith Epaminondas was
instituted; it is like in erecting a new military discipline amongst the
Macedonians, as he took many other things from the Graecians, so he borrowed
this form, having first seen the notable effect thereof at Mantinaea.

Now Aelian brings reasons, why the wedge was holden better than the square.
Let me with leave add a word or two why I take it to be better than the
Rhombe. And first it cannot be denied, that the wedge having the same manner of
disposition that the Rhombe has, that is a front ending in a point, where the
Captain stands; two points of the two flanks, where the flanke-commander
stands, the Lieutenant in the rear, and the best men in the flanks, but it
must be as powerful to open the enemies battle, as the Rhombe is. Then it
has this advantage of the Rhombe that it brings more hands to fight. For let
the Rhombe and wedge be framed of an equal number, the wedge in figure
resembling the forepart of the Rhombe must have the horse, that should be
ranged in the rear of the Rhombe, orderly couched within the 3 sides thereof:
where by both the number of the horse in the sides is increased, and the bulk
of the body betwixt flank and flank enlarged. And seeing both the Rhombe and
the wedge go to the charge with the point of their front, the wedge both has
the property to pierce, and enter the enemies battle by art, and slight, as
well as the Rhombe, and does it with more strength, because of the great number
of hands in the sides, which all come to fight. Join, that the hinder part of
the Rhombe serves only to avoid surprises, and works nothing in charging.
For after the two flank points are entered, the rest of the Rhombe growing
narrower, and narrower toward the Rear, falls further off from the enemy,
and is content only to follow the way, that was made to hand by the front, and
flanks; without being able to strike a stroke; especially if it preserve the
order it ought to keep: whereas all parts of the wedge are effectual, the
point to enter, the sides even to the flank corners, where the Rear ends,
to dispart and disseuer* and finally to disorder the enemy, whereby the
victory ensues. And if we may rely upon authority, the authority of King
Philip will sway much for the wedge. For unless he had held it better than the
Rhombe, he would not have chosen, nor accustomed his Macedonians to it, nor
Alexander after retained it, if he had not been of the same opinion. Neither
did the event deceive them: for almost in all battaile^ their horse thus
disposed carried away the victory. But, as I before noted, neither Rhombe, nor
wedge have found grace in the eyes of the great Generals of our days, nor can
we tell what to insist upon, till experience has taught, how well these forms
will agree with the weapons, and service of our modern wars.

4 The Persians made choice of squares] The square is the third, and last form
of horse-battaile that Aelian mentions; whereof there are three kinds; one
with a larger front, then flank; an other with a larger flank then front; the
third, with front, and flank equal. All these three were used amongst the
Persians, and Graecians. For two of the first, Xenophon may witness. When
Agesilaus, after Tissaphernes ( the King of Persia's Lieutenant in part of the
lesser Asia) had broken truce with him, made an incursion into Phrigia, Xenoph.
H^st. graec* lib. 3. 498. D.
Xenophon tells, that the rest of his journey was without impediment, till he
came not far from Dascylium. There when his horsemen galloped to a hill to
discover the country, by chance the horsemen of Pharnabazus (an other of the
King of Persians Lieutenants) being about the same number that the Graecians
were, and sent by Pharnabazus under the command of Rathynes, and Bancaeus his
bastard brother, galloped up the same hill, and discovering one the other no
further of, than two parts of a furlong, at the first they stood still; the
Graecians ordered Phalange-wise 4 in depth, the Barbarians making their front
12 in length, the depth many more. Afterward the Barbarians began first to
charge. when they came to hands, all the Graecians that joined, broke their
staves. The Persians having Corneil darts killed some 12 horsemen, and 2
horses. Hereupon the Graecians fled. But when Agesilaus came with the Army to
the reskew, the Barbarians again forsook the field. The Persians then used a
square longer in flank, then front: The Grecian a square longer in front,
theu flank. But which of the three squares is most to be esteemed Aelian
shows in the words following, saying those squares are best, that 5 Double
the number of the length, to the number of the depth] What the length, and
depth in a battle are, we have seen before. Yet to understand Aelian the
better, let us repeat, that the length of a battle is the extension of the
front; the depth the extension of the flank. To double then the number of the
length to the number of the depth, is to place twice so many men in front, as
in flank. As for the purpose, 6 in front, 3 in flank; or 8 in front, 4 in
flank; or 10 in front, 5 in flank. And that this was the manner of the
Lacedaemonians appears by the Plutarch. in Lycurgo.
Oulamos, or horse-troupe instituted by Lycurgus, which was figured
Tetragonally with 4 equal sides, and contained in it 50 horse. Now that it
could not be a square of number, that is, to have as many horse in flank, as
in front may hereby be showed, because no square number will make 50. The
nearest is 7 times 7, which amounts to 49. But proportioning the number of the
length double to the number of the depth, that is 10 in front, and 5 in flank,
even 50 will arise* So that the horse troop of the Lacedaemonians had the
number of the length double to the number of the depth, and made a square in
the equality of measure of the sides, not in number, which is the Tetragonall
figure, whereof Plutarch speaks. And where Xenophon (as I have alleged
before) reports that the horsemen of Agesilaus were but 4 in depth, it
hinders not this truth. For, as I noted before, the ordinary array of the
Lacedaemonians foot was 8 in depth. Yet did Pausanias the Lacedemonian King
cast his men into a deep Phalange against Thrasibulus. Other examples I have
alleged in the same place touching the same matter. Besides this appears to
be but a tumultuous fight either of the parties coming soddainely in the sight
of the other, and going presently to charge, before they could have time to
alter the order they then were in. And to say the horse troop of the
Lacedaemonians ought to have been but 4 in depth, it must thereof necessarily
follow that they were 12 in length, which yet will come short of 50: 4 times 12
makes but 48. Indeed Leo cap. 12. 9. 40.
Leo holds opinion, that in a horse battle, the depth ought to be no more
than 4. I will set down his words as near, as conveniently I can english
them. The depth, says he, or thicknes, as it was of ancient time limited, is
sufficient, if it be of 4 horse in every troop; because in horse a greater
depth will be idle, and to no purpose. For they cannot, as foot do with their
thicknes, thrust one an other forward from behind; and so the foremost, will
they, or nill they, are forced to go against the enemy. And this is done
amongst foot. But the horse can not thrust forward those, that are before
them, nor the file-leaders that stand in front, be seconded in that kind by
the rest, that stand in depth after the fourth man. For if they be Lancers, the
fifth rank cannot reach with their lances to the front. If Archers, they shall
be feign to shoot aloft for fear of hurting their companions before; and so
their arrows serve for no use, after fight is joined. Therefore is the number
of 4 sufficient in depth, as I have said. This was the opinion of Leo. To which
I cannot absolutely assent; unless he had given 8 for the front of his troop,
and so made it of 4 equal sides in figure, not in number, as Aelian requires
to be done in the best squares. For the reason of lances not reaching to the
front in the fifth rank, reaches not home to the reason of war. Aelian
before has declared, that the pikes of the seventh rank reach not to the
front of the Phalange. Yet no man will thereof infer, that the Phalange ought
to be but 6 deep. Yea but the foot that come after, help the foremost,
seconding them, and thrusting them on with the weight of their bodies, which
the horse can not do. This must be granted to be an advantage, that foot have
above horse in depth. Yet are there other reasons also of giving depth to a
Phalange: In the order whereof two considerations concur; one of offense, the
other of defense. The reaching of pikes or horsemens staves over the front is
good for offense, that is to annoy the enemy in the shocke: likewise the
thrusting on of those that come behind, serves with the violence to make them
give ground. A reasonable depth is for defense, in as much as it defends a
Phalange against the endeavor of the enemy to break it a sunder. And as it is
a fault to make it too deep, so is it likewise a fault to make it too shallow.
Too much depth narroweth the front, and gives easy means to the enemy to
incompasse, and o^er*front it. Leo cap. 14.. 108. 109.
Too much shallowness on the contrary side makes it weak, and ready to be
broken, and disseuered by the enemy, and gives a passage thorough, and means
not only to incompasse the front, but at the same instant also to assault it
behind, and so utterly to defeat it. So that the reasons of Leo reach not home,
as I said, there being other causes of thickning a horse troop besides
reaching of Lances to the front, and joint thrusting on of the horse coming
behind. And where Leo speaks but of 4 horse in depth of a troop, Polybius
says plainly that being ordered for fight, they had for the most part 8 in
depth; Polybius a man which lived in the times, whereof Leo speaks, and had
been General of the horse of the Achaeans. Besides Leo seems not a little
to differ from himself. Leo cap 7. 81. and cap. 14. * 70.
For in his seventh Chapter, he writes after this manner: If there be many
horse (that is above twelve thousand) let the depth be of 10. If but few, let
it be no more than 5. In squares therefore I hold Aelians proportion best, to
double the number of the front, to the number of the flank; and as the number
of the troop arises (for horse troops are not always of one number) to
enlarge the length of Cap. 19 A Rhombe filing but not ranking
The Front

The Rear

Cap. 19. A Rhombe neither filing nor Ranking
The Front

The Rear

Cap. 19. A Rhomb Ranking but not Filing
The Front

The Rear

the front, and the depth of the flank proportionably one to another. 6 When
there are as many horse in length as in depth] I noted before in the ninth
Chapter, that there were two squares of equal sides, the one of number, the
other of figure; which two squares differ in this, that the one makes unequal
sides in the shape of the battle, the other equal. The first at this day, we
call a square of men, the other a square of ground. When the number of the
sides is equal in length, and depth, it gives but half so much ground in
front, as in flank. Each soldier, if it be a foot battle, occupying a
foot, and a half of ground in front, when he goes to charge, where in flank
he must have 3 foot. And in a horse troop 3 foot in front, and double, or
(as some say) treble as much in flank. And so are the sides unequal. The even
length of flank and front gives a like ground to both, and makes the sides
of the figure equal, but the number of the front double to the number of the
flank, whether it be in horse or foot. In foot, because the soldiers in
Rank have but half so much distance, as they have in file; In rank a foot
and a half, in file three foot. In horse, because the length of the horse is
much more, than his breadth, and that length is fully stretched out in flank,
the breadth only in front.
Why Rhombes were first brought into use, and the diverse forms of them. CHAP.
XIX.
THE form of the Rhombe seems to have been taken up for the necessary use
thereof. For the Captain possessing the first place, the next following
Horsemen are not to rank with him, but to come a little after on both sides; so
that 1 the heads of their Horses may reach to his horse shoulders, and on the
right, and left hand, and behind, they ought to keep good distances that too
much thronging and clustering together, breed not disorder, whilst some horses
being by nature sullen fall a flinging oftentimes, and foul with other; and
considering the beast is somewhat long of body, that in turning about he wound
not the horsemen, that are in fight, whilst with his heels he aymeth at the
Horses next unto him.

They that fashion Horse into Rhombes, so fashion them, that some Rhombes file,
and rank; some neither file, nor rank; othersome file, but rank not; other
rank, but file not: every particular whereof stands thus.

They that would have 2 a Rhombe both file and rank make the greatest rank
being the middlemost of an uneven number, as of 11, or 13, or 15. To which they
join other ranks before, and behind, every one containing two less than the
former; as if the greatest rank consist of 15, the next ranks on either side
are to have but 13, the next on either side of these 11. and so every one two
less, till at last you come to 1. And the whole Troop is to consist of 113
horse.

3 The half Rhombe is called a wedge being fashioned three square; so that the
form thereof appears in the Rhombe.

Other have formed the Rhombe so, that the 4 Horsemen embattailed in that
form, neither file, nor rank, conceiving that turnings and other motions will
be more easily performed in this figure, nothing hindering before, behind, or
in flank. And first they place the Leader; then one at his right, and an other
at his left hand, so distant, that their Horses heads reach up to his Horses
shoulders, as is said before. And the first row they make of an uneven number
(as 11). The Leader of the Troop standing in the midst, and 5 other being
laid to him backwardly on either side; so that this Rank contains two sides
of the Rhombe. Then the reare-Commander is placed directly behind the Leader,
and to him are other joined forwardly on either side, and the number of every
following rank after the first, is to be two less than the former, and
therefore 4 must be added on either side to the reare-Commander, and the number
of the second rank be 9. This rank makes two sides Parallel to the two
former sides of the Rhombe. The third must be 7, and so forward to one. The
whole Troop has in it 36 Horse. 5 Polybius expresses the form by the Greek
letter D. and makes it to consist of 64 men.

Other Rhombes there are which 6 file, but rank not, and are fashioned thus:
They make a file of any number, the Captain of the Troop being File-leader,
and the Reare-Commander the last of the file. To both the flanks of this file,
they lay two other files, either of them one less in number, than the first.
These they begin to place, even with the midst of the distances of the first
file on both sides, as if there were 10 in the first file, the next files on
either side should have 9 a piece, and the next after them 8 a piece, and still
one less in all the rest aftercomming-files, and so it will fall out, that the
Horsemen shall file, but not rank. This form is profitable for turning of
faces, when need is, from one point of the Rhombe to another. 7 Turning to the
right hand is called turning to the staff. Turning to the left hand is called
turning to the Raines. But if a Troop be 8 to rank, and not to file, it must
be ordered thus: The middle and greatest rank is to be made of an uneven
number, and the rest of the ranks on both sides, laid even with the distances
of this rank, as was done in the filing troop. So shall you have a Troop
that ranketh, but fileth not.

Notes.
THE former Chapter had a general division of Horse battles into Rhombes,
wedges, and squares; this comprehends the sundry figures of Rhombes, and the
manner of framing them. Rhombes therefore are of 4 kinds, some filing, and
ranking; some filing, not ranking; some ranking, not filing; some neither
filing, nor ranking.

1 The heads of the horses reach to the heads of his shoulders] Aelian says,
that in a Rhombe the Captain stands first, and the heads of the next horse
reach to his horse shoulders. This rule, if it be taken generally, and meant of
all Rhombes, will deceive us; if for two kind of Rhombs alone, there is
nothing more true. The Rhombe neither filing, nor ranking; and the Rhombe
filing, not ranking, have the followers horses heads advanced to the shoulders
of them, that stand before. But the Rhombe filing and ranking, and the other
ranking not filing, come wholly behind the horse of the Captain, as the figure
shows, and will appear in the verbal description of the Rhombe. 2 A Rhombe
both to file and ranke] To make a Rhombe both file and rank, choice must first
be had of an uneven number for the rank the midst of the Troop, where the
manner is to begin the Rhombe; which number must neither be too great, least
the Troop grow also too great, nor too little, lest there be in it no strength.
Aelian gives a 11, 13, or 15 for that rank, and wills us to begin the frame
by placing first the middle rank, to which the other ranks are to be joined
on both sides, the middle men against the middle man of the first rank in a
right line of file, and the rest in like sort; every Rank still decreasing 2
men, till at last in the front, and reare-angle you come to one. The figure of
this kind of Rhombe I have placed in the praecedent Chapter; wherein the
middle rank is of 11, and the whole troop of 61, and the horse heads of those
that follow reach not to the former horses shoulders. 3 The half Rhombe is
called a wedge] I have spoken of wedges before, but nothing of the framing of
them. Aelian here shows how they are framed, when he says, that the form of
them appears in the Rhombe, and that the half Rhombe is a wedge. For as in a
Rhombe filing, and ranking, you begin with placing the middle rank first, and
so proceed adding on both sides rank to rank, till you come to one man in the
front: So must you proceed in a wedge, saving that to the first, and greatest
rank you join the rest only on the one side, abating still in every rank 2
men, till you come to the point of the front, where the Captain stands
alone. And this was the ordinary horse troop amongst the Macedonians, and is
described in the next Chapter. 4 That the horsemen neither file nor ranke] The
second kind of Rhombe specified here by Aelian is directly opposite to the
first. The first both filed, and ranked, this neither fileth, nor ranketh; and
is that kind, which I noted in the last Chapter, to have more curiosity, than
use. For the rest, what is more easy to frame, than they? In which either
files, or ranks are laid together; or files alone, or ranks alone. And out of
that joining both in the inward parts of the Rhombe, and the outward (that is
the flanks) arise, and are without difficulty figured. In this you must first
begin with the outsides, and make two front lines, or sides of the Rhombe; and
after add as many to the Rear. And then when the 4 sides are framed, and have
their place, patch up by peece-meale the rest of the body within. Wherein if
there be not very large distances left betwixt horse, and horse, especially
every one being laid head to shoulder to an other, it is not possible to convey
so many horses within the four sides, as will make up the full Rhombe. And yet
make it up as you will, the trouble is more, than in the rest of the Rhombes.
And for the use, I see not how it can be greater, than in the rest, whatsoever
is alleged for turnings, and other motions. And the more I think upon it, the
more I am induced to think, that it was the invention of some Tacticke master
(of whom were great plenty amongst the Graecians) who seeing that some Rhombes
filed, and ranked not; other ranked, but filed not; other both ranked, and
filed, and that the two first were opposite the one against the other, would
needs bring in a fourth, neither filing, nor ranking, to make an opposition
likewise against the third. But because this kind also is specified by Aelian,
let us see how it is to be framed. Aelian for examples sake would have the
Troop to consist of 36 horse. To put these 36 horse in a form, that shall
neither file nor rank, we are thus to work. First, we must begin with the two
front sides of the Rhombe, and make them of 11 horse, placing them thus: The
Leader and Captain in the point; next him backwardly on each side a horseman,
his horse head reaching to the shoulders of the Captains horse; then on the
outward side of each of these a Horseman, and their horses heads must likewise
reach to the shoulders of the next horses before. So must you go on, till you
have in like manner bestowed 2 a piece more on each side, still opening the two
sides of the Rhombe proportionally. Thus done you have two sides of the Rhombe
which will be in this form. Then are we to fashion the two Rear sides of the
Rhombe of 9 horse, placing them after this manner: The Lieutenant in the Rear
angle, directly opposite to, and yet looking toward the Captain; on either
side of him forward toward the front 2 Horsemen, their horses shoulders lying
even with the head of the Lieutenants horse. And after them the other 6; 3 on
one side, and 3 on the other in the same proportion. And so have we the other
two sides of the Rhombe in this form. which being joined to the former make
the 4 sides of the Rhombe; In the framing whereof 20 of the 36 horse are
bestowed. There remain 16, which are thus to be ordered: Within the Rhombe we
must at reasonable distance place a horseman behind the Captain in aright
line, and in the manner as before lay 3 to him on each side. The number will
amount to 7, and this is the figure Then another horseman is to be set at the
same distance directly before the Lieutenant, and on each side of him two other
toward the front, which will be 5 in all, and in this form And these 12 horse
joined together, will fashion out a lesser Rhombe, comprehended within the
sides of the first. So are 32 horse disposed of. The 4 that are left are thus
to be ordered. In a right line again after the Captain, and at the former
distance is another horsema^ to be set: Then 2, one of the one side, and the
other of the other side of him, their horses heads reaching to his horses
shoulders thus The horseman left must supply the void place, standing directly
before him, that stood next before the Lieutenant thus And this is the true
description of the Troop neither filing, nor ranking. I have been the longer
in describing it, because the figure graven is not fully to my mind, no horse
head reaching to the shoulders of the horse, that stands before him. 5
Polybius makes it to consist of 64 men] Aelian took the number of 36 horse to
frame this Rhombe, Polybius requires 64. The number is not material, so the
form be observed. If you make it of 64, you are to take 15 horse for the 2
front sides, and 13 for the 2 rear sides, and so in every rank within to
diminish 2, as you did in the former. 6 Which file, but rank not] The third
kind of Rhombe fileth, but ranketh not. It is easy to frame. Take what number
of horse you please, and make a file; then lay to the distances betwixt horse,
and horse of that file on each flank two other files, each file containing one
less in number, than the first. And the heads of the files are to be laid
right against the space which is betwixt the Captain, and his follower, and
the rest of the horses against the other spaces successively. In all the paires
of files, that follow, and are laid to the flanks, you must still diminish a
horse a piece, till you come to the points, which have but one either of them.
And of this abatement of one in every file, both front, and rear, and flanks
grow into points, and make a Rhombe: As of the even number in every file, a
square battle would arise. See the figure. This was the form the Thessalians
fought in, as appears by after cap. 46.
Aelian. 7 Turning to the right hand] The turnings of horsemen and footmen to
the right, and left hand, are not termed by the same names. And the difference
comes of the diversity of weapons carried on the right, or left side. The
horseman in his right hand held his staff, in the left the raines of his
bridle. The armed-foote in his right hand his pike, on the left shoulder his
Target. Hence was it, that when the horseman was commanded Polyen. lib. 4. 217.
^21.
to turn to the right hand, they bid him turn to his staff; the footeman to
his pike. When to the left hand, they bid the horseman turn to the Raines, the
footman to the Target. 8 To rank, and not to file] This is the last kind of
Rhombe, and it ranketh, but fileth not. It is made by a contrary way to the
former. The filing Rhombe began at the front point, and reare-point, and
proceeded to the flanks. This begins at the flank points, and proceeds to
the front and rear. First therefore a rank is to be laid of what number you
list. Aelian would have it of an uneven number; but it will fall out as well in
an even number, as the figure shows. To the distances of this rank you must
lay 2 ranks more, one on either side, whose number must be one less a piece,
than the former rank. Thus continue laying ranks still toward the front, and
rear, and in every pair of ranks diminish one a piece, till you come to the
points, either of which have but one, namely the Captain, and the Lieutenant,
and the Rhombe will rank, and not file.
Cap 20 The ordinary horse troop consisting of 64
The right Flank Commander

The Captain

The Front

The Lieutenant

The left Flank Commander



The place of Horsemen in the field, the number of an usual horse troop, the
degrees, and names of the officers of the Horse in general. CHAP. XX.
THE Troops of Horse, as the light-armed, are placed sometime before the
Phalange, sometime on the right, or left hand in flank of the Phalange,
sometime behind the light-armed in the Rear. For our purpose, let them be
placed in the Rear, and 1 let the first Troop be of 64 men, and the first
rank thereof 15 Horse The next 13. The next 11; and in all the rest abate 2,
till you come to the last, which is one.

2 He shall carry the Cornet, that stands in the second rank next the
Ranke-Commander on the left hand. All the Troops shall be 64 in number. The
horsemen in all 4096. 3 Two Troops are called an Epilarchy of 128 horse. Two
Epilarchies 4 a Tarentinarchy of 256 horse. Two Tarentinarchies 5 an Hipparchy
of 512. Two Hipparchies 6 an Ephipparchy of 1024 horse. Two Ephipparchies 7 a
Telos of 2048 horse. Two Telos make 8 an Epitagma of 4096 horse.

Notes.
HItherto of squares and Rhombes, usual horse battles amongst the Graecians.
Now follows the horse battle of the Macedonians, of which P Aelian has
thus afterward: This form of horse battle is called a wedge by Tacticks, and
it was invented by Philip King of Macedonia, who placed his best men before,
that by them the weaker might be held in, and enabled to the charge. As in a
spear, or sword, the point whereof, by reason of sharpnes quickly piercing
makes way for, and lets in the middle blunt iron. I have spoken somewhat of
the wedge in the two last Chapters. Aelian in this Chapter shows the number,
and manner of framing it, and how many troops ought to attend the Phalange,
and under what offices, and degrees.

1 Let the first troop be of 64 men] The number of the wedge ought to be 64
horse. You make it beginning (as the Rhombe that ranked, but filed not) with a
rank of 15 horse. Then must you proceed toward the front, with an other rank
of 13, the middle man filing with the middle man of the first rank, and the
rest with the rest. And so you are to continue abating still two in every
following rank, till at last you come to one, who is the Commander of the
Troop, and stands in the point of the front. 2 He shall carry the Cornet]
The place of the Cornet is not right set down in the figure. He there stands
on the right hand of the middle man of the second rank, where as he should
stand on the left. And you must not account the second rank to be the rank
next to the Commander in the front; but as Aelian does, that was secondly
placed after the first consisting of 15, which was in the Rear. So that the
Cornet is to stand in the next rank to the Rear.

But here is nothing said concerning the distances, that ought to be betwixt
horse, and horse. Of the distances between foot, and foot he has spoken in
the 11 Chap: But of the distances betwixt horse, I find nothing, but general
words. That which wants in Aelian, I will supply out of other Authors. We
must understand then, that two kind of distances were observed amongst
horsemen; one for marching, an other for fight. In marching there ought to be 6
foot betwixt horse and horse. Aelian has before given this distance to the
foot. And that horse held it likewise appears by Polybius. Who reprehending
Calisthenes for carelessness in describing the battle betwixt Alexander and
Darius at Issos, specially taxes this: That he placed thirty thousand horse,
and thirty thousand mercenaries, in fourteen furlongs of length. whereas the
place was not capeable of half the horse. Polyb. lib. 12. 663. A.
His words have this sense; The order of horse, when they are prepared for
fight, is for the most part 8 in depth. And there is a distance to be left in
front betwixt every troop, to give liberty to wheel and double-wheele. So
that one furlong will contain 800 horse; and 10 furlongs 8000; 4 furlongs
3200: And eleven thousand, and two hundred Horse will fill the space of 14
furlongs in length. The words seem at first somewhat obscure, being well
weighed they will be clear enough. Polybius says, that these 800 horse were
ordered 8 in depth, and that they took up a furlong of ground in length. There
must be therefore of them a hundred files. For a hundred files of 8 horse a
piece, will arise to 800 horse. Compare then these 100 files, (the length of
the battle) to the length of a furlong. And seeing a furlong contains 400
Cubits, or six hundred foot, every file shall have 4 cubits, or 6 foot space
betwixt them. And so the distance betwixt file and file in a march will be 4
Cubits, or 6 foot. The other distance of three foot appears in Leo cap.
17.. 89.
Leo, whose words stand thus: Put the case, that the battle is of 600 horse
in length, and 500 in depth, seeing that every horse in length of the battle
possesses three foot in breadth, the number of feet will amount to 1800; And
seeing again that every horse in depth possesses 8 foot, there will arise
hereof 4000 feet; so that in the foure-sided figure, out of the length of
1800, and the depth of 4000 feet arise 720 Myriades of square feet. And the
Perimeter alone of the outward four sides contains 11600 feet. And because
6 feet make a fathom, and a 100 fathoms make a furlong, and 7 furlongs, and a
half, make a mile, the whole Perimeter of 11600 feet will come to two mile,
and a half, and near a 10th part. In this distance therefore according to the
closest order, or shutting, the thirty thousand horse are contained. But if
they stand not so close, you must alter your account according to the
thinness, and out of the greatness of place conjecture of the multitude of
the people. So Leo. Which place albeit it seem to require a large
interpretation, because many things worth the noting offer themselves in it;
yet for this time I will only insist upon that, which I first propounded, that
is the distance of three foot betwixt horse, and horse, when they go to
charge (for that is the meaning of Leo, when he speaks of the closest order)
which distance is expressly here set down. And the matter will yet seem more
clear, if we add the words of Leo in the Paragraph next, but one, to this,
which are these: The oldest Tacticks in ordering of foot Battles give every
man at the first distance four Cubits; when the battle is closed two Cubits;
when serred and shut one Cubit. Out of which proportion a Scout may exactly
discover by the quantity of the place the number, not only of horse, but of
foot also. These oldest Tacticks that Leo mentions agree with Aelian, as we
have seen. But where the foot have three distances, the horse are to have but
two. The open order of six foot they ought to have, and likewise that of three
foot; nearerer they cannot come together, because of the breadth of their
horse, and because they are to have room sufficient for the weilding of their
weapons.

All the Troops are to be in number 64] A Troop consists of 64 men, and to
the Phalange belong 64 Troops, as the Phalange contains 64 Ensigns, or
Syntagma's of armed foot. To which Ensigns the 64 Troops of horse are
proportioned. Their place is according to Aelian after the light-armed; not one
troop after, or behind an other, but one beside an other, in one front; and
that front in a right line, which stretches out, as long as the Phalange of
armed it self. Now the files of the armed being 1024 in number, and the number
of the horse in the last rank (which contains the length of the
Horse-battaile, and should answer the number of files) but 960, we must seek
out a proportion to make the length of both equal one to another. The
difference then betwixt them in length is 64 men, which in order take up 192
foot. And where there go four Phalangarchies to a fourefold Phalange, and 16
troops of horse are placed behind every Phalangarchie, we must divide these
192 foot into four parts; every of which parts will amount to 48 foot, and
give to each troop three foot distance one betwixt an other (for distances
betwixt one troop, and an other, Polybius holds necessary) and so shall the
16 troops of horse take up as much ground in length as a Phalangarchie. The
one containing 256 files in length which occupy 768 foot of ground, and the
other 240 men in the last rank, which occupy 720 foot. To which adding 48
foot of distance, there arises the even number of 768. And so shall the 64
troops of horse be even in length with the fourefold Phalange.

The names of the Offices, and Commands of the Horse follow, wherein as I
before noted in the foot, we must not press too near the property of words,
but take them, as they have been used among Soldiers.

3 Two troops are called an Epilarchie] One troop is called I Will, and the
Commander an Cap. 18.
Ilarch; for so he is termed before in Aelian. Two troops an Epilarchie, and
the Commander an Epilarch, as it were a Commander over two Isles, troops. He
has 128 Horse under his command. 4 A Tarentinarchie] Of Tarentines mention is
made in the second Chapter. The name of a Tarentinarchie is not given to this
Troop, because it consisted of Tarentines, but because of likelihood the
Tarentine horsemen had so many in a troop Let it be, as it will, it signifies
here a troop of 256 Horse. 5 An Hipparchie] Properly signifies the command of
horse, and Xenophon uses the word Hipparch for the General of horse; but
Aelian, and the Tacticks use it for the command of 512 horse. 6 An
Ephipparchie] As it were a command over two Hipparchies, or over 1024 horse. 7
A Telos] The name of Telos is given both to a body of horse, and to a body of
foot. A Merarchie was called by some Telos (says Aelian before) and contained
2048 armed. The Telos of horse contains 2048 horse. So the bodies are equal
in number. The word sometimes signifies a Command, or Dignity, from which
signification this body, as seems, has the name. 8 Epitagma] The whole body
of light-armed was called an Epitagma, which name is given likewise to the
whole body of horse comprizing 4096 horse. It may be they are both so called,
because they are placed behind the Armed, as I noted before. For that place
Aelian assigns unto them.
The diligence to be used in choice, and exercise of the best forms of
Battles. CHAP. XXI.
THE Inventions and conceits of those, that lived in old time, about Troops of
Horse are declared, in what form every one was cast, and for what cause some
used one form, some another. Now it behooves (as in things that carry with
them great difference) not carelessly, and negligently, to rely upon the bare
precepts; but rather by daily exercise to make try all of every kind of
figure, and so attayning to the perfect knowledge of that, which is readiest,
and of most advantage, to admit and receive it in true fight. For it were great
simplicity, considering in matters of less importance men by curious inquiry
reach to the exact finding out of many things, herein not to ground upon
perfect and sure experience, before we come to join with the enemy.

Troops may be enlarged or lessened, as it shall seem convenient to him, that
has the command.

Of Chariots; the names, and degrees of the Commanders. CHAP. XXII.
AS for ordering Chariots and Elephants, albeit they are worn out of use, yet
to make up the measure of this discourse, I will remember their names, as they
are set down in ancient writers. In the Art of ordering Chariots for the
field, they call two Chariots a 1 Zygarchy; Two Zygarchies a 2 Zyzygi; Two
Zyzygies an 3 Epyzyzygi; Two Epizyzygies an 4 Hartamarchy; Two Hartamarchies a
5 wing; Two wings a 6 Phalange.

A man may use many and sundry Phalanges of Chariots, and yet retain the same
names in every Phalange. Some have framed simple Chariots to serve withal;
other some have armed them with Sithes prominent and standing out on each side.

Notes.
THere were two kind of Chariots used of ancient time, the one a simple
Chariot, the other a Chariot armed with sithes. The first kind was used by the
Heroes (as they term them, that is the renowned Soldiers of old, such as were
Achilles, Hector, Cycnus, Aeneas, Turnus) as appears by Homer, Virgil, Ovid,
and other Poets. The last was brought in by the Generals of later times,
especially by those that reigned in Asia, and in Africa. For the Live. decad. 4.
lib. 7. 142. B.
Europeans have counted them fruitless, and vain mockeries, and amongst them
you shall hardly find any mention of Chariots. Aelian touches them only,
because both they, and Elephants were in his time grown out of use. Wherefore
I mean likewise to pass them over slightly, only directing the Reader, that
is desirous to understand their manner of fight to places of History, where
they are mentioned. And first see for their

Form. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 6. 152. D. E. and 156. B. C. de exped. Cyr. lib. 1.
264 A. B. Liu. decad. 4. lib. 7. 142. A. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 17. 596. Quin.
Curt. lib. 4. 119 and lib. 8. 371.

Their violence, Diod. Sicul. lib. 17. 593.

Their place in the battle, Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 6. 168. C. D. Liu. decad. 4.
lib. 7. 142. A. Diod. Sicul. lib. 14. 408.

Remedies against them, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 17. 592. 593. Xenoph. de exped.
Cyr. lib. 1. 265. Liu. decad. 4. 142. Quint. Curt. lib. 4. 141. Plutarch. in
Sylla.

I come to the names of the Commands of Chariots.

1 A Zygarchie] The command of two Chariots; as it were a yoke of Chariots. 2
A Syzygy] The command over two yoakes, as it were, of Chariots joined together;
that is over 4 Chariots. 3 An Episyzygy] The command over four yoakes of
Chariots, that is over eight Chariots. 4 An Harmatarchie] Properly the command
of Chariots. But used by Aelian for the command of 16 Chariots. 5 A wing] As
foot, so Chariots, and Elephants, had their wings of battle. To the wing
went 32 Chariots. Yet find I this order of imbattailing Chariots no where, but
in Aelian. He that will, let him read the places, that I have noted before, for
the ordering of Chariots. Notwithstanding I can not doubt, that the names given
here by Aelian, are taken out of ancient writers. 6 A Phalange] It consists
of 64 Chariots; and we here see, that Chariots also had their Phalanges, as
well as foot, and Horse.
Of Elephants; the names, and degrees of their Commanders. CHAP. XXIII.
TOuching Elephants, he that is Commander of one Elephant is called 1 Zoarcha;
Of two 2 Therarcha, and the body a Therarchy; Of four 3 Epitherarcha, and the
body an Epitherarchy; Of eight 4 Ilarcha, and the body an Ilarchy; Of 16 5
Elephantarcha and the body an Elephantarchy; Of 32 6 Keratarcha, and the body a
Keratarchy. That which consists of 64 we call 7 a Phalange of Elephants, as
if a man should name the Commander of both the wings Phalangarcha.

Notes.
THe use of Elephants was greater amongst the people of Asia and Africa. Those
of Europe esteemed them not much. And yet we find, that they were brought into
the field by the Romans also; who first saw Elephants in Italy in the wars,
they had against King Pyrrhus. ^ The Indian Elephant was preferred before the
African for greatness d Liu. decad. 4. lib. 7. 141. Poly^. lib. 5. 425. C. D.
of body, strength, and courage. Many things are written concerning the service
of Elephants. But because Aelian touches no more, then the names of the
bodies, and the degrees of Commanders, I will only note such things, as I find
concerning them in Histories. Their kind of armor, and furniture I have taken
out of Liuy, and expressed them as near, as I could, in figure.

For their power, strength, and manner of fight, see Diodor. Sicul. lib. 17.
609. and lib. 19. 717. Polyb. lib. 1. ^5. D. and lib* 5. 425. C.

Their place in battle, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 17. 685. Arrian. lib. 5. 111.
Liu. decad. 4. lib. 7. 141. B. Appian. in Syriac. 107. Polyb. l. 1. 34. D.

The distance one from an other. Arrian. lib. 5. 111.

Light armed in the distances betwixt Elephant and Elephant, Diodor. Sicul.
lib. 17. 609. and lib. 18. 665. and lib* 19. 685. and 716. Plurarch. in Pyrrho.

Remedies against Elephants, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 18. 665. and lib. 19. 717.
Polyb. l. 1. 42. A. Hirt. de bell. African. 416. Liu. decad. 3. lib. 7. 194. C.

I have noted before the improprietie of names given to military bodies as
well in the armed and the light armed foot, as in horse troops, and in
Chariots. That defect is no less in Elephants. The Commanders and commands of
them having names, which were at first large, and improper enough, but
afterward made good by use, and received by the Tacticks as significant to
express the things, for which they were invented. The first is given to him
that is to command one Elephant. Who is called

1 Zoarchos] The Commander of a living creature, that is of one Elephant. The
next is 2 Therarchos] A Commander of Beasts: which name is appropriated to him,
that commands two Elephants, and the body it self is named a Therarchie. 3
An Epitherarcha] Having the authority over the Therarchie and the body is
called an Epitherarchie comprizing four Elephants. 4 An Ilarch] As it were the
Commander of a troop; and the body is called an Ilarchie. I Will is commonly
applied to horse, and signifies a horse troop, and Ilarcha the Captain. But
here Ilarcha signifies the Commander of 8 Elephants. 5 An Elephantarch] A
Commander of Elephants; as thoug^ the other bodies before mentioned were not of
Elephants. Such straights are men often times driven unto in devising new names
for new things, which notwithstanding pass afterward and grow familiar by
use. Elephantarcha commands 16 Elephants, and the command is called an
Elephantarchie. 6 A Keratarch] The Commander of a wing, the body a Keratarchie,
having in it 32 Elephants. A wing of Chariots had as many. 7 A Phalange] This
is the greatest body and consists of 64 Elephants. But as Chariots may be
ordered into many Phalanges, and yet the same names retained in every one of
the Phalanges, so it is in Elephants. For that armies have had in them at once
above 64 Elephants appears by Histories. Polybius, and Diodor Sicul:
testify, Polyb. lib. 1. 39. B.
the first that the Carthagineans, Diod. Sicul. lib. 17.
the last that King Porus against Alexander had the one 140, the other 130
Elephants in their armies. Polyb. lib. 5. 421.
The same Polybius says that Ptolomey had against Antiochus 73 Elephants in
his army, and Antiochus 102. And Plutarch. in Alexand.
Plutarch reports that Androcottus, King of a part of India, gave to Seleucus
at on time 500 Elephants
The names of military motions expressed in this book. CHAP. XXIV.
THus have we set down in particular the kinds of perfect Forces together
with the several names of every body; Which being premised, it seems Cap 25
(...)Faces turned to the right hand

The Front

C^^s or one Turning of Faces to the right hand

The Front

The first standing

The Front

fit to deliver the words of exercise, that when the Commander, shall will any
thing to be done, the Soldier in daily experience acquainted before with the
signification of every of them, and with the moving in each figure may easily
perform and execute, whatsoever is commanded.

There is a motion called Clisis whereof one kind is to the Pike, the other to
the Target; Another is called Metabole; another Epistrophe; another Anastrophe;
another Perispasmus; another Ecperispasmus; besides we say to file; to rank;
to return to the first posture; to countermarch; to double. Likewise we use
the words Induction; and Deduction to the right, or left hand; a
broad-Phalange; a deepephalange; and vneuen-fronted Phalange: and Parembole;
and Protaxis; and Entaxis, and Hypotaxis; and Epitaxis and Prostaxis. The
signification of which words I will shortly deliver. And yet I am not ignorant,
that the precepts of war are not by all Tacticks expressed in the same
terms.

Notes.
AElian in the Chapters precedent, has numbered up all kinds of forces, as
well foot, as Horse, and Chariots, and Elephants, that in ancient time were
accounted necessary for war. And has given them their armor, and furniture,
and distinguished them into military bodies, and imbattailed them, and taught
the distances, that they ought to hold in fight. It follows now that he
speak of motions military; which are the life of an army, and only give
means of victory; and without which all preparation of forces is vain, and
avails nothing in the field, nor to the end, for which they were levied. This
Chapter then contains the names of those motions; the following Chapters the
particular explication of them. To which we will note, what we find in ancient
writers. For the signification of the words, I refer them to the several
Chapters, where they are expounded.

Of turning, and double turning the Soldiers faces, as they stand embattailed.
CHAP. XXV.
1 CLisis or turning of the face, is the particular motion of every Soldier
declining his face either to his Pike, that is to the right hand, or to his
Target, that is to the left hand. The use of it is, when the enemy shows
himself in flank 2 to encompasse our wings, or else to charge us: or for
some other cause, whereof I will speak in convenient place. 3 Two turnings of
the face toward the same side transfer the sight of the Soldier to the
rear of the battle. And this kind of motion is called Metabole: being also
used either to the Pike, or to the Target. In the first standing the moving of
the Soldiers face toward the Pike is called Clisis, the second moving the same
way Metabole. For Metabole is the conversion of every man's face particularly to
the place, which was behind his back. And the same that Metabole is in each
several Soldier, the same is Perispasmos, or wheeling about in the whole
battle. There are 4 two kinds of Metabole, the one from the enemy, the other
to the enemy. Metabole is defined to be a changing of every man's face in
particular from the front to the rear; or contrariwise. Turning about from the
enemy is, when the Soldier turns his face twice toward the Pike; To the
enemy, when he turns twice toward the Target.

Notes.
Four kind of Motions are set down by Aelian whereby upon any occasion the
battle may be somewhat changed: Turning of faces, countermarch, wheeling, and
doubling, whereof the first may be used, in what order soever your battle
stands, the second only in open order, the third ^n close order only, the
fourth either in close, or open order. Clisis, or turning of faces, whereof
this Chapter entreats, albeit it may be brought in also in open Order; Yet
is it not don for the most part but in close order; and then especially, when
none of the other motions have place. The Graecians always coueted to bring
their file Leaders, that is their best men, to fight. In open Order they chose
to countermarch; In close Order, having place, to wheel their battle about,
and so turn the face of it against the enemy. If they could do neither of
these, they came to the last remedy, which was turning of faces of every
particular man in the battle.

1 Clisis, or turning of faces] This motion is of less pains then any other,
but of no less importance, or necessity. In the rest the Phalange changes
the place, or the form: In this it holds both, and yet is ready for any
attempt of the enemy. Only every Soldier in particular turns his
countenance to the right or left hand, as he is commanded. To turn his face to
the Pike is to turn to the right hand, because that hand bore the pike, to
turn to the Target is to turn to the left hand; because the Macedonians
carried their targets on their left shoulder. For the use of this turning of
Faces, Aelian says, It has place when the enemy shows himself in flank 2
To incompasse, our wings] Clisis is no more, then bearing faces to the right,
or left hand, that is to our wings. When then we find our enemies, to
incompasse our right wing, we turn our faces, and weapons that way to receive
him: to the left, when he comes to charge us on that side. If on both sides,
then turn we the faces of our Phalange half to the right, half to the left
hand; which is the Antistomus Phalange whereof Aelian speaks hereafter.
Briefly, there is almost none of the marching Phalanges which are afterward
discribed, but it has need of this motion. Besides if upon any occasion the
Phalange be to move from any of the flanks, you are only to command Turning of
faces to that flank, and then to lead on. I will give an example, or two.
Polyen. lib. 4. in Alexand. 17.
Alexander at Arbela having imbattailed his army to fight with Darius, had
intelligence, that Darius had strowed the ground betwixt the two armies with
Calthropes. He commanded therefore the right wing, which himself led, to turn
faces to the right hand, and follow him, to the end to go round about, and
avoid the places, that were sowed with Calthropes. Darius marching against him
to the left hand, disioyned his troops of horse, and Alexander taking the
advantage, and giving in quickly betwixt the spaces, put Darius to flight. If
Alexander had marched on with the right front, he had fallen upon the
Calthropes. To avoid them, be used the benefit of this motion, and turning
faces to the right hand he led on, until he had passed the danger, and then
turning again to the first posture, went to charge, and defeated the enemy.
An other example is in Polyb lib. 11. 634.
Polybius, who describing the battle betwixt Machanidas the Lacedemonian
Tyrant, and Philopoemen the Achaean General, tells, that Machanidas having
in the left wing put the Achaean mercenaries to flight, followed hard the
chase. Philopoemen as long* as there was hope, endeavored by all means to stay
his men: when he saw them utterly defeated, he hasted to the right wing, and
perceiving the enemy busy in chase, and the place void, where the fight had
been, commanding the first Merarchies to turn their faces to the right hand,
he led them on with high speed, not yet breaking the order of their
imbattailing. And quickly seazing upon the forsaken ground, he both cut
betwixt them, that gave chase, and home, and withal got the advantage of the
upper ground against the left wing of the armed. Whereby he obtained the
victory. If Philopoemen had in this action used wheeling of his battle, which
only was the other motion, which would have served his turn, besides the
troublesomenesse of the winding about, he should have been forced to have used
two wheelings, and so failed of the c^lerity, which was at that time requisite.
Faces were turned in a trice, and he made himself Master of the ground, he
desired, before he could have wheeled once his battle. 3 Two turnings of the
Soldiers face] Clisis, or turning faces to the right, or left hand, consists
of one turning and moves no further, then the side. If the motion be to the
rear, it has two turnings, and is called Metabole, which is defined to be a
changing of every man's face in particular from the front to the rear, or
contrariwise. And as wheeling of the whole body carries about the fronts of the
battle to the rear; So does Metabole turn the face of every particular
Soldier, and makes him look from the front to the rear. The word properly
signifies a change, which happens herein, when the soldiers are changed
from the front to the rear, or contrariwise. The use of Metabole is
principally to resist the enemy that gives on upon the rear. Plut. in Pyrrh.
So Pyrrhus being entered the City Argos with a few, and ouerpressed with
multitude, retired by little and little, and defended himself, often turning
his and his soldiers faces against the enemy. Polyen. lib. in Agesilao.
So the army of Cyrus the elder retiring from the walls of Babylon, often
turned about their faces to the left hand, and waited their enemy* who were
reported to be on foot, and ready to come and charge them. And if the enemy
assault both the front, and rear, it has been the manner to continue half
the soldiers in each file with their faces to the front, and command the other
half to turn their faces to the rear against the enemy behind. And this
form is called Phalanx Amphistomos discribed by Aelian cap. 38. And sometimes
it is used to speed our march, and prevent the enemy, as was said before of
Clisis. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7. 189* D.
Agesilaus made an incursion into the Territory of the Thebans, and finding a
Trench, and Ramper cast up by the Thebanes for defense of their Country, and
only two narrow ways betwixt, he cast his army into a hollow Plinthium, or
square, and led it against the left hand passage, whither all the Thebans
flocked for defense. But he turning about faces from the rear, hasted away,
and gained the other passage, where no man was present to resist, and entering
spoiled the Country; and returned without impeachment. 4 There are two kind
of Metaboles] Before were rehearsed two kind of turnings of faces about, one
to the pike, the other to the target, here is added two more, one from the
enemy and the other against the enemy; which are all one indeed, and differ
only in name. What the true meaning of these turnings should be, I am in
doubt, Aelian expounding them one way, Suidas an other. Aelian esteems them by
the right, and left hand, Suidas, albeit he have that signification also,
esteems them by the front and rear. Therefore Suidas defines the turning
from the enemy to be a turning about, toward the rear: that against the
enemy, a turning about toward the front. Aelian would have the first to
contain two turnings toward the right hand, the second two turnings toward the
left. I for my part assent rather to Aelian. For touching the turnings of
Suidas, I cannot yet understand, why turning toward the rear should be a
turning from the enemy; Or toward the front a turning to the enemy:
Considering that whether soever you turn faces, the enemy is imagined to be
there; faces and weapons being to be opposed always against the enemy, which
is the only end of turning. Aelians opinion seems to have more probability
in it, at least if I conceive the right reason. For I take it thus: That seeing
the Graecians ( as the Romans likewise) were Targetieres, and carried their
targets on their left side, and in fight advanced that side always nearest the
enemy, which they sought to cover with their targets, that therefore the
turning about to the enemy, was called turning to the Target; as contrarily
turning to the right side, on which side the Pike was carried, and which being
naked of such defensive arms was called Latus ape^u^
the open side, and therefore further removed from the enemy, might for the
same cause be termed turning from the enemy. So that I take turning about to
the enemy, and turning about to the target to be all one, as also turning about
from the enemy, and turning about to the Pike, howsoever the name differ. This
is my conjecture, which I shall imagine to be true, till I find some man, that
will be pleased to give me a more probable reason: I only add now the words
of command in this motion.

As you were.
Faces to the right hand. Faces to the left hand. Faces about, to the right or
left hand. The figure shows the manner.



Of wheeling, double, and treble-wheeling of the battle, and returning to the
first posture. CHAP. XXVI.
1 EPistrophe (or wheeling) is when the battle being so closed, that no man
can turn, or twice turn his face by reason of the neerenesse of man to man,
it wholly, and jointly wheeleth (as a ship, or some other body carried about) the
order thereof remaining undissolved. When the wheeling is to the Pike, we warn
the right-corner-file-leader to stand still (as it were the hook of a door
hinge) and the rest of the battle proceeding forward to turn about the same
file-Leader like the door. In the same manner is wheeling to the Target; It
may be thus defined: Epistrophe is, when shutting the battle by gathering
close the Followers, and Sidemen, we turn it wholly (as the body of a man)
toward the Pike, or Target, it being carried about the corner-file-leader, as
about a Center, and, changing the place of the front, transfer the
countenance of the soldier to the right, or left hand; the followers and
sidemen every one remaining in file and rank as before. How it is to be done I
will show hereafter.

Anastrophe, or returning to the first posture, is the restoring of the
wheeling to the place, where the battle first stood close, before it began
to wheel. Perispasmos, or wheeling about, is the motion of the battle in two
wheelings, so that thereby the front comes to the place of the rear. 2
Ecperispasmos, or treble wheeling, is the motion of the battle in three
wheelings, so as, when it turns to the Pike, the front comes about to the
left flank; when to the Target, it comes about to the right flank.

Notes.
THis Chapter has a diverse kind of turning from the other mentioned in the
last Chapter, which for distinction sake, is called Epistrophe, or wheeling.
The other turned no more, then the soldiers faces, every man yet keeping the
same ground* be had before. This wheels the whole body, and changes the place
of the Phalange either to the right, or left hand, or to the rear. And as
there was in the turning of faces a particular motion of every particular
soldier to the right, or left hand, called Clesis, and an other turning about
called Metabole: so is there in this a general wheeling of the whole body to
the right, or left hand, called Epistrophe, and an other wheeling about to the
rear called Perispasmos. But let us hear the description.

1 Epistrophe (or wheeling) is, when the Battaile] Shortly Epistrophe is no
more, then the first turning of the battle to the right or left hand. In
doing whereof first the files must be closed to the hand, you mean to wheel,
then the ranks. Then the corner file-Leader on the same hand is to stand
still, then all the rest keeping their files, and ranks closed, to turn to
the same hand jointly about the Corner-file-leader circle-wise, who is to move
by little, and little* till he have turned his face to that side, which was
intended. And when the first rank is even with him, and the rest wheeled
enough to the same hand, they are to stand still: The words of the definition
of Epistrophe ( or wheeling) are plain enough in Aelian; I need use no
exposition. Now because in exercise we rely not upon one form of motion
alone, but acquaint our soldiers with all the kinds; It is necessary to
bring the body again to the first place, to the end we may proceed in the
rest. This reducing to the first Posture is called Anastrophe, by which the
battle returns, but by a contrary hand, to that, to which the Epistrophe
was made. And but for changing the hand the wheeling back again is all one
with the wheeling forward. We shall see hereafter how it is done. To bring the
battle to have the front, where the rear was, you must use a double
wheeling. And that is called Perispasmos. Which comes of two Epistrophes, and
is made either to the right, or left hand. Only it must be observed, that if
the Perispasmos (or wheeling about) be to the right hand, the Anastrophe (or
reducing to the first posture) must be to the left. Contrary it is if the
Perispasmos were to the right hand. 2 Ecperispasmos] I could never hitherto
conceive any use of a treble wheeling (for so Aelian takes the word) unless a
Perispasmos were first made, and the battle had the front already brought to
the rear, and so an Epistrophe added from the rear to the same hand.
Otherwise seeing that one wheeling is sooner made, then two, and therefore
sooner then three, I see no need of three wheelings, especially seeing we may
do that, we desire with one. For example, let us wheel our battle thrice
to the right hand, the front will come to be in the place of the left flank.
The same will be performed as well with one wheeling to the left hand. Et
frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per pauciora, especially in matter of
war, where the least moment of time often carries the whole business. The
like may be said of Ecperispasmos to the left hand.
The use of the motions of wheeling, and double wheeling, is, when the battle
being closed, and the enemy coming to assault you in any other one place, then
the front, you seek to bring the best men to fight. For if you be to be
charged in two places at once, or more, wheeling helps little; except it be to
turn the front to one enemy, and in that case your only shift is, to turn
faces against them, that come to charge, on what side soever they come.
Examples of these two motions, I mean Epistrophe, and Perispasmos meet us
almost in every Greek History. Of which I will represent one, or two,
especially of the latter; the rather because practice gives both light, and
life to precepts. Plut. in Pyrrh.
Plutarch recounteth, that after King Pyrrhus, had in vain assaulted Sparta,
he was invited by an Argiuan named Aristaeus to receive Argos into his
protection, and that he marched thitherward with his army. Arieus the king of
Lacedemonia laying ambushes for him, and taking the principal streights* by
which he was to pass, charged his rear, wherein the Galatians and Molossians
were. When Pyrrhus heard the brute and noise, he sent his son Ptolomy with
the band of Companions to aid, himself with all speed marching out of the
streights, led on his army. The medly being sharp about Ptolomy, and the
chosen Lacedaemonians commanded by Eualcus standing close to their business,
Oroesus a Candiot of Aptera, valiant of his hands, and swift of foot, running
cross against the young Prince gave him a deadly stroke and overthrew him. His
fall made the rest to fly. And the Lacedaemonians having the victory, and
following the chase came into the Champian ground still killing but not
remembering they were not followed with armed foot. Upon whom Pyrrhus, having
even then heard of, and being much moved with the death of his son, wheeled
about the Molossian horsemen. And himself first advancing upon the spur
imbrued himself with the slaughter of Lacedaemonians. He always seemed mighty,
and terrible in arms; but then he exceeded himself in daring and valor. For
turning his Horse upon Eualcus who shunning him, shifted a side, and with all
struck at his bridle hand as he passed by, and wanted but little of cutting it
off. But missing the hand, he light upon the raines, and carved them quite a
sunder. Pyrrhus with all struck him thorough the body with his Lance. Then
leaping from his horse, and fighting a foot, he cut in pieces the chosen
Lacedaemonians, that fought to recover the body of Eualcus. This was the fight
that Pyrrhus made by wheeling about his Horsemen against the Lacedaemonians,
that followed upon his Rear. Another example of Wheeling about is reported by
Polybius, and it is of Amilcar Annibals father, this is the history. The
mercenary soldiers of the Carthaginians revolted from them, and overthrew some
of their Generals, and shut them up within the City of Carthage, possessing
both other streights, that led into the Country, and also a bridge laid over
a river called Macar, which river was not passable, but by that Bridge.
Besides, they built a City for defense of that Bridge. Amilcar seeking to
dislodge the enemy from that Bridge, and having no way to come at them
conveniently; observed, that when certain winds blew, the mouth of the river
toward the sea was commonly filled up with sand, and would give passage
sufficient for his army. Finding then a fit time, he put over his army in the
night, and before day, or ere any man knew of it, made himself Master of the
passage; and presently led against them, that held the bridge. Spendius (he
was one of the chief Rebels) hearing thereof, advanced to meet Amilcar in
the plain, and both ten thousand from the City at the bridge foot, and
fifteen thousand more from Vtica, came out one to aid another, thinking to
wrappe in the Carthaginians between them; who were not above ten thousand
Soldiers of all sorts, and 70 Elephants. Amilcar led on his army. Before were
the Elephants, the horse, and light armed followed next, the armed foot came
last. And perceiving the enemy, that followed his Rear, pressed hard upon
him, he commanded his whole army to turn about. Those that were in the
Vangard of the march he willed to return to him with speed; *the other, that
at first had the rear, he wheeled about, and straight opposed against the
enemy. The Lybians and mercenaries imagining the Carthaginians fled for fear,
fell upon them disorderly, and boldly came to hands. But when they saw the
Horsemen, being now turned about, and come up near to the foot, and already
put in order, make a stand, they themselves, by reason they looked for nothing
less, fell into a fear, turning their backs fled presently, as before they
gave on unadvisedly, and straglingly. And some of them falling upon their own
people, that were coming on, wrought both theirs, and their own destructions:
othersome were trampled upon, and trod to death, by the horse, and Elephants,
that followed the chase. Thus far Polybius. And thus far of Wheelings. The
figure, and words of command are reserved for the 32 Chapter, where the manner
of wheelings, and returning to the first posture is set down.

Of filing, ranking, and restoring to the first posture. CHAP. XXVII.
TO file is, when every particular man keeping equal distance from other
stands in his own file lineally betwixt the file-Leader and bringer-vp. To
rank is, to be in a right line even with his sidemen in the length of the
battle. 1 To restore to the first posture is, to bring the sight of the
Soldier to the same aspect, he had before the first turning. As if his face
were at first toward the enemy, being commanded to turn toward the Pike,
and thence to return to his first posture, he is again to return his face
toward the enemy.

Notes.
OF filing, and ranking enough is spoken before.

1 To restore to the first posture] This motion differs from Anastrophe
before specified. For Anastrophe brings back again the whole body to the
first place after a Wheeling: This the Soldiers faces particularly to the
first aspect. So that this is used after the making of an Anastrophe. For
always in motions it is requisite, that the Soldiers faces move forward. To
move backward has many inconveniences, of stumblings upon uneven ground, or
stones, or pittes, or stubbes, or such like. Which is the cause that in
Anastrophe after a Wheeling, Aelian wills, that the Soldiers turn their
faces the contrary way first, then move on, till they have recovered their
first ground, then open ranks, and files, and lastly to restore to the first
aspect. And as it differs from Anastrophe so differs it likewise from
Metabole. Metabole only turned faces about, this sets the Soldier in his
former posture, not only for his face, but for his arms, also, which, are
ordered as at first. The words wherein this motion is expressed by Aelian are
Ep orthon apodounai, and Eis orthon apoca^astesai, which is interpreted by Gaza
in arrectum reddere, to restore up right, by Arcerius rectum reddere, to
restore right, and so the words sound. Aelian interprets it to set again the
Soldiers sight in the same aspect in which it stood at first: as if being
placed with his face against the enemy he be commanded to turn his face to the
Pike, and then again to restore his face to his first posture, he must
return, and set his face against the enemy. Aelian therefore refers it to
the sight, he first had, which if it be the right meaning, how can it be
upright, or right, more in that, then in any other posture. For the Soldier
not only in front, but in flank, and in the rear carries himself upright,
or right. I doubt not, but that it may be applied to the upright standing of
men, as appears by sundry places of Pausanias: Who reherseth, that Mineruas
Image set Pausan. in Articis 43.
in the Temple Parthenion stands upright, orthon esti, and in an other place,
that in Corinth Pausan. in Corinth 89.
in the Temple Pantheon, there were two Images of Mercury standing upright,
Ortha, Pausan. in Corinth. 87.
and that in the Temple of Fortune the image of Fortune was carved of Parian-
stone, and stood upright* Orthon: and that in Neptunes Temple situate in the
Corinthian Isthmus, the images of Amphitrite and Neptune stand in a Chariot,
and the boy Palemon upright upon a Dolphin, Orthos. In all which places Orthos
designeth the site of men. But here, as I take, it cannot be so applied.
Because in every motion, not only in this, the men stand upright. How then can
they be restored to their standing upright, when they do it already. I take
the original of the appellation to come from another cause, and that is from
the ordering of the Pike. For when the battle is first set in the field,
every Soldier stands with his Pike ordered, that is upright. For to order a
pike is to set the butt end on the ground before the Soldier somewhat wide of
his right foot, and to hold it upright with the right hand borne even with the
shoulder. But when you begin, or continue any motion, the manner is to
advance, or to shoulder the Pike, and so to proceed. But being commanded to
return to the first posture, it must be ordered again. So that the first
posture of an armed man is to stand with his pike upright. And after many
motions and windings, he at last returns to the same posture, which I take
the command of Ep'orthon apodounai to signify. Now that I may not seem to
rely upon a probable conjecture alone, I will bring witness for the
confirmation of my opinion. It is reported by Diod. Sicul. lib. 15. 473.
Diodorus Siculus, that Agesilaus the Lacedemonian King with an army of
eighteen thousand foot, and fifteen hundred horse, invaded Boeotia. The
Athenians before hearing of Agesilaus coming had sent five thousand foot, and
200 horse to aid the Thebans, who gathering their army together seized upon a
long narrow hill distant 20 furlongs from the City; And making the hard access
to the place a kind of fortification against the enemy, they there waited his
coming, fearing to hazard upon even ground in regard of the renown, and glory
of Agesilaus. Agesilaus, having imbattailed his troops, led them against the
Boeotians; and approaching near, sent his light armed to sound their
disposition to fight, which being easily repulsed by the Thebans by the
advantage of the higher ground, he advanced the rest of his forces being
imbattailed in such manner, as might give greatest terror. Chabrias the
Athenian willed his Soldiers to awaite the enemy contemptuously both keeping
their first array, and their Targets at their knees, and continuing their Pikes
upright ordered; who when they jointly as upon a word given, did as they were
commanded, Agesilaus both wondering at the good order, and at the assured
fashion of the enemy thought it not fit to strive with unequal ground, and by
forcing them to fight, to compel them to be valiant, whether they would, or
no. Hitherto Diodor Sicul. of the Strategem of Chabrias against Agesilaus,
which consisted in the contempt of Agesilaus, and all his forces: First in not
stirring one foot, to meet the enemy, then in keeping the array they held
before; further in sincking their Targets to their knees; Lastly in continuing
the former order of their Pikes, that is not making readyto charge, but
remaining with their Pikes ordered, as they were at first. Agesilaus advancing
his army thought to strike a fear into his enemy; Chabrias trusting to the
strength of the place, scorned the Brouado of Agesilaus, conceiving, he would
not be so hardy to adventure the fight upon so great an inequallity of ground.
He therefore wills the Cap 28 The Macedoman Countermache by file
The rear

The front of the first standing

The Countermarche in action

The file leaders with their faces about standing firm

The bringers up dismarching

The front after Countermarche

The ground taken before ye front of the Phalange

Cap 29 The Lacedemonian Countermarche
The Countermarche in action

The fileleaders advancing in Countermarche

The bringers up standing firm with their faces turned about

The front after Countermarche

The ground taken beyond the reareof the Phalange

Cap* 20 The Chorean Countermarche
The Front in the first standing

The Bringers up moving

The fileleaders dismarching

The front after Countermarche

Cap. 20. Countermarche by Rank
The Countermarche in action

diers not to alter their posture, but to continue as they were. The words
concerning the Pike are: En ortho to dorati menein. That is to continue their
pikes upright (En ortho) Now whether the same be the posture, that the Tacticks
describe, when they speak or restoring Ep' ortho, upright, I refer to the
judgment of the Reader. a Poliaenus b Polyen. lib. ^* in Agesilao.
remembering this Stratagem uses somewhat different words, and yet consents
in meaning. Chabrias says he, commanded his Soldiers not to run out against
the enemy, but quietly to stand still holding their pikes before upright, and
their Targets before their knees which they were wont to do, when they would a
little ease themselves of the weight of their Targets. Where Diodore, has en
ortho to dorati menein, to continue their Pikes upright. Polienus has
protinomenous ta dorata ortha, holding before them their Pikes upright. But
both have pikes upright and Diodorus his Continue has relation to the Posture
they were in, which Chabrias would not have them to alter: Polienus his hold
before to that they were commanded to do. In ordering of Pikes at this day I
have showed, that the Soldiers hold them upright, the but end set on the
ground before, and somewhat wide of their right foot. Aemil. Prob. in Chabria.
105.
Aemilius Probus reciting this history peruerteth the Stratagem: He says
that Chabrias forbad the Phalange to give back, and taught his Soldiers to
receive the enemies charge kneeling with one knee, the other set against the
Target, and with the Pike abased. Wherein he quite dissenteth from Diodore,
and Polien. Diodore says, the command was to keep their array; Polienus not
to run forward, but quietly to stand still; Probus not to give back. Probus
says, they should kneel with one knee, and rest against the Target with the
other; Diodore that they should hold their Targets sunk to their knees;
Polienus that they should carry their Targets before at their knees. Probus
that they should abase, and charge their Pikes; Diodore that they should
continue, and order them upright; Polien that they should hold their Pikes
upright. So that Diodore and Polien agree, and expound one another: Aemilius
Probus bringing in a new history dissenteth, as I said, from the other two;
especially in making that to be a form of fight prescribed by Chabrias (a
simple form to receive the charge upon their knees) which was a contempt, to
show how little, especially in that strength of ground, he regarded Agesilaus;
which contempt also made Agesilaus retire, not doubting but it proceeded from a
great assurance of the enemy. Therefore as I said I take these words ep' orthon
apodounai, not only to appertain to the aspect of the Soldier, but also (and
that much rather) to the erection, and ordering of Pikes.

Of Countermarches, and the diverse kinds thereof, with the manner how they are
to be made. CHAP. XXVIII.
THere are two sorts of Countermarches, one by file, the other by rank; each
of these again is divided into three kinds. The first called the Macedonian:
The second the Lacedemonian: The third the Choraean, which is also the Persian,
and the Cretan. 1 The Macedonian is that, which leaving the ground, it first
had, takes in liew thereof the ground, which was before the front of the
Phalange, and turns the aspect of the Soldier backward [where before it was
forward.]

2 The Lacedemonian is that, which leaving likewise the ground it first had,
takes in steed thereof, the ground which was behind the Rear of the
Phalange, and turns also the face of the Soldier the contrary way.

3 The Persian is the Cretan, and Choraean: This keeps the same ground of the
Phalange, every soldier taking another place for that, he had, the file-Leader
the place of Bringer-vp, and so the rest in order; and turns also the face of
the Soldier the contrary way.

4 Countermarches by rank are made, when a man would transfer the wings
into the place of the Sections; and the Sections into the place of the wings,
to the end to strengthen the midst of the battle. Likewise the right hand
parts into the left hand parts, and the left hand parts into the right hand
parts. They that fear to countermarch the Phalange in gross the enemy being
at hand, do it by Syntagmaes.

I will now set down, in what manner countermarches ought to be made.

The Macedonian countermarch by file is said to be, when the file-leader
turns about his face, and all the rest with the Bringer-vp go against him on
the right, or left hand, and passing on to the ground before the front of the
Phalange place themselves in order one after an other, according as the
file-Leader himself has turned his face. Therefore it makes show to the
enemy appearing in the Rear, of running away: Or it is when the file-Leader
turns about his face, and the rest passing by him on the right or left hand
place themselves orderly one behind another.

But the Lacedemonian is, when the Bringer-vp turns his face about, and all
the rest turning also their faces, and proceeding forward together with their
file-Leader order themselves proportionably in the ground, which was behind
the Rear of the Phalange. Wherefore to the enemy appearing behind, it makes a
semblance of falling on. Again the Lacedemonian is, when the file-Leader
turning his face about to the Pike, or Target transferreth the whole file to
another place equal to the first; and the rest following stand, as before,
behinde*him. Or else, when the Bringer-vp turns his face about, and he, that
stood next before him, passing by on the right or left hand, is placed again
next before him, and the rest following are placed one before another in their
former order till the file-Leader be the first.

The Choraean is, when the file-Leader turning about toward the Pike, or
Target, precedeth the file, and the rest follow, till the file-Leader have the
place of the Bringer-vp, and the Bringer-vp the place of the file-Leader. And
these are the Countermarches by file.

In the same manner are Countermarches made by rank in case a man would
countermarch by rank. For every rank Countermarching either keeps the same
ground, or changes the right hand place, or else the left hand place, of the
battle, one of which must needs fall out, and never fails.

Notes.
THe two former motions are performed, one in close Order, the other in all
Orders; Epistrophe when the battle is shut so close, that (as Aelian says) a
man can turn his face neither the one way, nor the other. Clisis in open
Order, Order, and close Order. The two ^ following motions, Countermarch, and
Doubling, one is done in open See Leo cap. 7. 83. 84.
Order, the other for the most part in open order too; and yet sometimes in
Order, and close order; as we shall see in due place. This Chapter handles
Countermarches, the next Doublings. Countermarch is a motion, whereby every
soldier marching after other, changes his front for the rear, or one flancke
for the other. For there are two kinds of Countermarches, one by file, and the
other by rank. And each of these is again divided into three; the first
called the Macedonian; the second, the Lacedemonian; the third the Choraean, or
Cretan. A Countermarch by file is, when every soldier follows his Leader of
the same file; By rank, when every soldier follows his sideman of the same
rank in the Countermarch.

1 The Macedonian Countermarch] In this Countermarch, the purpose of the
Commander is to turn the front of his battle against the enemy that shows
himself in the Rear; and withal to take the ground that lies before the
front of the Phalange. It is called the Macedonian Countermarch ( says Aelian)
because the Macedonians were the inventers of it. Which of the Macedonians he
tells not, but excludes Philip, and Alexander, who both used the
Lacedemonian Countermarch. And before their times I have not read of any
warlike Kings of Macedonia The manner of it is this; First all the File-leaders
turn their faces about either to the right or left hand; then the next rank
passes thorough by them on the same hand; and being come to their distances,
place themselves directly behind their File-leaders, and then turn about their
faces the same way. And so the third rank after them, and the fourth, and all
the rest, till the Bringers-vp be last, and have taken the rear of the
battle again, and turned about their faces. The figure expresses not well
the action. For in it the Bringers-vp begin first to countermarch, which
according to Aelian should move last. Yet may this Countermarch be done, as the
figure is. But I take Aelians way to be easier, and readier. And it may be
also, that the Countermarch expressed in the figure is lost in the text. For
one of the Lacedemonian Countermarches, which proceeds the contrary way,
begins the motion with the File-leaders, as this does with the Bringers-vp,
as we shall straight see. 2 The Lacedemonian countermarch] In this
Countermarch the proceeding is contrary to that of the former; that took the
ground before the Phalange, this takes the ground after. In that the moving was
from the Rear to the front, in this from the front to the rear. This is the
invention of the Lacedaemonians. Aelian describes it to be done in two manners:
One, when the Bringers-vp first turn about their faces, and the next See Leo
cap. 12. * 95.
rank likewise turning faces begins the Countermarch, and every man thereof
places himself directly before his Bringer-vp, and the third do the like;
and so the rest, till the rank of the File-leaders come to be first: The
other, when the File-leaders begin the Countermarch, and every one in their
files follow them orderly. The figure expresses this last. Aelian prefers
the Lacedemonian Countermarch before the Macedonian: because in it the
soldiers seem to fall on, and go to the charge; where in the Macedonian they
seem to fly. There are notwithstanding times, when it is better to use the
Macedonian. As in case you mean to march on, and not to fight with the enemy,
except you be compelled: Or else you seek to gain some ground of advantage.
For the Macedonian continues still the march, and stays not; the
Lacedemonian returns upon the enemy, and so loses ground in marching.
Agesilaus after victory gotten against the Argives, against whom he stood in
the right winge, hearing that the Thebans had beaten the Orchomenians in the
left winge, used the Lacedemonian Countermarch against them. The words of
Xenoph. hist. graec. lib. 4. 519. C.
Xenophon sound thus: Here the strangers were about to crown Agesilaus
(thinking he had got the victory) when news was brought that the Thebans,
after they had broken the Orchomenians, had forced a passage as far as the
baggage. Then Agesilaus, countermarching his Phalange* led against them. The
Thebans perceiving their Confederates were fied up to the mount Helicon, closed
their troops together, as near as they could, seeking to open a way by force,
and to get up unto them. Agesilaus albeit he might by giving way to the foremost
have followed them at heels, and charged the rear, yet did he it not, but met
the Thebans front to front. Thus encountering, and clashing their Targets
together they fought, thrust on, killed, and were killed. In fine some of the
Thebans broke thorough to Helicon; other some, as they sought to escape, were
left dead on the place. Agesilaus here followed the chase upon the Argives
toward the mount Helicon: The Thebans upon the Orchomenians the contrary way
toward the enemies Camp. The Thebans seeing their confederates fled to the
mount Helicon, returned toward them, Agesilaus countermarched to meet them,
met them, and fought with them. For the Countermarch he used, I make account it
was the Lacedemonian, himself being a Lacedemonian. And he used it to meet the
Thebans bravely in front. The same Agesilaus, after he had by night encamped in
a piece of ground behind Mantinaea encompassed Xenoph. hist. graec lib. 6. 605.
D.
about with mountains, perceiving the next morning, that the Mantinaeans
gathered together upon the tops, that lay right over the head of his
Rearegard, determined to lead his Army out of the place with all speed. Now if
himself should lead, he feared the enemy would give upon his Rear. Therefore
standing still, and turning his arms against the enemy, he commanded the last
of the Phalange to march back again from the Rear, and come up to him; and
so at once he brought his Army out of the streights, and made it by little,
and little stronger. When the Phalange was thus doubled, he proceeded in that
order into the Champeigne, and there again reduced the depth of the armed
foot to 9 or 10 men in every file. This place of Xenophon, if it be not
corrupted, is very obscure. And I cannot tell whether to take it for doubling
of the front, or the Macedonian countermarch. The words make for a doubling.
For Xenophon says plainly, the Phalange was doubled. Besides he adds, it
was made by little and little stronger; which could not be done with a
Countermarch. And that a deep Phalange, or Hearse, (such as this by the
euenings march, and the straights it entered, seems to be) is made stronger by
doubling the front, there is no question. On the other side, the streights,
thorough which it was to pass, persuade me, it should be a Macedonian
Countermarch. For in doubling the front the length still increases; and the
manner is not to enlarge, but to extenuate the front, when an Army is to be
conveyed thorough a narrow place. And Xenophon says expressly, that Agesilaus
led it thorough the streights into the Champeigne in that order, to which it
was reduced last; and that in the Champion the depth of the Armed was lessened,
and brought to 9 or 10; for there Agesilaus imbattailed his Phalange to receive
the enemy, if he would charge. And in a march through straight ways the front
is commonly narrowed, and proportioned to the way; but in open ground the
Phalange is again brought to the just length. So that it seems the depth was
much, before it come into the plain; because in the plain it was brought to 9
or 10 men, and therefore no doubling. Lastly Agesilaus, (and the front I doubt
not of the Phalange with him) turned face to the enemy, before the Rear came
up to him. which is done in no other motion, than the Macedonian countermarch.
In which all the File-leaders first turn about their faces toward the enemy,
and then the whole battle marches against the File-leaders, and placing
themselves orderly behind them, turn their faces the same way, that they have
done before. Now where it is in Xenophon, that Agesilaus having gained the
Champeigne, extended his Army to 9 or 10 Targeteres, I suspect a fault to be
in the number of 9; and that it ought to be read 8 or 10. To extend a Phalange
is to draw it out in length. the length is the space betwixt the point of both
wings. When he says he extended it to 10, the meaning is he drew it out so
far in length that he left but 10 in depth. Ten is the decas, whereof I spoke
before, and I have likewise noted, that the Lacedaemonians for the most part,
made the depth of their battle 8. The number of 9, as all other uneven
numbers, was rejected by the Tacticks, as unfit for doublings. So that mine
opinion is that Xenophon at the first wrote 8 or 10, not 9 or 10, howsoever 9
be crept into the place of 8. But to return to Agesilaus, admit he used
doubling of ranks, or of the front in retiring out of the Mantinaean straights,
yet give me leave to be of opinion, that the Macedonian Countermarch had been
the fittest motion for that purpose. For himself being thereby cast in the
rear, he had both prevented the charge of the enemy (which he feared) and yet
wound better out of the straights, the long Hearse, which still remained in the
Macedonian Countermarch, being more proportionable to issue out of a narrow
place, then a broad-fronted Phalange, which arises out of doubling the front.
3 The Persian is the Cretan or Choraean] This Countermarch is called the
Persian, and Cretan, because it was used amongst the Persians and Cretans. And
it was termed the Choraean also, of the similitude it had with the solemn
Grecian dances upon stages; the company, that showed themselves in such dances
being called Chorus. Who in their daunces ordered themselves into files, and
ranks, as soldiers do in battle, and moving forward to the brinke of the
stage, when being straightned by the place, they could pass no further, they
retired one through the ranks of the other, exceeding not the bounds of the
place, as is done in this Countermarch. The other two kinds of Countermarch
changed the ground, they had before. The Macedonian took the ground before the
front; The Lacedemonian the ground after the rear. The Choraean holds the
same ground, and begins the motion with the File-leaders, who
notwithstanding proceed no further, then thither, where the Bringers-vp stood,
their files following them, and every soldier keeping the same distance, he
had before the moving. The figure shows the manner of it. Xenoph. de rep.
Lacedem. 686. E.
These Countermarches by file, are to be made, when the enemy appears in the
rear, and comes to charge us. And they are made to the end, to bring our
best men, that is the File-leaders, to the encounter. Wherein notwithstanding
there is a caution to be held, that if the enemy be very near, or so near,
that we cannot conveniently countermarch, See Leo cap. 18.. 39.
before he come up to us, we forbear, lest we fall into disorder, and in
disorder be easily defeated. In which case the best remedy is to turn faces
about, and so receive him. Hitherto of Countermarches by file. 4 Countermarches
by rank are made] The ends of Countermarches by rank are two in Aelian: one
to strengthen the midst of the battle; the other to strengthen the wings.
If the strength of the enemies battle, lie most in the midst, reason of
War would, that we should oppose our greatest strength against the midst.
If in the wings against the wings. There is an other cause of strengthening the
wings, namely if the enemy be ready to charge either of them: and this
strength Aelian would have given by the Countermarch of our best men into the
wings. It shall not be from the purpose to make all plain by an example or
two. Herodot. in Calliop^ 248. and Plutarch. in Aristide.
Herodotus reports, that before the battle of Plataea betwixt the
Graecians, and the Persians, it was agreed betwixt the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians, that where the Athenians had vanquished the Persians in the
battle of Marathon, and had lately slain Masistius the General of the
Persian horse; and by those incounters had good experience of the Persian
manner of fight; and where the Lacedaemonians were imbattailed in the right wing
against the Persians, the Athenians in the left wing against the Thebans, and
other Graecians, that took part with the Persians: they should change, and the
Athenians have the right wing, the Lacedaemonians the left. These news were
carried to Mardonius the General of the Persians; who whether fearing the
Athenians, or desirous to fight with the Lacedaemonians, changed his place from
the left into his right wing, to the intent to oppose against them; which when
Pausanias saw, he returned to his right wing, and Mardonius to his left, the
place, which he had at the beginning. Here are changing wings on both parts;
The one coveting to fight in the left wing, the other desirous to fight in the
right. The Countermarch by rank from the right wing would have fitted
Pausanias: as the contrary Countermarch would have fitted Mardonius. Yet am I
led to think that Pausanias used a wheeling of his battle, and so conveyed
it from one wing to an other behind the battle of the other Graecians, to the
end, that being shadowed by them, he might the better hide his purpose from
Mardonius. An other example I find in Livy and Polybius both. It is this: Live.
decad. 3. lib. 8. 204. B. Polyb. lib. 11. 640. B.
Pub: Scipio, who was afterward called Africanus, and Asdruball the son of
Gisgo, being encamped near together in Spain brought daily out of their
Camps their Armies one against an other. And after they had long stood
waiting, who should begin the fight, which was done at neither hand, they
conveyed them back again. The manner of their imbattailing was this. The
Romans, and likewise the Carthagineans mingled with the Africans, had the
middle, their Confederates the wings. The opinion was they should fight in that
order. Scipio when he perceived this to be firmly believed, the day before he
meant to fight, made an alteration of all. When night came, he gave the word
thorough the whole Camp, that horse, and men should dine, before it was light
day, and that the horsemen in Arms should keep their horses bridled, and
sadled. The day was scarce sprunge, when he sent his horse, and light-armed to
beat in the Carthaginean Gardes, himself straight followed with the armed
Legions; disposing the Romans (contrary to the settled opinion of his own
people, and of the enemy) in the wings, and receiving the Allies into the
midst. Asdrubal raised out of his bed with the cry of his horsemen, had no
sooner leaped out of his Tent, and seeing the tumult before the trench of his
Camp, and the amazednes of his people, and the Ensigns of the Legions shining
a far of, and the field full of enemies, presently sent out his whole power
of horse to undertake the Roman horse. Himself issued out of the Camp with
his foot, not changing any thing of his wonted manner of imbattailing. The
fight of the horsemen had now a long time been doubtful, and could not be
tried, because still, as they were beaten (which happened a like to both) they
found a safe retreat within the battles of foot. But when the Armies were
come within 500 paces one of an other, Scipio giving a signal of Retreat, and
opening his battle, received all the horse, and light-armed into the midst,
and dividing them into two parts, placed them as seconds, behind the wings. Now
when time was come to begin the fight, he commanded the Spaniards, who had the
middle ward, to march on leasurely, and sent a messenger from the right winge
(for he commanded there) to Syllanus and Martius, willing them to stretch out
the left winge, as they saw him stretch out the right; and to charge the enemy
with the light-armed, and horse, before the middle wards might be able to come
up, and join. The wings being thus stretched out, they led with all possible
speed three Cohorts of foot, and three troops of horse a piece, against the
enemy, besides the light-armed, and those that were received into the Rear,
who followed a thwart. There was a great empty space in the midst, because
the Ensigns of the Spaniards came slowly on. And now the wings were in fight,
when the old soldiers Carthaginians and Africans, the strength of the Army,
were not yet come to use their darts, neither durst they run into the wings
to help them, that fought for fear of opening the midst of the battle to
the enemy, who was coming on against them. The wings were pressed with a
double medley. The Horse, light-armed, and Velites, wheeling about their
Troops, charge their flanks. The Cohorts pushed on in front, to the end, to
break of the wings from the body of the battle. And the conflict was
unequal both in all other respects, and especially because a rabble, as it were
of drudges, and untrained Spaniards, were opposed against the Roman and Latin
soldiers. The day being now far spent, the Army of Asdruball oppressed with
the mornings tumult, and compelled to take the field, before they had
strengthened their bodies with meat, began to faint, and fail in strength;
which was the reason that Scipio lingered out the day, and made the fight
somewhat late. For it was past the seventh hour, before the wings of foot
attached one an other: and yet the fight came later to the middle wards. So
that the scorching heat of the south-sunne, and the labor of standing armed,
and hunger, and thirst, first afflicted their bodies, before they came to hands
with the enemy. Therefore they stood leaning upon their Targets, and being
weary both in body, and mind, they gave back at last; keeping notwithstanding
their array no otherwise, than as if the battle being yet entire, had
retreated at the commandment of the General. But when the victors, perceiving
them to shrink, so much the more eagerly pressed on, the brunt could hardly be
endured any longer. And although Asdrubal restrained, and stopped them, that
gave ground, crying that hills and a safe place of retreat was at their backs,
if they could be but entreated, to retire easily; yet fear ouercomming shame,
and the enemy killing them that were next to hand, they forthwith turned their
backs, and universally powered out themselves into flight. This stratagem of
Scipio rests principally in shifting his best men (the Romans) into the
wings; the Spaniards his worst into the midst, and in keeping the Spaniards
aloof from joining; and in hasting to try the day with the Romans against the
weakest of the enemy. Asdrubals way to meet with this stratagem had been to
countermarch by rank half his Carthaginians, and Africans into one winge, and
half into the other. And by that means his Spaniards should have had the
midst against the Roman-Spaniards, and his old soldiers Carthaginians and
Africans been opposed in the wings against the Romans, and Latins, and the
advantage eluded, that Scipio sought.
As the Countermarches by file were of three kinds, so are the Countermarches
by rank; namely the Macedonian, the Lacedemonian, and the Choraean. The
Macedonian begins to move at the corner of the wing, which is nearest to the
enemy, the enemy appearing to either flank. And therefore inc^rreth the same
imputation, that was laid upon the Macedonian countermarch by file; as seeming
to run away, because it dismarcheth from the enemy. Yet is there use of it,
as well as of that by file. For by this countermarch you may set the strongest
part of your Army against the enemy, and apply the weakest to some River,
Lake, hill, or such like, so that the enemy can not come to incompasse it. It
takes the ground that lies on the side of the contrary wing. The Lacedemonian
takes the ground that lies on the side of that wing, which is toward the
enemy, and brings the best men to be foremost against the enemy: And therefore
begins the moving on the contrary side. The use of it is, when your forces
are such as are able to encounter the enemy, and you desire to bring your best
men to fight. The Choraean keeps the same ground, the battle had at first,
and brings one wing to possess the place of the other; Or else the Sections
to possess the place of the wings, as might have been done in the last
example cited concerning Scipio and Asdrubal. The manner of countermarch by
rank is contrary to the countermarch by file. In countermarch by file the
motion was in the depth of the battle, and either the front removed toward
the rear, or the rear toward the front, and took one an others place. In
this the motion is in length of the battle flanke-wise; the wing either
marching into the midst, or else clean through to the other wing. In doing it
the soldiers, that stand uttermost in the flank of the wing, must move first
to the contrary wing, and the rest of every rank severally follow them in
order, The figure will show the manner of the motion. Patritius utterly
mistaketh the countermarch by rank; and groundeth himself upon a wrong
principle, namely that in all Countermarches the File-leaders must march toward
the rear, and the Bringers-vp toward the front. And therefore in changing the
wings into Sections, he makes the wings to fall of behind in the rear (the
File-leaders wheeling about) and there to join themselves as near, as the
middle Section will give leave, and the Sections falling back likewise, to
join themselves to the flanks of them, that were the wings. Whereas the nature
of this Euolution is clearly to leave the File-leaders in front, and
Bringers-vp in rear, as they were at first. And albeit the File-leaders then
change their places, yet change they their place with none, but with File
leaders, and the change is, but a change of hands, the right hand for the left,
or the left hand for the right. For whereas the File-leaders of the right wing
had before the right hand, now in countermarch by rank, being transposed to
the left wing, they have the left hand of all the rest of the File-leaders; as
likewise the Bringers-vp of the other bringers-vp.

The words of Command may be these,
For the Macedonian Countermarch by file.
File-leaders turn your faces about (to the right or left hand).

The rest of every File pass through in order one after another, and place your
selves at your distances after your Leaders, turning your faces about; and so
stand.

For the Lacedemonian Countermarch by file.
The first manner.
Bringers-vp, turn your faces about (to the right or left hand.)

The rest turn your faces about and beginning at them, that are next to the
Bringers-vp, countermarch and place your selves in your distances before the
Bringers-vp, and one before an other till the File-leaders be first.

The second manner.
File-leaders, countermarch to the right, or left hand, and let every man's file
follow him, and keep true distance.

For the Choraean countermarch by file.
File-leaders, countermarch to the place of the Bringers-vp, and stand, and let
your files follow you keeping their distance.

For the Macedonian countermarch by rank.
The right or left hand corner file, turn your faces to the right, or left
hand.

The rest of each rank, pass thorough to the right, or left hand; and place
your selves orderly behind your sidemen keeping your distance.

Cap 29 Dobling of Ranks
The front before Dobling of ranks

Dobling of ranks in action

The front after Dobling of Ranks



For the Lacedemonian countermarch by rank.
The first manner.
The corner file, where the enemy appears, turn your faces to the right or
left hand; The rest of each ranks turn your faces, and pass thorough, (to the
right or left hand) and place your selves before your sidemen orderly keeping
your distances.

The second manner.
The right or left wing, where the enemy appears not, countermarch to the
contrary wing, and all in the Ranks follow every man his side-man; keeping your
distance.

For the Choraean countermarch by rank.
The uttermost corner file of the right, or left wing, countermarch into the
place of the left or right winge, and stand.

And the rest follow ranke-wise keeping their distance.

Of doubling, and the kinds thereof. CHAP. XXIX.
1 THere are two kinds of doubling, one of Ranks, the other of Depth, or
files: and 2 either of these double the number, or the place. 3 The length is
doubled in number when of a front of 124 files we make a front (keeping the
same ground) of 248 files, by inserting in the spaces betwixt file and file,
some of the followers, that stood in the depth. This is done to the end to
thicken the length of the battle. If we lift to recall them to their first
posture, we are to command those, that were inserted, to countermarch to the
place, they had before.

4 There are, that mislike these doublings, especially the enemy being at hand;
and would have a show of doubling made, without indeed doubling the Phalange
already ordered, by stretching out the light-armed, and the Horse, on both
sides of the wings of the Battle. 5 The use of doubling the length is, when
either we would ouer-wing the enemy, or else our selves fear to be ouer-winged.

The Depth is doubled 6 by inserting the second file into the first; so that
the Leader of the second file be placed next behind the Leader of the first
file, and the second man of the second file be the fourth man of the first
file, and the third man of the second file be the sixth in the first file, and
so forth the rest, till the whole second file be engrossed into the first; and
likewise the fourth file into the third, and all the even files into the odd.

Doub^ing of the Depth by Countermarch is made, either when the next side-files
in several [as in the former example the second, and the fourth, and the rest
of the even files] countermarch to the Rear, and place themselves behind the
Bringersvp of the odd files; or else the files remaining in their first place,
and number, half of them, dividing themselves from the other half,
countermarch likewise to the Rear, and conveying themselves behind the other,
there order themselves, and so double the depth of the Phalange.

If we would return them to the first posture, we must recall those, that were
conveyed to stand behind, to the place they had before the Countermarch.

Notes.
THE former three Motions alter not the form of the Phalange. For whether you
turned faces, wheeled, or countermarched the Phalange, the depth and length
remained one. The motion to be expressed in this Chapter induces an other
shape to the Phalange; and makes it seem a different body from that it was
before, being by Doubling extended either in length or in depth. For Doubling
the number of men, or the place of the Phalange in front, makes the length
twice as much, and doubling the same in flank makes the depth double to that
it was before. For Doubling is nothing else, then making a military body twice
as long, or twice as deep, as it was before.

1 There are two kinds of doubling] The Doublings are either of length or
depth; Or (which is all one as Suidas in the word Dip^asiasai.
Suidas says) of ranks or files. For ranks stretch out in length, files in
depth. And these again are divided into two other kinds, the body being 2
Doubled in number or place] That which is here called number, is called
elsewhere persons; or Suidas in the word Dip^asiasai.
( by Suidas) men. It is called persons in the Insertion which is made to
Aelian, I know not by whom, in the precedent Chapter of Countermarches. Which
because it lay thrust in betwixt the description of Countermarches, and nothing
perteined to that argument, I never made doubt, was crept into the text. And I
am rather confirmed in my opinion, because I saw it note^ with an Asteriske in
that Aelian ( being of Robortellus Edition) which the learned Isaac Casaubon
had quoted, and purposed to set forth, if untimely death had not pr^vented him.
I will here set down the words, because they differ not much from Aelian, and
may give some light to the manner of Doubling. It is to be understood ( so are
the words) that a Phalange is doubled in persons, or place. when we therefore
take half the soldiers from the Depth, and making files of them, place them
even with the rest in length of the front, so that of 124 files we make 248,
this is Doubling of persons. In like sort we double the place with 124 files
(not increasing the number) but only commanding some to turn to the Pike,
some to the Target, till the Phalange be stretched out to a convenient length,
as from 5 furlongs to 10. In the same manner is the depth doubled. For either
one file is inserted into an other, man for man, so that the second File-leader
becomes the follower of the first, and the second man in the second file, the
follower of the second in the first file, and so the rest: Or else 16 men are
so extended, that they hold as much ground in length, as 32 vsuallydoe. So
far the insertion. It follows in Aelian. 3 The length is doubled in number]
When the front has twice as many files, as it had before, this is Doubling in
number, or in men, or in persons. For the persons, or men, make the number in
the files. And the files carrying an even depth of men, and being doubled,
double the number of the front, or length. Aelian speaks but of one kind of
doubling, namely of number, and that must be done in open order, as I said
before. For the files of 16 standing in open order, if you command the
Middlemen ( as we term them at this day, they were called in the Macedoman
files the third Enomotarchs) to double their ranks: These middle men with the
hinder half file march up to the front, and so doubling the front in number
leave yet the same measure of length. The figure shows how it is done. Yet
are there two other ways, when the Phalange stands in close order* both
which double the number, and place. One is when the Middlemen divide
themselves, and one half with their followers turning their faces march out of
the right flank: The other of the left flank of the Phalange. And then
turning their faces again, sleeue up and join themselves in an even line with
the File leaders in front; The other when all the Middle turn their faces one
way and march out with their followers beyond one flank right or left; and
turning faces again sleeue up to the front, and stand even with the
File-leaders. One of these is done, when we desire to enlarge both the wings of
the Phalange; the other, when but one wing. Of these two last ways, I have set
down no figure, because I find them not expressed in Aelian. Cleandridas the
Lacedemonian, used yet an other kind not spoken of by Aelian. Polyen. lib 2.
in Cleandrida. 4.
Polienus tells the story thus: Cleandridas making war upon the Thurians,
having half as many men again, as they, conceiving if they had intelligence
hereof, they would hardly be brought to fight, imbattailing his Phalange,
stretched it out in depth. The Lucans therefore, contemning the small number,
drew out their forces in length, with intent to ouer-front the enemy; which
Cleandridas perceiving, commanded the followers to march up, and rank with
their Leaders; and by that means increased the length of his Phalange, and
ouer-fronted the enemy; who being encompassed, and assailed with missiue
weapons on all hands perished entirely, excepting a few, that saved themselves
by shameful flight. The words seem obscure to a man not acquainted with the
Tacticks. There are two kind of soldiers says Aelian in a file, Leaders, and
followers. All the Leaders are the odd of the file; as the first, the 3. the
5, the 7, and so forth: the followers are the even, as the 2* 4, 6, 8. Those
that are in the same rank, are called sidemen. Now, says Polien, Cleandridas
willed the followers to step forward, and to rank, and become sidemen with
their Leaders: that is, he willed the even files to double their ranks with the
odd; and so extenuated the depth, but increased the length of his Phalange; by
which art he ouerfronted, and enclosed the enemy on all sides. This way then to
double ranks, or the length of the battle, is to insert the even ranks man by
man into the odd. All the Doublings that have been rehearsed, were Doublings
either in number alone, or else both in number, and place. For doubling of
place alone nothing is said in Aelian. The Insertion I recited, supplyeth this
defect: saying, the place is doubled with 124 files, only by commanding half
to turn to the Pike, half to the Target, till the Phalange be stretched to a
convenient length; as from 5 furlongs to ten; which is as much to say in few
words, as to open the Phalange; Or to bring it from order, to open order. For
so the front possesses double ground, to that it had before. 4 The use of
Doubling the length is] Two causes are assigned for the doubling of the length:
See Leo cap. 7.. 69. and 79.
One to ouerwing the enemy, the other to avoid ouerwinging our selves.
Cleandridas in the example above, performed both: For he both disappointed the
Lucans that sought to incompasse him, and besides encompassed, and enclosed
them. The narrower the front is, it is the more in danger of ouer-fronting;
Xenoph Cyrop lib. 6. 168. B.
being drawn out in length it is freer from enclosing, because a greater
compass must be fetched, before it can be enclosed. Yet are we to take heed,
that in doubling of the front, we give it not so much length that it fail in
depth. The want of length, or depth is alike dangerous, and gives advantage to
the enemy. I have touched before, and quoted Leo glancing only at his words.
Now I will set them down as they lie: Leo cap. 14*. 103.
When the thicknes or depth of the Phalange ( says he) is gathered up and made
more thin, it behooves not so to lengthen it, that it become altogether weak
and without depth. For it will so come to pass, that the enemy shall easily
cut it in pieces, and make a passage thorough it, and not only seek to
incompasse it before, but passing thorough the midst, be found behind, and
there indamage it. And this it behooves a General, not only to take heed,
he suffer not himself, but also endeavor to put upon his enemy. Hitherto are
the words of Leo: showing the disadvantage of a battle too much thinned by
doubling the length. But Leo cap. 7. 69.
Leo elsewhere a^deth an other cause of doubling, namely to make show a fair
sight of the Army. For the more ground it takes in front, the more will the
number appear, and the bravery of every man in particular discovered. Further
Antigonus used also this doubling for a polic^e to beguile his enemy. Poly^n
l^b 4. in (...). ^. 19.
Polien reports the fact thus: Antigonus encamped against Eumenes with an
army inferior in number. And when messengers were sent often from one to an
other, Antigonus at the receipt of a messenger of the enemy, commanded one of
his soldiers to come running in, as it were out of breath, and all to
be-sullied with dust, and to bring news that his Confederates were come.
Antigonus hearing the news, leaped for joy, and sent away the messenger. The
next day he led his Army out of his trench, doubling the length of his front.
When the enemy heard of their messenger the news, that was brought to
Antigonus concerning his Confederates, and saw the length of his battle
doubled, they imagined that the depth was answerable to the front. And
therefore they dislodged being afraid to join with him. 5 There are that
mislike] Countermarches, and Aelians doublings of number, are dangerous the
enemy being ready to charge. Because the files of the Battle must be kept in
open Order ^ill the motions be ended; which posture is not fit to receive the
charge of the enemy, as we saw out of the eleventh Chapter. The other two
doublings are done in close order, whereof I made mention a little before; The
one dividing the middle men in half, an^ sleeuing them up by the battle on
both sides; The other sleeuing them upon one side which you will, may be used
without danger, as well when the enemy is near, as when the fight is: in as
much, as they disturb not the battle, but advance fresh aides against the
enemy on the flanks of it. 6 By inserting the second file] There are two manner
of doublings of the depth or of files; one in number, the other in place. In
number, when one file is inserted into another, the Leader or first man of the
second file standing behind the Leader of the first; the second behind the
second, the third behind the third, and so forth of the rest: Or when the even
files countermarch, and their Leaders place themselves behind the Bringers-vp
of the odd, their files following them; or (which comes all to one) the
files being whole, they divide themselves into two parts in the front, and
half countermarch, and place themselves in the Rear of the other file to
file: albeit the two last are Doublings both in number and place, and not in
place alone. The true Doubling of the place alone is not Aelian. The Insertion
whereof I spoke, remedieth this defect also. There it is said, that when 16 men
(that is a file) are so extended, that they possess as much length as 32
should do, (that is, as 2 files) it is doubling of place. which is nothing
else but changing of the Soldiers order into open order. For in their order
they have 48 foot in depth; in their open order 96 foot in depth. In this
Doubling of depth we must take heed that we make not the front of our Army to
narrow; lest we give opportunity to the enemy to incircle, and incompasse it.
Polybius notes this a great faul^ in Marcus Atilius Regulus, at such time as
he fought with the Carthaginians, and was taken prisoner. His words have this
effect: k The Romans seeing the enemy order ^ Po^yb. l. b 1.
his battle marched out against him fu^l of courage. Being notwithstanding
somewhat appalled at, and foreseing the Elephants violence in coming on, they
set their Darters before, and placed many maniples of Armed behind, one after
an other, and divided the Horse half into one wing, half into the other. Then
making the whole battle shorter, but deeper, then they were wont, they
provided well against the Elephants, but not against the Horse, that far
exceeded theirs in number. Being now come to hands the Roman horse ouerpressed
with multitude of the Carthaginians quickly fled from either wing. But the
foot of the left wing, partly avoiding the Elephants, partly contemning the
Mercenaries, fell on, and charged the right wing of the Carthaginians, and
putting it to flight, followed hard, and gave chase even to the trench. But of
those, that were placed against the Elephants, the first sinking under the
violence of the beasts, perished being ouerturned, and trodden to death by
heaps. The body of the battle remained a while unbroken by reason of the
depth of them, that were after placed. But when the Rear of all, encompassed
by the horse, was forced to turn about, and fight with them; and the other
that had by force made way thorough the midst of the Elephants, and were now
behind their backs, came up to the fresh Phalange of the Carthaginians,
standing in good order, they were by them slain. Thus fortune being contrary
on all sides, the Romans for the most part were trodden to death by the
excessive might of the beasts, and the rest died with the darts of the horsemen
in the place, where they fought. The error of Attilius Regulus was in ordering
his battle too deep; by means whereof it was easily encompassed, and
distressed by the Carthaginian horse. Appian in Syriacis ^07. B.
Appian likewise blames Antiochus for ordering his Phalange 32 men in depth,
where the Macedonian Phalange ought to but 16 deep, showing that by that
oversight it was encompassed by the Romans, and overthrown. I have touched the
history in my notes before. Many other examples might be alleged, but these
two are sufficient for our purpose.
The words of Command in doubling of the length by number.
Middle men double your Ranks to the right, or left hand.

By this Command the middle men with their half files march up to the front,
in the spaces betwixt the files, and stand even with the File-leaders, and the
rest even with the rest of the Ranks.

Doubling of the length in place.
Stand in your open order.

One half opens their files to the right hand, the other to the left, and
stand six foot one from another.

Doubling of the depth in number.
Double your files to the right or left hand.

The even files fall into the spaces of the odd files.

Double your files by countermarch to the right or left hand.

The even files countermarch, and fall behind the rear of the odd, and place
thems^lues lineally after them, observing their first distances.

Divide your files and double them by countermarch to the right, or left hand.

Half the files divide themselves from the other half, and countermarch out
behind the Rear, then turn their faces toward the place behind the Rear of
the standing files, which removed not; then march on, and place themselves
orderly behind them file to file, then turn their faces, as at first.

Doubling the depth in place.
Ranks open behind to your open order.

The broad-fronted Phalange, the deep Phalange, or Hearse, and the
vneuen-fronted Phalange. CHAP. XXX.
PLagiophalanx, or the broad-fronted Phalange, is that, which has the length
much exceeding the depth.

Orthiophalanx, or the deep Phalange (commonly called the Hearse) is that, which
proceeds by wing having the depth much exceeding the length. In general
speech every thing is called Paramekes, which has length more then the depth;
and that which has the depth more, then the length, Orthion: and so likewise a
Phalange.

The Phalange Loxe, or uneven fronted, is that, which puts forth one of the
wings (which is thought fittest) toward the enemy, and with it beginning the
fight, holds off the other in a convenient distance, till opportunity be to
advance

Of Parembole, Protaxis, Epitaxis, Prostaxis, Eutaxis, and Hypotaxis. CHAP.
XXXI.
PArembole, or insertion is, when placing soldiers before we take off the
hindmost, and rank them within the distances of the first.

Protaxis, or fore-fronting, is when we place the light-armed before the front
of the armed, and make them fore-standers, as the File-leaders are.

When we place the light-armed behind, it is called Epitaxis, as it were an
afterplacing.

Prostaxis, or adjoining is, when to both flanks of the battle, or to one
flank, some part of the hindmost is added, the front of them, that are added,
lying even with the front of the battle; such addition is called Prostaxis.

Entaxis, or Insition, is when it seems good to set the light-armed within
the spaces of the files of the Phalange man to man.

Hypotaxis, or Double-winging, is when you bestow the light-armed under the
wings of the Phalange, placing them in an embowed form; so that the whole
figure resembles a threefold gate, or door.

How the motions of wheeling, double, and treble wheeling of the battle are
to be made. CHAP. XXXII.
IT follows to show how a battle may be turned or wheeled, and how after
reduced to the first posture, or Station.

When therefore we would accustom our Troops to wheel the battle to Cap.
30.
Plagiophalanx or the Brode-Fronted Phalange

Orthiophalanx or the Hearse

Protaxis, or forefronting

The Front

L^^halanx or the uneven fronted Phalange

Cap. 31.
Hypotaxis, or double-winging

Entaxis, or insertion

Protaxis, or forefronting

Cap. 32. The manner of wheeling
The first posture

Closing of files

Closing of ranks forward

The Front

the right hand, we command the right-hand-file to stand firm, and the rest of
the files to turn their faces to the right hand, and to move close up to the
right hand file. Then to turn their faces, as they were at first: Then the
hinder ranks to close forward: Then the whole battle in that closeness to
wheel about the corner-file-Leader to the right hand. This done, if need be
to reduce it to the first posture, or Station, we command every man to turn
about his face to the Target, or left hand (that is to look the contrary way)
Then to wheel about the body, that is, as it turned, closed, and serred with
the front to the right hand so to return it again to the place, from whence
it made the wheeling; Then the file-Leaders to stand firm, and the rest to
open their ranks behind; Then to turn their faces about, as they stood at
first; Then the right-hand-file to stand fast, and the rest turning faces to
the left hand to open their files; Then to stand; And lastly to turn their
faces again to the right hand: and so shall every man have his first posture.

But in case we desire to wheel to the left hand, we command the
left-hand-file to stand still, and all the rest to turn their faces to the
left hand, and move forward close up to the left hand file; Then to turn
their faces as they were; Then to gather up the hinder ranks; Then to wheel
the battle to the left hand, and stand; and so is it done, that was
commanded. But if restitution to the first posture be needful, we must do, as
we did in returning from the right. For every man must turn about his face to
the Pike; Then the whole battle wheeling about the
left-hand-corner-file-Leader must return to the place, it had; Then all the
file-Leaders stand firm, and turn about their faces, and the rest open their
ranks in moving forward and make Alte; Then the left hand file is to stand
firm (for it has the place it first had) and the rest turning their faces to
the right hand to open their files, and move forward, till they have recovered
their first distances; then to turn their faces as at first; and so shall
every man be in his first posture. Now if we would wheel the battle about,
to the pike we are to make 2 wheelings to the same side, so will it come to
pass that the file-Leaders shall in the change have their faces turned to the
Rear, where before they had them looking out from the front. But in restoring
to the first posture we command it to wheel about to the right hand; That is,
we give it two wheelings more the same way; So the file-Leaders will have their
faces set, as at first. Then we command the file-Leaders to stand firm, and
the rest to open their ranks behind; then to turn their faces about; Then the
right hand file to stand still (for it has the right place) and the rest
turning their faces to the right hand to march on, till the former distances
are regained; then to make Alte. So is the battle reduced to the first
Station.

If you would have the battle turn about to the Target, you are to give
contrary directions; That is, in stead of commanding a double wheeling to the
Pike, to command a double wheeling to the Target; Then by making two turns the
contrary way, to use the like changes, we spoke of before.

There is likewise a treble wheeling of the battle, when it turns thrice to
the same hand, namely to the Pike, or Target. The double wheeling to the Pike
transferreth the Soldiers face from the front to the back of the battle:
The treble wheeling to the Pike brings his face to the left flank. The
treble wheeling to the Target contrariwise to the right flank.

Notes.
BEfore in the 26 Chapter Aelian discoursed of wheeling, and the kinds
thereof. The manner, how it is to be done, is reserved for this place, I need
not therefore remember any thing else, besides the words of command.

The words of command in Epistrophe.
The uttermost file on the right or left hand stand firm

The rest turn faces (to the side purposed) and march up to the file standing
firm.

Faces as you were.

Close your ranks forward:

Wheel the body (to the hand appointed) and when you have your ground, stand.

Returning to the first Posture, or Anastrophe.
Faces to the right or left hand

Wheel back the body to the ground, it first had.

File-Leaders stand firm: the other ranks open to their first place.

Faces about (to which hand you will)

The corner file (to which the turning was) stand firm, the rest open to their
first ground.

Faces as you were, and order your Pikes.

Perispasmos, or wheeling about.
In wheeling about, the same words to close the files, and ranks, are to be
used, which were used in Epistrophe, there remains no more, then to say
Wheel about your body, to the right, or left hand.

Anastrophe or returning to the first Posture.
Return to your first Posture.

The same form is used, that was held in the former returning unto the first
posture for opening ranks and files.

Ecperispasmos, or treble wheeling.
In this motion the same course is held, that was in the wheeling; But only
that you command a treble wheeling. And the returning to the first Posture, or
Anastrophe is all one, but for the same difference.

Of closing the battle to the right, or left hand, or to the midst. CHAP.
XXXIII.
IF we would close, or thicken the Phalange in the right wing, we are to
command the right-wing-corner-file to stand still, and the rest turning faces
to the Pike to advance toward the right hand; Then to set their faces as they
were, and to gather up the ranks behind. In reducing them to the first
posture we are to com mand the file-Leaders to stand, and the rest turning
about their faces to open Cap ^^ Of Changes
The front after closing

Closing to ye right hand in action

Closing to ye left hand

Closing to the middell

Closing to ye right hand

The Front before closing

The Front of ye (...) before closing

their ranks behind; Then to turn their faces as they were; Then the
rightwing-corner-file to stand (for it has the right place already) and the
rest proceeding on to the Target to follow their Leaders, and observing their
distances to turn their faces as at first. A contrary course is to be held in
thickning the Phalange to the left wing.

If the Phalange be to be closed in the midst, the Diphalange on the right
hand must turn their faces toward the Target, and the Diphalange on the left
hand their faces toward the Pike; Then move forward toward the midst of the
Phalange; Then, after their true distance gained, to set their faces, as they
were, and to gather up the Ranks behind.

When we would reduce the Phalange to the first posture, we command to turn
faces about; then to open the Ranks, and all to move on, but the first Rank;
then to turn their faces again, and the right Diphalange turning to the Pike,
and the left Diphalange to the Target to follow their Leaders, till they have
recovered their first distances. Then to set their faces, as they were.

This rule is to be observed in all turnings about of faces, when they are made
out of closings, that the Pikes be advanced, least they hinder the Soldier in
making his turning.

The light-armed are to be taught, and exercised after the same manner.

Notes.
IN the 11 Chapter the distances, that ought to be betwixt soldier and
soldier, are particularly treated of. This Chapter shows, how they are to be
gained, that is, how we are to proceed out of one distance into another. And
because the open order is it, that is commonly begun withal, it is here
taught how from thence to pass to the rest, and to return to it again. The
end of closings is spoken of before. In regard of place they are said to be of
two kinds: One to the wing (right or left) the other to the midst of the
Phalange. I cannot express the manner better, then by setting down the words
of command, or direction, which are these in

Closing to the right wing.
The right-wing-corner-file stand firm

The rest turn faces to the Pike, and move (according to the distance
required) to the right hand.

Faces, as you were.

Close your hinder ranks forward, and order your Pikes.

Restoring to the first posture.
File-Leaders stand firm.

The other Ranks, turn faces about, and open behind to the first distance.

Faces as you were.

The right-wing-corner-file stand firm; the rest turn faces to the Target,
and proceed to your first distance.

Faces as you were; and order your Pikes.

Closing to the left wing.
It differs not from the other, but that the moving is to the contrary hand.

Closing to the midst of the Battle.
The right-wing turn faces to the Target, the left to the Pike.

Each move up to the midst of the Phalange, and stand at the distance named.

Faces as you were.

Close the hinder ranks forward, and order your Pikes.

Restoring to the first Posture.
The first rank stand firm.

The rest turn faces about, and open the ranks to the first distance.

Faces as you were.

The files next the middle section stand fast, and the right wing turn faces
to the Target, the left to the Pike, and move on till the first distance
recovered.

Faces as you were, and order the Pikes.

We may not forget Aelians general rule for turning of faces out of Closings,
that the Pikes be always advanced. For when you come up to the closeness
required, the Pike upon the shoulder will hardly admit turning of the face. The
like falls out when you would open from the Closing.

The use, and advantage of these exercises of arms. CHAP. XXXIV.
THese precepts of turning about of faces, of wheeling, and double wheeling of
the Battle, and of reducing it to the first posture, are of great use in
sudden approches of the enemy, whether he show himself on the right, or
left hand, or in front, or in the rear of our march. The like may be said of
Countermarches; Of which, the Macedonians are held to be the inuentors of the
Macedonian; the Lacedaemonians of the Lacedemonian; and for this cause either to
have name accordingly. The Histories witness, that Philip (who much enlarged
the Macedonian kingdom, and overcame the Graecians in battle at Cheronea,
and made himself General of Greece) and likewise his son Alexander (that in
short time conquered all Asia) made small account of the Macedonian
countermarch, unless necessity forced it; and that they both by the use of
the Lacedemonian became victorious over their enemies. For the Macedonian
countermarch the enemy falling upon the rear, is cause of great confusion; in
as much as the hindermost dismarching toward the front, and making a show of
running away, it more encourages, and emboldneth the enemy to follow. For
fear, and pursuit of the enemy [ordinarily] accompanies that kind of
countermarch. But the Lacedemonian is of contrary effect. For when the enemy
shows himself in the rear, the Leaders with their followers bravely
advancing, and opposing themselves, it strikes no small fear, and terror into
their minds.

Cap. 30
The File-leaders

A Deduction to the left hand

A right induction

The Front

A Deduction to the right hand



Cap. 36.
The Coelembolos, or hollow fronted wedge

The Front

The right Induction



Cap. 36.
The Coelembolos

The left wing

The right wing

The front

The Phalange set against ye left wing of ye Coelembolos

The Phalange set against ye right wing of ye Coelmebolos

The forbearing Phalange



Of the signs of direction, that are to be given to the army, and their
souerall kinds. CHAP. XXXV.
We are to acquaint our forces both foot, and horse, partly with the voice,
and partly with visible signs, that whatsoever is fitting be executed, and
done, as occasion shall require. Some things also are to be denounced by the
Trumpet, for so all directions will be fully accomplished, and sort to a
desired effect. The signs therefore, which are delivered by voice, are most
evident, and clear, if they have no impediment. But the most certain, and
least tumultuous, are such, as are presented to the eye, if they be not
obscured. The voice sometime can hardly be heard by reason of the clashing of
armor, or trampling, and neighing of Horses, or tumult of carriage, or noise,
and confused sounds of the multitude. The visible signs also become many ways
uncertain, by thicknes of air, and dust, or rain, or snow, or sunshine, or
else through ground, that is uneven, or full of trees, or of turnings. And
sometimes it will not be easy to find out signs for all uses, occasions
eftsoons presenting new matter, to the which a man is not accustomed. Yet can
it not fall out, that either by voice, or by signal, we should not give
certain and sure direction.

Of marching, and of diverse kinds of Battles fit for a March: And first of
the right-induction, of the Coelembolos, and the Triphalange to be opposed
against it, CHAP. XXXVI.
BEing now to speak of marching I will first give to understand, that some
kind of march is a Right-induction, other some a Deduction on the right, or
left hand; And that in a single, or double, or treble, or
quadruple-sided-battaile. In a single, when one enemy is feared; In a double,
when two; In a treble, when three; In a quadruple, when the enemy purposes to
give on on all sides. Therefore the march is undertaken sometimes in a single
Phalange, sometimes in a twofold Phalange, or else in a threefold Phalange, or
in a fourefold Phalange.

A right-induction is, when one body of the same kind follows another; as if
a Xenagy lead, and the rest follow Xenage-wise. Or a Tetrarchy lead, and the
rest follow according to that form. It is so called, when the march stretches
it self out into a wing having the Depth much exceeding the length.

Against it is opposed the Hollow Wedge.
Coelembolos, which is framed, when the Antistomos Double Phalange.
Diphalange disioyneth the Leading-wings, closing the Rear in manner of the
letter V: as the figure after placed does teach, In which the front is
disseuered, and the rear joined, and knit together.

For the Right-induction pointing at the midst of the enemies battle, the
Coelembolos quickly opening before serves both to frustrate the charge of the
front, and to claspe in, and circumuent the flanks of the right-induction.

Furthermore a Treble Phalange.
Triphalange is to be set against the Coelembolos, one Phalange fighting
against one winge of the Coelembolos; The second against the other, and the
middle, and third forbearing, and expecting a time fit to charge.

Of Paragoge, or Deduction. CHAP. XXXVII.
PAragoge, or Deduction is, when the Phalange proceeds in a wing not by file,
but by rank, having the Commanders, or file-Leaders, either on the right hand,
which is called a right-hand-Deduction, or on the left hand, which is called a
left hand- Deduction. For the Phalange marches in a double, treble, or
quadruple-side accor^ding to the place, and part, it is suspected, the enemy
will give on. And both the Paragogies beginning the fight in flank do make
the length double to the depth. This form of fight was devised to teach a
Soldier to receive heedfully the charge of the enemy not only in front, but
also in flank.

Of the Phalange Amphistomus. CHAP. XXXVIII.
THe Phalange Double fronted Phalange.
Amphistomus (for it is so called, because it has two fronts, and that part of
the battle, that is set, and advanced against the enemy, is called a front)
Seeing then in this form the middlemost are ordered back to back, and those
in front and rear make head against the enemy, the one being Commanders of the
front, the other of the rear, therefore it is called Amphistomus. It is of
great use against an enemy strong in Horse, and able to give a hot, and
dangerous charge; and principally practiced against those Barbarians, that
inhabit about the river Ister, whom they also call Horsemen that use two
horses, one spare, the other being vidden upon.
Amphippi because they change Horses in fight.

The Horse battle to encounter this form has a Tetragonall shape, being for
the purpose divided into two broad-squares (they are broad-squares, that have
the front twice as much as the depth) And these Squares are opposed severally
against the divisions of the foot-battaile.

Of the Phalange Antistomus. CHAP. XXXIX.
THe Phalange Doulbe flanked Phalange.
Antistomus is like the Amphistomus the form being a little altered; so that
it accustometh the soldier to resist the several kinds of incursions of
Horse. All that has been spoken concerning the former Phalange both for
foot, and Horse agrees with this figure also. Herein they differ, that Cap.
37. A four fronted Phalange against all allemptes of the Enemy
The Front of ye rear

The Front of ye right flank

The Front of the March

The Front of ye left flank

Cap. 38. The Phalange Amphistomus
Cap 39 The Phalange Antistomus
Front

Cap. 40.
The Horsmans wedge

Front

A Diphalange Antistomus

the Amphistomus receives the charge in front, and rear, the Antistomus in
flank But as well in the one, as the other, they fight with long Pikes, as do
the Alans, and Sauromatans. And the one half of the soldiers in the files
turn their faces forward, the other half backward; so that they stand back to
back. This form has two fronts, the one before, where the file-Leaders, the
other behind, where the back-Commanders stand. And being also divided into a
Diphalange it makes the forefront with the one, and the after-front with the
other Phalange.

Of the Diphalange Antistomus* CHAP. XL.
A Diphalange Antistomus is that, which has the file-Leaders placed not in
Deduction outwardly, but inwardly face to face one against-an other, and the
reare-Commanders without, one half in a right, the other in a left hand
Deduction.

This form is used when the Horse give on and charge Wedge-wise. For the *
Wedge shooting forth into a point, and having the Commanders following in
flank, and endeavoring to disseuer, and break the front of the foot, the
Leaders of the foot, foreseeing their purpose, place themselves in the midst
with intent either to repulse them, or else to give them a thorough passage
without loss. For the Wedge flies upon the foot in hope to charge the
multitude in the midst, and to disorder the whole battle: And the foot
Commanders conceiving well the fury of that kind of form, leave a little
space betwixt either front, and stand like walls on both sides, and jointly
turning their faces toward the midst, give them a fruitless, and empty
passage.

This form of Horse-battaile is called a Wedge by Tacticks, which was invented
by Philip King of Macedon, who placed his best men before, that by them the
weaker sort might be held in, and enabled to the charge: as we see in a spear,
or in a sword, the point whereof by reason of the sharpness quickly piercing
makes way for, and lets in the middle blunt iron.

Of the Diphalange called Peristomus. CHAP. XLI.
THe Phalange of the Diphalange * Peristomus proceeds by deduction in a wing,
the oblique deduction on the right hand having the file-Leaders without, the
left hand oblique deduction the reare-Commanders within. The figure shows the
intent of them that fight so ordered. For the battle going to charge, having
been at first Tetragonall, divides it self into two oblique wings (the
right, and the left) of purpose to enclose the adverse square-battaile. And
they fearing to be enclosed transform themselves into two several
marching-Phalanges directing one against the right, the other against the left
wing. Therefore it is called Peristomus, as having the front bent against the
enemy both ways.

Of the Diphalange called Homoiostomos, and of the Plinthium. CHAP. XLII.
A Diphalange * Homoiostomus is so named because a whole file (that is 16 men)
moving by it self, another file follows it. And it is therefore called
Homoiostomus, because they that follow, follow in a like figure.

This kind is opposed against the Plinthium. * Plinthium is a form of
Battle, that has the sides equal both in figure and number. In figure
because the distances are every where equal; In number because there are as
many men in length, as in depth. In this foure-sided-Battaile are none in the
flanks, but armed, without Archer, or Slinger to help. When therefore two
Phalanges march together, one by another, and both have their Leaders either in
a right hand, or left hand Deduction it is called a Diphalange Homoiostomus.

Of the Diphalange Heterostomus. CHAP. XLIII.
A Diphalange * Heterostomus is that, which proceeds by Deduction, having the
Leaders of the former Phalange in a right-hand-Deduction, and of the following
Phalange in a left-hand-Deduction: so that the battles march
counterchangeably, one having the Leaders in one flank, and the other in the
other: and so the rest.

Again of the Battle called a Rhombe, and of the foote-halfe moon to
encounter it. CHAP. XLIV.
THe battle framed in form of a Rhombe, was first invented by Ileon the
Thessalian, and was called I Will after his name; and to this form he exercised
and accustomed the Thessalians. It is of good use, in that it has a Leader at
every corner, at the point the Captain, of the Troop, the reare-Commander
behind, and on either side the flanke-commanders. The foot battle, fittest
to affront this, is the Menoides, or Cressant, having both the wings stretched
out, and in them the Leaders, and the midst imbowed to inuiron and wrap in
the Horsemen in their giving on. Whereupon the Horsemen ply the foot a far
off with flying weapons, after the manner of the Tarentines, seeking thereby to
dissolve, and disorder their circled frame of marching. Tarentum is a City of
Italy, the Horsemen whereof are called Acrobolists, because in charging they
first cast little Darts, and after come to hands with the enemy.

Cap. 42.
The Battle called Plinthium

The front

The Diphalange Homoiostomus

Cap. 43. The Diphalange Heterostomus
The File-leaders

The bringers up

Cap. 45.
Heteromekes or ye Hearse of Horse

The front

Plagiophalanx, or ye broad fronted battle of foot

Cap.
Epicampios Emprosthia

The front



Of the Horse-battaile Heteromekes, and of the Plagiophalange to be opposed
against it. CHAP. XLV.
THe Horse battle A H^rse.
Heteromekes is that, which has the depth double to the length. It is
profitable in many respects. For seeming to carry but few in so small a breadth
it deceives the enemy, and it easily breaks his forces with the thickness,
and strength of the embattailing, and may without perceiving, be lead thorough
straight, and narrow passages.

The Foot-battaile to encounter it is called the Plagiophalange, or
broad-fronted Battle. For being but slender in depth it bears forth and
extends it self in length; so that, albeit it be broken in the midst with
the charge of the Horse; yet is nothing broken, but a little of the depth; and
the fury of the Horse is carried not upon the multitude of the foot, but
straight, and immediately, into the open field. And for that cause is the
length thereof much exceeding the depth.

Of another kind of Rhombe for Horsemen, and of the foote-Battaile Epicampios
Emprosthia to encounter it. CHAP. XLVI.
ANother sort of Rhomboides there is, whereof I need say no more, but that it
fileth, and ranketh not. For I have before showed the use, and that Ileon the
Thessalian was the inuentor, and that Jason Medeas husband most put it in
practice. The use thereof is great being directed, and lead, in the four
corners by the Captain, the Lieutenant, and the two flanke-Commanders. It is
commonly fashioned of Archers on Horseback, as the Armenian, and Persian
manner is.

Against it is opposed the foote-battaile called The hollow fronted battle.
Epicampios Emprosthia, because the circumduction of the front is like an
embowing. The end of this form is to deceive and ouer-reach the Archers on
Horseback either by wrapping them in the void space of the front, as they
charge, and give on upon the spur, or else disordering them first with their
wings, and breaking their fury, by overthrowing them finally with their ranks
about the middle Ensigns. This kind of Battle was devised to entrappe and
beguile. For opening the middle hollownesse it makes show but of a few, that
march in the wings, having notwithstanding thrice as many following, and
seconding, in the rear. So that, if the wings be of power sufficient for the
encounter, there needs no more; if not, retiring easily on either fide, they
are to join themselves to the bulk of the Battle.

Of the foot-battaile called Cyrte, which is to be set against the Epicampios.
CHAP. XLVII.
THe Battle to be opposed against the Epicampios is called The
conuexebattaile.
Cyrte of the circumferent form. This also makes semblance of small forces by
reason of the conuexitie of the figure. For all round things appear little in
compass; and yet stretched out in length, and singled, they prove twice as
much, as they appeared to be: as is evident in pillars, which are round; and
therefore in sight show the one half, and conceal the other.

The greatest piece of skill in embattailing, is to make a show of few men to
the enemy, and indeed to bring twice as many to fight.

Of the Tetragonall Horse-battaile and of the wedge of foot to be opposed
against it. CHAP. XLVIII.
THe Foure-square.
Tetragonall Horsebattaile is square in figure, but not in number of men For in
Squares the number is not always the same: and the General for his advantage
may double the length to the depth. The Persians, Sicilians, and most of the
Graecians do affect this form, and take it to be easy in framing, and
better in use.

Against it is opposed the Phalange called Wedge.
Embolos, or Wedge of foot, all the sides consisting of armed men. This kind
is borrowed of the Horse-mans wedge. And yet in the Horse-wedge, one suffices
to lead in front, where the Footewedge must have three, one being unable to
bear the sway of the encounter. So Epaminondas the Theban fighting with the
Lacedaemonians at Mantinea, overthrew a mighty power of theirs by casting his
army into a Wedge. It is fashioned if the Antistomus Diphalangy in marching
join the front of the wings together, holding them open behind like unto the
letter A.

Of the foot-Battaile called Ploesium, and of the winding, or saw-fronted
foot-battaile to encounter it. CHAP. XLIX.
THe Battle Ploesium has the length much exceeding the depth. And it is
called Ploesium, when armed foot are placed on all sides, the Archers, and
Slingers, being thrown into the midst. Against this kind of Battle is set
the winding-fronted-battaile, to the end that with the unequal figure, they
may Cap. 47.
The Cyrte or unequal half Moon

The front

The Epicampios

The front

Cap. 48.
The foot wedge

The front

The Horsbattaile square in figure, not in horse

The front

Cap. 49.
The Peplegmene

The front

The Plesium

Cap. 50.
The adverse battle

The overfrontnig battle

Cap. 50.
The adverse battle

The overwinging battle

train out those of the Ploesium to cope with the foremost of the
winding-frontedbattaile, and by that means dissolve, and disorder the
thickness o^ the same. And the file-Leaders of the winding-battaile are to
observe, and mark the file-Leaders* of the Ploesium, that if they still
maintain their closeness, and fight serred, they also encounter them in the
like form; if the Ploesium file-Leaders sever themselves, and spring out from
their maine force, then they likewise be ready, to meet them man to man.

Of Hyperphalangesis, and Hyperkerasis, and of Attenuation. CHAP. L.
HYperphalangesis, or ouer-fronting is, when both wings of the Phalange
ouerreach the enemies front. Hyperkerasis, or ouerwinging is, when with one of
the wings we ouer-reach the front of the enemy. So that he, that ouerfronteth,
ouerwingeth, but he, that ouerwingeth, ouerfronteth not. For they, that match
not the enemy in multitude, may yet ouerwing them.

Attenuation or lessening is, when the depth of the battle is gathered up,
and instead of 16 men a smaller number is set.

Of conueying the Carriage of the Army. CHAP. LI.
THe leading of the carriage, if any thing else, is of great importance, and
requires a special Commander. It may be conveyed in five manners, either
before the Army, or behind, or on the one flank, or the other, or in the
midst.

Before the Army, when you fear to be charged behind. Behind the Army, when
you would lead toward the enemy. When you fear to be charged in flank on
the contrary side. In the midst, when a hollow-Battaile is needful and fit.

Of the words of Command, and certain observations about them. CHAP. LII.
LAst of all we will briefly repeat the words of direction, if we admonish,
first that they ought to be short, then that they ought to be without
double-signification. For the Soldiers, that in have receive direction, had
need to take heed of doubtful words, least one do one thing, and another
the contrary. As for the purpose: If I say turn your face, some it may be,
that hear me, will turn to the right, some to the left hand, and so no small
confusion follow. Seeing therefore these words turn your face import a
general signification, and comprehend turning to the right, or left hand, we
ought in stead of saying turn your face to the pike, to pronounce it thus: To
your Pike turn your face, that is, we ought to set the particular before, and
then infer the general. Like reason is, if you say, turn about your face,
or countermarch. For these are also general words; And therefore we should do
well to set the particular before. As to the Pike turn your face about, or to
the Target turn your face about. Likewise the Lacedemonian countermarch, not
the Countermarch Lacedemonian. For if you place the word Countermarch first,
some of the Soldiers will happily fall to one kind, other to another kind of
Countermarch. For which cause words of double sense are to be avoided, and the
special to be set before the general.

Of silence to be used by Soldiers. CHAP. LIII.
But above all things silence is to be commanded, and that beed be given to
directions: As Homere specially signifies in his discriptions of the Grecian
and Trojan fights.

The skillful Cheef-taines pressed on, guiding with careful eye
Their Armed troops, who followed their Leaders silently.
You surely would have deemed, each one of all that mighty thronge
Had been bereft of speech, so bride led he his heedfull tongue,
Fearing the dread Commanders check, and awful hest's among.
Thus marched the Greeks in silence, breathing flames of high desire,
And fervent zeal, to back their friends, on foes to wreake their ire.
As for the disorder of the Barbarians he resembles it to birds saying.

As sholes of foul, geese, cranes, and swannes with necks far stretched out,
Which in the slimy fennes Caisters winding streams about
Sheare here, and there, the liquid sky, sporting on wanton wing.
Then fall to ground with clanging noise, the fennes all over ring:
None otherwise the Trojans fill the field with heaped sounds
Of broken, and confused cries, each where tumult abounds.
And again:

The Captains marshall out their Troops ranged in goodly guise;
And fo^rth the Trojans pace like birds, which lade the air with cries.
Not so the Greeks, whose silence breathed flames of high desire,
Fernent in zeal to back their friends, on foes to wreake their ire.
The words of Command. CHAP. LIIII.
Thus then are we to command.
TO your Arms. Stand by your Arms. Carriage away from the battle. Mark your
directions. Separate your selves. Advance your Pikes. File and rank your
selves. Look to your Leader. Rear Commander order your file. Before cap. 11*
Keep your first distances. Before cap. 25.
Faces to the Pike, move a little further, stand so, as you were. Before cap.
25.
Faces to the Target, move a little further, stand so. Before cap. 25.
Faces about to the Pike, move a little further, stand so. Before cap. 29.
Double your Depth. To your first posture. Before cap. 29.
Double your Length. To your first posture. Before cap. 28.
The Lacedemonian countermarch. To your first posture. Before cap. 28.
The Macedonian countermarch. To your first posture. Before cap. 28.
The Choraan countermarch. To your first posture. before cap. 26.
Battle wheel to the Pike. To your first posture. before cap. 26.
Battle wheel about to the Pike. To your first posture.
These precepts of the Art Tacticke (most invincible Caesar) I have laid out
to your Matie, which will be a means of safety to such, as shall use them, and
of ^he overthrow of their enemies.

THE EXERCISE OF THE ENGLISH IN the service of the high and mighty Lords, the
LORDS the ESTATES of the united PROVINCES in the Low COUNTRIES.
THE Soldiers are divided into two kinds, Foot and Horse. The Foot again
are of two kinds; Pikemen and Musketeers.

Pikemen are armed with a head-peece, a Curace and Tases defensive, and with a
Pike of fifteen foot long, and a Rapier offen sieve. The Armor is all iron;
the Pike of Ashen wood for the Steal, and at the upper end an iron head of
about a handful long with cheeks about the length of two foot, and at the
butt-end a round strong socket of iron ending in a pike, that is blunt, yet
sharp enough to fix to the ground. The form thereof is expressed in the
graven figure.

The Musketier has a head-peece for defense, a Musket, the barrel of the
length of 4 foot, the bore of 12 bullets to the pound; a Bandelier, to which
are fastened a convenient number of charges for powder (sometimes as many as 15
or 16) a lether bag for bullets, with a pruning iron; a Rest for the Musket
with an iron forke on the upper end to support it in discharging, and a pike on
the nether end to stick into the ground* lastly, a Rapier. The figure of this
armor also is here inserted.

These soldiors, both Pike-men, and Musketeers, are divided into Companies; and
every Company consists, half of Pikes, half Musketeers. The Companies are
some more in number, some less. Some reach to 300 men, some 200, some 100,
some 90, some 80, some 70. Every Company has these officers of the field: A
Captain, a Lieutenant, an Ensign, 2 Serieants, 3 Corporalls, two Drommes; and
for other uses a Clerk, a Surgion, and a Provost.

Companies are compacted into Regiments; and the Regiments commanded by
Coronells. Regiments contain not always a like number of Companies, some
having 10, some 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, some 30 Companies and above. In every
Regiment are a Coronell, a Lieutenant Coronell, a Serieant Mayor, all officers
of the field; a Quartermaster, and a Prouost-martiall for other employments.
It shall not be greatly to the purpose to mention higher officers, then
Coronells, my principal intent being no other, then to set down the arms and
exercise of our Nation in the said united Provinces. Their arms are spoken of.
Their exercise follows.

FIrst both Pikes and Muskets are ordered into files of 10 deep. The
Musketeers are sometime placed before, sometime in flank, sometimes in the
rear of the pikes.

To exercise the motions, there are two distances to be observed.

The first is when every one is distant from his fellow 6 foot square, that is
in file and rank 6.

The second is when every Soldier is 3 foot distant one from the other as well
in file, as in Rank.

And because the measure of such distances cannot be taken so justly by the
eye, the distance of 6 foot betwixt the files is measured, when the Soldiers
stretching out their arms do touch one an others hands: and betwixt the
Ranks, when the ends of their pikes come well nigh to the heels of them, that
march before. And the measure of 3 foot betwixt the files is, when their
elbowes touch one another; betwixt the ranks, when they come to touch the ends
of one another Rapiers.

For to march in the field, the distance of 3 foot from file to file is kept,
and of 6 foot from Rank to Rank.

To order themselves in Battle, as also to go toward the enemy, the
distance of 3 foot in file, and rank, is observed; and likewise to conversion
or wheeling.

The Musquettiers also going for to shoot by Ranks keep the same distance of
3 foot, but going to skirmish they go a la Disbandade, which is out of order.

There is yet another sort of distance, which is not used, but for to receive
the enemy with a firm stand, and serves for the pikes only (for the
Musquettiers cannot be so close in files, because they must have their Arms at
liberty) and that is, when every one is distant from file to file a foot and a
half, and 3 foot from Rank to Rank. And this last distance is thus
commanded, Close your selves thoroughly. But it is not to be taught the
Soldiers, for that, when necessity shall require it, they will close
themselves but too much, of their own accord without command.

To begin therefore to do the exercises, the Company is set in the first
distance, to wit of 6 foot in file, and rank, and thus is said

These are the general words of Command which are often to be used.
Stand right in your files.
Stand right in your ranks.
Silence.
To the right hand.
As you were.
To the left hand.
As you were.
To the right hand about.
To the left hand as you were.
To the left hand about.
To the right hand as you were.
You must note, that when they are commanded to be as they were, they must
return thither, from whence they parted; and if they turned to the right hand,
they must return to the left, and so in countermarch.

The headpiece.

The forepart

The headpiece close.

The back

ye right gantlet

The left vambrace

The left cuishe

The breast

The back

ye guard

ye left ^^^^let

The Armor of ye Pikman

The Gorget

The Breast

The Tales

The Hedpiece

The Back

The Pike



To the right double your ranks.
Ranks as you were.
To the left hand double your ranks.
Ranks as you were.
To the right hand double your files.
Files as you were.
To the left hand double your files.
Files as you were.
With half files to the right hand double your Ranks.
Half files as you were.
With half files to the left hand double your Ranks.
Half files as you were.
Files to the right hand countermarch.
Files to the left hand countermarch.
To the right hand or left at discretion as you were.
Ranks to the right hand countermarch.
Ranks to the left hand countermarch.
To the right or left hand as you were.
Close your Files to 3 foot distance.
Close your Ranks to 3 foot distance.
Understand that in Closing from the outsides to the middle the Soldier is
^stand in his distance of 3 foot in file, and not closer.

To the right hand wheel.
To the left hand wheel.
Open your Ranks backwards in your double distance to wit at 12 foot, and
this for a single Company.

Ranks as you were, sc. at the first.

In opening Ranks or Files, you must keep them closed until the second Rank
or File beginning from the outsides have taken their distances, and so shall
the rest remain close until every Rank or File have taken their distance^ in
order.

Open your files, to wit to the first distance of 6 foot.

If you will command to close files to the right hand or left hand, the outmost
file stands still, and the rest close to that file.

For the Pike with a firm stand.
Advance your Pikes.
Order your Pikes.
Slope your Pikes.
Charge your Pikes.
Order your Pikes.
Traile your Pikes.
Cheeeke your Pikes.
More for the Pikes first with a firm stand and then marching.
Charge your Pikes.
Slope your Pikes.
To the right hand charge your Pikes.
Slope your Pikes.
To the left hand charge your Pikes.
Slope your Pikes.
Charge your Pikes to the Rear.
Slope your Pikes.
Order your Pikes.
This must be observed charging your Pikes with a firm stand to set the right
foot behind, and charging the Pikes marching to set the left foot before.

For the Musket.
THe Postures in his Excellencies Book are to be observed; but in exercisin^
you must only use these three terms of direction.

Make ready. Present. Give fire.
Your Musquettiers must observe in all their motions to turn to the right
hand, and that they carry the mouth of their pieces high, as well when they are
shouldred, as in pruning, and also when they hold their pannes guarded, and come
up to give fire.

In advancing toward an Enemy, when they do not skirmish loose and disbanded,
The enemy before the Vantgard.
they must give fire by Ranks after this manner.

Two Ranks must always make ready together, and advance ten paces forward
before the body, at which distance, a Sergeant (or when the body is great some
other officer) must stand, to whom the Musquettiers are to come up before
Advancing.
they present, and give fire, first the firstranke. And whilst the first gives
fire, the second Rank keep their Muskets close to their Rests, and their
pannes guarded, and as soon, as the first are fallen away, the second presently
present, and give fire, and fall after them.

Now as soon as the first two Ranks do move from their places in the front:
The two Ranks next them must vnshoulder their Muskets, and make ready, so as
they may advance forward ten paces as before as soon as ever the two first
ranks are fallen away; and are to do in all points as the former. And all the
other Ranks through the whole division must do the same by twoes, one after
another.

A manner there is to give fire retyring from an Enemy, which is performed
after this sor^t.
As the Troop marches the hindermost rank of all keeping still with the
Troop is to make ready, and being ready, the soldiers in that rank turn
altogether The enemy in the Rear.
to the right hand and give fire, marching presently away a good round pace to
the front, and there place themselves in rank together just before the front:
As soon as the first rank turn to give fire, the rank next makes ready, and
does as the former, and so the rest.

We give fire by the flanks thus. The uppermost file next the Enemy must be The
enemy in flank.
commanded to make ready, keeping still along with the body, till such time, as
they be ready, and then they turn to the right, or left hand (according to the
sight of their enemies either upon the right, or left flank) and give fire
altogether. When they have discharged they stir not, but keep their ground,
and charge their Pieces again in the same place, they stand. Now as soon as
the foresaid file does turn to give fire, the uttermost next it makes ready
always keeping along with the Troop till the Bringer-vp be past a little
beyond the Leader of that file, that gave fire last; and then the whole file
must turn, and give fire, and do in all points as the first did, and so the
rest one after the other. A Sergeant, or if the Troop be great some other
better qualified Officer must stand at the head of the first file, and as soon
as the second file has given fire, and has charged, he is to lead forward the
first file up to the second file, and so to the rest one after another, till he
has gathered up again the whole wing, and then he is to join them again in
equal front with the pikes.

Last of all the Troop or whole wing of Musquettiers makes ready altogether,
The enemy in front.
and the first rank without advancing gives fire in the place they stand in,
and speedily, as may be, yet orderly falls away, all the ranks doing the same
successively without advancing.
one after another.

Thus much of the arms and exercise of the foot. The horse ensue.

The order and discipline holden in Horse-troopes, or in the Cavalry.
THE Caualry has for his Chief the General, the Lieutenant General, and the
Comissary general.

To the Cavalry there is a Quartermaster general, and a Provost general
belonging; the Justice resorteth to the Council general of war of the Army.

The Cavalry is of two sorts. Har quebusiers, and Curassiers.

The first have for defensive arms, the Curace pistol proof, and a light
headpeece. For offensive the Carbine of 3 foot, 3 inches length, and the bore
of 20 bullets in the pound, and Pistolls like unto the Curassiers.

The Curassiers have for defensive Arms a complete armor, the Curace pistol
proof. For offen sieve two pistolls having the barrel of 26 inches in length,
and the bore of 36 bullets in the pound. See the figure of Arms.

For the order in Regiments the 40 Companies entertained by the States do make
eleven Regiments.

The Regiment of the General has always the Vantgard, the others
alternatiuely and by turns, and he that has it this day, the next day after
has the Rear, the rest following in the same sort.

Those which command the Regiments are called Coronells. The Regiments are
compounded of 3, or 4 Companies (of 3 at the least) and the Coronells Company
marches always on the left wing of the Regiment.

The Captains receive orders from their Coronells, as these from the
Commissary General.

All the Companies are divided in 3 equal parts, which are called Squadrons,
and distributed to the three chief officers; Captain, Cornett, and
Lieutenant, having each of them adjoined an old Soldier, which they do know
to be of more desert, called a Corporal.

Marching in the field, every Officer marches at the head of his Squadron, the
Lieutenant excepted, which marches behind with the Quartermaster; and the
third Corporal at the head of the Lieutenants Squadron.

The Companies are divided by files, and ranks, the file 5 deep, and no more,
how strong soever the Company be.

They observe that in marching in battle they must be close together, and to
do the Motions there must be 6 foot distance from one Horseman to another.

The Companies being in battle, there must be 25 paces distance left between
every Company, and 50 betwixt every Regiment at the least.

The exercise of Arms for the Cavalry.
To open the Squadron you must first open the ranks and after the files.

To close the Squadron, you must first close the files, and after the ranks.

There be two sorts of distances betwixt the files; the one close, and the
other open.

In the Close there must be no distance or intervalls betwixt the files, to the
open there must be 6 foot betwixt every file.

Likewise there must be two sorts of distances betwixt the ranks; the Close,
which must be without intervall or street; and the Open, which must be six
foot distance.

In a march it must be understood, that the ranks must never be more opened,
then the open distance of 6 foot.

And to the end that the Troop may march in good order, and observe well their
distance betwixt the ranks, without that the last may be forced to run or
go to fast, there must be heed taken, that so soon, as the first ranks begin
to march, all the Troop, and the Rear also at one time march.

The words of Command are
Open your Ranks.
Open your files.
Stand right in your ranks.
Stand right in your files.
To the right hand.
As you were.
So the left hand.
As you were.
To the right hand about.
To the left hand as you were.
To the left hand about.
To the right hand as you were.
Files to the right hand countermarch.
Files to the left hand countermarch.
To the right or left hand as you were.
Ranks to the right hand countermarch.
Ranks to the left hand countermarch.
Close your files.
Close your ranks.
To the right hand wheel.
To the left hand wheel.
Faults escaped in the Book.
Page 2. in the margent beneath, for Spartionem read Spartianus. Page 9* lin.
20. for was, were. and lin. 31. for Bircanna, Bircenna; and in the marg. lin.
40. for Dipnoseph, Dipnosoph. page 10. lin. 26. in marg. for Adrian, Arrian. p.
14. l. 11. in marg. for Dipnoseph, Dipnosoph. p. 15 l. 18. for Marsilians,
Massilians. p 17. l. 47. for pluimes, Plumes. p. 18. l 49 for conceited by,
conceitedly. p. 20. l. 45. for Thureo, Thureoi. lin. 48. dele full. p. 22. l.
for Those, These. l. 11. for Ochanes, Ochane. l. 32. dele Then. p. 23. l. 12.
for Divarates, Divarates. p. 27. l. for immitation, imitation. p. 2^. l. 11.
for (...). l. 17. dele That. p. 29. l. 4. for quiety, quietly. l. 25. slinges,
slingers. p. 30. l. 35. in marg. Analast. Analact. p. 31. l. 13. put in, it. p.
32. l 29. and 33. for bellys, bellies. p. 33. l. 35. 38. 41. for Sotridas,
Soteridas. p 34 l. 3. for forceble, forcible. l 19. Popana, Popana. 29.
vnfailable, vnfailible l. 42 dele once, and, for all. p. 35. l. 42. reduct,
reduce. p 36. l. 40. in marg. de bett, de bell. p. 39. l. 17. strok, struck.
p. 44. l. 12. in marg. Enometis, Enom^tis. 24. Enomotarches, Enomotarches. 31.
33. Prucestes, Peucestes. lin. 47. after Patricius, a full point. p. 49. l. 27.
Bathera, Batheia. 40* liptismos, leptismos. p. 50* l. 14. after supported, a
full point. 34. easily, easily. p. 53 l. 6. Prataxis, Protaxis* page 55. l. 35.
for having, giving. page 56. l. 18. sure, safe. lin 32, 37. Ansetaus, Ansetaus.
41. Then, They. 46. a full point after through. p. 57. l. 31. betwixt the, and
examples, put former. p. 58. l. 2. Pharnabarus, Pharnabazus. l. 18. after
M^nomachy, a full point. 37. the, them. 48. after number, a full point. p 59.
l. 6. speedely, speedily. 36. motion, motions. 39. 40. your, you. 41. after
form, a full point. p 60 l. 16. fi^th, fifth. 18. after may be, set the figure
2. 28. after sort, dele as, and for 2 read 4. p. 61. l. 18. never, neither. p.
62. l. 23. after Lydians, a full point. p. 63. l. 15. for 500, 5000. lin. 22.
for 800, 8000. p 66. l. 26. for 500, 400. lin. 25. read, when it is greatest in
Xenophon has no more, then 100. page 68. l. 35. besides, to preter^it. p. 70.
l. 40. fight, read marching. p. 72. l. 1. after Sun. set, read, and. l. 37.
for, of. p. 75. l. 19. and 27. Lochagie, Lochagi. l. 32. Pempedarches,
Pempadarchs. p. 78. l. 2. and 4. of, on. p. 79. l. 11. for fourth, third. p.
80. l. 29. insert after, an Army, that etc. ^oreth disorderly. and lin. 47*
after 21. insert, foot. page 82. lin. Target, Targets. lin. 30. for 6130. read
6144. page 84. l. 14. Philopomen, Philopoemen. p. 87. l. 36. Quintus, Quintius.
l 37 after, himself with, insert, in. p. 88. l. 39. fought, sought. p. 90. l.
41. they, those. p 91. l. 30. twenty six, sixteen. page ^2 l. 29. after 1024
men, insert Two Systremm^s an Epinen^gy of 204^ men. p. 96* l. 44. after,
flanks, insert, and front p 98. l. 37. after, Amb^shes are, insert, or may be.
p. 99. l. 18. for flights, flight. p. 112. l. 44. nea^er, nearer. p. 114. lin.
23. read Episyzygy. Harmatarchy. p. 115. l. 34. greater, great. p. 122. l. 4.
Lacedemon. lin. 21. a comma, after, cutting it of. another comma, after a
sunder. p. 124. l. 19 after proceed, put out, but. p. 130. l. 28. for and, but.
p. 135. lin. Middle, Middlemen. page 136 l. 4. after, particular, insert, be.
lin. 20. after doublings, insert, which. p. 138 l 15. read Entaxis. the folio's
are false page 138. 139. page 142. l. 19 for Chap. 24. read 34. page 153. l. 23.
after Rapier, insert for offense. page 154. l. 6. after 6, add foot. lin. 3^.
after, thus, insert, it. page 155. lin. 1. after right, insert, hand.

THE CONTENTS OF THE NOTES.
CHAP. II.
OF Arms in general. Page 12. Defensive arms of old time. Page ibid.
Offensive arms. Page ibid. Strength of arms; therein of the matter. Page 13.
Fitness for the body. Page 15. Fitness for the field. Page 15. Comeliness.
Page 17. Three kinds of Footmen. Page 19. 1. Arms of the armed. Page 20. The
form of the Macedonian Target. Page 20. The matter. Page 21. The Macedonian
Pike. Page 23. The wood it was made of. Page ibid. Target and Pike both used
together. Page ibid. How the Target was carried. Page 22.. 2. The light-armed
and their appellations. Page 24. 1. Arrows and the Nations that were Archers.
Page 25. The estimation of Archers of ancient time. Page ibid. That good
service might be drawn from our bows even at this day. Page ibid. 2. Darts,
and the diverse names given them. Page 27. The matter, fashion, and force of
Darts. Page 28. 3. Slingers. Page 29. The best slingers. Page ibid. How far a
sling will reach. Page ibid. 3. Targetiers. Page 30. The form of their Target.
Page ibid. Their Pikes. Page ibid. Their other arms. Page ibid. The Hypaspists
in the History of Alexander. Page ibid. Horsemen. Page 32. Cataphractes. Page
ibid. Their, and their horses armor. Page ibid. Their Lance. Page 33. Their
manner in charging. Page ibid. Launciers. Page ibid. Their, and their horses
armor. Tarentines. Page 35. Their arms, and manner of fight. Page ibid.
Archers on horseback. Page 36.
CHAP. III.
Levies of Soldiers. Page 37. Confiderations in Levies. Page ibid. What
number. Page ibid. The heads of the Art of War. Page 38. The effect of
exercise in Soldiors. Page ibid.
CHAP. IV.
Files, and the diverse significations of Lochos, a file. Page 40. The number of
Aelians file. Page ibid. Other files more or less. Page ibid. The reason of
Aelians number in a file. Page ibid.
CHAP. V.
Disposing of files. Page 42. The best man the leader, and why. Page ibid. The
difference betwixt the Romans, and Graecians in bringing their best men to
fight. Page 43. An Enomoty. Page 44. The place of Enomotarchs. Page ibid. The
Dimeritt, or Commander of the half file. Page 45. The worth of the
File-leader. Page ibid. Leo his disposing of a file. Page ibid.
CHAP. VII.
A Phalange. Page 48. The etymology of the name. Page ibid. The Phalange not
always of one number. Page ibid. The Inventor of the Phalange. Page 49. The
length of it. Page ibid. The depth. Page ibid. The thicknes. Page ibid. The
breadth. Page 50. The wings. Page ibid. The middle Section. Page ibid. Whether
there ought to be more, then one Section. Page ibid. The place of the
light-armed. Page 53. The place of the horse. Page 55. In the wings. Page 56.
In the rear. Page 57. In the front. Page ibid.
CHAP. VIII.
What motions transfigure the Phalange into another shape. Page 59. The number
fit for motion of the Phalange. Page 60. The number of the Macedonian Phalange.
Page 61. The number of the light-armed. Of horse the number.
CHAP. IX.
The Commander of the Phalange. Page 65. The number of them. Page ibid. The
double signification of the word Tetrarchy. Page ibid. The manifold
signification of Taxis. Page ibid. And of Syntagma. Page 66. The officers of
the Syntagma. Page 67. The Ensign. Page ibid. The beginning of Ensigns. Page
ibid. Why they are borne. Page ibid. The form of the Ensign. Page 68. The
matter of the Ensign. Page ibid. The place of the Ensigne-bearer in fight.
Page 60. The Trumpet, and use thereof amongst foot. Page 70. It was the
signal instrument of the Graecians. Page ibid. The Drum. Page ibid. How it
came into Europe. Page ibid. The Lacedaemonians used both Flute, and Trumpet.
Page 71. The place of the Trumpet in Battle. Page ibid. A Sergeants duty.
Page ibid. Qualities requisite in a Sergeant. Page ibid. His dignity. Page
ibid. His place in fight. Page ibid. A Cryers office. Page ibid. His place in
fight. Page 72. The tetragonall form of a Syntagma. Page 73. The number of the
Chiliarchy. Page ibid. The Roman Tribuneship and it differ. Page ibid. Our
Coronells come nearer the Chiliarch. Page ibid. Whether it were first
instituted by Alexander at Babylon. Page ibid. The Persian Chiliarch. Page 74.
The Merarchy. Page ibid. The Phalangarchy. Page ibid. The bodies military of
the Lacedaemonians. Page 75. Of the Athenians. Page ibid. Of Cyrus in Xenophon.
Page ibid. Of Vrbicius. Page ibid. Of Julius Pollux. Page ibid. The number of
the officers of Aelians Phalange. Page 76.
CHAP. X.
The places of the officers of the Phalange. All the Commanders in front. Page
77. Alternatiue Commanders. Page ibid. The place of the General. Page ibid. Of
the Phalangarches. Page ibid. Of the Merarches. Page 78. Of the rest. Page 79.
CHAP. XI.
Distances. Page 80. Open order. Page ibid. Order. Page 81. Close order. Page
ibid. The ground a Phalange possesses in each order. Page 82.
CHAP. XII.
The matter of the Macedonian Target. Page 83. The hollownesse. Page ibid. The
breadth. Page ibid. The length of the shortest pike. Page ibid. Advantage of
long pikes. Page ibid.
CHAP. XIIII.
The strength of the Macedonian Phalange. Page 85 The conquests of King Philip,
and Alexander his Son. Page ibid. Battles wherein the Romans beat the
Macedonians. Page 86. Proof of the Macedonian imbattailing against the Romans.
Page 87. Distance betwixt soldior, and soldior in fight. Page 89. How much of
the length of the pike is lost in charging. Page 90. How the pikes of the sixth
rank, and the other after them are to be held in fight. Page ibid. The pikes
of the Rear longer, than those in front. Page ibid.
CHAP. XV.
The place of the Light-armed. Page 91. The place of Targetiers. Page 92. The
File of the Light-armed. Page ibid.
CHAP. XVI.
The names of the Light-armed. Page ibid. The cause of impropriety of names.
Page ibid. The curiosity of the Graecians in their names. Page 93. Whether
there were Captains of the Centuries of the Light-armed. Page ibid. The bodies
of the Armed and light-armed compared. Page ibid.
CHAP. XVII.
The use of light armed. Page 95. Light-armed joined with the Armed. Page ibid.
The light-armed good --
To provoke the enemy, Page 96. To wound a far of, Page ibid. To disarray,
Page 97. To repulse horse, Page 98. To beat in the enemies light-armed, Page
ibid. To discover suspected places, Page ibid. For far and speedy attempts.
Page 99.

CHAP. XVIII.
The form of Horse-battailes. Page ibid. The service of Horse. Page 100. The
Thessalian horsemen. Page 101. The fable of Centaures. Page ibid. The Rhombe.
Page 102. Whether the Rhombe or Square be better in Horse. Page ibid. The
Wedge. Page 104. Whether the Rhombe or Wedge be better. Page ibid. Diverse
kinds of Squares. Page 105. The Square in figure. Page ibid. The depth in the
Square. Page 106. The Square in number. Page 107.
CHAP. XIX.
Diverse forms of Rhombes. Page ibid. A Rhombe filing and ranking. Page 108. A
Rhombe neither filing nor ranking. Page 109. A Rhombe filing not ranking. Page
110. A Rhombe ranking not filing. Page ibid.
CHAP. XX.
The Horse-troupe of the Macedonians. Page 111. The number, and manner of
framing it. Page ibid. The place of the Cornett. Page ibid. The distance
betwixt horse, and horse. Page 112. The distance betwixt Troop, and Troop.
Page 113.
CHAP. XXV.
Turning of Soldiors faces. Page 117. The end of this motion. Page 118. Two
turnings, or Metabole. Page 119. Turning to the Pike, or Target. Page ibid.
Turning to the enemy, or from the enemy. Page ibid. The words of direction in
this motion. Page 120.
CHAP. XXVI.
Wheeling the battle. Page 120. How it is done. Page 121. A Treble wheeling.
Page ibid. The end of this motion. Page ibid. Examples of double wheeling. Page
122.
CHAP. XXVII.
To restore to the first posture. Page 123. What (...) signifies. Page ibid.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Countermarches. Page 125. The Macedonian Countermarch by file. Page 127. The
Lacedemonian. Page ibid. The Choraean. Page 129. Countermarches by rank. Page
132. The words of direction. Page ibid.
CHAP. XXIX.
Doubling. Page 133. The length doubled in number. Page 134. The use of it.
Page 135. The danger of it the enemy being nigh. Page 136. The Depth doubled.
Page ibid. The words of command in this motion. Page 137.
FINIS.

