TO THE HIGH AND mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of WALES.
CHRIST JESUS, the 1 Timothy 6.15. Apoc. 17.14.
PRINCE of Princes, bless your Highness with length of days, and an increase
of all Graces, which may make you truly prosperous in this life, and eternally
happy in that which is to come.

Jonathan shot 1 Samuel 20 20.
three Arrows to drive David further off from Saul's fury: and this is the
third Epistle which I have written to draw your Highness nearer to Gods
favor, by directing your heart to begin (like Josiah) in your 2 Chronicles. 34.3*
youth to seek after the GOD of DAVID (and of JACOB) your Father: Not, but
that I know, that your Highness does this without mine admonition; but because
I Qui monet vt facias quod iam facis: ipse monendo, laudat, and hortatu
co^probat actae suo.
would with the Apostle, have you, to Cor. 8.7.
abound in every Grace, in faith and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in
your love to Gods Service and true Religion. Never was there more need of
plain and unfeigned Admonitions: for the Comicke in that saying seems but to
have prophesied of our times, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. And no
marvel; seeing that we are fallen into the dregs of Time, which being the
last, must needs be the worst days. And how can there be worse, seeing
Vanity knows not how to be vainer, nor Wickedness how to be more wicked? And
whereas heretofore those have been counted most holy, who have showed
themselves most zealous in their Religion: they are now reputed most discreet,
who can make the least profession of their Faith. And that these are the last
days, appears evidently; because that Security of men's eternal state has
so overwhelmed (as CHRIST foretold it should) all sorts: Mat. 25.1. etc.
that most who now live, 2 Timothy 3.4
are become lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. And of those who
pretend to love GOD. O GOD, what sanctified heart can but bleed to behold how
seldom they come to prayers? how irreuerently they hear Gods Word? what
strangers they are at the Lords Table? what assiduous spectators they are at
Stage Plays? where being Christians, they can sport themselves to hear the
Vassals of the Exemplu^ accidit Domino test^* mu^ieris quae Theatrum ae^^ij^,
and inde cum Daemonio redij^ Itaque in e^orcismo cum oneraretur immundus
spiritus, quod ausus est fide^em aggredi: constanter and iustissime quidem
(inquit) feci, in meo eam inueni. Tert. de spect. lib. cap. 26.
Devil scoffing Religion, and blasphemously abusing phrases of holy Scripture
on their Stages: as familiarly as they use their Tabacco-pipes in their
bibbing-houses. Therefore Tertullian in cap. 26. calls the Stage diaboli
Ecclesiam, and cathedram pestilentiarum.
So that he who would now adays seek in most Christians, for the power, shall
scarce almost find the very show of godliness. Never was there more sinning,
never less remorse for sin. Never was the Judge nearer to come, Iam 5 9.
Apo. 22.20.
never was there so little preparation for his coming. And if the Bridegroom
should now come; how many (who think themselves wise enough, and full of all
knowledge) would be found foolish Virgins, without one drop of the Oil of
saving Faith in their lamps? Mat. 25.8.
For the greatest wisdom of most men in this age; consists in being wise,
first, to deceive others, and in the end, to deceive themselves.

And if sometimes some good Book haps into their hands; or some good motion
comes into their heads, whereby they are put in mind to consider the
uncertainty of this life present; or how weak assurance they have of eternal
life if this were ended: and how they have some secret sins, for which they
must needs repent here, or be punished for them in Hell hereafter* Security
then forthwith whispers the Hypocrite in the Ear, that though it be fit to
think of these things; yet, It is not yet time, and that he is yet young
enough (though he cannot but know that many millions as young as himself, are
already in hell, for want of timely Repentance,) Presumption warrants him in
the other Ear, that he may have time hereafter at his leisure to repent: and
that howsoever others dye, yet he is far enough from death, and therefore
may boldly take yet a longer time to enjoy his sweet pleasures, and to
increase his wealth and greatness. And hereupon, Prou. 6.10.
like Salomons Sluggard, he yields himself to a little more sleep, a little
more slumber, a little more folding of the hands to sleep in his former
sins: till at last; Despair (Securities ougly hand-maide) comes in unlooked
for, and shows him his Houre-glasse, dolefully telling him, that his time is
past, and that nothing now remains but to dye and be damned. Let not this
seem strange to any, for too many have found it too true: and more without
more grace, are like to be thus soothed to their end; and in the end snared to
their endless perdition.

In my desire therefore of the common salvation; Jude ver. 3
but especially of your Highness everlasting Welfare: I have endeavored to
extract out of the Chaos of endless Controversies, the old Practice of true
PIETY, which flourished before these Controversies were hatched; which my
poor labors in a short while comes now forth again the third time, under the
gracious protection of your Highness favor; and by their entertainment seem
not to be altogether unwelcome to the Church of Christ. If to be pious, has in
all ages been held true honor; how much more honorable is it, in so impious
an age, to be the true Patron and Pattern of Piety? Piety made David,
Solomon, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Zerubbabel, Constantine, Theodosidus,
Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth, Prince Henry, and other religious Princes, to
be so honored: that their names (since their deaths) smells in the Church of
GOD, like a precious ointment, Eccles. 7.3 Ecclus. 49.1.
and their remembrance is sweet as Honey in all mouths, and as Music at a
banquet of Wine: when as the lives of others, who have been godless and
irreligious Princes; do rot and stink in the memory of Gods people. And what
honor is it for great men to have great titles on earth; when God counts their
Names unworthy to be written in his Book of life in heaven?

It is Piety that enbalmes a Prince his good name, and make his face to shine
before men, and glorifieth his Soul among Angels. Exodus 34.29.30.
For as Moses face by often talking with GOD shined in the eyes of the People:
so by frequent praying (which is our talking with God) and hearing the Word
(which is Gods speaking unto us) we shall be changed from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3.18
by the Spirit of the Lord, to the Image of the Lord. And seeing this life is
uncertain to all; (especially to Princes) What argument is more fit both for
Princes and People to study; then that which teaches sinful man to deny
himself by mortifying his corruption: that he may enjoy Christ the Author of
his salvation? To renounce these false and momentanie pleasures of the world,
that he may attain to the true and eternal joys of Heaven? and to make them
truly honorable before God in Piety, who are now only honorable before men
in vanity? What charges soever we spend in earthly vanities, for the most
part, they either dye before us, or we shortly die after them: but what we
spend, like Mat. 26.13
Mary, in the Practice of Piety, shall remain our true memorial for ever.
For, 1 Timothy 4 8.
Piety has the promise of this life, and of that which shall never end. But
Principibus ad salutem so a satis verae est Pietas: abs que illa vero nihil est
vel exercitus, vel im^eratoris fortitudo, vel apparatus reliquus Zozom. Eccle.
hist. lib. 9. cap. 1
without Piety* there is no internal comfort to be found in Conscience, nor
external peace to be looked for in the World, nor any eternal happiness to
be hoped for in Heaven. How can Piety but promise to her self a zealous
Patron of your Highness, being the sole Son and Heir of so gracious and
great a Monarch, who is not only the defender of the faith by Title: but also
a defender of the Faith in truth, as the Christian World has taken notice, by
his learned confuting of Bellarmines ouer-spreading Heresies: and his
suppressing in the blade of Vorstius Athean blasphemies? And how easy it is
for your Highness to equal, if not to exceed all that went before you in
Grace and greatness, if you do but set your heart to seek and to serve God,
considering how religiously your Highness has been educated by godly and
virtuous Governors and Tutors: The Honorable Sir. Robert Carey Knight, and
the religious Lady Carey his Wife. Mr. Thomas Murray. Sir James Fullerton.
as also that you live in such a time, wherein Gods providence and the Kings
religious care, have placed over this Church (to the unspeakable comfort
thereof) another venerable Iehoiada, that does good in our Israel, both toward
God, and toward his house: 2 Chronicles. 24.16.
of whom your Highness at all times, in all doubts, may learn the sincerity
of Religion, for the Salvation of your inward Soul, and the vvisest counsel
for the direction of your outward state. And let that Exhortation of David to
his Son Solomon be ever in your Princely mind. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the GOD of thy Father, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the LORD searches all hearts,
and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he
will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for
ever.

To help you the better to seek and to serve this GOD Almighty, who must be
your chief Protector in life, and only Comfort in death: I here once again,
on my bended knees, offer my old Mite new stamped into your Highness hands:
daily for your Highness offering up unto the most HIGH, my humblest prayers,
that as you grow in age and stature: Luke 2.52.
so you may (like your Master) increase in Wisdom and favor, with God and
all good men. This suite will I never cease: In all other matters I will ever
rest

Your Highness humble Servant, during life, to be commanded. Jews Bailey.

Ad CAROLVM Principem.
Toll Malos, extolle Pios, cognosce Teipsum.
Sacra tene, Paci consule, disce pati.
To the devout READER.
I Had not purposed to enlarge the last Edition, save that the importunity of
many devoutly disposed, prevailed with me, to add some points, and to
amplify others. To satisfy whose godly requests, I have done my best
endeavor: and with all finished all that I entend in this argument. If thou
shall hereby reap any more profit, give God the more praise: and remember him
in thy Prayers, who has vowed both his life and his labors to further thy
salvation as his own. Farewell in the Lord Jesus.

The chief Contents of this BOOK.
1 A Plain description of God, in respect of his Essence, Persons, and
Attributes: so far as every Christian should competently endeavor to learn
and know: with sundry sweet observations and meditations thereupon. page 5 2
Meditations setting forth the miseries of a man in life and death, that is not
reconciled to God in Christ. page 75 3 Meditations of the blessed state both in
life and death, of a man that is reconciled to GOD in Christ: wherein thou
shall find not a few things worthy the reading and observation. page 131 4
Meditations on 7. hindrances which keep back a sinner from the Practice of
Piety: necessary to be read of all, but especially of carnal Gospellers in
this age. 222 5 How to begin the morning with piou^ M^ditations and prayers.
300 6 How to read the Bible with profit and ease once over every year. 310 7
A Morning prayer. 320 Another shorter Prayer for the Morning. 343 Another
brief Morning Prayer. 352
8 Meditations how to walk with God all the day. 355 Especially how to guide thy
thoughts. ibid. Thy words. 368 Thy Actions. 379
9 Meditations for the Evening. 397 10 An Evening Prayer. 405 Another shorter
evening Prayer. 420
11 Things to be meditated upon as thou art going to bed. 426 12 Meditations
for a godly Householder. 430 13 A morning prayer for a Family. 438 14 Holy
Meditations and Graces before and after dinner and supper. 450 15 Rules to be
observed in singing of Psalms. 464 16 Evening Prayer for a Family. 468 17 A
religious discourse of the Sabbath day, wherein is proved, that the Sabbath was
altered from the seventh to the first day of the week, not by humane
ordinance, but by Christ himself and his Apostles: that the fourth
Commandment is perpetual and Moral under the new Testament, as well as under
the old. And the true manner of sanctifying the Sabbath day is described out of
the word of God. 481 18 A Morning Prayer for the Sabbath day. 581 19 An Evening
Prayer for the Sabbath day. 614 20 Meditations of the true manner of Fasting
and giving of Alms, out of the word of God. 625 21 The right manner of holy
Feasting. 661 22 Holy and devout Meditations of the worthy and reverent
receiving of the Lords Supper. 664 23 An humble Confession of sins before the
holy Communion. 748 24 A sweet Soliloquie to be said a little before the
receiving of the holy Sacrament. 753 25 A Prayer to be said after the receiving
of the holy Sacrament. 773 26 Meditations how to behave thy self in the time
of sickness. 794 27 A Prayer when one begins to be sick. 797 28 Directions
for making thy Will, and setting thy house in order. 809 29 A Prayer before
taking of Physic. 818 30 Meditations for one that is recovered from
sickness. 842 And a thanksgiving. 847
31 Meditations for the sick, taken from the ends of Gods chastisements. 822 32
Meditations for one that is like to dye. 856 33 A Prayer to be said of one that
is like to die. 872 34 Comfortable Meditations against despair. 879 35
Directions for those who come to visit the sick. 909 36 A Prayer to be said
for the sick. 916 And choice scriptures to be read unto him. 924
37 Consolations against impatiencie in sickness. 926 38 Consolations against
the fear of death. 933 39 7. sanctified thoughts, and so many spiritual
sighs, fit for a sick man that is like to dye. 942 40 Of the comfortable use
of true Absolution, and receiving of the Lords Supper, to the faithful and
penitent before they depart this life, if they may conveniently be had. 956 41
The last speech of a godly man dying. 976 42 Meditations of Martyrdom: wherein
is proved that those who dye for Popery cannot be Christ's Martyrs. 979 43 A
divine Colloquie twixt Christ, and the Soul, concerning the virtue and
efficacy of his dolorous passion. 995 44 The Souls Soliloquie unto Christ her
Savior. 1017
THE PRACTICE OF PIETY.
Directing a CHRISTIAN how to walk, that he may please GOD.
WHo ever thou art, that look into this Book, never undertake to read it:
unless thou first resoluest to become from thy heart, an unfeigned Practitioner
of Piety. Yet read it, and that speedily: least before thou have read it
over, God (by some unexpected death) cut thee off, for thine inueterate
Impiety.

The practice of Piety consists 1 In knowing 1 The essence of God, and that,
in respect of 1 The diverse manner of being therein, which are 3. persons 1
Father. 2 Son. 3 H. Ghost.
2 The Attributes thereof, which are, either, Nominall: or, Real, 1 Absolute, 1
Simplenes. 2 Infinitenes.
2 Relative, 1 Life. 2 Understanding. 3 Will. 4 Power 5 Majesty.



2 Thy own self, in respect of thy state of 1 Corruption. 2 Renouation.

2 In glorifying God aright, 1 By thy life, in dedicating thy self devoutly to
serve him. Ordinarily, 1 Privately in thine own person. 2 Publicly, 1 With
thy family every day. 2 With the Church on the Sabbath day.

Extraordinarily, by Fasting. Feasting.

2 By thy death in dying 1 In the Lord. 2 For the Lord.




Unless that a man does truly know God, Tum Deum amare libet, cum persuasum
habemus ipsum esse Optimum Maximum, vbique, praesentem, omnia in nobis
efficientem, eum in quo viuimus, mouemur, sumus. Bucer. in Ps. 115.
he neither can, nor will worship him aright: for, how can a man love him,
whom he knows not? and who will worship him, whose help a man thinks he
needs not? and how shall a man seek remedy by Grace, who never understood
his misery by Nature? Therefore (says the Heb. 11.6.
Apostle) He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him.

And for as much as there can be no true Piety, Danda in primis opera est, vt
Deum norimus, quotquot foelices esse volumus.
without the knowledge of GOD: nor any good practice without the knowledge of a
man's own self: Quid noscis, si teipsum nescis?
we will therefore lay down the knowledge of Gods Majesty, and man's misery,
as the first and chiefest grounds of the practice of Piety.

A plain Description of the Essence and Attributes of GOD, out of the holy
Scriptures, so far forth as every CHRISTIAN must competently know, and
necessarily believe, that will be saved.
ALthough no Creature can define what God is, because he is Psalm. 145.3
incomprehensible, and 1 Timothy 6.16.
dwelling in inaccessible light: yet it has pleased his Majesty, to reveal
himself in his Word unto us, so far, as our weak capacity can best
conceive him. Thus:

God, is that Deuteronomy. 1.4. and 4.35. and 32.39. and 6.4. Isay 45.5.6.7.8. 1 Cor.
8.4. Ephesians. 4.5.6 1 Timothy 2.5.
one Ioh. 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.17.
spiritual and 1 Kin. 8.27 Psalm. 147.5.
infinitely Deuteronomy. 32.4
perfect Exodus 3.14
essence, whose being is 1 Cor. 8.6. Act. 17.25. Romans 11.36.
of himself eternally.

In the Divine Essence, we are to consider two things: first, the diverse manner
of being therein: secondly, the Attributes thereof.

The diverse manner of being therein, are called Heb. 1.3.
Persons.

A Person is a Ioh. 1.1. Ioh. 5.31.37 Ioh. 14.16.
distinct subsistence of the Col. 2.9. John 14.9.
whole Godhead.

There are Genesis 1.26 3.22. and 11 7. Exodus 20.2. Hose. 1.4.7. Isa. 63 9.10.
Zach. 3.2. Hag. 2.5.6. 1 John 5.7. Mat. 3.16.17 and 28.19. Ioh. 14.26. 2 Cor.
13.13
three Divine Persons, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. These three
Persons are not three several substances, but three distinct subsistences, or
three diuer^ manner of beeings of Singula sunt in singulis, and omnia in
singulis, and singula in omnibus, et vnum omnia. Aug. lib. 6. de Trinit. cap.
vlt.
one and the same Substance, and Divine Essence. So that a Person in the
Godhead, is an individual understanding, and incommunicable Subsistence,
living of it self, and not sustained by another.

In the unity of the Godhead, there is a Genesis 1.26. and 3.22. and 11.7. Isay
6.8.
plurality, which is not accidental, (for GOD is a most pure act, and admits
no accidents:) nor essential: (for God is one essence only,) but Personae
diuinitatis distinguntur personaliter, sieve.

(...).


personal.

The Persons in this one essence are but three. In this Deus est indiuise, vnus
in Trinitate, and inconfuse trinus in vnitate, Justin. in (...).
Mystery there is alius and alius, another and another: but not aliud and
aliud, another thing, and another thing.

The Divine Essence in it self, is neither divided nor distinguished. But the
three Persons in the divine Essence, are distinguished among themselves three
manner of ways: 1 By their Names. 2 By their Order. 3 By their Actions.


1 By their Names, thus:
THe first Person is named the Father: first, in respect of his Mat. 11.27 Mat.
3.17.
natural Son Christ: secondly, in respect of the Elect, his Isa. 63.16. Ephesians.
3.14.15
adopted sons, that is, those, who being not his sons by Nature, are made his
Sons by Grace.

The second Person is named the Pro. 30.4.
Son, because he is Psalm. 2.7, Heb. 1.5.
begotten of his Heb. 1.3. Phil. 2.6.
Fathers substance or nature: and he is called the Word: first, because the
Basil. sup. 1 Johan.
conception of a word in man's mind is the nearest thing, Sicut men's cogitando
in seipsam reflectitur, and (...) internam gignit: ita men's illa aeterna, quae
est Deus Pater, in seipsum intelligendo reflexa (...) aeternum, modo ineffabili
genuit. Et sicut exterior (...) interioris effigi^s quasi est: ^ita. aetern^
ille (...) aeterni Patris imago est and maiestatis character, Heb. 1.3.
that in some sort can shadow unto us the manner how he is eternally begotten
of his Fathers substance: and in this respect he is also called the Wisdom of
his Father, Prou. 8.12. Secondly, because that by John 1.18. Jraen. lib. 4.
cap. 14*
him, the Father has from the beginning declared his Will for our salvation:
hence called (...) quasi (...), the Person speaking, with or by the Fathers.
Thirdly, because he is the chi^fe Act. 10.43. Heb. 1.1. Lu. 24.27. Ioh. 5.45.
Act. 3.22.23.24.
argument of all the Word of God, or that Word whereof GOD spoke when he
promised the blessed Seed to the Fathers, under the old Testament.

The third Person is named the Isa. 63.10. 2 Cor. 13.13
holy Ghost: first, because he is Ioh. 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.17.
spiritual without a body: secondly, because he is spired, and as it were,
breathed from both the Ioh. 20.21 22. Gal. 4.6. Ioh. 15.26.
Father and the Son, that is, proceeds from them both. And he is called
holy, both because he is 1 Pet. 1.15.16.
holy in his own nature, and also the immediate 2 Cor. 3.18. 1 These. 5.23 1
Pet. 1.2.
sanctifier of all Gods Elect people.

2 By their Order, thus:
THe Persons of the Godhead are either the Father, or those which are Origo
essentiae in diuinis nulla est, origo Personari^ locum habet in Filio, and
Spiritu sancto. Pater enim est prior Filio non tempore sed ordine, Alsted.
of the Father.

The Father is the Mat. 28.19 1 John. 5.7.
first person of the glorious Trinity, Ideo dicitur Pater (...).
having neither his being nor beginning of any other, but of himself,
begetting his Son and together with his Son, sending forth the Holy Ghost
from everlasting. The Persons which are of the Father, are those, who in
respect of their Personal existence have the whole Divine Essence aeternally
communicated unto them from the Father; and those are either from the Father
alone, as the Son, or from the Father and the Son, as the Holy Ghost.

The Son is the second person of the glorious Trinity, and the only
begotten Son of his Father, not by Grace, but by Nature: having his Filius
Dei (...), quoad essentiam absolutam, est quide^ a seipso, and (...): sed
ratione (...), sieve Esse personalis per aeternam generationem a Patre existit;
ideoque non est, (...) Ioh. 6.38.17 Ioh. 5.19. Mich. 5.2. John 1.1.
being of the Father alone, and the whole being of his Father, by an eternal
and incomprehensible generation: and with the Father, sends forth the Holy
Ghost. In respect of his absolute Essence, he is of himself, but in respect of
his Person, he is by an eternal generation of his Father. For the Essence
does not beget an Essence, but the Psalm. 2.7. Hebr. 1.5. Aliud est habere
Essentia diuinam a seipso; and habere essentia diuinam a seipsa existentem:
remota ^^^relatione ad Patrem, sola restat Essentia quae est a seipsa: hinc
Filius dicitur principiatus, non essentia^ Thom. S^m. page 1. q. 33.
person of the Father begets the Person of the Son, and so he is God of
God, and has from his Father the beginning of his Person and Order, but not of
Essence and time.

The holy Ghost is the third Person of the blessed Trinity, Ioh. 15.26 Ioh.
16.15. Therefore, Romans 8.9. the H. Ghost is called the Spirit of Christ.
proceeding and sent forth, equally from Spiritus S. a Patre and a Filio
procedit, tanqua^ ab vno and eodem principio, in duabus taentum personis
subsistente, non autem tanqu^ a duobus ac diuersis principijs.
both the Father and the Son, by an eternal and incomprehensible spiration:
For as the Son receives the whole divine essence by generation; so the H.
Ghost receives it wholly by spiration.

This Order betwixt the three persons appears, in that the Father begetting
must in order be before the Son begotten, and the Father and Son, before
the Holy Ghost proceeding from both.

This Order serves to set forth unto us two things: first, the manner how the
Trinity works in their external actions: as that the Father works of
himself, by the Son and the holy Ghost: the Son from the Father, by the
holy Ghost: the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. Secondly, to
distinguish the first and immediate beginning from which those external and
common action do flow. Hence it is that for as much as the Father is the
fountain and original of the Trinity: the beginning of all external
working, the Hinc Dei nomen saepe in Scripturis Patri (...) ^ribuitur. John
14.1. Romans 8.3. 1 Cor. 8.6. 1 Cor. 15.24
Name of God in relation, and the title of Creator in the Creed, are given in
a special manner to the Father: Our Redemption to the Son: and our
Sanctification to the person of the Holy Ghost, as the immediate agents of
these actions. And this also is the cause why the Son, as he is Mediator,
refers all things to the Mat. 11.25 26.27. Ioh. 5.19.20 21 22.23. John
11.41.42. Ioh. 12.49.
Father, not to the Holy Ghost; and that the Scripture so often says, that we
are 2 Cor. 5 18 etc.
reconciled to the Father.

This divine order or oeconomie excepted, there is neither first nor last,
neither superiority nor inferioritie among the three Persons, but for Nature
they are coessentiall, for Dignity coequall, for Time coeternall.

The whole divine Essence, is in every one of the three Persons; but it was
incarnated Incarnatio verbi proprie non Patri nec Spirituis. nisi (...)
competit. Damas. 1. de ortho. fid. c. 13 Impleuit carnem Christi Pater and
spiritus S. sed maiestate non susceptione. Aug. sermon. 3. de Temp. Ioh 3.16.
Romans 8.32. and 5.8.10. Hoc mirum foedus s^mper men's cogitet, vno hoc est ne
dubi^a foedere, parta (...). Melanct.
only, in the second Person of the Word, and not in the Person of the Father,
or of the H^ly Ghost, for three reasons.

First, that GOD the Father might the rather set forth the greatness of his
love to Mankind; in giving his first, and only begotten Son to be incarnated,
and to suffer death for man's salvation.

Secondly, that he who was in his Divinity the Son of GOD, should be in his
Humanity the Son of Man: Vt qui erat (...) diuinitate Dei filius* fieret in
humanitate hominis filius; ne nomen fili^ ad alterum transiret, qui non esset
aetern^ natiuitate filius. Aug.
lest the name of Son should pass unto another: who by his eternal
nativity was not the Son.

Thirdly, because it was meetest that that Person, who is the substantial
Image of his eternal Father, should restore in us the spiritual Image of GOD,
Congruebat filium assumere humaenam natura; vt haec pe^sona ^uae est
substantialis imago aeterni Patris, restitueret imaginem Dei in nobis
corruptam. Athan.
which we had lost.

In the Incarnation, the Godhead was not turned into the Manhood, nor the
Manhood into the Godhead: but the Godhead as it is the second Person or
Word, assumed unto it the Manhood, that is, the whole nature of man, body and
soul; Heb. 2.17.18 Heb. 4.15. Jnfirmitatis merae priuationis, non pratiae
dispositionis.
and all the natural properties and infirmities thereof, sin excepted.

The second Person took not upon him the Person of man: Humana natura est
distinctum, indiuiduum a natura diuina, etsi non sit distincta persona. Kecker.
Syst. Theol. lib. 3. page 315.
but the Nature of man. So that the humane nature has no personal subsistence
of it own, (for then there should be two Persons in Christ:) but it subsisteth
in the Word, the second Person: for, as the soul and body makes but one Person
of Man, Vniri Hypostatice Deum and hominem, nihil est aliud quam natural
humana^ non habere propriam existentiam, sed assumptam esse a Verbo aeterno, ad
ipsam verbi subsistentiam. Bellarm. de Incarn. lib. 3. cap. 8.
so the Godhead and Manhood makes but one Person of Christ.

The two natures of the Godhead and Manhood, are so really united by a
Personal union, that as they can never be separated asunder, so are they not
Saluis and distinctis manentibus proprietatibus, naturae tam assumentis, quam
assumptae.
confounded; but remain still distinguished by their several and essential
proprieties, which they had before they were united. As for example, the
infinit^nesse of the Divine is not communicated to the human^ nature, nor the
finitenesse of the Humane, to the Divine nature.

Yet by reason of this personal union, there is such a communion of the
proprieties of both natures: that, that which is proper to the one is sometimes
attributed to the other Nature: As that God purchased the Church, Act. 20.28.
with his own blood: And, that he will judge the world by that man, Act. 17.31.
whom he has appointed. Hence also it is, that though the Humanity of Christ
be a created, and therefore a finite and limited nature, D. Field of the Church
Book 3. chap. 35.
and cannot be every where present by actual position, or local extension
according to his Secundum esse natural Christus non est vbique.
natural being: yet because it has communicated unto it, the personal
subsistence of the Son of God, which is infinite and without limitation; and
is so united with God, that it is no where severed from God: the body of Christ
in respect of his Secundum esse personale Christus est vbique.
personal being, may rightly be said, to be every where.

3 The Actions by which the three Persons be distinguished.
THe Actions are of two sorts: either Eternal, respecting the Creatures, and
those are after a sort common to every one of the three Persons: or Internal,
respecting the Persons only amongst themselves, and are altogether
incommunicable.

The External and communicable Actions of the three Persons, are these.

In operibus ad extra; tres personae operantur simul, seruato ordine personaru^
in operando.
The creation of the World, peculiarly belonging to God the Father: The
redemption of the Church, to God the Son: And the sanctification of the
Elect, to God the holy Ghost. But because the Romans 11.36
Father created and still governs the World by the Son in the holy Ghost;
therefore these external actions are indifferently, in As Redemption. Act.
20.28. and Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.2. to the Father. Creation Ioh. 1.3. and
Sanctification 1 Cor. 1.2. to the Son. Creation Psalm. 33.6. and Redemption
Ephesians. 4 30. to the holy Ghost. Jointly all to each. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Scripture, oftentimes ascribed to each of the three Persons, and therefore
called communicable and divided Actions.

The Internal and incommunicable Actions or proprieties of the three Persons,
Opera Trinitatis ad extrae indiuisa, ad intus diuisae.
are these:

1 To beget: and that belongs only to the Father; who is neither made,
created, nor begotten of any.

2 To be begotten: and that belongs only to the Son, who is of the Father
alone, not made, nor created, but begotten.

3 To proceed from both: and that belongs only to the holy Ghost, who is of
the Father and the Son, neither made, created, nor begotten but proceeding.

So that when we say, Personae nomen, non est aliquid ab essentia abstractum
ac seperatum. Faius These. disp. 2.
that the divine essence is in the Father unbegotten: in the Son begotten:
and in the Holy Ghost proceeding: Persona est ipsa essentia diuina contracta,
ad certum and peculiarem subsistendi modu^. Zanchius
we make not three Essences, but only show, the diverse manners of subsisting,
by which the same most simple, eternal and vnbegotte^ Essence subsisteth in
each Person: Persona gignit, and gignitur, Essentia nec gignit nec gignitur,
sed communicatur. Alsted.
namely, that it is not in the Father by generation: that it is in the Son,
communicated from the father by generation: and in the holy Ghost, communicated
from both the Father and the Son by proceeding.

These are incommunicable Actions, and do make; not an Essential, accidental,
or rational, but a real distinction betwixt the three Persons. So that he who
is the Father in the Trinity, is not the Son: he who is the Son in the Trinity,
is not the Father: he who is the holy Ghost in the Trinity, is neither the
Son nor the Father, but the Spirit proceeding from both: though there is but
one and the same Essence common to Quum vnum cogito, trium incomprehensibili
luce inuoluor Nazianz.
all three. As therefore we believe that the Father is God, the Son is God,
and the holy Ghost is God: so we likewise believe that God is the Father, God
is the Son, and God is the holy Ghost. But by reason of this real
distinction: the Person of the one, is not, nor never can be, the person of the
other. The three Persons therefore of the Godhead, do not differ from the
Essence but Quamuis persona cum Essentia non sit omnino idem, non tamen ab ea
est omnino aliud. Differt n. non numero, quia sic in diuinis foret quaternitas,
non re quia essentia de personis praedicatur sed formaliter (...), sieve ratione
ratiocinante no ratiocinatae Essentia diuina non differt a personis vt res a
rebus, sed vt res a suis modis: nam in deo non est res and res, sed res and
modus rei.
formally: but they differ really one from an other, and so are distinguished
by their hypostaticall proprieties. As the Father is God begetting God the
Son: the Son is God begotten of God the Father: and the holy Ghost is God
proceeding from both God the Father and God the Son.

Hence it is, that the Scriptures use the name of God two manner of ways.
Either (...) Nomen Dei essentialiter positum, non minus Filium and Spiritum S.
quam patrem designat
Essentially, and then it signifies the three Persons coniointly: or (...).
Personally, and then by a Synecdoche it signifies but one of the three
Persons in the Godhead. As the Father, 1 Timothy 2.5. or the Son, Act. 20.28. 1 Timothy 3.16. or the holy Ghost Act. 5.4. 2 Cor. 6.16.

And because the divine Essence (common to all the three persons) is but one,
Sacramentu^ hoc venerandum, non scrutandum, quomodo pluralita^ sit in vnitate
and vnitas in pluralitate. Scrutari hoc temeritas est, credere pietas, nosce
vero vita aeterna. Bern.
we call the same Unity. And because there be three distinct Persons in this
one indivisible essence: we call the same Trinity. Neque ad loquendum digne de
Deo lingua sufficit, neque ad percipiendum intellectus praeualet, magis ergo
glorificare nos conuenit Deum, quod talis est, qui and intellectum transcendit
and cognitionis initium superat. Chrisost. Hom. 2. Heb. 1.
So that this Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is a holy De Deo loqui
etiam vera periculosissimum est. Arnobius.
mystery: rather to be religiously adored by faith, then Lingua, mente, and
cogitatione horresco, quoties de Deo sermonem habeo. Nazianz.
curiously searched by reason, further then God has revealed in his word.

Thus far of the diverse manner of being in the Divine Essence: now of the
Attributes thereof.
ATtributes are certain descriptions of the Divine Essence, delivered in the
Scriptures, according to the weakness of our Condescendit nobis Deus: vt nos
consurgamus ei. Aug. de spec. c. 112.
capacity, to help us the better to understand the nature of Gods Essence,
and to discern it from all other essences.

The Attributes of GOD are of two sorts, either nominall, or real.

The nominall Attributes are of three sorts: first, those which signify Gods
Essence: secondly, the Persons in the Essence: thirdly, those which signify
his essential works.

Of the first sort is the name Exodus 15.3 ab Hauah, vel Haiah, Esse: nam ita
Deus est a seipso, vt sit suura esse, et (...). Omnes huius nominis literae
sunt spirituales, vt denotetur Deu^ esse spiritum. P. Mart. loc. com. cap. 11.
Jehovah, or rather Montan. de arc. sermon. c. 1. Jehouah non habet plurale, and
in Scripturis soli vero Deo tribuitur. Locus Exodus 6.3 intelligendus est de
gradibus diuinarum patesactionum. Gerard. loc. 3. de Not. dei.
Iehueh, which signifies eternal being of himself, in whom being without
all beginning and end, all other beeings both begin and end. Isay 42.8. Psalm.
83.18.

GOD tells Moses, Exodus 6.3. that he was not known to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
by his name Jehovah. (Not, but that they knew this to be the name of God: for
they used it in all their prayers, but) because they lived not to see, God
effecting indeed, that which he promised them; in graciously delivering their
Seed out of Egypt, and in giving them the real possession of Canaans Land;
and so to be not only God Almighty, by whom all things were made, Ex vsu
scripturae res tunc dicuntur fieri, quando fiunt manifestae: Sic dicitur
Spiritus sanctus nondum erat, id est, nondum innotuerat. Alsted. Lex. Theol.
cap. 2.
but also performing indeed to the Children that which he promised in his
Word to the Fathers, which this name Jehovah especially signifies. And for
this cause Moses calls GOD first Jehovah, when the universal Creation had his
absolute being, Genesis 2.4. and this admirable name is graven on the Decalogues
forehead, which was pronounced upon the Israelites deliverance, to be the
rule of righteousness, after which they should serve their Deliverer in the
promised Land.

Quod licet scribere, effari cur non liceret? Theod. in Epit.
This Name is so full of divine mysteries, that the Jews hold it a sin to
pronounce it: but if it be no sin to write it, why should it be unlawful to
pronounce it?

This holy Name of GOD teaches us:

First, what GOD is in himself, namely, Ens aeternu^. (...).
An aeternall being of himself.

Secondly, how he is unto others, Tons est (...).
because that from him all other creatures have received their being.

Thirdly, that we may confidently believe his promises: for he is named
Jehovah, not only in respect of being, and causing all things to be; but
especially, in respect of his gracious promises which without fail he will
fulfill in his appointed time, Jn promissionibus Jehovah est (...).
and so causes that to be which was not before. And so this name is a golden
pledge unto us, that because he has promised, he will surely upon Isa. 55.7.
our Repentance forgive us all our sins, at the time of death Ioh. 12.26 Ioh.
14.2.3.
receive our Souls, and in the Resurrection Ioh. 6.40. Ioh. 11.25.
raise up our Bodies in glory to Life everlasting.

The second Name denoting Gods Essence is, Eheieh; but once read Exodus 3.14. of
the same root that Jehovah is; and signifies I am, or I will be: for when
Moses asked God by what name he should call him, GOD then named himself,
Eheieh Ascher Eheieh; I am that I am: or, I will be that I will be: signifying
that he is an eternal, unchangeable, being: For seeing every creature is
temporary and mutable, no creature can say, Ero qui ero, I will be that I will
be. This name in the New Testament is given to our Lord Christ, when he is
called Alpha and Omega, The beginning and the ending, (...).
which is, which was, and which is to come. The Almighty, Apoc. 1.8. For all
time past and to come is aye present before God. And to this Name, Christ
himself alludeth, John 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.

This Name should teach us likewise to have always present in our minds, our
first Creation, present corruption, and future Glorification: and not content
our selves, with I was good, or I will be good, but to be good presently, that
when ever God sends for us, he may find us prepared for him.

Deus est causa causarum, and ens en^^u^.
The third Name is Iah, which as it comes of the same root, so is it the
contract of Jehovah, and signifies Lord, because he is the beginning and
being of beeings. It is a Psalm. 68.19. Psalm. 102.18. Ps. 106.1.48 Psalm. 111.1.
etc. Ps. 112.1. etc Psa. 113.1.9. Psalm. 115.17.18. Psalm. 116.19 Ps. 118.5.14
Psa. 135.3.4
Name, for the most part, ascribed unto GOD when some notable deliverance or
benefit comes to pass according to his former promise: and therefore all
creatures in heaven and earth are commanded to celebrate and praise GOD in this
name Iah.

The fourth is (...), Lord: used often in the New Testament: Iunius in Eirenico.
for (...), or (...), signifies, I am. Hence (...) signifies the first
essence of a thing, or Authority. When it is absolutely given to GOD, it
answers to the Hebrew name Jehovah, and so translated by the seauentie
Interpreters: for God is so a Lord, that he is of (...). Polan. Synt. Theol.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
himself Lord, and Lord of all. This Name should always put us in remembrance
to Mal. 1.6.
obey his Commandments, and to fear his judgments, and submit our selves to
his blessed will and pleasure, saying with Eli, It is the Lord; let him do
what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3.18.

The fifth is, (...), God, 600. times used in the New Testament: and of profane
Writers commonly. It is derived Plato in Cratylo.
(...), because he runs through, and compasses all things: Zanchius.
or (...) (...), which signifies, to burn and kindle: for God is light, and
the Author both of Heat, Deus est lux (...).
Light, and Life, in all creatures, either immediately of himself, or
mediately by secondary causes. The name is used either improperly, or properly.
Improperly, when it is given either figuratively to Magistrates, Ioh. 10.34. 1
Cor. 8.5.
or falsely to Idols. But when it is properly and absolutely taken; it
signifies the eternal Essence of GOD, being above all things, and through all
things, giving life and light to all Creatures, and preserving and governing
them, in their wonderful frame and order. Incu^bit nobis necessitas recte
viuendi: cum omnia quae facimus facta sint corara oculis Judicis cuncta
videntis. Boe^tius.
God sees all, in all places: let us therefore every where take heed what we
do in his sight.

Thus far the names which signifies Gods Essence.

The Name which signifies the Persons in the Essence is chiefly one, Elohim.

Elohim signifies the mighty Judges: It is a name of the Nomen Elohim est
personaru^, (...). Alsted.
Plural number, to express the Trinity of Persons in Unity of Essence. And
to this purpose, the holy Ghost begins the holy Bible with this plural name
of God, Quum Elohim de ^ na Persona dicitur Synecdochice dictu^ est, propter
Essentiae vnicatem. Iuni^.
joined with a Verb of the singular number; as Elohim barae, Dij creauit, The
like you may read, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Josh. 24.19.
The mighty Gods, or, all the three Persons in the Godhead created. The Jews
also note in the Verb (...), bara, consisting of three Letters, the Mystery
of the Trinity. By (...), Ben, the Son; by (...), Resh Ruah, the Spirit; by
(...), Aleph Ab, the Father. But this holy Mystery is more clearly taught by
Moses, Genesis 3.22. And Jehovah Elohim, said, Behold the man is become as One of
(...). And Genesis 19.24. Jehovah rayned upon Sodom and upon Gomorha brimstone
and fire, from Jehovah out of Heaven: Sic Marcus Arethusius in S^^irniensi
Concilio sancte exposuit. Socrat. Eccl. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 30.
that is, God the Son from God the Father, who has committed all judgment
unto the Son, John 5.22. See Psalm. 33.6. Isa. 63.9.10. The Singular number of
Elohim is Eloah, derived of Alah, he swore, because that in all weighty
causes, when necessity requires an oath to decide the truth, we are only to
swear by the Name of God, which is the great and righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth.

This Name Eloah is but seldom used, as Abac. 3.3. Job. 4.9. Job. 12.4. and
15.8.36.2. Psalm. 18.32. Psalm. 114.7. Once it has a Noune plural joined to it.
Job. 35.10. None says, This place well urged had grinded Arrius in pieces.
where is Eloah Gosai, the Almighty my Makers? to note the Mystery of the
eternal Trinity. Many times also Elohim the, plural number, is joined with a
verb plural, to express more emphatically this mystery, as Genesis 35.7. 2 Samuel
7.23. Elohim Kedoschim Hi^, Dii sancti ipse.
I^sh. 24.19. Ier. 10.10. Elohim is also sometime Tropically given to
Magistrates, because they are Gods Vicegerents: as to Moses, Exodus 7.1. Jehovah
said unto Moses, I have made thee Elohim to Pharaoh, that is, I have appointed
thee an Ambassador to represent the Person of the true Three-one, GOD, and to
deliver his message and will unto Pharaoh. As often therefore as we read, or
hear this name Elohim, it should put us in mind to consider, that in one
divine Essence, there are three distinct Persons, and that God is Jehovah
Elohim.

Now follows the names which signify Gods essential works, which are these
five especially.

1 EL, which is as much as the strong God, Hence Eli in Hebrew, as Mat. 27.46.
and Eloi in the Syriake, as Mar. 15.34. both signfie, My God.
and teaches us that God is not only most strong and fortitude it self, in
his own essence: but also that it is he that gives all strength and power to
all other creatures. Therefore Christ is called, Isay 9.6. El Gibbor, the
strong, 2. Chr. 32.8.
most mighty, God. Let not Gods children fear the power of enemies, for El,
our God, is more strong then they.

2 Schaddai. The 70. turns it (...). It is derived of Dai, sufficiency, and
the relative (...). the same that (...) or of Schad a Dugge, because God feeds
his children with sufficiency of all grace, as the loving mrther the child with
the milk of her breasts.
That is, Omnipotent. By this name God usually styled himself to the
Patriarchs, I am El Schaddai, the strong God, almighty. Because he is
perfectly able to defend his servants from all evil: to bless them with all
spiritual and temporal blessings, and to perform all his promises, which he
has made unto them for this life, and that which is to come. This name
belongs only to the Godhead, and to no creature, no not to the humanity of
Christ. This may teach us with the Patriarchs, to put our whole confidence in
God, and not to doubt of the true performance of his promises.

3 A name compounded of A^, My, Adon, Lord. Adon deriuatur ab Eden, basis, quia
Deus est fundamentu^ and sus^^^ator omnium creaturar^^. Hinc Adon Dominus cui
^ei domesti^^e curae (...), and e^ tanqua columnae innititur.
Adonai. My Lord. This name, as the Massorets note, is found 134* times in the
old Testament. Analogically it is given to cretures: Quando de creatu is
vsurpatur Adonai est Iod cum patach: sed de creatore cum cametz.

Ab, Adonai manasse videtur Ethnicorum.

(...).


but properly it belongs to God alone. It is used Malachy 1.6. in the plural
number, to note the mystery of the holy Trinity. If I be Adonim, Lords, where
is my fear? Any the singular, Adonim the plural number. This name is given to
Chirst Dan. 9.17. Cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate,
for ADONAI (the Lord Christ) his sake. The hearing of this holy name may teach
every man to obey Gods Commandments, to fear him alone, to suffer none
besides him to reign in his conscience, to lay hold by a particular hand of
faith upon his word and promise, and to challenge God in Christ to be his God,
that he may say with Thomas Thou art my Lord and my God.

4 Is Helion: that is, most High. Psalm. 9.2. Psalm. 91 9. Psalm. 92.9. Dan. 4
17.24.25.34. Acts 7.48. This name, Gabriel gives unto God; telling the Virgin
Mary that the child which should be borne of her should be the son of the
most High, (...). So the devil styled Christ the Son of God the most High. Luke
8.28.
Luke 1.32. This teaches that God in his essence and glory exceeds infinitely
all creatures in heaven and earth. Secondly, that no man should be proud of any
earthly honor or greatness. For what is earthly, greatness compared to Gods
Highness.
Thirdly, if we desire true dignity, to labor to have communion with God, in
grace and glory.

5 Abba, a Syriake name, signifying, Father, Romans 8.15. This is sometimes used
essentially, as in the Lords prayer. Secondly, personally, as Matthew. 11.25. For
God is Christ's father by nature, and Christians by adoption and grace. Christ
is called the everlasting Father, Isay 9.6. because he regenerates us under
the New Testament. God is also called (...). Of whose substance the light of
the Sun is but a shadow. John 1.9.
the Father of light, James 1.17. because God dwells in inaccessible light,
1. Tim. 6.16. and is the author not only of the Suns light, but also of all
the light, both of natural reason, and supernatural grace, (...). Of whose
substance the light of the Sun is but a shadow. John 1.9.
Which lights every man that comes into the world. This name teaches us,
that all the gifts which we receive from God, proceed from his mere fatherly
love. Secondly, that we should love him again, as dear children. Thirdly,
that we may in all our needs and troubles be bold to call upon him as a
Father, for his help and succor. Thus should we not hear of the sacred
names of God, but we should thereby be put in mind of his goodness unto us,
and of our duties unto him. And then should we find how comfortable a thing
it is to do every thing in the name of God. A phrase usual in every man's
tongue: but the true comfort thereof (through ignorance) known to few men's
hearts.

It is a great wisdom, and an unspeakable matter for the strengthening of a
Christians faith, to know how in the mediation of Christ to invoke God by
such a name, as whereby he has manifested himself, to be most willing and
best able to help and succor him in his present need or adversity. The
ardent desire of knowing God is the surest testimony of our love to God, and of
Gods favor to us. Psalm. 91.14.15.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him on high, because he has known my name: he shall call upon me and I will
answer him, etc. and it is a great strengthening of faith, with understanding,
to begin every action in the name of God.

Thus far of the nominall Attributes.
The real Attributes are of two sorts: either absolute, or relative.

The absolute Attributes are such which cannot in any sort agree to any
creature, but to God alone.

These are two: Simpleness, and Infiniteness.

Simpleness, is that whereby God is void of all compoposition, Intelligentiae
habent aliquid simile materiae, aliquid simile formae, Solus Deus simplex est,
in quo nihil in potentia, sed in actu omnia, imo ipse purus primus, medius,
vltimus actus. Scal. Exerc. 6. Sect. 2. Justin. Martyr. quaest. 129. ad
Orthodoxos.
division, multiplication, accidents, or parts compounding, either sensible, or
intelligible: so that what ever he is, he is the same Essentially.

It hinders not Gods simpleness that he is three, because God is three, not by
composition of parts, but by coexistence of Persons.

Intelligentiae, cum sint entia alia ab infinito Ente, finita esse necesse est.
Nam duo infinita nequeunt esse, neque i^ natura, neque extra naturam. Essent n.
duo principia prima. Scal. Exerc. 359. Sect. 3.
Infiniteness is that, whereby all things in God are void of all measure,
limitation, and bonds, above and beneath, before and after.

From these two do necessarily flow three other Absolute attributes.

1 Unmeasurableness, or vbiquitie, whereby he is of infinite extension, Act.
7.48. Psalm. 145. Job. 11.7. etc. 1 King. 8.27 2 Chronicles. 2.5.6. Ps. 139.6. etc
Ier. 23.23.24. Deus est vbique, non ita vt in dimidia part sit dimidim, aut
tanquam in maiore part mayor Dei pars sit, in minore minor: sed vbique totu^,
and in seipso totus est. Aug.

Deus est intellectualis Sphaera, cui ut centrum est vbique circumferentia vero
nusquam. Trismegist.


filling heaven and Earth, containing all places, and not contained of any
space, place, or bounds, and being no where absent, is every where present.

There are four degrees of Gods presence: the first is universal, by which
God is repletiuely every where, inclusiuely no where.

Secondly, Special, by which God is said to be in heaven, because that Psalm.
19.1. Hos. 2.21.
there his power, wisdom, and goodness, is in a more excellent manner seen
and enjoyed: as also because that usually he does from thence pour both his
blessings and judgments.

Thirdly, more special, by which God 1 Cor. 3.16 and 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16
dwells in his Saints.

Fourthly, most special, and altogether singular, by which the whole fullness
of the Godhead Col. 2.8.
dwells in Christ bodily.

2 Unchangeableness, whereby God is void of all change: both in respect of his
Romans 1.23. Isa. 40.28. Psalm. 102.27. etc.
essence and Apoc. 1.8. 1 Samuel 15.29 Number. 23.19. Mal. 3.6. Romans 11.29. Iam.
1.18. Poenitentia cum de Deo enunciatur non affectum in Deo. sed effectum Dei
in hominibus significat. Alsted.
will.

3 Eternity, whereby God is without beginning of days or end of time: and
without all bounds of Isa. 44.6. Lam. 5.19. Dan. 6.26. Heb. 1.12. Apoc. 4.8.
Creaturae quaedam aeternae sunt a posteriori: a priori solus Deus* est
aeternus. Alsted. Lex. Theol. cap. 2.
praecession or succession.

Thus far of the absolute Attributes; now of the Relative, or such which have
reference to the Creatures.
Those are five: 1 Life: 2 Understanding: 3 Will: 4 Power: 5 Majesty.
1 THE Life of God is that by which, as by a most pure and perpetual act, he
not only lives of himself; but is also, that ever, and ouer-flowing
fountain of Life, from which, all creatures derive their Act. 17.25.28. Act.
14.15. Psalm. 42.2. Psalm. 36.9. Ioh. 5.26. Heb. 3.12.
lives: so as that in him, they live, move, breathe, and have their being. And
because only his Life differs from his Hence it is that as God is called of
the Hebrews Eheie, so likewise Echeie: and as of the Grecians, (...), so also
(...): and as of the Latins primum Ens, so also primum viuens: for to be, and
to live, is all one and the same in GOD.
Essence; therefore GOD is said only to have immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16.

2 The Understanding or Knowledge of GOD, is that whereby (by one pure act) he
most perfectly 1 Kin. 8.39 Psalm. 44.21. Psalm. 139.2. etc. Ier. 17.10. and
20.12. Luke 16.15. Act. 1.24. Heb. 4.12. Romans 11.33 and 16.17.
knows in himself all things that ever were, are, or shall be: Yea, the
thoughts and imaginations of all men's hearts.

This Knowledge of God, is either general, by which God knows simply all
things eternally, the good by himself, the evil by the good opposite to it:
imposing to things contingent the Lot of contingencie; and to things necessary,
the Law of necessity. And thus knowing all things in and of himself, he is
the cause of all the knowledge that is in all, both men and Angels. Secondly,
special, 1 Timothy 2.19. Mat. 7.13.
called the knowledge of approbation, by which he perticularly knows, and
graciously acknowledges only his Elect for his own.

Intellectus scie^tia and sapientia in deo non distingu^tur. Tilen. Na^
sapientia in homine est habitus intellectui impressus, qui de deo dici no^
debet, cuius intellectus est ipsa sapie^tia. Keck. (...). Hes. li. (...). Sap.
Hence the Platonicks term God (...), all-eye, seeing all.
Understanding also contaynes the Wisdom of God, by which he most wisely
created all things of nothing, in number, measure, and weight, and still rules
and disposes them to serve his own most holy purpose and glory.

3 The Will of God is that whereby of 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 9.19. Ephesians. 1.5.
necessity he wills himself, as the sovereign good: and (by willing
himself) wills most Deus voluntate sua cuncta constituit. Trism. in 4. dial.
Pim. Hinc Orpheus Deu^ vocat necessitatem, ratione sc^^nferioru^, quod omnia
ipsi parere cogantur.
freely all other good things which are out of himself. Voluntas Dei semper
impletur, aut de nobis aut a nobis. De no^is impletur, sed tamen no^ implemus
eam quando peccamus, ^ nobis impletur quando bonum facimus. Aug. Enchir. cap.
100. Romans 9.11.13 Iom. 1.21.


The Will of God, though in it self it be but one, as is his Essence, yet in
respect of the diversity of objects and effects it is called in the Scriptures
by diverse names: as, 1 Love, whereby is meant Gods eternal 1 Ioh. 3.1.
good will, whereby he ordeineth his elect to be freely saved through Christ,
and Psalm. 45.7.
bestows on them all necessary graces, for this life and that to come, Genesis
4.4.
taking pleasure in their persons and service. 2 Justice Norma^ Iustitiae
diuinae, est Dei v^luntas, Quia enim vult, ideo est Justum, non quia iustum
ideo vult, Ephesians. 1.11.
is Gods constant will, whereby he Romans 2.5. etc. 2 Th. 1.6. etc. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Deu. 7.9.10.
recompenceth men and Deus principiu^ and sine^ and media rerum omnium tenens,
rectaque linea incede^s, e vestigio habet (...) diuinae legis vindicem simul vt
quicqua^ sa^ctionu^ eius praetermissum est. Arist. lib. de mundo.
Angels, according to their works: punishing the impenitent according to their
deserts, called the justice of his wrath: and Romans 9.15.16. Ezekiel. 16.6. Psalm.
103 8. etc.
rewarding the faithful according to his promises, called the Justice of his
grace. 3 Mercy, which is Tit. 3.4. Semper inuenies Deum benigniorem quam te
culpabiliorem. Ser. 11* Ber. Vindictae gladiu^ miscrecordiae oleo s^mper
accuit. Nice. lib. 17. ca. 3.
Gods mere good-wil, and ready affection to forgive a penitent sinner
notwithstanding all his sins and ill deserts. 4 Goodness, Psa. 145.7.9.16
Mat. 19.17. In creaturis multa inueniuntur bona, ergo creator multo magis est
bonus: Imo (...), ipsu^ bonu^.
whereby God willingly communicates his good with his creatures: and because
he communicates it freely, it is termed Grace. 5 Truth, whereby Josh. 13.14
Psalm. 146.6. Number. 23.19. Veritas est harmonia tum intellectus and verborum cum
rebus, tum etiam rerum ipsarum cum Idaeis, in mente diuina. Keckerm. Veritas
Dei in verbis, fides Dei dicitur, quod certo fiant, quae ab ipso dicta sunt.
Item constantia, quia sententiam non mutat. Polan.
God wills constantly those things, which he wills: effecting, and
performing all things, which he has spoken in his appointed time. 6 Patience,
whereby God willingly forbeareth to punish the wicked so long as it may stand
with his Justice, and until their sins 2 Pet. 3.9. Romans 2.4. Genesis 15.16. Ad
poenam tardus, Deus est ad praemia velox. Sed pensare solet vi grauiore moram.
be ripened. 7 Holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 These. 4.3. Heb. 12.14. Mat. 15.8.
Quanta sanctitas Dei! ad cuius aspectum, sancti Angeli oculos prae fua
tenuitate alis velantes clamant Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Iehoua Tzabaoah. Isai
6.2.3.
whereby Gods nature is separated from all profaneness: and abhors all
filthynesse: and so being wholly pure in himself, delights in the inward and
outward purity and chastity, of his servants, which he infuseth into them. 8
Anger, Psa. 106.23 29.40.41. Number. 25.11. Jra Dei non est aliud qua^ voluntas
puniendi. Aug. 15. de Ciuit. dei cap. 25. Anselm. lib. 7, cap. 6. Cur Deus hom.
Furor and ira in Deo, non passionem mentis, sed vltionis acerbitate^, notant
Carth. in Apo. ca. 19.
whereby is meant Gods most certain and just will, in chastening the elect, and
in revenging and punishing the reprobate for the injuries they offer to him and
his chosen: and when GOD will punish with rigor, and severity, then it is
termed Wrath, 2 Cor. 19.2
temporal to the elect: 1 These. 1.10.
eternal to the Reprobates.


4 The Power of God is that whereby he Gen 17.1 Psalm. 115.3 Math. 11.26 Ephesians.
1.11. Mat. 8.2. Deus potest omnia quae contradictionem nonimplecant. Aqui. 1
quaest. 25. art. 3.4. Omnipotentia excludit omnes defectus, quae sunt im
potentiae seu posse mentiri mori, peccare, etc.
can simply and freely do whatsoever he will, that is agreeable to his nature,
and whereby (as he has made,) so he still rules heaven, and earth and all
things therein. This Almighty power of God is either absolute, by which he can
will and do more then he wills or does. Matthew. 3.9. and 20.53. Romans 9.18. Or
actual, by which God does indeed whatsoever he will, and hinders whatsoever
he will not have done. Psalm. 115.3.

5 Majesty is that by which God of his own absolute and free authority Chr.
29.11 12. 2 Samuel 7.22. Apo. 5.12.13
reigns and rules as Lord and King, over all creatures, visible and
invisible. Having both the right and propriety in all things, as 1 Chr. 29.14.
hinc deus dicitur, (...).
from whom and for whom, are all things: as also such a plenitude of power,
that he can pardon the offenses of all whom he Romans 9.15 Jonas 4.11.
will have spared, and subdue all his Enemies whom he will have Luke 19 27.
Psalm. 2.9. Psalm 110.1.
plagued and destroyed, without being bound to render to any creature a reason
of his doing: but making his own most holy and just will, his only most
perfect and eternal law.

From all these attributes arises one, which is Gods sovereign Blessedness,
or perfection.

Blessedness is that Deus est Schaddai sieve (...) non solum quia Ipse nihil
desiderat, sed etiam quia nihil in eo desiderari potest. Creaturas fecit
perfectas in suo quasque genere: ergo ipse perfecti Ti^us est in se and per se.
Scal. Exer. 146. sect. 2. Mar. 14.61. Act. 17.25. Romans 11.35.36. 1 Timothy 6.15.
Mat. 25.34. Iam. 1.17.
perfect and unmeasurable possession of joy and glory, which God has in
himself for ever: and is the cause of all the bliss and perfection that every
creature enioieth in his measure.

There are other Attributes figuratively and improperly ascribed unto God, in
the holy Scriptures, as by an Anthropomorphosis, the members of a man, eyes,
ears, nosthrils, mouth, hands, feet, etc. or the senses and actions of man,
as seeing, hearing, smelling, working, walking, striking, etc. By an
Anthropopatheia the affections and passions of a man, as gladness, grief,
joy, sorrow, love, hatred, etc. Or by an Analogia, as when he is named a Lion,
a rock, a tower, a Buckler, etc. Whose signification every See Mr. Wilsons
Dictionarie of the Bible, most profitable for this purpose.
commentary will express.

Of all these Attributes we must hold these general Rules.
1 NO Attributes can sufficiently express the Essence of GOD, because it is
infinite and ineffable. Whatsoever therefore is spoken of God, is not God: but
serves rather to help our weak understanding, to conceive in our reason, and
to utter in our speech the Majesty of his Divine Nature: so far as he has
vouchsafed to reveal himself unto us in his Word.

2 All the Attributes of God belong to every of the three Persons, Attributae
omnia propter (...). singulis diuinitatis personis competunt.
as well as to the Essence it self, with the limitation of a Personal
propriety: as the Mercy of the Father is Mercy begetting: the Mercy of the
Son is Mercy begotten: the Mercy of the Holy Ghost is Mercy proceeding: and
so of the rest.

3 The Essential Attributes of God differ not from his Essence. Because they
are so in the Essence, that they are the very Essence it self. In deo nihil
est quod non sit ipse Deus. Zanch.
In God therefore there is nothing, which is not either his Essence or a Person.

4 The Essential Attributes of GOD differ not Essentially, nor really one from
another (because whatsoever is in God, is one most simple Essence, and one
admits no division,) but only in our reason and understanding, which being not
able to know earthly things, by one simple Act, without the help of many
distinct acts, must of necessity have the help of many distinct Acts, to know
the incomprehensible GOD. Therefore (to speak properly,) there are not in God
many Attributes, but Omnia in diuinis sunt vnum, ibi no^ obuiat relationis
oppositio.
one only, which is nothing else but the Divine Essence it self, by what
Attribute soever you call it. But in respect of our reason they are said to be
so many different Attributes, for our Attributa Dei omnia ita in ipso sunt, vt
sint ipsum, ita insunt, vt nihil antecedat, nihil subsequatur, sed ex
intellectione nostra (quae perqua^ vmbratilis est) alia alijs prius animo
comprehenduntur. Scaliger. Ex. 365. sect. 6.
Understanding conceiues by the name of Mercy a thing differing from that which
is called Justice. The Essential Attributes of God are not therefore really
inseparable.

5 The Essential Attributes of GOD are not parts or qualities of the divine
Essence, nor Quae de Deo dicuntur (...), relatione ad creaturas, and sic
secundum accidens: non exprimunt mutationem in diuina essentia* sed in
creaturis factam. Nega^tur ergo de Deo accidentia realia, non autem predicata
accidentalia.
Accidents in the Essence, as in a Subject: but the very Omnia quae in Deo
sunt, ita insunt, vt sint ipse Deus.
whole and entire Essence of God. So that every such Attribute is not aliud and
aliud, another and another thing, but one and the same thing. There are
therefore no Quantities in God, by which he may be said to be so much and so
much: nor Qualities, by which he may be said to be such and such: but Essentia
diuina identificat sibi omnia, quae sunt in diuinis. Biel. sup. 1. sent, d. 1.
q. 5.
whatsoever God is, he is such and the same by his Essence. By his Essence he
is wise, and therefore Wisdom it self: by his Essence he is God, and
therefore Goodness it self: by his Essence he is merciful, and therefore
Mercy it self: by his Essence he is just, and therefore Justice it self,
etc. In a word, GOD is great, without Quantity: good, true, and just without
Quality: merciful without passion: an Act without motion: euery-where present
without site: without time the first and the last: the Lord of all Creatures,
from whom all receive themselves, Exhibet omnia accipit nihil, ipsum igitur
bonu^, est Deus ipse semper. Trismeg. ser. 2. Pim.
and all the good they have; yet neither needs nor receives he any increase
of goodness or happiness from any other.

This is the plain description of God, so far as he has revealed himself
to us in his Word.

This Doctrine (of all others) every true Practitioner of Piety, must
competently know, and necessarily believe for four special uses.

1 That we may discern our true and only God, from all false Gods and Idols:
for this description of God, is properly Psalm. 147.19 20. Ier. 10.25.
known only to his Church, in whom he has thus graciously manifested
himself.

2 To possess our hearts with a greater awe of his Majesty, whilst we admire
him for his simpleness and infiniteness: adore him for his unmeasurableness,
unchangeableness, and eternity: seek wisdom from his understanding and
knowledge: submit our selves to his blessed will and pleasure: love him, for
his love, mercy, goodness, and patience: trust to his Word, because of his
truth: fear him for his power, Justice and anger: reverence him for his
holiness: and praise him for his blessedness: and to depend all our life on
him, who is the only author of our life, being, and all the good things which
we have.

3 To stir us up to imitate the Divine Spirit in his holy Attributes: and to
bear (in some measure) the Image of his Wisdom, Love, Goodness, Justice,
Mercy, Truth, Patience, Zeal, and Anger against sin, that we may be wise,
loving, just, merciful, true, patient, and zealous, as our God is.

4 Lastly, that we may in our Prayers and Meditations conceive aright of his
divine Majesty, and not according to those gross and blasphemous imaginations
which naturally arise in men's brains: as when they conceive GOD to be like an
old man sitting in a chair: and the blessed Trinity to be like that
tripartitae Idol, which Papists have painted in their Church-windowes.

When therefore thou art to pray unto God, let thine heart speak unto him, as
to that Psalm. 90.2.
eternal, 1 Kin. 8.27.
infinite, Genesis 17.1. Job. 15.25.
almighty, Isa. 6.3. Apoc. 4.8. and 15.4.
holy, Romans 11.33 and 16.17.
wise, Ex. 34.6.7. Psalm. 108.4. and 103.11. and 145.8.9
just, Deuteronomy. 32.4 Genesis 8.25. Psalm. 145.17.
merciful, Ioh. 4.24.
Spirit, and most Deuteronomy 32.4.
perfect, 1 Ioh. 5.7. Mat. 3.16. Mat. 28.19. 2 Cor. vlt. vlt
indivisible Essence of three ssuerall Persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
who being 1 Kin. 8 27. Psalm. 139.2. Ier. 23 23.
present in all places, Isa. 40.26.28. Dan. 4.32.
rules Heaven and Earth, understands 1 Kin. 8.39 Ier. 17.10.
all men's hearts, Isa. 63.16.
knows all men's miseries, and is only 1 Samuel 10.19. Mat. 11.28.
able to bestow on us all graces which we want, and to deliver all penitent
sinners (who with faithful hearts seek for Christ's sake, his help) out of all
their afflictions and troubles whatsoever.

The ignorance of this true knowledge of GOD, makes many to make an Idol of
the true God; and is the only cause why so many do profess all other parts
of Gods worship and religion, with so much irreuerence and hypocrisy, whereas
if they did truly know GOD, they durst not but come to his holy Service; and
coming, serve him with fear and reverence: for so far does a man fear God
as he knows him; and then does a man truly know God, when he ioynes
practice to speculation. And that is;

First, when a man does so acknowledge and celebrate Gods Majesty, as he has
revealed himself in his word.

Secondly, when from the true and lively sense of Gods Attributes there is bred
in a man's heart a love, awe, and confidence in God: for says God himself;
Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Father, where is my honor? If I be a Lord, where is my fear? Psalm.
34.9.
O taste and see that the Lord ^s good, says David. He that has not by
experience tasted his goodness, knows not how good he is. He (says John)
that says he knows God, 1 Ioh. 2.4.
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. So
far therefore as we imitate God in his Goodness, Love, Justice, Mercy,
Patience, and other Attributes, so far do we know him.

Thirdly, when with inward groans and the serious desires of our hearts, we
long to attain to the perfect and plenarie knowledge of his Majesty in the
life which is to come.

Lastly, this discouers how few there are who do truly know God: for no man
knows God, but he that loves him; and how can a man choose but love him,
being the sovereign good, if he knew him? Seeing the nature of God is to
enamour men with the love of her goodness; and whosoever loves any thing more
then God, 1 Ioh. 2.15.
is not worthy of God: and such is every one, who setles the love and rest of
his heart upon any thing besides God. If therefore thou do believe that God
is Almighty, why do thou fear Devils and enemies, and not confidently trust
in God, and crave his help in all troubles and dangers? If thou beleeuest that
God is infinite, how dare thou provoke him to anger? If thou beleeuest that
God is simple, with what heart can thou dissemble and play the hypocrite? If
thou beleeuest that God is the Sovereign good, why is not thy heart more
settled upon him, then on all Worldly goods? If thou do indeed believe, that
God is a just Judge, how dare thou live so securely in sin without
repentance? If thou do truly believe that God is most wise, why do not
thou refer the events of crosses and disgraces unto him, who knows how to
turn all things to the best unto them that love him? Romans 8.28.
If thou art persuaded that God is true, why do thou doubt of his promises?
And if thou beleeuest that God is beauty and Si te habeam solum san^ ruat
arduus ether, Tellus rupta suo dissilia^que loco.
Perfection it self, why do not thou make him alone the chief end of all
thine affections and desires? for, if thou love beauty, he is most fair.
If thou desire riches, he is most wealthy: if thou seek Wisdom, he is
most wise. Whatsoever excellency thou have seen in any creature, it is
nothing but a sparkle of that which is in infinite Creata omnia perfecti* sunt
in Deo, qua^ in seipsis^ Dionis. de divine. cap. 5.
perfection in GOD: and when in Heaven we shall have an Immediate communion
with God, we shall have them all perfectly in him, communicated unto us.
Briefly, in all goodness he is all in all. Ama vnum illud bonum in quo omne
bonu^ and sufficit. Ansel. in prosol. cap. 25.
Love that one good God: and thou shall love him, in whom all the good of
goodness consists. He that would therefore attain to the saving knowledge of
God, must learn to know him by love. 1 Ioh. 4.8.
For God is love, and Ephe. 3.19
the knowledge of the love of God passes all knowledge. For all knowledge
besides to know Kemp. de-Imit. Chri. cap. 1.
how to love God, and to serve him only: is nothing, upon Salomons credit, but
vanity of vanities, and vexation of spirit.

Kindle therefore, O my Eccl. 1.2.17
Lady, nay rather, Domina, immo Dominus Charitas. Bernr.
O my Lord Charity, the love of thy self in my soul, especially, seeing it
was thy good pleasure: that being Romans 5.9.10.
reconciled by the blood of Christ, I should be brought, by the knowledge of
thy grace, Ioh. 17.3.22. 1 Cor. 15.28
to the communion of thy Glory: wherein only consists my sovereign good, and
happiness for ever.

Thus by the light of his own word we have seen the back parts of Iehoua
Elohim, the eternal Trinity: whom to worship, is true Piety: whom to believe,
is saving faith and verity. And unto whom, from all creatures in heaven and
earth, be all praise, dominion and Glory for ever, Amen.

Thus far of the knowledge of God. Now of the knowledge of a Man self. And
first of the state of his misery and corruption without renouation by CHRIST.

Meditations of the misery of a Man, not reconciled to GOD in Christ.
O Wretched man, where shall I begin to describe thine endless misery! who
art condemned as son as conceived, and adjudged to eternal death, Dammatus
anteqaam natus. Aug.
before thou wast borne to a temporal life. A beginning indeed I find, but no
end of thy miseries: for when Adam and Eve being created after Gods own Image,
and placed in Paradise, that they and their posterity might live in a blessed
state of life immortal, having dominion of all earthly creatures, and only
restrained from the fruit of one tree, as a sign of their subjection to their
Almighty Creator. Though God forbad them this one small thing, under the
penalty of eternal death; yet they believed the devils word before the word of
God, making God (as much as in them lay) a liar. And so being unthankful for
all the benefits which God bestowed on them, they became male-contented with
their present state, as if God had dealt enuiously, or nigardly with them: and
believed that the Devil would make them pertakers of far more glorious
things, then ever God had bestowed upon them: and in their pride they fell into
high treason against the most high, and disdayning to be Gods subjects, they
affected blasphemously to be Gods themselves equals unto God. Hence, till they
repented, (losing Gods Image) they became like unto the Devil: and so all
their posterity, as a traitorous brood (whilst they remain impenitent, like
thee,) are subject in this life to all cursed miseries, and in the life to
come, to the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Lay then aside for a while thy doting vanities, and take a view with me of
thy doleful miseries; which daily suruayed: I doubt not but that thou will
conclude, that it is far better never to have natures being: then not to be by
grace a Practicioner of religious Piety.

Consider therefore thy misery.

1 In thy life. 2 In thy death. 3 After death.
In thy life.

1 The miseries accompanying thy body. 2 The miseries which deforme thy soul.
In thy death, the miseries which shall oppress thy body and soul.

After death, the miseries which ouerwhelme both body and soul together in
Hell.

And first let us take a view of those miseries which accompany thy body
according to the four ages of thy life.

1 Infancy 2 Youth. 3 Manhood. 4 Old age.
Meditations of the misery of Infancy.
WHat wast thou being an Infant, but a bruit, having the shape of a man? was
not thy body conceived in the heat of lust, the secret of shame, and stain of
original sin? And thus wast thou cast naked upon the earth, all imbrued in
the blood of filthiness, (fithy indeed; when the Son of God, who disdained
not to take on him man's nature, and the infirmities thereof: yet thought it
unbeseeming his Holiness to be conceived after the sinful manner of man's
conception.) So that thy mother was ashamed to let thee know the manner
thereof. What cause then have thou to boast of thy birth, which was a cursed
pain to thy mother, and to thy self the entrance into a troublesome life? the
greatness of which miseries, because thou could not utter in words: thou
did express (as well as thou could) in weaping tears.

2 Meditations of the miseries of youth.
WHat is Youth but an vntamted beast? all whose actions are rash and rude, not
capable of good counsel when it is given, and Ape-like delighting in nothing
but in toies and bables? Therefore thou no sooner beganst to have a little
strength and discretion, but forthwith thou wast kept under the rod, and
fear of parents and masters: as if thou had been borne to live under the
discipline of others, rather then at the disposition of thine own will. No
tired Horse, was ever more willing to be rid of his burden; than thou wast to
get out of the servile state of this bondage. A state not worth the description.

3 Meditations of the miseries of Manhood.
WHat is Mans-state, but a Sea, wherein (as waves) one trouble arises in the
neck of another? the latter worse then the former. No sooner did thou
enter into the affairs of this world, but thou wast enwrapped about with a
cloud of miseries. Thy Flesh prouokes thee to lust, the World allures thee to
pleasures, and the Devil tempts thee to all kind of sins: fears of enemies
affrights thee, suites in Law do vex thee, wrongs of ill neighbors do
oppress thee, cares for Wife and Children do consume thee, and disquietnesse
twixt open foes and false friends, do in a manner confound thee: Sin stings
thee within, Satan lays snares before thee, Conscience of sins past, dogs
behind thee* Now adversity on thy left hand frets thee; anon prosperity on
thy right hand flatters thee: over thy head Gods vengeance due to thy sins is
ready to fall upon thee; and under thy feet Hell-mouth is ready to swallow
thee up. And in this miserable estate, whither will thou go for rest and
comfort? the house is full of cares, the field full of toil; the country of
rudeness, the city of factions; the Court of envy, the Church of sects, the
Sea of pirates, the Land of robbers. Or in what state will thou live? seeing
wealth is envied, and poverty is contemned; wit is distrusted, and simplicity
is derided; Superstition is mocked, and Religion is suspected; vice is
advanced, and virtue is disgraced? Oh with what a body of sin art thou
compassed about in a world of wickedness? What are thine Eyes, but windows to
behold vanities? What are thine Ears, but floud-gates to let in the stream of
iniquity? what are thy Senses, but matches to give fire to thy lusts? what is
thine Heart, but the Anuill, whereon Satan has forged the ougly shape of all
lewd affections? Art thou nobly descended? thou must put thy self in peril of
foreign wars to get the reputation of earthly Honor, often times hazard thy
life in a desperate combat, to avoid the aspersion of a Coward. Art thou borne
in mean estate? Lord I what pains and druggerie must thou endure at home, and
abroad to get maintenance? and all perhaps scarce sufficient to serve thy
necessity? and when after much service and labor, a man has got something;
how litttle certainty is there in that which is gotten? seeing thou see by
daily experience, that he who was rich yesterday, is to day a beggar: he that
yesterday was in health, to day is sick: he that yesterday was merry and
laughed, has cause to day to mourn and weep: he that yesterday was in
favor, to day is in disgrace, and he who yesterday was alive, to day is dead:
and thou know not how soon, nor in what manner thou shall die thy self.
And who can enumerate the losses, crosses, griefs, disgraces, sicknesses, and
calamities, which are incident to sinful man? To speak nothing of the death
of friends and children, which often times seems to be unto us far more bitter
then present death it self.

4 Meditations of the misery of old age.
WHat is old age, but the receptacle of all maladies? for if thy lot be to draw
thy days to a long date; in comes olde-bald-headed age, stooping under dotage,
with his wrinckled face, rotten teeth, and stinking breath: iesty with choler,
withered with dryness, dimmed with blindness, absurded with deafness,
overwhelmed with sickness, and bowed together with weakness: having no use of
any sense, but of the sense of pain: which so racketh every member of his
body, that it never eases him of grief, till he has thrown him down to
his grave.

Thus far of the miseries, which accompany the body: Now of the miseries,
which accompany chiefly the soul in this life.

Meditations of the misery of the soul in this life.
THe misery of thy Soul will more evidently appear, if thou will but
consider: 1 The felicity she has lost. 2 The misery which she has pulled
upon her self by sin.


1 The Felicity lost was first the fruition of the Image of God, whereby the
soul was like unto GOD in Col. 3.10. Romans 12.2.
knowledge, enabling her perfectly to understand the revealed will of GOD.
Secondly, true Holiness, by which she was free from all profane error.
Thirdly, Righteousness, whereby she was able to incline all her natural powers,
and to frame uprightly all her actions proceeding from those powers. With the
loss of this divine Image, she lost the Love of GOD, and the blessed
communion which she had with his Majesty; wherein consisted her life and
happiness. If the loss of earthly riches vex thee so much, how should the
loss of this divine treasure perplexe thee much more?

2 The Misery which she pulled upon her self consists in two things: 1
Sinfulness. 2 Cursednesse.


1 Sinfulness, is an universal corruption both of her Nature and Actions: for
her Ephe. 2.3. Genesis 6.5.
Nature is infected with a pronenesse to every sin continually, the Romans
12.2. Ephesians. 4.17.
Mind is stuffed with vanity, the 1 Cor. 2.14
Understanding is darkened with ignorance, the Phil. 2.3.
Will affects nothing but vile and vain things: All her Romans 3.12. Romans 7.19.
Actions are evil; yea this deformity is so violent, that oftentimes in the
regenerated soul, the Appetite will not obey the government of Reason: and the
Will wandreth after, and yields consent to sinful motions. How great then is
the violence of the Appetite and Will in the reprobate Soul, which still
remains in her natural corruption? Hence it is, that thy wretched Soul is so
deformed with sin, defiled with lust, polluted with filthiness, outraged
with passions, ouer-carryed with affections, pining with Envy, ouercharged with
gluttony; surquedred with drunkenness, boiling with revenge, transported with
rage, and the glorious Image of GOD, transformed to the ougly shape of the Ioh.
8.44.
Devil, so far; as it once Genesis 6.6.
repented the Lord that ever he made man.

From the former, flows the other part of the Souls misery, called Deu.
27.26. Gal. 3.10. Psalm. 119.21
cursednesse, whereof there are two degrees.

1 In part. 2 In the fullness thereof.
1 Cursednesse in part is that which is inflicted upon the Soul in life and
death, and is common to her with the body. The Cursednesse of the soul in life
is the wrath of God, which lies upon such a creature, so far, as that all
things, not only calamities, but also very Romans 2.4.5 Ier. 28.13.
blessings, and Isa. 28.13.
graces turn to ruin. Genesis 3.8.10 and 4.14. Heb. 2.15.
Terror of Conscience drives him from from GOD, and his service, that he dares
not come to his presence and ordinances; but is Romans 1.21 24.26.
given up to the Ephesians. 2.2. Col. 1.13.
slavery of Satan, and to his own lusts and vile affections.

This is the Cursednesse of the Soul in life; now follows the Cursednesse of
the Soul and body in death.

Meditations of the misery, of the body and soul in death.
AFter that the aged man has conflicted with long sickness; and having
endured the brunt of pain, should now expect some ease: in comes Death,
Natures slaughter-man, Gods curse and Hels purueyor, and looks the old man
grimme and black in the face: and neither pitying his age, nor regarding his
long-endured dolours) will not be hired to forbear, either for silver or gold:
nay, he will not take, to spare his life, skin for skin, Job 1.
and all that the old man has, but batters all the principal parts of his
body, and arrests him to appear before the terrible Judge. And as thinking
that the old man will not dispatch to go with him fast enough: Lord, how many
darts of calamities does he shoot through him, stitches, aches, crampes,
feauers, obstructions, rhewmes, phlegm, collicke, stone, wind, etc.

Oh what a ghastly sight it is, to see him then in his bed, when Death has
given him his mortal wound! what a cold sweat ouer-runnes all his body? what a
trembling possesses all his members? the head shoots, the face waxes pale,
the nose black, the, nether law-bone hangs down, the eye-strings break the
tongue faltreth, the breath shortneth, and smells earthy, the throat
ratleth, and at every gasp the heart strings are ready to break asunder.

Now the miserable Soul sensibly perceives her earthly body to begin to
dye: for as toward the dissolution of the universal frame of the great world;
the Sun shall be turned into darkness, the Moon into blood, and the Stars
shall fall from heaven: the Air shall be full of storms, and flashing
Meteors, the Erath shall tremble, and the Sea shall roar, and men's hearts
shall fail for fear, expecting the end of such sorrowful beginnings: So
toward the dissolution of man, (which is the little world) his Eyes, which are
as the Sun and Moon lose their light, and see nothing but bloud-guiltinesse
of sin: the rest of the Senses, as lesser Stars, do one after another
fail and fall: his Mind, Reason, and Memory, as heavenly powers of his
Soul, are shaken with fearful storms of despair, and first flashings of
Hellfire: his earthly body begins to shake and tremble, and the humors like
an ouer-flowing Sea roar and rattle in his throat, still expecting the woeful
ends of these dreadful beginnings.

Whilst he is thus summoned to appear at the great Assizes of Gods Judgment,
behold, a Quarter Sessions, and Gaole-deliuery is held within himself, where
Reason sits as Judge, the Devil puts in a Bill of indictment, as large as that
Book of Zachary, Zach. 5.2. Ezech. 2.10.
wherein is alleged all thy evil deeds that ever thou have committed, and all
the good deeds that ever thou have omitted: and all the curses and judgments
that are due to every sin. Thine own Conscience shall accuse thee, and thy
Memory shall give bitter evidence, and Death stands at the Bar ready, as a
cruel Executioner to dispatch thee. If thou shall thus condemn thy self, 1
Ioh. 3.20.
how shall thou escape the just condemnation of God, who knows all thy
misdeeds better then thy self? Feign would thou put out of thy mind, the
remembrance of thy wicked deeds, that trouble thee: but they flow faster into
thy remembrance, and they will not be put away, but cry unto thee, We are thy
works, and we will follow thee. And whilst thy Soul is thus within, out of
peace and order, thy children, wife, and friends, trouble thee as fast, to have
thee put thy goods in order; some crying, some craving, some pitying, some
cheering, all like Flesh-flies, helping to make thy sorrows more sorrowful.
Now the Devils, who are come from hell, Luke 12.20.
to fetch away thy soul, begin to appear to her, and wait, as soon as she
comes forth, to take her, and carry her away. Stay she would within, but that
she feels the body begin by degrees to dye: and ready like a ruinous house
to fall upon her head. Fearful she is to come forth, because of those
Hell Hounds which wait for her coming. Oh, she that spent so many days and
nights in vain and idle pastimes, would now give the whole world, if she had
it, for one hours delay, that she might have space to repent, and reconcile
her self unto GOD. But it cannot be, because her Body which joined with her in
the actions of sin, is altogether now unfit to join with her in the exercise
of repentance; and Repentance must be of the whole man.

Now she sees that all her pleasures are gone, as if they had never been: and
that but only torments remain, which never shall have end of being. Who can
sufficiently express her remorse for her sins past, her anguish for her
present misery, and her terror for the torments to come?

In this extremity, she looks every where for help, and she finds her
self every way helpless. Thus in her greatest misery (desirous to hear the
least word of comfort) she directs this, or the like speech unto her Eyes;
Prosopopaeia.
O Eyes, who in times past were so quicke-sighted, can ye spy no comfort, nor
any way, how I might escape this dreadful danger? But the Eye-strings are
broken, they cannot see the Candle that burns before him: nor discern
whether it be day or night.

The Soul (finding no comfort in the Eyes) speaks to the ears. O earaes, who
were wont to recreate your selves, with hearing new, pleasant discourses, and
Musickes sweetest harmony; can you hear any news or tidings of the least
comfort for me? The Ears are either so deaf that they cannot hear at all:
or the sense of hearing is grown so weak, that it cannot endure to hear his
dearest friends to speak. And why should those ears hear any tidings of joy
in Death, who could never abide to hear the glad Tidings of the Gospel in his
life? The Ear can minister no comfort.

Then she intimates her grief unto the Tongue. O Tongue who wast wont to brag
it out with the brauest; where are now thy big and daring words? now (in my
greatest need) can thou speak nothing in my defense? Can thou neither
daun^ these Enemies with threatening words, nor entreat them with fair
speeches? Alas, the Tongue two days ago, lay speechless: it cannot in his
greatest extremity, either call for a little drink, or desire a friend to
take away with his finger the phlegm, that is ready to choke him.

Finding here no hope of help, she speaks unto the feet. Where are ye, O
feet, which sometime were so nimble in running? can you carry me no where out
of this dangerous place? The feet are stone dead already: If they be not stird
they cannot stir.

Then she directs her speech unto her hands. O hands, who have been so often
approved for manhood, in peace and war? and wherewith I have so often
defended my self, and offended my foes; never had I more need then now. Death
looks me grimme in the face, and kills me: Hellish fiends wail about my bed
to devour me: help now, or I perish for ever. Alas the hands are so weak,
and do so tremble, that they cannot reach to the mouth a spoonefull of
supping, to relieve languishing nature.

The wretched soul seeing her self thus desolate, and altogether destitute of
friends, help, and comfort; and knowing that within an hour she must be in
everlasting pains: retires her self to the heart (which of all members is
Primum viuens, and vltimum moriens) from whence, she makes this doleful
lamentation, with her self.

O miserable caitiffe that I am! The doleful lamentation of the reprobate
Soul, at the point of death. 2 Samuel 22.5.
How do the Sorrows of death compass me! How do the floudes of Belial make
me afraid! Now have indeed, the snares both of the first and second death
overtaken me at once! Oh how suddenly has death stolen upon me with
insensible degrees? Like the Sun which the eye perceiues not to move, though
it be most swift of motion. How does Death wreake on me his spite, without
pity! The GOD of mercy has utterly forsaken me, and the Devil, who knows
no mercy waits for to take me. How often have I been warned of this doleful
day, by the faithful Preachers of Gods word. and I made but a jest thereat?
What profit have I now of all my pride* fine house, and fair apparel? what is
become of the sweet relish of all my delicious fare? All the wordly goods which
I so carefully gathered, would I now give for a good conscience which I so
carelessly neglected. And what joy remains now, of all my former fleshly
pleasures, wherein I placed my chief delight? Those foolish pleasures were but
deceitful dreams, and now they are past like vanishing shadows: but to
think of those eternal pains, which I must endure for those short pleasures;
pains me an Hell before I enter into Hell. Yet justly I confess, as I have
deserved I am served; that being made after Gods Image a reasonable soul, able
to judge mine own estate, and having mercy so often offered, and I entreated
to receive it; I neglected Gods grace, and preferred the pleasures of sin,
before the religious care of pleasing GOD: lewdly spending my short time,
without considering what accounts I should make of my last end. And now all the
pleasures of my life being put together, counteruaile not the lest part of my
present pains. My ioies were but momentany, and gone before I could scarce
enjoy them: my miseries are eternal, and never shall know end. Oh that I had
spent the hours that I consumed, in carding, dicing, playing, and other vile
exercises, in reading the Scriptures, in hearing Sermons, in receiving the
Communion, in weeping for my sins, in fasting, watching, praying, and in
preparing my soul, that I might have now departed in the assured hope, of
everlasting salvation. Oh that I were now to begin my life again! how would
I contemn the world and the vanities thereof! how religiously and purely,
would I lead my life! how would I frequent the Church, and sanctify the Lords
day. If Satan should offer me all the treasures, pleasures, and promotions of
this world; he should never entice me to forget these terrors of this last
dreadful hour. But O corrupt carcass, and stinking carrion! How has the
Devil deluded us: and how have we served and deceived each other? and pulled
swift damnation upon us both? Now is my case more miserable then the beast that
perishes in a ditch for I must go to answer, before the judgment seat, of
the righteous Judge of heaven and earth: where I shall have none to speak for
me: and these wicked fiends, who are privy to al my evil deeds, will accuse
me, and I cannot excuse my self. My own heart already condemns me, I must
needs therefore be damned before his judgment seat: and from thence be carried
by these infernal fiendes, into that horrible prison of endless torments, and
utter darkness: where I shall never more see light, that first most excellent
thing that God made. I who gloried heretofore, in being a libertine, am now
enclosed in the very claws of Satan: as the trembling Partriges within the
griping talents of the rauenenous Falcon. Where shall I logde to night? and who
shall be my companions? Oh horror to think! Grief to consider! Oh cursed be
the day wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me be
blessed. Cursed be the man that showed my Father, saying, a child is borne unto
thee, and comforted him. Cursed be that man because he slew me not. Oh that my
mother might have been my grave, or her womb a perpetual conception! How is
it that I came forth of the womb to endure these hellish sorrows! and that my
days should thus end with eternal shame! Cursed be the day that I was first
united to so lewd a body: O that I had but so much favor as that I might never
see thee more: Our parting is bitter and doleful: but our meeting again, to
receive at that dreadful day, the fullness of our deserved vengeance, will be
far more terrible and intolerable. But what mean I thus (by too late
lamentation) to seek to prolong time? My lost hour is come: I hear the heart
strings break: this filthy house of clay falls on my head: here is neither
hope, help, nor place of any longer abiding. And must I needs be gone? Then
filthy carkase: Oh filthy carcass with fareill, farewell, I leave thee; And so
all-trembling she comes forth, and forthwith is seized upon by Infernal
fiendes, who carry her with violence torrents simil^ to the bottomless lake,
that burns, with fire and brimstone. Where she is kept as a prisoner in
torments, Apoc. 21.8. Iud. ver. 6. 1 Pet. 3.19.
till the general judgment of the great day.

The loathsome carkase is afterward laid in the grave. In which action for the
most part the dead bury the dead, that is, They who are dead in sin, bury
them, who are dead for sin. And thus the godless and unregenerated wordling
who made earth his Paradise, his belly his God, his lust his law, as in his
life he sowed vanity: so he is now dead, and reapeth misery. In his prosperity
he neglected to serve GOD: In his adversity GOD refuses to save him. And the
Devil whom he long served, now at length paies him his wages. Detestable was
his life, damnable his death. The Devil has his soul, the grave has his
carcass: in which pit of corruption, den of death, and dungeon of sorrow: let
us leave the miserable caitiffe, rotting with his mouth full of earth, his
belly full of worms, and his carcass full of stench; expecting a fearful
resurrection, when his shall be reunited with the soul, that as they sinned
together: so they may be eternally tormented together.

Thus far of the miseries of the soul and body in death which is but
cursednesse in part: Now follows the fullness cursednesse: which is the misery
of the soul and body after death.

Meditations of the misery of a man after death, which is the fullness of
Cursednesse.
THe fullness, (when it falls upon a Creature, not able to bear the burnt
thereof) presses him down to that bottomless Luke 8.28. and 16.23.
deep of the endless These. 1.10.
wrath of Almighty God: which is called the Mat. 23.33
damnation of hell. This fullness of cursednesse is either particular or
general.

Particular, or that which in a less measure of fullness, lights upon the
Luke 16.22 23. 1 Pet. 3.19. Iud. ver. 6.7.
Soul, immediately as soon as she is separated from the body: For, in the
very instant of dissolution, she is in the sight and presence of God. For, when
she cease to see with the organe of fleshly eyes, she sees after a
spiritual manner, like Stephen, Act. 7.5.
who saw the glory of GOD, and Jesus standing at his right hand: or, as a man,
who being blinde-borne, and miraculously restored to his sight, would see the
Sun, which he never saw before. And there by the testimony of her own
Conscience, Christ the righteous Judge, who knows all things: makes her, by
his omnipresent power to understand the doom and Judgment that is due unto
her sins, Postquam anima de corpore est egressa: subito Iudicium Christi de
se latu^ cognoscit. Aug. lib. 2. de anim. and eius orig. cap. 4 Hier. Ep. ad
Pannat. Anima damnata continuo inuaditur a Damonibus qui crudelissime eam
rapientes ad in^ernum deducunt. Cyril. Alex. in o^at. de exit. anim. Mat. 5.34.
and 23.22. Luke 12.20. Luke 16.22.23. 1 Pet. 3.19. Jude Ver. 7. Luke 16.24.
Luke 8.31.
and what must be her eternal state. And in this manner standing in the sight
of Heaven, not fit for her uncleanness to come into Heaven; she is said, to
stand before the throne of God. And so forthwith she is carried by the evil
Angels, who came to fetch her, with violence into Hell, where she is kept as
in a Prison, in everlasting pains and chains; under darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great day: But not in that extremity of torments, which she
shall finally receive at the last day.

The general fulness of cursednesse, is in a 2 Pet. 2.4.9 Jude ver. 6. Apo.
11.18.
greater measure of fullness, which shall be inflicted upon both thy Dan. 12.2.
Ioh. 5.28.29
Soul and Body, when (by the mighty power of Christ the supreme Judge of
heaven and earth:) the one shall be brought out of Hell, Apoc. 20.13
and the other out of the Grave, as Prisoners, to receive their dreadful
doom, according to their evil deeds. How shall the Reprobate, by the roaring
of the Sea, the quaking of the Earth, Mat. 24.29. Luke 21.24.25.
the trembling of the Powers of Heaven, and terrors of heavenly Signs be
driven, at the worlds end, to their wits end! Oh, what a woeful Salutation
will there be, betwixt the damned Soul and Body, at their reuniting at that
terrible day!

The damned souls Apostrophe to her body at their second meeting.
O sincke of Sin, O lump of Filthiness (will the Soul say unto her Body,)
how am I compelled to re-enter unto thee, not as an habitation to rest, but as
a Prison to be tormented together? How do thou appear in my sight like
Iephtes Daughter, to my greater torment? Would God thou had perpetually
rotted in thy grave, that I might never have seen thee again! How shall we
be confounded together, to hear, before God, Angels, and Men, laid open all
those secret sins, which we committed together! Have I lost Heaven, for the
love of such a stinking Carrion? Art thou the flesh for whose pleasures I have
yielded to commit so many Fornications? O filthy B^lly! how became I such a
foul, as to make thee my God? How mad was I for momentanie joys, to incur
these torments of eternal pains? ye Rocks and Mountains, why skirpe ye so
like Rams, Psalm. 114.4. and will not fall upon me, to hide me from the face
of him that comes to sit on yonder Throne; for the great day of his wrath is
come, and who shall be able to stand? Apoc. 6.16.17. Why tremblest thou thus,
O Earth, at the presence of the Lord, and vvilt not open thy mouth and swallow
me up, as thou did Korah, that I be seen no more?

O damned Furies! I would ye might without delay, tear me in pieces, on
condition that you would tear me unto nothing! But whilst thou art thus in
vain bewailing thy misery, Mat. 13.41. Mat. 24.31.
the Angels hale thee violently away from the brincke of thy Grave, to some
place near the Tribunal seat of Christ; where being as a cursed Goat,
separated to stand beneath, on earth, as on the left hand of the Judge, Christ,
shall rippe up all the benefits he bestowed on thee, and the torments he
suffered for thee, and all the good deeds which thou omitted, and all the
ungrateful villainies which thou did commit against him, and his holy Laws.

Within thee thine own conscience (more then a thousand witnesses) shall
accuse thee: the Devils who tempted thee to all thy lewdness, shall on the
one side, testify with thy Conscience against thee: and on the other side,
shall stand the holy Saints and Angels approving Christ's Justice, and detesting
so filthy a creature. Behind thee an hydeous noise of innumerable
fellow-damned Reprobates tarrying for thy company. Before thee all the world
Anselm. lib. Meditat.
burning in flaming fire. Above thee, an irefull Judge of deserved vengeance,
ready to pronounce his sentence upon thee. Beneath thee, the fiery and
sulphurous mouth of the bottomless pit, gaping to receive thee. In this
woeful estate to hide thy self will be impossible: (for on that condition thou
would Apoc. 6.16.17.
wish that the greatest Rock might fall upon thee:) to appear will be
intolerable, and yet thou must stand forth, to receive with other reprobates
this thy sentence: Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

Bonauent. postill. Dom. 3. post Pent. Sermon. 2.
Depart from me.] there is a separation from all joy and happiness.

Ye cursed,] there is a black and direful Excommunication.

Into fire,] there is the cruelty of pain.

Everlasting,] there is the perpetuity of punishment.

Prepared for the Devil and his Angels.] Here are thy infernal tormenting,
and tormented companions.

O terrible Sentence! from which the condemned cannot escape: which being
pronounced, cannot possibly be with-stood: against which a man cannot except;
and from which a man can no where appeal. So that to the damned, nothing
remains but hellish torments, which knows neither ease of pain, nor end of
time. From this Iudgement-seate thou must be thrust by Angels, (together with
all the damned Devils and Reprobates) into the bottomless Lake of utter
darkness, Apoc. 21.8.
that perpetually burns with fire and Brimstone. Whereunto, as they shall be
thrust, there shall be such weeping, woes, and wailing, that the cry of the
company of Core, Dathan, and Abiram when the earth swallowed them up, was
nothing comparable to this howling; nay, it will seem unto thee a Hell,
before thou go into hell, but to hear it.

Into which bottomless Lake after that thou art once plunged, thou shall ever
be falling down, and never meet a bottom: and in it, thou shall ever lament,
and none shall pity thee: thou shall always weep, for the pain of fire,
and yet gnash thy teeth for the extremity of cold: thou shall weep to think
that thy miseries are past remedy: thou shall weep to think, that to repent
is to no purpose: thou shall weep to think, how for the shadows of short
pleasures, thou have incurred these sorrows of eternal pains: thou shall
weep to see how that weeping it self can nothing prevail: yea, in weeping
thou shall weep more tears, then there is water in the Sea; for the water of
the Sea is finite, Bonauent.
but the weeping of a Reprobate shall be infinite.

There thy lascivious Eyes shall be afflicted with sights of ghastly Spirits:
thy curious Ears shall be affrighted with hydeous noise of howling devils, and
the gnashing teeth of damned Reprobates: thy dainty Nose shall be cloyed with
noisome stench of Sulphur: thy delicate Taste shall be pained with intolerable
hunger: thy drunken Throat shall be parched with unquenchable thirst: thy
Mind shall be tormented, to think how for the love of abortiue pleasures,
which perished ere they budded, thou so foolishly lost Heavens joys, and
incurred hellish pains, which last beyond eternity: thy Conscience, shall
ever sting thee like an Adder, when thou think how often Christ by his
Preachers, offered the remission of sins, and the Kingdom of Heaven, freely
unto thee, if thou would but believe and repent: and how easily thou
might have obtained mercy in those days; how near thou vvast many times to
have repented, and yet did suffer the devil and the world to keep thee
still in impenitency: and how the day of mercy is now past, and will never dawne
again.

How shall thy understanding be racked, to consider, how for momentany riches,
thou have lost the eternal treasure, and changed heavens felicity, for hels
misery! where every part of thy body without intermission of pain shall be
continually tormented alike.

In these hellish torments, thou shall be for ever deprived of the beatificall
sight of GOD, wherein consists the sovereign good, and life of the soul. Thou
shall never see light, nor the lest sight of joy, but lie in a perpetual
prison of v^ter darkness: where shall be no order but horror: no voice but of
blas^h^mers, and howlers: no noise but of torturers and tortured: no society
but of the Devil and his Angels, who being tormented themselves, shall have no
other ease but to wreake their fury in tormenting thee. Where shall be
punishment without pity: misery without mercy: sorrow without succor: crying
without comfort: mischief without measure: torment without ease: where the
worm dies not, and the fire is never qu^nched: Mar. 9.
where the wrath of God shall sease upon thy soul and body as the flame of
fire does on the lump of pitch or brimestone: in which flame thou shall ever
be burning and never consumed: ever dying and never dead: ever rowing in the
panges of death, and never rid of those panges, nor knowing end of thy
pains: So that after thou have endured them so many thousand years as there
are grass on the Earth, or sands on the Seashore, thou art no nearer to have
an end of thy torments, then thou vvast the first day that thou wast cast into
them: yea, so far are they from ending, that they are ever but beginning. But
if after a thousand times so many thousand years, thy damned soul could but
conceive a hope, that those her torments should have an end, this would be some
comfort to think, that at length an end will come. But as often as the Mind
thinks of this word Never, it is as another Hell, in the midst of Hell.

This thought shall force the damned to cry, (...), as much as if they should
say, (...), O Lord, not ever, not ever, torment us thus; but their Conscience,
shall answer them, as an Echo, (...), ever, ever. Hence shall arise their
doleful (...), woe, and alas for evermore!

This is that second death, the general perfect fullness of all cursednesse
and misery: which every damned reprobate must suffer, so long as GOD and his
Saints shall enjoy bliss and felicity in heaven for evermore.

Thus far of the misery of man in his state of corruption, unless that he
be renewed by Grace in Christ.

Now follows the knowledge of Man's self in respect of his state of
regeneration by Christ.

Meditations of the state of a Christian reconciled to GOD in Christ.
NOw let us see, how happy a godly man is, in his state of renouation, being
reconciled to GOD in Christ.

The godly man whose corrupt nature is renewed by grace in Christ, and become a
new creature: is blessed in a threefold respect First, in his life. Secondly,
in his death. Thirdly, after death.

1 His blessedness during this life is but in part, and that consists in seven
things.

1 Because, he is conceived of the Ioh. 3.5.
spirit, in the womb of his Gal. 4.26.
mother, the Church: and is Ioh. 1.13.
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man but
of GOD, who in Christ is his Gal. 4.6.7. 2 Cor. 6.18.
father. So that the Ephesians. 4.23.24 Col. 3.10.
Image of God his father is renewed in him every day more and more.

2 He has, for the merits of Christ's sufferings, all his sins, original and
actual, with the guilt and punishment belonging to them, Romans 4.8.25. Romans
8.1.2. 1 Pet. 2.24.
freely and fully forgiven unto him. And all the Romans 4.5.19.
righteousness of Christ as freely and fully imputed unto him: and so God is 2
Cor. 5.29
reconciled unto him: and Romans 8.33.34.
aprooueth him as righteous in his sight and account.

3 He is freed from Satan's Act. 26.18 Ephesians. 2.2.
bondage, and is made a Ioh. 20.17 Romans 8.29.
brother of Christ, a fellow Romans 8.17
heir of his heavenly kingdom, and a spiritual Apo. 1.6.
King and Priest, to offer up Pet. 2.5.
spiritual sacrifices to GOD by Jesus Christ.

4 God spares him as a man spares his own son that serves him. Mal. 3.17.
And this sparing consists.

In 1 Not taking notice of every fault, but bearing with his infirmities, Exodus
34.6.7. A loving father, will not cast his child out of doors in his
sickness. 2 Not making his punishment when he is chastened, as great as his
deserts. Psalm. 103.10. 3 Chastening him moderately, when he sees, that he
will not by any other means, be reclaimed. 2 Samuel 7.14.15. 1 Cor. 11.32. 4
Graciously accepting his endeauours, notwithstanding the imperfection of his
obedience; and so preferring the willingness of the mind, more then the
worthiness, of the work. 2 Cor. 8.12. 5 Turning the curses, which he deserved
to crosses and to fatherly corrections: yea all Romans 8.28.
things, all Psa. 89.32.33. Psalm. 119.71. Heb. 12.10. 2 Cor. 12.7.
calamities of this life, 1 Cor. 3.22 and 15.54.55. Heb. 2.14.15.
death it self; Luke 22.31 32 Ps. 51.13.14 To. 5.20.21.
yea his very sins unto his good.


5 God gives him his holy spirit, which 1 1 These. 5.23. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Sanctifies him by degrees throughout: Romans 8.9.10.
so that he does more and more die to sin, and live to righteousness. 2
Assures him of his Romans 8.16
adoption, and that he is by grace the child of God. 3 Encourages him to come
with Heb. 4.10. Ephesians. 3.12.
boldness and confidence, into the presence of GOD 4 Moves him without fear,
to say unto him Abba Father. Gal. 4.6.
Romans 8.15.16 Zach. 12.10.
5 Powers into his heart the gift of sanctified prayer. 6 Persuades him, that
both he and his prayers are accepted and heard of God, Romans 8.16.27
for Christ his Mediators sake. 7 Fills him with 1 Peace of conscience. Romans
5.1. and 14.17. Romans 5.3 and 14.17.
2 Joy in the holy Ghost in comparison whereof: all earthly joys, seem vil^
and vain unto him.



6 He has a recovery of his Psa. 8.5. etc. Heb. 2.7.8.
sovereignty over the creatures which he lost by Adams fall: and from thence
free 1 Cor. 9.1. Romans 14.14. 1 Timothy 4.2. etc.
liberty of using all things, which God has not 1 Cor. 9.19 21
restrained, so that he may use them with a good 1 Cor. 3.22 23 Heb. 2.7.
conscience. For to all things in heaven and earth he has a sure 1 Cor. 3.22
title in this life, and he shall have the plenary and peaceable Mat. 25.34 1
Pet. 1.4.
possession of them, in the life to come. Hence it is that all Reprobates are
but usurpers of all that they possess: and have no Act. 1.25.
place of their own but Hell.

7 He has the assurance of Gods Fatherly care, and protection, day and night
over him; which care consists in three things.

1 In providing all things necessary for his soul and body, Mat. 6.32. 2 Cor.
12.14 Psalm. 23. Psa. 34.9.10.
concerning this life and that which is to come: so that he shall be sure, ever,
either to have enough: or patience to be content with that he has. 2 In that
God gives his holy Angels, as his ministers, a charge: to attend upon him
always for his good: yea in danger, to pitch their tents about him for his
safty where ever he be. Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11.
Yea Gods protection, shall defend him as a cloud by day, Isai. 4.5. Job 1.10.
and as a pillar of fire by night, and his providence shall hedge him from the
power of the Devil. 3 In that the eyes of the Lord are upon him, Psalm. 34.15.
Genesis 7.^.
and his ears continually open to see his state, and to hear his complaint,
and in his good time, Psalm. 34.19.
to deliver him out of all his troubles.
Thus far of the blessed estate of the godly, and Regenerated man in this
life: Now of his blessed estate in death.

2 Meditations of the blessed estate of a regenerate man in his death.
WHen GOD sends death as his messenger, for the regenerated man, he meets him
half the way to heaven: for his Phil. 3.20.
conversation, and Col. 3.2.
affection is there before him. Death is neither strange nor fearful unto
him: not strange, because he 1 Cor. 15.31
dyed daily: not fearful, because vvhilest he lived, he was dead, and his
life was Col. 3.3.
hid with Christ in God. To dye, unto him therefore, is nothing else in effect,
but to Apoc. 14.
rest from his labor in this world, to go 2 Cor. 5.6.
home to his Ioh. 14.1.
fathers house, unto the Heb. 12.22 etc.
city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general assembly and Church of the first borne, to God the
Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Testament. Whilst his Body is sick, his Mind is sound:
for, God Psalm. 41.3.
makes all his bed in his sickness, and strengthens him with faith and
patience, upon his bed of sorrow; and when he begins to enter into the way of
all the world, he gives (like Genesis 49.
Jacob, Moses, and Joshua) to his Children and friends, godly exhortations and
counsels, to serve the true GOD, to worship him truly all the days of their
life. His blessed soul breaths nothing but blessings, and such speeches as
savors a sanctified spirit. As his outward man decays, so his inward man
increases, and waxes stronger. When the speech of his tongue faultreth, the
sighs of his heart speaks louder unto GOD: when the sight of the Eyes
fails, the Holy Ghost illuminates him inwardly with abundance of spiritual
light. His soul fears not 2 Cor. 5 8.
but is bold to go out of the body, and to dwell with her Lord. He sigheth
out with Paul Phil. 1.23.
cupio dissolui, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And with Psalm.
42.2.
David, As the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so pants my soul after
thee O God. My Soul thristeth for God, for the living God: when shall I come
and appear before God. He prays with the Saints, Apoc. 6.10
How long O Lord, which art holy and true! Apo. 22.20
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And when the Job 14.5.
appointed time of his dissolution is come, knowing that he goes to his Psalm.
31.5.
Father and Redeemer in the peace of a good Conscience, and the assured
persuasion of the forgiveness of all his sins, in the blood of the Lamb:
he sings with blessed old Simeon his Luke 2.29 Psalm. 37.37. Isa: 57.2.
Nunc dimittis: Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, etc. And
surrenders up his Soul as it were with his own hands, into the hands of his
heavenly Father, saying with David: Psalm. 31.5.
Into thy hands O Father I commend my Soul, for thou have redeemed me O Lord
thou God of truth, And saying with Stephen, Acts 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. He no sooner yields up his sacred Ghost, but
immediately the Mat. 18.10 Act. 12.15. and 27.23.
holy Angels, who attended upon him from his birth, unto his death Luke 16.22
: carry and accompany his Soul into Heaven, as they did the Soul of Lazarus
into Abraham's bosom, Mat. 8.11. Luke 13.28. Act. 15.10.11. Ephe. 1.10. Heb.
11.9.10.16. and 12.22.23. Luke 19.9. and 9.31.
which is the Kingdom of Heaven, whither only good Angels, and good works,
do accompany the Soul: the one to deliver their Psalm. 91.11. Heb. 1.14.
charge, the other to receive their Apo. 14.13 and 22.12.
reward.

The Body in convenient time, as the sanctified 1 Cor. 19.
Temple of the holy Ghost: the 1 Cor. 6.15 Mat. 26.26.
members of Christ, nourished by his Body, the 1 Cor. 6.20 1 Pet. 1.19.
price of the blood of the Son of God, is by his fellow-brethren reverently
laid to 1 These. 4.14 Acts 7.6. and 8.2.
sleep, in his grave, as in the bed of Christ: in an assured hope, to Dan.
12.2. Ioh. 5.28.29 Luke 14.14. 1 These. 4.16.17. Apoc. 14.13.
awake in the resurrection of the just, at the last day, to be pertaker with
the Soul, of life and glory everlasting. And in this respect not only the
Souls, Apoc. 14.13
but the very Bodies of the faithful also are termed blessed.

Thus far the blessedness of the soul and body of the regenerated man in
death. Now let us see the blessedness of his soul and body after death.

3 Meditations, of the blessed estate of the regenerated man after death.
THis state has three degrees:

1 From the day of Death, to the Resurrection.

2 From the Resurrection, to the pronouncing of the Sentence.

3 After the Sentence, which lasts eternally.

As soon as ever the regenerated man has yielded up his Soul unto Christ,
the holy Angels take her into their custody, and immediately Luke 16.22
carry her into Heaven, and there presents her Heb. 1.14. and 12.24.
before Christ, where she is crowned with a Tim. 4.8. Apoc. 2.10. 1 Pet. 5.
Crown of righteousness and glory; not which she has deserved by her good
works, but which God has promised of his free goodness, to all those, who
of love, have in this life unfeignedly served him, and sought his glory.

Oh! what joy will it be to thy Soul, which was wont to see but misery,
and sinners, now to behold the face of the God of Glory? yea, to see Christ
well coming thee as soon as thou art presented before him by the holy
Angels, Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 1.21.
with an Euge bone serve! Well done, and well-come good and faithful servant,
etc. enter into thy masters joy! And what joy will this be, to behold
thousand thousands of Cherubims, Seraphims, Angels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers: All the holy Patriarchs, Priests, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Professors, and all the Souls of thy Friends, Parents, Husbands,
Wives, Children, and the rest of Gods Saints, who departed before thee in the
true Faith of Christ, standing before Gods Throne in bliss and glory? If the
Queen of Sheba, beholding the glory and attendance given to Solomon, as it
were ravished therewith, brake out and said, 1 King. 10.8.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy Servants, which stand ever before thee,
and hear thy Wisdom! How shall thy Soul be ravished to see her self by
grace admitted to stand with this glorious company? to behold the blessed
Face of Christ, and to hear all the Treasures of his divine Wisdom? How
shall thou rejoice to see so many thousand thousands wel-comming thee into
their heavenly Society? for as they all rejoiced at thy conversion; Luke 15.
so will they now be much more joyful to behold thy Coronation; 1 Timothy 4.8.
and to see thee receive thy Crown which was laid up for thee against thy
coming. For there the crown of Martyrdom, shall be put on the head of a
Martyr: who for Christ's Gospel sake endured torments: the Crown of
virginity on the head of a Virgin, which subdued Concupiscence: the Crown of
Piety and Chastity on the head of them, who sincerely professed Christ, and
kept their wedlocke-bed undefiled: the Crown of Good-workes on the good
Almes-giuers head, who liberally relieved the poor: the Crown of
incorruptible glory on the head of those Pastors, who by their preaching and
good example, have converted souls from the corruption of sin, to glorify
God in holiness of life. Who can sufficiently express the rejoicing of this
heavenly Company, Apoc. 7.9.
to see thee thus crowned with glory, arrayed with the shining Roabe of
righteousness, and to behold the Palm of victory put into thy hand? Oh what
gratulation will there be, that thou have escaped all the miseries of the
World, the snares of the Devil, the pains of Hell, and obtained with them thy
eternal rest and happiness? for there every one ioyeth as much in another
happiness as in his own, because he shall see him as much loved of GOD as
himself. Yea they have as many distinct joys, as they have compartners of
their joy. And in this joyful and blessed: state, the Soul rests with
Christ in Heaven, till the Resurrection, when as the number of her
Fellow-seruants and Brethren be fulfilled, Apoc. 7.9.
which the Lord terms but a little season.

The second degree of man's blessedness after death, is from the Resurrection
to the pronouncing of the final sentence. For at the last day:

1 The Elementary Heavens, Earth, and all things therein, shall be 2 Pet. 3.10
12.13.
dissolved, and purified with fire.

2 At the 1 Cor. 15.52 1 These. 4.16 Ioh. 5.28. Ezech. 37.
sound of the last Trumpet, or voice of Christ, the Archangell, the very same
bodies, which the Elect had before, (though turned to dust and earth:) shall
arise again; and in the same instant every man's soul shall re-enter into his
own body, Romans 8.11. Romans 5.17. 1 Cor. 15.21 Phil. 3.10.11 1 These. 4.14.
by virtue of the Resurrection of Christ, their head, and be made alive, and
rise out of their graves, as if they did but awake out of their beds. And
howsoever Tyrants bemangled their bodies in pieces, or consumed them to ashes:
yet shall the Elect find it true at that day, that not an hair of their head
is perished. Mat. 10.30.


Dan. 4.12. 1 These. 4.14. Par est potestas Dei ad instituendos and restituendos
homines. Athenagor.
3 They shall come forth out of their graves like so many Joseph's out of Prison,
or Daniels out of the Lions Dens, or Ionahs out of Whales bellies.

4 All the bodies of the Elect being thus made alive, shall arise in that Isa.
65.20.
perfection of nature, whereunto they should have attained by their natural
temperment, if no impediment had hindered: and in that vigor of age, that a
perfect man is at, about three and thirty years old, each in their Tertul. de
resurrect. cap. 6. Hier. Ep. 27. and 61. Aug. lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 17.
and omnes^ Theologi in 4. sent. did. 44.
proper sex. Whereunto Divines think the Apostle alludeth, when he says,
Ephe. 4.13 Ita communiter credunt Theologi in 4 Sent. did. 44. Vide Aug. d.
Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 15. and 16.
till we all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age (or stature)
of the fulness of Christ. Whatsoever imperfection was before in the body (as
blindness, lamenesse, crooke^nesse) shall then be done away. Jacob shall not
halt, nor Isaac be blind, nor Leah bleare-eyed, nor Mephibosheth be lame: for
if David would not have the blind and lame to come into his house, much less
will Christ have blindness and lamenesse to dwell in his heavenly Habitation.
Christ made all the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the
lame to walk, etc. that came to him, to seek his grace on earth: much more
will he heal all their imperfections, whom he will admit to his glory in
Heaven. Among those Tribes there is not one feeble: Psalm. 105.37.
but the lame man shall leap as an Heart, Isa. 35.6.
and the dumb man's tongue shall sing. And it is very probable, that seeing GOD
created our first Parents, not infants or old men, but of a perfect age or
stature: the (...), or new creation from death, shall every way be more perfect
then the (...) or first frame of a man from which, he fell into the state of
the dead. Neither is it like that Infancy being imperfection, and old age
corruption can well stand with the state of a perfect glorified body.

5 The bodies of the Elect being thus raised shall have four most excellent
and supernatural quallities. For 1 They shall be raised in power, whereby they
shall for ever be freed, 1 Cor. 15.43*
from all wants, and weakness, and enabled to continue, without the use of
meat, drink, sleep, and other former helps. 2 In incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.42.
Isa. 65.20. Aug. Ench. cap. 90.
whereby they shall never be subject, to any manner of imperfections, blemish,
sickness or death. Mat. 13.43. Dan. 12.3. Luke 9.31. Zach. 9.16.
3 In Glory, whereby their bodies shall shine as bright as the Sun in the
firmament* and which being made transparant, 1 These. 4.17.
their souls shall shine through, far more glorious then their bodies. Three
glimses of which glory was seen. First, Exodus 34.27 Mat. 17.
in Moses face: Secondly, in the transfiguration: Act. 6.15.
Thirdly, in Stephens countenance. Three instances, and assurances of the
glorification of our bodies at that glorious day. Then shall David lay aside, 1 Samuel 18.4.
his Shepherds weed, and put on the roabe of the Kings son Jesus, not
Jonathan. Then every true Mordecai, who mourned under the Sakecloth of this
corrupt flesh, shall be arrayed with the Kings royal apparel, Hest. 6.8.
and have the Crown royal set upon his head, that all the world may see: how
it shall be done to him, whom the King of kings delights to honor. If now
the rising of one Sun makes the morning so glorious, how glorious shall that
day be, when innumerable million of millions of bodies of Saints and Angels,
shall appear more glorious, then the brightness of the Sun? the body of
Christ in glory surpassing all. 4 In Agility, whereby our bodies shall be able
to ascend, Vbi volet Spiritus, ibi erit and corpus. Aug. Mat. 24.28.
and to meet the Lord at his glorious coming in the air; as Eagles flying
unto their blessed Carkase. To this agility of the Saints, glorious bodies, the
Prophet alludes, saying: They shall renew their strength: Esai. 40.31.
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles: they shall run and not be weary,
they shall walk, and not faint. And to this state, may that saying of Wisdom
be referred: In the time of their vision they shall shine and run too and
fro, Wisd. 3.7.
as sparks among the stubble.

And in respect of these four qualities, 1 Cor. 15.46 (...) p^st
resurrectionem eru^t corpora, non quia corpora esse desiste^t, sed quia spiritu
viuifica^te subsistent. Aug. lib. 13. de ciuit. dei. cap. 22.
Paul calls the raised bodies of the Elect Spiri^ual^: for they shall be
spiritual in qualities, but the same still in substance.




And howsoever sin and corruption makes a man in this state of mortality,
lower then Angels; Psalm. 8.5.
yet surely when God shall thus Crown him with glory and honor, I cannot see,
how man shall be any thing inferior to Angels. For are they Spirits? So is Man
also in respect of his soul: yea more then this, they shall have also a
spiritual Body Fashioned like unto the glorious body of the Lord Jesus Christ,
in whom, Phil. 3.21.
man's nature is exalted by a personal union, into the glory of the Godhead,
and individual society of the blessed Trinity. Heb. 2.16.
An honor which he never vouchsafed Angels. And in this respect man has a
prerogative above them. Heb. 1.14. Pas^. 9.11. Jude ves. 6. 2. Pet. 4.
Nay they are but spirits appointed to be ministers unto the Elect and as many
of them who at the first disdained this office and would not keep their first
standing were for their pride, hurled into hell. This lesseneth not the dignity
of Angels: but extols the greatness of Gods love to Mankind.

But as for all the Elect, who at that second and sudden coming of Christ
shall be found quick and living; The 2 Pet. 3.10.11.12.
fire that shall burn up the corruption of the world, and the works therein,
shall in a 1 Cor. 15.52.
moment, in the twinkling of an eye overtake them as it Luke 17.34
finds them, either grinding in the mill of provision, or walking in the
fields of pleasure, or lying in the bed of ease: and so burning up their
dross, and corruption, of mortal make them immortal bodies: and this change
shall be unto them in stead of death.

Then shall the Soul with ioyfulnesse greet her body, The Elect Souls
Apostrophe to her Body at their first meeting in the resurrection.
saying: Oh well met again, my dear sister, How sweet is thy voice! how
comely is thy countenance, having lain hid so long in the clifts of the rocks,
and in the secret places of the grave! Can. 2.14.
Thou art indeed an habitation fit, not only for me to dwell in; but such as
the Holy Ghost thinks meet to reside in, as his Temple for ever. The Winter
of our affliction is now past: the storm of our misery is blown over, and
gone. The Bodies of our Elect Brethren appear more glorious, then the Lilly
flowers on the earth; the time of singing Hallelu^ah is come; and the voice of
the Trumpet is heard in the Land. Thou have been my Yo^ke-fellow in the Lords
labors, and companion in persecutions and wrongs, for Christ and his Gospels
sake; now shall we enter together, into our Masters joy: as thou have borne
with me the cross, so shall thou now wear with me the Crown: as thou have
with me sowed plenteously in tears, so shall thou reap with me abundantly
in joy. O blessed, aye blessed be that GOD, who (when yonder reprobates spent
their whole time in Pride, fleshly lusts, eating, drinking and profane
vanities) gave us grace to join together, in watching, fasting, praying,
reading the Scriptures, keeping his Sabboths, hearing Sermons, receiving the
holy Communion, relieuing the Poor, exercising in all humility the works of
Piety to God, and vvalking conscionably in the duties of our calling toward
men. Thou shall, anon, hear no mention of thy sins, Psalm. 32.1.
for they are remitted and covered; but every good work which thou have done
for the Lords sake, shall be rehearsed and rewarded.

Cheer up thy heart, for thy Judge is flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy
bone. Dan. 9.21. etc.
Lift up thy head, behold these glorious Angels, like so many Gabriels, Luke
21.28.
flying toward us, to tell us, that the day of our Redemption is come, and to
convey us in the clouds, to meet our Redeemer in the Air. Lo they are at
hand, arise therefore my Dove, my Love, Can. 2.1.3.
my fair One, and come away: Verse 17.
and so like Roes, or young Hearts, they run with Angels toward Christ, over
the trembling mountains of B^ther.

6 Both quick and dead being thus revived and glorified, shall forthwith by
the ministry of Gods holy Angels, Luke 17.34.35.36.
be gathered from all the quarters and parts of the world, 1 These. 4.17
and caught up together in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
shall come with him, as a part of his glorious train, 1 Cor. 6.1.3.
to judge the Reprobates and evil Angels. The twelve Apostles shall sit upon
twelve Thrones, next Christ, to judge the twelve Tribes, who refused to hear
the Gospel, preached by their Ministry. 1 Cor. 6.2.3
And all the Saints in honor and order, shall stand next unto them, as Judges
also: to judge the evil Angels and earthly-minded men. And as every of them,
received grace in this life, to be more zealous of his glory, and more
faithful in his Service then others: Apo. 22.12.
so shall their glory and reward be greater then others, Romans 26.2. 2 Cor. 9.6.
John 14.1.
in that day.

The place whither they shall be gathered unto Christ, and where Christ shall
sit in Judgment shall be in the Air, 1 These. 4.17.
over the valley of Iehosaphat, by mount Oliuet, near unto Jerusalem,
Eastward from the Temple, as it is probable for four reasons.

1 Because the holy Scripture seems to intimate so much in plain words. I
will gather all Nations into the valley of Iehosaphat, Joel 3.1.2. etc.
and plead with them there. Ver. 11.12.
Cause thy mighty ones, to come down, O Lord: let the Heathen be wakened: and
come up to the valley of Iehosaphat; for there will I sit to judge all the
Heathen round about. Iehosaphat signifies the Lord will judge. And this valley
was so called from the great victory which the LORD gave 2 Chronicles. 20.29.
Iehosaphat and his people over the Ammonites, Miabites, and Inhabitants of
Mount Seir. Which victory was a Type of the final victory which Christ the
supreme Judge, shall give his Elect, over all their Enemies in that place at
the last day, as all the Jews interpret it. See Zach. 14.4 5. Psalm. 51.1.2.
etc. all agreeing, that the place shall be thereabouts.

2 Because, that as Christ was Near this valley was mount Moriah, where
Abraham sacrificed Isaak. Genesis 22. Jacob saw Angels ascending and descending on
a Ladder Genesis 28. The Angel put up his sword and fire from heaven burnt D.
Sacrifice in Araunah^ floor. 2 Samuel 24. Solomon builded the Temple, 2 Chronicles.
3.1. Christ preached the gospel, sufferd his passion, and entered into his
glory. Carth. in Genesis 28.
there-abouts crucified, and put to open shame; so over that place his glorious
Throne should be erected in the Air: when he shall appear in Judgment to
manifest his Majesty and glory: for it is meet that Christ should in that
place judge the world with righteous Judgment, where he himself was unjustly
judged and condemned.

3 Because, that seeing the Angels shall be sent to gather together the Elect
from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. It is most probable
that the place whither they shall be gathered to, shall be near Jerusalem, and
the valley of Iehosaphat, which The Sea beyond Jordan toward Tyrus, cutteth
the midst of the world. And Ezekiel says of Jerusalem, In medio gentiu^
posui eam. That from Zion as from a center, the Law should be published to all
Nations, and there all nations shall be judged according to the Law. Romans 2.12.
Cosmographers describe to be in the midst of the superficies of the Earth I*
the termini a quibus, be the four parts of the World, the terminus ad quem,
must be about the Center.

4 Because the Angels told the Disciples, that as they saw Christ ascend from
Mount Oliuet, which is over the valley of Iehosaphat, Acts 1.11.
so he shall in like manner come down from Heaven: This is the opinion of
Aquinas, Richardus de villa noua. Thom. in 4. Sent. did. 47.48.
and all the Schoolmen, except Lombard, and Alexander Hales.

7 Lastly, when Christ is set in his glorious Throne, Mat. 25.31. Jude ver. 14.
Apoc. 20.11 12. etc. Mat. 19.28.
and all the many thousands of his Saints and Angels, shining more bright then
so many Suns in glory, sitting about him: and the body of Christ in glory and
brightness surpassing them all: (The Reprobates being separated, and remaining
beneath upon the earth; for the right hand signifies a blessed, Hillar. in.
Can. 28. Anselm. in Mat. cap. 25.
the left hand a cursed estate:) Christ will first pronounce the sentence of
absolution, and bliss upon the Elect: first, because he will thereby increase
the grief of the reprobate that shall hear it: Psalm. 145.9. Isa. 28.21. Ad
poenas tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox.
secondly, to show himself more prone to Mercy then to Judgment. And thus
from his Throne of Majesty in the Air, he shall in the sight and hearing of
all the world, pronounce unto his Elect. Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat.
25.4.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world, for,
etc.

Come ye.] Here is our blessed union with Christ, and by him, with the whole
Trinity.

Blessed.] Here is our absolution from all sins, and our plenary endowment
with all grace and happiness.

Of my Father.] Here is the Author, from whom, by Christ proceeds our felicity.

Inherit.] Here is our Adoption.

The Kingdom.] Behold our Birthright and possession.

Prepared.] See Gods Fatherly care for his chosen.

From the Foundation of the world.] O the free, eternal, and unchangeable
Election of GOD!

How much are those souls bound to love GOD, who of his mere good will and
pleasure, chose and loved them before they Romans 9.11.
had done either good or evil.

For, I was hungry, etc] O the Goodness of Christ, who takes notice of all the
good-workes of his Children to reward them! How great is his love to poor
Christians, who takes every work of mercy done to them, for his sake, as if it
had been done to himself! Come ye to me, in whom ye have believed, Ioh.
20.29. 1 Pet. 1.8.
before ye saw me, and whom ye have loved, and sought for with so much
devotion, and through so many tribulations. Come now, from labor to rest: from
disgrace, to glory: from the jaws of death to the joys of eternal Life. For
my sake ye have been Mat. 5.11.
rai^ed upon, reviled, and cursed. But now it shall appear to all those cursed
Esaus, that you are the true Jacobs, that shall receive your heavenly Fathers
blessing, and blessed shall you be. Your Psalm. 27.10* Mat. 19.29.
fathers* mothers, and nearest kindred forsook, and cast you off, for my
Truths sake, which you maintained: but now Ioh. 20.17. 2 Cor. 6.18.
my Father will be unto you a Father, and you shall be his Sons and Daughters
for ever. You were cast out of your lands and livings, and forsook all for my
sake, and the Gospel: But that it may appear that you have not lost your
gain, but gained by your loss: in stead of an earthly inheritance and
possessions, you shall possess with me the inheritance of my heavenly
Kingdom: where you shall be for love, sons; for birthright, heirs; for
dignity, Kings; for holiness, Priests: and you may be bold to enter into the
possession thereof now, because my Father prepared and kept it for you, ever
since the first foundation of the world was laid.

Immediately, after this Sentence of absolution and benediction, every one
receives his crown, which Christ the righteous Judge puts upon their heads; 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Pet. 5.4. Apoc. 4.4.
as the reward which he has promised of his grace and mercy unto the faith
and good works of all them that loved that his appearing. Then every one
taking his Crown from his Head, Apoc. 4.10.
shall lay it down as it were at the Feet of Christ, and prostrating
themselves, shall with one heart and voice, in an heavenly sort and consort,
say, Praise, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, Apoc. 5.
and Thanks be unto thee, O blessed Lamb, who sit upon the Throne, wast
killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation; and have made us unto our God, Kings and
Priests, to reign with thee in thy Kingdom for evermore. Amen.

Then shall they sit in their Thrones and order, 1 Cor. 6.1.2.3. etc. Mat.
19.18.
as Judges of the Reprobates, and evil Angels: by approving, and giving
testimony to the righteous sentence and judgment of Christ the supreme Judge.

After the pronouncing of the Reprobates sentence and condemnation, Christ
will perform two solemn Actions.

1 The presenting of all the Elect unto his Father, Ioh. 17.12.14.23.24.
Behold O righteous Father, these are they whom thou gave me, I have kept
them, and none of them is lost. I gave them thy Word, and they believed it, and
the world hated them, because they were not of the world, even as I was not of
the world. And now Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with
me where I am, Ioh. 12.16.
that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me, and that I may be in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, that the world may
know that thou have sent me, and that thou have loved them, as thou have loved
me.

2 Christ, shall deliver up the Kingdom to GOD, 1 Cor. 15.24
even the Father, that is, shall cease to execute his office of Mediatorship,
whereby as he is King, Priest, Prophet, and supreme head of the Church, he
suppressed his Enemies, and ruled his faithful people, by his Spirit, Word,
and Sacraments. So that his Kingdom of grace over his Church, in this world
ceasing; he shall rule immediately as he is GOD, equal with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, in his Kingdom of Glory for evermore: not that the dignity of
his Manhood shall be any thing diminished, but that the glory of his Godhead
shall be more manifested: so that as he is God, he shall from thence forth,
in all fullness without all external means, rule all in all.

From this Tribunal seat, Christ shall arise, and with all his glorious
Company of Elect Angels and Saints, he shall go up triumphantly, in order and
array unto the heaven of Heavens, with such a heavenly noise and Music, that
now may that Song of David be truly verified, God is gone up with a triumph,
Psalm. 47.5.6.
the Lord with the sound of the Trumpets. 7.
Sing praises to God, sing praises, 9.
sing praises unto our King, sing praises; for God is the King of all the
Earth, he is greatly to be exalted. And that Marriage song of John: Let us be
glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his Wife has made her self ready, Alleluiah; for the Lord God
omnipotent reigns.

The third and last Degree of the blessed state, of a regenerated man after
death, begins after the pronouncing of the Sentence, and lasts eternally
without all end.

Meditations of the blessed estate of a regenerated Man, in heaven; after he
has received his sentence of Absolution, before the Tribunal seat of Christ,
at the last day of Judgment.
Here my Meditation lazeleth, and my Pen falls out of my hand: the one
being not able to conceive: 2 Cor. 4.17.
nor the other to describe that most excellent bliss, and eternal weight of
glory (whereof all the afflictions of this present life are not worthy) which
all the Elect shall with the blessed Trinity enjoy: Romans 8.18.
Romans 8.17.
from that time that they shall be received with Christ as joint heirs into
that everlasting Kingdom of joy.

Notwithstanding, we may take a scantling thereof, thus.

The holy Scriptures set forth (to our capacity) the glory of our eternal
and heavenly life after death, in four respects: 1 Of the Place. 2 Of the
Object. 3 Of the Prerogatives of the Elect there. 4 Of the effects of those
Prerogatives.


1 Of the Place.
THe place is the 1 King. 8.
Heaven of Heavens, or the 2 Cor. 12.2.^.
third Heaven, called Paradise, whither Christ, (in his humane nature,)
ascended far above all visible heavens. The Bridgroomes chamber, Psalm. 19.5.
Mat. 25.10.
which by the firmament, as by an azured curtain spangled with glittering
stars and glorious planets, is hid: that we cannot behold it with these
corruptible eyes of flesh. The holy Ghost (framing himself to our weakness)
describes the glory of that place, which no man can estimate, by such things as
are most precious in the estimation of man. And therefore likeneth it to a
great and a holy City, Aoc. 21.2. etc.
named the heavenly Jerusalem. Where only God, Verse 24. and 27.
and his people, who are saved, and written in the Lambs book do inhabit:
all built of pure gold, Ver. 18.
like unto clear glass, or Crystal: the walls of Jasper stone: the
foundations of the walls, Ver. 11. Ver. 19.20.
with twelve manner of precious stones: having twelve gates, each built of one
pearl: Ver. 21. Ver. 13. Ver. 12.
three gates toward each of the four corner^ of the world: and at each gate
an Angel, Ver. 27.
(as so many Porters) that no unclean thing should enter into it. It is four
square, therefore perfect, Ver. 16.
the length, the breadth, and height of it are equal, 12000. furlongs every
way, therefore glorious and spacious. Through the midst of her streets ever
runs a pure River of the water of life, as clear as Crystal, therefore
wholesome. And of either side of the river is the Tree of life, ever growing,
which bears twelve manner of fruits, and gives fruit every month, therefore
fruitful: and the leaves of the tree is health to the Nations, therefore
healthy. There is therefore no place so glorious by creation, Apo. 22.1.2.
so beautiful with delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for
habitation. For there the King, is Christ: the law, is love: the honor,
verity: the peace, felicity: the life, eternity. There is light without
darkness; mirth without sadness; health without sickness; wealth without
want; credit without disgrace; beauty without blemish; ease without labor;
riches without rust; blessedness without misery; and consolation that never
knows end. How truly may we cry out (with David) of this City, Glorious
things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God! Psalm. 87.3.
and yet all these things are spoken, but according to the weakness of our
capacity. For heaven exceeds all this in glory, so far: as that no tongue is
able to express: nor heart of man to conceive the glory thereof: 2 Cor. 12.4.
1 Cor. 2.9.
as witnesses Paul who was in it and saw it. O let us not then dote so much
upon these woedden cottages, and houses of moulding clay, which are but the
tents of ungodliness and habitation of sinners: but let let us look rather,
and long for this heavenly City, Heb. 11.10.
whose builder and maker is God: Heb. 11.16.
which he ( who is not ashamed to be called our God) has prepared for us.

2 Of the Object.
THE blisseful and glorious object of all intellectual, and reasonable
creatures in heaven, is the Godhead, in Trinity of Persons; without which
there is neither joy, nor felicity: but the very fullness of joy consists in
enjoying the same.

This Object we shall enjoy two ways.

1 By a beatificall vision of God.

2 By possessing an immediate communion with his divine nature.

The Visio Dei beatifica sola est summ^^ bonum nostru^ Aug. lib. de Trinit.
cap. 13.
beatificall vision of GOD is that only that can content the infinite mind of
man. ^^cisti nos domine ad te: inquietum igitur est cor nostrum donec
requiescat in te. Aug. Conf. lib. 1. cap. 1.
For every thing tends to his center. GOD is the center of the soul:
therefore (like Noah's Dove) she cannot rest, nor joy, till she return and
enjoy him. All that GOD bestowed upon Moses, Exodus 33.13 etc.
could not satisfy his mind, unless he might see the face of GOD. Therefore
the whole Church prays so earnestly: Psalm. 67.1. and 80.19.
God be merciful unto us, and bless us and cause his face to shine upon us.
When Paul once had seen this blessed sight, he (ever after) counted all the
riches, and glory of the world, Phil. 3.8.11.
(in respect of it) to be but dung. And all his life after was but a sighing
out (cupio dissolui) I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ. And Christ prayed for all his Elect in his last prayer:
that they might obtain this blessed vision. Father, I will that they which
thou have given me be (where?) even where I am. (To what end? Ioh. 17.24.
) that they may behold that my glory, etc. If Moses face did so shine when he
had been with GOD but forty days: Exodus 34.29 Exodus 33 23.
and seen but his back parts; how shall we shine, when we shall see him face
to face for ever? 1 Cor. 13.12 2 Cor. 3.18. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
and know him as we are known, and as he is? Then shall the soul no longer be
termed Marah, bitterness, but Naomi, beautifulness: for the Lord shall turn
her short bitterness, to eternal beauty and blessedness. Ruth 1.20.

The second means to enjoy this object, is, by having an immediate, and an
eternal communion with GOD in heaven. This we have, first, by being (as
members of Christ) united to his manhood: and by the manhood (personally united
to the word) we are united to him, as he is GOD: and (by his Godhead) to the
whole Trinity. Reprobates at the last day shall see GOD (as a just Judge) to
punish them: but (for lack of this Communion) they shall have neither grace
with him, nor glory from him. For want of this communion; the Devils (when they
saw Christ) cried out, Quid nobis te cum? What have we to do with thee, Mark.
5.7.
O Son of the most high God? But (by virtue of this Communion) the penitent
soul may boldly go and say unto Christ, Ruth. 3.9.
as Ruth unto B^az:) Spread, O Christ, the wing of the garment of thy mercy
over thine handmaide: for thou art my kinsman. This Communion God promised
Abraham, Genesis 15.1.
when he gave him himself for his great reward. And Christ prays for his
whole Church to obtain it. Ioh. 17.20.21.
This communion Saint Paul expresses in one word, saying: that God shall be
all in all unto us. 1 Cor. 15.28
Indeed, God is now all in all unto us: but by means, and in a small measure.
But in heaven, God himself immediately, (in fullness of measure, without all
means) will be unto us all the good things, that our souls and bodie^ can
wish or desire. He himself will be salvation, and joy to our souls: life and
health to our bodies: beauty to our eyes: music to our ears: honey to our
mouths: perfume to our nostrils: meat to our bellies: light to our
understandings: Anima animae erit Deus. Ber^.
contentment to our wills; and delight to our hearts; and what can be lacking*
where GOD himself, will be the soul of our souls? Yea all the strength, wit,
pleasures, virtues, colors, Non potest summus reru^ conditor in se non habere,
quae rebus a se conditis dedit: quemadmodum sol astris. Hugo lib. 4. de anima
cap. 15
beauties, harmony, and goodness, that are in men, beasts, fishes, fowls,
trees, herbs, and all creatures, are nothing but sparkles of those things,
which are in infinite perfection in GOD. And in him we shall enjoy them, in a
far more perfect, and blessed manner. He himself will then supply ^hei^
use: nay, the best creatures (which serve us now) shall not have the honor,
to serve us then. There will be no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon, to
shine in that City: Apoc. 21.23
for, the glory of God does light it. No more will there be any need, or use,
of any creature, when we shall enjoy the Creator himself.

When therefore we behold any thing that is excellent in any Creatures, let us
say to our selves; how much more excellent is he who gave them this
excellency! When we behold the wisdom of men who overrule creatures
stronger then themselves; out-runne the Sun and Moon in discourse
prescribing many years before, in what courses they shall be eclipsed: Seneca
de beneficijs. lib. 2. cap. 29.
let us say to our selves, how admirable is the wisdom of GOD, who made men
so wise! When we consider the strength of Whales and Elephants, the tempests of
Winds, and terror of Thunder; let us say to our selves, how strong, how
mighty, how terrible is that GOD that makes these mighty and fearful
Creatures! When we taste things that are delicately sweet, let us say to our
selves, oh, how sweet is that GOD, from whom all these Creatures have
received this sweetness! When we behold the admirable colors which are in
Flowers and Birds, and the lovely beauty of Women, let us say, how fair is
that GOD that made these so fair!

And if our loving GOD has thus provided us so many excellent delights, for
our passage through this Bochim, Judge. 2.5.
or valley of tears! what are those pleasures which he has prepared for us,
when we shall enter into the palace of our Masters joy! How shall our Souls
be there ravished with the love of so lovely a GOD! So glorious is the object
of heavenly Saints! So amiable is the sight of our gracious Savior!

3 Of the Prerogatives which the Elect shall enjoy in Heaven.
BY reason of this communion with GOD, the elect in Heaven shall have four
super-excellent prerogatives.

1 They shall have the Kingdom of heaven for their inheritance: Mat. 25. 1
Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 2.19. Hebr. 12.22.
and they shall be free Denizons of the heavenly Jerusalem. S. Paul (by being a
free citizen of Rome) escaped whipping; but they, Act. 22.26.
who are once free Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, shall ever be freed from
the whips of eternal torments. For this freedom was bought for us, not with
a great sum of money, Act. 22.28.
but with the precious blood of the Son of God. 1 Pet. 1.18.


Apoc. 5.10. 1 Pet. 2.9. Romans 16.10.
2 They shall be all Kings and Priests. Spiritual Kings, to reign with
Christ, and to triumph over Satan, the World, and Reprobates: and spiritual
Priests, to offer unto God the spiritual Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving
for evermore. 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15.
And therefore they are said to wear both Crowns and Roabes. Oh what a
comfort is this to poor Parents, that have many Children! If they breed them
up in the fear of God to be true Christians: then are they Parents to so many
Kings and Priests.

Mat. 13.43.
3 Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Sun in the Firmament:
Phil. 3.21.
like the glorious Body of CHRIST, Act. 22.6.
which shined brighter then the Sun at noone, when it appeared to Paul. A
glimpse of which glorious brightness appeared in the bodies of Moses and Elias
transfigured with our Lord in the holy Mount. Luke 9.31. Mark 9.3.
Therefore (says the Apostle) it shall rise a glorious body; yea, 1 Cor. 15.43.
a spiritual body, not in substance, Ver. 44.
but in quality: preserved by spiritual means, and having (as an Angel)
agilitie to ascend or descend. Oh what an honor is it that our bodies
(falling more vile then a carrion) should thus arise in glory, 1 These. 4.1.
like unto the body of the Son of God!

4 Lastly, they (together with all the holy Angels) there, keep (without any
labor to distract them) a perpetual Sabbath, to the glory, honor, and praise
of the aye-blessed Trinity, for the creating, redeeming, and and sanctifying
of the church: and for his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, and goodness, in the
government of Heaven and Earth. When thou hear a sweet Consort of Music,
meditate how happy thou shall be, when (with the Quire of heavenly Angels and
Saints) thou shall sing a part in that spiritual Alleluiah, on that eternal
blessed Sabbath, where there shall be such variety of pleasures, and satietie
of joys; as never know tediousness in doing, nor end in delighting.

4 Of the effects of those prerogatives.
From these prerogatives there will arise to the Elect in heaven, five notable
effects.
1 THey shall know GOD, with a perfect knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.12. Aug. soliloq.
cap. 36.
so far as Creatures can possibly comprehend the Creator. For there we shall
see; the Word, Nihil natum in terra, nihil ignotum in coelo.
the Creator; and in the Word, all creatures that by the Word were created: so
that we shall not need to learn of the things which were made; the knowledge
of him by whom all things were made. 1 Cor. 13.12
The excellentest creatures in this life, 2 Cor. 3.16.
are but as a dark veil, Res verae sunt in mundo inuisibili, in mundo
visibili vmbrae rerum. Her.
drawn betwixt GOD and us: but when this veil shall be drawn aside; then
shall we see GOD face to face, and know him as we are known.

We shall know the power of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, the grace of
the holy Ghost; and the indivisible nature of the blessed Trinity. And in him
we shall know not only all our friends (who dyed in the faith of Christ) but
also all the faithful that ever were, or shall be: For,

1 Chirst tells the Jews, that they shall see, Luke 13.28.
Abraham; Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the kingdom of God:
therefore we shall know them.

2 Adam in his innocence knew Eve to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, Genesis 2.23.
as soon as he awaked. Much more then shall we know our kindred, when we shall
awake perfected and glorified in the resurrection.

3 The Apostles knew Christ after his resurrection and the Saints which rose
with him, Mat. 27.53.
and appeared in the holy City.

4 Peter, James, and John, knew Moses and Elias in the transfiguration: Mat.
17.4.
how much more shall we know one an other, when we shall be all glorified?

5 Dives knew Lazarus in Abraham's bosom: Luke 16.23.
much more shall the Elect know one another in heaven.

6 Christ says, that the twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones, Mat.
19.28.
to judge (at that day) the 12. Tribes: therefore they shall be known, and
consequently the rest of the Saints.

1 Cor. 6.2.3.
7 Paul says, that at that day we shall know as we are known of God: 1 Cor.
13.12
and Augustine (out of this place) comfort a Widow, August. ad Italicam
viduam. Epist. 6
assuring her, that as in this life, she saw her husband with external eyes;
so in the life to come, she should know his heart, and what were all his
thoughts and imaginations. Then husbands and wives, look to your actions and
thoughts: For all shall be made manifest one day. See 1. Cor. 4.5.

8 The faithful in the old Testament, Genesis 25. and 35. 2 King. 22.
are said to be gathered to their Fathers: therefore the knowledge of our
friends remains.

9 Love never falls away: therefore knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.8.
the ground thereof, remains in another life.

10 Because the last day shall be a declaration of the just judgment of God:
Romans 2.5. Apo. 22.12. Eccl. 12.14.
when he shall reward every man acording to his works: and if every man's work
be brought to light, Romans 2.16.
much more the worker. And if wicked men shall account for every idle word,
Mat. 12.36.
much more shall the idle speakers themselves be known. And if the persons be
not known, in vain are the works made manifest. Therefore (says the
Apostle) Every man shall appear, to account for the work that he has done
in his body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
etc. See Wisdom Chapter 5.1. Though the respect of diversities of degrees,
and callings in Magistracy, Ministry, and Economy shall cease; yea Christ
shall then cease to rule, 1 Cor. 15.24 28.
as he is Mediator, and rule all in all, as he is God equal with the Father,
and the holy Ghost.

The greatest knowledge that men can attain unto in this life, comes as far
short of the knowledge which we shall have in heaven: 1 Cor. 13.11
as the knowledge of a child, that cannot yet speak plain, is to the
knoweldge of the greatest Philosopher in the World. They who thirst for
knowledge; let them long to be students of this University. Lumen est vmbra Dei
and Deus est lumen lumenis. Plato. Poli. 6.
For all the light by which we know any thing in this world, is nothing but
the very shadow of God: but when we shall know GOD in heaven, we shall, in
him, know the manner of the work of the creation, the mysteries of the work
of our Redemption: yea, so much knowledge as a Creature can possibly conceive
and comprehend of the Creator and his works. But whilst we are in this life,
we may say with Job. Job 26.14.
How little a portion hear we of him? And assure our selves with Syracides,
that There are hid yet greater things then these be, Ecclus. 42.32.
and that we have seen but a few of Gods works.

2 They shall love God with as perfect and absolute love, as possibly a
creature can do. The manner of loving God, is to love him for himself: the
measure, is to love him without measure. For in this life ( knowing God but in
part) we love him but in part: 1 Cor. 13.12.
but when the Elect in heaven shall fully know God, then they will perfectly
love God. And (for the infinite causes of love, which thy shall know to be in
him) they shall be infinitely rauish't with the love of him.

3 They shall be filled with all manner of divine pleasures. At thy right hand
(says David) there are pleasures for evermore: Psalm. 16.11.
Yea, they shall drink (says he) out of the river of pleasures. Psalm. 36.8.
For as soon as the soul is admitted into the actual fruition of the
beatificall presence of God: she has all the goodness, beauty, glory, and
perfection of all creatures (in all the world) united together, and at once
presented unto her in the sight of God. If any be in love, there they shall
enjoy that which is more amiable: if any delight in fairness, the fairest
beauty is but a dusty shadow to that: he that delights in Pleasures shall there
find infinite varieties, without either interruption of grief, or distraction
of pain: He that loves honor, shall there enjoy it, without the disgrace of
cankred envy; he that loves treasure, shall there possess it* and never be
beguiled of it. There they shall have knowledge, void of all ignorance: health,
that no sickness shall impair: and life, that no death can determine. In a
word look how far this wide world, surpasses for light, pleasures, and
comfort, the dark and narrow womb wherein thou wast conceived a child: so much
does the world to come exceed in joys, solace, and consolation, this present
world. Now happy then shall we be, when this life is changed, and we thither
translated

4 They shall be replenished with an unspeakable joy. In thy presence (says
David is the fullness of joy. Psalm. 16.11.
And this joy shall arise, chiefly from the vision of God: and partly from the
sight of all the holy Angels, and blessed souls of just and perfect men, who
are in bliss and glory with him.

But especially from the blissful sight of Jesus the Mediator of the New
Testament, our Emmanuel, Heb. 12.24.
God made man. His sight will be the chief cause of our bliss, and joy. If
the Israelites in Jerusalem so showted for joy that the earth rang again, 1
Reg. 1.40.
to see Solomon crowned; how shall the Elect rejoice in heaven to see Christ
the true Solomon adorned with glory? Luke 1.44.
If John Baptist at his presence did leap in his mothers womb for joy; Ioh.
17.23.
how shall we exult for joy, when he will be not only with us, but in us in
heaven? If the wise men rejoiced so greatly to find him, Mat. 2.10.
a Babe, lying in a manger; how great shall the joy of the Elect be, to see
him sit (as as King) in his celestial throne? Luke 2.28.
If Simeon was so glad to see him, an Infant, in the Temple presented by the
hands of the Priest; how great shall our joy be to see him a King, ruling all
things at the right hand of his Father? If Joseph and Mary were so joyful to
find him in the midst of the Doctors in the Temple; how glad shall our souls
be to see him sitting as Lord among Angels in heaven? Luke 2.46. Facilius
dicere possum^, quid ibi non sit, quam quid ibi sit. Aug. de symb. lib. 3. 1
Cor. 2.9. Mat. 25.21.
This is that joy of our Master, which (as the Apostle says) the eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart of man can conceive: which
because it cannot enter into us, we shall enter it.

5 Lastly, they shall enjoy this blissful and glorious estate for evermore.
Therefore it is termed everlasting life: and Christ says, Ioh. 16.22.
that our joy shall no man take from us. All other joys (be they never so
great) have an end. Assuerus Feast lasted an hundred and eighty days; Hest.
1.4.
but he, and it, and all his joys are gone. For mortal man to be assumed to
heavenly glory, to be associated to Angels, to be satiated with all delights
and joys, (but for a time) were much: but to enjoy them for ever, without
intermission of end, who can hear it, and not admire it! who can muse of it,
and not be amazed at it! All the Saints of Christ (as soon as they felt once
but a true taste of these eternal joys) counted all the riches and pleasures
of this life to be but Phil. 3.8.
loss and dung in respect of that. And therefore (with incessant prayers,
fasting, almes-deedes, tears, faith, and good life) they labored to acertaine
themselves of this eternal life: and (for the love thereof,) they Act. 2.45.
willingly either sold, or parted with all their earthly goods and possessions.

Christ calls all Christians Merchants, Luke 19. and eternal life a precious
pearl, which a wise Merchant will purchase, though it cost him all that he
has. Mat. 13.

Alexander hearing the report of the great riches of the Eastern country,
Plutar. Apoth^g. Regum.
divided forthwith among his Captains and Soldiers, all his Kingdom of
Macedonia: Hephoestion asking him what he meant in so doing; Alexander
answered, that he preferred the riches of India, (whereof he hoped shortly to
be Master) before all that his Father Philip left him in Macedonia. And should
not Christians then prefer the eternal riches of Heaven, so greatly
renowned, (which they shall enjoy ere long) before the corruptible trash of
the earth, which last but for a season?

Abraham and Sarah left their own Country and possessions, to Heb. 11.10 15.16.
look for a City, whose builder and maker is God, and therefore bought no
land, but only a place of burial. David prefers Psalm. 84.10.
one day in this place, before a thousand elsewhere: yea, to be a doore-keeper
in the house of God, rather then to dwell in the richest tabernacles of
wickedness. Elias earnestly 1 Reg. 19.4
besought the Lord to receive his soul into his Kingdom; and went willingly
(though in 2 Reg. 2.15
a fiery Chariot) thither. Paul (having once seen heaven) continually Phil.
1.23.
desired to be dissolved, that he might be with Christ. Peter (having spyed
but a glimpse of that eternal glory in the Mount,) wished, that he might
dwell there all the days of his life, saying, Mat. 17.4.
Master, it is good for us to be here. How much better does Peter now think it
to be in heaven it self? Christ (a little before his death) prays his Father
Ioh. 17.5.
to receive him into that excellent glory. And the Apostle witnesses, that (
Heb. 12.2.
for the joy which was set before him) he endured the Cross, and despised the
shame. If a man did but once see those joys, (if it were possible,) he would
endure an hundred deaths to enjoy that happiness but one day.

S. Augustine says, Sermon. 31. de Sanctu.
that he would be content, to endure the torments of hell to gain this joy,
rather then to lose it. Ignatius (Paul's Scholar) being threatened (as he was
going to suffer,) with the cruelty of torments, answered with great courage
of Faith: Hier. in Catalogo. Iren. lib. 5. cont. Valen.
Fire, Gallows, Beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of my members,
crushing of my body, all the torments of the Devil together, let them come
upon me, so I may enjoy my Lord Jesus and his Kingdom. The like constancy
showed Polycarpe, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 16.
who could not by any terrors of any kind of death, be moved to deny Christ in
the least measure. With the like resolution answered Basil his persecutors,
when they would terrify him with death; Nazianz. de de vita Basil.
I will never (said he) fear death, which can do no more then restore me to
him that made me. If Ruth left her own country, Ruth 1.16.
and followed Naomi her Mother in Law, to go and dwell with her in the Land of
Canaan, (which was but a type of heaven,) only upon the fame which she heard
of the God of Israel (though she had no promise of any portion therein,) how
should thou follow thy holy mother the Church, to go unto Christ into the
heavenly Canaan, wherein God has given thee an eternal inheritance, assured by
an holy Covenant made in the words of God, signed with the blood of his Son,
and sealed with his Spirit and Sacraments? This shall be thine eternal
happiness in the Kingdom of heaven, where thy life shall be a communion with
the blessed Trinity, thy joy the presence of the Lamb, thy exercise singing,
thy ditty Alleluiah, thy consorts, Saints and Angels: where youth flourishes
that never waxes old; Beauty lasts that never fades; love abounds that
never cools; health continues that never slaketh; and life remains, that
never ends.

Meditations directing a Christian how to apply to himself, without delay, the
foresaid knowledge of GOD and himself.
THou see therefore O man, how wretched and cursed thy state is, by
corruption of nature, without Christ: insomuch that whereas the Scriptures do
liken wicked men, unto Lions, Bears, Bulls, Horses, Dogs, and such like
savage Creatures in their lives: it is certain, that the condition of an
unregenerated man, is in his death more vile then a Dog, or the filthiest
Creature in the world: for the Beast (being made but for man's use) when he
dies ends all his miseries with his death. But man endued with a reasonable
and an immortal Soul, made after Gods Image, to serve God, when he ends the
miseries of this life, must account for all his misdeedes, and begin to endure
those miseries that never shall know end. No creature but man is liable to
yield at his death an account for his life. The brute Creatures, not having
reason, shall not be required to make any account for their deeds: and good
Angels, though they have reason, yet shall they yield no account, because they
have no sin. And as for evil Angels, they are, without all hope, already
condemned; so that they need not make any further accounts. Man only in his
death, must be Gods accountant for his life.

On the other side, thou see ( O Man) how happy and blessed thy estate is,
being truly reconciled unto GOD in Christ, in that through the restoration of
Gods Image, and thy restitution into thy sovereignty over other Creatures,
thou art in this life little inferior to the Angels, and shall be in the life
to come equal to the Angels; yea, in respect of thy Nature, exalted, by a
personal union to the Son of God, and by him, to the glory of the Trinity:
superior to the Angels: a Fellow-Brother with Angels in spiritual grace and
everlasting glory.

Thou have seen how glorious and perfect GOD is, and how that all thy chief
bliss and happiness consists in having an eternal communion with his
Majesty.

Now therefore (O impenitent Sinner) in the bowels of Christ Jesus I entreat
thee; nay, I conjure thee, as thou tenderest thy own salvation, seriously to
consider with me, how false, how vain, how vile are those things, which still
retain and chain thee in this wretched and cursed estate, wherein thou
live: and do hinder thee from the favor of God, and the hope of eternal
life and happiness.

Meditations on the hindrances, which keep back a sinner from the practice
of Piety.
THose Hindrances are chiefly seven.

I. An ignorant mistaking of the true meaning of certain places of the holy
Scripture, and some other chief grounds of Christian Religion.

The Scriptures mistaken are these.
1 Ezekiel. 33.14.16. At what time soever a sinner repents him of his sin, I
will blot out all, etc. Hence the carnal Christian gathers: That he may
repent when he will. It is true: Whenever a sinner does repent, GOD will
forgive: but the text says not, that a sinner may repent whenever he will,
but when GOD will give him grace. Many (says the Scripture) when they would
have repented were rejected; Heb. 12.17. Luke 13.24.27.
and could not repent, though they sought it carefully with tears. What
comfort yields this Text to thee, who have not repented, nor know whether
thou shall have grace to repent hereafter?

2 Math. 11.26. Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Hence the lewdest man collects, that he may come unto Christ
when he list. But he must know; That no man ever comes to Christ, but he, who
(as Peter says) Having known the way of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.20.21.
has escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. To come unto Christ is to repent and believe. Isa.
1.18. Ioh. 6.35. Ioh. 6.44.
And this no man can do, except his heavenly father draws him by his grace.

3 Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. True.
But they are such, who walk not after the flesh (as thou do) but after the
spirit, which thou did never yet resolve to do.

4 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, etc. True.
But such sinners who like Paul are converted from their wicked life: not like
thee, who still continuest in thy lewdness. For that Grace of God which
brings salvation unto all men, teaches us, Tit. 2.11.12.
that denying ungodliness and wordly lusts: we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

5 Prou. 23.26. A just man falls seven times in a day, and rises, etc. [In
a day] is not in the Text: Which means not falling into sin, but falling
into trouble, which his malicious enemy plots against the just: and from which
GOD delivers him* Psalm. 34.14.
And though it meant falling in, and rising out of sin; what is this to thee?
whose falls all men may see every day: but neither God nor man can at any time
see thy rising again, by repentance?

6 Isay 64.6. All our righteousness are as filthy rags. Hence the carnal
Christian gathers: That seeing the best works of the best Saints are no
better; then his are good enough: and therefore he needs not much grieve,
that his devotions are so imperfect. But Isay means not in this place, the
righteous work^ of the Regenerate, as fervent prayers in the name of God:
charitable alms from the bowels of mercy: suffering in the G^spels defense, the
spoil of goods, and spilling of blood, and such works, which Paul calls the
fruit of the spirit. But the Prophet making an humble confession in the name of
the Jewish Church, Gal. 5.22.
when she had fallen from GOD to Idolatry, acknowledges that whilst they were
by their filthy sins separated from GOD, as leapers are by their infected
sores and polluted clothes from men: their chiefest righteousness could not
be but abominable in his sight. And though our best works compared with
Christ's righteousness are no better then unclean rags; yet in Gods
acceptance, for Christ's sake, they are called Apo. 3.8.
white raiment, yea, Apo. 19.8.
pure fine linen and shining, far unlike thy Ier. 13.23.
Leopards spots, and Zach. 3.4.
filthy garments.

7 Iam. 3.2. In many things we sin all. True. But Gods children sins not in
all things as thou do, without either bridling their lusts, or mortifying
their corruptions. And though the relics of sin, remains in the dearest
children of God, that they had need daily to cry, Our Father which art in
heaven, forgive us our trespasses. Yet in the New Gal. 2.15.
Testament none are properly called Sinners, Romans 5.8. Ioh. 9.31.
but the unregenerate. But the Regenerate, in respect of their zealous endeavor
to serve God in unfeigned holiness, are every where called Saints. Insomuch
that Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 3.9. 1 Ioh. 5.18.
that whosoever is borne of God sins not. That is, lives not in wilful
filthiness, suffering sin to reign in him as thou do. Deceive not thy
self with the name of a Christian: whosoever lives in any custommary gross
sin, he lives not in the state of Grace. Let therefore, says Paul, 2 Timothy
2.19.
every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. The Regenerate
sin, but of frailty, they repent, and God does pardon: therefore they sin
not to death. The Reprobate sin maliciously, wilfully, and delight therein so
that by their good will sin shall leave them before they will leave it. 1
Ioh. 5.16.
They will not repent, and God will not pardon. Therefore their sins are
mortal, says Saint John: Or rather immortal, Ibid.
as says S. Paul, Romans 2.5. It is no excuse therefore to say we are all
sinners. True Christians thou see are all Saints.

8 Luke 23 43. The Thief converted, at the last gasp was received to
Paradise: What then? If I may have but time to say when I am dying, Lord have
mercy upon me, I shall likewise be saved. But what if thou shall not? Math. 7
22.23.
And yet many in that day shall say, Lord, Lord, and the Lord will not know
them. The Thief was saved, for he repented; but his fellow had no grace, to
repent, and was damned* Beware therefore, lest trusting to late Repentance at
thy last end on earth: thou be not driven to repent too late, without end in
Hell.

9 1 Ioh. 1. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, And 1 Ioh.
2.1. If any man si^ne we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, etc. O comfortable! But here what Saint John says in the same
place, My little children these things write I unto you that ye sin not. If
therefore thou leauest thy sin, these comforts are thine: else they belong
not to thee.

10 Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, Grace did abound much more. O sweet! But
hear what Paul adds. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin
that Grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin live any
longer therein? Romans 6.1.2. This place teaches us not to presume: but that we
should not despair. None therefore of these promises, promises any grace to
any: but to the penitent heart.

The grounds of Religion mistaken are.
1 From the doctrine of Justification by faith only: a carnal Christian
gathers: That good works are not necessary* he commends others, that do good
works, but he perswads himself, that he shall be saved by his faith, without
doing any such matters. But he should know that though good works are not
necessary to Justification: yet they are necessary to salvation; for, We are
Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has predestined that
we should walk in them. Whosoever therefore in years of discretion, Fulk.
Rhem. Test: Annot. on Ephesians. 2.12.
brings not forth good works, after he is called, he cannot besaued: neither
was he ever predestined to life eternal. Therefore the Scripturs says, that
Christ will reward every man according to his works. Romans 2.6. 2 Cor. 9.6. Apo.
22.12. Apo. 2. and 3.
Christ respects in the Angels of the 7. Churches nothing but their works. And
at the last day he will give the heavenly Inheritance only to them who have
done good works; Mat. 25.
in feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, etc. At that day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Righteousness shall wear the Crown. No righteousness, no Crown: No good
works (according to a man's talent) no reward from God: unless it be Romans 2.8.
vengeance. To be rich in good works is the surest foundation of our assurance
1 Timothy 6.19
to obtain eternal life. For good works are the true fruits of a true faith
which apprehends Christ and his obedience, unto Salvation. And no other faith
Gal. 5.6.
avails in Christ but that which works by love. And but in the act of
Justification, that Faith which only justifies, is Fides sola non est sola.
never only, but ever accompanied with good works, Fides sola iustificat, vt
oculus solus videt.
as the Tree with his fruits, the Sun with his light, the Fire with his heat,
and Water with his moisture: and that faith which does not justify her self
by good works before Men, is but Iam. 2.26.
a dead Faith, which will never justify a man's soul before God. But a
justifying faith, Act. 15.9.
purifieth the heart, and Act. 16.18 1 These. 5.23.
sanctifies the whole man throughout.

II. From the doctrine of Gods eternal Mat. 25.34. Ephe. 1.4. Eccles 3.14.
Predestination and unchangeable decree, he gathers, that if he be
predestined to be saved, he cannot but be saved: if to be damned, no means
can do any good. Therefore all works of Pi^tie are but in vain: but he
should learn, that God has predestined to the means as well as to the end.
Whom therefore GOD has predestined to be saved, which is the 1 Pet. 1.16
end, he has likewise predestined to be first called, justified, and made
conformable to the image of his Son, which is the Romans 8.29.30. John 15.16.
means. And they (says 1 Pet. 1.2.
Peter) who are elect unto salvation, are also elect unto the sanctification of
the spirit. Noli te in deo primum quaerere, sed in Christo, in quo si te per
fidem inueneris, certus esto, te esse electum.
If therefore upon thy calling, thou conformest thy self to the Word and
Example of Christ thy Master, and obeyest the good motions of the holy Spirit
in leaving sin, and living a godly life: then assure thy self, that thou art
one of those, who are infallibly predestined to everlasting salvation. If
otherwise, blame not Gods predestination, but thine own sin, and rebellion.
Do thou but return unto God, and God will graciously receive thee, as the
Father did the prodigal Son, and by thy conversion it shall appear both to
Luke 15.10
Angels and Verse 24.
Men, that thou did belong to his Election. If thou will not, why should God
save thee?

III. When a carnal Christian hears, that man has not free will unto good,
he loses the reins to his own corrupt will: as though it lay not in him to
bridle or to subdue it. Implicitly, making God the author of sin, in
suffering man to run into this necessity. But he should know, that GOD gave
Adam free will to stand in his Magna^ hom. liberi arbitris vires, cum
conderetur accepit: sed eas p^ccando amisit. Aug. de. spirit. and lit. cap. 3.
Eccles. 7.29. Ecclus. 15.14 Homo male vtens libero suo arbitrio, and se, and
liberu^ suum arbitrium perdidit. Aug. Ench. ad Laur. cap. 30
integrity if he would: but man abusing his free will, lost both himself and
it. Since the Fall, Man in his state of corruption, has Free Will to evil,
but not to good: for, in this state, 2 Cor. 3.5. Per lapsum, arbitrii libertas
in naturalibus manca, in supernaturalibus amissa est. donec gratia restituatur.
we are not (says the Apostle) sufficient to think a good thought. And God is
not bound to restore us what we lost so wretchedly, and make no more care to
recover again. But, as soon as a man is regenerated, the Grace of God freeth
his will unto good, so that he does all the good things he does, with a
Free Will: for so the Apostle says, that Phil. 2.12.13. Actiagimus, The will
is passive in receiving the first grace, afterward active in all goodness.
God of his own good pleasure, works both the will and the deed in us, who
(as the Apostle expounds) 2 Cor. 7.1.
cleance our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and finish
our sanctification in the fear of God. And in this state, every true Christian
has Free Will, and as he increases in grace, so does his will in freedom:
for Ioh. 8.36. Liberum arbitrium, non nisi gratia Dei efficitur. liberu^. Aug.
ad Colos. c. 7.
when the Son shall make us free, then shall we be free indeed: and, Cor.
3.17
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: for the holy Spirit draws
their minds, not by coaction, but by the cords of Love, Can. 1.4. by
illuminating their minds to know the truth; by changing their hearts to love
the known truth, and by enabling every one of them, according to the measure
of grace which he has received, Voluntas humana non liberate gratia^
consequitur, sed gratia libertatem. Aug. de great. cap. 8.
to do the good which he loves. But thou will not use the freedom of thy
will so far as GOD has freed it: for thou do many times wilfully against
Gods Law, to the hazard of thy Soul; that, which if the Kings Law forbad under
the penalty of death, or loss of thy worldly state thou would not do.
Make not therefore thy want of free will unto good to be so much the cause of
thy sin, as thy want of a loving heart to serve thy heavenly Father.

IIII. When the natural man hears, that no man since the fall, is able to
fulfill the Law of God, and to keep all his Commandments: He boldly presumes
to sin as others do: he contents himself with a few good thoughts: and if
he be not altogether as bad as the worst, he concludes that he is as truly
regenerate as the best. And every voluntary refusal of doing good, or
withstanding evil, he counts the impossibility of the Law. But he should
learn that though since the Fall* no man but Christ, who was both God and man,
did or can perfectly fulfill the whole Law. yet every true Christian, as soon
as he is regenerated, begins to keep all Gods Commandments in truth, though
he cannot in absolute perfection. Thus with David, they Ps. 119.112
apply their hearts to fulfill Gods Commandments always unto the end. And
then the Joel. 2.28.29. Zach. 12.10. Quod iubet, iuuat. Aug.
Spirit of grace which was promised to be more abundantly poured forth under
the Gospel, helps them in their good endeavors and assisteth them to do
what he commands them to do. And in so doing, GOD accepts their 2 Cor. 8.12
good will and endeavor, in stead of perfect fulfilling of the Law, supplying
out of the merits of Christ, who fulfilled the Law for us, whatsoever wants
in our obedience. And in this respect S. John says, that 1 Ioh. 5.3.
Gods commandments are not burdenous. And S. Paul says, Phil. 4.15.
I am able to do all things through the help of him that strengthens me. And
Z^chary and Elizabeth are said, Luke 1.6.
to walk^ in all the Commandments of the Lord, without reproof. Hereupon
CHRIST Ioh. 15.10
commends to his Disciples, the care of keeping his Commandments, as the
trueest testimony of our love unto him. So far therefore does a man love
Christ, as he makes conscience to walk in his Commandments: and the more unto
Christ is our love, the less will our pains seem in keeping his Law. The
Laws curse which under the Old Testament was so terrible, is under the New,
by the death of Christ, abolished to the regenerate. The rigor which made it so
impossible to our nature before, is now to the newborn, so mollified by the
Spirit, that it seems facile and easy. The Apostles indeed pressed on the
unconverted Jews and Gentiles the impossibility of keeping the Law, by
ability of nature corrupted. But when they have to do with regenerated
Christians, they require to the Law (which is the rule of righteousness) true
Romans 15.18
obedience in word and deed: the Col. 3.5.
mortifying of their members: the Gal. 5.24. Romans 6.12.13.
crucifying of the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof: Romans 6.4.5
Romans 8.11.
resurrection to newness of life: Gal. 5.25.
walking in the spirit: 1 Ioh. 5.4.
ouercomming of the world by faith. So that though no man can say as CHRIST,
John 8.46.
which of you can rebuke me of sin? yet every regenerated Christian can say
of himself, which of you can rebuke me of being an Adulterer, whoremonger,
swearer, drunkard, thief, usurer, oppressor, proud, malicious, covetous,
profaner of the holy Saboth, a Liar, a neglecter of Gods public Service, and
such like gross sins! else he is no true Christian. When a man casts off
the conscience of being ruled by Gods Law, then GOD Romans 1.24 28.
gives him over to be led by his own lusts, the surest sign of a reprobate
sense. Thus the Law which since the Fall, no man by his own natural ability
can fulfill: is fulfilled in truth of every regenerated Christian, through the
gracious assistance of Romans 8.9. etc. Augustinus optat vt (...) ^agnoscat posse
legem praestari per gratiam Christi, and pacem fore edicit.
Christ's holy Spirit. And this Spirit GOD will Luke 11.13 James 1.5.
give to every Christian that will pray for it, and incline his heart to keep
his Laws.

V. When the unregenerated man hears that GOD delights more in the inward
mind then in the outward man. Then he faineth with himself, Deus magis
delectatur affectu quam effectu. Amb.
that all outward reverence and profession is but either superstitious or
superfluous. Hence it is that he seldom kneeleth in the Church: that he puts
on his hat at singing of Psalms, and the public Prayers, which the profane
varlet would not offer to do, in the presence of a Prince or a Nobleman. And
so that he keep his mind unto GOD, he thinks he may fashion himself, in
other things, to the World. He diuides his thoughts, and gives so much to GOD,
and so much to his own lusts: yea, he will divide with GOD the Sabbath* and
will give him almost the one half, and spend the other wholly in his own
pleasures. But know, o carnal man, that Almighty GOD will not be served by
halfes, because he has created and redeemed the whole man. And as GOD detests
the service of the outward man, without the inward heart, as Hypocrisy: so he
counts the inward service without all external reverence, to be mere
profaneness; he requires both in his worship. In prayer fore bow thy knees,
in witness of thy humiliation: lift up thine eyes and thy hands in testimony
of thy confidence: hang down thy head, and smite thy breasts in token of thy
contrition, but especially call upon God with a sincere heart: serve him holy,
serve him wholly, serve him only, for GOD and the Prince of this world, Mat.
6.1.
are two contrary Masters, and therefore no man can possibly serve both.

VI. The unregenerated Christian, holds the hearing of the Gospel preached to
be but an indifferent matter, which he may use or not use at his pleasure: but
whosoever thou art, that will be assured in thy heart that thou art one of
Christ's elect sheep; thou must make a special care and conscience (if
possibly thou can) to hear Gods word preached: For first, the preaching of
the Gospel is the chief ordinary means which GOD has appointed to convert
the souls of all that he has Acts 13.48.
predestined to be saved: therefore it is called Romans 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes. And where this
divine ordinance is not, Pro. 29.18
the people perish: and whosoever shall refuse it, Mat. 10.25
it shall be more tolerable for the Land of S^dome and Gomorrha in the day of
Judgment then for those people. Secondly, the preaching of the Gospel is the
Isa. 11.12.
standard or ensign of Christ; to which all Soldiers and elect people must
assemble themselves. When this Ensign is displayed, as upon the Lords day, he
is none of Christ's people, that Isa. 2 2.3.
flocks not unto it: neither shall any drop of the Zach. 14.17
rain of his Grace light on their souls. Thirdly, it is the ordinary means,
by which the holy Ghost Romans 10.14
begets Faith in our hearts, without Heb. 11.6.
which we cannot please God. If the hearing of Christ's voice be the chief
mark of Christ's elect Ioh. 10.27^
sheep, and of the Ioh. 3.29.
Bridegroomes friend; then must it be a fearful mark of a reprobate Hebr.
2.3. Ioh. 8.47.
Goat, either to neglect or contemn to hear the preaching of the Gospel.
Let no man think this position foolish, for 1 Cor. 1.21
by this foolishness of preaching it pleases GOD to save them which believe.
Their state is therefore fearful, who live in peace, without caring for the
preaching of the Gospel. Can men look for Gods Mercy, and despise his means?
Lu. 10.16.
He (says Christ of the Preachers of his Gospel) that despises you,
despises me. John 8.47
He that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not, because
ye are not of God. Had not the Judge. 2.1. etc.
Israelites heard Phineas message, they had never wept. Had not the Baptist
Luke 7.32.33.
preached, the Jews had never mourned. Had not they who crucified Christ heard
Peter's Acts 2.37.
Sermon, their hearts had never been pricked. Had not the Nineuites heard
Jonas John 3.5.
preaching, they had never repented, and if thou will not Pro. 28.9.
hear and Luke 13.5.
repent, thou shall never be saved.

VII. The opinion that the Sacraments are but bare signs and seals of Gods
promise and grace unto us, does not a little hinder Piety; whereas indeed,
they are seals as well of our Service and obedience unto GOD: which service if
we perform not unto him, the Sacraments seal no grace unto us. But if we
receive them upon the resolution, to be his faithful and penitent Servants;
then the Sacraments do not only signify and ^ffer, but also seal and
exhibit indeed the inward spiritual grace, which they outwardly promise and
repr^sent. And to this end Baptism is called the Tit. 3.5.
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: and the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 10.16.
The communion of the body and blood of Christ. Were this truth believed, the
holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper would be oftener, and with greater reverence
received.

VIII. The last and not the least block, whereat Piety stumbleth in the
course of Religion, is by adorning vices with the names of Virtues: as to call
drunken carowsing, drinking of health; spilling innocent blood, valor;
Gluttony, hospitality; Couet^ousnesse, thriftinesse; Whoredom, loving a
Mistress; Symonie, gratu^^^; Pride, gracefulness; dissembling, complement;
children of Belial, good-fellowes; Wrath, hastiness; ribauldry, mirth: So on
the other side to call Sobriety in words and actions, Hypocrisy;
Almes-deedes, vainglory; Devotion, Superstition; Zeal in Religion,
Puritanisme; Humility, crouching; scruple of Conscience, preciseness, etc.
and whilst thus we call evil, good, and good evil; true Piety is much
hindered in her progress. And thus much of the first hinderance of Piety, by
mistaking the true sense of some special places of Scripture, and grounds of
Christian Religion.

The second hinderance of Piety.
2 The evil example of great persons. The practice of of whose profane lives
they prefer for their imitation, before the precepts of Gods holy word. So
that when they see the greatest me^ in the state, and many chief Gentlemen in
their Country to make neither care nor conscience to hear Sermons, to receive
the Communion, nor to sanctify the Lords Sabbaths, etc. But to be swearers,
adulterers, carowsers, oppressors, etc. Then they think, that the using of
these holy ordinances are not matters of so great moment: for if they were;
such great and wise men would not set so little by them. Hereupon they think
that Religion is not a matter of necessity. And therefore where they should
like Christians row against the stream of impiety toward heaven: they suffer
themselves to be carried with the multitude down right to Hell, thinking it
impossible that God will suffer so many to be damned. Whereas if the God of
this world had not blinded the eyes of their minds: the holy Scriptures would
teach them, that 1 Cor. 1.26
Not many wise men, after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called, etc. but that for the most part, the Ioh. 11.5.
poor receive the Gospel, and that Mat. 19.23.24.
few rich men shall be saved. And, That howsoever many are called, yet the
chosen are but few. Mat. 22.
Neither did the multitude ever save any from damnation. As God has advanced
men in greatness above others,: Apoc. 6.15.16, etc^
so does God expect that they in religion and piety should go before others:
otherwise greatness abused in the time of their stewardship, Potentes Potenter
cruciabuntur. Sap.
shall turn to their greater condemnation in the day of their accounts. At what
time, sinful great and mighty men* as well as the poorest slaves and bondmen:
shall wish that the rocks and mountains shall fall upon them, and hide them
from the presence of the Judge, and from his just deserved wrath. It will
prove but a miserable solace, to have a great company of great men partakers
with thee of thine eternal torments. The multitude of sinners does not
extenuate but aggrauate sin, as in Sodom. Better it is therefore, with a few
to be saved in the Arc: then with the whole world to be drowned in the flood.
Walk with the few goodly, in the Scriptures narrow path to heaven: but crowde
not with the godless multitude in the broad way to hell. Mat. 7.13.
Exo, 23.2.
Let not the examples of irreligious great men, hinder thy repentance: for
their greatness cannot at that day exempt themselves from their own most
grievous punishments.

The third hinderance of Piety.
3 The long escaping of deserved punishment in this life. Eccl. 8.11.
Because sentence (says Solomon) is not speedily executed against an evil
worker, therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully set in them to
do evil, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads them to
repentance. Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.10.
But when his patience is abused, and man's sins are ripened: his Justice will
at once both ^ Sam. 3.12. Ezekiel. 39.8.
begin and make an end of the sinner: and he will recompense the slownesse
of his delay with the grieuousnesse of his punishment. Though they were
suffered to run on the score all the days of their life: yet they shall be
sure to pay the utmost farthing at the day of their death. And whilst they
suppose themselves, to be free from judgment; they are already smitten with
the heauiest of Gods Iugdements, Romans 2.5. (...). Cor poenitere nescium.
a heart that cannot repent The stone in the r^ines or bladder, is a grievous
pain that kills many a man's body: but there is no disease to the stone in the
heart, whereof 1 Samuel 25.37.
Nabal dyed, and kills millions of Souls. They refuse the trial of Christ
and his Cross: but they are stoned by hels executioner to eternal death.

Because many Nobles and Gentlemen are not smitten with present Judgments, for
their outrageous Swearing, Adultery, drunkenness, oppression, profaneness of
the Sabbath, and disgraceful neglect of Gods worship and service: they begin
to doubt of divine providence and i^stice. Both which two eyes, they would as
willingly put out in God: as the Philistims boared out the eyes of Sampson.
Judge. 16..21
It is greatly therefore to be feared; lest they will provoke the Lord to cry
out against them, as Sampson against the Philistimes. By neglecting the Law,
and walking after their own hearts, they put out, as much as in them lies,
the eyes of my Providence and justice. Lead me therefore to those chief
pillars, vvhereupon the Realm stands: Judge. 16.26. etc.
that I may pull the Realm, upon their heads, and be at once avenged of them
for my two eyes! Let not Gods patience hinder thy repentance: but because he is
so patient, therefore do thou the rather repent.

The fourth hinderance of Piety.
4 The presumption of Gods mercy. For when men are justly convinced of their
sins, forthwith they betake themselves to this shield, Christ is merciful:
so that every sinner makes Christ the Patron of his sin: as though he had
come into the world, to bolster sin; and not to destroy the works of the
Devil. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
Hereupon the carnal Christian presumes that though he continues a while
longer in his sin: God will not shorten his days. But what is this but to be
an Implicit Atheist? Doubting that either GOD sees not his sins, or if he
does, that he is not Just. For if he believes that God is just* how can he
think that God, who for sin so severely punishes others, can love him who
still loves to continue in sin. True it is, Christ is merciful; But to
whom? only to them that repent and turn from iniquity in Jacob. Isai. 59.20.
But if any man bless himself in his heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according to the stubbornness of
mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, The Lord will not be
merciful to him, etc. O mad men! who dare bless themselves when God
pronounces them accursed. Non delinquenti, sed peccata ^elinquenti condonat^
Deus.
Look therefore how far thou art from finding repentance in thy self: so
far art thou from any assurance of finding mercy in Christ. Let therefore the
wicked forsake his ways, Isai. 55.7.
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive.

Despair is nothing so dangerous as presumption. For we read not in all the
Scriptures of above three or four whom roaring Despair overthrew: But secure
Presumption, has sent millions to perdition, without any noise. As therefore
the Damsels of Israel sang in their daunces, Saul has killed his thousands, 1 Samuel
and David his ten thousands: so may I say, that despair of Gods mercy has
damned thousands, Me^^endu^ est ne te occidat spes: and cum multum speres de
misericordia, incidas in Iudicium. Aug.
but the presumption of Gods mercy has damned ten thousands, and sent them
quick to hell, where now they remain in eternal torments, without all help
of ease, or hope of redemption. God spared the thief, but not his fellow. Luke
23.
God spared one, that no man might despair: God spared but one, Latronis
exemplum, non est exemplum imitationis sed consolationis.
that no man should presume. Joyful assurance to a sinner that repents: no
comfort to him that remains impenitent. God is infinite in mercy but to them
only, who turn from their sins to serve him in holiness: without which no
man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14. To keep thee therefore from the hinderance
of presumption, remember; that as Christ is a Savior, so Moses is an accuser.
Ioh. 5.45.
Live therefore, as though there were no Gospel: die as though there were no
law. Pass thy life as though thou were under the conduct of Moses: depart this
life, as if thou knew none but Christ, Qui dat poenitenti veniam, non dabit
peccanti poenitentiam. Aug.
and him crucified. Presume not if thou will not perish: Repent if thou will be
saved.

The fifth hinderance of Piety.
5 Evil company, commonly termed. Good fellows: but indeed the Devils chief
instruments, to hinder a wretched sinner from repentance and piety. The first
sign of Gods favor to a sinner is, to give him grace to forsake evil
companions, such who wilfully continue in sin, contemn the means of their
calling: gibing at the sincerity of profession in others: and shaming Christian
religion by their own profane lives. These sit in the seat of the Scorners.
For as soon as God admits a sinner to be one of his people; he bids him, Apoc.
18.4.
Come out of Babylon. Every lewd company is a Babylon. Out of which let every
child of God either keep himself, or if he be in; think that he hears his
fathers voice sounding in his ear. Come out of Babylon my child? As soon as
Christ looked in mercy upon Peter, he went out of the company that was in the
high Priests Hall, Luke 22.62.
and wept bitterly, for his offense. David vowing upon recovery a new life,
said: Away from me all you workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6.8.
etc. As if it were impossible to become a new man: till he he had shaken of
all old ill companions. The truest proof of a man's religion, is the quallity
of his companions? Profane companions are the chief enemies of Piety, and
quellers of holy motions. Many a time is, poor Christ, (offering to be newborn in thee) thrust into the stable: Luke 2.
when these lewd companions, by their drinking, plays, and jests take up all
the best rooms in the Inn of thy heart. Oh, let not the company of earthly
sinners hinder thee from the society of heavenly Saints and Angels.

The sixth hinderance of Piety.
6. A conceited fear, least the practice of Piety should make a man
(especially a young man) to wax too sad* and pensive, whereas indeed none can
better joy, nor have more cause to rejoice, then the pious and religious
Christian. For as soon as they are Romans 5.2.
justified by faith, they have peace with God, then which there can be no
greater joy. Besides, they have already the Kingd^me of grace descended into
their hearts, as an assurance that (in Gods good time) they shall ascend into
his Kingdom of glory. This kingdom of grace consists in three things: First,
Righteousness; for having Christ's righteousness to justify them before GOD,
Romans 14.17
they endeavor to live righteously before Men: Secondly, Peace; for the peace
of conscience inseparably follows a righteous conversation: Thirdly, the joy
of the holy Ghost, which joy is only felt in the Peace of a good Conscience,
and is so great; that it Phil. 4.7.
passes all understanding: no tongue can express it, no heart can conceive
it, but only he that feels it. This is that fullness of joy, which Ioh.
16.24. Verse 22.
CHRIST promised his Disciples, in the midst of their troubles, a joy that no
man could take from them: the feeling of this joy, David upon his repentance
begged so earnestly at the hands of GOD, Psalm. 51.12
Restore me to the joy of thy salvation. And if Angels in Heaven Luke 15.7.10.
rejoice so much at the conversion of a sinner? the joy of a sinner converted
must needs be exceeding great in his own heart. It is 2 Cor. 7.10
worldly sorrow that snowes so timely upon men's heads, and fills the furrows of
their hearts with the sorrows of death. The godly sorrow of the godly (when
GOD thinks it meet to try them,) causes in them Repentance, not to be
repented of: for it does but further their salvation. And in all such
tribulation, they shall be sure to have the Holy Ghost to be their John
14.16.17.
Comforter, who will 2 Cor. 1.5
make our consolations to abound through Christ, as the sufferings of Christ
shall abound in us. But whilst a man lives in impiety, he has Isa. 57.21
no peace, says Isay: his Eccles. 2.2.
laughter is but madness, (says Solomon: his riches are but Abak. 2.6.
clay, says Abakkuk: nay, the Apostle esteems them no better then Phil. 3.8.
dung, in comparison of the pious man's treasure: all his Luke 6.25.
joys shall end in woes, says Christ. Let not therefore this false fear
hinder thee from the practice of piety. Better it is to go sickly, with
Lazarus, to Heaven, then full of mirth and pleasure, with Dives, to Hell.
Better is it to mourn for a time with men, then to be tormented for ever with
Devils.

The seventh hinderance of Piety.
7. And lastly, The hope of long life: for, Fleres si scires vnum tua tempora
menseni.

Rides quum non sit forsitan vna dies. T. Morus.


were it possible that a wicked liver thought this year to be his last year;
this moves, his last month; this week, his last week; but that he would
change and amend his wicked life? no verily, he would use the best means to
repent, and to become a new man. But as the rich man in the Gospel promised
himself many years to live in ease, Luke 12.19.20.
mirth and fullness, when he had not one night to live longer: so many wicked
Epicures falsely promise themselves the age of many years, when the thread of
their life is already almost drawn out to an end. So Jeremy ascribes the
cause of the Jews sins and calamities to this, Lam. 1.9.
that she remembered not her last end.

The longest space twixt a man's coming by the womb, and going by the grave,
is but short: for man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live:
Job 14.1.
He has but a few days, and those full of nothing but troubles. And, except
the practice of Piety; how much better is the state of the child, that
yesterday was baptized, and to day is buried, then Methusalems, who lived nine
hundred sixty nine years, and then dyed? of the two; happier the Babe,
because he had less sin, and fewer sorrows. And what now remains of both
but a bare remembrance? What trust should a man repose in long life? Quotidie
morimur, quotidie enim demitur pars vitae, and tunc quoque cu^ crescimus vitae
decrescit. Viues. 1 Cor. 15.31
seeing the whole life of man is nothing but a lingering death: so that as the
Apostle protests, a man dies daily?

Hark in thine ear, O secure fellow; thy life is but a puff of breath in
thy nostrels, Isa. 2.2^.
trust not to it: thy Soul dwells in a house of clay, that will fall ere it be
long: as may appear by the dimnesse of thy eyes, the deafness of thy ears,
the wrinckles in thy cheeks, the rottenness of thy teeth, the weakness of
thy sinews, the trembling of thy hands, the Calendar in thy bones, the
shortness of thy sleep, and every gray hair, as so many Summoners, bids thee
prepare for thy long home. Come, let us in the mean while walk to thy
fathers Coffin: break open the lidde, see here, how that Corruption is thy
Father, and the Worm thy Mother and Sister: Job. 17.14.
see thou how these are? so must thou be ere long: fool, thou know not
how soon. Thy Houre-glasse runs apace, and in all places, death in the
mean while wayteth for thee.

Homo est fatuus vsque ad 4^. annum, deinde vbi agnouit se esse fatuum vita
consumpta est. Luther.
The whole life of man, save what is spent in Gods service, is but a foolerie:
for a man lives forty years before he knows himself to be a fool, and by
that time he sees his folly his life is finished.

Hark Husbandman, before thou see many more crops of harvest, thy self
shall be ripe, and Death will cut thee down with his Syckle. Hark Tradesman,
ere many six months goes over, thy last month will come on, after which thou
shall trace away, and trade no longer. Hark most grave Judge, within a few
Terms, the term of thy life approaches, wherein thou shall cease to judge
others, and go thy self to be judged. Hark, o man of God that go to the
Pulpit, preach this Sermon, as if it were the last thou should make to thy
people. Hark Nobleman, lay aside the high conceit of thy Honor! Death ere
it be long, Sceptra ligonibus aequat.
will lay thine Honor in the dust, and make thee as base as the earth that
thou treadest under thy feet. Hark thou that now read this Book, assure
thy self ere it be long, there will be but two holes where now thy two eyes
are placed, and others shall read the truth of this lesson upon thy bare
skull, which now thou read in this little Book. How soon I know not: but
this I am sure of; that Job 14.14
thy time is appointed, thy Job 14.5.
months are determined, thy Psalm. 90.12 Dan. 5.26. Stat sua cuique dies. Virg.
days are numbered, and thy very Ioh. 11.9. and John 13 1.
last hour is limited, beyond which thou shall not pass: for then, the Job
17.13.
first borne of Death, mounted on his Apoc. 6.8.
pale Horse, shall alight at thy door: and notwithstanding all thy Wealth, thy
Honor, and the tears of thy dearest friends, will carry thee away bound hand
and foot, as his prisoner: and keep thy body under a load of earth, until
that day come: wherein thou must be brought forth to 2 Cor. 5.10
receive according to the things which thou have done in that body, whether it
be good or evil. Oh, let not then the false, hope of an uncertain long life
hinder thee, from becoming a present Practizer of religious Piety. GOD Psalm.
95. Heb. 3. Poenitenti veniam spospondit, sed viuendi in crastinum non
spospondit. Chrysostom.
offers grace to day, but who promises to morrow? There are now in hell many
young men, who had purposed to repent in their old age, but Death cut them
off in their impenitencie, ere ever they could attain to the time they set for
their repentance. Nemo tam diuos habuit fauentes crastinum vt possit sibi
polliceri. Senec.
The longer a man runs in a disease, the harder it is to be cured: Heb. 3.13.
for custom of sin breeds hardness of heart: and the impediments which
hinder thee from repenting now, will hinder thee more when thou art more aged.

A wise man being to go a far and foul journey, will not lay the heauiest
burden upon the weakest horse. And with what conscience can thou lay, the
great load of repentance, on thy feeble and tired old age? Whereas now in thy
chiefest strength thou can not lift it, but art ready to stagger under it. Is
it wisdom for him that is to sail a long and dangerous voyage, to lie playing
and sleeping whilst the wind serves, and the Sea is calm, the ship sound,
the Pilote well, the Mariners strong: and then to set forth when the winds
are contrary, the weather tempestuous, the Sea raging, the Ship rotten, the
Pilote sick, and the Sailers languishing? Therefore, O sinful soul, begin
now thy conversion to God, whilst life, health, strength, and youth lasts:
before those Eccl. 12.1.
years draw nigh, when as thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. GOD ever
required in his service, the Exodus 13.2
first borne; and the Exo. 22.29
first fruits, and those to be offered unto him without delay. So just d Abel
offered unto GOD his firstlings, and fattest lambs, and reason good; that the
best Lord should be first, and best, served. All Gods servants should therefore
Eccl. 12.12
remember to serve their Creator in the days of their youth, and Genesis 22.3.
early in the morning, like Abraham, to sacrifice unto GOD the young Isaak of
their age. Genesis 43.3.
Ye shall not see my face (says Joseph to his brethren) except you bring your
younger brother with you. And how shall thou look in the face of Jesus; if thou
give thy younger years to the Devil, and bring him nothing but thy
blind, lame, and decrepit old age? Mal. 1.8.
Offer it unto thy Prince, says Malachy. If he will not accept such a one to
serve him? how shall the Prince of Princes admit such a one to be his servant?
If the Dan. 1.4.
King of Babel would have young men well favored, and such as had ability in
them, to stand in his palace; shall the King of heaven have none to stand in
his Courts but the blind and lame, such as the soul of David hated? Think
thou, 2 Samuel 5.8.
when thou have served Satan with thy prime years, to satisfy God with thy
dog days? Take heed lest God turn thee over to thy old master again.
That as thou have all the days of thy life, done his work: so he may in the
end pay thee thy wages. Is that a fit time, to undertake by the serious
exercises of repentance, which is the work of works, to turn thy sinful
Soul to GOD, when thou art not able with all thy strength to turn thy weary
bones, on thy soft bed? If thou find it so hard a matter now? thou shall
find it far harder then. For thy sin will wax stronger, thy strength will
grow weaker, thy conscience will clog thee, pain will distracte thee, the
fear of death will amaze thee, and the visitation of friends will so disturb
thee: that if thou be not furnished aforehand with store of faith, patience and
consolation: thou shall not be able either to meditate thy self, or to hear
the words of comfort from others, nor to pray alone, nor to join with others
who pray for thee. It may be thou shall be taken with a dumb palsy, or such
a deadly senslessenesse; that thou shall neither remember God, nor think upon
thine own estate. And do thou not well deserve that God should forget to
save thee in thy death: who art so unmindful now to serve him in thy life?
The fear of death, will drive many at that time to cry, Lord, Lord: but Christ
protests that he will not then know them for his. Mat. 7.22.
Yea many shall then like Esau with tears seek to repent: Heb. 12.17.
and yet find no place to repentance. For man has not free will to repent,
when he will, but when God will give him grace. And if Mercy showed her self
so inexo^able, that she would not open her gates to so tender suitors as*
Virgins, to so earnest suitors as knockers, Mat. 25.11.12.
because they knocked too late: How think thou, that she will ever suffer
thee to enter her gates, being so impure a wretch, that never thinks to leave
sin, till sin first leaves thee: and did never yet knock with thine
own fistes upon the breasts of a penitent heart? And justly does her Grace
deny to open the gates of Heaven when thou knockest in thine adversity; who in
thy prosperity would not suffer Christ, Apoc. 3.10.
whilst he knocked, to enter at in the door of thy heart. Trust not either
late Repentance, or long life: not late repentance, because it is much to be
feared; least that the Repentance which the fear of death enforces, dies
with a man dying. And the Hypocrite who deceived others in his life, may
deceive himself in his death. GOD accepts none but free will Offerings, and
the repentance that pleases him must be voluntary, Nascentes morimur,
finisque ab origin pendet: Et pubescentes iuncta senecta premit. Manil.
and not of constraint. Not long life, for old age will fall upon the neck of
youth; and as nothing is more sure then Death: so nothing is more uncertain
then the time of dying. Yea, oft-times when ripeness of sin, is hastened by
outragiousnesse of sinning, GOD suddenly cutteth off such vicious livers,
either with the sword intemperatenes, luxury, surfeit, or some other fearful
manner of sickness. May thou not see that it is the evil Spirit that
persuades thee to defer thy Repentance till old age, when Experience tells
thee, that not one of a thousand that takes thy course, Nequities vitae non
sine^ esse senem.
do ever attain unto it? Let Gods holy Spirit move thee not to give thy self
any longer to eat and drink with the drunken, least thy Master send Death for
thee, Mat. 27.49.
in a day when thou look not for him, and in an hour that thou art not
aware of, and so suddenly cut thee off, and appoint thee thy portion with the
Hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. But if thou love
Deu. 30.1^ Prou. 3.2. Psalm. 34.11. etc.
long life, fear GOD, and long for life everlasting. The longest life here
when it is come to the period, will appear to have been, but as a Psalm. 90.9.
tale that is told, a James 4.14
vanishing vapor, a flitting Ps. 109.23.
shadow, a seeming Psalm. 76.5. Psalm. 90.5.
dream, a glorious flower, growing and 1 Pet. 1.24
flourishing in the Psalm. 90.6.
morning, but in the evening cut down and withered, or like a weauers Isa.
38.12.
shittle, which by winding here and there, swiftly vnwindeth it self to an
end. It is but a 2 Cor. 4.17
moment, says Saint Paul. O then the madness of man! that for a moment of
sinful Heb. 11.25
pleasure will hazard the loss of an 2 Cor. 4.17
eternal weight of glory!

These are the seven chief hinderers of Piety which must be cast out like
Mary Magdalens seven Devils, Ma^ke 16.9. Luke 8.2.
before ever thou can become a true practizer of Piety: or have any sound
hope to enjoy either favor from CHRIST by grace, or fellowship with him in
glory.

The Conclusion.
TO conclude all: for as much as thou see, that without Christ, thou art but
a slave of sin, Deaths vassal, and worms meat, whose thoughts are vain,
whose deeds are vile, whose pleasures have scarce beginnings, whose miseries
never knows end: what wise man would incur these hellish torments, though
he might by living in sin, purchase to himself for a time, the Empire of
Augustus, the riches of Croesus, the pleasures of Solomon, the policy of
Achitophel, the voluptuous fare, and fine apparel of Dives? for what should
it avail a man (as our Savior says) to win the whole world, for a time;
and then to lose his soul in Hell for ever.

And seeing that likewise thou see how great is thy happiness in Christ, and
how vain are the hindrances that debar thee from the same: beware (as the
Apostle exhorts) of the deceitfulness of sin. Hebr. 3.13.
For that sin which seems now to be so pleasing to thy corrupt nature, will
one day prove the bitterest enemy to thy distressed soul: and in the mean
while harden unawares thine impenitent heart.

Sin as a Serpent seems beautiful to the eye: but take heed of the sting
behind: whose venomous effects if thou knew; thou would as carefully
fly from sin as from a Serpent: for,

1 Sin did never any man good, and the more sin a man has committed, the
more odious he has made himself to GOD, the more hateful to all good men.

2 Sin brought upon thee all the evils, crosses, losses, disgraces, and
sickness, that ever befell thee: Psalm. 107.17
Fools (says David) by reason of their transgressions, and because of their
iniquities are afflicted. Lam. 3.39.
Jeremy in lamenting manner asks the question; Wherefore is the living man
sorrowful? The holy Ghost answers him; Man suffers for his sin. Hereupon
the Prophet takes up that doleful outcry against sin, as the cause of all
their miseries, Lam. 5.16.
woe now unto us that ever we have sinned!

3 If thou do not speedily repent thee of thy sins, they will bring upon thee
yet far greater plagues, losses, crosses, shame and Judgments, then ever
hitherto befell thee. Read Leuit. 26.18. etc. Deuteronomy. 28.15. etc.

4 And lastly, if thou will not cast off thy sin* GOD when the measure of
thine iniquity is full, Genesis 15.16.
will cast thee off for thy sin: for, as he is just, so he has power to
kill and cast into hell all hardened and impenitent sinners. If therefore thou will avoid the cursed effects of sin in this life, and the eternal wrath
due thereto in the world to come; and be assured that thou art not one of those
who are given over to a reprobate sense; Dan. 4.27.
Let then (o Sinner) my counsel be acceptable unto thee: break off thy sins
by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy toward the poor: oh
let there, at length, be an healing of thine error. Nathan used but one
Parable, 2 Samuel 12.13
and David was converted. Jonas 3.5. etc.
Jonas preached but once to Niniuie, and the whole City repented. Luke 22.62.
CHRIST looked but once on Peter, and he went out and wept bitterly. And now,
that thou art often and so lovingly entreated, not by a Prophet, but by Christ,
the Lord of Prophets; yea, that GOD himself, by his Ambassadors does pray
thee to be reconciled unto him; 2 Cor. 5.20.
leave off thine adultery, with David; repent of thy sins, like a true
Niniuite; and whilst Christ looks in mercy upon thee, leave thy wicked
companions, and weep bitterly for thine offenses.

Content not thy self with that formal Religion, which unregenerated men have
framed to themselves, in stead of sincere devotion: for, in the multitude of
opinions most men have almost lost the practice of true religion. Think not
that thou art a Christian good enough, because thou do as the most, and art
not so bad as the worst. No man is so wicked, that he is addicted to all kind
of vices, (for there is an Antipathie twixt some vices:) But remember that
Christ says, except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20.
ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Consider with thy
self how far thou come short of the Pharisees, in fasting, praying,
frequenting the Church, and in giving of Alms. Think with thy self how many
Pagant, who never knew Baptism, yet in moral virtues and honesty of life do
go far beyond thee. Where is then the life of Christ thy Master? and how
far art thou from being a true Christian? If thou do willingly yield to
live in any one gross sin, thou can not have a regenerated Soul: though
thou reformest thy self like Herod from many other vices. Mark. 6.20.
A true Christian must have respect to walk, in the truth of his heart, in all
the Commandments of GOD alike: for, says Saint James, James 2.10.
he that shall offend in one point of the Law (wilfully) it guilty of all. And
Peter bids us, 1 Pet. 2.1.
lay aside (not some, but) all malice, guile, and hypocrisies, etc. One sin is
enough to damn a man's Soul, without Repentance: dream not to go to heaven,
by any nearer or easier way then Christ has trained unto us in his Word. The
way to Heaven is not easy or common, but strait and narrow; Mat. 7.14.
yea, so narrow, that Christ protests, that a rich man shall hardly enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.23.
and that those who enter are but few: Mat. 7.14. and 22.14. Luke 13.24.
and that those few, cannot get in but by striving: and that some of those who
strive to enter in, shall not be able. This all Gods Saints (whilst they here
lived) knew well; when with so often fastings, so earnest prayers, so frequent
hearing the word, and receiving the sacraments, and with such abundance of
t^ares, they devoutly begged at the hands of GOD, for Christ's sake, to be
received into his Kingdom.

If thou will not believe this truth, I assure thee that the Devil which
persuades thee now that it is easy to attain Heaven, will tell thee
hereafter, that it is the hardest business in the world. If therefore thou art
desirous to purchase sound assurance of salvation to thy Soul, and to go the
right and safe way to Heaven, get forthwith like a wise Virgin, Mat. 25.1. etc.
the Oil of Piety in the Lamp of thy Conversation: that thou may be in a
continual readiness to meet the Bridegroom, whether he comes by Death,
or by Judgment. Which that thou may the better do, let this be thy daily
practice.

How a private man must begin the morning with Piety.
AS soon as ever thou awakest in the morning, keep the door of thy heart
fast shut, that no earthly thought may enter, before that GOD be come in first,
and let him before all others, have the Primitiae oris and cordis Deo
offerendae. Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
first place therein. So all evil thoughts, either will not dare to come in;
or shall the easier be kept out: and the heart will more savor of Piety and
godliness all the day after. But if thy heart be not at thy first waking,
filled with some meditations of GOD, and his Word, and dressed like the Lamp
in the Tabernacle every morning and evening, Exo. 27.20.21. Exo. 30.6.7.
with the oil Olive, of Gods word, and perfumed with the sweet incense of
prayer. Psalm. 141.2.
Satan will attempt to fill it with vvorldly cares, or fleshly desires, so
that it will grow unfit for the service of God: all the day after sending
forth nothing but the stench of corrupt and lying words, and of rash and
blasphemous oaths.

Begin therefore every days work, with Gods word and prayer. And offer up
unto God upon the Alter of a Psalm. 51.
contrite heart, the Romans 8.
groans of thy spirit, and the Hos. 13.2.
calves of thy lips, as thy morning sacrifice, and the first fruits of the
day, and as soon as thou awakest say unto him thus.

A short Soliloquie when one first wakes in the Morning.
MY soul waits on thee, O Lord, Psalm. 130.6.
more then the morning-watch watches for the morning. O God therefore be
merciful unto me, Psalm. 67.1.
and bless me, and cause thy face to shine upon me: fill me with thy mercy
this morning, Psalm. 90.14.
so shall I rejoice and be glad all my days.

Meditations for the Morning. Then Meditate.
1 HOw Almighty GOD, can (in the resurrection) as easily raise up thy body out
of the grave, from the sleep of death: as he has this morning wakened thee
in thy bed, out of the sleep of nature. At the dawning of which resurrecti^n
day, Christ shall come to be glorified in his Saints: 2 These. 1.10 Jude ver. 14
Phil. 3.21. Math. 13.43. and 17.2. Luke 9.31.
and every one of the bodies of the thousands of his Saints, being fashioned
like unto his glorious body, shall shine as bright as the Sun. All the Angels
shining likewise in their glory, the body of Christ surpassing them all in
splendour and glory, and the Godhead excelling it. If the rising of one Sun,
make the morning sky so glorious; what a bright shining and glorious morning
will that be, when so many thousand thousands of bodies, far brighter then
the Sun, shall appear and accompany Christ as his glorious train, coming
to keep his general Session of righteousness, and to judge the wicked
Angels, Act. 17.31 1 Cor. 6.3.
and all ungodly men? And let not any transitory profit pleasure or
vainglory, Jude ver. 15.
of this day: cause thee to lose thy part, and portion of the eternal bliss
and glory of tha^ day, which is properly termed the resurrection of the just.
Beasts have bodily eyes, Luke 14.14.
to see the ordinary light of the day: but endeavor thou, with the eyes of
faith, to foresee the glorious light of this day.

2 That thou know not how near the evil spirit (which night and day like a
roaring Lion walks about, 1 Pet. 5.8. Job 1.7.
seeking to devour thee) was unto thee whilst thou sleptst, and wast not able
to help thy self: and that thou know not what mischief he would have done
to thee, had not God hedged thee and thine, Job 1.10. Psalm. 121.4. Psalm. 34.7.
and 91.11. Genesis 32.1.2. 2 King. 6.16
with his euer-waking providence, and guarded thee with his holy and blessed
Angels.

3 If thou hear the Cock crow, Luke 22.61.62.
remember Peter to imitate him: and call to mind that Cocke-crowing sound of
the last Trumpet, which shall waken thee from the dead. And consider in what
case thou art* if it sounded now: and become such, as thou would wish to be
then. Lest at that day thou will wish; that thou had never seen this: yea,
curse the day of thy natural birth, Ier. 20.14. Job 3.1. Tit. 3.5.
for want of being newborn, by spiritual grace. Gallo canente suas Latro
relinquit Insidias etc, Ambr. Hexam. lib. 5. cap. 24.
When the Cock crows the Thief despaires of his hope, and gives over his
nights enterprise: So the Devil cease to tempt or attempt any further, when
he hears the devout Soul wakening her self with morning prayer.

4 Remember that Almighty God is about thy bed, Psa. 139.2.3.
and sees thy down lying and thy vprising, understands thy thoughts, and is
acquainted with all thy ways. Remember likewise, that his holy Angels who
guarded and watched over thee all night, Genesis 31.55. and 32.1.2. Psalm. 91.5.11
Act. 12.11.
do also behold how thou vvakest and risest. Do all things therefore as in
the awefull presence of GOD: and in the sight of his holy Angels.

5 As thou art putting on thine apparel, remember, that they were first given
as couerings of shame, being the filthy effect of sin: and that they are made
but of the offals and excrements of dead beasts. Therefore, whether thou
respect the stuff, or the first institution: thou have so little cause to be
proud of them, that thou have great cause to be humbled at the sight and
wearing of them: seeing the richest apparels are but fine couers of the foulest
shame. Meditate rather, that as thine apparel serves to cover thy shame, and
to fence thy body from cold: so thou should be as careful to cover thy
soul with that wedding garment, Mat. 22.11. Romans 13.14. 1 Cor. 1.30. Phil. 3.9.
which is the righteousness of Christ, (and because apprehended by our faith,
Apoc. 19.18 Epes. 4.24.
called the righteousness of the Saints.) Lest whilst we are richly
apparelled in the sight of men, we be not found to walk naked (so that all
our filthynesse be seen) in the sight of God. Apoc. 16.15
But that with his righteousness as with a roabe we may cover our selves
from perpetual shame, and shield our souls from that fiery cold that will
procure infernal weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22.13.
And withal consider how blessed a people were our Nation if every silken
suite did cover a sanctified soul, and yet a man would think that on whom God
bestowed most of these outward blessings, of them he should receive greatest
inward thanks. But if it prove otherwise; their reckoning will prove the
heavier in the day of their accounts. Luke 12.48.


6 Consider, how Gods mercy is renewed unto thee every morning, in giving thee,
Lamen. 3.23
as it were, a new life, and in causing the Sun after his incessant race,
Psalm. 19.5.
to rise again to give thee light. Let not then this glorious light burn in
vain: but prevent rather (as often as thou can) the Sun rising, to give GOD
thanks, and kneeling down at thy bed side, salute him at the dayspring with
some devout Anteluc^num, Wisd. 15.20
or morning Soliloquie: containing an humble confession of thy sinne^, the
pardon of all thy faults: a thanksgiving for all his benefit, and a craving of
his gracious protection to his Church, thy self, and all that do belong unto
thee.

Brief directions how to read the holy Scriptures, once every year over,
with ease, profit, and reverence.
BUT forasmuch that as Faith is the soul, so reading and meditating of the
word of God, are the Parents of Prayer: Therefore before thou prayest in the
Morning, first read a Chapter in the Word of GOD: then Meditate a while with
thy self how many excellent things thou can remember out of it:

As first, what good counsels or exhortations to good works, and to holy life.

Secondly, what threatenings of judgments against such and such a sin: and
what fearful example of Gods punishment or vengeance upon such and such
sinners.

Thirdly, what blessings GOD promises to patience, chastity, mercy,
almes-deedes, zeal in his service, charity, faith, and trust in God, and such
like Christian virtues.

Fourthly, what gracious deliverance GOD has wrought, and what special
blessings he has bestowed upon them who were his true and zealous servants.

Fifthly, apply these things to thine own heart, and read not these Chapters
as matters of Historical discourse: but as if they were so many Letters or
Epistles sent down from God out of Heaven unto thee: for whatsoever is
written, is written for our learning. Romans 15.4.

Sixthly, read them therefore with that reverence, as if GOD himself stood by,
and spoke these words unto thee, to excite thee to those virtues, to diswade
thee from those vices: assuring thy self, that if such sins (as thou read
there) be found in thee without Repentance, the like plagues will fall upon
thee: but if thou do practice the like Piety, and virtuous deede^; the like
blessings shall come unto thee and thine.

In a word* apply all that thou read in the holy Scripture, to one of these
two head^ chiefly; either to confirm thy Faith, or to increase thy Repentance
for as susti^e and abstine, bear and forbear, Epicteti dict.
was the Epitome of a good Philosopher^ life: so creda and resipi^^^, believe
and repent, is the whole sum of a true Christians profession. One Chapter
thus read with understanding, and meditated with application, will better feed
and comfort thy soul, then five read and run over without marking their
scope or sense, or making any use thereof to thine own self. If in this
manner thou shall read three Chapters every day: one in the morning, another
at noone, and the third at night, (reading so many Psalms in stead of a
Chapter, as our Church Liturgy appoints for Morning or Evening Prayers) thou
shall read over all the Canonical In the Canonical Books of the old
Testament, there are 931. Chapters, but distributing the 150. Psalms into 60.
parts, thou shall find but 841. which being added to 260. (the number of the
Chapters in the new Testament) will amount to 1101. dividing which by three
into 365. (the number of the days of the year) there will remain but six*
which thou may dispose of as is prescribed.
Scripture in a year, except six Chapters, which thou may add to the task
of the last day of the year. The reading of the Bible in order will help thee
the better to understand both the History and scope of the holy Scripture. And
as for the Hos viginti duos libros lege, cum Apocriphis vero nihil habeas
negotii: ha^ tantum studiose meditare Scripturas, quas in Ecclesia considenter
legimus. Multo prudentiores te and religiosiores fuerunt Apostoli and primi
Episcopi veritatis duces, qui nobis eas tradiderunt. Tu igitur cum sis filius
Ecclesi^* non transgrediaris illius terminos. Ac veteris Testamenti (vt dictum
est) viginti duos meditare libros, Cyrillus Hierosolymitan Catechis. 4.
Apocrypha, being but penned by man's spirit, thou may read them at thy
pleasure, but believe them so far as they agree with the Canonical
Scripture, which is endited by the Holy Ghost.

But it may be thou will say, that thy business will not admit thee so much
time, as to read every morning a Chapter, etc. O man remember that thy life is
but short, and that all this business is but for the use of this short life:
but salvation or damnation is everlasting. Rise up therefore every morning by
so much time the earlier: defraud thy foggie flesh of so much sleep; but rob
not thy Soul of her food, nor GOD of his Service. And serve the Almighty duly
whilst thou have time and health.

Having thus read thy Chapter, as thou art about to pray, remember: that God
is a God of Exodus ^6.36.
holiness, whereof he warns us by repeating so often, Leuit. 21.44. and
19.2. and 20.7. 1 Pet. 1.5.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. And when he devoured, with a sudden fire, Nadab
and Abihu for offering unto him Incense with Leuit. 10.1.2.
strange fire, (like those now a-dayes, who offer prayers from hearts fraught
with the fire of lusts and mal^^e:) the Lord would give no other reason of
his Judgments but this, Verse 3.
I will be sanctified in them that come near me: as if he should have said;
If I cannot be sanctified by them, who are my Servants, in serving me with
that Holiness that they should: I will be sanctified on them, by confounding
them with my just judgments, which their lewdness does deserve. God
therefore cannot abide any wilful uncleanness, or filthiness in them who
serve him: insomuch that he commanded the Israelites that when they were in
Camp against their Enemies, they should dig a hole with a paddle, and cover
their excrements: Deu. 23.13.14.
his reason is, for the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, to
deliver thee, and to give thee thine Enemies before thee: therefore thy Host
shall be holy that he see no filthy thing in thee, and turn away from thee.

If he will have men to be so holy in time of war in the Field, how much more
holiness expects he at our hands in time of peace, in our houses? therefore
says Zophar in Job: Job 11.13.14.
If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hand toward GOD to pray:
if iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let no wickedness dwell in
thy Tabernacle. For, as Esaias says, Isa. 1.15.
If there be any uncleanness in our hands, (that is, any sin whereof we have
not repented) though we stretch out our hands unto him, and make many Prayers,
the Lord will hide his eyes from us, and will not hear our prayers. Therefore
before thou prayest, let GOD see that thy heart is sorrowful for thy sin:
and that thy mind is resolved through the assistance of his grace to amend thy
faults. And then having washed thy self, and adorned thy body with apparel
which beseems thy calling, and the Image of GOD, which thou bear: shut thy
chamber-doore, and kneel down at thy bedside, or some other convenient
place, and in reverent manner lifting up thy heart, together with thy hands and
eyes, as in the presence of GOD who sees the inward intention of thy soul,
offer up unto God from the Altar of a contrite heart, thy Prayer, as a Morning
Sacrifice, through the mediation of Christ, in these, or the like words.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Most mighty and glorious GOD, full of incomprehensible power, and Majesty,
whose glory the very Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain: 1 King. 8.72
look down from heaven upon me thine unworthy Servant, who here prostate my
self at the foote-stoole of thy Throne of Grace. Psalm. 132.7. Heb. 4.16.
But look upon me O Father, Dan. 9.18. Mat. 3.17.
through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, thy beloved Son, in whom
only thou art well pleased. For of my self, I am not worthy to stand in thy
presence, or to speak with mine unclean lips, Esaias 6.5.
to so holy a God as thou art. For, Psalm. 51.5.
thou know that in sin I was conceived and borne, and that I have lived,
ever since in iniquity: so that I have broken all thy holy Commandments by
sinful motions, unclean thoughts, Genesis 6.5. Mat 15.19. Mat. 12.34. Psalm.
14.1.2. Dan. 9.10.
evil words, and wicked works, omitting many of those duties of piety which
thou requirest for thy service, Dan. 9.11.
and committing many of those vices, Leuit. 26.14 etc.
which thou under the penalty of thy displeasure, have forbidden.

[Here thou may confess unto God thy secret sins which do most burden thy
conscience: with the circumstances, of the time, place, person, and manner how
it was committed, saying, But more especially O Lord, I do here with grief of
heart confess unto thee, etc.]

Deuteronomy. 27.26. Dan 9.11. Gal. 3.10.
And for these my sins, O Lord, I stand here guilty of thy curse, with all
the miseries of this life, and everlasting torments in hell fire, Esdr. 9.13.
when this wretched life is ended, if thou should deal with me according
to my deserts. Yea, Lord, I confess, Lam. 3.22.
that it is thy mercy which endures for ever, and thy compassion which never
fails: that is the cause, that I have not been long ago consumed. But with
thee O Lord, Psalm. 130.4.
there is mercy, and plenteous redemption. Psalm. 5.7.
In the multitude therefore of thy mercy, and confidence in Christ's merits,
Psalm. 13.5.
I entreat thy divine Majesty that thou would not enter into judgment
with thy Servant, neither be extreme, Psalm. 143.2.
to mark what I have hitherto done amiss for if thou do, then no flesh can
be justified in thy sight, nor any living stand in thy presence. But be thou
merciful unto me, Ezech. 36.25.
and wash away all the uncleanness of my sin, 1 Ioh. 1.9.
with the merits of that precious blood, which Jesus Christ has shed for me.
And seeing that he has borne the burden of that curse which was due to my
transgressions. Gal. 3.13.
O LORD deliver me from my sins, and from all those Judgments which hang
over my head, as due unto me for them. And separate them, Psalm. 103.12.
as far from thy presence, as the East is from the West: bury them in the
burial of Christ; Col. 2.12.13
that they may never have power to rise up against me, Ephesians. 2.5.6.
to shame me in this life, or to condemn me in the world which is to come. And
I beseech thee, O Lord, not only to wash away my sins with the blood of
thine immaculate Lamb; John 1.29.
but also to purge my heart, Psalm. 51.7.10
by thy holy spirit, from the dross of my natural corruption: that I may feel
thy spirit, more and more killing my sin, in the power and practice thereof:
Gal. 4.24.25
so that I may with more freedom of mind, and liberty of will, serve thee the
everliving God, Luke 1.74.75
in righteousness and holiness this day. And give me grace that by the
direction and assistance of the same thy holy spirit, I may persevere, to be
thy faithful and unfeigned servant unto my lives end: that when this mortal
life is ended I may be made a partaker of immortality, Mat. 24.13.
and everlasting happiness in thy heavenly kingdom. In the mean time, O
Lord, whilst it is thy blessed will and pleasure, that I may continue to
spend, and end that small number and remnant of days, which thou have
appointed for me to live in this vale of misery: Teach me so to number my
days, Psalm. 90.12.
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom: and as thou do add days unto my
life; so, good Lord, I beseech thee, add repentance and amendment to my days:
that as I grow in years, so I may increase in grace, and favor with thee,
and all thy people. And to this end; give unto me a supply of all those graces,
which thou know to be wanting in me, and necessary for me, with an increase
of all those good gifts, whervvith thou have already endued me: that so I may
be the better enabled, to lead such a godly life and honest conversation, as
that thy name may thereby be gloryfied, others may take good example by me, and
my soul may more cheerfully feed on the peace of a good conscience, and be
more replenished with the joy of the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.
And here, O Lord, according to my bounden duty, I give thee most humble and
hearty thanks, for all those blessings, which of thy goodness thou have
bestowed upon me. And namely, for that thou have of thy free love according to
thine eternal purpose, elected me, before the foundation of the world was
laid, Ephesians. 1.4. Mat. 25.34.
unto salvation in Jesus Christ: for that thou have created me after thine
own Image, Genesis 9.6. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
and have begun to restore that in me, which was lost in our first
Parents: for that thou have effectually called me by the working of thy spirit,
Romans 8.28. Mat. 22.3. Romans 1.16.
in the preaching of the Gospel, and the receiving of thy Sacraments, to the
knowledge of thy saving grace, To. 16.25.26
and obedience of thy blessed will: for that thou have bought and redeemed me
with the blood of thine only begotten Son, 1 Pet. 1.18.19. Apoc. 5.9.
from the torments of Hell, and thrall of Satan: for that thou have by faith in
Christ, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.3.
freely justified me, who am by nature the child of wrath: 1 Cor. 6.11. 1
Pet. 1.2. 2 Pet. 3.9.
for that thou have in good measure sanctified me by thy holy spirit, and
give me so large a time to repent, together with the means of repentance. I
thank thee likewise good Lord, for my life, health wealth, food, raiment,
peace, prosperity and plenty: and for that thou have preserved me this night,
from all perils and dangers of body and soul, and have brought me safe to the
beginning of this day. And as thou have now vvakened my body from sleep; so I
beseech thee waken my soul from sin and carnal security: Ephesians. 5.14.
and as thou have caused the light of the day, to shine in my bodily eyes, so
good Lord, cause the light of thy word, and holy spirit to illuminate my heart:
and give me grace as one of thy children of light, Luke 16.8. Phil. 2.15.
to walk in all holy obedience before thy face this day, and that I may
endeavor to keep faith and a clear conscience toward thee, Act. 24.16.
and toward all men, in all my thoughts, words, and dealings. And so, good
Lord, bless all my studies and actions, which I shall take in hand this day:
as that they may tend to thy glory, the good of others, and the comfort of mine
own soul and conscience in that day, when I shall make my final accounts
unto thee for them. 2 Cor. 5.10.
O my God, keep thy servant, that I do no evil unto any man this day: and
let it be thy blessed will, not to suffer the Devil, Zach. 3.2.
nor his wicked Angels, nor any of his evil members, or my malicious enemies
to have any power to do me hurt or violence. But let the eye of thy holy
providence watch over me, for good, and not for evil, and command thy holy
Angels to pitch their tents round about me, Psalm. 34.7.
for my defense and safety, in my going out and coming in, Psalm. 91.11.
as thou have promised they should do about them that fear thy name: for,
into thy hands, O Father, I do here commend my soul, Psalm. 31.5. Luke 23.46.
and body, my actions, and all that ever I have, to be guided, defended, and
protected by thee: being assured that whatsoever thou take into thy custody,
cannot perish, nor suffer any hurt or harm. And if I at any time this day,
shall through frailty, forget thee; yet Lord, I beseech thee, do thou in
mercy remember me. Neh. 13.31.
And I pray not unto thee, O Father, for my self alone, but I beseech thee
also be merciful unto thy whole Church, and chosen people, wheresoever they
live upon the face of the earth. Defend them from the rage and tyranny of the
Devil, the world, and Antichrist. Give thy Gospel a free and a joyful passage
through the world, for the conversion of those, who belong to thine election
and kingdom.

Bless the Churches and kingdoms wherein we live, Psa. 51.18.19. Isa. 39.8.
with the continuance of peace, justice, and true Religion. Defend the Kings
Majesty from all his enemies, and grant him a long life, in health, Psalm.
72.1.15 1 Timothy 2.2. Hest. 6.10.
and all happiness to reign over us. Bless the Queen, Prince Charles, the
Prince Palatine of Rhene* and the Gracious Lady Elizabeth his Wife. Increase in
them all heroycall gifts, and spiritual graces, which may make them fit for
those places, for which thou have ordained them. Direct all the Nobility,
Bishops, Ministers, 1 Timothy 2, 2.
and Magistrates of this Church and commonwealth, to govern the commons in
true Religion, justice, obedience, and tranquillity. Be merciful unto all the
Brethren which fear thee and call upon thy name. And comfort as many among
them as are sick, Iam. 5.15.
and comfortless in body or in mind: especially, be favorable to all such as
suffer any trouble or persecution for the testimony of thy truth, Heb. 13.3.
and holy Gospel. And give them a gracious deliverance out of al their
troubles, 1 Cor. 10.13
which way it shall seem best to thy wisdom: for the glory of thy Name, the
further enlarging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.9.
and the more ample increase of their own comfort and consolation. 2 Cor. 1.5.
etc.
Hasten thy coming, O blessed Savior, and end these sinful days, and give
me grace, that like a wise Virgin I may be prepared with oil in my Lamp, Mar.
25.1.2. etc.
to meet thee the sweet Bridegroom of my Soul at thy coming, whether it be
by the day of death or of judgment: And then, Lord, Jesus, come when thou will: even Lord Jesus come quickelie! These, Apoc. 22.20.
and all other graces which thou know needful and necessary for me this
day and evermore, I humbly beg and crave at thy hands, O father, giving thee
thy glory, in that form of Prayer, which Christ himself has taught me to say
unto thee.

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name, etc.

Meditations.
IF when thou art about to pray, Satan shall suggest that thy prayers are too
long, and that therefore it were better either to omit prayers, or else to cut
them shorter: meditate that prayer is thy spiritual sacrifice, Heb. 13.15.16.
wherewith God is well pleased. And therefore it is so displeasing to the Devil
and so irksome to thy flesh. Bend therefore thy Affections (will they, nill
they) to so holy an exercise: assuring thy self, that it does by so much the
more please God, by how much the more it is unpleasing to thy flesh.

2 Forget not how the holy Ghost, puts it down as a special note of
reprobates, Psalm. 14.4.
They call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 53.4.
They call not upon God. And when Eliphaz supposed that Job had cast off the
fear of God, Job 15.4.
and that God had cast Job out of his favor; he charge him that he
restrained prayer before God: making that a sure note of the one, and a
sufficient cause of the other. On the other side, that GOD has promised that
whosoever shall call on his Name shall be saved. It is certain, Romans 10.13.
that he who makes no conscience of the duty of Prayer, has no grace of the
holy Spirit in him. Zach. 12.10.
For the spirit of Grace and of Prayer, are one, and therefore Grace and Prayer
go together. But he that can from a penitent heart, morning and evening pray
unto GOD: it is sure, that he has his measure of grace in this world: and he
shall have his portion of glory in the life which is to come.

3 Remember, that as loathing of meat, and painfulness of speaking, are two
Symptoms of a sick body: so irkesomnesse of praying when thou talkest with
GOD, and carelessness in hearing, when GOD, by his Word, speaks unto thee: are
two sure signs of a sick soul.

4 Call to mind the zealous devotion of the Christians in the Primitive
Church: who spent many whole nights and vigils in watching and praying for the
forgiveness of their sins: and that they might be found ready at the
coming of Christ. And how that David was not content to pray at morning, at
evening, and at noone: Ps. 55.16.17.
but he would also rise up at midnight to pray unto GOD. Psalm. 119.62.
And if CHRIST did chide his Disciples, Mat. 26.40.
because they would not watch with him one hour in praying; what chiding
do thou deserve, who think it too long to continue in Prayer but one
quarter of an hour? If thou have spent diverse hours in seeing a vain Mask
or a Play; yea, whole days and nights in carding and dicing, to please thy
flesh, be ashamed to think a Prayer of a quarter of an hour long, to be too
long an exercise for the service of GOD.

5 Consider, that if the Papists in their blind superstition, do in an
unknown, and therefore 1 Cor. 14.15. and 16.26.37.
vnedifying Tongue, (fit only for the children of Genesis 11.7.9 Apoc. 17.5.
mystical Babylon) mutter over upon their A superstition, Quae filo insertis
numerat sua murmura baccis. Mant. Alphons. lib. 4.
Beads, every morning and evening, so many scores of Aue-Maries,
Pater-nosters, and Idolatrous Prayers: how shall they, in their superstitious
devotion, rise up in Judgment against thee, professing thy self to be a true
Worshipper of Christ? If that thou think these Prayers to be too long a
task, being shorter for quantity then theirs, but far more profitable for
quality, tending only to Gods glory, and thy good, and so compiled of
Scripture- phrase, as that thou may speak to God, as well in his own h^ly
words, as in thine own native language? Be ashamed, that Papists in their
superstitious worshipping of Creatures, should show themselves more devout then
thou, in the sincere worshipping of the true and Ioh. 17.3.
only God. And indeed, a prayer in private devotion, should be one Vox
continuata, non concisa and rupta, vt battologia vitetur. Perkin. de vnic.
ration. conci. cap. 10.
continued speech, rather then many broken fragments.

6 Lastly, when such thoughts come into thy head, either to keep thee from
prayer, or to distract thee in praying: remember that those are the Fowls
which the evil one sends to devour the good Seed, Matthew. 13.4.19.
and the carkeises of thy spiritual Sacrifices: but endeavor, Genesis 25.11.
with Abraham, to drive them away. Yet notwithstanding, if thou perceiuest at
some times, that thy spirits are dull, and thy mind not apt for Prayer, and
holy devotion: strive not too much for that time; but humbling thy self at the
sense of thine infirmity and dullness, Mat. 26.41.
knowing that God accepts the willing mind (though it be oppressed with the
heaviness of the flesh, 1 Cor. 8.12.
) endeavor the next time, to recompense this dullness, by redoubling thy
zeal, and for the time present commend thy Soul to God in this or the like
short Prayer.

Another shorter Morning Prayer.
O MOST gracious GOD, and merciful Father, I thine unworthy Servant, do here
acknowledge, that as I have been borne in sin, so I have lived in iniquity,
and broken every one of thy Commandments, in thought, word, and deed,
following the desires of mine own will, and lusts of my flesh, not caring to
be governed by thy holy Word and Spirit: and therefore I have justly deserved
all shame and misery in this life, and everlasting cond^mnation in Hellfire,
if thou should but deal with me, according to thy Justice, and my desert.
Wherefore, O Heavenly Father, I beseech thee for thy Son Jesus Christ, his
sake, and for the merits of that bitter death and bloody Passion* which I
believe that he has suffered for me: that thou would pardon and forgive
unto me all my sins, and deliver me from the shame and vengeance, which is due
unto me for them. And send thy holy Spirit into my heart, which may assure
me, that thou art my Father, and that I am thy child, and that thou love
me with an unchangeable love: and let the same thy good Spirit lead me in
thy truth, and crucify in me more and more all worldly and carnal lusts, that
my sins may more and more dye in me; and that I may serve thee in unfeigned
righteousness and holiness this day, and all the days of my life: that when
this mortal life is ended, I may through thy mercy in Christ, be made a
partaker of everlasting glory in thy heavenly Kingdom. And here, O Lord, from
the bottom of my heart, I thank thee for all thy blessings which thou have
bestowed upon my soul and body: for electing me in thy love, redeeming me by
thy Son, sanctifying me by thy Spirit, and preserving me from my youth up,
until this present day and hour by thy most gracious providence.

I thank thee more specially, for that thou have defended me this night, from
all perils and dangers, and have brought me safe to the beginning of this day.
And now (good Lord) I beseech thee, keep me this day from all evil that may
hurt me, and from falling to any gross sin, that should offend thee. Set thy
fear before mine eyes, and let thy Spirit so rule my heart, that all that I
shall think, do, or speak this day, may tend to thy glory, the good of
others, and the peace of mine own Conscience. And to this end, I commend my
self, and all my ways and actions, together with all that do belong unto me,
unto thy gracious direction and protection, praying thee to keep both them and
me from all evil: and to give a blessing to all our honest labors and
endeavors. Defend thy whole Church from the tyranny of the World, and of
Antichrist: Preserve our gracious King from all conspiracies and treasons:
grant him a long and prosperous reign over us. Bless the Queen, Prince
Charles, the Prince Palatine of Rhene, and the virtuous Lady Elizabeth: endue
them with thy grace, and defend them from all evil. Bless all our Ministers
and Magistrates, with those graces and gifts, which thou know necessary for
their places. Be favorable to all that fear thee, and tremble at thy
Judgments: comfort all those that are sick and comf^rtlesse. Lord keep me
in a continual readiness, by Faith and Repentance, for my last end: that
whether I live or dye, I may be found thine own, to thine eternal glory, and
mine everlasting salvation: through Jesus Christ my only Savior. In whose
blessed Name, I beg these mercies at thy hands, and give unto thee thy praise
and glory in that Prayer, which he has sanctified with his own lips, saying,
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Further Meditations, to stir us up to prayer in the Morning.
Think not any business or haste (though never so great) a sufficient excuse
to omit Prayer in the Morning, but meditate:

1 That the greater thy business is; by so much the more need thou have to
pray, for Gods good-speed and blessing thereon: seeing it is certain; that
nothing can prosper without his blessing.

2 That many a man, when he thought himself surest has been soonest
crossed: so may thou.

3 That many a man has gone out of his door, and never come in again. Many a
man who arose well and lively in the morning: Quem dies vidit veniens
superbum: Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem. Senec.
has been seen a dead man ere night. So may it befall thee. And if thou be
so careful before thou go abroad to drink, Nescis quid vesper serus vehat.
Varro
to fence thy body from ill airs; how much more careful should thou be to
pray, to perserue thy soul from evil temptations?

4 That the time spent in prayer, never hinders: but furthereth, and
prospers a man's journey and business.

5 That in going abroad into the world, thou go into a forest full of
unknown dangers; where thou shall meet many briars to tear thy good name: many
snares to trap thy life, and many hunters to devour thy soul. It is a field
of pleasant grass, but full of poisonous serpents. Adventure not therefore to
go nak^^ among these briars, till thou have prayed Christ to clothe thee with
his righteousness: nor to pass through these snares and ambushments, till
thou have prayed for Gods providence to be thy guide; nor to walk barefoote
through this snakie field; till having thy feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace: thou have prayed to have still the brazen Serpent, in the
eye of thy faith: that so if thou come not home holier; thou may be sure,
not to return worser, then when thou wentest out of doors.

Therefore though thy haste be never so much, or thy business never so great;
yet go not about it, nor out of thy doors: till thou have at least used this
or the like short prayer.

A brief Prayer for the Morning.
O Merciful father for Jesus Christ his sake, I beseech thee forgive me all my
known and secret sins, which in thought, word, or deed, I have committed
against thy divine Majesty. And deliver me from al those judgments, which are
due unto me for them, and sanctify my heart with thy holy spirit, that I may
hence forth lead a more godly and religious life. And here (O Lord) I praise
thy holy name, for that thou have refreshed me this night with moderate sleep
and rest: I beseech thee likewise, defend me this day from all perils and
dangers of body and soul. And to this end I commend my self, and all my
actions unto thy blessed protection and government: beseeching thee that
whether I live or die. I may live and die to thy glory, and the salvation of my
poor soul, which thou have bought with thy precious blood. Bless me
therefore, O Lord, in my goying out and coming in: and grant that whatsoever I
shall think, speak, or take in hand this day; may tend to the glory of thy
name, the good of others, and the comfort of mine own conscience, when I shall
come to make before thee my last accounts. Grant, this O heavenly father, for
Jesus Christ thy Sons fake: In whose blessed name I give thee thy glory, and
beg at thy hands all other graces, which thou see to be needful for me this
day and ever, in that prayer which Christ himself has taught me, saying: Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

Meditations, directing a Christian, how he may walk all the day with God,
like Enoch.
Having thus beg^n, keep all the day after, as diligent a watch as thou can,
over all thy thoughts, words, Romans 11.16. Phil. 2.3. Prou. 27.2.
and actions; which thou may easily do, by craving the assistance of Gods
holy spirit, and observing these few rules.

First, for thy thoughts,
1 BE careful to suppress every sin in the Ephesians. 4.23. Mat. 15.18.19.
first motion. Dash Psalm. 137.9
Babylons children, whilst they are young, against the stones. Tread betimes
the Isa 59.5.
Cockatrice egg, lest it break out into a Serp^nt. Let sin be to the heart
a stranger, 2 Samuel 12 4.
not a home-dweller. Take heed of falling often into the same sin, lest the
custom of sinning, Qui conscientiae cura^ ab^iciunt nec homines reuerentur nec
Deum.
take away the conscience of sin, and then shall thou wax so impudently
wicked, that thou will neither fear God, nor reverence man.

2 Suffer not thy mind to feedde it self upon any imagination, Prou. 6.14.
Zach. 8.17.
which is either impossible for thee to do, or unprofitable, if it be done:
but rather think of the worlds vanity, to contemn it; of death, to expect
it; of judgment, to avoid it; of hell, to escape it; and of heaven, to desire
it.

3 Desire not to fulfill thy mind in all things: but learn to deny thy self
those desires (though never so pleasing to thy nature) which being attained;
will draw either, scandal on thy Religion, or hatred to thy Person. Consider
in every thing the end, before thou attempt the Action.

4 Labor daily more and more to see thine own misery, through unbelief,
self-love, and wilful breaches of Gods law: and the necessity of Gods mercy
through the merits of Christ's passion, to be such: that if thou were demanded,
What is the vilest creature upon the earth? thy Conscience may answer; mine
own self, by reason of my great sins: And that if on the other side thou
were asked, What thou esteemest to be the most precious thing in the world? Thy
heart might answer, One drop of Christ's blood, to wash away my sins. And as
thou tendrest the salvation of thy soul, live not in any wilful filthiness.
For true faith and the purpose of sinning can never stand together.

5 Approve thy self to be a true servant of Christ, not only in thy general
calling, as in the frequent use of the Word and Sacraments: but also in thy
particular, in making conscience to eschew every known sin: and to obey God
in every one of his commandments: like Josiah, 1 Kin. 13.25 Luke 1.6.
who turned to God with all his heart, according to all the Law of Moses. And
Zachary and Elizabeth, who walked in all the commandments of God without
reproof. But if at any time through frailty, thou slippest into any sin: Lie
not in it, but speedily rise out of it by unfeigned repentance. Praying for
pardon til thy conscience be pacified, thy hatred of sin increased, and thy
purpose of amendment confirmed.

6 Beware of affecting popularitie by adulation: the end never proves good. And
though attained by due desert; yet manage it wisely: lest it prove more
dangerous then contempt. For States desire but to keep down whom they
contemn for their unworthiness: but to cut off whom they envy for their
greatness^. He therefore is truly prudent; who (considering the premises)
neither affects, nor neglects popularity. But in any wise, take heed of
harboring a Socrates in forum egressus, quam multis egeo inquit, non egeo. Non
est ergo pauper qui caret, sed qui eget.
discontented mind, for it may work thee more woe, then thou art aware of. It
is a special mercy, in the multitude of so many blessings, as thou do
enjoy, to have some crosses. God gives thee many blessings, lest through want
(being his child) thou should despair: And he sends thee some crosses,
lest by too much prosperity (playing the fool) thou should presume. Many
who have mounted to great dignities, would have contented themselves with
Dimidium plus toto. Hesiod.
meaner: had they known their Feriunt summos fulmina ^ontes. Hor.

Tangu^t magnos tristia fata deos, Ovid. (...). Qui notus nimis omnibus,
ignotus moritur sibi. Senec.


great dangers: Love therefore competencie, rather then eminency. And in all
thy will have ever an eye to Gods will, least thy self-action, turns to thine
own destruction. Happy the man, who in this short life is least known of the
world: so that he does truly know God and himself! Whatsoever cross
therefore thou have to discontent thee; remember, that it is less then thy
sins have deserved. Count therefore Christ thy chiefest joy, and sin thy
greatest grief: estimate no want to the want of Grace, nor any loss to the
loss of Gods favor: And then the coffeehouse for outward things shall the
less perplexe thine inward mind. And as often as Satan shall offer any motion
of coffeehouse to thy mind, remember Saint Paul's admonition, We brought
nothing into this World, 1 Timothy 6.7.8 9. Insaniae damnandi sunt qui tam multa
tam anxie congerunt, quum sit tam paucis opus. Viues.
and it is certain that we can carry nothing out. And having food and
raiment, let us be therewith content: But they that will be rich fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. Pray therefore with wise Agur: Pro. 30.8.9.
O Lord, give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient
for me, Viuitur exiguo melius. Claud.
least I be too full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Or least I be
poor and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.

7 Bestow no more thought upon worldly things then thou needs must, for the
discharge of thy place, Tim. 6.8.9. Genesis 28.20.
and the maintenance of thine estate: but still let thy care be greater for
Col. 3.1.2. Phil. 3.20.
heavenly then earthly things: and be more grieved for a Ios. 7.9. Psalm.
139.21. etc.
dishonor done to GOD, then for an injury offered to thy self: But if any
private injury be offered unto thee; bear it, as a Christian, with Patience.
Never was an innocent man wronged, but if patiently he bare his cross, he
Nobile vincendi genus est patientia, vincit qui patitur: si vis vincere, disce
pati.
overcame in the end. But thy good name in the mean while is wounded: bear
that also with Patience. And he that at the last day will give thy Body a
Resurrection, will as sure in his good time grant a resurrection to thy good
name. Optima iniuriae vltio est obliuio: efficit enim, vt animu^ vret, nec
magis Ledet, quam si facta non esset.
If impatiently thou frettest and vexest at thy wrongs, the hurt which thou
do thy self, is more then that which thine Enemy can do unto thee.
Neither can thou more rejoice him, then to hear that it thoroughly vexes
thee. But if thou can show Patience on earth, GOD will show himself just
from Heaven. Pray for him, for, if thou be a good man thy self, thou can not
but rejoice, if thou should see thy worst enemy to become a good man too.
But if he still continues in his malice, and increases in his mischief,
give thou thy self unto Prayer, committing thy self, and commending thy cause
unto the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, saying with Jeremy, O Lord of
hoasts, that iudgest righteously, Ier. 11.20.
and tryest the reins and the heart: vengeance is thine, and unto thee have I
opened my cause. In the mean while, wait (with David) on the Lord: Psalm.
27.14.
Be of good courage and he shall comfort thine heart.

8 The more others commend thee for any excellent act, Ne verbis quod se^s
ostentes* sed rebus te ostende s^^re.
be thou the more humble in thine own thoughts. Affect not the vain praises
of men: the blessed Virgin was troubled when she was truly praised of an
Angel. They shall be praised of Angels in Heaven, who have eschewed the
praises of men on Earth. Neither need thou praise thy self: deal but
uprightly, Psalm. 49.18.
others will do that for thee. Be not thou curious to know other men's doings,
but rather be careful that no man knows any ill dealings by thee.

9 Esteem no sin little, for the curse of GOD is due to the least: and the
least would have damned thee, had not the Son of God dyed for thee. Bewail
therefore the misery of thine own state: and as occasion is ministered, Ezekiel.
9.4. Psalm. 69.9.10 Mark. 3.5.
mourn for the iniquity of the time. Pray to God to amend it, and be not thou
one of them that make it worse.

10 Lastly, think often of the Heu fugiunt fraeno non remorante dies! Psalm.
90.9.10.15. Non quam d^u, sed quam been.
shortness of thy life, and certainty of Death: and wish rather a good life
then a long. For, as one day of man's life is to be preferred before the longest
age of a Stagge or Raven: so one day spent religiously, is to be higher valued
then a man's Fuit, non vixit. Senec.
whole life that is consumed in profaneness.

Cast over therefore once every day, Non refer^ quanta sit vitae diuturnitas,
sed qualis sit administratio. Viues.
the number of thy days, by substracting those that are past (as being
vanished like yesternights dream,) contracting them that are to come (since the
one half must be slept out, Tota vita d^es vnus, vt mirum sit homines non
exsatiari iisdem toties redeuntibus.
the rest made uncomfortable by the troubles of the world, thine own
sickness, and the death of friends:) counting Non potest praesentem diem recte
vi^ere ^s, qui se non eam quasi vltimam victurum esse cogitat.
only the present day thine; which spend, as if thou were to spend no more.

Secondly, for thy Words.
1 REmember, that thou must answer for every Mat. 12.36
idle word: that in Pro. 17.27 and 10.19.
multiloquie, the wisest man shall ouer-shoote himself. Avoid therefore all
tedious and idle talk, whereof seldom arises comfort, Dixisse saepe
paenituit, tacuisse vero nunquam.
many times repentance: especially beware of rash answers, when the tongue
out-runs the mind. The word was thine whilst thou keptst it in: it is Nescet
vox missa reuerti. Quam periculosum illud, lingua quo vadis?
another as soon as it is out. O the shame, when a man's own tongue shall be
produced a witness, to the confusion of his own face!

Let then thy words be few, but advised: fore-thinke whether that which thou
art to speak, be fit to be spoken: Nescit paenitenda loqui, qui proferenda
priu^ s^o tradidit examini. Cassiod. lib, 10. Ep. 4.
affirm no more then what thou know to be true, and be rather James 1.19
Consultius est tacere quam inepte loqui.
silent, then speak to an ill, or to no purpose.

2 Let thy heart and tongue ever go together in honesty and truth: hate 1
Pet. 2.1. Psalm. 3.2.
dissembling and lying in another, detest it in thy self, or GOD will detest
thee for it: for he hates the liar, Si mendace^ te norint, nemo tibi credet,
etiamsi affirms verissima. Arist.
and his father the Devil alike. And if once thou be discovered to make no
conscience of lying, no man will believe thee when thou speak a truth, but
if thou love truth, more credit will be given to thy word, then to a liars
oath. Great is the possession which Satan has in those, who are so accustomed
to lying, that they will lie, though they get nothing by it themselves, nor are
not compelled unto it by others. Let not thine anger remain, when thou see
the cause removed: Odi tanquam amaturus.
and ever distinguish twixt him that offends of Prou. 6.30. Acts 3.17. 1 Timothy
1.13.
infirmity, or against his will, and him who offends Psalm. 59.5. Psalm. 101.7.
maliciously, and of set purpose: let the one have pity, the other justice.

3 Keep thy speech as clean from all obsenitie, as thou would thy meat
from poison: and let thy talk be Ephesians. 4.29. Psalm. 1.2. Prou. 31.26.
gracious, that he that hears thee, may grow better by thee: Pii est actos
reddere pios.
and be ever more earnest when thou Psalm. 139.21 Psalm. 69.9.
speak of Religion, then when thou talkest of worldly matters.

If thou perceiuest that thou have erred, Si verum audias silentio protinus
reuerere, illique tanquam diuinae rei assurgito.
persevere not in thine error: rejoice to find the truth, and magnify it.
Study therefore three things especially, to understand well, to say well, and
to do well.

And when thou meetest with Gods Children, be sure to make some holy advantage
by them: learn of them all the good that thou can, and communicate with
them all the good things that thou know. The more good thou teach others,
the more will God still Mark 4.24.25.
minister unto thee. For, as the gifts of men by much using do perish and
decrease: so the gifts of God by much using do the more grow and increase,
like the 2 King. 4.2.
Widows Pitcher of Oil, which, the more it poured to fill other vessels, the
more it was still replenished in it self.

4 Beware that you believe not all that is told you, and that you tell not
Eccle. 3.7 Luke 2.19.
all that you hear: for if you do, you shall not long enjoy true friends, nor
ever want great troubles. Therefore in accusations be first assured of the
truth, then censure. And as thou tenderest the reputation of an honest heart:
Arcanum tibi creditum fidelius custodi quum depositam pecuniam.
never let malice in hatred make thee to reveal that which love in friendship
bound thee a long time to conceal. But for fear of such afterclaps, observe
two things.

First, Though thou have many acquaintance; yet make not any thy familiar
friend, but he that truly Vera amicitia tantummodo est inter bonos. Mali nec
inter se amici sunt, nec cum bonis.
fears God. Such a one thou never need to fear. For though you should in
some particulers fall out: yet Christian love, the maine ground of your
friendship will never fall away, and the fear of God will never suffer him to
do thee any villainy.

Secondly, do nothing in the sight of a civil friend, for which thou can
not be safe unless it be concealed: Ciuilem Amicum sic habeas vt putes posse
innimicum fieri.
nor any thing for which (if just cause be offered) thou need fear him, if
he proves thine unjust enemy. If thou have done any thing amiss, Quod taceri
vis, prior ipse taceas.
ask God forgiveness, and persuade thy self rather then thy friend to keep
thine own counsel. For be assured that what friendship soever is grounded
upon any other cause then true Religion; Bellum non est hominum, sed (quod
verbum sonat) belluaru^ and vitiis non hominibus gerendum.
if ever that cause fail, the friendship falls off: And the rather; because
that as GOD breeds among men, Truth, Peace, and Amity, that we should live to
do one another good: so the Devil daily sows falsehood, discord, and enmity,
to cause (if he can) the dearest friends to devour one another.

Ephesians. 5.4. Psalm. 15.3.
5 Make not a jest of another man's infirmity: remember thine own. Abhor the
froathy wi^ of a filthy nature, Irridere pium n^fas, impium immane, hominem
inhumanum.
whose brains having once conceived an odd scoff: his mind, travels (as a
woman with child) till he be delivered of it. Yea, he had rather lose his
best friend then his worstiest. Nemo videtur sibi tam vilis, vt irrideri
mereatur.
But if thou be disposed to be merry; have a special care to three things.

First, That thy mirth be not against Religion.

Secondly, that it be not against Charity.

Thirdly, that it be not against Chastity, and then be as merry as thou can;
Phil. 4.4.
only in the Lord. Pro. 24.17


6 Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy; for no man knows what shall be the
manner of thine own end. But be more Valentinianus Imp. cum supplitio mortis
aliquis afficiendus esset, aiebat se malle ad vitam reuocare.
glad to see the worst man's amendment, then his punishment. Crudelis animi est
alienis malis gaudere, and non misereri co^munem naturam.
Hate no man for fear lest Christ loves him: who will not take it well, that
thou should hate whom he loves. Christ loved thee when thou wast his enemy:
Romans 5.8.10 Ephesians. 2.4.
by the merits therefore of his blood, he requires thee for his sake to love
thine enemy. Deny him (being a christian) if thou dare. He asks but
forgiveness for forgiveness. The forgiveness of an 100. pence, for the
forgiveness of ten thousand talents. Mat. 18.24.28.
The 60 hundred thousand crowns, for ten crowns. Petty forgiveness of man,
for the infinite forgiveness of Almighty God. Though thou think thine enemy
unworthy to be forgiven: yet Christ is worthy to be obeyed.

7 Whether the glory of GOD, or good of thy neighbor does require it? Speak
the truth, Psalm. 119. Nec mendacii vtilitas est diuturna, nec veritatis damnum
diu nocet.
and fear not the face of man. The frown of a Prince may sometimes be the
favor of God. Neither shall flattery still hold in credit, nor truth always
continue in disgrace.

8 Ever think him a true friend, who tells thee secretly and plainly of thy
faults. He that sees thee offend, and tells thee not of thy fault; either
flatters thee for favor or dares not displease thee for fear. Reprehensio
semper vel meliores vel cautiores nos reddit.
Miserable is his case, who when he needs, has none to admonish him.
Reprehension, be it just, be it unjust; come it from the mouth of a friend, or
of a foe; it never does a wise man harm. For if it be true; thou have a
warning to amend: if it be false; thou have a caveat what to avoid. So every
way, Si reprehendi fers aegre reprehendenda ne seceris.
it makes a wise man better or warier. But if thou can not endure to be
reprehended; do then nothing worthy of reprehension.

9 Speak not of God, but with fear and reverence, Leu. 19.22.
and as in his sight and hearing. Deu. 28.58.
For seeing we are not worthy to use his holy Name in our mouths: Romans 9.5.
much less ought we to abuse it vainly in our talk. Eccle. 5.1.5. Psalm.
239.4.7 Qui facile in sertis jurat in iocis iurabit, qui in iocis, and in
mendacio. Viues.
But ordinarily, to use it, in vain, rash, or false oaths* is an undoubted
sign of a soul, that never truly feared GOD. Pray therefore with David,
Psalm. 141.3.
when thou art to speak in any matter that may move passion: Set a watch, O
Lord, before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips.

10 Lastly, in 1 Pet. 5.12
praising, be discreet, in To. 12.10
Affabilitas and comitas res funt nullius impendii, amicitias tamen magnas
conglutinant (...) exhibitae, dissoluunt praetermissae.
saluting, courteous in 1 These. 5.26.14
admonishing, friendly, in 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Leui. 19.17.
forgiving, merciful, in Psa. 15.4. Eze. 17.15.
promising, faithful, and bountiful in Deu. 15.13 14.
recompensing good service: making not the rewards of virtue, the gifts of
favor.

Thirdly, for thy actions.
1 Do no evil, though thou might, for GOD will not suffer the least sin
(without bitter repentance) to escape unpunished. Leave not undone any good
that thou can. But do nothing without a calling, nor any thing in thy
calling, till thou have first taken counsel at Gods Word, Ps. 119.101. 1 Cor.
7.2. 1 Samuel 30.8.
of the lawfulness thereof, and prayed for his blessing upon thy endeavor,
and then do it, in the name of God, with cheerfulness of heart, committing
the success unto him; in whose power it is, to bless with his grace,
whatsoever business is intended to his glory.

2 When thou art tempted to do an evil work, 1 Cor. 7.5.
remember that Satan is where his business is. Imminet semper occasioni suae
diabolus. Greg.
Let not the child of God be the instrument of so base a slave: hate the work,
if thou abhorrest the author. Ask thy conscience these two questions; Would I
have another to do this unto me? Mat. 7.12.
What shall I answer Christ in the day of my accounts? If contrary to my
knowledge and conscience, Luke 16.2. 2 Cor. 6.2. 2 Cor. 5.10.
I shall do this wickedness, and sin against him? And remember with Joseph,
Genesis 39.9.11. etc.
that though no man sees: yet GOD sees all. Fly therefore with Joseph from
all sins, as well those which are secret in the sight of GOD, as those that
are manifest in the eyes of men. For GOD as he is just, without speedy
repentance, will bring thy secret sins, as he did David's, To the open light,
before all Israel, 2 Samuel 12.12
and before the Sun. Be therefore as much afraid of secret sins, as of open
shame. And so avoid all in general, Luke 8.17. and 12.2.
as that thou do not allow to thy self any one particular, or darling sin
which the corruption of thy nature could best agree withal: For the crafty
Devil can hold a man's soul as fast by one, as by many sins; and faster by
that one which does please thee, then by all those which begin to be
abominable unto thee. And as thou desire to avoid a sin: so be careful to
shun the Pro. 5.8. and 6.27. Omnis peccandi occasio vitandae est, nam qui
amat periculum peribit in illo. Ecclus. 3.
occasion.

3 In effecting good actions, which are within the compass of thy calling,
distrust not Gods providence, though thou see the means, either wanting or
weak. And if means do offer themselves, be sure that they be lawful: Judge.
7.2.7.
and having gotten lawful means, take heed that thou rely not more upon
them, then upon God himself. Labor, in a lawful calling, is Gods ordinary
means by which he blesses his children with outward things Pray therefore for
GODS blessing upon his own means. In earthly business, bear an heavenly
mind: do thou thy best endeavor, and commit the whole success to the
fore-ordaining wisdom of Almighty God. Never think to thrive by those means
which God has accursed. Mat. 16.26.
That will not in the end prove gain which is gotten with the loss of thy
soul. In all therefore both actions and means, endeavor, Hic muru^ ahen^n^
esto, nil conscire sibi nulla pallescere culpa. Horat. Act. 24.16.
with Paul, to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men.

Look to your selves what conscience ye have,
For conscience shall damn, and conscience shall save.
4 Love all good things for Gods sake: Psa. 118.6.7 Romans 8.31. Pro. 16.7.
but God for his own sake. Whilst thou hold GOD thy friend, thou need
not fear who is thine enemy: Ge. 32.4. etc Genesis 31.7.29.42 Exodus 32.25. Number.
14.42.43. etc.
for either God will make thine enemy to become thy friend, or will bridle him
that he cannot hurt thee. No man is ouerthrown by his enemy, unless that
first his sin have prevailed over him, and God has left him to himself. He
that would therefore be safe from the fear of his enemies, and live still in
the favor of his God: let him redeem the folly of the time past with serious
Repentance: look to the time present with religious diligence, and take heed
to the time to come with careful providence. Psalm. 27.11.12.13.


5 Give every man the honor due to his place, but honor a man more for his
goodness, then for his greatness. And of whomsoever thou have received a
benefit, unto him (as GOD shall enable thee) remember to be thankful.
Acknowledge it lovingly unto men, and pray for him heartily unto God, and count
every blessing received from God, as a pledge of his eternal love, and a spur
to a godly life.

6 Be not proud for any external vvorldly goods, nor for any internal
spiritual gifts. Not for external goods, because that as they came lately, so
they will shortly be gone again, their loss therefore is the less to be
grieved at. Not for any internal gifts, for as GOD gave them, so will he
likewise take them away: If (forgetting the giver) thou shall abuse his gifts,
to puff up thine heart with a pride of thine own worth: and to contemn
others, for whose good Almighty God bestowed those gifts upon thee. Have thou
any one virtue that moves thee to be selfe-conceited? thou have twenty vices
that may better vilify thee in thine own eyes.

Be the same in the sight of God, who beholds thy heart, that thou seem to
be in the eyes of men that see thy face. Content not thy self with an outward
good name, Nil iuuat bonum nomen re clamante Conscientia.
when thy Conscience shall inwardly tell thee it is undeserved, and therefore
none of thine. A deserved good name for any thing, but for godliness, lasts
little, and is less worth. In all the holy Scriptures I never read of an
Hypocrites repentance: and no wonder, for whereas after sin, conversion is
left as a means to cure all other sinners; what mean^^ remains to recover him
who has converted conversion it self into sin? Woe therefore unto the Soul
that is not, and yet still seem religious.

7 Mark the fearful ends of notorious evil men, to abhor their wicked
actions; mark the life of the godly, Number. 23.10. Psalm. 37.35.36.37.
that thou may imitate it: and his blessed end, that it may comfort thee.
Obey thy betters, observe the wise, accompany the honest, and love the
religious. And seeing the corrupt nature of man is prone to hypocrisy: beware
that thou use not the exercise of religion, as matters of course and custom,
without care and conscience, to grow more holy and de^out thereby. Observe
therefore how by the continual use of Gods means, thou feel thy special
corruptions weakened, 1 Cor. 1.28.
and thy sanctification more and more increased: and make no more show of
holiness outwardly to the world, Isa. 58.5.6. Mat. 23.27.28. Psalm. 51.6.
then thou have in the sight of God inwardly in thine heart.

8 Endeavor to rule those who live under thine authority, rather by love then
by fear: for to rule by Ama and impera. Blando vi^ latet imperio. Ausonius.
love is easy and safe, but tyranny is ever accompanied with care and Qui
terret plus ille timet, sors illa Tyranno conuenit. Claud. de instit. prin.
terror. Oppression will force the oppressed to take any advantage to shake off
the yoke that they are not able to bear: neither will Gods justice suffer the
sway that grounded on Tyranny long to continue. Remember that though by Pet.
2.13.
humane ordinance they serve thee; yet by a more peculiar right, they are
Leuit. 25.^55.
Gods Servants. Yea, now being Christians, not as thy Servants, Philem. v. 16 1
Cor. 9.5.
but above Servants, brethren beloved in the Lord. Rule therefore over Si
Pericle^ quoties clamidem indueret, apud se dicere consueu^t, Attend Pericles.
quod ges^atu^us es imperium in liberos Athen^^nses? Plat. in Apotheg. Quanto
magis tu, qu^ties authoritatem exerciturus es apud teip^um dicere de^^res?
Memento o homo quod imperiu^ geris in liberatos Christianos.
Christians, being a Christian, in love and mercy, like Christ thy Master.

9 Remember that of all actions, none makes a Magistrate more like God (whose
vicegerent he is:) then in doing Justice justly, for the due execution
whereof:

First, have ever an open ear to the just complaints of unjust dealings.

Secondly, so lend one ear to the accuser, as that thou keep the other for
the accused: for Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera aequum licet
statuerit, haud aequus fuit. Sen. in Med.
he that decrees for either part, before both be heard, the decree may be
just, but himself is unjust.

Thirdly, in hearing both parts, incline not to the right hand of affection, or
to the left of hatred: as to believe arguments of persuasion for a friend,
before arguments concluding for a foe.

Fourthly, deny not Justice, which is Regia mensura, to the meanest Subject:
but let the cause of the poor and needy come in equal balance with the rich
and mighty. If thou perceiuest on the one side in a cause, the high hills of
cunning advantages, powerful combination, and violent prosecution: Judicious
Sir Fr. Bacons Essaies of Judicature.
and on the other side, the low valleys of poverty, simplicity, and
desolation: prepare thy way (as GOD does) to judgment, by Luke 3.4.5. Isay
40.3.
raising valleys, and taking down hills, equalling in equality: that so thou
may lay the foundation of thy sentence upon an ^euen ground. In matters of
right and wrong twixt party and party, let thy conscience be careful rather
Ius 2 Chronicles. 19.10.
dicere to pronounce the Law that is made, secundum allegata and probata,
rather then Ius dare, to make a Law of thine own, upon the authority of sic
volo, sic iubeo, fearing that fearful malediction: Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors land-marke. In trials of life and
death, let Judges like Elohim, Abak. 3.2.
in Justice, remember mercy, and so cast the severe eye of Justice upon the
fact, as that they look with the pitiful eye of Mercy upon the Malefactor,
wresting the favor of Law to the favor of life, where grace promises
amendment: but if Justice requires that Melius vt pereat vnus, quam vt pereat
vmtas.
one rather then unity must perish, and that a rotten member must be Ense
rescindendum ne pars syncera trahatur.
cut off, to save the whole body from putrifiing; fiat Iustitia. But whilst
thou art pronouncing the sentence of Judgment on another, remember that thine
own judgment hangs over thine head. In all causes therefore judge aright, for
thou shall be sure to find a righteous Judge, before whom thou must shortly
appear to be judged thy self: at what time thou may leave to thy Friend,
this for thine Epitaph: Nuper eram Iudex, iam Iudicis ante Tribunal
Subsistens, paueo: iudicor ipse modo.


Many (I know not upon what grounds) seem to be much agrieued with the Laws
of the Land: but wiser men may answer them with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.8.
nos scimus bonam esse Legem, modo Iudex ea legitime vtatur; We know that the
Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. And he shall be unto me a righteous
Judge; whose heart neither corruption of bribes, fear of foes, nor favor of
friends can withdraw from the conscionable practice of these precepts. And to
that rare and venerable Judge, I say with Iehosaphat: 2 Chronicles. 19 11.
Be of courage, and do Justice, and the Lord will be with the good.

10 Lastly, make not an occupation of any recreation. The longest use of
pleasure is but short: but the pains of pleasure abused are eternal. Use
therefore lawful recreation, so far forth, Prou. 21.17.
as it makes thee the fitter in body and mind, Phil. 4.8.
to do more chearefully the service of God, and the duties of thy calling.
Vita breuis opusque multu^, operarii pigri, and vrget Pater familius. Rabbin.
Apotheg. Apoc. 22.12 James 5.9.
Thy work is great, thy time is but short. And he who will recompense every
man according to his works, stands at the door. Think how much work is
behind, how slow thou have wrought in the time which is past, and what a
reckoning thou should make, if thy Master should call thee this day to thine
accounts. Be therefore careful henceforth, to make the most advantage of thy
short time that remains, as a man would of an old Lease that were near
expiring: and when thou disposest to recreate thy self, remember how small a
time is allotted for thy life: and that therefore much of that, is not to be
consumed, in idleness, sports, plays, and toyish vanities: seeing the whole
is but a short while, though it be all spent in doing the best good that thou
can: for, a man was not created for sports, plays, and recreation: but
zealously to serve GOD in Religion, and conscionably to serve his neighbor in
his vocation, and by both to acertaine himself of eternal salvation. Esteem
therefore the loss of Nihil est aliud temp^^s quam vita, quam vnusquisque
tantum, se amare profitetur, quam rei nullus magis sit prodigus quam temporis.
Ephesians. 5.16. Luke 16.2. Mat. 25.21.
time, one of the greatest losses. Redeem it carefully, to spend it wisely:
that when that time comes, that thou may be no longer a steward on earth;
thy Master may welcome thee, with an Euge bone serve, and give thee a better in
Heaven, where thou shall joyfully enjoy thy Masters joys for evermore.

Meditations for the Evening.
At Evening, when thou preparest thy self to take thy rest, meditate on these
few points.
1 THat seeing thy days are numbered, Psalm. 90. Job 14.5.
there is one more of thy number spent: Viue memor quam sis eui breuis. Hor.
and thou art now the nearer to thy end by a day.

2 Sit down a while before thou go to bed and consider with thy self what
memorable thing thou have seen, heard, or read that day more then thou saw,
heardest or knew before, and make thy best use of them; but especially, call
to mind, what sin thou have committed that day against GOD or Man: and what
good thou have omitted: and humble thy self for both: If thou find that
thou have done any goodness, Heu Perdidi diem! Tit. Vesp. Apothegm. Nullus
sine linea dies.
acknowledge it to be Gods grace, and give him the glory, and count that day
lost, wherein thou have not done some good.

3 If by frailty or strong temptation, thou shall perceive, that thou have
committed any grievous sin or fault; presume not to sleep till thou have
upon thy knees, made a particular reconciliation with God in Christ for the
same: both by confessing the fault, and by fervent praying, for the pardon of
the same. Thus making thy score even with Christ every night, thou shall have
the less to account for; when thou art to make thy final reckoning, before
his Majesty in the Judgment day. Epes. 4.26.


4 If thou have fallen out with any in the day, let not the Sun go down on
thine anger that night. If thy conscience tells thee that thou have wronged him,
acknowledge thine offense, and Non turpe est veniam precari, turpe est Deum aut
hominem habere inimicum.
entreat him to forgive thee. If he have wronged thee, offer him
reconciliation, and if he will not be reconciled, yet do thou from thy heart
forgive him, Matthew. 5.23: But in any case presume not to be thine own
revenger. Mihi vindicta dicit Dominus. Romans 12.19.
For in so doing thou do God a double injury: First, in offering to take his
sword of Justice out of his hand as though he were not just: having reserved
the execution of vengeance to himself. Non est tibi i^s inseruum alienum im^
in conseruum tuum.
Secondly, in usurping authority over his servant, without referring the cause
to his hearing and censure, being his and thy Master. Besides, thou art too
partial to be a Revenger. For if thou be to execute revenge on thy self, thou will do it too lightly; if on thy enemy, too heavily. It belongs therefore
to God to revenge; to thee to forgive.

And in testimony that thou have freely forgiven him, Cui semel ignoueris cura
vt ille sentiat bona fide id esse actum and si qua in re illi iuuare potes ex
periatur te amicum. Viues. Mat. 3.39. Romans 12.20.
pray unto God for the forgiveness of his fault, and the amendment of his
life: and the next time that occasion is offered (and it lies in thy power) do
him good, and rejoice in doing it: for he that does good to his enemies,
shows himself the child of GOD; and his reward is with GOD his Father.

5 Use not sleep as a means, Id vite tempus; quod sonino impenditur, non est
vita. Vita enim vigilia est.
to satiate the foggy lithernesse of thy flesh: but as a medicine to refresh
thy tired senses and members. Sufficient sleep quickens the mind, and
reuiueth the body: but immoderate sleep dulleth the one, and fatneth the other.

6 Remember that many go to bed, and never rise again; till they be wakened
and raised up by the fearful sound of the last trumpet. But he that sleeps
and wakeneth with prayer; sleeps and wakeneth with Christ. If therefore thou
desire to sleep securely, and safely, yield up thy self into the hands of
God, whilst thou art waking, and so go to bed with a reverence of Gods
majesty, and consideration of thine own misery, which thou may imprint in
thy heart in some measure, by these means and the like meditations.

Read a Chapter in the same order as was prescribed in the morning: and when
thou have done, kneel down on both thy knees at thy bed side, or some other
convenient place in thy Chamber, and lifting up thy heart, thine eyes and hands
to thy heavenly Father, in the name and mediation of his holy Son JESUS, pray
unto him, if thou have the gift of prayer.

1 Confessing thy sins, especially those which thou have committed that day.

2 Caruing most earnestly (for Christ his sake) pardon and forgiveness for
them.

3 Requesting the assistance of his holy spirit, for amendment of life.

4 In giving thanks for benefits received, especially for thy preservation
that day.

5 Praying for rest and protection that night.

6 Remembering the state of the Church, the King, and the Royal Posterity, our
Ministers and Magistrates, and all our brethren visited or persecuted.

7 Lastly, commending thy self and all thine to his gracious custody.

All which thou may do in these or the like words.

A prayer for the Evening.
O Most gracious God, and loving Father, who art about my bed, Psalm. 139.23.
Psalm. 145.18.
and know my down lying, and mine vprising, and art near unto all that call
upon thee, in truth and sincerity, I wetched sinner do beseech thee, to look
upon me with the eyes of thy mercy, and not to behold me as I am in my self:
For then thou shall see but an unclean and defiled creature, conceived in
sin, and living in iniquity: so that I am ashamed to lift up mine eyes to
heaven, Psalm. 51.5. Hezr. 9.6.
Luke 15.18.
knowing how grievously I have sinned against heaven, and before thee: For,
Dan. 9.11.
O Lord, I have transgressed al thy commandments and righteous laws, not
only through negligence and infirmity, but oftentimes through wilful
presumption, contrary to my knowledge: yea, contrary to the motions of thy holy
spirit reclaiming me from them, so that I have wounded my conscience, and
grieved thy holy spirit, by whom thou have sealed me to the day of redemption.
Ephesians. 4.30.
Thou have consecrated my soul and body, to be the temples of the holy Ghost:
I wretched sinner have defiled both, with all manner of pollution and
uncleanness. My eyes in taking pleasure to behold vanity, Psalm. 119.37.
mine ears in hearing impure and unchaste speeches, Isa. 6.5. Isa. 1.15.
my tongue in leasing and evil speaking: my hands are so full of impuritie,
that I am ashamed to lift them up unto thee: and my feet have carried me after
mine own ways: Romans 3.15.16.
my understanding and reasoning which are so quick in all earthly matters, are
only blind, and stupide, when I come to meditate or discourse of spiritual
and heavenly things: my memory, which should be the treasury of all goodness,
is not so apt to remember any thing, as those things which are vile and vain.
Yea, Lord, by woeful experience I find, that naturally, all the imaginations
of the thoughts of mine heart, Genesis 6.5.
are only evil continually. Psalm. 40.12.
And these my sins are more in number then the hairs which grow upon mine
head, and they have grown over me like a loathsome leprie: that from the
crown of my head to the sole of my feet, Isai. 1.6.
there remains no part which they have not infected. They make me seem vile
in mine own eyes; 2 Samuel 5.22.
how much more abominable must I then appear in thy sight? 1 Ioh. 3.20.
And the custom of sinning has almost taken away the conscience of sin, and
pulled upon me such dullness of sense and hardness of heart; that thy
judgments denounced against my sins, by the faithful Preachers of thy Word
do not terrify me to return unto thee by unfeigned repentance for them. And
if thou Lord, should but deal with me, according to thy justice and my
desert, I should utterly be confounded and condemned. But seeing that of thine
infinite mercy thou have spared me so long, and still waitest for my
repentance: I humbly beseech thee, for the bitter death and bloody Passion^
sake, which Jesus Christ has suffered for me: that thou would pardon, and
forgive unto me all my sins and offenses, and open unto me that
euer-streaming fountain of the blood of Christ, which thou have promised to
open under the New Testament, Zach. 13.1.
to the penitent of the house of David: that all my sins and uncleanness may
be so bathed in his blood, buried in his death, and hid in his wounds: that
they never be more seen, to shame me in this life, or to condemn me before
thy Iudgement-seate, in the world which is to come. And forasmuch, O Lord, as
thou know, that it is not in man to turn his own heart, Ier. 20.23.
unless thou do first give him grace to convert: And seeing that it is as
easy with thee to make me righteous and holy, as to bid me to be such: O my
God, give me grace, Da Domine quod iubes, and iube quod vis August.
to do what thou command, and then command what thou will, and thou shall
find me willing to do thy blessed will. And to this end, give unto me thine
holy spirit, which thou have promise^ to give to the worlds end, Mat. 28.20.
John 16.13
unto all thine elect people. And let the same thy holy spirit, purge my heart,
heal my corruption, sanctify my nature, and consecrate my soul and body,
that they may become the Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Luke 1.74.
to serve thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of my life. That
when by the direction and assistance of thy holy spirit, Act. 13.65. 2 Timothy 4.7.
I shall finish my course in this short and transitory life; I may cheerfully
leave this world, and resign my Soul into thy Fatherly hands, Psa. 31.5.
in the assured confidence of enjoying everlasting life with thee, in thine
Heavenly Kingdom, Mat. 25.34. 2 Timothy 4.8.
which thou have prepared for thine elect Saints, who love the Lord Jesus, and
expect his appearing.

In the mean while, O Father, I beseech thee, let thy holy spirit work in me
such a serious repentance, as that I may with tears lament my sins past,
with grief of heart be humbled for my sins present, and with all mine
endeavor resist the like filthy sins in time to come. And let the same thy
holy spirit likewise keep me in the unity of thy Church. Lead me in the
truth of thy Word, and preserve me that I never swerve from the same to
Popery, nor any other error or false worship. And let thy Spirit open mine
eyes more and more, Psalm. 119.18.
to see the wondrous things of thy Law: and open my lips, that my mouth may
daily defend thy Truth, and set forth thy Praise. Increase in me those good
gifts, Psalm. 51.15.
which of thy me^cy thou have already bestowed upon me, and give unto me a
patient spirit, a chaste heart, a contented mind, pure affections, wife
behavior, and all other graces which thou see to be necessary for me: to
govern my heart in thy fear, and to guide all my life in thy favor: Psalm.
19.14.
that whether I live or dye, I may live and dye unto thee, who art my God, and
my Redeemer.

And here (O Lord) according as I am bound, I render unto thee from the Altar
of my humblest heart, all possible thanks for all those blessings and
benefits, which so graciously and plentifully, thou have bestowed upon my soul
and body, for this life, and for that which is to come: namely, for mine
Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and
Preservation from my childe-hoode, until this present day and hour: and for
the firm hope which thou have given me of my Glorification. Likewise for my
health, wealth, food, raiment, and prosperity: and more especially, for that
thou have defended me this day now past, from all perils and dangers, both of
body and soul, furnishing me with all necessary good things that I stand in
need of. And as thou have ordained the day for man to travail in, and the
night for him to take his rest: so I beseech thee, sanctify unto me this
nights rest and sleep, that I may enjoy the same, as thy sweet blessing and
benefit. That so this dull and wearied body of mine, being refreshed with
moderate sleep and rest: I may be the better enabled to walk before thee,
doing all such good works* as thou have appointed: when it shall please thee
by thy divine power to waken me the next morning. And whilst I sleep; do
thou, O Lord, who art the keeper of Israel, Psalm. 121.4.
that never slumbrest nor sleep, watch over me in thy holy providence, to
protect me from all danger, so that neither the evil Angels of Satan, Apoc.
12.7.
nor any wicked enemy, may have any power to do me any harm or evil. And to
this end, give a charge unto thy holy Angels, that they at thine appointment,
Psalm. 34.7.
may pitch their tents round about me, for my defense and safety: as thou have
promised that they should do about them that fear thy Name. And knowing that
thy name is a strong tower of defense unto all those that trust therein; Prou.
18.10.
I here recommend my self and all that do belong unto me, unto thy holy
protection and custody. If it be thy blessed will to call for me in my sleep:
O Lord, for Christ his sake, have mercy upon me, and receive my soul into thy
heavenly Kingdom. And if it be thy blessed pleasure to add more days unto my
life, O Lord, add more amendment unto my days: and weane my mind from the
love of the world, and worldly vanities: and cause me more and more to settle
my conversation on Heaven and heavenly things. And perfect daily in me, that
good work which thou have begun, to the glory of thy Name, and the salvation
of my sinful Soul.

O Lord, I beseech thee likewise, save and defend from all evil and danger,
thy whole Church, the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Prince Charles, together
with the Princely Count Palatine of Rhene, and the religious Princess
Elizabeth his Wife: keep them all in the sincerity of thy Truth, and prosper
them in all grace and happiness. Bless the Nobility, Ministers, and
Magistrates of these Churches and Kingdoms, each of them with those graces,
which are expedient for their place and calling. And be thou, o Lord, a comfort
and consolation to all thy people, whom thou have thought meet to visit with
any kind of sickness, cross, or calamity. Hasten, O Father, the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Apoc. 6.10.22.20.
Make me ever mindful of my last end, and of the reckoning that I am to make
unto thee therein. And in the mean while, careful, so to follow Christ in the
regeneration during this life, Mat. 19.28.
as that with Christ I may have a portion in the resurrection of the just, when
this mortal life is ended. These graces, Luke 14.14.
and all other blessings, which thou, O Father, know to be requisite and
necessary for me, I humbly beg and crave at thy hands in the Name and mediation
of Jesus Christ thy Son, and in that form of Prayer, which he himself has
taught me to say unto thee. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Another shorter Evening Prayer.
O Eternal GOD, and heavenly father, if I were not taught and assured by the
promises of thy Gospel, and the examples of Peter, Luke 22.61 Luke 7.47. Luke
18.14. Luke 15.20.
Magdalene, the Publicane, the Prodigal child, and many other penitent
sinners: Psalm. 103.8.
that thou art so full of compassion, and so ready to forgive the greatest
sinners, Mat. 11.28.
who are heauiest laden with sin, Ezech. 18.21.22. etc.
at what time soever they return unto thee with penitent hearts, lamenting
their sins, and imploring thy grace: I should despair for mine own sins,
and be utterly discouraged, from presuming to come unto thy presence:
considering the hardness of my heart, the unruliness of my affections, and
the uncleanness of my conversation: by means whereof I have transgressed all
thy laws, and deserved thy curse, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
which might cause my body to be smitten with some fearful disease, my soul
to languish with the death of sin, my good name to be traduced with
scandalous reproaches, and make mine estate liable to all manner of crosses,
and casualities. And I confess, Lord, that thy mercy is the cause that I have
not been long ago confounded. But, O my God, Lam. 3.22. Mal. 3.6.
as thy mercy only stayed thy judgment from falling upon me hitherto; so I
humbly beseech thee, in the bowels of the mercy, of Jesus Christ, Col. 3.12.
in whom only thou art well pleased, Mat. 3.17.
that thou will not deal with me according to my deserts, Psalm. 15.7. Psalm.
28.4.
but that thou would freely and fully, Hos. 13.5.
remit unto me all my sins and transgressions: and that thou would wash
them clean from me, Isa. 1.16.18.
with the virtue of that most precious blood, which thy son Jesus Christ
has shed for me, For he alone is the Physician, Mat. 9.12. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
and his blood only is the medicine that can heal my sickness. And he is
the true brazen Serpent, that can cure that poison wherewith the fiery Serpents
of my sins, Ioh. 3.14.
have stung and poisoned my sick and wounded soul. And give me I beseech
thee thine holy spirit, which may assure me of mine adoption, and that may
confirm my faith: increase my repentance, Gal. 4.5.6.
enlighten my understanding, purify my heart, rectify my will and affections,
and so sanctify me throughout: 1 These. 5.23.
that my whole body, soul, and spirit may be kept unblameable until the
glorious coming of my Lord Jesus Christ. And now, O Lord, I give thee hearty
thanks and praise, for that thou have this day preserved me from all harms
and perils, notwithstanding all my sins and ill deserts. And I beseech thee
likewise defend me this night from the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.
which night and day seeks to devour me. Watch thou, O Lord, over me this
night, to keep me from his temptations and tyranny: and let thy mercy shield
me from his unappeasable rage and malice. And to this end, I commend my self
into thy hands, Psalm. 31.5.
and protection; beseeching thee, O my Lord and God, not to suffer Satan, nor
any of his evil members, to have power to do unto me any hurt or violence
this night. And grant, good Lord, that whether I sleep or wake: live or die: I
may sleep, wake, live, and die unto thee, and to the glory of thy name, and
the salvation of my soul. Lord bless and defend all thy chosen people every
where* Grant our King a long and happy reign over us. Bless the Queen,
Prince Charles, the Prince Palatine of Rhene, and the virtuous Princess
Elizabeth his wife, together with all our Magistrates, and Ministers: comfort
them who are in any misery, need, or sickness: Good Lord, give me grace to
be one of those wise Virgins, Math. 25.2.
which may have my heart prepared like a Lamp furnished with the Oil of
Faith, and light of good works, to meet the Lord Jesus the sweet bridegroom of
my soul, at his second and sudden coming in glory. Grant this good Father,
for Christ Jesus sake, my only Savior and Mediator, in whose blessed name, and
in whose own words I call upon thee as he has taught me.

Our Father which etc.

Afterward say.

Thy grace O Lord Jesus Christ, thy love O heavenly Father, thy comfort and
consolation, O Holy and blessed spirit, be with me, and dwell in my heart this
night and evermore. Amen.

Then rising up in a holy reverence, meditate as thou art putting off thy
clothes.

Things to be Meditated upon, as thou art putting off thy clothes.
1 THat the day is coming when thou must be as barely vnstript of all that thou
have in the world, Nudus in hunc mundu^ veni simul hinc quoque nudus abibo.
Luke 16.2.
as thou art now of thy clothes; thou have therefore here, but the use of all
things, as a Steward for a time, and that upon accounts. Whilst therefore thou
art trusted with this Stewardship, Math. 24.25.
be wise and faithful.

2 When thou see thy bed, Job 17.13. Vt somnus mortis; sic lectus imago
sepulchri.
let it put thee in mind of thy grave; which is now the bed of Christ: For
Christ by laying his holy body to rest three days and three nights in the
grave; Mat. 12.40. 1 These. 4.14.
has sanctified, and as it were warmed it for the bodies of his Saints to rest
and sleep in till the morning of the resurrection: So that now unto the
faithful, Isa. 57.2.
Death is but a sweet sleep, and the grave but Christ's bed, where their bodies
rest and sleep in peace: until the joyful morning of the Resurrection day
shall dawne unto them. Isa. 26.20.


Let therefore thy bed-cloathes represent unto thee, the mould of the earth
that shall cover thee: thy sh^etes, thy winding sheet: thy sleep, thy death:
thy waking, thy resurrection. And being laid down in thy bed when thou
perceiuest sleep to approach: say, I will lay me down and sleep in peace,
Psalm. 4.8.
for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

Thus religiously opening every Morning thy heart, and shutting it up again
every Evening with the word of God and prayer, as it were with a lock and
key: and so beginning* the day with GODS worship, continuing it in his fear,
and ending it in his favor: thou shall be sure to find the blessing of GOD
upon all thy days labors and good endeauours: and at night thou may assure
thy self thou shall sleep safely and sweetly in the arms of thy heavenly
Fathers providence.

Thus far of the Piety which every Christian in private ought to Practice
every day. Now follows that which (he being a Householder) must practice
publicly with his Family.

Meditations for Household Piety.
1 IF thou be called to the government of a Family, thou must not hold it
sufficient to serve GOD, and live uprightly in thine own person: unless thou
cause all under thy charge to do the same with thee. For the performance of
this duty God was so well pleased with Abraham, that he would not hide from
him his counsel. For (says GOD) I know him that he will command his sons and
his household after him; Genesis 18.17.19.
that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that he has spoken unto him. Genesis 14.14.
And Abraham had 318. men servants; which were thus borne and Catechized in his
house. With whose help he rescued also his Nephew Let from the captivity of
his enemies. And religiously valiant Iosuah protests before all the people,
that if they all would fall away from the true worship of GOD, yet that he and
his house would serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15.
And GOD himself gives a special charge to all householders that they do
instruct their Family in his word, and train them up in his fear and service.
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.7.93
and thou shall wh^^ them continually upon thy children, and shall talk of
them, when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc. Thou shall fear the Lord
thy God and serve him. David according to this Law had so ordered his Family,
That no deceitful person should dwell in his house, Psalm. 101.6.
but such as would serve God and walk in his way. And religious Hester had
taught her Maids to serve GOD in fasting and prayer. Hest. ^.16.
And the more to further thy family in the zeal of Religion: settle ever thy
chiefest affection on those, whom thou shall perceive to be best addicted to
true religion. This also will turn to thine own advantage in a double
respect. First, GOD will the rather bless and prosper the labor and handy
work of such godly Servants. Genesis 30.27.
For Laban perceived that God blessed him for Jacobs sake: And Potiphar saw,
Genesis 39.3.
that the Lord made all that Joseph did to prosper in his hand; yea, when
innocent Joseph was cast into prison, Genesis 39.22.23.
his Keeper saw that whatsoever he did, the Lord made it to prosper: and
therefore the Keeper committed all the charge of the Prisoners into Joseph's
hand. Secondly, the truer a man does serve God, the faithfuller he will serve
thee.

2 If every Householder were thus careful, according to his duty, to bring up
his Children and Family in the service and fear of God in his own house,
then the house of God should be better filled, and the Lords Table more
frequented every Sabbath day; and the Pastors public preaching and labor
would take more effect then it does. The streets of Towns and Cities, would
not abound with so many drunkards, swearers, whoremongers, and profane
scorners of true Piety and Religion. Westminster Hall would not be so full of
contentions, wrangling suites, and unchristian debates: and the Prisons would
not be every Sessions, so full of thieves, robbers, traitors, and murderers.
But alas, most Householders make no other use of their Servants, then they do
of their beasts. Whilst they may have their bodies to do their service, they
care not if their Souls serve the Devil. Yet the common complaint is; that
faithful and good servants are scarce to be found. True; but the reason is,
because there are so many profane and irreligious Masters: for, the example
and instruction of a godly and religious Master, will make a good and a
faithful servant, as may witness the examples of Abraham, Joshua, David,
Cornelius, etc. who had good servants, because they were religious masters,
such as were careful to make their servants Gods servants.

It is the chief labor and care of most men, to raise and to advance their
house; yet let them rise up early and lie down late, and eat the bread of
carfulness, all will be but in vain, Psalm. 127.1.2
for except the Lord build a house (that is, raise up a family) they labor in
vain. For GOD has sealed this as an irreuocable Decree, Ier. 10.25.
that he will pour his wrath upon the Families that call not upon his Name:
yea, God will take the wicked, Psalm. 52.5.
and pluck him out of his Tabernacle, and root him out of the land, Genesis
15.16.
etc. Yea, when his iniquities are full; he will make the Land to spue out
every Canaanite. Leu. 18.25.
Religion then, and the Service of God in a Family, is the best building and
surest entailing of house and Land to a man and his posterity: Psalm. 3.7.29.
for the righteous man shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.

As therefore if thou desire to have the blessing of God upon thy self and
upon thy family: either before or after thine own private devotion, call
every morning all thy family to some convenient room; and first, either read
thy self unto them a Chapter in the word of God, or cause it to be read
distinctly by some other. If leisure serve, thou may Origin would have the
Word expounded in Christian houses. Hom. 9. in Leuit. Augustine says, that
which the Preacher is in the Pulpit, the same the householder is in the house.
admonish them of some remarkable good notes; and then kneeling down with
them in reverent sort, as is before described, pray with them in this manner.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Lord our GOD and heavenly father, who art the only Creator and Governor of
Heaven and Earth, and all things therein contained, we confess that we are
unworthy to appear in thy sight and presence, considering our manifold sins
which we have committed against Heaven, and before thee: and how that we
have been borne in sin, and do daily break thy holy Laws and
Commandments, contrary to our knowledge and Consciences, albeit that we know
that thou art our Creator, who have made us; our Redeemer, who have bought us
with the blood of thine only begotten Son; and our Comforter, who bestowest
upon us all the good and holy graces, which we enjoy in our souls and bodies.
And if thou should but deal with us, as our wickedness and
unthankfulness have deserved; what other thing might we, O Lord, expect from
thee, but shame and confusion in this life, and in the world to come wrath and
everlasting condemnation? Yet, O Lord, in the obedience of thy Commandment,
and in the confidence which we have in thy unspeakable and endless mercy in
thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ: we thy poor Servants appealing from thy
Throne of Justice (where we are justly lost and condemned) to thy throne of
Grace (where mercy reigns to pardon abounding sin:) do from the bottom of
our hearts most humbly beseech thee to remit and forgive unto us all our
offenses and misdeedes, that by the virtue of the precious blood of JESUS
CHRIST, thine innocent Lamb, which he so abundantly shed to take away the
sins of the world: all our sins both original and actual, may be so cleansed
and washed from us, as that they may never be laid to our charge, nor never
have power to rise up in Judgment against us. And we beseech thee, good
Father, for Christ his death and passions sake: that thou will not suffer to
fall upon us that fearful curse and vengeance, which thy Law has threatened,
and our sins have justly deserved. And for as much, O Lord, as we are taught
by thy word, that Idolaters, Adulterers, covetous men, contentious persons,
drunkards, gluttons, and such like inordinate livers, shall not inherit the
kingdom of God: pour the grace of thy holy spirit into our hearts, whereby we
may be enlightened to see the filthiness of our sins, to abhor them: and
may be more and more stirred up to live in newness of life, and love of thy
Majesty; so that we may daily increase in the obedience of thy word, and in
a conscionable care of keeping thy Commandments.

And now, O Lord, we render unto thee most hearty thanks, for that thou have
elected, created, redeemed, called, justified and sanctified us in good measure
in this life, and given us an assured hope that thou vvilt glorify us in thy
heavenly Kingdom, when this mortal life is ended. Likewise we thank thee
for our life, health, wealth, liberty, prosperity, and peace, especially, o
Lord, for the continuance of thy holy Gospel among us, and for sparing us so
long, and granting us so gracious a time of Repentance. Also we praise thee,
for all other thy mercies bestowed upon us; more especially, for preserving us
this night past, from all dangers, that might have befallen our souls or
bodies. And seeing thou have now brought us safe to the beginning of this day,
we beseech thee, protect and direct us in the same. Bless and defend us in
our going out and coming in, this day and evermore. Shield us, O LORD, from
the temptations of the Devil, and grant us the custody of thy holy Angels to
defend and direct us in all our ways.

And to this end, we recommend our selves, and all those that belong unto us,
and are abroad from us, into thy hands, and almighty tuition. Lord defend them
from all evil, prosper them in all graces, and fill them with thy goodness.
Preserve us likewise this day, from falling into any gross sin, especially
those whereunto our natures are most prone. Set a watch before the door of
our lips, that we offend not thy Majesty, by any rash or false oaths; or by
any lewd or lying speeches: give unto us patient minds, pure and chaste
hearts, and all other graces of thy Spirit, which thou know to be needful
for us, that we may the better be enabled to serve thee in holiness and
righteousness. And seeing that all man's labor without thy blessing is in
vain; bless every one of us in our several places and callings, direct thou
the works of our hands upon us, even prosper thou our handy-worke; (for except
thou guide us with thy grace, our endeavors can have no good success.) And
provide for us all things which thou, O Father. know to be needful for
every one of us in our souls and bodies this day. And grant that we may so
pass through the pilgrimage of this short life; that our hearts being not
settled upon any transitory things, which we meet with, in the way: our souls
may every day be more and more ravished with the love of our home, and thine
everlasting Kingdom.

Defend likewise, O Lord, thy universal Church, and every particular member
thereof: especially we beseech thee to continue the peace and prosperity of
these Churches and Kingdoms wherein we live. Preserve and defend from all
evils and dangers, our gracious King, the Queen, our hopeful Prince Charles,
together with the Princely Palsgraue of Rhene, and religious Princess
Elizabeth his wife. Multiply their days in bliss and felicity: and afterward
crown them with everlasting joy and glory. Bless all our Ministers and
Magistrates with all graces needful for their places, and govern thou them,
that they may govern us, in peace and godliness. And of thy mercy, O Lord,
comfort all our brethren that are destressed, sick, or any way comfortless,
especially those who are afflicted either with an evil conscience, because
they have sinned against thy word, or for a good conscience, because they will
not sin against thy truth. Make the first to know, that not one drop of the
blood of Christ, was a drop of vengeance, but all drops of grace, powerful to
procure pardon upon repentance, for the greatest sins of the chiefest sinner
in the world. And for the other, let not, O Lord, thy long sufferance either
too much discourage them, or too much encourage their enemies: but grant them
patience in suffering, and a gracious and speedy deliverance, which way may
stand best with their comfort and thy glory.

Give every one of us grace, to be always mindful of his last end, and to be
prepared with faith and repentance, as with a wedding garment against the time
that thou shall call for us out of this sinful world. And that in the mean
while, we may so in all things, and above all things, seek thy glory, that
when this mortal life is ended, we may then be made partakers of immortality,
and life eternal, in thy most blessed and glorious Kingdom. These and all
other graces, which thou, O Father, see to be necessary for us, and for thy
whole Church, we humbly beg and crave at thy hands; concluding this our
imperfect prayer, in that absolute form of prayer, which Christ himself has
taught us, saying: Our Father, etc.

After Prayers, let every one of thy Household (taking in the fear of GOD, such
a breakefast or refreshing as is fit) depart: the children to School, the
servants to their work, every one to his office, the Master and Mistress of
the Family to their callings, or to some honest exercises for recreation as
they think fit.

The Practice of Piety at meals and the manner of feeding in the fear of God.
BEfore dinner and supper, when the Table is covered, ponder with thy self
upon these Meditations: to work a deeper impression in thy heart of Gods
fatherly providence and goodness toward thee.

Meditations before dinner and supper.
1 MEditate that hunger is like the sickness called a Woolfe: which if thou
do not feed; will devour thee, and eat thee up: and that meat and drink,
Hoc me docuisti, vt quemadmodum medicamenta, sic alimenta sumpturus accedam.
Aug. lib. 10. Confess.
are but as Physic, or means which GOD has ordained, to relieve and cure
this natural infirmity, and necessity of man. Use therefore to eat and to
drink, rather to sustain and refresh the weakness of nature; then to
satisfy the sensuality and delights of the flesh. Eat therefore to live, but
live not to eat. A Skauenger, whose living is to empty; is to be preferred
before him, that lives but to fill Priuies. There is no service so Mayor sum
and ad maiora genitus, quam vt mancipiu^ sim mei corporis. Senec.
base; as for a man to be a slave to his belly. The Apostle terms such,
Belly-gods, Phil. 3.19. Therefore we may boldly term them as the Scriptures
do other Idols, Of Galal, which signifies man's Dung, as Eze. 4.17.15.
Gillulim, Dungy gods. Hab. 2.18.19. 2 King. 17.12. And as no one action (Gods
ordinance excepted) makes a man more to resemble a beast, then eating or
drinking: so the abuse of eating and drinking to surfeiting, drunkenness, and
spewing; makes a man more vile then a beast.

2 Meditate of the omnipotency of GOD who made all these creatures of nothing:
Heb. 11.3.
of his wisdom, who feeds so many infinite creatures through the universal
world, Psalm. 145.15.16.
maintaining all their lives, which he has given them: which surpasses the
wisdom of all the Angels in heaven: Math. 5.14.45. etc.
and of his clemency and goodness, Act. 14.17.
in feeding also his very enemies.

3 Meditate, how many sorts of creatures, as beasts, fish, and foul, have lost
their lives, to become food to nourish thee: and how Gods providence from
remote places, has brought al these portions together on thy Table, for thy
nourishment: and how by these dead creatures he maintains thee in health and
life.

4 Meditate, that seeing thou have so many pledges of Gods fatherly bounty,
Hanc ob caeusam Gentiles mensas sacra and festa nominabant. Viues.
goodness, and mercy toward thee, as there are dishes of meat on thy Table:
Oh suffer not in such a place, so gracious a God, to be abused by scurrilitie,
ribauldry, or swearing: or thy Saint Austen had written over his table. Quisquis
amat dictis absentum rodere samam, hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
Possid. de vita Aug.
fellow brother, by disgraceful backebiting, taunting or slandering.

5 Meditate, how that thy Master Jesus Christ did never eat any food* but
first he blessed the creatures, and gave thanks to his heavenly Father for the
same. And after his last Supper, we read that he sung a Psalm. Luke 9.16.
Matthew. 14.19. and 15.36. Mar. 6.41. and 8.6. Luke 24. Ioh. 6.11. Mar. 26.30.
Deuteronomy. 1.10.
For this was the commandment of God. When thou have eaten and filled thy
self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God, etc. This was the practice of the
Prophets. For, The people would not eat at their feast, till Samuel came to
bless their meat. 1 Samuel 9.13.
And says Joel to Gods people, You shall eat and be satisfied, Joel. 2.26.
and praise the name of the Lord your God. This also was the practice of the
Apostles. Act. 27.35.
For Saint Paul in the ship, gave thanks before meat. In the presence of all
the people that were therein. Imitate thou therefore in so holy an action, so
blessed a Master, and so many worthy Presidents that have followed him, and
gone before thee. It may be; because thou have never used to give thanks at
meals, therefore thou art now ashamed to begin. Think it no shame to do
what Christ did: but be rather ashamed that thou have so long neglected so
Christian a duty. And if the Son of God gave his Father such great thanks
for a dinner of Barley bread and broyled fish; Ioh. 6.9. and 21.9.
what thanks should such a sinful man as thou art, render unto GOD, for such
va^ietie of good and dainty cheer? how many a true Christian would be glad to
fill his belly with the morsels which thou refusest, and do lack that which
thou leauest? How hardly do others labor for that which they eat, and thou
have thy food provided for thee, without either care or labor? To conclude,
Dan. 5.1.4.
if Pagan Idolaters at their feasts, were accustomed to praise their false
Gods; what a shame is it for a Christian, at his dinners and suppers, not to
praise the true GOD, Acts 17.28.
in whom we live, move, and have our being?

6 Meditate, that thy body which thou do now so daintily feed, must be
(thou know not how soon) meat for Worms: Ioh 17.14.
When thou shall say to Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm, thou
art my Mother, and my Sister.

7 Meditate, how that many a man's Table is made his snare: Psalm. 69.22.
so that through his intemperancie and unthankfulness, the meat which should
nourish his body, kills him with a surfeit: insomuch, that more are killed with
this snare, Genesis 3.17. 1 Timothy 4.4.5.
then with the sword. And seeing that since the Curse, Mat. 4.4. Leuit. 26.26
the use (as of all creatures, so likewise) of meat and drink, is unto us
unclean, Ezch. 4.16. and 5.16.
till the same be sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer: and that man lives
not by bread only, 1 Samuel 9.13. Mat. 14.6. Luke 24.30. 1 Cor. 10.1. Romans 14.6.
1 These. 5.18. Eccle. 10.17 Luke 21.34. Eccle. 31.20 Nehe. 6.10. Amos 6.6.
but by the Word of Gods ordinance, and his blessing, which is called the
staff of bread: Sit not therefore down to eat, before you pray, and rise
not, before you give God thanks. Feed to suffice Nature, yet rise with an
appetite: and remember thy poor christian brethren, who suffer hunger, and
want those good things wherewith thou do abound. These things, or some of them
premeditated: (if there be not a Samuel present) lift up with all comely
reverence, 1 Samuel 9.13. Mat. 14.19.
thy heart with thy hands and eyes, unto the great Creator and Feeder of all
Creatures, and before meat pray unto him thus:

Grace before meat.
O Most gracious GOD, and loving Father, who feedest all Creatures living,
Psalm. 104.27 Joel 1.20. Psalm. 147.9. Job 39.3. 1 Timothy 4.5.
which depend upon thy divine Providence: we beseech thee, sanctify these
creatures, which thou have ordained for us: give them virtue to nourish our
bodies, in life and health: and give us grace, to receive them soberly and
thankefully, as from thy hands: 1 Reg. ^9.8.
that so in the strength of these and other thy blessings, we may walk in
the uprightness of our hearts, before thy face, this day, and all the days of
our lives: Through Jesus Christ, our LORD and only Savior. Amen.

Or thus.
MOst gracious God, and merciful Father, we beseech thee sanctify these
Creatures to our use: make them healthful for our nourishment; and us
thankful for all thy blessings, through Christ our Lord and only Savior.
Amen.

Another Grace before meat.
O Eternal GOD, in whom we live, move, and have our being, we beseech thee
bless unto thy Servants, these Creatures, that in the strength thereof, we may
live to the setting forth of thy praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

After every meal, be careful of thy self and Family, as Job was for
himself, and his Children, Job 1.4. least that in the cheerfulness of eating
and drinking, some speech has slipped out, which might be either offensive to
God, or injurious to Man: And therefore with the like comely gesture and
reverence give thanks unto God, and pray in this manner.
BLessed be thy holy name O Lord our GOD, for these thy good benefits,
wherewith thou have so plentifully at this time refreshed our bodies; O Lord
vouchsafe likewise to feed our souls, with the spiritual food^ of thy holy
Word and spirit unto life everlasting. Lord defend and save thy whole Church:
our gracious King, and Queen, our Noble Prince, the Prince Palatine of Rhene,
and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife: Forgive us our sins, and unthankfulness,
pass by our manifold infirmities, make us all mindful of our last ends, and
of the reckoning that we are to make to thee therein. And in the mean, while
grant unto us health, peace, and truth, in Jesus Christ our Lord, and only
Savior.

Or thus.
BLessed be thy holy name (O Lord) for these thy good benefits, wherewith thou
have refreshed us at this time. Lord, forgive us all our sins and frailties,
save and defend thy whole Church, our King, Queen, and royal posterity, and
grant us health, peace, and truth in Christ our only Savior. Amen.

Or thus.
WE give thee thanks (O heavenly Father, for feeding our bodies so graciously
with thy good Creatures, to this temporal life: beseeching thee likewise to
feed our souls with thy holy Word unto life everlasting. Defend (O Lord)
thine universal Church, the King, Queen, and their royal Posterity, and
grant us continuance of thy grace and mercy in Christ our only Savior. Amen.

The Practice of Piety at Evening.
At evening when the due time of repairing to rest approaches, call together
again all thy Family. Read a Chapter in the same manner that was prescribed
in the morning. Then (in the holy imitation of our Lord and his Disciples) sing
a Psalm. But in singing of Psalms either after Supper, or at any other time,
observe these Rules.

Rules to be observed in singing of Psalms
1 BEware of singing divine Psalms for an ordinary recreation; as do men of
impure spirits, who sing holy Psalms intermingled with profane Ballads. They
are Gods word, take them not in thy mouth in vain.

2 Remember to sing David's Psalms with David's spirit. Mat. 22.43.


3 Practice Saint Paul's rule: I will sing with the spirit, 1 Cor^ 14.15
but I will sing with the understanding also.

4 As you sing uncover your heads, 1 Cor. 11.4.
and behave your selves in comely reverence, as in the sight of God, singing to
God, in Gods own words. But be sure that the matter makes more melody in your
hearts, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16.
then the Music in your ears: for the singing with a grace in our hearts, is
that which the Lord is delighted withal, according to that old verse: Non
vox, sed votum, non musica chordula, sed cor:
Non clamans, sed amans, psallit in aure Dei.
It Is not the voice, but vow:
Sound heart, not sounding string:
True zeal, not outward show,
That in Gods ear does ring.


5 Thou may, if thou think good, sing all the Psalms over in order: for all
are most divine and comfortable. But if thou vvilt choose some special Psalms,
as more fit for some times and purposes: and such as by the often usage, thy
people may the easilier commit to memory:

Then sing,

In the Morning, Psalm. 3.5.16.22.144.

In the Evening, Psalm. 4.127.141.

For mercy after a sin committed, 51.103.

In sickness or heaviness, Psalm. 6.13.88.90 91.137.146.

When thou art recovered, Psalm. 30.32.

On the Sabbath day, Psalm. 19.92.95.

In time of joy, Psalm. 80.98.107.136.145.

Before Sermon, Psalm. 1.12.147. The 1. and 5. Part of the 119.

After Sermon, any Psalm, which concerns the chief argument of the Sermon.

At the Communion, Psalm. 22.23.103.111.113.

For spiritual solace, Psalm. 15.19.25.46.67.112.116.

After wrong and disgrace received, Psalm. 42.69.70.140.144.

After the Psalm, all kneeling down in reverend manner, as is before
described, let the Father of the Family (or the chiefest in his absence,) pray
thus.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Eternal GOD, and most graciour Father, we thine unworthy Servants, here
assembled, do cast down our selves, at the foote-stoole of thy grace,
acknowledgeing that we have inherited our Fathers corruption, and actually in
thought, word and deed, transgressed all thy holy commandments. So that in us
naturally, there dwells nothing that is good: for our hearts are full of
secret pride, anger, impatiency, dissembling, lying, lust, vanity,
profaneness, distrust, too much love of our selves, and the world, too little
love of thee, and thy Kingdom: but empty and void of faith, love, patience,
and every spiritual grace. If thou therefore should but enter into
judgment with us, and search out our natural corruptions, and observe all the
cursed fruits and effects that we have derived from thence: Satan might justly
challenge us for his own, and we could not expect any thing from thy
Majesty, but thy wrath, and our condemnation, which we have long ago
deserved. But good Father, for Jesus Christ thy dear Sons sake, in whom
only thou art well pleased, Mat. 3.17.
and for the merits of that bitter death, and bloody passion, which we believe
that he has suffered for us: have mercy upon us, pardon and forgive us all our
sins, and free us from the shame and confusion which are due unto us for
them: that they may never seize upon us to our confusion in this life, nor to
our condemnation in the world which is to come. And forasmuch as thou have
created us to serve thee, as all other creatures to serve us: so we beseech
thee inspire thy holy Spirit into our hearts that by his illumination and
effectual working, we may have the inward sight, and feeling of our sins and
natural corruptions, and that we may not be blinded in them through custom,
as the Reprobates are: but that we may more and more loath them, and be
heartily grieved for them, endeavoring by the use of al good means to
overcome and get out of them. Oh let me feel the power of Christ's death,
killing sin in our mortal bodies, Romans 6.6. Phil. 3.10.
and the virtue of his resurrection, raising up our souls to newness of life.
Convert our hearts, subdue our affections, regenerate our minds, and purify
our nature; and suffer us not to be drowned in the stream of those filthy
vices and sinful pleasures of this time, wherewith thousands are carried
headlong to eternal destruction: but daily frame us more and more to the
likeness of thy Son Jesus Christ, Romans 8.29. Ephesians. 4.24.
that in righteousness and true holiness we may so serve and glorify thee:
that living in thy fear, and dying in thy favor, we may in thine appointed
time attain to the blessed resurrection of the just, unto eternal life. In the
mean while, O Lord, increase our faith in the sweet promises of the Gospel,
and our repentance from dead works, the assurance of our hope in thy promises,
our fear of thy name, the hatred of all our sins, and our love unto thy
children; especially those whom we shall see to stand in need of our help and
comfort. That so by the fruits of piety and a righteous life; we may be
assured that thy holy spirit does dwell in us, and that we are thy children by
grace and adoption. And grant us good Father the continuance of health, peace,
maintenance, and all other outward things: so far forth, as thy divine
wisdom shall think meet and necessary for every one of us.

And here. O Lord, according to our bounden duty* we confess that thou have
been exceeding merciful unto us all, in things of this life: but infinitely
more merciful in the things of a better life: and therefore we do here from
our very souls render unto thee all humble and hearty thanks for all thy
blessings and benefits bestowed upon our souls and bodies: acknowledging thee
to be that Father of lights, from whom we have received all these good and
perfect gifts; Iam. 1.17.
and unto thee alone for them, we ascribe to be due, all glory, honor, and
praise, both now and evermore. But more especially, we praise thy divine
majesty, for that thou have defended us this day from all perils and dangers:
so that none of those judgments (which our sins have deserved) have fallen
upon any one of us. Good Lord, forgive us the sins, which this day we have
committed against thy divine Majesty, and our Brethren: and for Christ his
sake, be reconciled unto us for them. And we beseech thee likewise of the same
thine infinite goodness and mercy, to defend and protect us, Psalm. 78.49.
Psalm. 91.5.
and all that belong unto us, this night, from all danger of fire, robbery,
terrors of evil Angels, or any other fear or peril, which for our sins
might justly fall upon us. And that we may be safe under the shadow of thy
wings; Psalm, 91.5^
we here commend our bodies and souls and all that we have, unto thine
Almighty protection. Lord bless and defend both us and them from all evil.
And whilst we sleep do thou, O Father, who never slumbrest nor sleep,
watch over thy children, and give a charge to thy holy Angels, Genesis 32.2. 2
King. 6.16 17. Psalm. 91.11.12. Heb. 1.14.
to pitch their tents round about our house and dwelling, to guard us from all
dangers. That sleeping with thee we may in the next morning be wakned by thee;
and so being refreshed with moderate sleep, we may be the fitter, to set
forth thy glory in the conscionable duties of our callings.

And we beseech thee, O Lord, to be merciful likewise to thy whole Church,
and to continue the tranquillity of these Kingdoms wherein we live, turning
from us those plagues which the crying sins of this Nation do cry for.

Preserve our religious King James, from all dangers and conspiracies, bless
and prosper the Queen, our hopeful Prince Charles, The Princely Palsgraue of
Rhene, and the gracious Princess Elizabeth his dear wife: all our Magistrates
and Ministers, all that fear thee, and call upon thy name, all our Christian
brethren and sisters, that suffer sickness or any other affliction or misery:
especially those who any where do suffer persecution for the testimony of the
holy Gospel, grant them patience to bear thy cross, and deliverance, when,
and which way, it shall seem best to thy divine wisdom. And Lord, suffer us
never to forget our last ends, and those reckonings, which then we must render
unto thee; In health and prosperity, make us mindful of sickness, and of
the evil day that is behind: that these things may not overtake us as a
snare, but that we may in good measure, Luke 21.35.
likewise Virgins, be found prepared for the coming of Christ, Mat. 25.2. etc.
the sweet bridegroom of our souls. And now, O Lord most holy and just, we
confess that there is no cause, why thou, (who art so much displeased with
sin) should hear the prayer of sinners: but for his sake only who
suffered for sin and sinned not. In the only mediation therefore of thine
eternal Son Jesus our Lord and Savior, we humbly beg these, and all
other graces which thou know to be needful for us, shutting up those our
imperfect requests, in that most holy prayer, which Christ himself has
taught us to say unto thee. Our Father, etc.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy love O heavenly Father, thy comfort and
consolation, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us, and remain with us this
night and for evermore. Amen.

Then saluting one another, as becomes Christians who are the vessels of
Grace, and temples of the holy Ghost. Let them in the fear of God depart every
one to his rest: using some of the former private meditations for Evening.

Thus far of the Householders public practice of Piety, with his Family
every day. Now follows his practice of Piety, with the Church on the Saboth
day.

Meditations of the true manner of practicing Piety on the Sabbath day.
ALmighty God will have himself worshipped, not only in a private manner, by
private persons and Families: but also in a more public sort, of all the godly
joined together in a visible Church: that by this means he may be known not
only to be God and Lord of every singular person; but also of the Creatures of
the whole universal world.

Quest. But why do not we Christians, under the new, keep the Sabbath on the
same seventh day, vvhereon it was kept under the Old Testament?

I answer: because that our Lord Jesus, Mat. 12.1. Deuteronomy. 18.18.19.
who is the Lord of the Sabbath, and whom the Law it self commands us to
hear, did alter it from that seventh day to this first day of the week,
whereon we keep the Sabbath. For the holy Evangelist notes; that our Lord
came into the midst of the holy assembly, on the two first days of the two
weeks immediately following his Resurrection, Ioh. 20.19. verse 26.
and then blessed the Church, breathed on the Apostles the holy Ghost, and gave
them the ministerial Keys and power of binding and remitting sins. And so
it is most probable he did in a solemn manner, every first day of the week,
during the forty days he continued on earth between his Resurrection and
Ascension, (for the fiftieth day after, being the first of the week, the
Apostles were assembled,) during which time he gave Commandments unto the
Apostles, and Acts 1.2.3. Cyril bids us note, that S. John does not simply set
down the manner of Christ's appearing unto Thomas, but also the circumstance of
the time, ( post dies octo) whence he concludes thus; Diem igitur octauum
Dominicu^ diem esse necesse est. Cyril. in Johan. lib. 12. cap. 58.
spoke unto them those things which appertain to the Kingdom of God, that is,
instructed them, how they should throughout the Churches (which were to be
converted) change the Sabbath to the Lords day: the bodily sacrifices of beasts
to the spiritual sacrifices of praise, prayer, and contrite hearts: the Heb.
7.11.12 Ephesians. 4.8.11.12.13.
Leuiticall Priesthood of the Law, to the Christian Ministry of the Gospel:
the Jewish Temples and Sinagogues, to Churches and Oratories: the old
Sacraments of Circumcision and Passover, to Baptism and the Lords Supper,
etc. as may appear by the like phrase, Acts 19.8. and Acts 28.23. Col. 4.11.
put for the whole sum of Paul's doctrine, by which was wrought all these
changes where it took effect. So that as Christ was forty days instructing
Moses in Sinai, what he should teach, and how he should rule the Church under
the Law: So he continued forty days teaching his Disciples in Sion what they
should preach, and how they should govern the Church under the Gospel. And
seeing it is manifest that within those forty days, Ephesians. 4.1.11.12.
Christ appointed what Ministers should teach, and how they should govern his
Church to the worlds end; it is not to be doubted, but that within those
forty days he likewise ordained on what day they should keep their Sabbath,
and ordinarily do the works of their Ministry, especially seeing that
under the old Testament, GOD showed himself as careful both by his Moral
and Ceremonial Law, to prescribe the time, as well as the matter of his
worship. Neither is it a thing to be omitted, that the Lord, Acts 1.7.
who has times and seasons in his own power, appointed this first day of the
week, to be the very day Act. 2.1. etc.
wherein he sent down from heaven the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, so that
upon that day they first began, and ever after continued the public
exercising of their Ministry, in the Act. 2.14.
preaching of the Word, the Act. 2.38.41.42.
administration of the Sacraments, and the Act. 2.31.39
loosing of the sins of penitent sinners: upon these and the like grounds,
Athan. in front. specio hom. de sem.
Athanasius plainly affirms, that the Sabbath day was changed by the Lord
himself.

As therefore our Communion is termed the Lords Supper, because it was
instituted of the Lord, for the remembrance of his death: so the Christian
Sabbath is called the Apoc. 1.10 The Scripture of the new Test. gives not this
honorable title to any thing but only to the blessed Sabbath and holy Supper.
For as he substituted the Lords Supper in stead of the Passover: so did he
the Lords day in the Jewish Sabbaths room.
Lords day, because it was ordained of the Lord, for the memorial of his
Resurrection. And as the Name of the 1 Cor. 11.20.
Lord honors the one, so does it the other. And as the Lord of the Sabbath,
by his royal prerogative, and transcendent authority could; so he had also
reason to change the holy* Sabbath from the seventh day to this, whereon we
keep it. For as concerning that seventh day, we followed the six days,
wherein God finished the Creation; there was no such precise institution, or
necessity of sanctifying it perpetually; but such, as by the same authority,
or upon greater reason and occasion, it might very well be changed and altered
unto some other seventh day. For the Commandment does H. Wolphii Cronolog. de
Temp. lib. 2. cap. 1 page 92 Legis substa^tia est, sex diebus terrenis negotiis
incumbere, septima diuino cul^ui dare operam.
not say, Remember to keep holy the seventh day, next following the sixth day
of the creation, or this, or that seventh day: but indefinitely remember that
thou keep holy a seventh day. And to speak properly, as we take a day for
the distinction of time, called either a day natural, consisting of 24.
hours, or a day artificial, consisting of 12. hours, from Sunrising, to
Sunsetting: and withal consider the Sun standing still at noone, Josh.
10.12.13. 2 King. 20.11.
in Ioshuahs time, the space of a whole day: and the Sun going back ten
degrees, viz. five hours, (almost half an artificial day) in Ezechias time:
the Jews themselves could not keep their Sabbath upon that precise and just
distinction of time, called at the first, the seventh day from the Creation.

Add hereunto that in respect of the diversity of Meridians, Christoph.
Heluic. Syst. contr. Theol. cum Iudaeis cap. de Sab.
and the unequal rising and setting of the Sun, every day varyeth in some
places, a quarter, in some half, in other, a whole day: Therefore, the Jewish
seventh day cannot precisely be kept at the same instant of time, every where
in the world.

Now, our Lord Jesus having authority as Lord over the Sabbath, Mat. 12.8.
had likewise now far greater reason and occasion to translate the Sabbath
from the Jewish seventh day, unto the seventh day, whereon Christians do
keep the Sabbath.

1 Because, that by his Resurrection from the dead, there is wrought a new
spiritual creation of the World: without which all the sons of Adam had
been turned to everlasting destruction, Isa. 65.17. etc. Isay 66.22. Psalm.
90.3.
and all the works of the first creation had ministered no consolation unto us.

And in respect of this new spiritual Creation, the Scripture says, that 2
Cor. 5.17
Old things are passed away, and all things are become new: Gal. 6.15.
new creatures, 1 Pet. 2.10
new people, Ephe. 4.24.
new men, Col. 3.10.
new knowledge, Mat. 26.28
new Testamant, Ioh. 13.14
new Commandment, Apoc. 2.17
new names, Heb. 10.20
new way, Apoc. 3.9.
new song, Luke 5.36
new garment, new Wine, new vessels, Apoc. 21.
new Jerusalem, 2 Pet. 3.13
new Heaven, and a new Earth. And therefore of necessity there must be in
stead of the old a new Isa. 66.22. Heb. 4.9.
Sabbath day, to honor and praise our Redeemer, and to meditate upon the
work of our Redemption, and to show the new change of the old Testament.

3 Because that on this day, Christ rested from all the sufferings of his
Passion, and finished the glorious Work of our Redemption. If therefore the
finishing of the work of the first Creation, whereby GOD mightily manifested
himself unto his creatures, deserved a Sabbath for to solemnize the memorial
of so great a work, to the honor of the worker, and therefore calls it mine
holy Day: Isa. 58.13.
much more does the new creation of the world, effected by the resurrection of
Christ, (whereby he mightily declared himself to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4.
) deserve a Sabbath, for the perpetual commemoration thereof, to the honor of
Christ, and therefore worthily called the Lords day. Apoc. 1.10.
For, as the deliverance out of the captivity of Babylon, Ier. 23.7.8.
being greater, took away the name from the deliverance out of the bondage of
Egypt: so the day whereon Christ finished the redemption of the world, did more
justly deserve to have the Sabath kept on it: then on that day, wherein GOD
ceased from creating the world. As therefore in the Creation the first day
wherein it was finished, was consecrated for a Sabbath: so in the time of
Redemption, the first day wherein it was perfected must be dedicated to a holy
rest. But still a seventh day kept according to Gods moral commandment. The
Jews kept the last day of the week, beginning their Sabath with the night,
when GOD rested: but Christians honor the Lord better, Genesis 2.2. Leuit. 23.32.
Neh. 13.19.
on the first day of the week, beginning the Sabath with the day, when the
Lord arose. Mat. 28.1. Act. 20.7.11
They kept their Sabath in remembrance of the worlds Creation: but Christians
celebrate it in memorial of the worlds redemption: yea the Lords day being the
first of the Creation and Redemption, puts us in mind, both of the making of
the old, and redeeming of the new world.

As therefore under the old Testament, Exodus 25.31
God by the glory consisting of 7. Lamps, 7. Branches, etc. putting them in
remembrance of the Creations, light, and Sabbaths rest: So under the new
Testament, Christ the true light of the world approaceth in the midst of the
7. Lamps, Apo. 1.13.
and 7. golden candlestickes, to put us in mind to honor our redeemer in the
light of the Gospel on the Lords seventh day of rest. And seeing the
Redemption, both for might and mercy, so far exceeds the creation; it
stood with great reason, that the greater work should carry the honor of the
day. Neither does the honorable title of the Lords day, diminish the glory of
the Sabbath: but rather being added, augments the dignity thereof: as the name
Israel added, unto Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
made the Patriarch the more renowned.

The reason taken from the example of Gods resting, from the work of the
creation of the world: continued in force, till the Son of God ceased from
the work of the Redemption of the world, and then the former gave place to the
latter.

4 Because it was foretold in the old Testament that the Sabath should be kept
under the New Testament on the first day of the week.

For, first, in the 110. Psalm, which is a Prophecy of Christ and his
kingdom; it is plainly foretold: that there should be a solemn day of
Assembling, Psalm. 110.3.
wherein all Christ's people should willingly come together in the beauty of
holiness. Insomuch that no rain (of peace) shall be upon those Families that
in that feast will not go up to Jerusalem (the Church) to worship the King,
Zach. 14.17.
the Lord of Hoasts. Now on what day this holy feast, and assembly should be
kept; David shows plainly in Psalm. 118. which was a prophecy of Christ, as
appears, Matthew. 21.42. Act. 4.11. Ephesians. 2.20. as also by the consent of all
the Jews, as Jerome witnesses. For showing how Christ by his ignominious
death, should be as a stone rejected of the builders or chief rulers of Judea,
and yet by this glorious resurrection should become the chief stone of the
corner: he wishes the whole Church to keep holy that day, whereupon Christ
should effect this wonderful work, saying: This is the day which the Lord has
made, Psalm. 118.24.
let us rejoice and be glad in it. And seeing that upon this day, that which
Peter says of Christ appears to be true, That God made him both Lord and and
Christ. Acts 2.36. And therefore the whole Church under the New Testament, must
celebrate the day of Christ's resurrection. Rabbi Bachay also saw by the fall of
Adam on the 6. day, Zohar upon Genesis fol. 21
that on the same day Messiah should finish the work of man's redemption. And
alluding to the speech of Boaz to Ruth: H. Broughton. Require of Consent. page
50.51.
Sleep unto the morning, that Messiah should rest in his grave all their
Sabbath day. And he gathers from that Speech, Genesis 1. on the first day: Let
there be light, that the Messiah should rise on the First day of the week,
from death to life, and cause the spiritual light of the Gospel to enlighten
the world, that lay in the shadow of darkness and death. The Hebrew author of
the Book called Sedar Olam Rabba, cap. 7. records many memorable things
which were done upon the first day of the week, Ex H. Wolphii Cron. de temp.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
as so many types that the chief worship of God should under the New Testament
be celebrated upon this day. As, That on this day the cloud of Gods Majesty
first sat upon his people. Aaron and his children, first executed their
Priesthood. God first solemnly blessed his people. The Princes of his people
first offered publicly unto God. The first day, wherein fire descended from
heaven. The first day of the world, of the year, of months of the week, etc.
All shadowing that it should be first and chief holy day of the New Testament.
Saint Austen proves by diverse places and reasons, Aug. Epist ad Januar. 119.
cap. 13.
out of the holy Scripture, that the Fathers, and all the holy Prophets under
the Old Testament, did foresee and know that our Lords day was shadowed by
their 8. day of Circumcision. And, that the Sabath should be changed from the
7. day to the 8. or first day of the week. And Sacramentum hoc fuit die^
illius octaui, quo dominus resurrexit ad iustificationem nostram etc. vt
scribit ad Fidum Ciprianu^. lib. 3. ep. 10. Iun. in Genesis 17.12.
Iunius out of Cyprian says, that Circumcision was commanded on the 8. day, as
a Sacrament of the 8. day, when Christ should arise from the dead. The Council
Foro Iuliense, affirms that Esaias Prophesied of the keeping of the Sabath upon
the first day of the week. If this mystery was so clearly seen by the
Fathers under the shadows of the Old Testament: 2 Cor. 4.4.
sure the God of this world has deeply blinded their minds who cannot see
the truth thereof under the shining light of the Gospel. Therefore this change
of the Sabath day under the New, was nothing but a fulfilling of that which was
prefigured and foreprophesied under the old Testament.

5 According to their Lords mind and commandment, and the derection of the
holy Ghost, which always assisted them in their Ministerial office: the
Apostles in all the Christian Churches (which they planted) ordained: that the
Christians should keep the holy Sabath, upon that seventh day which is the
first day of the week. 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
Concerning the gathering for the Saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of
Galatia, so do ye also. Every first day of the week, etc. The Syriack
translation has Quu^ congregamini, non sicut iustu^ est in die domini nostri,
commeditis and bibetis.

The Arabian translation also has thus. Non comeditis and bibitis pro vt vere,
diebus domini nostri decet, and Beza witnesses, that in one ancient Greek
copy there is read (...) the Lords day added to every first day, etc.


When ye come together in the Church* (being the Lords day) to eat the Lord
Supper, 1 Cor. 11 20.25.26.
to remember and show the Lords death till he come, etc. In which words note.

1 That the Apostle ordained this day to be kept holy, therefore a divine
Institution.

2 That the day is named the first day of the week, therefore not the Jewish
seventh, or any other.

3 Every first day of the week, which shows a perpetuity.

4 That it was ordained in the Churches of Galatia, as well as of Corinth, and
he settled one uniform order in all the 1 Cor. 14.33.
Churches of the Saints, therefore it was universal.

5 That the exercises of this day were As the phrase of breaking of bread,
comprehends al other exercises of religion. Act. 26.7. So this phrase, of
laying by in store, comprehends all the other exercises of the Sabath, and why
should the Apostle require the collections to be made on the first day of the
week, but because that on this day the holy assembly were held in the the
Apostles time.
collections for the poor (which appears by Act. 2.42. and Iustine Martyrs
testimony Apolog. 2. were gathered in the holy Assembly after) Prayers,
Preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, therefore it was
spiritual.

6 That he will have the collection (though necessary) removed, against his
coming lest it should hinider his preaching: but not their holy meeting on the
Lords day, for it was the time ordained for the public worship of the Lord,
which argues a necessity.

And in the same Epistle, Saint Paul protests, that he delivered them none
other ordinance, 1 Cor. 11.33 and 15.1.2.
or doctrine, but what he had received of the Lord. Insomuch that he charge
them, that If any man think himself to be a Prophet, 1 Cor. 14.37
or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are
the commandments of the Lord. But he wrote unto them, and ordained among them,
to keep their Sabbath on the first day of the week: therefore to keep the
Sabbath on that day, is the very commandment of the Lord. And how can he be,
either a true Prophet, or have any grace of Gods Spirit in his heart, who
seeing so clearly the Lords day to have been instituted and ordained by the
Apostles; will not acknowledge the keeping holy of the Lords day, to be a
Commandment of the Lord? The Jews confess this change of the Sabbath, to
have been made by the Apostles, Pet. Alphons. in Dialog. contr. Iudaeos, tit.
12. they are therefore more blind and sottish then the Jews, who profanely
deny it.

At Troas likewise Saint Paul, together with seven of the chief Evangelists
of the Church, Sopater, Aristarchus, Acts 20.4.5.6. etc.
Secundus, Gayus, Timotheus, Tichicus, and Trophimus, and all the Christians
that were there, kept the holy Sabbath on the first day of the week, in
praying, preaching, and receiving the Lords Supper.

And as it is a thing to be noted, that Luke says not, that the Disciples were
sent for to hear Paul preach, but the Disciples being come together to break
bread upon the first day of the week, that is, to be partakers of the holy
Communion, at what time the Lords death was by the preaching of the word
showed, 1 Cor. 11.26. Paul preached unto them; etc. And that none kept these
meetings but Christians, who only are called Disciples, Act. 11.26. But at
Philippi, where as yet there were no Disciples, Paul is said to go on their
Sabbath day, to the place where the Jews and their Proselites were wont to
pray, and there preached unto them, Acts 16.12.13. so that it is as clear as
the Sun, that it was the Christians usual manner to Acts 21.4. etc.
pass over the Jewish seventh day, and to keep the Sabbath: and their holy
meetings, on the first day of the week. And why does S. John call this the
Lords day; but because it was a day known to be generally kept holy to the
honor of the Lord Jesus, who rose from death to life upon that day, throughout
all the Churches which the Apostles planted? Which, Saint John calls the
Apoc. 1.10 Mos Christianus, etc. It is the manner of Christians to call it the
Lords day, Beda in Luc. cap. 24.1.
Lords day, the rather, to stir up Christians, to a thankful remembrance of
their Redemption by Christ his Resurrection from the dead. And with the day,
the blessing of the Sabbath is likewise translated to the Lords day: because
that all the sanctification belonging to this new world is in CHRIST, Heb. 2.5.
Heb 2.11. and 5.9.
and from him conuayed to Christians. And because there cannot come a greater
authority then that of Christ and his Apostles: nor the like cause, as the new
creation of the world; therefore the Sabbath can never be altered from this
day, to any other, vvhilest this world lasts. Add hereunto how the
Scripture notes, that in the first planting and settling of the Church; nothing
was done, but by the special order and direction of the Apostles, 1 Cor.
11.34. 1 Cor. 14.36.37. Tit. 1.5. Acts 15.6.24. and the Apostles did nothing,
but what they had vvarrant for from Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23.

To sanctify then the Sabbath on the seventh day, is not a ceremonial Law
abrogated: but the moral, and perpetual Law of God perfected. So that the
same perpetual Commandment, which bound the Jews to keep the Sabbath on
that seventh day, to celebrate the worlds creation: binds Christians to
solemnize the Sabbath on this seventh day, in memorial of the worlds
Redemption: for, the fourth Commandment, being a Moral Law, requires a
seventh day, to be kept holy for ever. And the Morality of this, as of the
rest of the Commandments, is more religiously to be kept of us under the
Gospel, then of the Jews under the Law: by how much we (in Baptism) have made
a more special Covenant with God, to keep his Commandments: and God has
couenanted with us, to free us from the Curse, and to assist us with his
spirit to keep his Laws. And that this Commandment of the Sabbath (as well
as the other nine) is Moral and perpetual, may plainly appear by these
reasons.

Ten Reasons demonstrating the commandment of the Sabbath to be Moral.
1 BEcause all the reasons of this Commandment, are moral and perpetual. And
God has bound us to the obedience of this Commandment, with more forcible
reasons then to any of the rest. First, because he did foresee, that
irreligious men, would either more carelessly neglect, or more boldly break
this Commandment, then any other. Secondly, because that in the practice of
this Commandment, the keeping of all the other consists: which makes GOD so
often complain, that all his worship is neglected, or ouer-throwne, when the
Sabbath is either Ier. 17.22. Ezech. 20.19.20.21.24 Ezec. 23.38. Nehe. 9.14.
neglected or transgressed. It would make a man amazed (says Mr. Calvin,) to
consider how eft, and with what zeal and protestation, God requires all that
will be his people, Ex. Bodin de Repub. lib. 4. cap. 2.
to sanctify the seventh day. Yea, how the God of mercy mercilesly punishes
the breach of this Commandment with cruel death: as though it were the sum
of his whole honor and service.

And it is certain; that he who makes no conscience to break the Sabbath;
will not (to serve his turn) make any conscience, to break any of the other
Commandments: so he may do it, without discredit of his reputation, or
danger of man's law. Therefore God placed this Commandment in the midst of
the two Tables: because the keeping of it is the best help, to the keeping of
all the rest. The conscionable keeping of the Sabbath, is the Mother of all
Religion, and good discipline in the Church. Take away the Sabbath, and let
every man serve God when he lists; and what will shortly become of
Religion, and that peace, and order, 1 Cor. 14.33 40.
which God will have to be kept in his Church? The Sabbath day is Gods Market
day, for the weeks provision, wherein he will have us to come unto him, Esa.
55.1.2.
and buy of him, without silver or money, the Bread of Angels, and Water of
life, the Wine of the Sacraments, and Milk of the Word, to feed our Souls:
tried Gold, to enrich our Faith: Apoc. 3.18.
precious eye-salue, to heal our spiritual blindness: and the white raiment
of Christ's righteousness, to cover our filthy nakedness. He is not far
from true Piety, who makes conscience to keep the Sabbath day: but he who can
dispense with his conscience, to break the Sabbath for his own profit or
pleasure: his heart never yet felt, what either the fear of God, or true
Religion means. For, of this Commandment may that speech of S. James be
verified; he that fails in one, James* 2.9.
is guilty of all. Seeing therefore that GOD has fenced this Commandment
with so many moral reasons, it is evident, that the Commandment it self is
moral.

2 Because it was commanded of GOD to Adam in his Innocence: vvhilest
(holding his happiness, not by Faith in Christ's Merits, but by Obedience to
Gods Law:) he needed no Ceremony, shadowing the Redemption of Christ. A
Sabbath therefore of a seventh day cannot be simply a Ceremony, but an
essential part of Gods worship, enjoined unto man when there was but one
condition of all men. And if it was necessary for our first Parents to have a
Sabbath day, Genesis 2*3.
to serve GOD in their perfection, much more need their Posterity to keep
the Sabbath in the state of their corruption. And seeing God himself kept this
day holy, how can that man be holy, that does wilfully profane it?

3 Because it is one of the commandments which God spoke with his own mouth,
and twice Exodus 34.1. etc.
vvrote with his own Fingers in Tables of stone, to signify their authority
and perpetuity. All that God wrote, were moral and perpetual commandments,
Deuteronomy. 4.13.
and those are reckoned ten in number. If this were now but an abrogated
ceremony, then there were but nine commandments. The Ceremonial that were to
be abrogated by Christ, were written all by Moses. Deuteronomy. 4.4.
But this of the Sabbath, with the other nine, written by GOD himself, were
put into the Arc, where no Ceremonial Law was put, to show that they should
be the perpetual rules of the Church; yet such, 1 Reg. 8.9. Heb. 9.4.
as none could perfectly fulfill and keep, but only Christ.

4 Because Christ professes, Romans 5.17.
that he came not to destroy the moral law: and that the least of them should
not be abrogated in his kingdom of the new Testament. Insomuch, that
Whosoever breaks one of the least of these ten commandments, and teaches
men so: Matthew. 5.19.
he should be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, that is, he should
have no place in his Church. Now the Moral Law commands one day of seven to
be perpetually kept a holy Sabbath. And Christ himself expressly mentions
the the keeping of a Sabbath among his Christians, at the destruction of
Jerusalem, about 42. years after his Resurrection. By which time, all the
Mosaical ceremonies (except eating of blood, and things strangled) were by a
public decree of all the Apostles quite abolished, Acts 15.20.24.28.21.
and abrogated in Christian Churches. And therefore Christ adomonished his
Disciples, Mat. 24.20.
to pray that their flight be not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day. Not
in the winter; for that (by reason of the foulness of the ways and weather)
their flight should be more painful and troublesome unto them: not upon the
Sabath; because it would be more grievous to their hearts, to spend that day
in toyling to save their lives: which the Lord had commanded to be spent in
holy exercises, to comfort their souls. Now if the sanctifying of the Sabbath
on this day had been but ceremonial: it had been no grief to have fled on
this day no more then on any other day of the week. But in that Christ does
tender so much this fear and grief of being driven to fly on the Sabath day:
and therefore wishes his to pray unto God to prevent such an occasion: he
plainly demonstrates, that the observation of the Sabbath is no abrogated
ceremony, but a Moral commandment, confirmed and established by Christ among
Christians. If you would know the day whereupon Christ appointed Christians to
keep the Sabbath; Saint John will tell you that it was on the Lords day. Apoc.
1.10. If you will know on what day of the week that was; Saint Paul will tell
you, that it was on every first day of the week. 1 Cor. 16.1.

As Christ admonished, so Christians pray, and according to their prayers;
Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 5. It is probable that this oracle was that
voice ( migremus hinc) which with an earthquake was heard by night in the
temple mentioned by Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 7. cap. 12.
GOD (a little before the wars began,) warns by an Oracle, all the
Christians in Jerusalem to depart thence, and to go to Pella, a little Town
beyond Jorden: and so to escape the wrath of GOD, that should fall upon that
City and Nation. If then a Christian should not, without grief of heart, fly
for the safety of his life on the Lords day: with what joy or comfort can a
true Christian neglect the holy exercises of Gods worship in the Church, to
spend the greatest part of the Lords day in profane and carnal sports or
servile labor? And seeing the destruction of Jerusalem was both a type and an
assurance of the destruction of the world: Mat. 24.35.
who seeeth not, but that the holy Sabbath must continue, till the very end of
the world?

5 Because that all the ceremonial Law was enjoined to the Jews only, and
not to the Gentiles: but this commandment of the holy Sabbath (as Matrimony)
was instituted of God in the state of innocence, when there was but one state
of all men: and therefore enjoined to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews. So
that all Magistrates and Householders were commanded to constrain all strangers
(as well as their own Subjects and Family) to observe the holy Sabath, Isa.
56.6.
as appears by the fourth commandment, and practice of Nehemiah. Nehem.
13.11. etc. Ephesians. 2.14.
All the Ceremonies were a partition wall to separate Jews and Gentiles. But
seeing the Gentiles are bound to keep this commandment as well as the Jews;
it is evident, that it is no Jewish ceremony. And seeing the same authority, is
for the Sabbath, that is for marriage; a man may as well say, that marriage is
but a ceremonial law, as the Sabath. And remember that where marriage is termed
but once the covenant of GOD, Pro 2.17. Mat. 19.6.8.
because instituted by GOD in the beginning: So the Sabbath is every where
called the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, because ordained by God in the same
beginning, both of time, state, and perpetuity: therefore not ceremonial.

The corruption of our nature found in the manifest opposition of wicked men,
Nitimur in vetitum. Hor.
and in the secret unwillingness of good men to sanctify sincerely the
Sabbath, sufficiently demonstrateth, that the commandment of the Sabbath is
spiritual and moral. Romans 7.14.


7 Because that as God by a perpetual decree, Genesis 1.14. Job. 9.9. Job 38.31.
Amos 5.8.
made the the Sun, the Moon, and other lights in the Firmament of Heaven,
not only to divide the day from the night, but also to be for To distinguish
twixt Spring and Harvest, Summer and Winter and to foreshew Judgments to come.
signs, and for Moaedim sig. Sacred times appointed for Gods holy worship,
having special significations and promises.
seasons, and for One of the 7. days of the week from the other.
days, and for Solar, Sabbatary, and Jubilee. Ex. 23 11.12.
years: so he ordained in the Church on Earth, the holy Sabbath to be not
only the appointed season for his solemn worship: but also the perpetual rule
and measure of time. So that as seven days make a week, four weeks a
month, twelve months a year: so seven years make a Sabbath of years: seven
Sabbaths of years a Jubilee: or 80. Iubilies, or 4000 years, or after
Ezechiel, 4000 cubits the whole time of the old Testament, til Christ by his
Baptism and preaching began the state of the new Testament. Neither can I here
pass over without admiration, how the Sacrament of circumcision continued in
the Church 39. Iubilies, from Abraham, to whom it was first given, unto the
Baptism of Christ in Jordan: Index Chron. apup Anno Mundi. 1998.
which was just so many Iubilies (after Bucholcerus count) as the world had
continued before from Adam to the birth of Abraham. Moses began his Ministry in
the 80. year of his age: Christ enters upon his Office in the 80. Iubile of
the worlds age. Joseph was 30. year old, when he began to rule over Egypt.
Genesis 41.46. and the Levites began to serve in the Tabernacle at 30. years old:
so Christ likewise to answer these figures, began his Ministry in the 30.
Iubile of Moses, and when he began to be 30. years of age. Luke 3.23. in the
midst of Daniels last week: and so (continuing his ministry on earth 3.
years and a half) finished our redemption, and Daniels period, by his
innocent death upon the Cross. The most of all the great alterations, and
strange accidents, which fell out in the Church, came to pass, either in a
Sabaticall year, or in a year of Jubilee. For example. After M. Rob. Pont.
his computation. Treatise of the last decaying age of the world, published Anno
Dom. 1600.


The 70. weeks of Daniel beginning the first year of Cyrus, and 3430. year
of the World, contain so many years, as the world did weeks of years unto
that time: and so many weeks of years, as the world had lasted Iubilies. R.
Pont. tr. of the last age, page 17.
Daniels 70. weeks of years contained 490. single years, the World before
that time 490. weeks or Sabbaths of years. Daniels period, 70. weeks, the
worlds 70. Iubilies: So that to comfort the Church for their 70. years
captivity which they had now, Ier. 25.11.12
according to Ieremies Prophecy endured in Babylon: Hezr. 1.1.
Gabriel tells Daniel, that at the end of 70. weeks or Sabbaths of years,
that is, 70. times seven years, or 490. years, their eternal redemption from
hell, should be effected by the death of Christ, as sure as they were now
redeemed from the Captivity of Babylon. This period of Daniel, containing 70.
Sabbaths, or 10. Iubilies of years, began at the first liberty granted the
Jews by Cyrus, in the first year of his reign over the Babilonians,
mentioned Hezr. 1.1. and ends justly at the time that Christ dyed upon the
Cross. From the death of Christ, or the last end of Daniels weeks, to the
71. year of Christ, the world is measured by seven seals, or seven Sabbaths
of years, making one complete Jubilee. From the end of those 7. seals the
World is measured to her end by Apoc. 8.2. and 9.7. Napier on the Apoc.
Proposition 6.8.9. and hi^ Resolution
7: Trumpets, Apoc. 5.
each containing 245. years (as some conjecture about 440. years hence, the
truth will appear.) Enoch the seventh from Adam, having lived so many
years, as there are days in the year, 365. was translated of God in a
Sabbaticall year. Moses the seventh from Abraham, as an other En^ch, is
buried of God, Pont. Of the last age of the world. page 12. Buchol. 2. Index
Chron. Broughton. Consent. A.M. 2430.
but borne in a Sabbaticall year of the world 2373. and in the 777. year
since the Flood (after Broughtons Computation) is saved, as a new Noah, in a
Reed Arc, and lives a Builder of the Church, Deuteronomy. 34.
so long as Noah was building the arc 120. years. The promise was made to
Abraham in a Sabbaticall year, Pont. ibid. and Scaliger. Bucholzer.
being the 2023. of the World. The sixth year of Joshua, being the 2500. year
from the Creation of the world; wherein the Land was possessed, and divided
among the Children of Israel, was a Sabbaticall year, and the Pont. p. 21.
Buch. Index Cronol. apud A.M. 2500.
50. Jubilee from the Creation of the world. At this year Moses begins his
Jubilee, by which, as with a chain of 30. linckes, he tyeth the parting of
Canaans possession to the Israelites, by Joshua: to the opening of the Kingdom
of Heaven to all believers by Jesus. And so carries the Church of the Jews,
by a Jubilee, some derive of trumpets or Rammes-hornes, wherewith the Jubilee
was sounded: others from Jubal, a stream, because they carry us to the death
of Christ, the author of our eternal rest and joy.
joyful stream of Iubilies from the Type to the substance, from Canaan to
Heaven, from Joshua to Jesus: for, Christ at the end of Moses 30. Iubilies, and
the beginning of the 30. year of his age: at his Baptism opens heaven, and
gives the clearest vision of the blessed Trinity, Isay 61. Luke 4.
that was seen since the world began. And by the silver Trumpet of his
Gospel, proclaims, according to the Prophecy of Isay, eternal redemption to
all that repent and believe in him.

And the year of our Savior Christ's birth being the 3948. of the World, was
at the end of a Sabbaticall year, and the Pont. of the last decaying age of
the world. page 12.13.21
524. Septenarie of the World. Moses makes the common age of all men, to be
ten times seven, Psalm. 90. and every seventh year commonly produces some
notable Expertum est in plerisque omnibus 63. annum cum periculo and clad^
aliqua venire, aut corporis morbique grauioris aut vitae interitus, aut animi
agritudinis. Agellius lib. 1.15. c. 7. Augustus in ep. ad Cai^n nepotem exultat
s^ (...) comm^^em sen^orum omnium 63. euasisse, Bodin. de Repub. lib. 4. cap. 2.
change or accident in man's life: And no wonder; for as Hypocrates affirms,
that a child in his mothers womb, on the seventh day of his conception, has
all his members finished, and from that day grows to the perfection of birth:
which is always either the ninth or seventh month. At seven years old, the
child casts his teeth, and receives new. And every seventh year after there
is some alteration or change in man's life: especially, at nine times seven,
the Clymactericke year, which by experience is found to have been fatal to
many of those learned Aristotle, Cicero, Bernard, Bocace, Erasmus, Luther,
Melancthon, Sturmi^s, etc.
men who have been the chiefest lights of the world. And if they escaped that
year, yet most of them have departed this life in a septenary year. Lamech
dyed in the year of his life 777. Methusalem, the longest liver of the sons
of men, died when he began to enter his 900. and 70. year. Abraham dyed, when
he had lived 25. times 7. years. Jacob when he had lived 21. times 7.
years. David after he had lived ten times 7. years. So did Galen, so did
Petrarch (who as Bodin notes) dyed on the same day of the year that he was
borne: so did the Maiden-Queene She was, she is (what can there more be said?)
In earth the first, in heaven the second Maid.
Elizabeth, of blessed and never dying memory, who came into this world the
Eve of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin Mary: and went out of this world, on
the Eve of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary. Hypocrates dyed in his 15.
septenarie. Hierome and Isocrates in their 13. Pliny Bartolus and Caesar* in
their 8. septenarie. Bodin. Bucholz.
And Johannes de temporibus, who lived 361. years dyed in the 53. septenary
of his life. The like might be observed of innumerable others. Climax vitae
virorum fere septenariis aut nouenariis, Faeminarum vero senariis d finitur.
Bodin. de Rep. lib. 4. cap. 2.
And indeed the whole life of a man is measured by the Sabbath: for, how many
years soever a man lives here: yet his life is but a life of 7. days,
multiplied, so that in the number of 7. there is a mystical perfection, which
our understanding cannot attain unto.

All which divine disposition of admirable things, so often by seauens: call upon
us to a continual meditation of the blessed seventh day Sabbath, in knowing
and worshipping GOD in this life: that so from Sabbath to Sabbath, we may be
translated to the eternal glorious Sabbath of rest and bliss in the life to
come.

By the consideration whereof, any man that looks into the holy History, may
easily perceive: that the whole course of the world is drawn and guided by a
certain chain of Gods providence, disposing all things in number measure,
Wisd. 11.17
and weight. All times are therefore measured by the Sabbath: so that time and
the Sabbath can never be separated. Wolph. praem. chron. Apoc. 10.6.
And the Angel swears, that this measuring of time shall continue, Tempus est
reru^ mundanarum duratio extrinsecu^ obseruata H. Wolph. Chron. cap. 1.
till, that Time shall be no more. And as the Sabbath had his first institution
in the first Book of the Scriptures, so has it its confirmation in the last:
Tempus cum mundo caepit, and una desiturum est, ibid. Genesis 2.3. Apoc. 1.10.
and as this Book does authorize this day, so this day graceth the Book: in
that the matter thereof was revealed upon so holy a day; the Lords revelation
upon the Lords day. As well therefore may they pull the Sun, Moon and Stars
out of the heavens, as abolish the holy Sabbath (times meterod) out of the
Church: seeing the Sabbath is ordained in the Church, (as well as the Sun and
Moon in the Firmament) for the distinction of times.

8 Because that the whole Church, by an Si quid horu^ tota die per orbem
frequentat Ecclesia. Nam hoc quin ita saciendum sit disputare: insolentissimae
insaniae est. August. Ep. 118. ad Ian.
universal consent, ever since the Apostles time, have still held the
commandment of the Sabbath, to be the moral and perpetual Law of God, and
the keeping of the Sabbath on the first day of the week, to be the institution
of Christ and his Apostles.

Synod. Col. part. 9. cap. 9.
The Synod called Synodus Coloniensis says, that the Lords day has been
famous in the Church ever since the Apostles time. Ignat. ad Magnes.
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, living in S. John's time, says, Let every one that
loves Christ, keep holy the Lords day, renowned by his Resurrection, Apolo. 2.
which is the Queen of days, in which death is overcome, and life is sprung
up in Christ. Iustine Martyr, who lived not long after him, shows, how the
Christians kept their Sabbath on the Lords day, as we do. Origin, Origin.
homilia 7. super Exodus 1.
who lived about 180. years after Christ, shows the reason why the Sabbath is
translated to the Lords day. Epistol. ad Ianuar. 119. cap. 13. and ad Cassul.
Epi. 86.
Augustine says, that the Lords day was declared unto the Church by the
Resurrection of the Lord upon that day. Et ex illo caepit habere festiuitatem
suam, August. de temp. Ser. 251.
and by Christ it was first ordained to be kept holy. And in another place,
that the Apostles appointed the Lords day to be kept with all religious
solemnity, because that upon that day our Redeemer rose from the dead, which
also is therefore called the Lords day.

Psalm. 87.3. Aug. de temp. ser. 251. and 154. Conc. Constable. Can. 8. Wolphius
Chron. lib. 2. cap. 1. Muss. Bipont. postill. Dom. Pasc. Mat. 27.52. Codoman.
A^nat. An. Mun^. 2515.
As therefore David said of the City of God, so may I say of the Lords day,
Glorious things are spoken of the day of the Lord* for it was the birthday of
the world, the first day wherein all Creatures began to have being. In it
Light was drawn out of darkness. In it the Law was given on Mount Sinai. In
it the Lord rose from death to life. In it the Saints came out of their graves,
assuring that on it Christians should rise to newness of life. In it the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles. And it is very probable that on the seventh
day when the 7. Trumpets have blown: the cursed Jericho of this world shall
fall, Josh. 6.13. Apo. 10.7.
and our true Jesus shall give us the promised possession of the heavenly
Canaan.

He that would see the uniform consent of Antiquity and practice of the
Primitive Church in this point, let him read Eusebius Ecclesisticall history
Lib. 4. cap. 23. Tertullian, lib. de Idololatria, Aug. ad Casulan ep. 86. and
ad Ianuar. 119. cap. 13.
cap. 14. Chrysostom. Sermon. 5. de resurrectione. Consti^^^. Apost. lib. 7. cap.
37. Cyrill in Johan. lib. 12. cap. 58. Aug. Sermon. de temp. 251. and 154. and
Conc. 6. Constant. cau. 8.
Of this judgment are all the sound new writers: see Fox on the Apoc. 1.10.
Bucer. in Mat 12.11. Gualt. in Malach. 3. hom. 23. Fulke on the Rhemish Test.
Apo. 1.10 Chem. Exam. Conc. Trid. par. 4. de diebus festis. Wolph. Chronol.
lib. 2. cap. 1. Non dubi^amus quin vary apud Christianos Sabbathum violetur,
non abstinendo ab iis quae aliis diebus licita sunt. Armin. Iunius praelect in
Genesis 2.3.
Armin These. in 4. precept. and innumerable others. Learned Iunius shall speak
for all. Quamobr^m cum dies dominicus, etc. Wherefore seeing the Lords day is
both by the fact of Christ, viz. his (resurrection, and of often appearing to
his Disciples upon that day) by the example and institution of the Apostles,
and by the continual practice of the Ancient Church, and by the testimony of
the Scripture, observed and substituted into the place of the Jewish Sabbath:
Inepte faciunt, they do foolishly, who say that the observation of the Lords
day is of Tradition, and not from the Scripture, that by this means they might
establish the traditions of men. And again, The cause of this change is the
resurrection of Christ, and the benefit of the restoring of the Church by
Christ, the remembrance of which benefit did succeed into the place of the
memory of the creation, Non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius obseruatione
and instituto, not by the tradition of man, but by the observation and
appointment of Christ, who both on the day of his resurrection, and on every
eight day after unto his ascension into heaven did appear unto his Disciples,
and came into their assemblies.

9 Because that the Lord himself expounds the end of the Sabath, Exodus 31.13
14. etc. Ezekiel. 20.12.20.
to be a sign and document for ever, betwixt him and his people, that he is
Jehovah, by whom they are sanctified: and therefore must only of the^ be
worshipped: Ezekiel. 46.1.2.3. etc.
and upon the pain of death charge his people for ever to keep this
memorial unviolated. Exodus 35.2. Armin. disput. Theolog. in praecep. 4. These.
14.
But this end is moral and perpetual. Therefore the Sabath is moral and
perpetual. What God has perpetually sanctified, Let ^^ man ever presume to
make common or profane. Act. 10.15.
Upon this ground it is that the Commandment terms this day, the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. Isa. 58.13.
And GOD himself calls it his holy day. And upon the same ground likewise, the
old^ Testament consecrated all their Sabaths and Holy days, to the worship and
honor of God alone. To dedicate therefore a Sabbath to the honor of any
creature is gross Idolatry. For the first Table makes it a part of Gods
worship to have a Sabbath to his honor. So does Leuit. 23.3.37.38. etc. and
Ezekiel. 20.20. Neh. 9.14. the Sabbath is put for the whole worship of GOD. And
our Savior teaches, that We must worship the Lord God only. Matthew. 4. and
therefore keep a Sabbath to the only honor of GOD. The holy Ghost notes it as
one of Ieroboams greatest sins: That he ordained a feast from the devise of
his own heart. 1 King. 12.33. And God threatens to visit Israel for keeping
the days of Baalim: That is, of Lords, as Papists do of Saints Hos. 2.13. but
says, that such forget him. And so indeed none are less careful in keeping
the Lords Sabbath: then they who are most superstitious obseruers of men's holy
days. The Church of Rome therefore commits gross Idolatry.

Read H. Wolphins Cronolog. de Temp. lib. 2. cap. 4 page 118. and cap. 7. page
140. etc.
First, in taking upon her to ordain Sabbaths, which belongs only unto the
Lord of the Sabbath to do.

Secondly, in dedicating those Holy Days to the honor of Creatures, which in
effect is to make them sanctifying Gods.

Thirdly, in tying to these days Gods worship, Prayers, fasting, and merit.

Fourthly, in exacting on these days of men's invention, a greater measure of
solemnity and sanctification, then upon the Lords day, which is Gods
commandment, which in effect is to prefer Antichrist before Christ. Our
Church has justly abolished all superstitious and Idolatrous Feasts: and only
retains a few holy days to the honor of God alone, and easing of servants.
Deuteronomy 5.14. though long custom forces to use the old names, for civil
distinction: as Luke used the profane names of Castor and Pollux. Act. 28.11.
and Christians of Fortunatus. 1 Cor. 16.17. Mercurius* Romans 16.14. and Jews of
Mardocheus day. 2 Macab. 15.37.

10 Lastly, the examples of Gods Judgments on Sabbath Breakers may
sufficiently seal unto them, whose hearts are not seared, how wrathfully
Almighty God is displeased with them, who are wilful profaners of the Lords
day.

The Lord (who is otherwise the GOD of mercy) commanded Moses to stone to death
the man who of a presumptuous mind would openly go to gather sticks on the
Sabbath day. Number. 5.32.
The fact was small. True; but his sin was the greater, that (for so small an
occasion) would presume to break so great a commandment.

Nichanor* offering to fight against the Jews, 2 Mac. 27.28
on the Sabath day, was slain himself, and 35000. of his men.

A husband man grinding Corn upon the Lords day, Cent. Magdol. 12. cap. 6
had his Meal burned to ashes.

Another carrying Corn on this day, Discip. de tempore. Ser. 117.
had his Barn and all his Corn therein burnt with fire from Heaven the next
night after.

Also a certain Nobleman (profaning the Sabbath usually in hunting) had a
child by his wife with a head like a dog, Tho. Cantiprat. lib. 2. de apib.
Tympi^. admiran. vindict. diu. Theus. hist.
and with ears and chaps, crying like a hound.

A covetous flaxe-wife at Kinstat in France, Johan Finc. lib. 3. de miraculis.
An. 1559. using with her maids to work at her trade on the Lords day, it
seemed unto them that fire issued out of the Flax, but did no harm: the next
Sabbath it took fire indeed, but was quickly quenched; but not taking warning
by this, the third Sunday after it took fire again, burnt the house* and so
scorched the wretched woman with 2. of her children, that they died the next
day: but through Gods mercy a child in the cradle was taken out of the fire
alive and unhurt.

On the 13, of January, Anno Dom. 1582. being the Lords day, the Scaffolds fell
in Paris Garden, under the people at a Beare-baiting, Stowes A. bridgement Anno
1582. Discite iam moniti Dominum non temnere Christum.
so that 8. were suddenly slain, innumerable hurt and maimed. A warning to
such who take more pleasure, on the Lords day, to be in a Theater beholding
carnal sports: then to be in the Church serving God with the spiritual wo^^^s
of Piety.

Many fearful examples of Gods judgments by fire, have in our days been
showed upon diverse Towns, where the profanation of the Lords day has been
openly countenanced.

Stratford upon Auon was twice on the same day-twelue-moneth (being the Lords
day) almost consumed with fire: chiefly for profaning the Lords Sabbaths, and
for contemning his Word in the mouth of his faithful Ministers.

Teuerton in Devonshire (whose remembrance makes my heart bleed) was often
times admonished by her godly Preacher, that GOD would bring some heavy
Judgment on the Town for their horrible prophanat^^n of the Lords day,
occasioned* chiefly, by their Market on the day following. Not long after his
death, on the third of April. Anno Domini 1598. GOD, in less then half an
hour, consumed with a sudden and fearful fire, the whole Town, except
only the Church, the Courthouse, and the Almes-houses, or a few poor peoples
dwellings, where a man might have seen 400. dwelling houses all at once on
fire, and above 50. persons consumed with the flame. (And now again, since the
last Edition of this Book, Whilst the Preachers cried in the church,
profaneness, profaneness* Gain would not suffer them to hear: therefore
when they cried fire, fire in the streets, God would not suffer any to help.
on the fifth of August last, 1612.) 14. years since the former fire,) the
whole Town was again fired, and consumed, except some 30. houses of poor
people, with the ^choole-house, and Almes-houses. They are blind, who see not
in ^his the Finger of GOD. God grant them grace, when it is next built, to
change their Market Day, and to remove all occasions of profaning the Lords
day. Let other towns remember the Tower of Siloe, L^ke 13.4* and take warning
by their neighbors chastisements, fear Gods threatenings, Ierem. ^7.27. and
believe Gods Prophets, if they will prosper, 1 Chronicles. 20.20.

Many other examples of Gods Judgments might be alleged: but if these are not
sufficient to terrify thy heart from the wilful profanation of the Lords day:
proceed in thy profanation, it may be the Lord will make thee the next
example to teach others to keep his Sabbath^ better.

He punishes some in this life, to signify how he will plague all wilful
transgresso^^ of his Sabbaths at the last day.

Thus we have proved that the Commandment of the Sabbath is Moral, and that
the change of it, from the seventh to the first day of the week, was
instituted by the authority of Christ, and of his Apostles. But as in
promulgating of the Law, diverse Ceremonies peculiar to the Jews were annexed,
the rather to bind that people to the more careful performance thereof, as to
the first Commandment, their deliverance from Aegipt, shadowing their
redemption from Hell: to the fifth Commandment, length of days in Canaan,
typing eternal life in heaven: to the sixth Commandment, abstinence from blood
and things strangled, figuring the care to abstain from all kind of Murder:
and to the whole Law, the Ceremony of Numb. 15.38.
Partchment-Lace, putting them in mind to keep within the limits of the Law.
So likewise to the fourth Commandment were added some Ceremonies which
peculiarly belonged to the Jews, and to no other people; as first, the double
Number. 28.9.10.
Sacrifices appointed for them on the Sabbath day, shadowing how GOD will be
served on the Sabbath with greater obedience then on the week days:
Secondly, the Exo. 35.2.3
rigid and strict ceasing from making of fire, Exo. 16.23.
dressing of meat, and all bodily labor, both Deu. 5.15.
remembering them of their full deliverance by Moses conduct from the fiery
Furnaces and slavery of Egypt upon It was the Sabbath day, on which Moses and
the Children of Israel sang to God, when Pharaoh and his host, were drowned in
the sea Exodus 15. See Trem. and Iun. notes on Deu. 5.15 and on Exodus 12.15.
that day: as also shadowing unto them the eternal Redemption of their souls
from Hell, by the death of Christ. Thirdly, the keeping of the Sabbath upon the
precise seventh day, in order of the creation, shadowing to the Jews that
Christ by his death and resting on their Sabbath in the grave, should bring
them rest and ease from the burden and yoke of the Legal Ceremonies, which
neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10. Col. 2.16.17.

And howsoever in Paradise before man's Fall, the keeping of the Sabbath on the
seventh day of the creation, was not a Ceremony but an Argument of
perfection: yet after the fall it became Ceremonial, and subject to change in
respect of the restoration by Christ. As man's life before the Fall, being
immortal, became afterward mortal: and nakedness being an ornament before,
became afterward a shame: and Marriage became a type of the Mystical union
betwixt CHRIST, and his Church, Ephesians. 6. And to fulfill these Ceremonies,
(added for the Jews sake unto the Sabbath,) Christ at his death rested in the
grave all the Jewish Sabbath day: and by that rest fulfilled all those
ceremonial accessaries. Now as the ceasing of the Ceremonies annexed to the
1.5. and 6. Commandments, and to Marriage, did not abolish those
Commandments, and Marriage; nor cause them to cease from being the perpetual
rules of Gods worship, and man's righteousness: no more did the abrogating of
the Ceremonies annexed to the Sabbath, abolish the morality of the
Commandment of the Sabbath, so that though the Ceremonies be abolished, by the
access of the Substance; and the Shadow ouer-shadowed by the Body, which is
Christ: yet the holy rest which was commanded and kept, before either the Jews
were a people, or those Ceremonies annexed to the Sabbath: still continues as
Gods perpetual Law, whereby all the posterity of Adam are bound to rest from
their ordinary business, that they may wholly spend every seventh day in the
solemn worship and only service of GOD their Creator and Redeemer, but in the
substance of the fourth Commandment, there is not found one word of any
Ceremony.

The chief objections against the morality of the Sabbath are three.

Object. ^.
1 That of Paul to the Galathians, Gal. 4.10.
Ye observe days and months, and times, and years, etc. But there the
Apostle condemns not the moral Sabbath, which we call the Lords day; 1 Cor.
16.1. and 14.37.
and which he himself ordained according to Christ's commandment, in the same
Churches of Galatia and Corinth, Act. 20.7.
and kept himself in other Churches: but he speaks of the Jewish days and
times, and years, and the keeping of the Sabbath on the seventh day from the
Creation, which he terms shadows of things to come, Col. 2.17.
abolished now by Christ the body, Leuit. 23.37 38.
and in the Law are called sabbaths; but distinguished from the moral Sabbaths.

2 That of Paul to the Colossians, Object. 2.
Col. 2.16.
let no man therefore condemn you in meat or drink, or in respect of an
Holy Day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days. But here the Apostle
means the Jewish ceremonial Sabbaths, not the Christian Lords day, as before.

3 That of the same Apostle to the Romans, Object. 3.
Romans 14.5.
This man esteems one day above another day; and another counts every day
alike, etc.

But Saint Paul makes no such account. For the question there, is not between
Jew and Gentiles, Romans 15.1.
but between the stronger and weaker Christian. The stronger esteemed one day
above another, as appears, in that there was a day both commanded and
received in the Church, every where known and honored by the name of the
Lords day. Apoc. 1.10.
And therefore Paul says here, that he that observed this day, observed it
unto the Lord. The observation whereof; because of the change of the Jewish
seventh day: some weak Christians (as many now a days) thought not so
necessary: so that if men (because the Jewish day is abrogated) will not honor
and keep holy the Lords day, but count it like other days: it is an argument,
says the Apostle, of their weakness whose infirmity must be borne, till they
have time to be further instructed and persuaded. Other objections are
frivolous, and not worth the answering.

The true manner of keeping holy the Lords day.
NOW the sanctifying of the Sabbath consists in two things. First, In resting
from all servile and common business, pertaining to our natural life.
Secondly, In consecrating that rest wholly to the service of God, and the use of
those holy means which belong to our spiritual life.

For the first.
1 The servile and common works from which we are to cease, are generally all
civil works, from the Exo. 31.29 30. Exodus 31.12 13.
least to the greatest: More particularly.

First, from all the works of our calling, though it were reaping in the time
of harvest. Exodus 31.15 etc. Exodus 34.21 Nehe. 13.15 Ier. 17.21.22.27.


Secondly, from carrying burdens, as Carryers do: or riding abroad for
profit, or for pleasure: GOD has commanded that the beasts should rest on the
Sabbath day, because all occasion of travailing or laboring with them should
be cut off from man. GOD gives them that day a rest* and he that, Deuteronomy. 5.14.
without necessity, depriues them of their rest on the Lords day: the groans
of the poor tired beasts, shall in the day of the Lord rise up in Judgment
against him. Romans 8.22^ Deuteronomy. 25.^. ^ Cor. 9.9.
Likewise such as spend the greatest part of this day, in trimming, painting,
and pampering of themselves, like Iezabels, Neh. 15.15.16.19.
doing the Devils work upon Gods day.

Thirdly, from keeping of Fayres ^r Markets, which for the most part God
punishes with pestilence, fire, and strange floods.

Fourthly, from studying any books, or science, but the holy Scriptures, and
Divinity. For our study must be, to be ravished in spirit upon the Lords day.
In a word, Apoc. 1.19.
Thou must on that day cease in thy calling to do thy work: that the Lord by
his calling, may do his work in thee. For whatsoever is gotten by common
working on this day, shall never be blessed of the Lord: but it will prove
like Achans gold, which being got contrary to the Lords commandment, brought
the fire of Gods curse, upon all the rest which he had lawfully gotten. And if
Christ scourged them out as thieves, who bought and sold in his Temple; (which
was but a ceremony shortly to be abrogated:) is it to be thought, that he
will ever suffer those to escape unpunished, who contrary to his commandment
buy and sell on the Sabbath day, which is his perpetual law? Christ calls
such sacrilegious Thieves; and as well may they steal the Communion C^p from
the Lords Table: as steal from GOD, the chiefest part of the Lords day, to
consume it in their own lasts. Such shall one day find, the Judgments of
God, heavier then the opinions of men.

Fifthly, from all recreations, and sports which at other times are lawful: for
if lawful works be forbidden on this day; much more lawful sports which do
more steal away our affections, Isa. 58.13.14.
from the contemplation of heavenly things, then any bodily work or labor.
Neither can there be unto a man that delights in the Lord; Psalm 37.4.
any greater del^ght or recreation, then the sanctifying of the Lords day. For
can there be any greater joy for a person condemned, then to come to his Prince
his house to have his pardon sealed? For one that is deadly sick, to come to a
Physician that can cure him? Or for a Prodigal child that fed on the husks
of Swine, to be admitted to eat the bread of life at his Fathers Table? Or
for him who fears for sin, the tidings of death to come to hear from God
the assurance of eternal life? If thou will allow thy self, or thy servant
recreation; allow it in the six days which are thine: not on the Lords day
which is neither thine nor theirs. No bodily receation therefore, is to be
used on this day: but so far, as it may help the soul to do more
cheerfully the service of the Lord.

Sixthly, from gross feeding, liberal drinking of wine, Ephesians. 5.18.19.
or strong drink, which may make us either drowsi^, Romans 12.11. Deuteronomy. 28.47.
or unapt to serve GOD with our hearts and minds.

Seventhly, from all talking about wordly things, Isa. 58.13.
which hinders the sanctifying of the Sabbath, more then working: seeing one
may work alone, but cannot talk but with others.

He that keeps the Sabbath, only by resting from his ordinary work, keeps
it but as a beast. But rest on this day, is so far commanded to Christians,
as it is an help to sanctification: and labor so far forbidden, as it is an
impediment to the outward and inward worship of GOD.

If then those recreations, which are lawful at other times, are on the
Sabbath not allowed; much more those that are altogether at all times
unlawful. Who without mourning can endure to see* how in most places;
Christians keep the Lords day: as if they celebrated a feast rather to
Bacchus, then to the honor of the Lord Jesus, the Savior and Redeemer of the
world? For having served God, but an hour, in outward show; they spend the
rest of the Lords day in sitting down to eat and drink, 1 Cor. 10.7.
and rising up to play: First, balasting their bellies with eating, and
drinking: Exodus 32.6.18.19.
and then feeding their lusts with playing and dancing. Against which
profanation, all holy Divines, both old and new, have in their times most
bitterly inueighed. Insomuch, Melius enim arare quam saltare in Sabato. Aug. in
tit. Psalm. 91.
that August. affirms, that it was better to plough then to dance upon the
Sabbath day.

Now, in the name of Almighty God, (who rested, having created Heaven and
Earth:) and of his eternal Son Jesus, the Redeemer of his Church, (who shall
shortly come, Act. 17.31. Romans 2.12. etc. 2 These. ^.8. etc.
on the dreadful day of doom, to judge all men according to the obedience
which they have showed to his commandments.) I require thee, who read these
words, as thou will answer before the face of Christ, and all his holy Angels
at that day? that thou better weigh and consider, whether dancing,
stage-playing, masking, carding, dicing, tabling, chesse-playing, bowling,
shooting, Beare-baiting, carowsing, tippling, and such other fooleries of
Robbin-Hood, Morrice-daunces, Wakes, and May-games, be exercises that GOD will
bless and allow on the Sabbath day? And seeing that no action ought to be
done that day, but such, as whereby we either bless God, or look to receive a
blessing from God; how dare thou do those things on that blessed day, on
which thou dare not to pray to God to bestow a blessing on it to thy use?
Hear this and tremble at this, O profane youth, of a profane age!

O heart all frozen, and void of the feeling of the grace of God! that having
every day in six, every hour in every day, every minute in every hour, so
tasted the sweet mercy of thy God in Christ, without which thou had
perished every moment! Yet can not find in thy corrupt and irreligious heart
to spend in thy Masters service that one day of the week, which he has
reserved for his own praise and worship! Let men in defense of their
profaneness, object what they will; and answer what the Devil puts in their
mouths; yet I would wish them to remember, that seeing it is an ancient
Tradition in the Church, Lactan. lib. 7. cap. 19.
that the Lords second coming shall be upon the Lords day, how little joy they
should have, to be overtaken in those carnal sports, to please themselves:
when their Master should find them in spiritual exercises serving him? The
prophanest wretch would then wish, rather to be taken kneeling at prayers in
the Church: then skipping like a Goat in a dance. If this cannot move; yet I
would wish our impure gallants to remember, that whilst they thus dance on
the Lords day, contrary to the Lords commandment: they do but dance about
the pits brinke: and they know not which of them shall first fall therein.
Whereinto being once fallen without repentance: no greatness can exempt them
from the vengeance of that great GOD, whose commandment (contrary to their
knowledge and conscience) they do thus presumptuously transgress. If then
Gods commandment cannot deter thee; Apo. 12.11.
nor Gods word advise thee: I say no more, but what Saint John said before me,
This was the last and heauiest curse that Saint John wished spiritual Babylon.
he which is filthy, let him be filthy still.

For the second.
2 The consecration of the Sabbaths rest consists in performing three sorts of
duties. First, before* Secondly, at: Thirdly, after the public exercises of
the Church.

The duties to be performed before the public exercises are.

1 To give over working betimes on the Eve, that thy body may be the more
refreshed and thy mind the better fitted to sanctify the Sabbath on the next
day. For want of this preparation thy self and thy servants being tired with
labor and watching the night before: Apo. 2. and 3.
are so heavy, that when you should be serving God, and hearing what his spirit
says unto the Church for your souls instruction; you cannot hold up your
heads for sleeping: to the dishonor of God, the offense of the church, and the
shame of your selves: therefore the Lord commands us not only to keep holy: but
also to remember aforehand the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, by preparing our
hearts, and removing all business, that might hinder us to consecrate it as a
glorious day unto the Lord. Therefore, Isa. 56.2. etc. and 58.13. etc.
whereas the Lord in the other Commandments, does but either bid or forbid:
he does both in this commandment, and that with a special memorandum. As if
a Master should charge his Servant, to look well unto ten things of great
trust; but to have a more special care to remember one of those ten for diverse
weight reasons: should not a faithful Servant, that loves his Maste^, show
a more special care unto that thing about all other business?

Thus Moses taught the people ouer-night to remember the Sabbath, Exodus 16.23
etc.
and it was a holy custom among our fore fathers, when at the ringing to
Prayer on the Eve before: the Husbandman would give over his labor in the
field, and the Tradesman his work in the Shop, and go to Evening Prayer in
the Church, to prepare their souls: that their minds might more cheerfully
attend Gods worship on the Sabbath day.

2 To possess^ that night, thy vessel in holiness and honor: Exodus 19.15 1
Cor. 7.5. Genesis 35.2. 1 These. 4.4. 1 Samuel 21.5
that thou may present thy Soul more purely in the sight of GOD the next
morning.

3 To rise up early in the morning on the Sabbath day. Exodus 19.16 Psalm. 92.2.
Eccles. 417.
Be careful therefore to rise sooner on this day, then on other days: by how
much the service of GOD is to be preferred before all earthly businesses. For
there is no Master to serve so good as God: and in the end, no work shall be
better rewarded then his service.

4 When thou art up, consider with thy self what an impure sinner thou art;
and into what an holy place thou go to appear, before the most holy GOD,
who sees thy heart, and hates all impuritie and hypocrisy. Examine thy
self therefore before thou go to Church, what grievous sins thou have
committed the week past; confess them unto God, and earnestly pray for the
pardon and forgiveness of them. And so reconcile thy self with God in Christ:
Renew thy vows to walk more conscionably, and pray for an increase of those
graces, which thou have, and a supply of those which thou want. But
especially pray, that thou may have Grace to hear the Word of God read and
preached with profit: and that thou may receive the holy Sacrament with
comfort (If it be a Communion day:) that God by his holy Spirit would assist
the Preacher to speak something that may ^ill thy sin, Col. 4.3.
and comfort thy soul: which thou may do in this or the like sort.

A Morning Prayer for the Sabbath day.
O Lord most high, Psalm. 91.1.2.5.
O God eternal, all whose Works are glorious, and whose Thoughts are very
deep: there can be no better thing, then to praise thy Name, and to declare
thy loving kindness in the morning, on thy holy and blessed Sabbath day. For
it is thy will and commandment, that we should sanctify this day in thy
service and praise: and in the thankful remembrance, as of the creation of
the World by the power of thy Word: so of the redemption of mankind by the
death of thy Son. 1 Chronicles. 29 11. etc.
Thine (O Lord) I confess, is greatness, and power, and glory, and victory,
and praise, for all that is in heaven and earth is thine: Thine is thy
Kingdom, O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all: both riches and honor
come of thee, and thou raignest over all, and in thine hand is power and
strength, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give grace unto all.
Now therefore O my God, I praise thy glorious Name: that whereas I a wretched
sinner, having so many vvayes provoked thy Majesty to anger and displeasure:
thou notwithstanding (of thy favor and goodness, passing by my profaneness
and infirmities,) have vouchsafed to add this Sabbath again, unto the number
of my days. And vouchsafe O heavenly Father, for the merits of Jesus Christ
thy Son (whose glorious Resurrection thy whole Church celebrateth this day:)
to pardon and forgive me, all my sins and misdeeds. Especially, O Lord, [ Here
thou may confess whatsoever sin of the last week clogs thy conscience.
] cleanse my soul from those filthy sins, with the blood of thy most pure and
undefiled Lamb, John 1.29.
which takes away the sins of the world. And let thy holy Spirit more and
more subdue my corruptions, that I may be renewed after thine own Image, to
serve thee in newness of life, and holiness of conversation. And as of thy
mercy, thou have brought me to the beginning of this blessed day: so I beseech
thee, make it a day of Reconciliation, betwixt my sinful soul, and thy Divine
Majesty. Give me grace to make it a day of Repentance unto thee, that thy
goodness may seal it to be a day of pardon unto me: and that I may remember,
that the keeping holy of this day, is a Commandment which thine own finger
has written. That on this day, I might meditate on thy glorious works of our
Creation and Redemption: and learn how to know and to keep, all the rest of
thy holy Laws and Commandments. And when anon, I shall with the rest of the
holy Assembly, appear before thy presence in thy house; to offer unto thee our
morning sacrifice of praise and Prayer: and to hear what thy Spirit, by the
preaching of thy Word, shall speak unto thy Servant: Oh let not my sins
stand as a Cloud to stop my Prayers* from ascending unto thee; or to keep
back thy Grace from descending, by thy Word, into my heart. I know O Lord, and
tremble to think, that three parts of the good Seed falls upon bad ground. O
let not my heart be like the Highway, Mat. 13.1. and Luke 8.25.
which through hardness, and want of true understanding, receives not the
Seed, till the evil one comes, and catches it away: nor like to the stony
ground, which hearing with joy for a time, falls away as soon as persecution
arises for thy Gospels sake: nor like to the thorny ground, which by the cares
of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choaketh the Word which it
hears, and makes it altogether unfruitful: but that like unto the good
ground, I may hear thy Word, with an honest and good heart; understand it, and
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience, in that measure that thy
Wisdom shall think meet for thy glory, and mine everlasting comfort. Col.
4.3.
Open likewise I beseech thee O Lord, the door of utterance unto thy faithful
Servant, whom thou have sent unto us to open our eyes that we may turn from
darkness to light, Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan, unto God; that we may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith in Christ. And
give me grace to submit my self unto his Ministry, as well when he
terrifieth me with judgments; as when he comfort me with thy Mercies.
And that I may have him in singular love for his works sake; because he
watches for my soul as he that must give an account for the same unto his
Master. 1 These. 5.13 Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor. 11.10 Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12.
And give me grace to behave my self in the holy Congregation, with
comeliness and reverence, as in thy presence, and in the sight of thy holy
Angels. Keep me from drowsinesse and sleeping, and from all wandering
thoughts, and worldly imaginations: sanctify my Memory, that it may be apt to
receive and firm to remember those good and profitable doctrines, which shall
be taught unto us out of thy Word. And that through the assistance of thy holy
spirit, I may put the same lessons in practice for my direction in prosperity,
for my consolation in misery, for the amendment of my life, and the glory of
thy Name. And that this day, which godless and profane persons spend in there
own lusts and pleasures* I (as one of thy obedient servants) may make my
chief delight to consecrate it to thy glory and honor, Esa. 58.13.
not doing mine own ways, nor seeking mine own will, nor speaking a vain
word: but that ceasing from the works of sin, as well as from the works of
mine ordinary calling: I may through thy blessing, feel in my heart the
beginning of that eternal Sabbath, which in unspeakable joy and glory, I
shall celebrate with thy Saints and Angels, to thy praise and worship in thy
heavenly kingdom for evermore. All which I humbly crave at thy hands, Esa.
66.23.
in the name and mediation of my Lord Jesus; in that form of prayer which he
has taught me.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Having thus in private prepared thine
own soul, if thou have the charge of a Family, call all thy household
together, read a Chapter, and pray as in the week days; but remember so to
dispatch these private preparations and duties, as that thou and thy family may
be in the Church, before the beginning of prayers. Else your private exercises
are rather an hinderance then a preparation. And as thou (and thy household) do
go in all reverence toward the Church; let every one meditate thus with
himself.

Things to be Meditated as thou go to the Church.
1 THat thou art going to the Court of the Lord, and to speak with the great
GOD by Prayer; Psalm. 104.4.
and to hear his Majesty speak unto thee by his Word: and to receive his
blessing on thy soul, and thy honest labor in the six days last past.

2 Say with thy self by the way, As the Heart braieth for the Rivers of water,
so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God: When shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Psalm.
42.1.2.
For, a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand other where. I had rather
be a doorekeeper in the House of my God, Psalm. 84.10
then to dwell in the Tabernacles of wickedness. Therefore I will come into
thy House in the multitude of thy mercies, Psalm. 5.8.
and in thy fear will I worship toward thine holy Temple.

3 As thou entrest into the Church, say; How fearful is this place? this is
(...) other but the house of GOD; Genesis 28.26.17.
this is the gate of Heaven. Surely, 1 Cor. 14.25
the Lord is in this place. God is in this people indeed, and prostrating with
thy face downward, being come to thy place, say, O Lord, Psalm. 26.8.
I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy honor
dwells: One thing therefore have I desired of thee, that I will require,
Psalm. 27.4.
even that I may dwell in thy house all the days of my life, to behold thy
beauty, and to visit thy temple, therefore will I offer in thy Tabernacle
sacrifices of joy, Psalm. 27.6.
I will sing and praise the Lord. Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry;
have mercy also upon me, and hear me. Doubtless, kindness, and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life, Psalm. 23.6.
and I shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord. And this is that
preparation or looking to our feet, whereto Solomon advises us, before we
enter into the House of GOD. Eccl. 4.17.


The second sort of duties, which are to be performed, at the time of the holy
Assembly.
WHen prayers begin, lay aside thine own private Meditations; and let thine
heart join with the Minister, and the whole Church, as being one body of
Christ; 1 Cor. 12.12 Act. 2.2.46. and 4.32,
and because that GOD is the God of order, he will have all things to be done
in the Church, with one heart and accord: and the exercises of the Church are
common and public. It is therefore an ignorant pride, for a man to think his
own private prayers more effectual, then the public prayers of the whole
Church. Eccle. 5.1.
Solomon therefore advises a man not to be rash, to utter a thing in the
Church before GOD. Pray therefore when the Church prays, sing when they sing,
and in the action of kneeling, standing, sitting, Eze. 46.10. Psalm. 110.3.
and such indifferent ceremonies (for the avoiding of scandal, the continuance
of charity and in testimony of thine obedience) Cum Romam venio, Jeiuno
Sabbato: cum hic sum, non Ieiuno. Sic and tu, ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris,
eius morem serua, si cuiqua^ non vis esse scandalo, nec que^quam tibi. Amb.
consil. August. ep. ad Ianuar.
conform thy self to the manner of the Church wherein thou live.

Whilst the Preacher is expounding and applying the word of the Lord: look
upon him; for it is a great help to stir up thine attention, and to keep
thee from wandering thoughts, so the eyes of all that were in the Synagogues,
Luke 4.20.
are said to be fastened on Christ whilst he preached: and that all the people
hanged upon him when they heard him. Luke 19.48.
Remember that thou art there as one of Christ's Disciples, to learn the
knowledge of salvation, by the remission of sins, through the tender mercy
God. Luke 77.

Be not therefore in the School of Christ, like an idle boy in a Grammar
school, that often hears, but never learneth his lesson: and still goes to
School, but profits nothing. Thou hate it in a child; Christ detesteth it
in thee. To the end therefore, that thou may the better profit by hearing,
mark:

1 The coherence and explication of the Text.

2 The chief sum or scope of the holy Ghost in that Text.

3 The division or parts of the Text.

4 The doctrines, and in every doctrine, the proofs, the reasons, and uses
thereof.

A method of all others, easiest for the people (being accustomed thereto) to
help them to remember the Sermon; and therefore much wished to be put in
practice of all faithful Pastors, who desire to edify their people in the
knowledge of God, and his true Religion.

If the Preachers method be too curious or confused; then labor to remember.

1 How many things he taught, which thou knew not before; and be thankful.

2 What sins he reproved, whereof thy conscience tells thee that thou art
guilty; and therefore must be amended.

3 What virtues he exhorts unto, which are not so perfect in thee; and
therefore endeavor to practice them with more zeal and diligence.

But in hearing, apply every speech as spoken to thy self, Isa. 2.3. Act.
10.33. 1 Chr. 17.25 Gal. 4.14. 1 These. 2.13.
rather by GOD then by man: and labor not so much to hear the words of the
Preacher sounding in thine ear: as to feel the operation of the spirit,
working in thy heart: therefore it is said so often, Let him that has an ear,
Apoc. 2.7.
hear what the spirit speaks to the Church. And, did not our hearts burxe
within us, Luke 24.32.
whilst he opened unto us the Scriptures? And thus to hear the Word, has a
blessing promised thereto. Luke 11.28. Romans 15.16.
It is the acceptablest sacrificing of our selves unto God. It is the surest
note of Christ's Saints. Deuteronomy. 33.3.
The truest mark of Christ's sheep: Ioh. 10.27. Ioh. 8.47. and 18.37.
the apparantest sign of Gods elect: the very blood as it were, which unites
us to be the spiritual kindred, Luke 8.21. Mark. 3.35.
brethren and sisters of the Son of God. This is the best Art of memory for a
good hearer.

When the Sermon is ended.

1 Beware thou depart not like the nine Leapers, till that for thine
instruction, to saving health; thou have returned thanks and praise to GOD by
an after prayer, and singing of a Psalm: and when the blessing is pronounced*
Eze. 46.10.
stand up to receive thy part therein, and hear it; as if Christ himself
(whose Minister he is) did pronounce the same unto thee, for in this case it
is true, He that hears you, Luke 10.16.
hears me: and the Sabbath day is blessed, because GOD has appointed it to
be the day, wherein by the mouth of his Ministers, Numb. 6.23.27.
he will bless his people, which hear his word, and glorify his Name. For
though the Sabbath day in it self be no more blessed then the other six
days; yet (because the Lord has appointed it to holy uses above others) it
does as far excel the other days of the week, as the consecrated bread
(which we receive at the Lord Table) does the common Bread which we eat at
our own Table.

2 If it be a Communion day, draw near to the Lords Table, in the Wedding
Garment of a faithful and penitent heart, to be partaker of so holy a banquet.

And when Baptism is to be administered, stay and behold it with all reverent
attention, that so thou may, First, show thy reverence to Gods ordinance.
Secondly, that thou may the better consider thine own ingraffing into the
visible body of Christ's Church: and how thou performest the vows of thy new
Covenant. Thirdly, that thou may repay thy debts in praying for the Infant,
which is to be baptized (as other Christians did in the like case for thee:)
that God would give him the inward effects of Baptism by his Blood and Spirit.
Four'thly, that thou may assist the Church in praising God for graffing
another member into his Mystical Body. Fifthly, that thou may prove whether
the effects of Christ's death kills sin in thee; and whether thou be raised
to newness of life by the virtue of his Resurrection: and so to be humbled for
wants, and to be thankful for his grace. Sixthly, to show thy self to be a
Freeman of Christ's Corporation: having a voice or consent in the admission of
others into that holy society.

3 If there be any Collection for the poor, 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 9.5.6.7. etc.
freely without grudging, bestow thine Alms as GOD has blessed thee with
ability.

And thus far of the duties to be performed in the holy assembly.

Now of the third sort of duties after the holy Assembly.
AS thou returnest home, or when thou art entered into thy house, meditate a
little while upon those things, which thou have heard. And as the clean
beasts which chew the cudde: Leuit. 11.3.
so must thou bring again to thy remembrance, that which thou have heard in
the Church. And then kneeling down, turn all to a prayer, beseeching GOD to
give such a blessing to those things, which thou have heard: that they may be a
direction to thy life; and a consolation unto thy Soul: Psalm. 119.11.
for till the Word be made thus our own; and as it were close hidden in our
hearts, we are in danger, Mat. 13.19.
least Satan steal it away, and we shall receive no profit thereby. And when
thou go to dinner, in that reverend and thankful manner before prescribed;
remember according to thine ability to have one or more poor Christians,
whose hungry bowels may be refreshed with thy meat: imitating holy Job, who
protested that he did never eat his morsels alone, Job 31.17.18.
without the good company of the poor and fatherless: this is the
Commandment of Christ our Master, Luke 14.13. Or at leastwise, send some part
of thy dinner to the poor, Hest. 9.22. Deuteronomy. 15.10. etc.
who lies sick in the backe-lane without any food. For this will bring a
blessing upon all thy works and labors; and it will one day more rejoice thy
soul; then it does now refresh his body, when Christ shall say unto thee, Mat.
25.35. etc. 40. If thou be a private man either perform these holy duties by
thy self, or join with some godly Family in the performance of them.
O blessed child of God! I was: an hungered, and thou gave not ^eate, etc. And
forasmuch as thou have done it for my sake, to the least of these my Brethren,
I take it in as good part, as if thou had done it to mine own self.

When dinner is ended, and the Lord praised; call thy family together examine
what they have learned in the Sermon: commend them that do well, yet
discourage not them whose memories or capacities are weaker: Acts 17.11. Heb.
5.14. Mat. 26.30. Iam. 5.13.
but rather help them, for their will and minds may be as good. Turn to the
proofs which the Preacher alleged, and rub those good things over their
memories again. Then sing a Psalm or more. If time permit, thou may teach
and examine them in some part of the Catechism, conferring every point with
the proofs of the holy Scripture. Deuteronomy. 6.7.20 Heb. 6.1.
This will both increase our knowledge, and sha^pen our memory: seeing by
experience we find, that in every trade, they who are most exercised, are
ever best expert. But in any wise, Heb. 5.14.
remember so to dispose all these private exercises, as that thou may be with
the first in the holy congregation at the Evening exercise; where behave thy
self in the like devotion and reverence, as was prescribed for the holy
Exercise of the morning.

After Evening Prayer, and at thy Supper, behave thy self, in the like
religious and holy manner, as was formerly prescribed. And either before, or
after Supper, if the season of the year and weather does serve:

Psalm. 92.5. and 19.1. etc. and 8.1.3. etc. Romans 1.19.20.
1 Walk into the fields, and meditate upon the Works of God: for in every
creature thou may read, as in an open Book, Praesentem narrat quaelibet
Herba Deum.
the Wisdom, Power, Providence, and Goodness of Almighty God: and how that
none is able to make all these things in the variety of their forms, Isay
40.26.
virtues, beauties, life, motions, and qualities, but our most glorious God.

2 Consider how gracious he is that made all these things to serve us. Psalm. 8.


3 Take occasion hereby, to stir up both thy self and others, to admire and
adore his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness: and to think what ungrateful
wretches we are, if we will not (in all obedience) serve and honor him.

4 If any neighbor be sick, Mat. 25.35. James 5.14. etc.
or in any heaviness, go to visit him. If any be fallen at variance, help
to reconcile them.

To conclude, three sorts of works may lawfully be done on the Sabbath day.

1 Works of Piety, which either directly concern the Service of God, though
they be performed by bodily labor: as under the Law, the Priests did labor in
killing, Mat. 12.5.
and dressing the Sacrifices, and burning them on the Altar. And Christians
under the Gospel, when they travail far to the places of Gods Worship: Act.
1.12.
it is but a Sabbath days journey, like to that of the Shunamite, 2 Reg. 4.22.
who travailed from home, to hear the Prophet on the Sabbath day, because she
had no teaching near her own dwelling. And the Preacher, though he labors
in the sweat of his brows, to the wearying of his body, yet he does but a
Sabbath days work. For the holy end sanctifies the work, as the temple did
the Gold, or the Altar the gift thereon. Mat. 23.17.19.
Or else such bodily labor, whereby the people of God are assembled to his
worship, as the sounding of Trumpets under the Law, Number. 10.2.3
or the ringing of Bells under the Gospel.

2 Works of Charity, as to 1 Reg. 19.8 Mark 3.4.
save the life of a man, or Math. 12.11.
of a beast, to Luke 13.15
fodder, water, and dress Cattle. To make honest Mat. 12.1.
provision of meat and drink, to refresh our selves, and to Hest. 9.22. 1
Cor. 11.22.34.
relieve the poor: to visit the sick, to make 1 Cor. 16.1
collections for the poor, and such like.

3 Works of necessity, not fained, but present and imminent, and such as
could not be prevented before, nor cannot be deferred unto another day. As to
resist the invasion of Enemies, or the robberies of Thieves, to quench the rage
of Fire: and for Physicians to stanch, or let blood, or to cure any other
desperate disease: and for Mid-wiues to help women in labor: Mariners may do
their labor: Soldiers being assailed may fight: and Nuncius praecepti
excipitur a Sabbato. Iud. Coment. sup. Number. 13 3.
Posts may ride for the public good, and such like. On these or the like
occasions, a man may lawfully work. Yea, and when they are called, they may
upon any of these occasions, go out of the Church, and from the holy exercises
of the Word and Sacraments: provided always, that they be humbled, that such
occasions falls out upon that day and time: And that they take no Money for
their pains on that day, but only for their stuff, as in the fear of God,
and conscience of his commandment.

When the time of rest approaches, retire thy self to some private place: and
knowing, that in the state of corruption no man living can sanctify a Sabbath
in that Spiritual manner that he should: but that he commits many breaches
thereof, in his thoughts, words, and deeds: humbly crave pardon for thy
defects, and reconcile thy self unto God, with this, or the like, Evening
Sacrifice.

A private Evening Prayer for the Lords day.
O Isai. 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath! Suffer me who am but Genesis 18.27
dust and ashes, to speak unto thy most glorious Majesty. I know that thou
art a Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire. I acknowledge that I am but withered Job 21.18
stubble, my Psalm. 51.3.
sins are in my sight, and Satan Zach. 3.1.1
stands at my right hand to accuse me for them. I come not to excuse, but to 1
Cor. 11.31.
judge my self worthy of all those Judgments, which thy justice might most
justly inflict upon me a wretched creature, for my sins and transgressions.
The number of them is so great, the nature of them is so grievous, that they
make me seem vile in mine own eyes, 2 Samuel 6.22.
how much more loathsome in thy sight? I confess they make me so far from
being worthy to be called thy Son, Luke 15.21.
that I am altogether unworthy to have the name of thy meanest servant. And if
thou should but recompense me according to my desert, Psalm. 106.17.
the earth (as weary of such a sinful burden) should open her mouth and
swallow me up, like one of Dathans family, 2 Pet. 2.4.
into the bottomless pit of hell. For if thou did not spare the natural
branches, those Angels of glorious excellency; but hurledst them down from the
heavenly habitations, into the pains of hellish darkness, to be kept unto
damnation, when they sinned but once against thy Majesty? and did expel our
first Parents out of Paradise, Genesis 3.23.
when they did but transgress one of thy laws? Alas, what vengeance may I
expect, who have not offended in one sin only, Romans 2.5.
heaping daily sin upon sin, without any true repentance, drinking iniquity
as it were water, Job 15.16.
ever pouring in, but never pouring out any filthynesse: and have trangressed
not one, but all thy holy laws and commandments. Yea this present day, which
thou have straightly commanded me to keep holy, to thy praise and worship, I
have not so religiously kept and observed, nor prepared my soul in that
holiness and chastity of heart, as was fit, to meet thy blessed Majesty in
the holy assembly of thy Saints. I have not attended to the preaching of thy
word, nor to the administration of thy Sacraments, with that humility,
reverence, and devotion, that I should. For though I was present at those holy
exercises in my body; yet Lord I was overtaken with much drowsinesse; and when
I was awake, my mind was so distracted and carried away with vain and wordly
thoughts: that my soul seemed to be absent, and out of the Church. I have not
so duly (as I should) meditated with my self, nor conferred with my Family,
upon those good instructions, which we have heard and received out of thy holy
word, by the public Ministry. For default whereof, Satan has stolen the most
part of these instructions out of my heart: and I wretched creature have
forgotten them, as though they had never been heard. And my family does not
thrive in knowledge and sanctification under my government as they should.
Though I know, where many of my poor brethren live in want and necessity, and
some in pain, and comfortless: yet I have not remembered to relieve, the one
with my alms, nor the other with consolations: but I have feasted my self,
and satisfied mine own lusts. I have spent the most part of the day, in idle
talk, vain sports, and exercises: Yea Lord I have etc. Here confess
whatsoever fault thou have done that day by omission or commission, and then
fetching from thy heart a deep sigh, say.
And for all these my sins, my conscience cries guilty, thy law condemns me:
and I am in thy hand to receive the sentence and curse that is due to the
wilful breach of so holy a commandment. But what if I am by thy Law
condemned? yet, Lord, thy Gospel assures me that thy mercy is above all thy
works: Psalm. 145.9. Iam. 2.13.
that thy grace transcendes thy Law: and thy goodness delights there to
reign, where sins do most abound. Romans 5.20.
in the multitude therefore of thy mercies and merits of Jesus Christ my
Savior, I beseech thee O Lord (who despisest not the sighing of a contrite
heart, nor desire the death of a penitent sinner) to pardon and forgive me
all those my sins, and all the errors of this day, Eze. 33.11.
and of my whole life: and free my soul from that curse and judgment which is
due unto me for them. Thou that did justify the contrite Publican for four
words of confession, Luke 1.18. etc.
and receiuedst the Prodigal child (when he had spent all the stock of thy
grace) into favor upon his repentance: pardon my sins likewise, O Lord, and
suffer me not to perish for my trangressions. Oh spare me and receive me into
thy favor again. Will thou O Lord reject me, who have received all Publicans,
harlots, and sinners, Mat. 21.31.32.
that upon repentance sued to thee for grace? Shall I alone be excluded from
thy mercy? Far be it from me to think so: For thou art the same GOD of mercy
unto me, that thou wast unto them, and thy compassions never fail. Lam. 3.22.
Wherefore O Lord deal not with me after my merits, but according to thy great
mercy. Execute not thy severe justice against me a sinner: but exercise thy
long sufferance in forbearing thine own creature. I have nothing to present
unto thee for a satisfaction, but only the bloody wounds, and bitter death and
passion, which thy blessed Son, my only Savior has suffered for me. Him
(in whom only thou art well pleased.) I offer unto thee for all my sins,
wherewith thou art displeased. He is my Mediator, the request of whose blood,
speaking better things then that of Abel, Heb. 12.24.
thy mercy can never gainsay. Illuminate my understanding, and sanctify my
heart with thy holy spirit that may bring to my remembrance, all those good and
profitable lessons, which this day, and at other times have been taught me out
of thy holy word; that I may remember thy commandments, to keep them; thy
judgments, to avoid them; and thy sweet promises, to rely upon them in time
of misery and distress. And now, O Lord, I resign my self to thy most holy
will: Oh receive me into thy favor: and so draw me by thy grace unto thy
self, that I may as well be thine by love and imitation, as by calling and
creation. And give me grace so to keep holy thy Sabbaths in this life: as that
(when this life is ended) I may with all thy Saints and Angels, celebrate an
eternal Sabbath of joys, and praise, to the honor of thy most glorious name,
in thy heavenly Kingdom for evermore. Amen.

And then calling thy family together; shut up the Sabbath with the Meditations
and Prayers before prescribed for thy Family. And the Lord will give thee that
night a more sweet and quiet rest then ordinary, and prosper thee the better in
all the labors of the week following.

Thus far of the ordinary practice of Piety, both in private and public.
Now follows the extraordinary Practice of Piety, whereby God is glorified in
our lives.
THe extraordinary practice of Piety consists, either in Fasting, or in
Feasting.

1 Of the Practice of Piety in Fasting. Ieiunium.


There are diverse kinds of Fasting: First, 1 Coactum.
a constrained Fast, as when men either have not food to eat, as in the 2
Kin. 6.26
Famine of Samaria. or having food cannot eat it for heaviness or
sickness, as it befell them who were in the Acts 27.33
Ship with Saint Paul. This is rather Famine, then Fasting.

Secondly, A natural Fast, 2 Physicum. Nihil periculosius habitudine corporis
extreme bona: detrahenda sunt ergo per Ieiunium redundantia, ne natura suo
podere fracta succumbat. Basil. hom. 1.
which we undertake Physically for the health of our body.

Thirdly, 3 Politicum.
A civil Fast, which the Magistrate enioyneth for the better maintenance of
the Commonwealth, that by using Fish as well as Flesh, there may be greater
plenty of both.

4 Miraculosum.
Fourthly* A miraculous Fast, as the forty days fast of Moses and Elias, the
types: and of Christ the substance. This is rather to be admired, then imitated.

5 Quotidianum.
Fifthly, A daily Fast, when a man is careful to use the creatures of GOD with
such moderation; that he is not made heavier, but more cheerful, to serve
God, and to do the duties of his calling. This is specially to be observed, of
Tim. 3.3. Tit. 2.3. Pro. 31.4.5.
Ministers and Judges.

Sixthly, A religious Fast, which a man voluntarily undertakes, 6 Religiosum.
2 Cor. 6.4.6
to make his body and soul the fitter to pray more fervently unto GOD, upon
some extraordinary occasion. And of this fast only we are to treat. The
Religious Fast is of two sorts, either private or public.

1 Of a private Fast.
THat we may rightly perform a private Fast, four things are to be
observed: first, the Author: secondly the Time, and Occasion: thirdly, the
Manner: fourthly, the Ends of private Fasting.

1 Of the Author.
The first that ordained Fasting was God himself in Paradise: Ieiunium in
Paradiso praescriptu^ est: reuerere igitur I^iunii canitiem. Basil. hom. 1. de
Ieiun.
and it was the first Law that God made, in commanding Adam to abstain from
eating the forbidden fruit. GOD would not pronounce nor write his Law without
Fasting, Exo. 19. and 3. Leuit. 23.
and in his Law commands all his people to Fast. So does our Savior Christ
teach all his Disciples under the New Testament likewise. Mat. 6.17. and 9.15.
By religious Fasting a man comes nearest the life of Qui ieiunat Angelorum
ritu viuit: and dum paucissimis contentus est similitudinem cum illis
assequitur. Basil. hom. 1. de Ieiun.
Angels, and to do Gods will on earth, as it is done in heaven. Yea, Nature
seems to teach man this duty, in giving him a little mouth, and a narrower
throaete: for, Nature is content with a little, Grace with less. Neither does
Nature and Grace agree in any one act better, Naturae o^ paruum and gu^tur
arct^^ homini dedit.
then in this exercise of religious Fasting: for it strengthens the memory,
and clears the mind: illuminateth the understanding, and bridleth the
affections: mortifieth the flesh, and preserves chastity: preuenteth
sickness, and continues health: it delivers from evils, and procures all
kind of blessings.

By breaking this Fast* Quamdiu ieiunauit Adam, in Paradis^ suit, comedit, and
erectus est. Hierom.
the Serpent ouer-threw the first Adam, so that he lost Paradise. But by
keeping a Fast the second Adam vanquished the Serpent, and restored us into
Heaven. Fasting was she who covered No^h safe in the Arc: whom Intemperance
uncovered, and left stark naked in the Vineyard. By fasting Lot quenched the
flame of Sodom, whom drunkenness scorched with the fire of Incest. Religious
Fasting and talking with GOD, made Moses face to shine before men: when
Idolatrous eating and drinking caused the Israelites to appear abominable in
the sight of GOD. It rapt Elias in an Angelical Coach to Heaven: when
voluptuous Ahab was sent in a bloody Chariot to Hell. It made. Herod believe
that John Baptist should live after death by a blessed resurrection: when after
an intemperate life he could promise nothing to himself, but eternal death
and destruction. O divine Ordinance of a divine Author!

2 Of the Time.
Praeceptum esse Ieiunium video, quibus autem diebus non oporteat ieiunare, and
quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini vel Apostolorum non inuenio definitum.
August. ad Cassulan. Ep. 86.
The holy Scripture appoints no time under the new Testament to fast: but leaves
it unto Christians own free choice, Romans 14.3. 1 Cor. 7.5. to fast as
occasions shall be offered unto them, Mat. 9.15. As when a man becomes an
humble and earnest suitor unto God for the pardon of some gross sin
committed, Indifferenter ieiunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex imperio nouae
disciplinae, pro temporibus and causis vniuscuiusque. Tert. aduers. Psychic.
or for the prevention of some sin, whereunto a man feels himself by Satan
solicited: or to obtain some special blessing which he wants: or to auert
some Judgment, which a man fears, or is already fallen upon himself or
others: or lastly, Montanus haereticus primus erat qui ieiuniorum leges
praescripsit. Eus. Eccl. hist. li. 5. cap. 18. ex Apollon.
to subdue his flesh unto his spirit, that he may more cheerfully pour forth
his Soul unto God by prayer. Upon these occasions a man may fast a Leu. 23.32.
Josh. 7.6. 2 Samuel 3.35.
day or Hest. 4.16.
longer, as his occasion requires, and the consti^u^ion of his body, and other
needful affairs will permit.

3 Of the manner of a private Fast.
The true manner of performing a private Fast, consists partly in outward,
partly in inward actions.

The outward Actions are to abstain, for the time that we fast, First, from
all Leuit. 23.28.36. Joel 1.14. and 2.15.
worldly business and labor, making our fasting day as it were a Sabbath day;
Leuit. 23.28. for worldly business will distract our minds from holy devotion.

Secondly, from all manner of food; yea, from 2 Samuel 3.35 Hezra 10.6. Dan*
10.3. Ester 4.16. Acts 9.9.
bread and water, so far as health will permit: 1 That so we may acknowledge
our own indignity, as being unworthy both of life, and all the means for the
maintenance thereof. 2. That by afflicting the body the soul which follows
the constitution thereof, may be the more humbled. 3. That so we may take a
godly 2 Cor. 7.11
revenge upon our selves, for abusing our liberty in the use of Gods
Creatures. 4. That by the hunger of our bodies, through want of these earthly
things, our Souls may learn to hunger more eagerly after spiritual and
heavenly food. 5. To put us in mind that as we abstain from food which is
lawful: so we should much more abstain from Quid prodest vacuare corpus ab
escis, and animam replere peccatis? Aug. de temp. sermon. 46.
Sin, which is altogether unlawful.

Thirdly, from good and costly Exo. 33.5.6
Apparel: that as the abuse of these puffes us up with pride; so the laying
aside their lawful use may witness our humility. And to this end in ancient
times they used (especially in public Fasts) to put Hest. 4.1.2 Jonas 3.5.6
Joel 1.13. Mat. 11.21.
on Sacke-cloath, or other course apparel. The equity hereof still remains;
especially in public Fasts, at what time to come into the Assembly with
starched bands, crisped hair, brave apparel, and decked with ^lowers or
perfumes, argues a Soul that is neither humbled before GOD, nor ever knew the
true use of so holy an exercise.

Fourthly, from the full measure of 2 Samuel 12.16. Joel 1.13. Hest. 4.3.
ordinary sleep. That thou may that way also humble the body: and that thy
soul may watch and pray to be prepared for the coming of Christ. And if thou
vvilt break thy-sleepe early and late for worldly gain: how much more
should thou do it for the service of God? 1 Kin. 21.27.
And if Ahab (in imitation of the godly) did in his fast lie in Sacke-cloath to
break his sleep by night; what shall we think of those, who on a fasting
day will yield themselves to sleep in the open Church.

Fifthly, and lastly, from all outward pleasures of our senses. So that as it
was not the Si sola gula peccauit, sola ieiunet and sufficit: Si vero
peccauerunt and me^bra caetera, cur non ieiunent and ipsa? Bern. sermon. Quadrag.
3.
throat only that sinned, so must not the throat only be punished: and
therefore we must endeavor to make our eyes (as at all times) so especially on
that day to fast from beholding vanities: our ears from hearing mirth or
Music, but such as may move to mourn: our nostrils from pleasant smells: our
tongues from lying, dissembling and slandering: yea, the use of the Marriage
bed must be omitted in a religious reverence of the divine Majesty. That so
nothing may hinder our true humiliation, but that all may be signs that we
are unfeignedly humbled. Thus much of the outward manner.

2 The inward manner of Fasting consists in two things. 1. Repentance. 2.
Prayer.

Repentance has two parts. 1. Penitencie for sins past: (...)
2. Amendment of life in time to come.

This penitency consists in 3. things. First, an inward insight of sin, and
sense of misery. Secondly, a bewailing of thy vile estate. Thirdly, an humble
and particular confession of all thy known sins.

1 Of the inward insight of sin* and sense of misery.

This sense and insight will be effected in thee. First, by considering thy
sins, especially thy gross sins, according to the circumstances of the
time when, place where, manner how, and person with whom it was committed.
Secondly, the Majesty of God against whom it was done: and the rather because
thou did such things against him, since he became a Father unto thee, and
bestowed so many sweet blessings in bountiful manner upon thee. Thirdly, in
considering the curses which GOD has threatened for thy sin: how grievously
GOD has plagued others for the same faults; and how that no mea^es in heaven
or earth, could deliver thee from being eternally damned for them; had not the
Son of God, so lovingly dyed for thee. Lastly, that if GOD loves thee, he
must chasten thee ere it be long with some grievous affliction, unless thou
do prevent him by speedy and unfeigned repentance. Let these and the like
considerations, so prick thy heart with sorrow: that melting for remorse
within thee: it may be dissolved into a fountain of tears, trickling down
thy mournful cheeks. This mourning is the beginning of true fasting: and
therefore often times, Mat. 9.15. Can the children mourn then shall they fast.
And Mark and Luke for mourn have fast.
put for fasting; the first and principal part, for the whole action.

2 Of the bewailing of thine own estate.

Bewailing or lamentation, Examples Psa. 6. and 22. and 38. and 79. and
Ieremies Lamentions Joel. 2.12.17
is the pouring out of the inward mourning of the heart, by the outward moanes
of the voice* and tears of the eyes. With such filial earnestness and
importunity in prayer, as our heavenly father well pleased. Ier. 31.18.19.20.
Nay, when it is the fruits of his spirit, and the effects of our faith, he
cannot be displeased with it. For if he heard the moanes which extremity wrung
from Ismael and Hagar; Genesis 21.17.
and hears the cry of the young Ravens, Job 39.3. Psalm. 147.9. Psalm. 104.21.
and roaring of Lions; how much rather will he hear the mournful
lamentation which his own children make unto him in their misery?

3 Of the humble confession of sins.

In this action thou must deal plainly with God, and acknowledge all thine
offenses not only in general but also in particular: 1 Samuel 7. Ezr. 9. and
Dan. 9. Neh. 1.
this has been the manner of all Gods children in their fasts: First, because
that without Confession thou have no promise of mercy, or forgiveness of
sins. Secondly, that so thou may acknowledge GOD to be just, Prou. 28.13.
Ps. 32.3. etc. Psalm. 51.4.
and thy self unrighteous. Thirdly, that by the numbering of thy sins, thy
heart may be the more humbled and pulled down. Fourthly, that it may appear,
that thou art truly penitent: for till GOD has given thee grace to repent;
thou will be more ashamed to confess thy fault, then to commit thy sin. The
plainer thou dealest in this respect with God; the more gracious will GOD deal
with thee, for if thou do^st acknowledge thy sins, God is faithful and just
to forgive thee thy sins: 1 Ioh. 1.7.9.
and the blood of Jesus Christ his son will cleanse thee from all thy sins.

To help thee the better to perform these 3. parts of penitency, thou may
diligently read such Chapters and portions of the holy Scriptures; as do
chiefly concern thy particular sins: that thou may see Gods curse and
judgments on others for the like sins, and be the more humbled thy self.

Thus far of the first part of Repentance, which is Penitencie.

The other Part, which is Amendment of life: consists, First, in devout
Prayer. Secondly, in devout Actions.

The devout Prayer, which we make in time of fasting, is either, Deprecation of
evil, or craving needful good things. (...).


Deprecation of evil is, when thou beseechest GOD, for Christ thy mediator
sake, to pardon unto thee those sins which thou have confessed, and to turn
from thee those Judgments which are due unto thee for thy sins. And as
Benhadad, because he heard, 1 Ring. 20.31.
That the King of Israel was mercyful, prostrated himself unto him with a Rope
about his neck; so because thou know that the King of heaven is merciful:
cast down thy self in his presence, Psalm. 50.15.
in all true signs of humiliation (especially, seeing he calls upon thee to
come unto him in thy troubles) and doubtless thou shall find him merciful.

The Craving of needful good things, is, First, a fervent and faithful
begging of God to seal, by his spirit, in thy heart, the assurance of the
forgiveness of all thy sins? Secondly, Phil. 4.6.
to renew thy heart by the holy Ghost, so that sin may daily decay, and
righteousness more and more increase in thee. Lastly, in desiring a supply of
faith, 1 Timothy 5.5.
patience, chastity, and all other graces which thou wa^^est: and an increase
of those which God of his mercy has bestowed upon thee already.

Thus far of Prayer in fasting.

The devout Actions in fasting, are two. First Avoiding evil. Secondly, doing
good.

1 Of avoiding evil.
This Abstinence from evil, is that which is chiefly signified by thy
abstinence from food, Non possum far iniquitatem, and interdicti diem. Isai.
1.13.
etc. and is the chief end of fasting, as the Ninevites very well knew. Ion.
3 8.10.
A day of fast, and not fasting from sin the Lord abhors. It is not the
vacuity of the stomach: but the Pulchrum est corporis ieiunium, cu^ sit animus
a vitiis ieiunus Hierom. ad Ce lant. Ep. 14. Ieiuna a malis actibus abstine a
malis sermonibus contine a cogitationibus pessimis. Cyril. in Leu. cap. 10.
purity of the heart that GOD respects. If therefore thou would have God
to turn from thee the evil of affliction: thou must first turn away from thy
self, the evil of transgression. And without this fasting from evil, thy
fast savors more noisome to God, Isa. 58.2. etc Zach. 7.5.7.
then thy breath does to man. This made God so often to reject the fast of the
Jews. And as thou must endeavor to avoid all sin; so especially that sin
wherewith thou have provoked God, either to shake his rod at thee, or already
to lay his chastening hand upon thee. And do this with a resolution, by the
assistance of Gods grace, never to commit those sins again. Quid prodest
tenuari corpus abstinentia, si animus intumescit superbia? Vinum non bibere,
and ira inebriari? Carnibus non vesci; and de ore omni esca sordidius egredi
maled^ctum aut mendacium. Maximus Epu^s.
For what shall it profit a man by abstinence to humble his body; if his mind
swells with pride? Or to forbear wine, and strong drink, and to be drunk with
wrath and malice? Or to let no flesh go into thy belly, when lies, slanders,
and ribauldrie (which are worse then any meat) comes out at thy mouth. Qui
cibis abstinent and mala agunt daemones imitantur, quibus culpa adest and cibus
deest. Isidor.
To abstain from meat, and to do mischief, is the Devils fast, who does
evil, and is ever hungry.

2 Of doing good works.
The Vis orationem tuam volare ad culum? Fac illi duas alas, ieiunium and
eleemosynam. Aug.
good works which as a Christian thou must do every day, but especially, on
thy fasting day: are either the works of Piety to GOD, or the works of Charity
toward thy brethren.

First, the works of Piety to GOD, are the Practice of all the former duties,
in the sincerity of a good Conscience, and in the sight of GOD.

Secondly, the worke^ of Charity toward our brethren; are, forgiving wrongs,
Isa. 58.6. etc
remitting debts to the poor that are not well able to pay: Isay 58.6. etc.
Zach. 7.9.10.
but especially in giving Alms to the poor, that want relief and
sustenance. Else we shall Qui ieiunat vt parcat, non ad Dei gloriam ieiunat,
sed substantiae suae parcit. Chrysostom. in Mat.
under pretense of godliness, practice miserableness, like those who will
pinch their own bellies to defraud their laboring Servants of their due
allowance. As therefore Christ joined Fasting, Prayer, and Alms together in
precept: so must thou join them together, Mat. 6. Act. 10.30.31.
with Cornelius, in practice. And therefore be sure to give at the least so
much to the Non Deo, sed sibi ieiunat qui quae ^d tempus subtrahit, non
inopibus subtrahit: sed ventri postmodum offerenda custodit. Greg. in Pastor.
ca. 44.
poor, on thy Fasting day: as thou would have spent in thine own diet, if
thou had not fasted that day. And remember, that he that sows plenteously
shall reap plenteously, and that this is a special sowing day. Let thy
Fasting so 2 Cor. 9.6. Ieiunium tuum te casliget, sed alterum laetificet. Aug.
ser. de temp. 64. Accipiat esuricus Christus, quod ieiuna^s minus accepit
Christianus. Aug. de temp. ser. 157

Beatus qui ieiunat, vt alat pauperem: imitatur enim Christu^, qui animam suam
posui^ pro fratribus suis. Cyril. in Leuit. lib. 10.


afflict thee, that it may refresh a poor Christian, and rejoice that thou
have dined and supped in another: or rather that thou have feasted hungry
Christ in his poor members.

In giving Alms observe two things: first, the Rules: secondly, the Rewards.

1 Rules in giving of Alms, and doing good works.
1 They must be done in obedience of Gods Commandments. Not because we think
it to be good, but because God requires us to do such and such a good deed:
for such 1 Samuel 15.22.
obedience of the worker, God prefers before all Sacrifices, and the
greatest works.

2 They must proceed from Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23.
Faith, else they cannot please God: nay, without faith the most specious
works are but Splendida peccata. August.
shining sins, and Pharisees Alms.

3 Thou must not think by thy good works and Alms, to merit Heaven: for in
vain had the Son of GOD shed his blood, if Heaven could have been purchased
either for Money or Meat. Thou must therefore seek Heavens possession by the
purchase of Christ's blood, not by the merits of thine own works. For Romans 6.
vlt.
eternal life is the gift of GOD through Jesus Christ. Yet every true
Christian that believes to be saved, and hopes to come to heaven, must do good
works (as the Apostle says) for necessary uses, which are four.

First, that 1 Cor. 10.31. 2 Cor. 8.19. Phil. 1.11.
God may be glorified: Secondly, that thou may show thy self Luke 1.74.75.
thankful for thy Redemption. Thirdly, that thou may 2 Pet. 1.10.
make sure thine Election unto thy self. Fourthly, that thou may Mat. 5.16.
Isa. 61.9.
win others, by thy holy devotion, to think the better of thy Christian
profession. And for these uses we are said to be Ephesians. 2.10
Gods Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good work, and that God has
ordained us to walk in.

4 Thou must not give thine alms to impudent Vagabonds, who live in wilful
idleness and filthiness: but to the religious and honest poor, who are
either sick, or old that they cannot work: or such who work, but their
work cannot competently maintain them, seek out these in the back Lanes,
and relieve them. But if thou meetest one that asks an Alms for Jesus sake,
and know him not to be unworthy, deny him not: for it is better to give unto
ten Counterfeits, then to suffer Christ to go, in one poor Saint,
vnrelieued. Look not on the Person, but give thine Alms as unto Christ in the
party.

2 Of the Rewards of Almes-deedes and good works.
1 Alms are a special means to move God in mercy to turn away his Dan.
4.24.
temporal Judgments from us: when we by a true Faith, (that shows it
self by such fruits) do return unto him.

2 Merciful Almes-givers Luke 6.35.36.
shall be the Children of the Highest: and be like GOD their Father, who is the
2 Cor. 1.3.
Father of Mercies. They shall be his Luke 16.1.
Stewards to dispose his goods; his Hands, to distribute his Alms: and if it
be so great an honor to be the Kings Almner? how much greater is it to be the
God of heavens Almes-giuer?

3 When all this World shall forsake us, then only good Works and good Angels
shall accompany us: the one to Apo. 14.13
receive their reward, the other to deliuer^ their Luke 16.22 Psalm. 91.11. Heb.
1.^4.
charge.

4 Liberality in Alms de^des is our 1 Timothy 6.19
surest foundation in this life, that we shall obtain in eternal life a
liberal reward through the Mercy and Merits of Christ.

Lastly, by Alms deeds we feed and relieve Christ in his Members: and Mat.
25.
Christ at the last day will acknowledge our love, and reward us in his Mercy:
and then it shall appear that what we gave to the poor, was not lost, but
Pro. 19.17.
lent unto the Lord. What greater motives can a Christian wish, to excite him
to be a liberal Almes-giuer? Thus far of the Manner of Fasting: Now follow
the Ends.

3 Of the Ends of Fasting.
The true ends of Fasting, are not to merit Gods favor or eternal life (for
that we have only of the gift of God through Christ.) Nor to place Religion
in bodily abstinence (for fasting in it self, is not the worship of GOD, but
an help to further us the better to worship GOD.) But the true ends of fasting
are three:

First, to subdue our Esd. 8.21. 1 Cor. 9.17.
flesh to the Spirit: but not so to 1 Timothy 5.23
weaken our bodies, as that we are made unfit to do the necessary duties of
our calling. A good man (says Solomon) is merciful to his beast, Prou. 12.10.
much more to his own body.

Secondly, that we may more devoutly contemplate Gods holy Will, Ieiunium
orationem roborat, oration sanctificat Ieiunium Bern. ser. de Jeiun.
and fervently Joel. 1.17. Nehem. 4. Luke 2.37. 1 Cor. 7.5.
pour forth our souls unto him by prayer: for as there are some kind of
Devils, so there are also some kind of sins, which cannot be subdued but by
Fasting, joined unto prayer, Mat. 17.22.

Thirdly, that by our Joel 2.18.19. 1 Cor. 11.
serious humiliation, and judging of our selves; we may escape the Judgment of
the Lord; not for the merit of our fasting (which is none:) but for the Mercy
of God, who has promised to remove his judgments from us: when we by
Fasting, do unfeignedly humble our selves unto him. And indeed no Child of
God ever conscionably used this holy exercise, but in the end he obtained his
request at the hand of GOD, both in receiving graces, which he wanted; as
appears in the examples of 1 Samuel 7.
Annah, 2 Chro. 20
Iehosaphat, Nehem. 1.
Nehemiah, Dan 9.
Daniel, Esdr. 8.23.
Esdra, Hest. 9.
Hester: as also in turning away Judgments threatened, or fallen upon him: as
may be seen in the examples of the 1 Samuel 7.6.
Israelites, the Jonah. 3.
Ninevites, 2 Chronicles. 12.5 7. etc.
Rehoboam, 1 King. 21.
Acha^, 2 Chronicles. 32.26.
Ezechia, 2 Cor. 33.18.19.
Manasses. He who gave his dear Son from heaven to the death, to ransom us
when we were his Enemies: thinks nothing too dear on Earth, to bestow upon
us, when we humble our selves, being made his reconciled Friends and Children.

Thus far of the private Fast.
2 Of the public Fast.
A Public Fast is, when by the Jonah 3.7. 2 Chro. 20.3 Ezra 8.21.
authority of the Magistrate, either the whole Church, within his dominion, or
some special congregation (whom it concerns) do assemble themselves
together, to perform the forementioned duties of Humiliation, either for the
1 Samuel 7.5.6 Joel 2.15. 2 Chronicles. 20 Jonah. 3. Hest. 4.
removing of some public calamity, threatened or already inflicted upon them,
as the sword, invasion, famine, pestilence, or other fearful sickness: or
else for the obtaining of some public blessing, for the good of the Exodus 19.
Esdr. 8. Acts 1. and 13 and 14.
Church, as to crave the assistance of his holy Spirit, in the election and
ordination of fit and able Pastors, etc. or, for the trial of truth, and
execution of Justice in matters of difficulty and great importance, etc.

When any evil is to be removed, the Joel. 1.14. Nehem. 8.
Pastors are to lay open unto the people, by the evidence of Gods Word, the
sins which were the special causes of that calamity: call upon them to
repent, and publish unto them the mercies of God in Christ, upon their
Repentance. The people must hear the voice of Gods Messengers with hearty
sorrow for their sins; earnestly beg Pardon in Christ, and promise unfeigned
amend^ment of their life. When any blessing is to be obtained, the Pastors must
lay open to the people the necessity of that blessing, and the goodness of
GOD, who gives such graces for the good of men. The People must devoutly pray
unto GOD, for bestowing of that Grace, and that he would bless his own
means, to his own glory, and the good of his Church. And when the holy
Exercise is done, let every Christian have a special care, according to his
ability, to Isa. 58.7.10 2 Cor. 9.7. Gal. 2.10.
remember the poor. And whosoever (when just occasion is offered) uses not
this holy exercise of Fasting, he may justly suspect, that his heart never yet
felt the power of true Christianity.

So much of Fasting. Now follows the exercise of holy feasting.
2 Of the Practice of Piety in holy Feasting.
HOLY Feasting is a solemn thanksgiving (appointed by authority) to be
rendered unto God on some special day, for some extraordinary blessings, or
deliverances received. Such among the Jews, was the Feast of the Passover, to
remember to praise God for their deliverance out of Egypts bondage: Exodus 12.
and 15.
or the feast of Purim, to give thanks for their deliverance from Hamans
conspiracy. Hest. 9.19.22.
Such among us are the 5. of August, to praise God for delivering our gracious
King, from the bloody conspiracy of the Traitorous Gowries. And the 5. of
November, to praise God for the deliverance of the King and the whole State,
from the Popish Gunpowder Treason. Such feasts are to be celebrated by a
public rehearsal of those special benefits, by spiritual Psalms, and
daunces, by mutual feasting, and sending presents every man to his neighbor,
and by giving gifts to the poor.

But forasmuch as the benefit of our Redemption was the greatest that man
needed from God; or that God ever bestowed upon man: and that the Lords Supper
is left by our Redeemer as the chiefest memorial of our Redemption: every
Christian should account this holy Supper his cheifest and ioyfullest feast in
this world. And seeing that as it ministers to worthy partakers the greatest
assurance which they have of their sa^^ation: so it pulls temporal
Judgments on the bodies, and (without Repentance) eternal damnation on the
souls of them who receive it unworthily. Let us see how a Christian may best
fit himself, to be a due partaker of so holy a feast, and to be a worthy guest
at so sacred a Supper.

Meditations concerning the due manner of practicing Piety, in receiving the
holy Supper of the Lord.
THough no man living is of himself worthy to be a guest at so holy a banquet;
yet it pleases GOD of his grace to accept him for a worthy receiver, who
endeavors to receive that holy mystery, 2 These. 1.11. Col. 1.12. Luke 20.35.
Apo. 3.4.
with that competent measure of reverence that he has prescribed in his word.

He that would receive this holy Sacrament with due reverence must conscionably
perform 3. sorts of duties. First, those which are to be^ one before he
receives. Secondly, those that are to be done in the receiving. Thirdly, those
that are to be done after that he has received the Sacrament. The first is
called, Preparation, the second, Meditation, the third, Action or Practice.

1 Of Preparation.
That a Christian ought necessarily to prepare himself before he presume to be
a partaker of the holy Communion, may evidently appear by 5. reasons.

First, because it is Gods commandment. For if he commanded under the pain
of death that none uncircumcised should eat the paschall Lamb: Exo. 12.48.
Exodus 12.6.
nor any circumcised under 4. days preparation: how much greater preparation
does he require, of him that comes to receive the Sacrament of his body and
blood, which as it succeeds, so does it exceed by many degrees the Sacrament
of the Passover.

Secondly, because the example of Christ teaches us so much: for he washed his
Disciples feet before he admitted them to eat of his Supper. Ioh. 13.5.
Signifying how thou should lay aside, all vnpurenesse of heart and
uncleanness of life, and be furnished with humility and charity, before thou
presumest to taste of his holy Supper.

Thirdly, because it is the counsel of the holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 11.28
Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. And if a man when he
is to eat with an earthly Prince, must consider diligently, what is before
him; Pro. 23.1.2.
and put a knife to his throat, rather th^n commit any rudeness. How much
more ought thou to prepare thy soul, that thou may behave thy self with
all fear and reverence when thou art to feast at the holy Table of the Prince
of Princes?

Fourthly, because it has been ever the practice of all Gods Saints, to use
holy preparation, before they would meddle with divine Mysteries. David would
not go near to Gods Altar, till he had first washed his hands in innocence.
Psalm. 26.6.
Much less should thou without due preparation, approach to the Lords
Table? Ahimelech would not give, 1 Samuel 21.4.
nor David and his men would not eat the shewbread but on condition that their
vessels were holy; how much less should thou presume to eat the Lords
bread, or rather the bread which is the Lord, unless the vessel of thy heart
be first cleansed by repentance? And if the Lord required Ioshuah (as he had
done Moses before) to put off his shoes, Exodus 3.5. Josh. 5.15.
in reverence of his holiness, who was present in that place, where he
appeared, with a sword in his hand, for the destruction of his enemies; how
much rather should thou put off all the affections of thine earthly
conversation, when thou come near that place where Christ appears to the
eye of thy faith, with wounds in his hands and side, for the redemption of his
friends? And for this cause it is said, That the Lambs wife has made her
self ready for his marriage. Apoc 19.7.
Prepare therefore thy self, if thou will in this life be betrothed unto
Christ by Sacramental grace: or in heaven married unto him by eternal glory.

Fifthly, because that God has ever smitten with fearful judgments, those
who have presumed to use his holy ordinances without due fear and preparation.
God set a flaming sword in a Cherubins hand, to smite our first Parents being
defiled with sin, if they should attempt to go into Paradise to eat the
Sacrament of the tree of life. Fear thou therefore to be smitten with the
sword of Gods vengeance. If thou presumest to go to the Church with an
unpenitent heart, Genesis 3.24.
to eat the Sacrament of the Lord of life. God smote 50000. of the Bethshemites
for looking irreuerently into his Arc, 1 Samuel 6. 1 Samuel 21. 2 Chr. 26.18 etc.
and killed Vzza with sudden death, for but rash touching of the Arc, and smote
Vziah with a Leapry for meddling with the Priests office, 2 Chr. 30.18 etc.
which pertained not unto him. The fear of such a stroke made Ezechias so
earnestly to pray unto God, that he would not smite the people that wanted time
to prepare themselves as they should to eat the Passover, and it is said,
that the Lord heard Ezechiah, and haled the people, intimating that had it not
been for Ezechias prayer, the Lord had smitten the people for their want of
due preparation. And the man who came to the Marriage Feast, without his
wedding garment, or examining of himself, was examined of another, and
thereupon bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness, Mat. 22.12. And
Saint Paul tells the Corinthians, that for want of this preparation in
examining and judging themselves, 1 Cor. 11.29
before they did eat the Lords Supper, God had sent that fearful sickness
among them whereof some were then sick, 1 Cor. 11.29
others week, and many fallen asleep, that is, taken away by temporal d^^th.
Insomuch that the Apostle says; that every unworthy receiver ea^es his own
Judgment, 1 Cor. 11.29
temporal if he repents, eternal if he repents not: and that in so heinous a
measure, as if he were guilty of the very body and blood of the Lord, Verse. 27.
whereof this Sacrament is a holy sign and seal. And Princes punish the
indignity offered to their great seal, in as deep a measure as that which is
done to their own Persons whom it represents: and how heinous the
guiltiness of Christ's blood is, may appear by the misery of the Jews ever
since they wished his blood to be on them and their Children. Mat. 27.25.
But then thou will say. It were safer to abstain from coming at all to the
holy Communion. Not so; for God has threatened to punish the wilful neglect of
his sacraments, with eternal damnation both of body and soul. And it is the
Commandment of Christ; Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me: Numb.
9.13. Heb. 2.3. Mat. 26. 1 Cor. 11.
and he will have his Commandment under the penalty of his Curse obeyed. And
seeing that this Sacrament was the greatest token of Christ's love, which he
left at his end to his friends, John 13.1.
whom he loved to the end: Therefore the neglect and contempt of this
Sacrament, must argue the contempt and neglect of his love and bloud-shedding,
Heb. 10.28.29.
then which no sin in (...) account can seem more heinous. Nothing hinders
why thou may not come freely to the Lords Table; but because thou had
rather want the love of God, then leave thy filthy sins. Oh come, but come a
guest prepared for the Lords Table; seeing they are blessed, Apoc. 19.9.
who are called to the Lambs Supper. Efficacia Eucharistiae non aequaeliter se
habet, quoaed omnes fideles, sed pro ratione fidei communicantium. Origin.
O come, but come prepared; because the efficacy of this Sacrament is received
according to the proportion of the Faith of the Receiver.

This preparation consists in the serious consideration of three things: first,
of the Worthiness of the Sacrament, which is termed ^o discern the Lords
Body: secondly, of thine own Unworthiness, which is to judge thy self:
thirdly, of the means, whereby thou may become a worthy Receiver, called
communication of the Lords body.

1 Of the worthiness of the Sacrament.
THE worthiness of this Sacrament is considered three vvayes: first, by the
Majesty of the Author ordaining: secondly, by the Preciousnesse of the Parts
whereof it consists: thirdly, by the Excellency of the Ends for which it
was ordained.

1 Of the Author of the Sacrament.
The Author was not any Saint or Angel, but our Lord Jesus the eternal Son
of God: for it pertains to Christ only, under the New Testament to institute
a Sacrament, because he only can promise and perform the grace that it
signifies. And we are charged to Mat. 17.5.
hear no voice but his in the church. How sacred should we esteem the
Ordinance that proceeds from so divine an Author!

2 Of the parts of the Sacrament.
The parts of this blessed Sacrament are three: first, the Earthly signs
signifying: secondly, the divine Word sanctifying: thirdly, the heavenly graces
signified.

First, the earthly Signs are 1 Cor. 11.23. etc. Prou. 9.5.
Bread and Wine, in number two, but one in use.

Secondly, the divine Word, is the word of Christ's Institution, pronounced with
prayers and blessings, by a Heb. 5.4. Number. 16.40. 1 Cor. 10.16
lawful Minister. The Bread and Wine without the word are nothing but as they
were before, Eucharistiae Sacramentu^ non de alioru^ manu, quam praesidentium
sumimus, Tert. lib. de Coron, cap. 3.
but when the Word comes to those Elements, then they are made a Sacrament,
and GOD is present with his own ordinance, and ready to perform whatsoever
he does promise. The divine words of blessing do not change or annihilate
the Qui est a terra panis percipiens vocationem Domini, non iam communis panis
est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti. Iren.
lib. 4. cap. 30.
substance of the bread and wine: (for if their substance did not remain, it
could be no Sacrament:) but it changes them in use and in name. For, that
which was before but common bread and wine to nourish men's Bodies, is after the
blessing destinated to an holy use, Per Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis
Domini diuinae efficimur consortes naturae, and tamen esse no^ desinit
substantia vel natura panis and vini. Gelasius cont. Eutic.
for the feeding of the Souls of Christians: and where before they were called
but Bread and Wine; they are now called by the name of those holy things which
they signify, The body and blood of Christ, the better to draw our minds from
those outward Elements to the heavenly graces, which by the sight of our
bodies they represent to the spiritual eyes of our faith. Neither did CHRIST
direct these words, Christus visibilia symbolae corporis and sanguinis
appellatione honorauit, non naturam mutans, sed gratiam naturae ad^ciens.
Theodoret. Dialog. 1.
This is my Body, this is my Blood, to the Bread and Wine, but to his
Disciples, as appears by the words going before; Take ye, eat ye. Neither
is the Bread his Body, but in the same sense that the Cup is the New Testament,
viz. by a Sacramental Metonymie. And Mark notes plainly, that the words,
This is my Blood, etc. was not pronounced by our Savior till after that all
his Disciples had drunken of the Cup. Mar. 14.23.24. And afterward in respect
of the natural substance thereof, he calls that the fruit of the vine, which
in respect of the spiritual signification thereof* he had before termed his
Blood, verse 25. After the manner of tearming all Sacraments. And Christ bids
us, not to MAKE him, but to do this in remembrance of him, and he bids us
eat, not simply his body, but his body as it was then broken, and his blood
shed: which Saint Paul expounds to be but the Communion of Christ's body, and
the 1 Cor 10.16.
communion of his blood, that is, an effectual pledge that we are partakers
of Christ, and of all the merits of his body and blood. And by the frequent use
of this Communion, Paul will have us to 1 Cor. 11.26.
make a show of the Lords death till he come Acts 3.21. Acts 1.11. Heb. 8.21.
from heaven: and till we, as Mat. 24.27 28.
Eagles, shall be caught up into the 1 These. 4.17.
Air to meet him who is the blessed Carkeis and life of our souls.

Thirdly, the spiritual graces are likewise two, the Body of Christ, as it was
(with the feeling of Gods anger due to us) crucified: and his blood as it was
(in the like sort) shed for the remission of our sins. They are also in
number two, but in use one, viz. whole Christ, with all his benefits offered to
all, and given indeed to the faithful. These are the three internal parts of
this blessed Sacrament, the Sign, the Word, and the Grace. The Sign without
this Word, or this Word without the Sign, can do nothing: and both conjoined
are unprofitable without the Grace signified: but all three concurring make an
effectual Sacrament to a worthy Receiver. Some receive the outward sign
without the spiritual grace, as Judas, who (as Austen says) received the
bread of the Lord, but not the Bread which was the Lord. Some receive the
spiritual grace without the outward sign as the Saint-Theefe on the Cross,
and innumerable of the faithful, who dying desire it, but cannot receive it
through some external impediments: but the worthy Receivers to their comfort
receive both in the Lords Supper.

Christ chose Bread and Wine, (rather then any other Elements) to be the
outward signs in this blessed Sacrament: first, because they are easiest for
all sorts to attain unto: secondly, to teach us, that as man's temporal life
is chiefly nourished by David calls Bread the strength of man's heart, Psalm.
104.15. Isay, the stay of bread, Chap. 3.1. Ezechiel, the staff of bread.
Chap. 4.16. Homer, (...).
bread, and cherished by wine: so are our souls by his body and blood
sustained and quickened unto eternal life. He appointed Wine with the Bread,
to be the outward sign in this Sacrament, to teach us: first, that as the
perfect nourishment of man's Body consists both of meat and drink: so Christ
is unto our souls not in part but in perfection both salvation and
nourishment: secondly, that by seeing the Sacramental Wine apart from the
Bread, we should remember how all his precious blood was spild out of his
blessed body for the remission of our sins. The outward Signs the Pastor
gives in the Church, and thou do eat with the mouth of thy body: the
spiritual grace Christ reaches from Heaven, and thou must eat it with the
mouth of thy Faith.

3 Of the Ends for which this holy Sacrament was ordained.
The excellent and admirable Ends or fruits, for which this blessed Sacrament
was ordained, are seven.

Of the first end of the Lords Supper.
1 To keep Christians in a continual Mat. 26.16 1 Cor. 11.26
remembrance of that propitiatory sacrifice, 1 Cor. 11.26
which Christ once for all offered by his death upon the cross to reconcile us
unto GOD. Do this (says Christ) in remembrance of me. And (says the Apostle)
As often as ye shall eat this bread, Gal. 3.1.
and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death, till he come. And he
says, that (by this Sacrament, and the preaching of the word) Jesus Christ was
so evidently set forth before the eyes of the Galathians as if he had been
crucified among them. For the whole action represents Christ's death: the
breaking of the bread blessed, the crucifying of his blessed body, and the
pouring forth of the sanctified wine, the shedding of his holy blood. Christ
was once in himself really offered: Heb. 9.26. and 10.12. and 1.3. Quotidie
nobis Christus crucifigitur. Aug. in Psa. 95.
but as often as this Sacrament is celebrated: so often is he spiritually offered
by the faithful.

Hence the Lords Supper is called a propitiatory sacrifice, not preperly and
really, but (...).
figuratively, because it is a memorial of that propitiatory Sacrifice, which
Christ offered upon the Cross. And to distinguish it from that real
sacrifice, the Fathers call it the Incruentum sacrificium. If it be unbloody,
because it is void of blood, the^ is it not Chrs. natural body: If because it
is offered without shedding of blood, then is it not available for the
remission of sins. Heb. 9.22.
unbloody Sacrifice. It is also called the Eucharist, because that the Church
in this action offers unto God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for
her redemption, effected by the true and only expiatory sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross. If the sight of Moabs King, Christo cum patre and spir. Sancto
sacrificiu^ panis and vini in fide and charitate* sancta Ecclesia Catholicae
offerre non cessat. Aug. de fid. ad Pet. diac. cap. 19. Cum frangitur hostia
du^ sanguis de calice in ora fidelium funditur quid aliud quam Dominici
corporis in cruce immolatio eiusque sanguinis de latere effusio designatur?
Can. did. 2. de conse cap. cu^ frangitur. 37.
sacrificing on his walls his own son to move his gods to rescue his life,
2 King. 3.27. moved the assayling Kings to such pity, that they ceast their
assault, and raised their siege; how should the spiritual sight of God the
Father, sacrificing on the Cross his only begotten son, to save thy soul,
move thee to love God thy Redeemer: and to leave sin that could not in
justice be expiated by any meaner ransom?

Of the second end of the Lords Supper.
2 To confirm our faith, for God by this Sacrament does signify and seal
unto us from heaven, that according to the promise and new covenant which he
has made in Christ, he will truly receive into his grace and mercy all
penitent believers who duly receive this holy Sacrament: and that for the
merits of the death and passion of Christ, he will as verily forgive them all
their sins: as they are made partakers of this Sacrament. In this respect the
holy Sacrament is called, the seal of the new Covenant and remission of sins.
Romans 4.11. Mat. 26.28. 1 Cor. 11.25
In our greatest doubts, we may therefore, receiving this Sacrament,
undoubtedly say with Sampsons mother, If the Lord would kill us, Judge. 13.23.
he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands,
neither would he have showed all these things, nor would at this time have told
us such things as these.

Of the 3. end of the Lords Supper.
3 To be a pledge and symbol of the most near and effectual communion which
Christians have with Christ. The cup of blessing which we bless, 1 Cor. 10.16
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? that is, a most effectual sign
and pledge of our Communion with Christ. Ioh. 14.16.23. 1 Cor. 6.17. (...).
Ephesians. 3.17. (...). Ioh. 15.5. Ephesians. 6. (...)
This union is called, abiding in us; joining to the Lord; dwelling in our
hearts: and set forth in the holy Scriptures, by diverse Similies. First of the
Vine and branches, Secondly, of the head and body. Thirdly, Ephesians. 6.35. Col.
1.18. Romans 12.4.5 Ephesians. 2.19.20. 1 Cor. 10.17 Ephesians. 5.31.32 Apo. 21.2.
of the foundation and building. Fourthly, of one Loaf confected of many
grains. Fifthly, of the matrimonial union twixt man and wife, and such like.
And it is threefold betwixt Christ and Christians. The first is natural,
betwixt our humane nature, and Christ's divine nature in the person of the
word. The second is mystical, betwixt our persons absent from the Lord, and
the person of Christ God and Man, into one mystical body. The third is
celestial, betwixt our persons present with the Lord, and the person of Christ
in a body glorified; these three conjunctions depend each upon other. For had
not our nature been first hypostatically united to the nature of GOD in the
second person; we could never have been united to Christ in a mystical body.
And if we be not in this life (though absent) united to Christ by a mystical
union; we shall never have communion of glory with him in his heavenly
presence. The mystical communion (chiefly here meant) is wrought betwixt
Christ and us by the Spirit of Christ apprehending us, and by our faith
(stirred up by the same spirit) apprehending Christ again. Both which, Saint
Paul does most lively express, I follow after, Phil. 3.12.
If that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
How can he fall away that holds, and is so firmly holden? This union he
shall best understand in his mind, who does most feel it in his heart. But of
all other times this union is best felt and most confirmed; when we do duly
receive the Lords Supper. For then we shall sensibly feel our hearts knit unto
Christ, and the desires of our souls drawn by faith and the holy Ghost, as by
the cords of love, nearer and nearer to his holiness.

From this Communion with Christ there follows to the faithful many
unspeakable benefits.

2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 4.25. 1 Pet. 2.24. Phil. 3.9.
As first, Christ took by imputation al their sins and guiltiness upon him
to satisfy Gods justice for them: and he freely gives, by imputation, unto us
all, his righteousness in this life, and all his right unto eternal life when
this is ended. And counts all the good or ill that is done unto us, Mat.
25.35. Act. 9.4. Mat. 25.45. Zach. 2.8.
as done unto his own person.

Secondly, their flows from Christ's nature into our nature, united to him,
the lively spirit, and breath of grace, which renueth us to a spiritual life,
Ephesians. 4.23.24 Romans 8.29.
and so sanctifies our minds, wills, and affections, that we daily grow more
and more conformable to the Image of Christ.

Thirdly, he bestows upon them all saving graces, necessary to attain
eternal life, as the sense of Gods love, the assurance of our election, 2 Cor.
3.18. Ioh. 15.5. Ioh. 1.16.
with regeneration, justification, and grace to do good works, till we come
to live with him in his heavenly kingdom. 2 Cor. 8.1.4 6.7.19.
This should teach all true Christians to keep themselves as the undefiled
members of Christ's holy body, and to beware of all uncleanness and
filthynesse, knowing that they live in Christ, or rather that Christ lives in
them. From this union with Christ, (sealed unto us by the Lords Supper) Saint
Paul draws arguments to withdraw the Corinthians from the pollution both of
Idolatry 1 Cor. 10.16. and Adultery. 1 Cor. 16.15.16. etc.

Lastly, from the former Communion twixt Christ and Christians, there flows an
other communion twixt Christians among themselves. Which is also lively
represented by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: in that the whole Church
being many, do all communicate of one bread, in that holy action. We being
many are one bread and one body: 1 Cor. 10.17
for we are all partakers of that one bread; that, as the bread which we eat
in the Sacrament is but one though it be confected of many grains; so all the
faithful, though they be many, yet are they but one mystical body, under one
head, which is Christ. Our Savior prayed 5. times in that prayer which he
made after his last Supper, Ioh. 17.11.21.22.23.26
that his Disciples might be one: to teach us at once, how much this unity
pleases him. This union betwixt the faithful, is so ample, that no distance
of place can part it; so strong that death cannot dissolve it; so durable, that
time cannot wear it out; so effectual, that it breeds a fervent love betwixt
those who never saw one another face. And this conjunction of Souls, is
termed the Communion of Saints, 2 Cor. 4.13.
which Christ's effects by 7. special means. First, by governing them all by
one and the same holy Spirit. Secondly, by enduing them all with one and the
same faith. Ephesians. 4.5.
Thirdly, by shedding abroad his own Romans 5.5.
love into all their hearts. Fifthly, by Tit. 3.5. Ephe. 4.5.
regenerating them all by one and the same Baptism. Sixthly, by 1 Cor. 10.17. 1
Cor. 11.33
nourishing them all with one and the same spiritual food. Seauenthly, by
being one Col. 1.18. and 22.
quickening Head* of that one Body of his Church, which he reconciled to GOD
in the body of his flesh. Hence it was that the multitude of Believers in the
Primitive Act. 4.32.
Church (...) of one heart, and of one soul, in truth, affection, and
compassion. And this should teach Christ (...) to love one another, seeing they
are all members of the same holy and mystical body, whereof Christ is He^d.
And therefore they should have all a Christian Sympathy, and fellow-feeling,
to rejoice one in another joy, to condole one in another grief, to bear
with one another infirmity, and mutually to relieve one another wants.

Of the fourth end of the Lords Supper.
4 To feed the Souls of the faithful in the assured hope of life
everlasting: for this Sacrament is a Sign and pledge unto as many as shall
receive the same according to Christ's Institution, that he will according to
his promise, by the virtue of his crucified body and blood as verily feed our
souls to lie eternal, as our bodies are by Bread and Wine nourished to this
temporal life. And to this end Christ in the action of the Sacrament, really
gives his very body and blood to every faithful Receiver. Therefore the
Sacrament is called the Communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord. 1 Cor.
10.16
And communication is not of things absent but present: neither were it the
Lords Supper, if the Lords Body and Blood were not there. Christ is verily
present in the Sacrament, by a double union: whereof the first is spiritual,
twixt Christ and the worthy Receiver: the second is Sacramental, twixt the
body and blood of Christ, and the outward Signs in the Sacrament. The former
is wrought by means that the same holy Spirit dwelling in Christ and in the
Faithful, Haec (s^corpus and sanguis Domini) accepta atque hausta, id
efficient, vt and nos in Christo, and Christus in nobis sit. Hill. lib. 8 de
Trin.
incorporateth the Faithful, as Members, unto Christ their Head, and so makes
them one with Christ, and pertakers of all the Graces, Life, Holiness, and
eternal Glory, which is in him: as sure and as verily as they hear the
words of the promise, I am corpus Christi meo corpori sociatum est, and
sanguis eius meas ornauit genas. B. Agn^tis doct. apud Ambros.
and are partakers of the outward Signs of the holy Sacrament. Hence it is
that the will of Christ, is a true Christians will: and the Christians life
is Christ who lives in him. Gal. 2.20. If you look to the things that are
united; this Union is essential: If to the Truth of this Union; it is real.
If to the manner how it is wrought, it is spiritual. It is not our Faith, that
makes the Body and Blood of Christ to be present: but the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in him and us. Our Faith does but receive and apply unto our Souls
those heavenly graces which are offered in the Sacrament.

The other, being the Sacramental Union, is not a Physical or local, but a
spiritual conjunction of the earthly Signs, which are Bread and Wine, with
the heavenly Graces, which are the Body and Blood of Christ in the act of
receiving: as if by a mutual relation, they were but one and the same thing.
Hence it is, that in the same Corpus non adest cu^ pane (...), id est, simul
loco, sed (...), id est^ simul tempore.
instant of time, that the worthy Receiver eats with his mouth the Bread and
Wine of the Lord: he eats also with the mouth of his Faith, the very Body
and Blood of Christ. Not that Christ is brought down from Heaven to the
Sacrament; but that the holy Spirit by the Sacrament, lifts up his mind unto
Christ, not by any local mutation, but by a devout affection: so that in the
Fidem mitte in Coelum, and eum in terris tanquam praesentem tenuisti. Aug.
Epist. 3. ad Volus.
holy contemplation of Faith, he is at that present with Christ, and Christ
with him. And thus believing and meditating how Christ his Body was crucified,
and his precious Blood shed for the remission of his sins, and the
reconciliation of his Soul unto GOD: his Soul is hereby more effectually fed
in the assurance of eternal Life, then Bread and Wine can nourish his body to
this temporal life. There must be therefore of necessity in the sacrament,
both the outward signs, to be visibly seen with the eyes of the body: and the
Body and Blood of Christ to be spiritually discerned with the Eye of Faith. But
the form how the Holy Ghost makes the Body of Christ being absent from us in
place, to be present with us by our union, Ephesians. 5.32.
S. Paul terms A great Mystery, such as our understanding cannot worthily
comprehend. The Sacramental Bread and Wine therefore are not bare signifying
Signs, but such as wherewith Christ does indeed exhibit and give to every
worthy Recei^er, not only his divine virtue and efficacy: but also his very
Body and Blood, as verily, as he gave to his Disciples the Holy Ghost, by the
sign of his sacred Breath: or Health to the diseased, by the word of his
Mouth, or touch of his hand or garment. And the apprehension by faith is more
forcible, then the exquisitest comprehension of Sense or Reason. To conclude
this point: this holy Sacrament is that Blessed Bread, which being eaten,
opened the Eyes of the Luke 24.30.31.
Emauites that they knew Christ. This is that Lordly Cup, by which 1 Cor.
12.13.
we are all made to drink into one Spirit. This is that Rock flowing with 1 Samuel 14.27.
honey, that reuiueth the fainting spirits of every true Jonathan, that tastes
it with the mouth of Faith. This is that Judge. 7.13.
Barley Loaf, which tumbling from above, strikes down the Tents of the
Midianites of infernal darkness. Elias Angelical 1 King. 19.6.7.
Cake and Water preserved him forty days in Horeb: and Psalm. 78.24.25. Number.
16.35.
Manna (Angels food,) fed the Israelites forty years in the Wilderness: but
this is that John 6.32.33.49.50.
True Bread of life, and heavenly Manna, which if we shall duly eat, will
nourish our Souls for ever unto life Ioh. 6.51.58.
eternal. How should then our Souls make unto Christ that request from a
spiritual desire, which the Capernaites did from a carnal motion; John 6.34.
Lord evermore give us this Bread!

The fifth end of the Lords Supper.
5 To be an assured pledge unto us of our Resurrection. The Resurrection of a
Christian is two-folde; first* the John 5.25. Romans 6.4.5.11.
spiritual Resurrection of our Souls, in this life, from the death of Sin,
called the first Resurrection: because that by the Trumpet-voyce of Christ, in
the preaching of the Gospel, we are raised from the death of sin, to the
life of grace: Apoc. 20.6
Blessed and holy is he (says Saint John) who has part in the first
Resurrection, for on such the second death has no power. The Hinc apud priscos
Sacramentum Baptism^ appellabatur, salus, Sacramentum vero Dominici corporis,
vita. Aug. lib. 1. de peccatorum meritis. c. 14.
Lords Supper is both a mean and a pledge unto us of this spi^rituall and
first Resurrection. John 6.57.
He that eats me, even he shall live by me. And then are we fit Guests to
John 12.2
sit at the Table with Christ, when like Lazarus* we are raised from the death
of sin to newness of life.

The truth of this first resurrection will appear by the motion wherewith
they are internally moved: for if, when thou art moved to the duties of
Religion, and practice of Piety, thy heart answers, with Samuel, 1 Samuel
3.10.
Here I am, Speak Lord for thy servant hears. Psalm. 108.1.
And with David, O God my heart is ready. And with Paul; Acts 9.6.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Then surely thou art raised from the
death of sin, and have thy part in the first Resurrection: but if thou
remainest ignorant of the true grounds of Religion, and find in thy self a
kind of secret loathing of the exercises thereof, and must be drawn, as it
were against thy will, to do the works of Piety, etc. then surely thou have
but a name that thou live, but thou art dead, as Christ told the Angel of
the Church of Sardis, Apo. 3.1.
and thy Soul is but as salt to keep thy body from stinking.

Secondly, the corporal Resurrection of our bodies at the last day which is
called the second resurrection, which freeth us from the first death. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.45.
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For this
Sacrament Hinc panis and vinum a veteribus nominantur symbola resurrectionis.
Canon Nicaenus.
signifies and seals unto us that Christ died and rose again for us, and
that his Ioh. 6.51. Caro Christi non in sese sed in verbo ipsi hypostatice
vnito viui^^ca est. Cyr. in Ioh. 10.13. Et quia est propria caro verbi, cuncta
viuifica^^is. Synod. Ephesians. directa fide ad Regina^. Viu^si^at 1. ratione merit^
obedien^i, a quia Christi ^aro pro cred^^tib^s oblata fuit in sacrificium. 2.
ratione copulationis nostrae cum Christo, quia non possumus ad Deum vit fontem
pertingere, (...) carne illa Christi mediante, and quatenus carni illi quasi
membra sumus insit^. Caro non prod^st. Ioh. 6.63. ^i. carnalis opinio non
conueniens cum mysterio mandacationis carnis Christi.
flesh quickneth and nourishes us unto eternal life, and that therefore our
bodies shall surely be raised to eternal life at the last day. For seeing our
head is risen, all the members of the body shall likewise surely rise again.
For how can those bodies which (being the weapons of Righteousness, Romans 16
13. Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. and Members of Christ.) have bin
Quomodo negane carnem capacem esse resurrectionis, quae sanguine and corpore
Christi nutritur? Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 34.
fed and nourished with the body and blood of the Lord of life: but be
raised up again at the last day? And this is the cause that the bodies of the
Saints, being dead are so reverently buried and laid to sleep in the Lord. And
their burial places are termed, the beds and dormitories of the Saints. The
reprobates shall arise at the last day. But by the Almighty power of Christ, as
he is Judge, bringing them as malefactors out of the goal, to receive their
sentence, and deserved execution: but the Elect shall arise by virtue of
Christ's resurrecti^n, and of the Communion which they have with him, as with
their head. And his resurrection is the Christi resurrectio in qua nostrae
innititur communis resurrectionis fide iussor est. Theod.
cause, and assurance of ours. The Mortuum esse Christum etiam Pagani credunt:
resurrexisse vero propriae fides est christianorum. Aug. lib. 16. cont. Faust.
cap. 19. Tota fiduciae Christianoru^ est resurrectio mortuorum. Tertul. lib. 5
de resur. Carn.
Resurrection of Christ, is a Christians particular faith: the Resurrection of
the dead, is the child of Gods chiefest confidence. Therefore Christians in
the Primitive Church, were wont to salute one another in the morning with these
phrases. (...).
The Lord is risen: and the other would answer, True. The Lord is risen
indeed.

The sixth end of the Lords Supper.
6 To seal unto us the assurance of everlasting life. Omnium terribilium
terribilissimum mors. Arist.
Oh what more wished or loved then life? Or what do all men more, either
fear, or abhor, then death? Yet is this first death nothing if it be
compared with the second death; neither is this life any thing worth in
comparison of the life to come. If therefore thou desire to be assured of
eternal life, prepare thy self to be a worthy receiver of this blessed
Sacrament. For our Savior assures us, That if any man eat of this bread,
Ioh. 6.51.
he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world. He therefore who duly eats of this
holy Sacrament, may truly say, not only, Credo vitam aeternam, I believe the
life everlasting: but also, Edo vitam aeternam, I eat life everlasting. And
indeed this is the true tree of life* which GOD has planted in the midst of
the Paradise of the Church. And whereof he has promised to give every one
that overcomes, to eat. Apoc. 2.7.
And this tree of life by infinite degrees excels the tree of life, that
grew in the Paradise of Eden; for that had his root, in the earth, this from
heaven; that gave but life to the body, this to the soul, that did but
preserve the life of the living, this restores life to the dead. The leaves of
this tree heals the Nation of believers, Apoc. 22.6.
and it yields every month a new manner of fruit, which nourishes them to
life everlasting. Oh, blessed are they who often eat of this Sacrament! at
lest, once every month, taste anew of this renewing fruit, which Christ has
prepared for us at his Table to heal our infirmities, and to confirm our
belief of life everlasting*

The seventh end of the Lords Supper.
Milites sacramento erant iurati and obstricti ad praestandam soli Imperatori
fidelitat^m and obedientiam. Cicero.
7 To bind all Christians, as it were, by an oath of fidelity, to serve the one
only true God: and to admit no other propitiatory sacrifice for sins but
that one real sacrifice which by his death, Christ once offered, and by which
he finished the sacrifice of the Law, and effected eternal redemption and
righteousness, for all believers. And so to remain for ever a public mark
of profession, to distinguish Christians from all sects and false religions.
And seeing that in the Mass, there is a strange Christ adored, not he that
was borne of the Vigin Marie: but one that is made of a wafer Cake: and that
the offering up of this breaden-god is thrust upon the Church; as a
propitiatory sacrifice for the Quick and the dead: all true Christians upon
the danger of wilful perjury before the Lord chiefe-Iustice of heaven and
earth are to detest the Mass, as that Idol of indignation which is most
derogatory to the all-sufficient World-sauing-merits of Christ's death and
passion. For by receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we al swear that
all real sacrifices are ended by our Lords death: and that his body and blood
once crucified and shed, is the perpetual food and nourishment of our Souls.

2. How to consider thine own unworthiness.
A Man shall best perceive his own unworthiness by examining his life
according to the ten Commandments of Almighty GOD. Search therefore what
duties thou have omitted, and what vices thou have committed, contrary to every
one of the Commandments: remembering that without repentance and Gods mercy in
Christ, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
the Curse of God (containing all the miseries of this life, and everlasting
torments in Hell fire when this is ended) is due to the breach of the least of
Gods commandments. And having taken a due surueigh both of thy sins and
miseries, retire to some secret place, and there putting thy self in the sight
of the Judge as a guilty malefactor standing at the Bar to receive his
sentence, bowing thy knees to the earth, smiting thy breast with thy fists and
bedewing thy cheeks with thy tears, confess thy sins, and humbly ask him
mercy and forgiveness, in these or the like words.

An humble Confession of sins to be made unto God before the receiving of the
holy Communion.
O GOD and heavenly Father, when I consider the goodness which thou have ever
showed unto me, and the wickedness which I have committed against heaven and
against thee, Luke 15.
I am ashamed of my self, and confusion seems to cover my face as a veil:
for which of thy commandments have I not transgressed? Oh Lord, I stand here
guilty of the breach of all thy holy Laws. For the love of my heart has not
so entirely cleaued unto thy Majesty as to vain and earthly things: The 1.
Commandment. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.38. Leuit. 19.14. Psalm. 22.5.6. Psalm. 38.8.
I have not feared thy judgments to deter me from sins, nor trusted to thy
promises, to keep from doubting of my temporal, or from despairing of mine
eternal state. The 2. Commandment. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Mat. 15.9.
I have made the rule of thy divine worship, to be what my mind thought fit,
not what thy word prescribed: finding my heart more proane to remember my
blessed Savior in a painted picture of man's devise: rather then to behold him
crucified in his Word and Sacraments after his own ordinance. Gal. 3.1.
Where The 3 Commandment.
I should never use thy name (whereat all knees do bow) but with religious
reverence, Phil. 2.10. Eccl. 4.17. 1 King. 19.10. Ier. 5.2.
nor any part of thy worship, without due preparation and zeal: I have
blasphemously abused thy holy name to rash and customary oaths, yea I have
used oaths by thy sacred name, as false couers of my filthy sins. And I have
been present at thy service often times more for ceremony then conscience, Here
confess thy rash and false swearing.
and to please men, more then to please thee, my gracious GOD.

The 4. Commandment.
Where I should sanctify thy Sabath day, by being present at the public
exercises of the Church, Act. 20.7.
and by meditating privately on the word and works of GOD, and by visiting the
sick, 1 Cor. 16.2.
and relieuing of my poor brethren. Alas, Here confess thy traveling on the
sabbath, and thy leaving the holy exercise, to go to sporting or feasting.
I have thought those holy Exercises a burden, because they hindered my vain
sports: yea, I have spent many of thy Sabbaths, in my own profane pleasures,
without being present at any part of thy divine worship.

Where I should have given all due reverence to my Natural, Ecclesiastical,
The 5. Commandment.
and Politic Parents, I have not showed that measure of duty and affection
to my Parents which their care and kindness has deserved. I have not had thy
Ministers in such singular love for their works sake, as I ought, 1 These. 5.13
Gal. 4.15.
but I have taunted at their zeal, and hated them because they reproved me
justly. Here confess thy disobedience to thy Parents, Ministers Magistrates,
Masters or Tutors.
And I have carried my self contemptuously against my Magistrates and
Ministers, though I knew that it is thine ordinance, that I should be obedient
unto them.

The 6. Commandment.
Where I should be Pro. 19.11.
slow to wrath, and Ephesians. 4.31. Mat. 5.44.
ready to forgive offenses, and not suffered the Sun to go down upon my
wrath, but to do good for evil, loving my very enemies for thy sake: Here
confess thy hastines and fury: and if thou have been any way the cause of any
man's death unjustly or cruelly.
I alas, for one sorry word have burst out into open rage, and harboring
thoughts of mischief in my heart, I have preferred to feed on mine own
malice, rather then to eat of thy holy Supper.

The 7. Commandment. 1 These. 4.3. etc.
Where I should keep my mind from all filthy lusts, and my body from all
uncleanness: O Lord, Romans 6.13.
I have defiled both, and made my heart a Cage of all impure thoughts, Here
confess unto God thy secret pollusions, fornication or adultery, if Satan
has so far prevailed over thee.
and my mind a very Stie of the unclean Spirit. Yea, the remedy which thou
Lord have ordained for continency, could not contain me within the bounds of
Chastity: for by doting on beauty, whose ground is but dust, Satan has
bewitched my flesh to lust after strange flesh.

Where I should have lived in uprightness, The 8. Commandment.
giving every man his due: being contented with mine own estate: Ephesians. 4.28.
and living conscionably in my lawful calling, Luke 6.34.35.
should be ready (according to mine ability) to lend and give unto the poor:
o Lord, Leuit. 25.35
I have by oppression, Here confess if thou have secretly stolen or openly
robbed any thing, or have detained from any fatherless child that which is
his by right.
extortion, Bribes, cauilation, and other indirect dealings under pretense of
my Calling and Office, robbed and purloyned from my fellow Christians: yea, I
have deceived and suffered Christ where I was trusted, many a time, in his
poor members, to stand hungry, cold, and naked at my door, and hungry, cold,
and naked to go away succourlesse, as he came: and when the leanenesse of his
cheeks pleaded pity, the hardness of my heart, would show no compassion.

The 9. Commandment. Zach. 8.16.
Where I should have made conscience to speak the truth in simplicity,
without any falsehood, Mat. 10.16.
prudently judging aright, 1 Cor. 13.7. Mat. 1.18.19
and charitably construing all things in the best part: and should have
defended the good name and credit of my neighbor: alas (vile wretch that I am)
I have belyed and slaundered my fellow-Brother, Psalm. 50.20.
and as soon as I heard an ill report, Psalm. 15.3.
I made my tongue the instrument of the Devil, to blazon that abroad unto
others, before I knew the truth of it my self. Here confess if thou have
belyed or slaundered thy neighbor, or not spoken the truth to clear his
innocence, when thou wast called thereto.
I was so far from speaking a good word, in defense of his good name: that it
tickled my heart in secret, to hear one that I envied, to be taxed with such a
blemish, though I knew that otherwise, the graces of God shined in him* in
abundant measure. I made ^ests of officious, and advantage of pernicious lies:
herein showing my self a right Cretian, Tit. 1.12.
rather then an upright Christian.

The 10. Commandment. Heb. 13.5. 1 Timothy 6.6. Phil. 4.11.12
And lastly (O Lord) where I should have rested fully contented with that
portion which thy Majesty thought meetest to bestow upon me in this
Pilgrimage: and rejoiced in an others good, as in mine own: Alas my life has
been nothing else but a greedy lusting after this neighbors house, and that
neighbors land: yea, secretly vvishing such a man dead, that I might have his
living or office, coveting rather those things which thou have bestowed on
another, rather then being thankful for that which thou have given unto my
self. Thus I O Lord, who am a carnal sinner, Romans 7.
and sold under sin, have transgressed all thy holy and spiritual
commandments from the first to the last, from the greatest unto the least, and
here I stand guilty before thy Iudgement-seate of all the breaches of all thy
laws, and therefore liable to thy Curse, and to all the miseries that Justice
can pour forth upon so cursed a creature. And whither shall I go for
deliverance from this misery? Angels blush at my rebellion, and will not help
me. Men are guilty of the like transgression, and cannot help themselves.
Shall I then despair with Caine, or make away my self with Judas? No Lord:
for that were but to end the miseries of this life, and to begin the endless
torments of Hell: I will rather appeal to thy Throane of Grace, Heb. 4.
where Mercy reigns to pardon abounding sins, and out of the depth of my
miseries, Psalm. 130.1.
I will cry, with David, for the depth of thy mercies. Though thou should
kill me with afflictions; Job. 1.12.
yet will I, like Job, put my trust in thee. Though thou should drown me in
the Sea of thy displeasure, Ion. 2.2.
with Jonas, yet will I catch such hold on thy Mercy, that I will be taken up
dead, clasping her with both my hands. And though thou should cast me into
the bowels of Hell, as Jonas into the Belly of the Whale: yet from thence would
I cry unto thee; O God the Father of Heaven, O Jesus Christ the Redeemer of the
World, O Holy Ghost my Sanctifier, three Persons, and one eternal God, have
mercy upon me a miserable sinner. And seeing the goodness of thine own
nature first moved thee to send thine only begotten Son, to dye for my sins,
that by his death I might be reconciled to thy Majesty: O reject not now my
penitent Soul, who being displeased with her self for sin, desires to
return to serve and please thee in newness of life, and reach from Heaven thy
helping hand to save me thy poor servant, who am (like Peter) ready to sincke
in the Sea of my sins and misery. Wash away the multitude of my sins, with
the merits of that blood which I believe that thou have so abundantly shed for
penitent sinners.

And now that I am to receive this day the blessed Sacrament of thy precious
body and blood; O Lord I beseech thee, let thy holy Spirit, by thy Sacrament,
seal unto my soul, that by the merits of thy Death and Passion all my sins
are so freely and fully remitted and forgiven, that the curses and Judgments
which my sins have deserved, may never have power either to confound me in this
life, or to condemn me in the world which is to come. For my steadfast faith
is, that thou have dyed for my sins, Romans 4. vlt.
and risen again for my justification. This I believe, O Lord help mine
unbelief. Work in me likewise I beseech thee, an unfeigned Repentance, that I
may heartily bewail my former sins, and loath them, and serve thee hence forth
in newness of life, and greater measure of holy devotion. And let my soul
never forget the infinite love of so sweet a Savior, that has laid down his
life to redeem so vile a Sinner. And grant Lord that having received these
seals and pledges of my Communion with thee; thou may henceforth so dwell by
thy Spirit in me, that I so live by Faith in thee: and that I may walk all
the days of my life, in godliness and piety toward thee, and in Christian
love and charity toward all my neighbors: that living in thy fear, I may
dye in thy favor, and after death be made partaker of eternal life, through
Jesus Christ, my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

3 Of the means whereby thou may become a worthy Receiver.
THese Means are duties of two sorts; the former respecting GOD, the later
our Neighbor: Those which respect GOD are three; first, sound knowledge:
secondly, true faith: thirdly, unfeigned repentance. That which respects our
neighbor is but one, sincere Charity.

1 Of sound knowledge requisite in a worthy communicant.
Sound knowledge is a sanctified understanding of the first Principles of
Religion. Heb. 6.1.2. Ioh. 17.3. 1 Timothy 2.4. 1 Cor. 11.29 2 Cor. 13.5.
As first, of the Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Godhead. Secondly, of
the Creation of Man and his fall. Thirdly, of the curse and misery due to
sin. Fourthly, of the natures and offices of Christ, and redemption by faith
in his death: especially of the doctrine of the Sacraments sealing the same
unto us. For as an house cannot be built unless the foundation be first laid;
no more can Religion stand, unless it be first grounded upon the certain
knowledge of Gods word. Secondly, if we know not Gods will, we can neither
believe nor do the same. For as wordly businesses, cannot be done, but by them
who have skill therein; so without knowledge must men be much more ignorant in
divine and spiritual matters. And yet in temporal things, a man may do much
by the light of nature. But in religious mysteries, the more we rely upon
natural reason, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.7.
the further we are from comprehending spiritual truth. Which discouers the
fearful estate of those who receive without knowledge, and the more fearful
estate of those Pastors who minister unto them without Catechizing.

2 Of sincere faith, required to make a worthy communicant.
Sincere faith is not a bare knowledge of the Scriptures, and first grounds of
Religion, (for that; Iam. 3.19. Heb. 4.2.
Devils and Reprobates have in an excellent measure, and do believe it and
tremble.) But a true persuasion, as of all those things whatsoever the Lord
has revealed in his word: so also a particular application unto a man's own
soul, of all the promises of mercy which God has made in Christ to all
believing sinners. And consequently, that Christ and all his merits do belong
unto him as well as to any other. For first, if we have not the righteousness
of Faith, Romans 4.11.
the Sacrament seals nothing unto us, and every man in the Lords Supper,
receives so much as he believes. Secondly, because that without Faith we
communicating on earth, cannot apprehend Christ in heaven. For as he dwells
in us by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
so by faith, we must likewise eat him. Thirdly, because that without faith
we cannot be persuaded in our consciences that our receiving is acceptable
unto God. Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23.


3 Of unfeigned repentance requisite for a true Communicant.
True Repentance is a holy change of the mind, Isa. 55.7. Ezech 33.11
when upon the feeling sight of Gods mercy, Act. 26.19. Act. 3.19. Luke 1.74.75
and of a man's own misery, he turns from all his known and secret sins to
serve God in holiness and righteousness, all the rest of his days. For as he
that is glutted with meat is not apt to eat bread: so he that is stuffed with
sins, is not fit to receive Christ. And a conscience defiled with wilful
filthiness, Ha. 2.13.14. Tit. 1.15.
makes the use of all holy things unholy unto us. Our sacrificed spotless
Passover cannot be eaten with the sour leaven of malice and wickedness, says
Paul, 1 Cor. 5.8. Neither can the old bottles of our corrupt and impure
consciences, retain the new wine of Christ's precious blood, as our Savior
says, Mar. 2.22. We must therefore truly repent, if we will be worthy
partakers.

2 The duties to be performed in respect of our neighbor, is Charity.
Charity is a hearty forgiving of others who have offended us, and after
reconciliation, an outward unfeigned testifying of the inward affections of our
hearts by gestures, words, and deeds, as often as we meet, and occasion is
offered. For first, without love to our neighbor, Mat. 5.23.24.
no sacrifice is acceptable unto GOD. Secondly, because one chief end
wherefore the Lords Supper was ordained, is, to confirm Christians love one
toward an other. Ioh. 13.14.34.35.
Thirdly, no man can assure himself that his own sins are forgiven of God,
if his heart cannot yield to forgive the faults of men that have offended him.
Mat. 6.12.14.15. and 18.35.
Thus far of the first sort of duties which we are to perform before we
come to the Lords Table, called Preparation.

2 Of the second sort of duties which a worthy Communicant is to perform at
the receiving of the Lords Supper, called Meditation.
THis exercise of spiritual Meditation consists in diverse points.

First, when the Sermon is ended, and the banquet of the Lords Supper begins to
be celebrated: meditate with thy self how thou art invited by Christ, to be a
guest at his holy table, Matthew. 22. 1 Pet. 1.
and how lovingly he inuiteth thee; Hoe, every one that thirsts, Isa. 55.1.2.
come ye to the waters of life, etc. Come, buy wine and milk, without money,
and without price, eat ye that which is good, let your soul delight it self
in fatness. Mat. 26.26.27.28. etc.
Take ye, eat ye, This is my body, which was broken for you, drink ye all of
this, for this is my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins.
What greater honor can be vouchsafed then to be admitted to sit at the Lords
own Table? What better fare can be affoorded then to feed of the Lords own
body and blood. If David thought it to be the greatest favor that he could
show unto good Barzalla^, 2 Samuel 19.33
for all the kindness that he showed unto him in his troubles, to offer him,
That he should feed with him at his own Table in Jerusalem; how much greater
favor ought we to account it, when Christ does indeed feed us in the Church,
at his own Table, and that with his own most holy body and blood?

Secondly, as Abraham, when he went ^p to thy Mount, Genesis 22.5.
to sacrifice Isaak his Son, left his Servants beneath in the Valley: so
when thou come to the Spiritual Sacrifice of the Lords Supper, lay aside
all earthly thoughts and cogitations: that thou may wholly contemplate of
Christ, and offer up thy Soul unto him, who sacrificed both his Soul and
Body for thee.

Thirdly, meditate with thy self, how precious and venerable is the Body and
Blood of the Son of God, who is the Ruler of Heaven and Earth, the Lord, at
whose beck the Angels tremble: and by whom both the quick and dead shall be
judged at the last day, and thou among the rest. And how that it is he, who
having been crucified for thy sins, offers now to be received by faith
into thy soul. On the other side consider how sinful a Creature thou art: how
altogether unworthy of so holy a Guest: how ill deserving to taste of such
sacred food; having been conceived in filthiness, and wallowing ever since
in the mire of Iniquity: bearing the Name of a Christian, but doing the Works
of the Devil; adoring CHRIST, with an, Hail King
Aue Rex, in thy mouth, but spitting Oaths in his face, and crucifying him
anew with thy graceless actions.

Fourthly, ponder then with what face dare thou offer to touch so holy a body
with such defiled hands; or to drink such precious blood, with so lewd and
lying a mouth: or to lodge so blessed a guest, in so unclean a stable? For if
the Bethshemites were slain for but looking irreuerently, into the Arc of
the old Testament, what Judgment may thou justly expect; who with such
i^^ure eyes and heart art come to see and receive the Arc of the New
Testament, Col. 2.3.9.
in which dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily?

If Vzza for but touching (though not without zeal) the Arc of the Covenant
was stricken with sudden death. 2 Samuel 6.7.
What stroke of divine Judgment may thou not fear; that so rudely with
unclean hands, do presume to handle the Arc of the eternal Testament,
wherein is hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge?

If John Baptist (the holiest man that was borne of a woman) thought himself
unworthy to bear his shoes; Mat. 3.11.
O Lord, how unworthy is such a profane wretch, as thou art: to eat his holy
flesh, and to drink his precious blood!

If the blessed Apostle S. Peter, seeing but a glympse of Christ's Almighty
Power; thought himself unworthy to stand in the same B^ate with him; how
unworthy art thou to sit with Christ, at the same Table, where thou may
behold the infiniteness of his Grace and Mercy displayed?

If the Centurion thought that the roof of his house was not worthy to
harbor so divine a Guest; Mat. 8.8.
what room can there be fit under thy ribs for Christ's holiness to dwell in?

If the bloud-issued sick woman feared to touch the Hemme of his Garment; how
should thou tremble to eat his flesh, and to drink his all-healing blood?

Yet if thou come humbly in Faith, Repentance, and Charity, abhorring thy
sins past, and purposing unfeignedly to amend thy life henceforth: let not thy
former sins affright thee: for they shall be never laid unto thy charge: and
this Sacrament shall seal unto thy Soul, that all thy sins, and the
Judgments due unto them, are fully pardoned, and clean washed away by the
blood of Christ. For, this Sacrament was not ordained for them who are
perfect; but to help penitent sinners unto perfection: Christ came not to call
the righteous, Mat. 9.12.13
but sinners to repentance. And he says, Mat. 11.28.
that the whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick. Those has
Christ called, and when they came, them has he ever helped. Witness the
whole Gospel which testifies: that not one sinner, who came to Christ for
mercy, went ever away without his errand. Bathe thou likewise thy sick Soul
in this fountain of Christ's blood, and doubtless according to his promise,
Zach. 13.1. thou shall be healed of all thy sins and uncleanness. Not
sinners therefore, but they who are unwilling to repent of their sins, are
debarred this Sacrament.

Fifthly, meditate, that Christ left this Sacrament unto us, as the chiefest
token and pledge of his love, not when we would have made him a King, John
6.15. (which might have seemed a requital of kindness) but when Judas and
the High Priest were conspiring his death (therefore wholy of his mere
favor.) When Nathan would show David how entirely the poor man loved his
sheep, that was killed by the rich man: he gave her (said he) to eat of his
own morsels, and of his own Cup to drink: 2 Samuel 12.3. and must not then the
love of Christ to his Church be unspeakable, when he gives her his own flesh
to eat, and his own blood to drink, for her spiritual and eternal
nourishment? If then there be any love in thine heart; take the Cup of
salvation into thy hand, and pledge his love with love again. Psalm. 116.11.

Sixthly, when the Minister begins the holy consecration of the Sacrament,
then lay aside all praying, reading, and all other cogitations whatsoever; and
settle thy meditation only upon those holy actions and rites, which according
to Christ's Institution, are used in and about the holy Sacrament. For it has
pleased God (considering our weakness) to appoint those rites as means the
better to lift up our minds to the serious contemplation of his heavenly
graces.

When therefore thou see the Minister putting apart Bread and Wine on the
Lords Table, and consecrating them by Prayers and the rehearsal of Christ's
Institution, to be a holy Sacrament of the blessed Body and Blood of Christ:
then meditate, how GOD the Father of his mere love to mankind, set apart, and
sealed his only begotten Son, to be the all-sufficient means, and only
Mediator, to redeem us from sin, and to reconcile us to his grace, and to
bring us to his Glory.

When thou see the Minister break the Bread, being blessed; thou must
meditate that Jesus Christ the eternal Son of GOD was put to death, and his
blessed Soul and Body (with the sense of Gods anger) broken asunder, for thy
sins, as verily, as thou now see the holy Sacrament to be broken before
thine eyes. And withal call to mind the heinousness of thy sins, and the
greatness of Gods hatred against the same: seeing Gods Justice could not be
satisfied but by such a Sacrifice.

When the Minister has blessed and broken the Sacrament, and is addressing
himself to distribute it: then meditate, The King (who is the Master of the
feast) stands at the Table, Mat. 22.11.
to see his guests, and looks upon thee, This wedding Garment is
righteousness and true holiness. Apoc. 19.8. Ephe. 4.24.
whether thou have on thee thy Wedding garment: think also that all the holy 1
Cor. 11.10. Ephesians. 1. vlt.
Angels who attend upon the Elect in the Church, and 1 Pet. 1.12.
do desire to behold the celebration of these holy Mysteries, do observe thy
reverence and behavior. Let thy Soul therefore whilst the Minister brings
the Sacrament unto thee, offer this or the like short Prayer unto Christ.

A sweet Soliloquie to be said betwixt the Consecration and receiving of the
Sacrament.
IS it true indeed that GOD will dwell on earth? 1 King. 8.27
behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens are not able to contain thee,
how much more unable is the soul of such a sinful c^itife as I am to receive
thee?

But seeing it is thy blessed pleasure to come thus, to Apo. 3.20.
suppe with me, and to Ioh. 14.23
dwell in me: I cannot for joy but burst out and say, What is man that thou
art so mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou so regardest him? What
favor soever thou vouchsafest me in the abundance of thy Grace; I will freely
confess what I am in the wretchedness of my Nature. I am in a word; a
carnal Creature, whose very soul is Romans 7.14
sold under sin: a wretched man compassed about with Verse 24.
a body of death: yet Lord seeing thou Mat. 9.13. Mat. 11.28.
call, here I come; and seeing thou call sinners, I have thrust my self
in among the rest; and seeing thou call all with their heauiest loades, I
see no reason why I should stay behind. O Lord I am sick, and whither should
I go but unto thee the Physician of my Soul? Thou have cured many, but never
did thou meet with a more miserable patient: for I am more leaprous then
Gehazi, more unclean then Magdalene, more blind in Soul, then Bartimeus was
in Body: for I have lived all this while and never seen the true light of thy
Word. My Soul runs with a greater flux of sin, then was the Hemorisse
issue of blood. Mephiboseth was not more lame to go, then my soul is to walk
after thee in love. Ieroboams Arm was not more withered to strike the Prophet,
then my hand is maimed to relieve the poor. Cure me O Lord, and thou shall do
as great a work as in curing them all. And though I have all their sins and
sores; yet Lord so abundant is thy grace; so great is thy skill; that if thou will, thou can with a word, forgive the one, and heal the other. And why
should I doubt of thy good will, when to save me will cost thee now but one
loving smile, who shewedst thy self so willing to redeem me, though it should
cost thee all thy heart blood, and now offerest so graciously unto me the
assured pledge of my redemption, by thy blood? Who am I O Lord God? 2 Samuel 7.18.
and what is my merit that thou have bought me with so dear a price? It is
merely thy mercy; and I O Lord am not worthy the least of all thy mercies:
Genesis 32.10.
much less to be a partaker of this holy Sacrament, the greatest Pledge of the
greatest mercy that ever thou did bestow upon those sons of men, whom
thou love. How might I in respect of mine own unworthiness, cry out for
fear at the sight of thy holy Sacrament, as the Philistimes did, 1 Samuel 4.7.
when they saw the Ark of God come into the assembly. Woe now unto me a
sinner; But that thy Angel does comfort me, as he did the women. Fear thou
not, Mat. 28.5.
for I know that thou seek Jesus which was crucified. It is thou indeed that
my soul seeks after. And here thou offerest thy self unto me in thy
blessed Sacrament. If therefore ELIZABETH thought her self so much honored at
thy presence, Lu. 2.43.44.
in the womb of thy blessed mother that the babe sprange in her belly for
joy; how should my soul leap within me for joy, now that thou come by thy
holy Sacrament, to dwell in my heart for ever? Oh what an honor is this that
not the mother of my Lord, but my Lord himself should come thus to visit me?
Indeed, Lord, I confess with the faithful Centurion; that I am not worthy
that thou should come under my roof: Matthew. 8.8.
and that if thou did but speak the word only, my soul should be saved.
Yet seeing it has pleased the riches of thy grace for the better strengthening
of my weakness; to seal thy mercy unto me by thy visible sign, as well as
by thy visible word. In all thankful humili^y my soul speaks unto thee with
the blessed Virgin. Behold the handmaide of the Lord, Luke 1.38. Apo. 3.20.
Luke 18.13.
be it unto me according to thy word. Knock thou, Lord, by thy word and
Sacraments at the door of my heart, and I will like the Publicane with both my
fists knock at my breast, as fast as I can that thou may enter in: and if
the door will not open fast enough; break it open, O Lord, by thine Almighty
power, and then enter in and dwell there for ever: that I may have cause with
Zacheus to acknowledge that this day salvation is come into my house. Luke 19.9.
And cast out of me, whatsoever shall be offensive unto thee: for I resign the
whole possession of my heart unto thy sacred Majesty, entreating that I may
not live henceforth, but that thou may live in me, speak in me, work in
me, and so to govern me by thy spirit that nothing may be pleasing unto me,
but that which is acceptable unto thee. That finishing my course in the life of
grace, I may afterward live with thee for ever in thy kingdom of glory. Grant
this, O Lord Jesus, for the merits of thy death and bloodshedding. Amen.

When the Minister brings toward thee the bread thus blessed and broken; and
offering it unto thee, bids thee, Take eat, etc. Then meditate that Christ
himself comes unto thee, and both offreth and gives indeed unto thy faith,
his very body and blood with all the merits of his death and passion* to feed
thy soul unto eternal life: as surely as the minister offers and gives the
outward signs that feeds thy body unto this temporal life. The bread of the
Lord is given by the Minister but the bread which is the Lord is given by
Christ himself.

When thou take the bread at the Ministers hand to eat it, Sacramentu^
requirit sacram mentem.
then rouse up thy soul to apprehend Christ by faith, and to apply his merits
to heal thy miseries. Embrace him as sweetly with thy faith in the Sacrament:
as ever Simeon hugde him with his arms in his swaddling clouts.

When thou eatest the bread, imagine that thou see Christ hanging upon the
Cross, and by his unspeakable torments, fully satisfying Gods justice for thy
sins and strive to be as verily pertaker of the spiritual grace, as of the
elementall signs. For the truth is not absent from the sign, neither does
Christ deceive, when he says, This is my body, but he gives himself indeed
to every soul that spiritually receives him by faith. For as ours is the same
Supper which Christ administered: so is the same Christ verily present at his
own Supper, not by any Papal Christ calls it his body, not the sign of his
body, because this Sacrament was instituted not only to signify but also to
communicate the spiritual graces that they represent. And by the signs to
draw our minds* to the graces signified. So Euthimius in Mat. 26. Non dixit
dominus, haec sutu signa corporis mei sed hoc est corpus meum. Oportet ergo non
ad naturam eorum, quae proposita sunt aspicere, sed ad ipsorum virtutem and
gratiam.
Transubstantiation, but by a Sacramental participation, Non hoc corpus quod
videtis manducaturi estis: et bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt, qui me
crucifigent. Sacramentu^ aliquod vobis commendaui: spiritualiter intellectum
viuificabit vos. Aug. in Psalm. 98. speaking in the person of Christ. The
Disciples did not eat Christ corporally and substantially in the first
institution no more do we in the reiteration of the same Supper.
whereby he does truly feed the faithful unto eternal life: not by coming
down out of heaven unto thee; but by lifting thee up from the earth unto him.
According to that old saying, Sursum corda. Lift up your hearts, and where the
carkase is thither will the Eagles res^^t. Mat. 24

When thou see the wine brought unto thee apart from the bread: then remember
that the blood of Jesus Christ was as verily separated from his body upon the
Cross for the remission of thy sins. And that this is the seal of that new
covenant which GOD has made to forgive all the sins of al penitent sinners
that believe the merits of his blood^heding. For the wine is not a Sacrament of
Christ's blood contained in his ^eines: but as it was shed out of his body upon
the Cross for the remission of the sins of all that believe in him. Mat.
26.28.


As thou drinkest the wine, and pourest it out of the Cup into thy stomach;
meditate and believe that by the merits of that blood which Christ shed upon
the Cross, all thy sins are as verily forgiven, as thou have now drunk this
Sacramental Wine, and have it in thy stomach. And in the instant of drinking
settle thy meditation upon Christ* as he hanged upon the Cross: as if like
Mary and John, thou did see him nailed, and his blood running down his blessed
side out of that gastfull wound which the Spear made in his innocent heart:
wishing thy mouth closed to his side, that thou might receive that precious
blood before it fell to the dustie earth. And yet the actual drinking of that
real blood with thy mouth; would be nothing so If remission of sins and
eternal life had bin appropriated to the drinking of the real blood,
doubtless John and Mary would have made means to have drunk it. But John
ascribes the virtue to believing that it was shed.
effectual, as this Sacramental drinking of that blood, spiritually by Faith.
For one of the Soldiers might have drunk that, and been still a reprobate:
but whosoever drinks it spiritually by Faith in the Sacrament, shall surely
have the Remission of his sins, and Life everlasting.

As thou feel the Sacramental Wine which thou have drunk, warming thy
cold stomach: so endeavor to feel the Holy Ghost cherishing thy soul in the
joyful assurance of the forgiveness of all thy sins, by the merits of the
blood of Christ. And to this end God gives every faithful soul together with
the Sacramental blood, the holy Ghost to drink. We are all made to drink
into one Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.13
And so lift up thy mind from the contemplation of Christ, as he was
crucified upon the Cross: Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24.
to consider how he now sits in glory at the right hand of his Father, making
intercession for thee: by presenting to his Father, the invaluable me^its of
his death, which he once suffered for thee: to appease his Justice for the
sins which thou do daily commit against him.

After thou have eaten and drunk both the Bread and Wine: labor that as those
Sacramental Signs do turn to the nourishment of thy body, and by the
digestion of heat become one with thy substance: so by the operation of Faith
and the Holy Ghost thou may become one with Christ, and Christ with thee:
and so may feel thy Communion with Christ confirmed and increased daily more
and more. That as it is impossible to separate the Bread and Wine digested into
the blood and substance of thy body: so it may be more impossible to part
Christ from thy Soul, or thy Soul from Christ.

1 Cor. 10.17 Vnus est panis communi notione Sacramenti, non autem necessario
vnus numero.
Lastly, as the Bread of the Sacrament, though confected of many grains; yet
makes but one Bread: so must thou remember, that though all the faithful are
many: yet are they all but one Mystical Body, whereof Christ is Head. And
therefore thou must love every Christian as thy self, and a member of thy body.

Thus far of the duties to be done at the receiving of the holy Sacrament,
called Meditation.

3 Of the duties which we are to perform after receiving of the holy
Communion, called Action, or Practice.
THe duty which we are to perform after the receiving of the L^rds
Supper, is called Action or Practice: without which all the rest will minister
unto us no comfort.

This Action consists of two sorts of duties: first, such as we are to
perform in the Church: or else, after that we are gone home.

Those that we are to perform in the Church, are either several, from our
own souls: or else, jointly, with the Congregation.

The several duties which thou must perform from thine own Soul are three:
first, thou must be careful (that forasmuch as Christ now dwells in thee,
therefore) to entertain him in a clean heart, and with pure affections; Psalm.
18.26.
for, the most holy will be holy with the holy: Sancta non nisi sancte and
sanctis.
for if Joseph of Arimathia when he had begged of Pilate his dead body to
bury it, vvrapped it in sweet odours, and fine linen, and laid it in a new
Tomb: how much more should thou lodge Christ in a new heart, and perfume
his rooms with the odoriferous Incense of Prayers, and all pure affections.
If God required Moses to provide a pot of pure gold to keep the Manna that
fell in the Wilderness: what a pure heart should thou provide to retain
this divine Manna that is come down from Heaven.

And as thou came sorrowing like Joseph and Mary to seek Christ in the
Temple, Luke 2.46.
so now having there found him in the midst of his Word and Sacraments, be
careful with joy to carry him home with thee as they did.

And if the man that found but his lost Sheep rejoiced so much; Luke 15.6.
how can thou having found the Savior of the World but rejoice much more?

Secondly, thou must offer the Sacrifice of a private thanksgiving unto God
for this inestimable grace and mercy: for as this action is common unto the
whole Church: so is it applied particularly to every one of the faithful in
the Church, and for this particular mercy, every Soul must joyfully offer up a
particular Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. For if the Wisemen rejoiced so much
when they saw the Star which conducted them unto Christ; and worshipped him so
devoutly when he lay, a Babe, in the Manger, and offered unto him their Gold,
Myrrh, and Frankincense: how much more should thou rejoice now that thou
have both seen and received this Sacrament, which guides thy Soul unto him,
where he sits at the right hand of his father in glory? And thither lifting
up thy heart, adore him, and offer up unto him the Gold of a pure Faith, the
Myrrh of a mortified heart, and this or the like sweet Incense of Prayer and
Thanksgiving.

A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the Communion.
WHat shall I render unto thee (O blessed Savior) for all these blessings,
which thou have so graciously bestowed upon my Soul? how can I sufficiently
thank thee, when I can scarce express them? Where thou might have made
me a Beast, thou made me a man after thine own Image. When by sin I had
lost both thine Image, and my self: thou did renew in me thine Image by thy
Spirit: and did redeem my Soul by thy blood again: and now thou have
given unto me thy Seal and pledge of my Redemption; nay, thou have given thy
self unto me O blessed Redeemer. Oh what an inestimable treasure of riches,
and ouer-flowing Fountain of grace has he got who has gained thee! No man
ever touched thee by Faith, but thou did heal him by Grace, for thou art the
Author of Salvation, the remedy of all evils, the medicine of the sick, the
life of the quick, and the resurrection of the dead. Seemed it a small matter
unto thee to appoint thy holy Angels to attend upon so vile a Creature as I am;
but that thou would enter thy self into my Soul, there to preserve,
nourish and cherish me unto life everlasting?

If the carkeis of the dead Prophet could revive a dead man that touched it; 2
King. 13.21
how much more shall the living body of the Lord of all Prophets, quicken the
faithful, in whose heart he dwells? And if thou will raise my body at the
last day out of the dust; how much more vvilt thou now revive my Soul which
thou have sanctified with thy Spirit, and purified with thy blood? Oh Lord,
what could I more desire, or what could thou more bestow upon me, then to
give me thy body for meat, thy blood for drink, and to lay down thy Soul
for the price of my Redemption? Thou Lord enduredst the pain, and I do reap
the profit: I received Pardon, and thou did bear the punishment. Thy
tears were my bathe, thy wounds my weal, and the injustice done to thee,
satisfied for the Judgment which was due to me. Thus by thy birth thou art
become my Brother, by thy death my ransom, by thy mercy my reward, and by thy
Sacrament my nourishment. O divine food, by which the sons of men are
transformed into the sons of God: so that man's nature dies, and Gods nature
lives and rules in us. Indeed all Creatures wondered that the Creator would
be enclosed nine months in the Virgins womb, (though her womb being
replenished with the Holy Ghost, was more splendide then the starry
Firmament.) But that thou should thus humble thy self to dwell for ever in
my heart, which thou foundst more unclean then a dunghill: It is able to make
all the Creatures in heaven and earth to stand amazed: But seeing it is thy
free grace and mere pleasure thus to enter and to dwell in my heart, I would
to GOD that I had so pure a heart, as my heart could wish to entertain thee.
And who is fit to entertain Christ? or who though invited would not choose,
with Mary, rather to kneel at thy feet, then presume to sit with thee at the
Table? Though I want a pure heart for thee to dwell in, yet weeping eyes shall
never be vvanting to vvash thy blessed feet, and to lament my filthy sins.
And albeit I cannot weep so many tears as may suffice to wash thy holy feet,
yet Lord it is sufficient that thou have shed blood enough to cleanse my sinful
Soul. And I am fully (O Lord) assured that all the dainty fare wherewith the
disdainful Pharisie entertained thee at his Table, did not so much please thee
as those tears which penitent Mary poured under the table. I would therefore
wish with Jeremy, that my head were a fountain of tears, that seeing I can
by no means yield sufficient thanks for thy love to me; yet I might by
continual tears, testify my love unto thee. And though no man is worthy of
so infinite a grace: yet this is my comfort, that he is worthy whom thou in
favor accountest worthy. And seeing that now of thy mere grace thou have
counted me (among others thy chosen) worthy of this unspeakable favor, and
sealed by thy Sacrament the assurance of thy love and the forgiveness of my
sins: O Lord confirm thy favor unto thy Servant; and say of me as Isaac did
of Jacob, Genesis 27.33.
I have blessed him, therefore he shall be blessed. And that I may say unto
thee, with David, Thou O Lord have blessed my Soul, 1 Chronicles. 1^.27.
and made it thy house, and it shall be blessed for ever. And seeing it pleased
thee to bless the house of Obededom, 2 Samuel 6.11.12.
and all his household, whilst the Ark of the Lord remained in his house: I
doubt not but thou will much more bless my Soul and Body, and all that do
belong unto me, now that it has pleased thy Majesty of thine own good will
to enter under my roof, and to dwell for ever in my poor Cottage. Bless me,
O Lord, so, that my sins may wholly be remitted, by thy blood, my conscience
sanctified by thy spirit, my mind enlightened by thy truth, my heart guided by
thy spirit, and my will, in all things, subdued to thy blessed will and
pleasure. Bless me with all graces which I want, and increase in me those
good gifts which thou have already bestowed upon me. And seeing that I hold
thee not by the arms, as Jacob, wrestling without me; but inwardly dwelling
by faith within me: surely, Genesis 32.24. etc.
Lord, I will never let thee go, except thou bless me, and give me a new
name, a new heart, a new spirit, and strength by the power of God to prevail
over sin and Satan. And I beseech thee, O Lord, desire not to depart from me
as thou did from Jacob because the day breaks, and thy grace begins to
dawn and appear. But I from my soul, humbly with the Emmauites, entreat thee
O sweet Jesus to abide with me, because it drawneth toward night. For the night
of temptation, the night of tribulation, yea my last long night of death
appears, O blessed Savior, stay with me therefore now and ever. And if thy
presence go not home with me, Exodus 33.14
carry me not from hence. Go with me and live with me, and let neither death
nor life seperat^ me from thee. Drive me from my self, draw me unto thee. Let
me be sick, but sound in thee, and in my weakness let thy strength appear.
Let me seem as dead, that thou alone may be seen to live in me, so that
all my members, may be but instruments to act thy motions. Set me as a seal
upon thine heart, Cant. 8.6.
and let thy zeal be settled upon mine, that I may be out of love with all:
that I may be only in love with thee. And grant, O Lord, that as thou now
vouchsafest me this favor to sit at thy table to receive this Sacrament in thy
house of grace: so I may hereafter through thy mercy, Luke 22.30
be received to eat and drink at thy table in thy kingdom of glory. And for
thy mercy, I do here with the 4. beasts and 24. Elders cast my self down
before thy throane of Grace, acknowledging that it is thou that have redeemed
me with thy blood, Apo. 5.9.
and that salvation comes only from thee. And therefore, unto thee I do
yield all praise and glory, Apoc. 7.10.11.12.
and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, and majesty, O my
Lord, and my God, for evermore. Amen.

Thirdly, seeing Christ has sacrificed himself for thee: (and all that thou
can give is too little) therefore thou must offer thy self to be a living,
Romans 12.1. Luke 17.5.
holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God: by serving him in righteousness and
holiness all thy days. Thus Tertullian witnesses, that in his time, a
Christian was known from an other man, only by the holiness and uprightness
of his life.

2 Of the duties which we are to do after the Communion, jointly with the
Congregation.
THe duties to be performed jointly with the Church, are three. First, public
thanksgiving, both by prayers and singing of Psalms, Man. 26 30. Which is
probable to have been the 113. Psalm. 1 Cor. 16.1. Heb. 13.16. Romans 15.25.
thus Christ himself and his Apostles did. Secondly, Joining with the church,
in giving (every man according to his ability) toward the relief of the poor.
This was the manner of the Primitive Churches to make a Collections and Qui
copiosiores sunt and volunt, pro arbitrio quisqus suo quod visum est,
contribuunt: and quod ita colligitur, apud praepositum deponitur: atque inde
ille opitulatur pupillis and viduis and qui propter morbum aut aliquam aliam
causam egent etc. Justin. Martyr. Apolog. 2.
Loue-feasts after the Lords Supper, for the relief of the poor Christians.
Thirdly, When thanks and praise is ended: then with all reverence to stand up,
and to receive the blessing of God, by the mouth of his Minister, and to
receive it, as if thou did hear God himself pronouncing it unto thee from
heaven. For by (...). Lucrum est pietatis nomine facere sumptum. Tertul. Apo.
adu. Gent. cap. 39. Number. 6.23.27.
their blessing, God does bless his people.

Thus far of the duties to be practiced in the Church.

The duties which thou art to practice after that thou art departed home, are
three. First, to observe diligently, whether thou have truly received CHRIST
in the Sacrament. Which thou may thus easily perceive: for seeing his flesh
is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, Ioh. 6.65.
and that he is so full of grace, that no man ever touched him by faith, but he
received virtue from him. It cannot possibly be, that if thou have eaten his
flesh, or drunk his blood, but thou shall receive grace and power to be
cleansed from thy sins and filthynesse. For if the Hemorise, that did but
touch his garment, had her bloody issue that continued so long, forthwith
stanched: Mar. 5.29.
How much more will the bloody issue of thy sin, be stanched, if thou then
have truly eaten and drunk the very flesh and blood of Christ? But if thy
issue still runs, thou may justly suspect, thou have never yet truly
touched Christ.

Secondly, Seeing thou have now reconciled thy self to GOD, and renewed thy
Covenant, and vowed newness and amendment of life. Thou must therefore have a
special care, that thou do not yield to commit thy form^r sins any more:
knowing that the unclean spirit, Mat. 12.44. etc.
if ever he can get into thy Soul again, after that it is swept and
garnished: he will enter forcible possession with 7. other Devils worse then
himself: So that the end of that man shall be worse then his beginning. Be
ye not therefore like the Dog that returns to his vomi^, 2 Pet. 2.22.
or the washed sow that walloweth in the mire again. And return not to thy
malice, like to the Adder, who laying aside her poison while she drinks,
takes it up again when she has done. But when either the Devil or thy flesh
shall offer to tempt and move thee to relapse into thy former sins: answer
them as the Spouse does in the Canticles, I have put off my coat (of my former
corruption) how shall I put it on? Cant. 5 3.
I have washed my feet how shall I defile them again?

Lastly if ever thou have found either joy or comfort in receiving the holy
Sacrament; let it appear by thy eager desire of receiving it often again. For
the body of Christ as i^ was anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows: Psalm. 45.7 Heb. 1.9.
so does it yield a sweeter savor then all the ointments of the world. The
fragrant smell whereof, allureth all souls who have once tasted the sweetness
thereof, ever after to desire oftener to taste thereof again. Because of the
savor of thy good ointment, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Cant. 1.3.
O taste therefore and often see how good the Lord is, says David; Psalm. 34.8.
This is the commandment of CHRIST himself, Scio Romae hanc esse
consuetudinem vt fideles semper Christi corpus accipiant Hier. Apol. adu. Iouin.
Do this in remembrance of me, and in doing this thou shall show thy self
best mindful and thankful for his death. Quotidie communione^ Eucharistiae
percipere, nec laudo, nec reprehendo. Omnibus Dominicis diebus communicandum
sua^leo and hortor, s^ men's sine affectu peccandi sit. Aug ( vel potius
Genadius) lib. de Eccl. dogm. cap. 53. Tit. 2.12.14.
For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye shall show
the Lords death until he come. And let this be the chief end whereunto, both
thy receiving and living tends: that thou may be a holy Christian, zealous
of good works, purged from sin, to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world; that thou may be acceptable to God, profitable to thy
brethren, and comfortable unto thine own soul.

Thus far of the manner of glorifying God in thy life.
Now follows the Practice of Piety in glorifying God in the time of
sickness, and when thou art called, to die in the Lord.
AS soon as thou perceiuest thy self to be visited with any sickness;
meditate with thy self:

1 That misery comes not forth of the dust: Job 5.6.
neither does affliction spring out of the earth. Sickness comes not by hap or
chance, (as the Philistimes supposed that their Mise and Emeroides came: 1 Samuel
6.9.
) but from man's wickedness, which as sparkles breaks out. Man suffers
(says Jeremy,) for his sins. Lam. 3.39.
Fools (says David) by reason of their transgressions, Psalm. 107.17
and because of their iniquities are afflicted. As therefore Solomon advised a
man to carry himself toward an earthly Prince: Eccles. 10.4
If the spirit of him that rules, rise up against thee: leave not thy place,
for gentleness pacifieth great sins: so counsel I thee, to deal with the
Prince of Princes: If the spirit of him, that rules heaven and earth rise up
against thee, let not thy heart despair; for repentance pacifieth great sins.
2 Chro. 15.4
And whosoever returns in his affliction, to the Lord God of Israel, and
seeks him, he will be found of him.

Mat. 6.6.
2 Shut too thy Chamber door: Psalm. 4.4.
Examine thine own Heart upon thy bed. Search and try thy ways: Lam. 3.40.
Search as diligently for thy capital sin (as Joshua did for Achan) till
thou find it: Josh. 7.16. etc.
for albeit GOD, when he begins to chasten his Children, has respect to all
their sins: yet when his anger is incensed: he chiefly takes occasion to
chasten, and enter with them into Judgment, for some one grievous sin,
wherein they have lived without Repentance.

3 When thou have thus considered all thy sins, put thy self before the
Judgment seat of God, as a fellon or murderer standing at the Bar of an
earthly Judge: and with grief and sorrow of heart confess unto God all thy
known sins, especially thy Capital offenses, wherewith GOD is chiefly
displeased. Lay them open, with all the circumstances of the time, place, Prou.
28.30.
and manner how they were committed; as may most serve to aggrauate the
heinousness of thy sins, and to show the contrition of thy heart for the
same. Lift up thine hand, and acknowledge thy self before the righteous Judge
of heaven and earth, guilty of eternal death and damnation, for those thy
heinous sins and transgressions. And having thus accused and judged thy
self; Psalm. 99.5. Heb. 4.10.
cast down thy self before the Foote-stoole of his Throne of Grace: assuring
thy self, that whatsoever the Kings of Israel be; 1 Reg. 20.3^
yet the GOD of Israel is a merciful God. And cry unto him from a penitent and
faithful heart, for mercy and forgiveness: as eager, and earnest, as ever
thou knew a malefactor, being to receive his sentence, crying unto the Judge
for favor, and pardon: vowing amendment of life, and (by the assistance of
his Grace) never to commit the like sin any more. All which thou may do
in these or the like words.

A Prayer when one begins to be sick.
O Most righteous Judge, yet in Jesus Christ, my gracious Father: I wretched
sinner, do here return unto thee (though driven with pain and sickness,)
like the prodigal child, with want and hunger. I acknowledge that this
sickness and pain comes not by blind chance or fortune: but by thy divine
providence and special appointment. It is the stroke of thy heavy hand,
which my sins have justly deserved: and the things that I feared are now
fallen upon me. Job. 3.25.
Yet I do well perceive, Habak. 3.2.
that in wrath thou remembrest mercy: When I consider how many, and how
heinous are my sins, and how few and easy are thy corrections. Thou might
have stricken me with some fearful and sudden death, whereby I should not
have had either time or space to have called upon thee for grace and mercy; and
so I should have perished in my sins, and been for ever condemned in Hell.

But thou O Lord visitest me with such a Fatherly chastisement, as thou use
to visit thy dearest children, whom thou best love; giving me (by this
sickness) both warning and time to repent, and to sue unto thee for grace and
pardon. I take not therefore, O Lord, this thy visitation, as any sign of thy
wrath or hatred, but as an assured pledge and token of thy favor and loving
kindness, whereby thou do with thy temporal Judgments; 1 Cor. 11.31
draw me to judge my self, and to repent of my wicked life, that I should not
be condemned with the godless and unpenitent world. For thy holy Word assures
me, that whom thou love, Heb. 12.6.7. etc.
thou thus chastenest: and that thou scourgest every Son that thou receiuest.
That if I endure thy chastening, thou offerest thy self unto me as unto a
son, and that all that continue in sin* and yet escape without correction,
whereof all thy Children are partakers, are Bastards, and not sons, and that
thou chastenest me for my profit, that I may be a partaker of thy holiness. O
Lord, how full of goodness is thy nature, that have dealt with me so
graciously in the time of my health and prosperity; and now being provoked by
my sins and unthankfulness, have such fatherly and profitable ends, in
inflicting upon me this sickness and correction.

I confess Lord, that thou do justly afflict my body with sickness; for my
soul was sick before of long prosperity, and surfetted with ease, Ezech.
16.49
peace, plenty and fullness of bread. And now, O Lord, I lament and mourn for
my sins, I acknowledge my wickedness, and mine iniquities are always in my
sight. Oh what a vvretched sinner am I, void of all goodness by nature, and
full of evil by sinful custom! Oh what a world of sin have I committed
against thee, whilst thy long sufferance expected my conversion, and thy
blessings wooed me to repentance! Yet O my God, seeing it is thy property
more to respect the goodness of thine own nature, then the deserts of
sinners: I beseech thee, O Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, and for
the merits of that all-sauing death, which he has voluntarily suffered, for
all which believe in him: have mercy upon me according to the multitude of thy
mercies; Psalm. 51.1.
Verse 11.
turn thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquity: Psalm.
25.7.
cast me not out of thy presence, neither reward me according to my deserts:
for if thou do reject me, who will receive me? or who will succor me, if
thou do forsake me? But thou, Hos. 14.4.
O Lord, art the helper of the helpless, and in thee the fatherless finds
mercy: for though my sins be exceeding great, yet thy mercy, O Lord, far
exceeds them all: neither can I commit so many as thy Grace can remit and
pardon. Wash therefore, O Christ, my sins with the virtue of thy precious
blood; especially, those sins, which from a penitent heart I have confessed
unto thee: but chiefly O Lord, for Christ his sake forgive me [ Here name
that sin, which most troubles thy conscience.
]. And seeing that of thy love thou did lay down thy life for my ransom,
when I was thine enemy: Oh save now the price of thine own blood, when it
shall cost thee but a smile upon me, or a gracious appearance in thy Fathers
sight in my behalf. Reconcile me once again, O merciful Mediator, unto thy
Father; for though there be nothing in me that can please him, yet I know that
in thee and for thy sake, Mat. 3.17.
he is well pleased with all, whom thou acceptest and love. And if it be thy
blessed will, remove this sickness from me, and restore me to my former
health again; that I may live longer to set forth thy glory, and to be a
comfort to my Friends, which depend upon me; and procure to my self a more
settled assurance of that heavenly inheritance, which thou have prepared for
me. And then Lord, thou shall see how religiously and wisely I shall redeem
the time, Ephesians. 5.16.
which heretofore I have so lewdly and profanely spent: and to the end that I
may the sooner and the easier be delivered from this pain and sickness: direct
me, O Lord, I beseech thee, by thy divine providence, to such a Physician and
helper: as that (by thy blessing upon thy means) I may recover my former
health and welfare again. And good Lord vouchsafe, that as thou have sent this
sickness unto me; so thou would likewise be pleased to send thy holy
spirit into my heart, whereby this present sickness may be sanctified unto me:
that I may use it as thy school, wherein I may learn to know the greatness
of my misery and the riches of thy mercy: that I may be so humbled at the one,
that I despair not of the other: and that I may so renounce all confidence of
help in my self, or in any other creature: that I may only put the whole
rest of my salvation in thy all sufficient merits. And forasmuch as thou
know Lord, how weak a vessel I am, full of frailty and imperfections; and
that by nature I am angry and froward under every cross and affliction: O
Lord, Iam. 1.17. Ioh. 3.27.
who art the giver of all good gifts, arm me with patience to endure thy
blessed will and pleasure: and of thy mercy lay no more upon me, 1 Cor. 10.13
then I shall be able to endure and suffer. Give me grace to behave my self in
all patience, love and meekness, unto those that shall come and visit me,
that I may thankefully receive, and willingly embrace all good counsels and
consolations from them, and that they may likewise see in me such good examples
of patience, and hear from me such godly lessons of comfort, as may be
arguments of my Christian faith and profession; and instructions unto them how
to behave themselves, when it shall please thee to visit them with the like
affliction or sickness. I know, O Lord, I have deserved to die; and I desire
not longer to live then to amend my wicked life, and in some better measure to
set forth thy glory. Therefore, O Father, if it be thy blessed will, restore
me to health again, and grant me a longer life. But if thou have according to
thine eternal decree) appointed by this sickness, to call for me out of
this transitory life: I resign my self into thy hands, and holy pleasure: thy
blessed will be done, Psalm. 31.5.
whether it be by life or by death. Only, I beseech thee, of thy mercy forgive
me all my sins, and prepare my poor soul, that by a true faith and
unfeigned repentance, sh^e may be ready against the time, that thou shall call
for her out of my sick and sinful body. O heavenly Father, who art the hearer
of prayers, hear thou in heaven this my prayer; Psalm. 65.2. 1 King. 39.8
and in this extremity grant me these requests, not for any worthiness that is
in me, but for the merits of thy beloved Son Jesus, my only Savior and
Mediator: for whose sake thou have promised to hear us, Ioh. 16.23.
and to grant whatsoever we shall ask of thee in his Name. In his name
therefore, and in his own words I conclude this my imperfect Prayer, saying:
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Having thus reconciled thy self with GOD in Christ:

1 Let thy next care be to set thy house in order, as Isay advised king
Ezechias, Isay 38.1.
making thy last Will and Testament (if it be not already made.) If it be
made; then peruse it, confirm it, and for avoiding all doubts and contention,
publish it before witnesses, (that if God call for thee out of this life) it
may stand in force and unalterable, as thy last Will and Testament, and so
deliver it locked, or sealed, up in some Box, to the keeping of a faithful
friend, in the presence of honest witnesses.

2 But in making thy Testament take a religious Divines advise, how to bestow
thy benevolence: and some honest Lawyers counsel to contriue it according to
Law.

Dispatch this, before thy sickness does increase, and thy memory decay, lest
otherwise thy Testament proves a dotement: and another man's fancy, rather then
thy will.

3 To prevent many inconveniences, let me recommend to thy discretion two
things.

1 If God have blessed thee with any competent state of wealth; make thy Will
in thy health time. It will neither put thee further from thy goods, nor hasten
thee sooner to thy death: but it will be a great ease to thy mind in freeing
thee from a great trouble, when thou shall have most need of quiet: for when
thy house is set in order, thou shall be better enabled to set thy soul in
order, and to dispose of thy journey toward GOD.

2 If thou have children, give to every one of them a portion, according to
thine ability, in thy life time; that thy life may seem an ease, and not a
yoke unto them: yet so give; as that thy children may still be beholding unto
thee, and not thou unto them. But if thou keep all in thy hands whilst thou
live: they may thank death and not thee for the portion that thou leauest
them. If thou have no children, and the Lord have blessed thee with a great
portion of the goods of this world; and if thou mean to bestow them upon any
charitable or pious uses: put not over that good work to the trust of others;
seeing thou see how most of other men's Executors, prove almost Executioners.
And if friends be so unfaithful in a man's life? How much greater cause have
thou to distrust their fidelity after thy death?

Lamentable experience shows, how many d^admens Wills, have of late, either
been quite concealed, utterly overthrown, or by cauils and quirckes of Law
frustrated or altered: whereas by the Law of God, Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.17.
the will of the dead should not be violated: 2 Cor. 5.10. Eccl. 12.14. Romans
2.15. 1 Cor. 4.5. Act. 17.31.32.
but all his godly intentions conscionably performed and fulfilled, as in the
sight of God: Who in the day of the Resurrection, will be a just Judge, both
of the quick and dead. And if any thing should hap in his Will to be ambiguous
or doubtful it should be Voluntas testatoris magis inspicienda est quam verba.
l. cum virum sani. C. de fidei cum ff. ad leg. Fall. l. ^i. ff. ad Treb. l. vbi.
te rogo.
construed, as it might come nearest to the honor of GOD, and the honest
intention of the Testator. But let the vengeance due to such unchristian
deeds, light on the Actors that do them: not on the kingdom wherein they are
suffered to be done. And let other Rich men be warned by such wretched
examples not to Matrimonium inter aurum and Arcam, diuortium inter deum and
animam. Aug.
marry their minds to their money: as that they will do no good with their
goods till death diuorceth them.

Faelix quem faciunt aliena periculae cautum.
Considering therefore the shortness of thine own life and the uncertainty of
others just dealings after thy death, in these unjust days: Let me advise thee
(whom GOD has blessed with ability, and an intent to do good) to become in
thy life time thine own Administrator; make thine own hands thine Executors,
and thine own eyes thy overseers; cause thy lantern to give her light before
thee, and not behind thee: give God the glory, Gal. 6.9. Math. 10.42 Mar. 9
41. Mar. 25.40. Luke 14.14. and 18.22. 1 Cor. 15.58 Apo. 14.13.
and thou shall receive of him in due time the reward, which of his grace and
mercy he has promised to thy good works.

4 Having thus set thy house and soul in order (if the determined number of
thy days be not expired) God will either have mercy upon thee, and say, Job.
14.5.
Job. 33.24.
Spare him (O killing malady) that he go not down into the pit; for I have
received a reconciliation. Or else, his Fatherly providence will direct thee to
such a Physician and to such means, 2 King. 20.7. 2 King. 5.7.8.10. Ioh. 9.7.
as that by his blessing upon their endeauours: thou shall recover, and be
restored to thy former health again. But in any wise* take heed; that thou
nor none for thee, send unto sorcerers, wisards, ^harmers, or enchaunters for
help: for this were to leave the God of Israel, and to go to Baalzebub the
God of Ekron for help, 2 Reg. 1.2.3
as did wicked Ahaziah, and to break thy vow which thou have made with the
blessed Trinity in thy Baptism: and be sure that GOD will never give a
blessing by those means which he has accursed. But if he permits Satan to
cure thy body, Leu. 20.6. Deu. 18.10. etc. 2 These. 2.10 Deuteronomy. 13.3.
fear lest it tend to the damnation of thy soul, thou art tried: beware.

5 When thou have sent for the Physician, take heed that thou put not thy
trust rather in the Physician, then in the Lord, as Aza did; of whom it is
said, that he sought not the Lord in his disease, but to the Physicians: 1
Chr. 16.12
which is a kind of Idolatry, that will increase the Lords anger, and make
the Physic received ineffectual. Use therefore the Physician as Gods
Instrument, Isa. 1.5.6.
and Physic, as Gods means. Ier. 8.22.
And seeing it is not lawful without Prayer to use ordinary food, 1 Timothy
4.4. much less extraordinary. Physic (whose good effect depends upon the
blessing of GOD.) Before thou take thy Physic, pray therefore heartily unto
GOD, to bless it unto thy use, in these or the like words.

A Prayer before taking of Physic.
O Merciful Father, who art the Lord of health, and of sickness, of life,
and of death: who killest, and make alive: 1 Samuel 2.6.
who bring down to the grave, and raisest up again: I come unto thee, as
to the only Physician, who can cure my soul from sin, and my body from
sickness. I desire neither life nor death, but refer my self to thy most
holy will. For, though we must needs dye, 2 Samuel 14.14
and bring dead our lives are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again. Yet has thy gracious providence (whilst life remains)
appointed means, which thou vvilt have thy children to use; and (by the
lawful use thereof) to expect thy blessing upon thine own means, to the
curing of their sickness, and restitution of their health. And now O Lord, in
this my necessity, I have, according to thine ordinance, sent for thy servant
(the Physician) who has prepared for me this Physic which I receive, as
means sent from thy fatherly hand. I beseech thee therefore, that as by thy
blessing on a lump of dry figs, Isay 38.21.
thou did heal Ezekias sore, that he recovered: 1 King. 5.14.
and by seven times washing in the River of Iordane, did cleanse Naaman the
Syrian of his Leprosy: and did restore the man that was blind from his
birth, by annoynting his eyes with clay and spittle, John 9.6.7.
and sending him to wash in the poole of Siloam: Mat. 8.15.
and by touching the hand of Peter's wives mother, did cure her of her Fever:
and did restore the Woman that touched the hemme of thy Garment, Mat. 8.20.
etc.
from her bloody issue: So it would please thee of thine infinite goodness and
mercy, to sanctify this Physic to my use, and to give such a blessing unto
it, that it may (if it be thy will and pleasure) remove this my sickness and
pain, and restore me to health and strength again. But if the number of
those days, Job 14.
which thou have appointed for me to live in this vale of misery be at an end;
and that thou have sent this sickness as thy Messenger, to call for me out
of this mortal life: then Lord let thy blessed will be done: for I submit my
will to thy most holy pleasure. Only I beseech thee; increase my Faith and
patience, and let thy gra^e and mercy be never wanting unto me: but in the
midst of all extremities, assist me with thy holy Spirit, that I may willingly
and chearefully resign up my Soul, (the price of thine own blood,) into thy
most gracious hands and custody. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ his
sake; to whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, both
now and evermore, Amen.

Meditations for the sick.
Whilst thy sickness remains, use often (for thy comfort,) these few
Meditations; taken from the ends, wherefore GOD sends afflictions to his
children. Those are ten.

1 That by afflictions, God may not only Deus suos percutit vt emend^t. Hier.
Com. in Esa. lib. 6. Deus calamitates infligit, non extingue re sed castigare
nos cupiens. Basil. ser. 3. in diuites.
correct our sins past: but also work in us, a deeper loathing of our
natural corruption; and so prevent us from falling into many other sins, which
otherwise we would commit: like a good Father, who suffers his tender Babe
to scorch his finger in a candle, that he may the rather learn to beware of
falling into a greater fire. So that the child of God may say with David,
Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy Statutes:
for, before I was afflicted, Psalm. 119.67.
I went astray, but now I keep thy Word. And indeed (says S. Paul) we are
chastened of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32
because we should not be condemned with the World. With one Cross God makes
two cures: the chastisement of sins past, the prevention of sin to come.
For though the eternal punishment of sin (as it proceeds from Justice,) is
fully pardoned in the sacrifice of Christ: yet we are not (without serious
judging of our selves) exempted from the temporal chastisement of sin; for
this proceeds only from the love of God, for our good. And this is the
reason, that when Nathan told David, 2 Samuel 12.10
from the Lord, that his sins were forgiven: yet that the Sword (of
chastisement) should not depart from his house: Verse 13.
and that his Child should surely die. For GOD, like a skillful Physician,
seeing the soul to be poisoned with the settling of sin; and knowing that
the reigning of the Flesh will prove the ruin of the Spirit: ministers the
bitter pill of affliction, whereby the relics of sin is purged, and the
soul more soundly cured: the flesh is subdued, and the spirit is sanctified:
Oh the odiousness of sin, which causes God to chasten so severely his
Children, whom otherwise he loves so dearly!

2 God sends affliction, to seal unto us our Adoption: Heb. 12.6.7.8.
for every Child whom God loves he corrects: And he is a Bastard that is
not corrected. Yea, it is a sure note* that where GOD sees sin, and smites
not: he there detests, and loves not. Therefore it is said, that he Ad mala
seruantur non moritura mali. 1 Samuel 2.25.
suffered the wicked Sons of Eli, to continue in their sins without
correction, because the Lord would slay them. On the Namque favor nimius non
est favor, ira sedinge^s: At favor in magno saep^ dolor latet. Bill. Anthol.
sacr.
other side, there is no surer token of Gods fatherly love and care: then to be
corrected with some cross, as often as we commit any sinful crime. Affliction
therefore is a seal of Adoption, no sign of Reprobation. For, the purest
Corn is cleanest fanned, the finest Gold is oftest tried, the sweetest Grape
is hardest pressed, and the truest Christian heauiest crossed.

3 God sends affliction, to weane our hearts, from too much loving this World
and worldly vanities: and to cause us the more earnestly to desire and long for
Crebris tribulationibus Ecclesiam suam Dominus exercet: ne si cuncta temporalia
forte prospere current, incolatu praesentis exili^ delectata, minus coelestem
patriam suspiret. Beda in Cant.
eternal life. For as the Children of Israel (had they not been ill entreated
in Aegipt) would never have been so willing to go toward Canaan: so (were
it not for the crosses and afflictions of this life,) Gods Children would not
so heartily long, Mundanus affectus praesentia amat, temporalia cumulat,
spiritualia negligit, and cum totus se spargit ^n imis, nil potest amare de
summis. Justin. Patriarch. de disc. monast. cap. 4.
and willingly desire for the Kingdom of Heaven. For we see many Epicures
that would be content to forgo heaven, on condition that they might still
enjoy their earthly pleasures; and (having never tasted the joys of a better:)
how loath are they to depart this life? whereas the 2 Cor. 12.
Apostle (that saw Heavens glory) tells us: that there is no more comparison
twixt the joys of eternal life, and the pleasures of this world, then there
is betwixt the filthiest dung and the pleasantest meat: Phil. 3.8.
or betwixt the stinkingst dunghill, and the fairest bedchamber. As therefore
a loving Nursse puts Worme-wood, or Mustard, on the breast, to make the child
the rather to forsake the dug: so GOD mixeth sometimes affliction, Ne sancti
viri aliqua elatione in hac vita superbiant, quibusdam tentationibus
reprimuntur. Eucher. in li. Reg.
with the pleasures and prosperity of this life; least (like the Children of
this generation) they should forget God, and fall into too much love of this
present evil world; and so by riches grow proud: by fame; insolent: by
liberty, vvanton: and spurn with their heel against the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
when they wax fat. For, if Gods children love the world so well, when (like
a cursed stepmother) she misvseth and strikes us; how should we love this
harlot if she smiled upon us, and stroaked us, as she does her own worldly
Brats? Thus does GOD (like a wise and loving Father) embitter with crosses the
pleasures of this life, to his children: that finding in this earthly state no
true nor permanent joys) they might sigh and long for eternal life, where
firm and everlasting joys are only to be found.

4 By affliction and sickness* God exercises his children, and the graces
which he bestows upon them. 1 Pet. 1.7.
He refineth, and tries their faith, as the Goldsmith does his gold, in Vt
igne purgati and ab admixtione vit^orum carnabum defecati, sole^deant,
examinatae innocentiae clari^ate. Hi^^r. in Psalm. 5^.
the furnace, to make it shine more glistering, and bright: he stirs us up
to pray more (...), and zealously: and proves what patience we have learned
all this while in his Schola crucis schola lucis.
school. The like experience he makes of our hope, love, and all the rest of
our Christian virtues: Gubernator in tempestate dignoscitur in aci^ nules
probatur, delicata iactatio est: cum periculu^ non est: conflictatio in
aduersis, probatio est est veritatis. Cypr. ser. 4. de Immor. Ier. 48.11.
which without this trial, would rust, like iron unexercised; or corrupt, like
standing waters that either have no current: or else are not powered from
vessel to vessel: whose taste remains and whose sent is not changed. And
rather then a man should keep still the sent of his corrupted nature, to
damnation; who would not wish to be changed from state to state, by crosses and
sickness to salvation? For as the Camomill which is trodden, grows best and
smells most fragrant: and as the fish is sweetest that lives in the saltest
waters: so those souls are most precious unto Christ, who are most exercised
and afflicted with his Cross.

5 God sends affliction, to demonstrate unto the world, the trueness of his
childrens love and service. Every hypocrite will serve GOD, whilst he
prospers and blesses him: as the Devil falsely accused Job to have done: Job.
1.9.10.
but who (save his loving child) will love and serve him in adversity; when
GOD seems to be angry and displeased with him? yea* and cleave unto him most
inseperably; when he seems (with the greatest frown, and disgrace) to reject
a man, and to cast him out of his favor? yea, when he seems to wound and
kill as an enemy; yet then to say with Job, Though thou Lord kill me, Job.
13.15.
yet will I put my trust in thee. The loving, and serving of God, and trusting
in his mercy in the time of our correction and misery: is the truest note of an
unfeigned child, and servant of the Lord.

6 Sanctified affliction, is a singular help to further our true conversion:
and to drive us home by repentance to our heavenly Father. In their affliction
(says the Lord) they will seek me diligently. Hos. 5.15.
Aegypts burdens made Israel cry unto GOD. Exodus 3.7.
Psalm. 86.7.
David's troubles made him pray. Isai. 38.2.3.
Hezekias sickness made him to weep and misery drove the Prodigal child,
Luke 15.16. etc.
to return and sue for his Fathers grace and mercy. Yea, we read of many in
the Gospel, that (by sickenesses and affliction) were driven to come into
CHRIST; who (if they had health and prosperity, as others;) would have (like
others) neglected, or contemned their Savior: and never have sought unto him
for his saving health, and grace. For as the Arc of Noah; the higher it was
tossed with the flood, the nearer it mounted toward heaven: so the sanctified
Soul, the more it is exercised with affliction, the nearer it is listed
toward GOD. Oh blessed is that cross, that draws a sinner to Deuteronomy non
delectatur poenis nostris sed confessionem quaerit erroris. Alb. in Psalm. 4.
Peniten.
come (upon the knees of his heart) unto Christ, to confess his own misery,
and to implore his endless mercy! Oh blessed, aye blessed be that Christ,
that never refuses the sinner, that comes unto him, though weather-driuen by
affliction and misery!

7 Afflictions work in us, pity and compassion toward our fellow-brethren,
that be in distress and misery: whereby we learn to have a fellow-feeling
of their calamities: and to condole their estate, Heb. 13.3.
as if we suffered with them. And for this cause CHRIST himself would suffer,
and be tempted in all things, like unto us (sin only excepted: Heb. 4.15
and 2.18. and 5.8.9.
) that he might be a merciful high Priest, touched with the feeling of our
infirmities. For none can so heartily bemone the misery of another; as he who
first suffered himself the same affliction. Hereupon a sinner in misery, may
boldly say unto Christ: Non ignare mali miseris succurrito Christ.
Our frailty, since O Christ, thou did perceive:
Condole our state, who still in frailties cleave.


8 God uses our sicknesses, and afflictions, as means and examples, both to
Sinit Deus iustum incidere in calamitates, vt virtutem quae in illo latebat,
aliis apertam manifestamque faciat. Damasc. li. 2. de Orth. ca. 29.
manifest unto others the faith and virtues which he has bestowed upon us: as
also to strengthen those who have not received so great a measure of faith as
we. For there can be no greater encouragement to a weak Christian; then to
behold a true professor, (in the extremest sickness of his body, supported
with greater patience, and consolation in his soul. And the comfortable and
blessed departure of such a man will arm him against the fear of death, and
assure him: that the hope of the godly, is a far more precious thing, then
that flesh and blood can understand, or mortal eyes behold, in this vale of
misery. And were it not that we did see many of those whom we know to be the
undoubted children of GOD, to have endured such affliction and calamities
before us. The greatness of the miseries and crosses which often times we
endure, would make us doubt whether we be the children of GOD or no. And to
this purpose Saint James says, GOD made Job and the Prophets, an example of
suffering adversity, and of long patience.

9 By afflictions GOD makes us conformable to the Image of Christ his son,
Romans 8.18. 1 Pet. 4.13. Heb. 2.10. Heb. 2.7. Mat. 27.34. Luke 24.42. Fauos post
mella gustauit. Tertul. lib. de Coron. milit. cap. 24.
who being the Captain of our salvation, was made perfect through sufferings.
And therefore he first bare the Cross in shame, before he was crowned with
glory: and did first taste gall, before he did eat the honey comb: and was
first derided, king of the Jews by the Soldiers in the High priests hal:
Psalm. 24.7.
before he was saluted, King of glory, by the Angles in his Fathers Court. And
the more lively, our heavenly Father shall perceive the image of his natural
Son to appear in us, the better he will love us; and when we have, for a
time, borne his likeness in his sufferings, and fought and overcome: we shall
be crowned by Christ, and with Christ sit in his throne, 2 Timothy 4.7.8 Apo.
3.21. Apo. 2.17.18. Phil. 3.21.
and of Christ receive the precious white stone and morning star, that shall
make us shine like Christ for ever in his glory.

Ideo tentantur Sancti, vt ipsi se agnoscant. Primas.
10 Lastly, that the godly may be humbled in respect of their own state and
misery: Esse se magnarum viriu^ homo crederet si m^llum vnquam earu^dem virium
defectum sentiret. Gre. lib. 2. Moral. Job.
and God glorified by delivering them out of their troubles and afflictions,
when we call upon him for his help and succor. For though that there is no
man so pure, but if the Lord will straightly mark iniquities; Psalm. 130.3.
he shall find in him just cause to punish him for his sin: Yet the Lord in
mercy, does In his quae patimur nullum contra Deum murmur cordi nostro
subrepat: quia ad quid hoc creator noster oper^tur ignotum est Greg. ep. 31.
not always in the affliction of his children respect their sins: but
sometimes lays afflictions and crosses upon them for his glories sake. Thus
our Savior Christ told his Disciples, that the man was not borne blind, for
his own, Ioh. 9.3.
or his Parents sins: but that the work of God should be showed on him. So
he told them likewise, Ioh. 11.4.
that Lazarus sickness was not unto the death, but for the glory of God. O
the unspeakable goodness of God, which turns those afflictions, which are
the shame and punishment due to our sins, to be the subject of his honor
and glory!

These are the blessed, and profitable ends, wherefore God sends sickness
and afflictions upon his children, whereby it may plainly appear, Malum pa^^
malum non est: malum facere malum est. Chrysostom. de Prod. Judah.
that afflictions are not signs either of Gods hatred, or of our reprobation:
but rather tokens and pledges of his fatherly love unto his children whom he
loves: and therefore chasteneth them in this life, where, upon repentance,
there remains hope of pardon: rather then to refer the punishment to that
life where there is no hope of pardon, nor end of punishment. For this cause
the Christians in the Cum v^xamur, ac praemimur, tum maximo gratias agimus
indulgentissimo Patri, quod corruptelam nostra^ non patitur longius procedere,
sed plagis ac verberibus emendat. Lactan. lib. 5 cap. 23.
Primitive Church were wont to give God great thanks for afflicting them in
this life: So the Apostles rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer
for Christ's name. Act. 5.41. And the Christian Hebrews suffered with joy the
spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance. Heb. 10.34. And in respect of these holy ends, the Apostle
says, That though no affliction for the present seems joyous, but grievous:
Heb. 12.11.
yet afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, to them who are
thereby exercised. Pray therefore heartily, that as God has sent unto thee
this sickness, so it would please him to come himself unto thee, with thy
sickness: by teaching thee to make those sanctified uses of it, for which he
has inflicted the same upon thee.

Meditation for one, that is recovered from sickness.
IF GOD has of his mercy heard thy prayers, and restored thee to thy health
again, consider with thy self.

1 That thou have now received from GOD, as it were another life. Spend it
therefore, to the honor of God, in newness of life. Let thy sin die with
thy sickness: but live thou by grace to holiness.

2 Be not the more secure, that thou art restored to health: neither insult in
thy self, that thou have escaped death: but think rather, that GOD (seeing
how unprepared thou wast:) has of his mercy heard thy prayer, spared thee, and
given thee some little longer time of respite; that thou may both amend thy
life, and put thy self in a better readiness against the time that he shall
call for thee, without further delay, out of this world. For though thou have
escaped this; It may be, thou shall not escape the next sickensse.

3 Consider how fearful a reckoning thou had made; before the Judgment
seat of Christ by this time, if thou had dyed of this sickness. Spend
therefore the time that remains, so; as that thou may be able to make a
more cheerful account of thy life, when it must be expired indeed.

4 Put not far off the day of death: thou know not for all this, how near
it is at hand: and (being so fairly warned) be wiser: for if thou be taken
unprovided, the next time thy excuse will be less, and thy judgment greater.

5 Remember, that thou have vowed amendment, and newness of life. Thou have
vowed a vow unto God, defer not to pay it: Eccl. 5.3.
for he delights not in fools; pay therefore that thou have vowed. The
unclean spirit is cast out: Oh let him not re-enter with seven worse then
himself. Mat. 12 43. etc.
Thou have sighed out the groans of contrition: thou have wept the tears of
repentance: thou art washed in the poole of Bethesda, streaming with five
bloody wounds, not of a troubling Angel: but of the Angel of Gods presence,
Ioh. 5.2.4. Isai. 63.9. Luke 14.33.
troubled with the wrath due to thy sins: who descended into hell, to restore
thee to saving health, and heaven. Return not now with the Dog to thine own
vomit: nor like the washed sow, to wallow again in the mire of thy former
sins, and uncleanness: lest being entangled, and overcome again with the
filthiness of sin (which now thou have escaped) thy latter end prove worse
then thy first beginning. 2 Pet. 2.20.22.
Twice therefore does our Savior Christ give the same cautionary warning to
healed sinners. First, to the man cured of his 38 years disease: Behold, Ioh.
5.14.
thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing fall unto thee.
Secondly, to the woman taken in adultery: Neither do I condemn thee: Ioh.
8.11.
Go thy way and sin no more. 1 Pet. 4.4.
Teaching us, how dangerous a thing it is, to relapse and fall again, into the
former excess of riot. Take heed therefore unto thy ways, and pray for
grace, that thou may apply thy heart unto wisdom: during that small number
of days, Psalm. 90.12.
which yet remain behind. And for thy present mercy and health; imitate the
thankful Leaper, and return unto God this, or the like thanksgiving.

A thanksgiving to be said of one that is recovered from sickness
O Gracious and merciful Father, who art the Lord of health, and sickness,
of life and of death: who killest, and make alive: 1 Samuel 2.6.
who bring down to the grave, and raisest up again: who art the only
preserver of all those that trust in thee. I thy poor and unworthy servant
(having now by experience of my painful sickness) felt the gieuousnesse of
misery due unto sin; and the greatness of thy mercy in forgiving sinners:
and perceiving with what a fatherly compassiion thou have heard my prayers, and
restored me to my health and strength again:) do here (upon the bended knees
of my heart) return (with the thankful Leaper) to acknowledge thee alone to
be the God of my health and salvation; and to give thee the praise and glory
for my strength and deliverance, out of that grievous disease and malady: and
for thus turning my mourning into mirth; my sickness into health: and my
death into life. My sins deserved punishments, and thou have corrected me,
but have not given me over unto death. I looked (from the day to the night)
when thou would make an end of me: I did chatter like a Crane, or a Swallow:
I mourned (as a Dove) when the bitterness of sickness oppressed me: I lifted
up mine eyes unto thee, O Lord, and thou did comfort me, for thou did cast
all my sins behind thy back; and did deliver my soul from the pit of
corruption: and when I found no help in my self, nor in any other creature,
(saying, I am deprived of the residue of my years, I shall see man no more,
among the inhabitants of the world) then did thou restore me to health
again, and gave life unto me: I found thee, O Lord, Isa. 38.9. etc.
ready to save me.

And now, Lord, I confess* that I can never yield unto thee such a measure of
thanks, as thou have (for this benefit) deserved at my hands. And (seeing that
I can never be able to repay thy goodness with acceptable work^:) Oh that I
could with Mary Magdalen testify the ^oue and thankfulness of my heart, with
abounding tears! Oh, what shall I be able to render unto thee, O Lord, for all
these benefits which thou have bestowed upon my soul! Surely as in my
sickness, when I had nothing else to give unto thee; I offered Christ and his
merits unto thee as a ransom for my sins: so being now restored by thy grace
unto my health and strength; and having no better thing to give, behold, O
Lord, I do here offer up my self unto thee, Romans 12.1.
beseeching thee so to assist me with thy holy spirit, that the remainder of
my life may wholly be spent in setting forth thy praise and glory.

O Lord, forgive me my former follies and unthankfulness, that I was not
more careful to love thee according to thy goodness: nor to serve thee,
according to thy will; nor to obey thee, according to thy commandments; nor to
thank thee, according to thy benefits. And seeing thou know that of my
self I am not sufficient, so much as to think a good thought (much less to
do that which is good, and acceptable in thy sight:) assist me with thy grace
and holy spirit, that I may (in my prosperity) as deuoutely spend my health in
thy service: as I was eranest in my sickness to beg it at thy hands. And
suffer me never to forget either this thy mercy, in restoring me to my
health; or those vows and promises, which I have made unto thee in my
sickness. With my new health, renew in me, O Lord, a right spirit, which may
free me from the slavery of sin, and establish my heart in the service of
grace. Work in me a greater detestation of all sins (which were the causes
of thy anger and my sickness) and increase my faith in Jesus Christ, who is
the author of my health and salvation. Let thy good spirit lead me in the way,
Tit 2.12.
that I should walk, and teach me to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this world: that others by my
example may think better of thy truth. And since this time (which I have yet to
live) is but a little respite and small remnant of days, which cannot long
continue: teach me, Psalm. 90.1^.
O my God, so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to that spiritual
wisdom, which directs to salvation. And to this end make me more zealous
then I have been in religion, more devout in prayer, more fervent in spirit,
more careful to hear and profit by the preaching of thy Gospel, more
helpefull to my poor brethren, more watchful over my ways, more faithful in
my calling, and every way more abundant in all good works. Let me (in the
joyful time of prosperity) fear the evil day of affliction: in the time of
health, think of sickness: in the time of sickness make my self ready for
death; and when death approaches, prepare my self for judgment. Let my whole
life be an expressing thankfulness unto thee for thy grace and mercy. And
therefore, O Lord, I do here from the very bottom of my heart, together with
the thousand thousands of Angels, the four beasts and twenty four Elders,
Apoc. 5.11. etc.
and all the creatures in Heaven, and on the Earth acknowledge to be due unto
thee, O Father, which sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, thy Son, who
sits at thy right hand: and to the holy spirit, which proceeds from both:
the holy Trinity of persons in unity of substance, all praise, honor, glory
and power, from this time forth, and for evermore. Amen.

Meditations for one that is like to die.
IF thy sickness be like to increase unto death, then meditate on three
things: First, how graciously God deals with thee. Secondly, from what evils
death will free thee. Thirdly, what good death will bring unto thee.

First, concerning Gods favorable dealing with thee:

1 Meditate, that God uses this chastisement of thy body, but as a Medicine to
cure thy soul, by drawing thee (who art sick in sin) to come by repentance
unto Christ (thy Physician) to have thy soul healed. Mar. 9.12.


2 That the sorest sickness or painefullest disease, which thou can endure,
is nothing, if it be compared to those dolours and pains which Jesus Christ
thy Savior has suffered for thee: Luke 22.44. Psalm. 88.7. Isai. 53.4. Psalm.
18.5. Heb. 5.7. Gal. 3.13.
when in a bloody sweat, he endured the wrath of God, the pains of hell* and a
cursed death which was due to thy sins. Justly therefore may he use those
words of Jeremy, Behold and see, Lam. 1.12.
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, Dum
legimus vel audimus quot and quanta ille sine culpa sustinuit, intelligimus nos
peccatores omnia debere libenter sustinere. Theo. in 5. cap. ad Romans
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. Has the
son of God endured so much for thy redemption; and wilt not thou a sinful
man, endure a little sickness for his pleasure? especially when it is for thy
good?

3 That when thy sickness and disease is at the extremest, yet it is less and
easier then thy sins have deserved. Let thine own conscience judge whether
thou have not deserved worse then all that thou do suffer.

Murmr not therefore, but considering thy manifold and grievous sins:
thank God that thou art not plagued with far more grievous punishments. Think
how willingly the damned in hell would endure thy extremest pains a 1000.
years, Lam. 3 22.
on condition that they had but thy hope to be saved, (and after so many
years) to be eased of their eternal torments. And seeing that it is his mercy
that thou art not rather consumed then corrected; 1 Cor. 11.32
how can thou but bear patiently his temporal correction; seeing the end
is to save thee from eternal condemnation?

4 That nothing comes to pass in this case unto thee, but such as ordinarily
befell to others thy brethren, Heb. 11.35. etc. 1 Pet. 5.9.
who (being the beloved and undoubted servants of GOD, when they lived on
earth:) are now most blessed and glorious Saints* with Christ in Heaven, as
Job, David, Lazarus, etc. They groaned for a time, as thou do, under the
like burden: but they are now delivered from all their miseries, troubles, and
calamities. And so likewise ere long, (if thou will patiently tarry the Lords
leisure,) thou shall also be delivered from thy sickness and pain: either by
restitution to thy former health, with Job, or (which is far better) by being
received to heavenly rest, with Lazarus.

5 Lastly, that God has not given thee over into the hand of thine enemy to
be punished and disgraced; but (being thy loving Father) he corrects thee
with his own merciful hand. When David had his wish to choose his own
chastisement: he chose rather to be corrected by the hand of GOD, then by any
other means. Let us fall into the hands of the Lord, 2 Samuel 24.14
for his mercies are great, and let me not fall into the hand of man. Who will
not take any affliction in good part, when it comes from the hand of God;
from whom though no affliction seems joyous for the present) we know nothing
comes but what is good. Heb. 12.11.
The consideration hereof made David to endure Shemeis cursed railing, 2 Samuel
16.6.10.
with greater patience, and to correct himself another time for his
impatiencie. Psalm. 39.9.
I should not have opened my mouth, because thou did it: and Job to reprove
the unadvised speech of his wife, thou speak like a foolish woman: What?
shall we receive good at the hand of God, Job. 2.10^
and not receive evil? And though the cup of Gods wrath due to our sins, was
such a horror to our Saviors humane nature; Mat. 26.39.
that he earnestly prayed that it might pass from him: yet (when he
considered that it was reached unto him by the hand and will of his Father,
Verse. 42.
) he willingly submitted himself to drink it to the very dregs thereof.
Nothing will more arm thee with patience in thy sickness, then to see, that
it comes from the hand of our heavenly father: who would never send it, but
that he sees it to be unto thee both needful and profitable.

The 2. sort of Meditations are to consider from what evils death will free
thee.
IT freeth thee from a corruptible body, which was conceived in the witness of
flesh, the hear of lust, the stain of sin, and borne in the blood of
filthynesse: a li^ing prison of the soul, a lively instrument of sin, ^ very
sack of stinking dung: the excrements of whose nostrils, ears, pores, and
other passages (duly considered) will seem more loathsome then the vncleanest
sink or vault. Insomuch that whereas trees and plants, bring forth leaves,
flowers, fruits, and sweet smells; man's body brings forth naturally nothing but
lice, worms, rottenness and filthy stench. His affections are altogether
corrupted; Psalm. 14.1.
and the imaginations of his heart are only evil continually. Genesis 6.5.
Hence it is that the ungodly is not satisfied with prophannesse, nor the
voluptuous with pleasures, nor the ambitious with preferments, nor the curious
with precisenes nor the malicious with revenge, nor the lecherous with
uncleanness, nor the covetous with gain, nor the drunkard with drinking. New
passions and fashions do daily grow: new fears and afflictions do still
arise: here wrath lies in wait; there vainglory vexes: here pride lifts
up, there disgrace casts down; and every one waits who shall arise in the
ruin of another. Now a man is privily stung with backbiters, like fiery
Serpents: anon, he is in danger to be openly devoured by his enemies, like
Daniels Lions. And a godly man, where ere he lives, shall ever be vexed (like
Lot) with Sodomes uncleanness.

2 Death brings unto the godly an end of sinning, and of all the miseries which
are due unto sin: Romans 6.7.
So that after death there shall be no more sorrow, nor crying: neither shall
there be any more pain; for GOD shall wipe away all tears from our eyes:
yea, Apo. 21.4.
by death we are separated from the company of wicked men, and GOD, Isa. 57.1.
takes away merciful and righteous men from the evil to come. So he dealt
with Josiah, 2 King. 22.20.
I will gather thee to thy Fathers and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace;
and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.
And God hides them for a while in the grave, Esa. 26.20.
until the indignation pass over. So that, as Paradise is the Heaven of the
souls joy: so the grave may be termed, the haven of the bodies rest.

3 Whereas this wicked body lives in a world of wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5.19.
so that the poor soul cannot look out at the eye and not be infected: nor
hear by the ear, and not be distracted: nor smell at the nostrils, and not
be tainted: nor taste with the tongue, and be allured: nor touch by the hand
and not be defiled: and every sense upon every temptation is ready to betray
the soul. By death the soul shall be delivered from this thraldom, and this
corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality, 1
Cor. 15.53. Oh blessed! thrice blessed be that death in the Lord! which
delivers us out of so evil a world; and freeth us from such a body of bondage
and corruption!

The 3. sort of Meditations to consider what good death will bring unto thee.
1 DEath brings the godly man's soul to enjoy an immediate communion with the
blessed Trinity in everlasting bliss and glory.

2 It translates his soul from the miseries of this world, the contagion of
sin, and society of sinners, to the City of the living God, the celestial
Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.23.24.
and to the company of innumerable Angels. And to the assembly and congregation
of the first borne, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all,
and to the souls of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Covenant.

3 Death puts the soul into the actual and full possession of all the
inheritance and happiness, which Christ has either promised unto thee in his
word, or purchased for thee by his blood.

This is the good and happiness whereunto a blessed death will bring thee. And
what truly religious Christian that is young, would not wish himself old,
that his appointed time might the sooner approach to enter into this celestial
Paradise? where thou may exchange thy brass for gold; thy vanity for
felicity; thy vileness for honor; thy bondage for freedom; thy lease for an
inheritance; and thy mortal stat^ for an immortal life. He that does not
daily desire this blessedness above all things: of all others he is less
worthy to enjoy it.

If Plut. in vit. Catonis
Cato Vticensis, and Cleombrotus, Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 1. Vel de praecipiti
venias in Tartara saxo, vt qui Socraticum de nece legit opus. Ovid. in Ibin.
two heathen men (reading Platoes book of the Immortality of the soul:) did
voluntarily, the one break his neck: the other run upon his sword, that
they might the sooner (as they thought) have enjoyed those joys; What a shame
is it for Christians (knowing those things in a more excellent measure and
manner out of Gods own book) not to be willing to enter into these heavenly
joys? Mat. 25.21.
especially when their Master calls for them thither. If therefore there be in
thee any love of God, or desire of thine own happiness or salvation; when the
time of thy departing draws near; that time, I say, and manner of death,
which GOD in his unchangeable counsel, has appointed and determined before
thou wast borne: yield and surrender up ( willingly and cheerfully thy soul
into the merciful hand of Jesus Christ thy Savior. And to this end when
thine end is come; as the Angel in the sight of Manoah and his wife, ascended
from the Altar up to heaven in the flame of the sacrifice: Luke 13.19.20.
so endeavor thou that thy Soul in the sight of thy friends, may from the
Altar of a contrite heart, ascend up to heaven, in the sweet perfume, of this
or the like spiritual sacrifice of Prayer.

A Prayer for a sick man, when he is told that he is not a man for this
world: but must prepare himself to go unto GOD.
O Heavenly Father, who art the Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, Number.
16.22.
and have made us these souls, Number. 27.16. Ier. 38.16.
and have appointed us the time, as to come into this world, Act. 13.25.36.
so (having finished our course) to go out of the same: The number of my
days, 2 Timothy 4.7. Psalm. 90.12. Job. 14.5.14. and 16.22. and 21.21. Luke 22.53.
which thou have determined, are now expired; and I am come to that utmost
bound, which thou have appointed, beyond which I cannot pass. I know O Lord,
Psalm. 143.2.
that if thou entrest into judgment, no flesh can be justified in thy sight:
And I, O Lord, of all others should appear most impure and unjust; 2 Timothy 4.7.
for I have not fought that good fight, for the defense of thy faith and
religion, with that zeal and constancy that I should: but for fear of
displeasing the world. I have given ^ay unto sins and errors, and for desire
to please my flesh, I have broken all thy commandments, in thought, word and
deed: so that my sins have taken such hold on me, Psalm. 43.12.
that I am not able to look up, and they are more in number then the hairs of
my head. Psalm. 130.3.
If thou will straightly mark mine iniquiti^s, O Lord, where shall I stand? If
thou waighest me in the balance, Dan. 5.27.
I shall be found too light: For I am void of all righteousness that might
merit thy mercy; Mat. 11.28.
and laden with all iniquities, that most justly deserve thy heauiest wrath.
But O my Lord, and my GOD, for Jesus Christ thy Sons sake, in whom only thou
art well pleased with all penitent and believing sinners, Math. 3.17.
take pity and compassion upon me, who am the chief of sinners: 1 Timothy 1.15.
Ezec. 18.22.
blot out all my sins out of thy remembrance, and wash away all my
transgressions out of thy sight, Psalm. 51.7.
with the precious blood of thy Son, 1 Pet. 1.19.
which I believe that he (as an undefiled Lamb has shed for the clensing of
my sins. Ioh. 1.29.
In this faith I lived, in this faith I die; believing that Jesus Christ died
for my sins, Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3.4.
and rose again for my justification. And seeing that he has endured that
death, and borne the burden of that Judgment which was due unto my sins; O
Father, 1 Pet. 2.24.
for his death, and passions sake, now (that I am coming to appear before thy
Judgment seat) acquit and deliver me from that fearful Judgment, which my
sins have justly deserved. And perform with me that gracious, and
comfortable promise, which thou have made in thy Gospel: That whosoever
believes in thee has everlasting life, Ioh. 5.24.
and shall not come into Judgment, but shall pass from death unto life.
Strengthen, Luke 17.5.
O CHRIST, my faith, that I may put the whole confidence of my salvation in the
merits of thy obedience and blood. Increase O holy Spirit, my patience, lay no
more upon me then I am able to bear: 1 Cor. 10.13
and enable me to bear so much as shall stand with thy blessed will, and
pleasure. O blessed Trinity in unity, my Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier,
vouchsafe that as my outward man does decay: so my inward man may more and more
by thy grace and consolation increase, and gather strength. O Savior, put my
soul in a readiness, that (like a wise Virgin, Mat. 25.4. Mat. 22.11.
having the wedding Garment of thy righteousness, Apoc. 19.8.
and holiness:) she may be ready to meet thee at thy coming with oil in
her lamp. Apoc. 19 7.
Marry her unto thy self, that she may be one with thee in everlasting love
and fellowship. Ioh. 17.22.
Zach. 3 2.
O Lord reprove Satan, and chase him away. Deliver my soul from the power of
the dog. Ps. 12.20.21.
Save me from the Lions mouth. I thank thee, O Lord, for all thy blessings
both spiritual and temporal bestowed upon me; especially for my Redemption by
the death of my Savior Christ. I thank thee that thou have protected me with
thy holy Angel^ from my youth up until now. Lord I beseech thee, Mat. 18.8.
Heb. 1.14.
give them a charge to attend upon me, till thou call for my soul; and then
to carry her (as they did the soul of Lazarus) into thy heavenly kingdom.
Luke 16.22.
Math. 8.11. Luke 13.28. Ephesians. 1.10. Act. 15.11.
And as the time of my departure shall approach nearer unto me: so grant, O
Lord, that my soul may draw nearer unto thee. And that I may joyfully commend
her into thy hands, Psalm. 31.4.
as into the hands of a loving Father, and merciful Redeemer; and at that
instant, O Lord, graciously receive my spirit. Act. 7.59.
All which that I may do, assist me, I beseech thee with thy grace; and let
thy holy spirit continue with me unto the end, and in the end, for Jesus Christ
his sake, thy Son, my Lord, and only Savior; In whose name I give thee thy
glory, and beg these things at thy hand, in that prayer, which he himself
has taught me.

Our Father, etc. Meditations against despair, or doubting of Gods mercy.
IT is found by continual experience, that near the time of death, (when the
children of GOD are weakest:) then Satan makes the greatest flourish of his
strength: and assailes them with his strongest temptations. For he knows
that either he must now or never prevail: for if their souls once get to
heaven; he shall never v^xe nor trouble them any more. And therefore he will
now bestirre himself as much as he can, and labor to set before their eyes
all the gross sins which ever they committed, and the judgments of God
which are due unto them; thereby to drive them if he can, to despair, which is
a grieuouser sin then all the sins that they committed, or he can accuse
them of.

If Satan therefore trouble thy conscience, Satan's first stratagem, in time of
death.
more toward thy death then in thy life time;

The defeature.
1 Confess thy sins unto GOD, not only in general, but also in particular.

2 Make satisfaction unto those men, whom thou have wronged, if thou be able.
And if thou do injuriously or fraudulently detain or keep in thy
possession, any lands or goods, that of right do belong unto any Widow, or
Fatherless child: presume not as thou tenderest thy souls health; to look
Christ the righteous Judge in the face: unless thou do first make a
restitution thereof to the right owners. For the Law of God under the penalty
of his curse, requires thee, to restore whatsoever was given thee to keep,
Leuit. 6.2.3.4. etc. Nu^. 5.6.7.8 Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur
ablatum.
or which was committed to thy trust, or whatsoever by robbery, or violent
oppression thou tookest from thy neighbor, with a fifth part for amends added
to the principal. And unless that like Zacheus thou do make restitution of
such goods and lands according to Gods law; Luke 19.8.3. Eze. 15.3.12 16. Mich.
6.10.11.
thou can never truly repent: and without true Repentance thou can never
be saved. Luke 13.3. Ier. 18.7. Act. 2.38. Act. 8.22. 2 Pet. 3 i9.
But though by the temptation of the Devil thou have done wrong and injury:
yet if thou do truly repent and make restitution to thy power, the Lord has
promised to be merciful unto thee, to hear the prayers of his faithful
ministers for thee, Genesis 20.7. Iam. 5.14.15 16.
to forgive thee thy trespass and sin: and to receive thy soul in the
merits of Christ's blood, Leuit. 6.6.7.
as a Lamb without blemish.

3 Ask GOD for Christ his sake pardon and forgiveness. And then these
troubles of mind are no discouragements, but rather comforts: exercises, not
punishments. They are assurances unto thee, that thou art in the right way: for
the way to Heaven is by the gates of Hell: that is, by suffering pains in the
body, and such doubtings in the mind, that thy estate in this life being every
way made bitter, the joys of eternal life may relish unto thee better and
more sweet.

If Satan tell thee, Satan's second assault.
that thou have no faith, because thou have no feeling, meditate,

1 That the truest faith has oftentimes the least feeling and greatest doubts;
The Christians encounter. Psalm. 7.19. Mark. 9.24. Math. 17. etc. Mat. 14.31.
but so long as thou hate such doubtings, they shall not be laid unto thy
charge: for they belong to the flesh, Mat. 14.31.
from which thou art divorced. When thy flesh shall perish, thy weak inward
man, which hates them, and loves the Lord Jesus, shall be saved.

2 That it is a better faith to believe without feeling then with feeling. Job.
13.15.16.
The least faith (so much as a grain of mustard seed, so much as is in an
infant baptized) is enough to save the soul, Mat. 17.20.
which loves CHRIST, and believes in him.

3 That the child of God, which desires to fe^le the assurance of Gods favor,
Mat. 10.14.
shall have his desire, when God shall see it to be for his good: for God has
promised to give them the water of life, Apoc. 2.6. Isai. 55.1.
who thirst for it. We have an example in Fox Act. and Monum. Fol. 1555. in
the last edition.
Master Glouer, the holy Martyr, who could have no comfortable feeling till he
came to the sight of the stake; and then cried out, and clapped his hands for
joy to his friend, saying, O Austen, he is come, he is come; meaning the
feeling joy of faith and the holy Ghost. Tarry therefore the Lord leisure, be
strong, Psalm. 27.16.
and he shall comfort thine heart.

If Satan shall aggrauate unto thee the greatness, Satan's third assault.
the multitude, and heinousness of thy sins; meditate,

1 That upon true repentance it is as easy with GOD to forgive the greatest
sin as the least; The encounter.
and he is as willing, to forgive many, 1 Timothy 1.15.
as to pardon one. And his mercy shines more in pardoning great sinners then
small offenders; as appears in the examples of Manasses, Magdalene, Romans 5.20.
Peter, Paul, etc. And where sin most abounded, there does his grace rejoice
to abound much more.

2 That GOD did never forsake any man, till that a man did first forsake GOD;
as appears in the examples of Caine, Saul, Achitophel, Ahazia, Judas, etc.

3 That God calls all, even those sinners who are heavy laden with sin;
Mat. 11.28.
and that he did never deny his mercy to any sinner that asked his mercy with a
penitent heart. This the history of the Gospel witnesses: There came unto
Christ all sorts of sick sinners: the blind, lame, hal^, leapers; such as
were sick of palsies, dropsies, bloody flixes; such as were lunaticks, and
possessed with unclean spirits, and Devils. Yet of all those, not one that
came and asked his mercy and help, went away without his errant. If mercy he
asked, mercy he found, were his sin never so great, were his disease never so
grievous. Nay he offered and gave his mercy to many, who never asked it (being
moved only with the bowels of his own compassion, Ioh. 5.56.
and the sight of their misery) as to the woman of Samaria, the widow of Naim,
and to the sicke-man that lay at the poole of Bethesda, Luke 7.13.
who had been 38. years sick. If he thus willingly gave his mercy to them
that did not ask it, and was found of them (as the Prophet says) that sought
him not; Isai. 65.1. Romans 10.20.
will he deny mercy unto thee who do so earnestly pray for it with tears?
and do like the poor Publican, so ha^tily knock for it with penitent fists
upon a bruised and broken heart? Especially when thou prayest to thy Father in
the name and mediation of Christ, for whose sake he has promised to grant
whatsoever we shall ask of him: Ioh. 14.14.
as sure as GOD is true he will not. Though Nin^uies-sinnes had provoked the
Lord to send out his sentence against them; yet upon their repentance, he
called it again, Nouit Dominus mutare sententiam, si tu noueris emendare
vitam. Aug. in Psalm. 50.
and spared the City: how much more if thou likewise repentest, will he spare
thee; seeing his sentence is not yet gone forth against thee? If he deferred
the Judgment all Ahabs days, for the external show only which he made of
Humiliation: how much more will he clean turn away his vengeance, if thou will unfeignedly repent of thy sin, and return unto him for Grace and Mercy?

He offered his mercy unto Caine (who murdered his innocent Brother; Genesis 4.7.
) If thou do well shall thou not be accepted? as if he should have said, If
thou will leave thy envy and malice, and offer unto me from a faithful and
contrite heart, both thou and thine Oblation also shall be acceptable unto me.
Mat. 26.50.
And to Judas (that so treacherously betrayed him) in calling him friend, a
sweet appellation of love: and when Judas offered, he willingly consented
with that mouth (wherein never was found guile) to kiss those dissembling
lips, 1 Pet. 2.22. Psalm. 140.3. Mat. 26.50.
under which lurked the poison of Aspes. Had Judas apprehended this word friend
out of the mouth of Christ, 1 King. 20.32.33. Verse 31.
as Benhadad did the word Brother from the mouth of Achab; doubtless Judas
should have found the God of Israel, more merciful then Benhadad found the
King of Israel. But God was Judas non tam scelus, quam desperatio fecit,
penitus interire. Aug. li. de vtil. paenit.
more displeased with Caine for despairing of his mercy, then for murdering
his Brother: and with Sceleratior omnibus, o Judah extitisti, quem non
paenitentia duxit ad Dominum, sed desperatio traxit ad laqueum. Leo.
Judas for hanging himself, then for betraying his Master: in that they would
make the sins of mortal men, greater then the infinite mercy of the eternal
GOD: or as if they could be more sinful then GOD was merciful. Whereas the
least drop of Christ's blood is of more merit to procure Gods mercy for thy
salvation: then all the sins (that thou have committed) can be of force, to
provoke his wrath to thy damnation.

If Satan shall suggest, Satan's third assault.
that all this is true of Gods mercy, but that it does not belong unto thee,
because that thy sins are greater then other men's, as being sins of
knowledge, and of many years continuance; and such as whereby others have
been undone: and all (for the most part) committed wilfully and presumptuously
against God and thy conscience. And therefore though he will be merciful unto
others, yet he will not be merciful unto thee; meditate

The encounter.
1 That many (who are now in heaven most blessed and glorious Saints) committed
in the same kind kind (when they lived on earth) as great, and greater
sins then ever thou have committed, and continued before they repented, in
those sins as long as ever thou have done. As therefore all their sins, and
the continuance in them could not hinder gods mercy upon their repentance, from
forgiving their sins, and receiving them into favor: no more shall thy sins
and continuance therein, hinder him from being merciful unto thee, if thou
do repent as they did: yea, 1 Timothy 1.16.
upon thy repentance every one of their examples is a pledge that he will do
the same unto thee that he did unto them. For, as the least sin in Gods
Justice without Repentance is damnable: so the greatest sin upon repentance
is in his Mercy pardonable. Thy greatest and inueteratest sins are but the
sins of a man: but the least of his mercies is the mercy of God. Because thou
know thine own sins; thou doubtest whether they shall be pardoned. Mark
how this doubtful case is resolved by GOD himself. Many in Isayes days
thought (as thou do) that they had continued so long in sin, that it was
too late for them now to seek to return unto GOD for grace and mercy. But GOD
answers them; Seek ye the Lord whilst he may be found: Isa. 55.6.7.8
call ye upon him whilst he is near. As if he had said; Whilst life
lasts, and my Word is preached, I am near to be found of all that seek me,
and pray unto me. The people reply: But we O Lord are grievous sinners, and
therefore dare not presume to call upon thy Name, or to come near thine
Holiness. To this the LORD answers: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
man of iniquity his thoughts: and let him return unto me, and I will have
mercy upon him, and be his God; and I will pardon him abundantly. But we
would think (say the people) that if our sins were but ordinary sins,
this promise of mercy might belong unto us. But because our sins are so
great, and of such long continuance, therefore we fear least when we
appear before GOD he will reject us. To this GOD answers again: My
thoughts (of mercy) are not your thoughts, neither are your ways (of
pardoning) my ways: for as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my
ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts. If therefore
every Sinner in the World were a world of such sinners as thou art: do thou
but yet (what GOD bids thee) repent and believe, and the blood of Jesus Christ,
Acts 20.28. 1 John 1.7.
being the blood of God, will cleanse both thee and them from all your sins.

2 That as God did foresee all the sins which the world should commit, and
yet all those could not hinder him from loving the world: John 3.16.
so, That he gave his only begotten Son to the death, to save as many of
the world as would believe and repent: much less shall thy sins (being the
sins of the least Member of the world) be able to hinder GOD from loving thy
soul, and forgiving thy sins, if thou do repent and believe.

3 That if he loved thee so dear (when thou vvast his enemy) that he paid
for thee so dear a price as the spilling of his heart blood; Romans 5.8.3.
how can he now but be gracious unto thee, when to save thee, will cost him
but the casting of a gracious look upon thee? Look not thou therefore to the
greatness of thy sins, but to the infiniteness of his mercy, which is so
surpassing great, that if thou put all thine own grievous sins together,
and add unto those the sins of Caine and Judas, and put unto them all the
sins of all the Reprobates in the world (doubtless, it would be a huge
heap.) Yet compare this huge heap with the infinite Mercy of GOD, and there
will be no more comparison betwixt them: then betwixt the least Molehill, and
the greatest Mountain in a Country. The cry of the grieuousest sins that
ever we read of, could never reach up higher then unto heaven, as the cry of
the sins of Sodom; Genesis 19.13.
Psalm. 108.4.
but the Mercy of God (says David) reaches up higher then the Heavens, and so
ouer-toppeth all our sins. Psalm. 145.9.
And if his mercy be greater then all his works, it must needs be greater
then all thy sins. And so long as his mercy is greater then the sins of the
whole world, do thou but repent, there is no doubt of pardon.

If Satan shall object, Satan's fourth assault.
that thou have many times vowed to repent, and have made a show of Repentance
for the time, and yet did fall to the same sins again, and again, and
that all thy Repentance was but fained, and a mocking of God. And that seeing
thou have so often broken thy vows, therefore God has withdrawn his mercy,
and has changed his love, etc. meditate,

The encounter.
1 That though this were true (which indeed is heinous) yet it is no sufficient
cause why thou should despair; seeing that this is the common case of all
the Children of God in this life, who vow so often to forb^are some sins: I
remember (says Luther) that Staupitius was wont to tell me, Ego plus quam
millies Deo voui, etc: I have more then a thousand times vowed unto God, that I
would mend my life, but I could never perform my vow. Henceforth I will make
no such vow, because I verily know that I cannot keep it. Unless therefore
God will be merciful unto me for Christ his sake, and grant me a blessed
departure out of this wretched life, all my vows and good works will stand me
in no stead. This is the state of the dearest children of God in this life.
Read Luther on Ga^a^. Chap. 5.
till perceiving their weakness not able to perform it, then vow that they
will vow no more. Their vows show the desires of their spiritual man; their
breakings, the weakness of their corrupt flesh. And our often slips to the same
sins Christ foresaw: when he taught us to pray daily, O Father, forgive us
our trespasses. And why does Christ enjoin thee (who art but sinful man) to
forgive thy brother seven times in a day, if he shall return seven times in
a day, and say, Luke 17.3.4.
it repents me? But to assure thee that he (being the God of mercy and
goodness it self) will forgive unto thee, thy seventy times seven fold
sins a day, Mat. 18.21.22.
which thou have committed against him, if thou return unto him by true
repentance? The Israelites were cured by looking (though with weak eyes) on
the brazen Serpent, Number. 21.9.
as often as they were stung by the fiery Serpent in the wilderness: to assure
thee that upon thy tears of repentance, Post lachrymas gemitusque graves
clemen^^a Christi, Confestim est oculos ante locanda tuos.
thou shall be recovered by faith in Christ, as often as thou art wounded to
death by Sin.

2 That thy salvation is grounded, not upon the constancy of thine obedience;
but upon the firmness of Gods covenant. Though thou variest with GOD, Iam.
1.17.
and the covenant be broken on thy behalf, yet it is firm on Gods part; and
therefore all is safe enough if thou will return; for there is no
variableness with him, neither shadow of change. He has locked up thy
salvation, and made it sure in his own unchangeable purpose; Romans 8.28. Romans
9.11.
and has delivered to thy keeping the keys, which are By these Keys Peter
opened heaven to himself: and afterward with the rest of the Apostles unto
others. Luc. 22.62. Luke 24.47. etc. Ioh. 20.21. and Ioh. 13.1. Romans 11.29.
Romans 8.39. Satan's fifth assault.
Faith and Repentance; and whilst thou have them, thou may persuade thy
self that thy salvation is sure and safe: For, whom God loves, he loves to
the end, and never repents of bestowing his love on them who repent and
believe.

Lastly, if Satan shall persuade thee, that thou have been doubting a long
time, and that it is best for thee now to despair; seeing thy sins increase,
and thy judgments draws near; meditate,

1 That no sin (though never so great) should be a cause to move any
Christian to despair, so long as Gods mercy, by so many millions of degrees is
greater: and that every penitent and believing sinner, has the pardon of all
his sins confirmed by the Word and Oath of GOD; two immutable things wherein
it is impossible that God should lie. Heb. 6.18.
Eze. 18.22.
His Word is that at what time soever, D. King, B. of Lo^d. his Lectures on
Jonas.
a sinner, whosoever, does repent of his sin whatsoever, (for both time, and
sins, and sinners are indefinite) from the bottom of his heart; God will
blot forth all his sins out of his remembrance, that they shall be mentioned
unto him no more. If we will not take his word (which GOD forbid we should
doubt of) he has given us his oath: As I live, I desire not the death of the
wicked, Eze. 33.11.
but that the wicked turn from his way and live: as if he had said; Will ye
not believe my word? I swear by my life, that I delight not to damn any
sinner for his sins, but rather to save him upon his conversion and
repentance. The meditation hereof, moved Tertullian to exclaim: Oh, how happy
are we, O faelices nos, quorum causa turat Deus! O miserrimos nos sine Deo
quidem iuranti credimus! Tertul.
when God swears that he will not our damnation! Oh, what miserable wretches
are we, if we will not believe God, when he swears this truth unto us!
Listen, O drooping spirit, whose soul is assailed with waves of faithless
despair: how happy were it to see many like thee, and Hezechias? (who mourn
like doves for the sense of sin, Isa. 38.14.
and chatter like Cranes and Swallows for the fear of Gods anger) rather then
to behold many who die like beasts without any feeling of their own estate, or
any fear of Gods wrath, or tribunal seat, before which they are to appear?
Comfort thy self, O languishing soul; for if this earth has any for whom
Christ spilt his blood on the Cross? thou assuredly art one. Cheer up
therefore thy self. in the all-sufficient atonement of the blood of the Lamb*
Heb. 12.24.
which speaks better things then that of Abel. And pray for those, who never
yet obtained the grace, to have such a sense with detestation of sin. Thou
art one indeed, for whom Christ dyed; and from whom a wounded spirit (judging
rather according to his feeling, then his faith) has wrung that doleful voice
of Christ, My God, my God, Mat. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? And doubt not but ere long thou shall as truly
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11. 2 Cor. 1.20.
as now thou do suffer with him: Apoc. 3.14.
for Yea and Amen has spoken it. No sin bars a man from salvation but
only incredulity, Heb. 6.6.
and impenitencie: nothing makes the sin against the holy Ghost unpardonable,
but want of repentance. Thy unfeigned desire to repent, is as acceptable unto
God, as the perfectst repentance, that thou could wish to perform unto him.

Meditate on these Evangelical comforts, and thou shall see that in the very
agony of death; GOD will so assist thee with his spirit, that when Sa^an
looks for the greatest victory he shall receive the foulest foil: yea when
the eye-strings are broken, that thou can not see the light, Jesus Christ
will appear unto thee to comfort thy soul, Luke 16.22.
and his holy Angels will carry thee into his heavenly kingdom. Then shall thy
friends behold thee like Manoahs Angel doing wonders indeed; when they shall
see a frail man in his greatest weakness (by the mere assistance of Gods
Spirit) ouercomming the strength of sin, the bitterness of death, and all the
power of Satan; and in the fire of Faith, and perfume of Prayer, ascend up with
Angels victoriously into Heaven.

An admonition to them who come to visit the sick.
THey who come to visit the sick must have a special care not to stand dumb
and staring in the sick persons face to disquiet him; nor yet to speak idly,
and to ask unprofitable questions as most do.

If they see therefore that the sick party is like to die, let them not
dissemble: but lovingly, and discreetly admonish him of his weakness, and to
prepare for eternal life. One hour well spent, when a man's life is almost
out-spent: may gain a man the assurance of eternal life. Sooth him not with
the vain hope of this life: least thou betray his soul to eternal death.
Admonish him plainly of his estate, and ask him briefly, these or the like
questions.

Questions to be asked of a sick man, that is like to die.
Do thou believe that Almighty God the Trinity of Persons in unity of
Essence, has by his power, made heaven and earth, and all things therein? and
that he does still by his divine providence govern the same So that nothing
comes to pass in the world, nor to thy self: but what his divine hand and
counsel had determined before to be done.

Do thou confess that thou have transgressed, and broken the holy
commandments of Almighty God, in thought, word, and deed; and have deserved
for breaking his holy laws, the Curse of God, which contains all the
miseries of this life, and everlasting torments in Hell fire, when this life is
ended, if so be that GOD should deal with thee according to thy deserts?

3 Art thou not sorry in thy heart, that thou have so broken his Laws, and
neglected his service, and worship: and so much followed the world, and thine
own vain pleasures? And would thou not lead a holier life, if thou were
to begin again?

4 Do thou not from thy heart desire to be reconciled unto GOD in Jesus
Christ his blessed son thy Mediator: Romans 8.34.
who is at the right hand of God in heaven, now appearing for thee in the sight
of God, and making request unto him for thy Soul? Heb. 9.24.


5 Do thou renounce all confidence in all other Mediators or Intercessors,
Saints or Angels, believing that Jesus Christ the only Mediator of the new
Testament, Heb 9.15. 1 Timothy 2.5.
is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them? And will thou with David
say unto Christ; Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.25.
And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee?

6 Do thou confidently believe and hope to be saved, by the only merits of
that bloody death and passion which thy Savior Jesus Christ has suffered for
thee? not putting any hope of salvation in thine own merits: nor in any other
means or creatures? being assuredly persuaded; Acts 4.12. Acts 10.43.
that there is not salvation in any other: And that there is none other name
under heaven, whereby thou must be saved.

7 Do thou heartily forgive all wrongs, and offenses done or offered unto
thee, Esa. 26.20.
by any manner of person whatsoever? And do thou as willingly (from thy
heart) ask forgiveness of them, whom thou have grievously wronged in word or
deed? And do thou cast out of thy heart, all malice and hatred, which thou
have borne to any body; that thou may appear before the face of Christ (the
Prince of Peace) in perfect love and charity? Isay 9.6. Heb. 12.14.


8 Does thy Conscience tell thee of any thing, which thou have wrongfully
taken, and do still withold, from any Widow or fatherless children, or
from any other person whomsoever? Be assured that unless thou shall restore,
like Zacheus, those goods and Land (if thou be able,) thou can not truly
repent, and without true repentance thou can not be saved, nor look CHRIST
in the face when thou shall appear before his Iudgement-seate.

9 Do thou firmly believe, that thy body shall be raised up out of the
Grave, at the sound of the last Trumpet? And that thy body and soul shall be
united together again in the Resurrection day, to appear before the Lord
Jesus Christ; and thence to go with him into the Kingdom of Heaven, to live
in everlasting bliss and glory?

If the sick party shall answer to all these questions like a faithful
Christian* then let all, who are present, join together and pray for him, in
these or the like words.

A Prayer to be said for the sick, by them who visit him.
O Merciful Father, who art the Lord, and giver of life, and to whom belongs
the issues of death: we thy children here assembled, do acknowledge, that (in
respect of our manifold sins) we are not worthy to ask any blessing for
our selves at thy hands: much less to become suitors to thy Majesty, in the
behalf of others: yet because thou have commanded us to pray one for another,
James 5.
especially for the sick: and have promised that the prayers of the righteous
shall avail much with thee. In the Obedience therefore of thy Commandment;
and confidence of thy gracious promise, we are bold to become humble suitors,
unto thy divine Majesty, in the behalf of this our dear Brother (or Sister)
whom thou have visited with the chastisement of thine own fatherly hand. We
could gladly wish the restitution of his health, and a longer continuance of
his life, and Christian Fellowship amongst us: but for as much, as it appears
(as far as we can discern:) that thou have appointed by this visitation, to
call for him out of this mortal life: we submit our wills to thy blessed will:
and humbly entreat for Jesus Christ his sake, and the merits of his bitter
death and Passion (which he has suffered for him) that thou would pardon,
and forgive unto him all his sins: as well that wherein he was conceived and
borne, as also all the offenses and transgressions, which ever since, to this
day and hour, he has committed in thought, word, and deed, against thy
divine Majesty. Cast them behind thy back: remove them as far from thy
presence, Psalm. 103.
as the East is from the West. Blot them out of thy remembrance: lay them not
to his charge: vvash them away with the blood of Christ, that they may no more
be seen: and deliver him from all the Judgments which are due unto him for
his sins, that they may never trouble his conscience, nor rise in judgment
against his Soul: and impute unto him the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
whereby he may appear righteous in thy sight. And in his extremity at this
time, we beseech thee look down from heaven upon him, with those Eyes of
Grace, and compassion, wherewith thou art wont to look upon thy Children in
their affliction, and misery. Pity thy wounded servant, like the good
Samaritane; for here is a sick Soul, that needs the help of such a
heavenly Physician. O Lord increase his Faith, that he may believe that Christ
dyed for him, and that his blood cleanses him from all his sins: and either
assuage his pain, or else increase his patience, to endure thy blessed will
and pleasure. And good Lord, lay no more upon him, then thou shall enable him
to bear. Heave him up unto thy self, with those sighs and groans, which
cannot be expressed. Make him now to feel what is the hope of his Calling:
and what is the exceeding greatness of thy Mercy, and power toward them that
believe in thee. And in his weakness, O Lord, show thou thy strength. Defend
him against the suggestions and temptations of Satan,: who (as he has all
his life time) will now in his weakness especially seek to assail him, and
to devour him. Oh save his soul; and reprove Satan, and command thy holy
Angels to be about him, to aid him, and to chase away all evil, and malignant
Spirits far from him. Make him more and more, to loath this world, and to
desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. And when that good hour and time
shall come (wherein thou have determined to call for him out of this present
life) give him grace peaceably and joyfully to yield up his Soul into thy
merciful hands, and do thou receive her into thy mercy, and let thy blessed
Angels carry her into thy Kingdom. Make his last hour his best hour: his
last words his best words: and his last thoughts his best thoughts. And when
the sight of his eyes are gone, and his tongue shall fail to do his office,
grant (O Lord) that his Soul may (with Stephen) behold Jesus Christ in Heaven
ready to receive him, and that thy Spirit within him, may make requests for
him, Romans 6.26.
with sighs, which cannot be expressed. Teach us in him to read and see our
own end and mortality: and therefore to be careful to prepare our selves for
our last ends, and put our selves in a readidinesse against the time that thou
shall call for us in the like manner. Thus Lord we recommend this our dear
Brother ( or Sister) thy sick Servant, unto thy eternal grace, and mercy in
that Prayer, which Christ our Savior has taught unto us.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ: thy love, O heavenly Father: thy comfort and
consolation, O holy Spirit, be with us all, and especially with this thy sick
servant, to the end, and in the end. Amen.

Let them read often unto the sick, some special Chapters of the holy
Scriptures: as,

The three first Chapters of the Book of Job.

The 34. Chapter of Deutronomie.

The two last Chapters of Joshua.

The 17. Chapter of the first of Kings.

The 2.4. and 13. Chapters of the second of Kings.

The 14. and 19. Chapters of Job.

The 38.40. and 65. Chapters of Isay.

The History of the Passion of Christ.

The 8. Chapter to the Romans.

The 15. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

The 4. of the first Epistle to the Thessalonians.

The 5. Chapter of the second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.

The first and last Chapters of S. James.

The 11. and 12. to the Hebrews.

The first Epistle of Peter.

The three first and the three last Chapters of the Revelation, or some of
these.

And so exhorting the sick party to wait upon God by faith and patience,
till he send for him; and praying the Lord to send them a joyful meeting in
the Kingdom of Heaven, and a blessed Resurrection at the last day; they may
depart at their pleasure, in the peace of God.

Consolations against Impatiencie in sickness.
IF in thy sickness by extremity of pain thou be driven to Impatiencie;
meditate,

1 That thy sins have deserved the pains of Hell: therefore thou may with
greater patience, endure these fatherly corrections.

2 That these are the scourges of thy Heavenly Father, and the rod in his hand.
If thou did suffer with reverence being a child, the correction of thy
earthly Parents; Heb. 12.9.
how much rather should thou now subject thy self, (being the child of God)
to the chastisements of thy heavenly Father, seeing it is for thine eternal
good?

3 That Christ suffered in his Soul and body far grieuouser pains for thee,
Vir dolorum. Isa. 53.3.
therefore thou must more willingly suffer his blessed pleasure for thine own
good. Therefore says Peter, Christ suffered for you, 1 Pet. 2.21.
leaving you an example, that ye should follow his steps. And, Let us (says
Saint Paul) run with joy the race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1.2.
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, etc.

4 That these afflictions, which now you suffer, are none other but such which
are accomplished in your Brethren, 1 Pet. 5.9.
that are in the world, as witnesses Peter: S. Romitus cum quotannis graui
morbo tentaretur a Deo, doluit, quod vno anno liber esset, acsi a Deo tunc
desertus fu^sset. Vit. Patr. 2. p. c. 148.
Yea, Jobs afflictions were far more grievous. There is not one of the
Saints, which now are at rest in heavenly joys, but endured as much as you
do before they went thither: yea, many of them willingly suffered all the
torments that Tyrants could inflict upon them, that they might come to those
Heavenly joys whereunto you are now called. And you have a promise, that the
God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.
after that you have suffered a while, will make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, and settle you. And that God of his fidelity will not suffer you
to be tempted above that you are able: 1 Cor. 10.13
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able
to bear it.

5 That God has determined the time when thy affliction shall end, as well as
the time when it began: Thirty eight years were appointed to the sick man
at Bethesda's Poole. John 5.
Matthew. 9.
Twelve years to the Woman with the bloody Issue. Exodus 2.2.
Three Months to Moses. Apoc. 2.
Ten days tribulation to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna: Three days
plague to David. 2 Samuel 24.
Yea, Psalm. 56.
the number of the godly man's tears are registered in Gods Book, and the
quantity kept in his bottle.

The time of our troubles (says Christ) is but a modicum. Modicum and videbo
vos. John 16.16. Psalm. 30.
Gods Anger lasts but a Moment (says David.) A little season (says the Lord)
and therefore calls all the time of our pain, Apoc. 6.11.
Josh. 1.6.
but the hour of sorrow. David, for the swiftness thereof, Psalm. 110.7.
compares our present trouble to a Brook. And Athanasius to a Shower. Nubecula
est, cito transibit.
Compare the longest misery that man endures in this life, to the eternity of
heavenly Joys, and they will appear to be nothing. And as the sight of a
Son safe borne, John 16.21.
makes the Mother forget all her former deadly pain: so the sight of Christ in
Heaven, who was borne for thee, will make all these pangs of death, to be
quite forgotten, as if they had never been; like Stephen, who as soon as he
saw Christ, forgot his own wounds, Act. 7.
with the horror of the Grave, and terror of the stones, and sweetly yielded
his Soul into the hands of his Savior. Forget thine own pain, think of
Christ's wounds. Apoc. 2.10.
Be faithful unto the death, and he will give thee the Crown of eternal
life.

6 That you are now called to Repetitions in Christ's School, to see how much
Faith, Patience, and godliness you have learned all this while; and whether
you can, like Job, Ioh. 2.10.
receive at the hand of God some evil, as well as you have hitherto received
a great deal of good? as therefore you have always prayed, Thy Will be done,
so be not now offended at this which is done by his holy will.

Romans 8.28.
7 That all things shall work together for the best to them that love God,
insomuch that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, Verse 38.
nor Principalities, nor Powers, 39.
etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus
Christ our Lord. Morbus non malis adnumerandus, quia multis vtiliter accidit.
Basil. in Hexam. Morbus est vtilis quaeda^ institutio quae docet caduca
aspernere, and coelestia spirare. Nazian. a^ Philagrium.
Assure your self that every pang is a prevention of the pains of Hell; every
respite an earnest of heavens Rest: and how many stripes do you esteem Heaven
worth? As your life has been a comfort to others, so give your Friends a
Christian example to dye, and deceive the Devil, as Job did. It is but the
Cross of Christ sent before to crucify the love of this world in thee: that
thou may go eternally to live with Christ, who was crucified for thee. As
thou art therefore a true Christian, take up, like Simon of Cyrene, with both
thy arms his holy Cross, carry it after him, unto him: thy pains will
shortly pass, thy joys shall never pass away.

Consolations against the fear of Death.
IF in the time of thy sickness, thou find thy self fearful to dye;
meditate,

1 That it argues a dastardly mind to fear that which is not. For in the
church of Christ there is no Death, Isay 25.7.8. And Whosoever lives and
believes in Christ shall never dye, John 11.26. Let them fear death, who
live without Christ, Christians dye not, but when they please GOD they are
like Enoch translated unto GOD: Genesis 5.24.
Their pains are but Eliahs fiery Chariot to carry them up to heaven: 1 King.
2.11 12.
Luke 26.23.
or like Lazarus sores sending them to Abraham's bosom. In a word, if thou be
one of them that like Lazarus love Jesus, John 11.
thy sickness is not unto thee death, but for the glory of God: who of his
love changes thy living death to an everlasting life. John 14.
And if many Heathen men, as Socrates, Curtius, Seneca, etc. dyed willingly
(when they might have lived,) in hope of the immortality of the Soul; vvilt
thou being trained so long in Christ's School, and now called to the Marriage
Supper of the blessed Lamb, Apoc. 10.7. be one of those Guests that refuse to
go to that Joyful Banquet? God forbid.

2 Remember that thy aboade here is but the second degree of thy life: for
after thou had first lived nine months in thy Mothers womb, thou wast of
necessity driven thence to live here in a second degree of life. And when that
number of months which GOD has determined for this life, are expired, thou
must likewise leave this, and and pass to a third degree in the other World,
which never ends. Which to them that live and die in the Lord, surpasses as
far this kind of life, as this does that which one lives in his mothers
womb. To this last and excellentest degree of life, through this door passed
Christ himself, and all his Saints that were before thee, and so shall all the
rest after them and thee. Why should thou fear that which is common to all
Gods Elect? Why should that be uncouth to thee, which was so welcome to all
them. Fear not death; Mors praesentis vitae exitus, and introitus melioris.
Bern. in Ep. ad Romans
for it is the Exodus of a bad, but the Genesis of a better World: the end of a
temporal, but the beginning of an eternal life.

3 Consider, that there are but three things that can make death so fearful
unto thee: first, the loss thou have thereby: secondly, the pain that is
therein. Thirdly, the terrible effects which follows after. All these are but
false fires, and causlesse fears. For the first; if thou leauest here
uncertain goods which thieves may rob; thou shall find in heaven a true
treasure that can never be taken away: Mat. 6.19.20.
these were but lent thee as a Steward upon accounts: those shall be given thee
as thy reward for ever. If thou leauest a loving Wife, thou shall be married to
Christ which is more lovely. If thou leauest Children and Friends, thou shall
there find all thy religiously Ancestors and children departed: yea, Christ,
and all his blessed Saints and Angels, and as many of thy Children as be Gods
children, shall thither follow after thee. Thou leauest an earthly possession,
John 14.1.
and a house of clay, and thou shall enjoy an Heavenly inheritance and Mansion
of Glory, 2 Cor. 5.1.
which is purchased, prepared and reserved for thee* What have thou lost? Nay,
is not death unto thee gain? go home! go home! and we will follow after
thee.

Timor mortis ipsa morte peior.
Secondly, for the pain in Death; the fear of Death more pain^s many then the
very pangs of death: for many a Christian dies without any great pang or
pains. Pitch the Anchor of thy hope on the firm grou^^ of the Word of God,
who has promised in thy weakness to perfect his strength: 2 Cor. 12.9 1 Cor.
10.13
and not to suffer thee to be tempted above that thou art able to bear. And
Christ will shortly turn all thy temp^rall pains to his eternal joys.

Lastly, as for the terrible effects, which follow after death, they belong not
unto thee, being a Member of Christ, for Christ by his death has taken away
the sting of death to the faithful: so that now there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.
And Christ has protested that he that believes in him has everlasting life,
John 5.24.
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life.
Hereupon the holy Spirit from Heaven says, Blessed are the dead which dye in
the Lord, and that from thenceforth they rest from their labors, and their
works do follow them. In respect therefore of the faithful, 1 Cor. 15. 1
These. 4. Isay 26. Apoc. 14. John 14.1. (...). Luke 2. 2 Cor. 5. Phil. 1. (...).
death is swallowed up into victory, and his sting, which is sin and the
punishment thereof, is taken away by Christ. Hence death is called in respect
of our bodies, a sleep, and rest: In respect of our souls, a going to our
heavenly Father: a departing in peace: a removing from this body to go to the
Lord: Mors porta gloriae. Greg. Ianua vitae. Bernar.
a dissolution of soul and body to be with Christ. What shall I say? Precious
in the sig^^t of the Lord is the death of his Saints. These pains are but thy
throws and travel to bring forth Eternal Life. And who would not pass
through Hell to go to Paradise? much more through death. There is nothing
after death that thou need fear; not thy sins, because Christ has paid
thy ransom: not the Judge, for he is thy loving Brother: not the Grave, for
it is the Lords Bed: not Hell, for thy Redeemer keeps the Keys: not the
Devil, for Gods holy Angels pitch their Tents about thee, and will not leave
thee till they bring thee to Heaven. Thou wast never nearer Eternal life,
glorify therefore Christ by a blessed death. Say cheerfully, Come Lord Jesus,
for thy Servant comes unto thee, I am willing, Lord help my weakness.

Seven sanctified thoughts, and mournful sighs of a sick man, ready to die.
NOW for as much as God of his infinite mercy, does so temper our pain and
sickness, that we are not always oppressed with extremity: but gives us in
the midst of our extremities some respite, to ease and refresh our selves; thou
must have an especial care (considering how short a time thou have, either for
ever to lose, or to obtain Heaven) to make use of every breathing-time, which
God does afford thee: and during that little time of ease, to gather strength
against the fits of greater anguish. Therefore in these times of relaxation and
ease, use some of these short thoughts and sighs.

The first thought.
SEeing every man enters into this life in Tears, passes it in sweat, and
ends it in sorrow; ah what is there in it, that a man should desire to live any
longer to it! oh what a folly is it, that when the Mariner roweth with all his
force to arrive at the wished Port; and that the Traveler never testeth, till
he come to his iourneyes end; we fear to discrie our Port; and therefore
would put back our Bark, to be longer tossed in this continual Tempest, we
weep to see our iourneyes end; and therefore desire our journey to be
lengthened, that we might be more tired with a foul and cumbersome way.

The spiritual sigh thereupon.
O Lord, this life is but a troublesome Pilgrimage: Genesis 47.9.
few in days, but full in evils; and I am weary of it, by reason of my sins.
Let me therefore (O Lord) entreat thy Majesty in this my bed of sickness:
as Elias did under the Juniper tree in his affliction; 1 Reg. 19.4
It is now enough, O Lord, that I have lived so long in this vale of misery;
take my f^ule into thy merciful hands, for I am no better then my Fathers.

The second thought.
Think with what a body of sin thou art laden; Romans 7.24.
what great civil wars are contained in a little world; the flesh fighting
against the spirit: James 4.1. Gal. 5.17.
Passion against Reason: Earth against Heaven: and the world within thee,
^anding it self for the world without thee; and that but one only mean
remains to end this conflict, Death: which (in Gods appointed time) will
separate thy Spirit, from thy flesh: the pure and regenerate part of thy soul,
from that part which is impure and unregenerated*

The spiritual sigh upon the second thought.
Romans 1.24.
O Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! O
my sweet Savior Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.
thou have redeemed me with thy precious blood. And because thou have delivered
my soul from sin, Apoc. 5.9.
Psalm. 116.8.
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. I do here, from the very
bottom of my heart, ascribe the whole praise and glory of my Salvation, to
thy only grace and mercy, saying (with the holy Apostle:) Thanks be unto
GOD, 1 Cor. 15.57
which has given me the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm. 145.9.


The third thought.
Think how it behooues thee, to be assured that thy soul is Christ's: for
death has taken sufficient gages to assure himself of thy body in that all
thy senses begin already to dye, save only the sense of pain: but since the
beginning of thy being began with pain: marvel the less, if thy end
conclude with dolours. But if these temporal dolours (which only afflict the
body) be so painful: Isay 33.14.
O Lord who can endure the devouring fire? who can abide the everlasting
burning?

The spiritual sigh upon the third thought.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living GOD, who art the only
Physician, that can ease my body from pain, and restore my Soul to life
eternal: put thy Passion, Cross, and death betwixt my Soul and thy
Judgment: and let the merits of thy Obedience stand betwixt thy Fathers
Justice, and my disobedience: and from these bodily pains receive my soul
into thine everlasting peace: for I cry unto thee with Stephen, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. Acts 7.59.


The fourth thought.
Think that the worst that death can do, is but to send thy soul sooner,
then thy flesh would be willing, to Christ and his heavenly joys: Remember
that that worst, is thy best hope. The worst therefore of death, is rather a
help then a harm.

The spiritual sigh upon the fourth thought.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of all them that put their trust in thee:
forsake not him that in misery flies unto thy grace for succor and mercy. Oh
sound that sweet voice in the ears of my soul, which thou spokest unto the
penitent thief on the Cross, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise;
Luke 23.43.
For I, O Lord* do (with the Apostle) from my soul speak unto thee, I desire
to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23.


The fifth thought.
THink (if thou fear to dye) that in Mount Sion there is no death: Isai.
25.7.8.
for he that believes in Christ shall never die. Ioh. 11.25.
And if thou desire to live; without doubt the life eternal (whereunto this
death is but a passage) surpasses all. There do all the faithful departed
(having ended their miseries) live with Christ in joys: and thither shall all
the godly, which survive, be gathered out of their troubles, to enjoy with him
eternal rest.

The spiritual sigh on the fifth thought.
O Lord, thou see the malice of Satan, who (not contenting himself, (...)
all the da^es and nights of our life, 1 Pet. 5.8.
to seek our destruction) shows himself most b^siest, when thy children are
weakest, and nearest to their end. O Lord, reprove him, and prese^ue my Soul.
He seeks to terrify me with death, which my sins have deserved, but let thy
holy spirit comfort my soul, with the assurance of eternal life, which thy
blood has purchased. Assuage my pain, increase my patience, and (if it be thy
blessed will) end my troubles; Luke 2.29.
for my soul beseeches thee with old blessed Simeon, Lord, now let me thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word.

The sixth thought.
THink with thy self, what a blessing God has bestowed upon thee* above many
millions of the world, that whereas they are either Pagans, who worship not the
true GOD: or Idolaters who worship the true GOD falsely. Thou have lived in a
true Christian Church, and have grace to dye in the true Christian faith, and
to be buried in the sepulchers of Gods servants, Act. 26.6.7.
who all wait for the hope of Israel, the raising of their bodies in the
resurrection of the just. Luc. 14.14.


The spiritual sigh upon the sixth thought,
O Lord Jesus Christ, who art the resurrection, and the life, Ioh. 11.25.26.
Verse. 24.
in whom whosoever believes, shall live, though he were dead, I believe, that
whosoever lives and believes in thee, shall never dye. I know that I shall
rise again in the resurrection, at the last day: for I am sure that thou my
Redeemer, live. Job. 19.25.26.
And though that after my death worms destroy this body, yet I shall see thee,
my Lord, and my God, in this flesh. Grant therefore, O CHRIST, for thy bitter
death and passions sake, that at that day I may be one of them to whom thou will pronounce that joyful sentence; Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before
the foundation of the world.

The seventh thought.
Think with thy self, how Christ endured for thee a cursed death, Gal. 3.13.
Lam. 7.12.
and the wrath of God, which was due unto thy sins, and what terrible pains
and cruel torments the Apostles and Martyrs have voluntarily suffered for the
defense of Christ's faith, when they might have lived by dissembling or denying
him: how much more willing should thou be to depart in the faith of Christ,
having less pains to torment thee, and more means to comfort thee?

The spiritual sigh upon the seventh thought.
O Lord, my sins have deserved the pains of hell, and eternal death; much
more these fatherly corrections wherewith thou do afflict me* Ioh. 1.29.
But O blessed Lamb of God, which take away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon me, Apoc. 5.1.
and wash away all my filthy sins with thy most precious blood: Luke 23.42.
and receive my soul into thy heavenly kingdom; for into thy hand^, Psalm.
31.5.
O Father, I commend my spirit, and thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of
truth?

The sick person ought now to send for some Godly and Religious Pastor.
IN any wise, remember (if conveniently it may be) to send for some godly and
religious Pastor, not only to pray for thee at thy death (for GOD in such a
case has promised to bear the Prayers of the righteous Genesis 20.7. Ier. 18.20.
and 15.1. Eze. 14.14. 1 Samuel 9.7. and 12.19.23.
Prophets, and Iam. 5.14.5.16.
Elders of the Church) But also upon thy confession and unfeigned repentance to
absolve thee of thy sins. For as Christ has given him a calling to Mark.
1.4. Act. 19.4.
baptize thee unto repentance for the remission of thy sins: so has he
likewise given him a calling and 1 Cor. 5.4.
power, and 2 Cor. 10.8
authority (upon repentance) ^o absolve thee from thy sins. Mat. 16.19
I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be l^^sed in heaven. Mat. 18.18.
And again, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind in earth shall be
^ound in heaven: whatsoever ye loose in earth, Ioh. 20.22.23.
shall be loosed in heaven. And again, receive ye the holy Ghost: whosoever
sins yeare^ (...), they are remitted unto them: and whosoever sins ye
retain, they are retained. This doctrine was as ancient in the Church of God
as Job, for Elihu tells him, Job. 33.23.
That when God strikes a man with malady ^n his bed, so that his soul draws
near the grave, and his life to the buri^rs. If there be^ any messenger with
him, or an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto man his
righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, etc. And answerable
heereunto (says Saint James) if the sick (...) committed sins (upon his
repentance, Iam. 5.17.18.
and the prayer of the Elders) they shall be forgiven him. These have power ^o
shut heaven, Apoc. 11.6.
and to deliver (the scandalous impenitent sinner) (...) Satan. 1 Cor. 5.5.
For the weapon^ of their war fa^^, are (...) carnal, 1 Cor. 10.3. etc.
but mighty, through God, to cast down* etc. and to have vengeance in
readiness against all disobedience. They have the key of loosing, therefore
the power of absoluing.

The Bishops, Mark. 2.7. M^nistri peccata remittunt non (...), sed (...). 1
Cor. 5.4. 1 Cor. 4.1.2. Act. 13.38. To this end says Basil, in Ascet. c. 13.
Christus omnibus Pastoribus and Doctoribus, Ecclesiae (...) aequalem tribuit
potestatem cuius signum est, quod omnes ex aequo ligant and soluunt, vt
and Pastors of the Church, do not forgive sins by any absolute power of
their own (for so only Christ their master forgiueth sins) but
ministerially, as the servants of Christ, and stewards, to whose fidelity their
Lord and Master has committed his keys; and that is, when they do declare
and pronounce either publicly or privately by the word of God* what binds*
what loses, and the (...) of God to penitent (...): or his judgment to
impenitent and obstinate person^: and so do apply the general promise^ or
threatenings to the penitent or impenitent. For CHRIST from heaven does by them
(as by his Ministers on Earth) declare whom he remitteth and binds, Petrus,
Papists dare not deny this.

Quilib^^ sacerdos (quantum est ex virtute clauium) habet potestatem
indifferenter in omnes. In supplement. Tohmae. 4.6.


and to whom he will open the gates of heaven, and against whom he will shut
them. And therefore it is not said, whose sin ye signify to be remitted,
but whose sins ye remit: they then do remit sins, because Christ by their
ministry (...)* a^ Christ by his Disciples lo^sed: Lazarus, Job. ^^.44. And as
no water could wash away (...), but the waters of (...) (though other rivers
(...) clear) because the promise* was annexed unto the (...) of Iordane, Verse.
^0.
and not of ^^ther Rivers: so though another man may pronounce the same words:
yet have they not the like efficacy and power to work on the conscience, as
when they are pronounced from the mouth of Christ's Ministers, because that the
John 20.22.23.
promise is annexed to the Word of God in their mouths: for them has he Act.
1.24.
chosen, Act. 13.2.
separated, and Romans 1.1.
set apart for this work, and to them he has committed the 2 Cor. 5.18.19.
ministry and word of reconciliation, by their holy Act. 13.2. 1 Cor. 1.1.
Heb. 5.4.
calling and Tit. 1.5.
ordination they have received the John 20.22.23.
holy Ghost, and the Ministerial power of binding and loosing. They are font
forth of the holy Ghost, Act. 13.4.2.
for this work whereunto he has called them.

And Christ gives his Ministers power to forgive sins to the penitent, in the
same (...). John 20.23.
words that he teaches us in the Lords Prayer to desire God to forgive us our
sins: to assure all penitent sinners, that God by his Ministers absolution does
fully, through the merits of Christ's blood, (...). Luke 11.4.
forgive them all their sins. So that what Christ decrees in heaven, in foro
Iudicij, the same he declares on earth by his reconciling Ministers, in foro
paenitentiae: So that as GOD has reconciled the world to himself by Jesus
Christ: so has he (says the Apostle) given unto us the ministry of this
reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.18


He that sent them to baptize, John 20.21.23.
saying, Go and teach all nations baptising them, etc. sent them also to remit
sins, 2 Cor. 2.7.10
saying, As my Father sent me so send (...), whosoever sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them, etc. As therefore none can baptize, (though he use the
same Water and words) but only the lawful Minister, Heb. 5.4.
whom Christ has called and authorized to this divine and Ministerial
Function. So though others may comfort with good words; yet none can absolve
from sin, but only those, to whom Christ has committed the holy ministry
and word of reconciliation: 2 Cor. 5.18.19.
and of their absolution Christ speaks, he that hears you hears me. Luke
10.16.
In a doubtful title thou will ask the counsel of thy skillful Lawyer: in
peril of sickness thou will know the advice of thy learned Physician: and is
there no danger in dread of damnation, for a sinner to be his own Judge?

Lib. 3. Instit. cap. 4. sect. 12.
Judicious Calvin teaches this point of doctrine most plainly, Etsi omnes
mutuo nos debeamus consolari, etc. Although (says he) we ought to comfort and
confirm one another in the confidence of Gods mercy, yet we see that the
Ministers are appointed as witnesses and sureties to acertaine our consciences
of the remission of sins: insomuch, as they are said to remit sins, and to
loose souls. Let every faithful man therefore remember, that it is his duty
(if inwardly he be vexed and afflicted with the sense of his sins) not to
neglect that Remedy which is offered unto him by the Lord, to wit, that (for
the easing of his Conscience,) he make private confession of his sins unto
his Pastor; and that he desire his private endeavor for the application of some
comfort unto his soul: whose office it is (both publicly and privately) to
administer Evangelical Consolation to Gods people.

Beza highly In Antith. Papatus and Christianismi. vol. 1. fol. 66. Luther tom.
6. fol. 109. and s^aq.
commends this practice; and Luther says, that he had rather lose 1000.
worlds, then suffer private confession to be thrust out of the Church. Our
church has ever most Witness our liturgy. D. Holland absolved D. Rainolds at
his death: who not being able to speak, kissed the hand wherewith he was
absolved.
soundly maintained the truth of this doctrine; but most justly abolished the
tyrannous and Antichristian abuse of Popish auricular confession, which they
thrust upon the Souls of Christians, as an Expiatorie Sacrifice, and a
merito^ious satisfaction for sin: racking their Consciences to confess, when
they feel no distress, and to enumerate all their sins, which is
impossible; that by this means they might diue into the secrets of all men,
which often times has proved pernicious not only to private persons, but also
to public states. But the truth of Gods word is, that no person, having
received Orders in the Church of Rome, can truly absolve a sinner: for the
Keys of absolution are two, the one is the Key of Authority, and that only
Apoc. 3.7. Mar. 2.7. Luke 5.21.
Christ has: the other is the Key of Ministry; and this he Mat. 16.19
gives to his Ministers, who are therefore called, the Ministers of Christ: The
1 Cor. 4.1.
Stewards of Gods Mysteries: The 2 Cor. 5.20
Ambassadors of reconciliation, Bishops, Pastors, Elders, etc. Ministerii
clauis duplex est, vna scientia discernendi. 1 Cor. 12.10 1 Ioh. 4.1. Ier.
15.19. alia est potestas ligandi and absoluendi. John 20. Mat. 27.4.
But Christ never ordained in the New Testament, any Order of sacrificing
Priests, neither is the name of (...), which properly signifies Sacerdos, or
sacrificing Priest, given to any Officer of Christ, in all the New Testament.
Neither do we read in all the New Testament, of any who confessed himself to
a Priest, but Judas. Neither is there any real Priest of the New Testament,
but only Christ. Heb. 7.24.27.28.
Neither is there any part of his Priesthood, to be now accomplished on Earth,
Heb. 8.4.
but that which he fulfilleth in Heaven, Heb. 7.25.
by making intercession for us. Seeing therefore Christ never ordained any
Order of sacrificing Priests: and that Popish Priests scorn the name of
Ministers of the Gospel, to whom only Christ committed his Keys, it
necessarily follows, that no Popish Priest can truly either excommunicate or
absolve any sinner, or have any lawful right to meddle with Christ's Keys. But
the Antichristian abuse of this divine Ordinance, should not abolish the
lawful use thereof twixt Christians and their Pastors in cases of distress of
Conscience, for which it was chiefly ordained.

And verily there is not any means more excellent to humble a proud heart, nor
to raise up an humble spirit, then this spiritual conference betwixt the
Pastors and the People committed to their charge. If any sin therefore
troubles thy conscience, confess it to Gods Minister: ask his counsel, and
if thou do truly repent, receive his Absolution. And then doubt not in foro
Conscientiae, but thy sins be as verily forgiven on earth* as if thou did
hear Christ himself in foro iudicij, pronouncing them to be forgiven in
Heaven. Qui vos audit, Luke 10.1^.
me audit, he that hears you, hears me. Try this, and tell me whether
thou shall not find more ease in thy Conscience, then can be expressed in
words. Did profane men consider the dignity of this divine calling: they
would the more honor the Calling, and reverence Persons.

The sick man (having thus eased his Conscience, and received his Absolution)
may do well (having a convenient number of faithful Christians joining with
him) to receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to encourage him in his
Faith, to discourage the Devil in his assaults. In this respect the Conc.
Nice. Canon. 12.
Council of Nice terms this Sacrament, Viaticum, the souls provision for
her journey. And albeit the Lords Supper be an Ecclesiastical action, yet for
as much as our Lord (the first institutor) celebrated it in a Mat. 29.18 Luke
22.12.
private house, and that Saint Romans 16.5 Philem. v. 2.
Paul terms the houses of Christians, the Churches of Christ. And that Mat.
18.20
Christ himself has promised to be in the midst of the faithful, where but
two or three are gathered together in his Name.

I see no reason, but if Christians desire it (when they are not through
sickness able to come to the church) but that they should receive, and
Pastors ought to administer unto them the Sacraments at home. He shows more
simplicity then knowledge, who thinks that this savors of a private Mass.
For a Mass is called private, not because it is said in a private house, but
because (as Bishop Jewel against Harding. Artic. 1 of private Mass. fol. 4.
Jewel teaches out of I^ Massis priuatis suffic^t si vnus sit praesens,
scilicet Minister, qui populi totius personam gerit. Aquin. par. 3. quaest. 38.
art. 5.
Aquinas) the Priest receives the Sacrament himself alone without
distribution made unto others, and then it is private; although the whole
Parish be present and look upon him. There is as much difference between such
a Communion, and the Antichristian Idol of a private Mass, as there is betwixt
Heaven and Hell. For at a Communion in a private family upon such an
extraordinary occasion, Christ his institution is observed: Many faithful
brethren meet together, and tarry one for anoth^r: Christ his death is
remembered and showed; and the Minister, together with the faithful, and the
sick party, De coenae administratione itae sentio, libenter admittendum esse
hunc morem, vt apud aegrotos celebretur Communio, cum itares and opportunitas
feret. Epist. 51
do communicate. Master Calvin says, That he does very willingly admit
administering of the Communion to them that are sick, when the case and
opportunity so requires. And in Cur caenam aegrotis negandam esse non
arbitror, multa and graves causae me impellun^ Epist. 361.
another place he says, That he has many weighty reasons to compel him not
to deny the Lords Supper unto the sick. Yet I would wish all Christians to use
to receive often (in their health) especially once every month with the whole
Church; for then they shall not need so much to assemble their friends upon
such an occasion, nor so much to be troubled themselves for want of the
Sacrament. Perkins right way of dying well.
For as Master Perkins says very well, The fruit and efficacy of the Sacrament
is not to be restrained to the time of receiving: but it extends it self to
the whole time of man's life afterward: the efficacy whereof, did men thoroughly
understand: they should not need to be often exhorted to receive it.

Pastores omnes hic exorat^s vellem, Admonitio ad Pastores.
vt in huius controuersiae statum penitius introspiciant: nec fideles ex hac
vita migrantes, and panem vitae petentes; viatico suo fraudari sina^t, ne
lugubris ista in ^ijs adimpleatur lamentatio: Parv^li panem petunt, Lam. 4.4.
and non sit qui frangat eis.

As therefore when a wicked liver dies he may say to death, as Ahab said to
Eliah, Have thou found me, 2 King. 21.20.
O mine enemy? So on the other side when it is told a penitent sinner that
death knocks at the door, and begins to look him in the face; he may say of
death, as David said of Ahimaaz, Let him come, 2 Samuel 18.27
and welcome, for he is a good man, Vt moriare pius, viuere disce pie.
and comes with good tidings: he is the messenger of Christ, and brings
unto me the joyful news of eternal life. And as the Red Sea was a gulf to
drown the Egyptians to destruction, but a passage to the Israelites to convey
them to Canaans possession: so death to the wicked, is a sincke to hell and
condemnation; but to the godly the gate to everlasting life and salvation. And
one day of a Summum hominis bonum bonus ex hac vita exitus.
blessed death, will make an amends for all the sorrows of a bitter life.

When therefore thou perceiuest thy soul departing from thy body pray with thy
tongue if thou can; else pray in thy heart and mind these words, fixing the
eyes of thy soul upon Jesus Christ thy Savior.

A Prayer at the yielding up of the Ghost.
Ioh. 1.29.
O Lamb of God, which by thy blood have taken away the sins of the world,
have mercy upon me a sinner. Luke 18.13.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Amen.

When the sick party is departing, Let the faithful that are present kneel
down and commend his Soul to God in these or the like words.
O Gracious God and merciful father, Psalm. 46.1.
who art our refuge and strength, and a very present help in trouble; lift up
the light of thy favorable countenance at this instant upon thy servant, Psalm.
4.6.
that now comes to appear in thy presence. Wash away, good Lord, all his
sins by the merits of Christ Jesus blood, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
that ^ho^ may never be laid to his charge. Increase his faith, preserve and
keep safe his soul from the danger of the Devil and his wicked Angels.
Comfort him with thy holy spirit, cause him now to feel that thou art his
loving Father, and that he is thy child by Adoption and Grace. Save, O
Christ, the price of thine own blood, and suffer him not to be lost whom thou
have bought so dearly. Receive his Soul as thou did the penitent thief
into thy heavenly Paradise. Let thy blessed Angels conduct him thither as they
carried the soul of Lazarus, and grant unto him a joyful resurrection at the
last day. O (...), hear us for him, and hear thine own Son, our only
Mediator that sits at thy right hand: Romans 8.34.
for him and us all, even for the merits of that bitter death and passion which
he has suffered for us: In confidence whereof we now recommend his soul into
thy fatherly hands, in that blessed prayer, which our Savior has taught us in
all times of our troubles to say unto thee: Our Father, etc.

Thus far of the Practice of Piety in dying in the Lord.
Now follows the Practice of Piety in dying for the Lord.
THE Practice of Piety in dying for the Lord, is termed Martyrdom.

2 Cor. 12.15
Martyrdom, is the testimony which a Christian bears to the doctrine of the
Gospel, Sanguis Martyrum semen ecclesiae. Apoc. 2.10.
by enduring any kind of death: to inuit many, and to confirm all, to
embrace the truth thereof. To this kind of death, Christ has promised a
crown: Martires acceperum non dederunt coronas. Leo.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
Which promise the Church so firmly believed, that they termed Martyrdom it
self, a crown: and God to animate Christians to this excellent prize,
Martyrio coronatus. Eus. usually. (...). Apoc. 2.10. Bern. Ser. in ^est. Innoc.
would by a prediction that Stephen, the first Christian Martyr should have his
name of a crown.

Of Martyrdom there are three kinds.

First, Sola voluntate, in will only: as John the Evangelist, Frid. Nausea. in
vlt. Johan. Flores hist. ad an. 95.
who (being boiled in a Cauldron of oil) came out rather anointed then sod:
and dyed of old age at Ephesus.

Secondly, Solo opere, in deed only: Matthew. 2.
as the innocents of Bethleem.

Thirdly, Voluntate and opere, both in will, and deed: as in the Primitive
Church, Stephen, Polycarpus, Ignatius Laurentius, Romanus, Act. 7.
A^tiochianus, and thousands. And in our days, Cranmer, Latimer, Ho^per,
Ridley, Acts and Monument.
Farrar, Bradford, Philpot, Sanders Glouer, Tailor, and others innumerable,
whose fiery zeal to Gods truth, 1 Pet. 2.19. Causa non passio facis Martyrem.
Aug. Ep. 61.
brought them to the flames of Martyrdom to seal Christ's faith. It is not the
cruelty of the death: Non mortes, sed mores. Boys. Tho. Aquin. 1.2. quest. 19.
art. 6.
but the innocence and holiness of the cause that makes a Martyr; neither is
an erroneous conscience a sufficient warrant to suffer Martyrdom: because
Science in Gods word must direct conscience in man's heart; for they who killed
the Apostles, in their erroneous consciences thought they did God good service.
Ioh. 16.2.
And Paul of zeal breathed out slaughters against the Lords Saints: Act. 9.1.
Phil. 3.6.
Now whether the cause of our Seminary Priests and Jesuits, be so holy, true
and innocent; as that it may warrant their conscience to suffer death, and to
hazard their eternal salvation thereon; Epistola ad Romanos, is now Epistola
in Romanos.
let Paul's Epistle written to the Ancient Christian Romans, (but against our
new Antichristian Romans) be judge: And it will plainly appear, that the
doctrine which Saint Paul taught to the ancient Church of Rome is ex diametro
opposite in ^6 fundamental points of true Religion: to that which the new
Church of Rome teaches and maintains? For Saint Paul taught the Primitive
Church of Rome:

1 That our election is of Gods free grace, and not ex operibus praeuisit. Romans
9.11. Romans 11.5.6.

2 That we are justified by faith only without good works. Romans 3.20.28. Romans
4.2. etc. Romans 1.17.

3 That the good works of the Regenerate, are not of their own condignity
meritorious, nor such as can deserve heaven. Romans 8.18. Romans 11.6. Romans 6.23.

4 That those books only are Gods Oracles and Canonical Scripture which were
committed to the custody and credit of the Jews. Romans 3.2. Romans 1.2. Romans
16.16. such were never the Apocrypha.

5 That the holy Scriptures have Gods authority. Note, that the Scripture
says, and God says: the Scripture concludes and God concludes, is all one
with Paul.
Romans 9.17. Romans 4.3. Romans conferd. Romans 11.3.2. conferd with Gal. 3.22.
Therefore above the authority of the Church.

6 That all, as well Laity as Clergy that will be saved, must familiarly read or
know the holy scriptures, Romans 15.4. Romans 10.1.2.8. Romans 16.26.

7 That all Images made of the true God are very Idols. (...), Having reference
to what he spoke before, Romans 1.13. of Images.
Romans 1.23, and Romans 2.22. conferd.

8 That to bow the knee religiously to an Image, or to worship any Creature,
is mere Idolatry, Romans 11.4. and a lying seruic^. Romans 1.25.

9 That we must not pray unto any but to GOD only, in whom we believe, Romans
10.13.14. Romans 8.15.27. therefore not to Saints and Angels.

10 That Christ is our only Intercessor in Heaven. Romans 8.34. Romans 5.2. Romans
16.27.

11 That the only Sacrifice of Christians, is nothing but the spiritual
sacrificing of their Souls and Bodies to serve GOD in holiness and
righteousness. Romans 12.1. Romans 15.16. Therefore no real sacrificing of Christ
in the Mass.

12 That the religious worship called dulia, as well as l^t^i^, belongs to
God alone. Romans 1.9. Romans 12.11. Romans 16.18. conferd.

13 That all Christians are to pray unto God in their own native language.
Romans 14.11.

14 That we have not of our selves, in the state of corruption, freewill unto
good, Romans 7.18. etc. Romans 9.16.

15 That Concupiscence in the Regenerate, is sin, Romans 7.7.8.10.

16 That the Sacraments do not confer grace ex opere operato, but sign and
seal that it is conferred already unto us. Romans 4.11.12. Romans 2.28.29.

17 That every true believing Christian may in this life be assured of his
salvation. Romans 8.9.16.35 etc.

18 That no man in this life since Adams Fall, can perfectly fulfill the
Commandments of God. Romans 7.10. etc. Romans 3.19. etc. Romans 11.32.

19 That to place Religion in the difference of meats and days is
superstition. Romans 14 3.5.6.17 23.

20 That the imputed righteousness of Christ, is that only that makes us just
before God. Romans 4.9.17.23.

21 That Christ's flesh was made of the Seed of David, by Incarnation: not of a
wafer-cake by Transubstantiation. Romans 1.3.

22 That all true Christians are Saints: and not those whom the Pope only does
canonize. Romans 1.7. Romans 8.27. Romans 15.31. Romans 16.2. and 15. Romans 15.25. etc.

23 That Ipse, Christ, the God of Peace: and not Ips^, the Woman, should bruise
the Serpents head. Romans 16.20.

24 That every Soul must of conscience be subject, and pay Tribute to the
Higher Powers, that is, the Magistrates which bear the sword. Romans 13 1.2.
etc. and therefore the Pope and all Prelates must be subject to their Emperor,
Kings, and Magistrates, unless they will bring damnation upon their Souls, as
Traitors, that resist God and his Ordinance. Romans 13.2.

25 That Paul (not Peter) was ordained by the grace of God to be the chief
Apostle of the Gentiles, and consequently of Rome, the chief It seems by Romans
15.20.29. and the whole last Chapter, that the Christians who were in Rome
before Paul came thither, were converted by those Preachers whom he had sent
thither before him: for he calls ^ them his helpers, ver. 3.9. kinsmen, ve. 7.13
fellow prisoners, ver. 7. the first fruits of Acha^a, where he had preached,
ver. 5. all familiar to him, and to Tertius, who writ the Epistle, ver. 22. And
therefore they came so joyfully to me to Paul at the Market of Appius, hearing
that he was coming toward Rome. Act. ^8.15.
City of the Gentiles. Romans 15.15.16.19.20 etc. Romans 11.13. Romans 16.4.

26 That the Church of Rome may err and fall away from the true Faith: as well
as the Church of Jerusalem, or any other particular Church. Romans 11.20.21.22.

And seeing the new vpstart Church of Rome teaches in all these, and in
innumerable other points clean contrary to that which the Apostles taught the
Primitive Romans; let GOD and this Epistle judge betwixt them and us, whether
of us both stand^ in the true ancient Catholic Faith, which the Apostle
taught the old Romans. And whether we have not done well to depart from them,
so far as they have departed from the Apostles doctrine: and whether it be
not better to return to S. Paul's truth, then still to continue in Romes error.
And if this be true; then let Jesuits and Seminary Priests take heed and
fear, least it be not faith, but faction: not truth, but treason: not
religion, but rebellion, beginning at Tyber, and ending at Tyburne, which is
the cause of their deaths. And being sent from a troublesome Apostaticall See,
rather then from a peaceable Apostolical Seat; because they cannot be
suffered to persuade Subject, to break their Oaths, and to withdraw their
Allegiance from their Sovereign; to raise rebellion; to move invasion; to
stab and poison Queens; to kill and murder Kings; to blow up whole States
with Gunpowder, they desperately cast away their own bodies to be hanged and
quartered: and (their souls saved if they belong to GOD) I wish such honor to
all his Saints that sends them. Psalm. 149.9.
And I have just cause to fear, that the miracles of Lypsius two Ladies,
Bluntstones Boy, Garnets Straw, and the Maids fiery Apron* will not suffice to
clear, that these men are not murderers of themselves, Vt Alexandri causa it is
qui illam scire cuptunt patefiat: Iudicatus est Ephesi ab Aemilio Frontino
Proconsule, non propter professionis nomen, sed propter perpetrata latrocinia,
cum iam esset praenaricator (and proditor.) Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap.
18.
rather then Martyrs of Christ.

And with what Conscience can any Papist count Garnet a Martyr, when his own
Conscience forced him to confess, that it was for treason, and not for
Religion that he dyed? But if the Priests of such a Gunpowder Gospel be
Martyrs; I marvel who are Murderers? If they be Saints, who are Scythians?
and who are Canibals, if they be Catholics?

But leaving these; let us (to whose fidelity the Lord has committed his true
faith, 1 Timothy 6.20.
as a precious deposit^^) pray unto GOD: that we may lead a holy life,
answerable to our holy Faith, Prou. 24.21.
in Piety to Christ, 1 Pet. 2.17.
and obedience to our King: that if our Savior, Acts 5.41.
shall ever count us worthy that honor, to suffer martyrdom for his Gospels
sake: be it by open burning at the Stake, as in Queen Mary's days: or by
secret murdering, as in the Inquisition house: or by outrageous massacring, as
in the Parrisian Mat^ens:) we may have Grace to pray for the assistance of his
holy Spirit, so to strengthen our frailty, and to defend his cause: as that
we may seal with our deaths the Evangelical truth which we have professed
in our lives. That in the days of our lives, Luke 11.28.
we may be blessed by his Word: In the day of death, Apoc. 14.13
be blessed in the Lord: and in the day of Judgment be the blessed of his
Father. Mat. 25.34.
Apoc. 22.20
Even so, grant Lord JESUS. Amen.

A divine Colloquie between the Soul and her Savior, concerning the
effectual merits of his dolorous passion.
Soul. LORD, wherefore did thou John 13.4.
wash thy Disciples feet?


Chr. To teach thee how thou should prepare thy self to come to my Supper.


S. Lord, why would thou wash them John 13.14.
thy self?


C. To teach thee Humility, if thou will be my Disciple.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou before thy death Luke 22.19
institute thy last Supper?


C. That thou might the better remember my death* and be assured, that all
the merits thereof are thine.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou go t^ such a place, where John 18.2.
Judas knew to find thee?


C. That thou might know, that I went as willingly to suffer for thy sin,
as ever thou went est to any place to commit a sin.


S. John 18.1.
Lord, wherefore would thou begin thy Passion in a Garden?


C. Genesis 1.3.
Because that in a Garden thy sin took first beginning.


S. Lord, wherefore did thy three select Disciples Mat. 26.40.
fall so fast a sleep, when thou beganst to fall into thy agony?


C. To show that I alone wrought the work of thy Redemption. Isai. 63.5.



S. Lord, why were there so many plots and snares laid for thee? Mat. 26.4.



C. That I might make thee to escape all the snares of thy ghostly hunter.
Psalm. 91.3.



S. Lord, why would thou suffer Judas (betraying thee) to kiss thee? Math.
26.40



C. That by enduring the words of dissembling lips: Genesis 3.4.5.
I might there begin to expiate sin where Satan first brought it into the world.


S. Lord, why would thou be sold for 30. pieces of silver? Mat. 27.3.



C. That I might free thee from perpetual bondage.


S. Lord, why did thou pray with such strong crying and tears? Mat. 26.39.
Heb. 5.7.



C. That I might quench the fury of Gods justice, which was so fiercely
kindled against thee.


S. Lord, why wast thou so afraid, Luke 22.44.
and cast into such an agony?


C. That suffering the wrath due to thy sins, thou might be more secure in
thy death, and find more comfort in thy crosses.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou pray so often and so earnest that the Cup might
pass from thee? Mat. 26.39.42.44.



C. That thou might perceive the horror of that curse and wrath, which being
due to thy sins, Gal. 3.13.
I was then to drink and endure for thee.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou after thy wish submit thy will to the will of
thy father?


C. To teach thee what thou should do in all thy afflictions: and how
willingly thou should yield to bear with patience, that cross, which thou
see to come from the just hand of thy heavenly Father.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou sweat such drops of water and blood? Luke
22.44.



C. That I might cleanse thee from thy stains, and bloody spots.


S. Lord, why would thou be taken, Luke 22.54.
when thou might have escaped thine enemies?


C. That thy spiritual enemies should not take thee, Mat. 5.25.
and cast thee into the prison of utter darkness. Mat. 22.13.



S. Lord, wherefore would thou be forsaken of all thy Disciples? Math. 26.56



C. That I might reconcile thee unto God, of whom thou wast forsaken for thy
sins.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou stand to be apprehended alone? Ioh. 18.8.



C. To show thee that my love of thy salvation, was more then the love of all
my Disciples.


S. Lord, wherefore was the young man caught by the Soldiers, Mar. 14.51.52.
and onstript of his linen, who came out of his bed, hearing the stir at thy
apprehension, and leading to the high Priest?


C. To show their outrage in apprehending me, and my power in preserving out of
their outrageous hands, all my Disciples, who otherwise had been worse handled
by them, then was that young man.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou be bound? Mat. 27.2.



C. That I might lose the cords of thine iniquities.


S. Lord, Luke 22.57*
why wast thou denied of Peter?


C. That I might confess thee before my Father, and thou might learn; that
there is no trust in man, and that Salvation* proceeds of my mere mercy.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou bring Peter to repentance by the crowing of a
cock? Luke 22.60.



C. That none should despise the means which God has appointed for their
conversion, though they seem never so mean.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou at the Cock-crowing turn and look upon
Peter? Luke 22.61.



C. Because thou might know, that without the help of my grace, no means
can turn a sinner unto God when he is once fallen from him.


S. Lord, wherefore wast thou covered with a purple roabe? Ioh. 19.5.



C. That thou might perceive that it was I, that did away thy Scarlet
sins. Isai. 18.



S. Lord, wherefore would thou be crowned with thorns? Mat. 27.29.



C. That by wearing thorns, the first fruits of the curse, it might appear:
that it is I which takes away the sins and curse of the world, 1 Pet. 5.
Apoc. 2.10.
and crowns thee with the crown of life and glory.


S. Lord, why was a Reed put into thine hand? Mat. 27.29.



C. That it might appear that I came not to break the bruised Reed. Mat.
12.20.



S. Lord, wherefore wast thou mocked of the Jews? Mat. 27.29.



C. That thou might insult over Devils, who otherwise would have mocked
thee, as the Philistims did Sampson. Judge. 16.25.



S. Lord, wherefore would thou have thy blessed face defiled with spittle?
Mat. 26.27.



C. That I might cleanse thy face from the shame of sin?


S. Wherefore Lord, were thine eyes hood-winkt with a veil? Mat. 14.65.



C. That thy spiritual blindness being removed, thou might behold the face
of my Father in heaven. Mat. 18.20.



S. Mat. 27.30.
Lord, wherefore did they b^ffet thee with fists, and beat thee with staves?


C. That thou might be freed from the strokes, and tearings of infernal
fiends.


S. Mat. 27.39.
Lord, wherefore would thou be reviled?


C. That God might speak peace unto thee, by his word and spirit.


S. Lord, wherefore was thy face disfigured with blows and blood? Ioh. 19.3.
Isay 53.2.



C. That thy face might shine glorious as the Angels in heaven. Mat. 13.43.
Mat. 22.30.



S. Lord, wherefore would thou be so cruelly scourged? John 19.1.



C. That thou might be freed from the sting of conscience, and whips of
everlasting torments.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou be arraigned at Pilats bar? Mark. 14.53



C. That thou might at the last day be acquitted before my judgment seat.


S. Lord, Luke 23.2.
wherefore would thou be falsely accused?


C. That thou should not he justly condemned.


S. Lord, wherefore wast thou turned over to be condemned by a str^nge Judge*
Mat. 27.2.



C. That thou being redeemed from the captivity of a hellish Tyrant: might
be restored to God, whose own thou ar^ by right.


S. Wherefore, O Christ, John 19.11.
did thou acknowledge that Pilate had power over thee from above?


C. That Antichrist under pretense of being my Vicar, Tit. 3.1. Romans 13 1. 1
Pet. 2.13.14.
should not exalt himself above all Principalities and Powers.


S. Lord, why would thou suffer thy passion under Pontius Pilate being a
Roman, Luke 23.^1.2. Ioh. 19.12. etc.
President to Caesar of Rome?


C. To show that the Caesarian and ^ontifician policy of Rome should chiefly
persecute my Church and crucify me in my members. Note well Apo. 11.8. and
Apo. 17.5.6.24.



S. But why, O Lord would thou be condemned? Ioh. 19.16.



C. That the law being condemned in me, Luke 23.24 Romans 8.3.
thou might not be condemned by it.


S. But why wast thou condemned; Mat. 27.24. Ioh. 19.6.
seeing nothing could be pro^ed against thee?


C. That thou might know, that it was not for my fault, but for thine that I
suffered.


S. Lord, wherefore wast thou led, to suffer out of the City? Mat. 27.33. Heb.
13.12.



C. That I might bring thee to rest, in the heavenly City.


S. Lord, why did the Jews compel Simon of Cyrene, Luke 23.26. Mat. 27.32.
coming out of the field to carry thy Cross.


C. To show the weak^nesse, whereunto the burden of thy sins brought me: and
what must be every Christans case, which goes out of the field of this world,
toward the heavenly Jerusalem.


S. Lord, why wast thou vnstripped of thy garments? Ioh. 19.23.



C. That thou might see, how I forsook all to redeem thee.


S. Lord, wherefore would thou be lift up upon a Cross? Luke 23.



C. That I might lift thee up with me to heaven.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou hang upon a cursed tree? Luke 23.33



C. That I might satisfy for the sin committed, in eating the forbidden fruit
of a tree. Genesis 2.17.



S. Lord, wherefore would thou hang between two thieves? Luke 23.33.



C. That thou my dear soul might have place in the midst of heavenly
Angels.


S. Psalm. 22.16. John 20.25.
Lord, wherefore were thy hands and feet nailed to the Cross?


C. To enlarge thy hands to do the works of righteousness, and to set thy
feet at liberty, to walk in the ways of peace.


S. Lord, wherefore did they crucify thee in Golgotha, Mat. 27.33.
the place of dead men's souls?


C. To assure thee that my death is life unto the dead.


S. Lord, why did (...) the Soldiers divide thy seamelesse coat? Ioh. 19.24.



C. To show that my church is one; without rent of Schism.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou taste vinegar and gall? Mat. 27.34.



C. That thou might eat the bread of Angels, and drink the water of life.


S. Lord, why said thou (upon the Cross) It is finished* Ioh. 19.30.



C. That thou might know that by my death, Romans 10.4.
the Law was fulfilled, 2 Cor. 3.13.
and thy redemption effected.


S. Lord, why did thou cry out upon the Cross, Ioh. 19.34.
My God my God, why have thou forsaken me?


C. Least thou being forsaken of God, should have been driven to cry in the
pains of hell, Woe and alas for evermore.


S. Lord, wherefore was there such a (...) darkness, Mat. 27.45.
when thou did suffer* and cry out ^n the Cross?


C. That thou might see an Image of those Hellish p^in^^ which I (...)
deliver thee from (...) less pains of Hell, and everlasting chains of
darkness. 2 Pet. 2.4. Iud. verse. 6.



S. Lord, why would thou have thin^ (...) bread? Ioh. 19.23.



C. That I might embrace thee more lovingly my sweet soul.


S. Lo^d, how (...) the thief that never wrought good before, Luke 23.43.
obtain Paradise upon so short repentance?


C. That thou may see the power of my death, to forgive them that repent,
that no sinner needs despair.


S. Lord, Luke 23.39.
why did not the other Thief which hanged as near thee, obtain the like
mercy?


C. Because I leave whom I will to harden themselves in their lewdness to
destruction, Romans 9.18.22.
that all should fear, and none presume.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou cry with such a loud and strong voice, Mat.
26.50.
in yielding up the ghost?


C. That it might appear that no man took my life from John 10.18.
me, but that I laid it down of my self.


S. Lord, wherefore did thou commend thy Soul into thy Fathers hands? Luke
23.46.



C. To teach thee what thou should do, being to depart this life. Ioh.
13.1.



S. Lord, wherefore did the veil of the Temple rend in twain at thy death?
Mat. 27.51.



C. To show that the Leuiticall Law, should be no longer a partition wall
between Jews and Gentiles: Ephesians 2.14. Heb. 10.19.20.
and that the way to Heaven is now open to all believers.


S. Lord, wherefore did the Earth quake, Mat. 27.51.
and the Stones cleave at thy death?


C. For horror to bear her Lord dying, and to vpbraid the cruel hardness of
sinners hearts.


S. Lord, wherefore did not the Soldiers break thy Legs, as they did the
Thieves who hanged at thy right and left hand? Exodus 12.46 Psalm. 34.21. Zach.
12.10.



C. That thou might know, that they had not power to do any more unto me,
then the Scripture had fore-tolde that they should do, and I should suffer to
save thee.


S. Lord, Ioh. 20.34.
wherefore was thy side opened with a Spear?


C. That thou might have a way to come nearer my heart.


S. Lord, wherefore ran there out of thy pierced side blood and water? Ioh.
19.34.



C. To assure thee that I was slain in deed, seeing my heart-bloud gushed
out, and the water which compassed my heart flowed forth after it, There is
about man's heart a skin called Pericardu^ containing water which cooles and
moistens the heart, least it should be scorched with continual motion. This skin
once pierced, man cannot line. Columb. Anatom. lib. 7. Horst. de not. human.
lib. 1. exerc. 8. q. 5.
which once spilt, man must needs dye.


S. Lord, wherefore ran the blood first by 1 Ioh. 5.6.
it self, and the water afterward by it self, out of thy blessed wound?


C. To assure thee of two things: first, that by my Blood shedding,
Justification and Sanctification were effected to save thee: secondly, that my
Spirit by the conscionable use of the Water in Baptism, and blood of the
Eucharist will effect in thee righteousness and holiness by which thou shall
glorify me.


S. Lord, wherefore did the graves open at thy death? Mat. 27.52.



C. To signify that Death by my death had now received his deaths wound, and
was overcome.


S. Lord, Mat. 27.60.
wherefore would thou be buried?


C. That thy sins might never rise up in Judgment against thee.


S. Lord, Mat. 27.57.
wherefore would thou be buried by two such honorable Senators, John
19.39.40.
as Nichodemus and Joseph of A^imathia?


C. That the truth of my death (the cause of thy life) might more evidently
appear unto all.


S. Lord, Ioh. 19.4. Mat. 27.60.
wherefore wast thou buried in a new sepulcher, wherein was never man laid
before?


C. That it might appear that I, and not another arose, and that by mine own
power, not by another virtue, like him who revived at the touching of
Elishaes bones. 2 King. 13.21.



S. Lord, wherefore did thou raise up thy body again? Mat. 28.6.



C. That thou may be assured that thy sins are discharged, Romans 4.25.
and that thou art justified.


S. Lord, wherefore did so many bodies of thy Saints (which slept) arise at thy
Resurrection? Mat. 27.52.53.



C. To give an assurance that all the Saints shall arise, Acts 17.31.
by the virtue of my Resurrection at the last day.


S. Lord, what shall I render unto thee for all these benefits? Psalm. 116.11.



C. Love thy Creator, and become a new creature. Gal. 6.15.



The Souls Soliloquie, ravished in contemplating the Passions of her Lord.
WHat had thou done, o my sweet Savior, and ay^-blessed Redeemer? that thou
wast thus betrayed of Judas, sold to the Jews, apprehended as a Malefactor,
and led bound as a Lamb to the slaughter? What evil had thou committed,
that thou should be thus openly arraigned, accused, falsely and unjustly
condemned before Annas and Caiaphas, the Jewish Priests, at the Iudgement-Seate
of Pilate the Roman President? What was thine offense? or to whom did thou
ever wrong? that thou should be thus pitifully scourged with whips, crowned
with thorns, scoffed with flouts, reviled with words, buffeted with fists,
and beaten with staves? O Lord, what did thou deserve, to have thy blessed
face spat upon, and covered as it were with shame? to have thy garments parted,
thy hands and feet nailed to the Cross? to be lifted up upon the cursed Tree,
to be crucified among Thieves, and made to taste gall and vinegar? and in thy
deadly extremity, to endure such a sea of Gods wrath, that made thee to cry
out, as if thou had been forsaken of God thy Father? yea, to have thy
innocent heart pierced with a cruel Spear, and thy precious blood to be spilt
out before thy blessed Mothers eyes? Sweet Savior, how much vvast thou
tormented to endure all this! seeing I am so much amazed but to think upon it!
I enquire for thine offense, but I can find none in thee: No, not so much as
guile to have been found in thy Mouth. 1 Pet. 2.22.
Thine enemies are challenged, and none of them dare rebuke thee of sin: John
1.46.
thine accusers (that are suborned) agree not in their witness: the Judge that
condemns thee, openly clears thine Innocence: Mat. 27.19.
his Wife sends him word, that she was warned in a dream, that thou wast a
just man, and therefore should take heed of doing injustice unto thee. The
Centurion that executes thee, confesses thee of a truth, to be both a just
man, and the very Son of God. The thief that hanged with thee, justifies
thee, that thou have done nothing amiss. What is the cause then, O LORD, of
this thy cruel Ignominy, Passion, and Death? I, O Lord, I am the cause of
these thy sorrows: my sins wrought thy shame, mine iniquities are the
occasion of thy injuries. I have committed the fault, and thou art plagued for
the offense: I am guilty, and thou art arraigned: I committed the sin, and
thou sufferedst the death; I have done the crime, and thou hangest on the
Cross. Oh the deepenesse of Gods love! Oh the the wonderful disposition of
heavenly grace! Oh the unmeasurable measure of divine mercy! The wicked
transgresses, and the just is punished: the guilty is let escape, and the
innocent is arraigned: the malefactor is acquitted, and the harmless
condemned: what the evil man deserves, the good man suffers: the servant
does the fault, the Master endures the strokes: What shall I say? Man sins;
and God dies. O Son of God! Who can sufficiently express thy love? or commend
thy piety? or extol thy praise? I was proud, and thou art humbled: I was
disobedient, and thou becammest obedient. I did eat the forbidden fruit, and
thou did hang on the cursed tree: I played the glutton, and thou did
fast: evil concupiscence drew me to eat the pleasant apple, and perfect
charity led thee to drink of the bitter cup: I assaied the sweetness of the
fruit, and thou did taste the bitterness of the gall. Foolish Eve smiled,
when I laughed: but blessed Mary wept, when thy heart bled and dyed. O my God,
here I see thy goodness, and my badnesse: thy justice, and my injustice: the
impiety of my flesh, the piety of thy nature. And now, O blessed Lord, that
thou have endured all this for my sake; What shall I render unto thee for all
thy benefits bestowed upon me, a sinful soul? Indeed, Lord, I acknowledge
that I owe thee already for my creation, more then I am able to pay: for I am
in that respect, bound with all my powers, and affections to love and to adore
thee. If I owed my self unto thee, for giving me my self in my creation, what
shall I now render unto thee, for giving thy self for me to so cruel a death
to procure my Redemption? Great was the benefit that thou would create me
of nothing; but what tongue can sufficiently express the greatness of this
grace: that thou did redeem me with so dear a price, when I was worse then
nothing? Surely, O Lord, if I cannot pay the thanks which I owe thee; (and who
can pay thee, who bestowest thy graces, without either respect of merit, or
regard of measure.) It is the abundance of thy blessings that makes me such a
bankerupt: that I am so far unable to pay the principal, that I cannot
possibly pay, so much as the interest of thy love.

But, O my Lord, thou know that since the loss of thine image) by the fall
of my first unhappy parents) I cannot love thee with all my might, and my mind
as I should. Therefore as thou did first cast thy love upon me, when I was a
child of wrath, and the lump of the lost and condemned world; so now, I
beseech thee, shed abroad thy love by thy spirit, through all my faculties and
affections: that though I can never pay thee in that measure of love, which
thou have deserved: yet I may endeavor to repay thee in such a manner, as thou
vouchsafest to accept in mercy; that I may in truth of heart, love my neighbor
for thy sake, and love thee above all for thine own sake. Let nothing be
pleasant unto me, but that which is pleasing unto thee. And, sweet Savior,
suffer me never to be lost nor cast away whom thou have bought so dearly, with
thine own most precious blood. O Lord, let me never forget thine infinite love,
and this unspeakable benefit of my redemption, without which it had been
better for me never to have been, then to have any being.

And seeing that thou have vouchsafed me the assistance of thy holy spirit:
suffer me, O heavenly Father, who art the Father of spirits, in the mediation
of thy Son, to speak a few words in the ears of my Lord. If thou, O Father,
despisest me for mine iniquities, as I have deserved; yet be merciful unto me
for the merits of thy Son, who so much for me has suffered. What if thou
see nothing in me but misery, which might move anger and passion? Yet behold
the merits of thy Son, and thou shall see enough to move thee to mercy and
compassion. Behold the mystery of his incarnation, and remit the misery of my
transgression. And as often as the wounds of thy Son appear in thy sight; Oh
let the woes of my sins be hid from thy presence. As often as the redness of
his blood glisters in thine eyes, Oh let the guiltiness of my sins be
blotted out of thy Book. The wantonness of my flesh provoked thee unto wrath,
Oh let the chastity of his flesh persuade thee unto mercy, that as my flesh
seduced me to sin, so his flesh may reduce me unto thy favor. My
disobedience has deserved a great revenge, but his obedience merits a greater
weight of mercy: for what can man deserve to suffer, which GOD made man, cannot
merit to have forgiven? When I consider the greatness of thy passion, then do
I see the trueness of that saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save the chiefest sinners. Dare thou, then O Caine, say, that thy sins are
greater then may be forgiven? Thou lie like a murderer. The mercies of one
Christ are able to forgive a whole world of Caines, if they will believe and
repent. The sins of all sinners are finite, the mercies of GOD are infinite.
Therefore, O Father, for the bitter death and blody passion sake, which thy son
Jesus Christ has suffered for me; and I have now remembered unto thee: pardon
and forgive thou unto me all my sins, and deliver me from the curse and
vengeance, which they have justly deserved. And through his merits, make me, O
Lord, a partaker of thy mercy. It is thy mercy that I so earnestly knock for.
Neither shall mine importunity cease to call and knock, with the man that would
borrow the loaves: until thou arise and open unto me thy gates of grace. And
if thou will not bestow on me the loaves, yet* O Lord, deny me not the crummes
of thy mercy, and those shall suffice thy hungry handmaide.

And seeing thou requirest nothing for all thy benefits, but that I love thee
in the truth of my inward heart (whereof a n^w creature is the truest outward
testimony) and that it is as easy for thee to make me a new creature, as to
bid me to be such. Create in me, O Christ, a new heart, and renew in me a right
spirit: and then thou shall see (how mortifying old Adam and his corrupt lusts)
I will serve thee as thy new creature; in a new life, after a new way; with a
new tongue, and new manners, with new words and new works, to the glory of thy
Name, and the winning of other sinful souls unto thy Faith by my devout
example.

Keep me for ever, O my Savior, from the torments of Hell, and tyranny of the
Devil. And when I am to depart this life, send thy holy Angels to carry me,
as they did the soul of Lazarus into thy kingdom. Receive me then into that
most joyful paradise, which thou did promise unto the penitent thief: which
at his last gasp upon the Cross, so devoutly begged thy mercy and admission
into thy kingdom: Grant this, O Christ, for thine own names sake: to whom (as
it is most due) I ascribe all glory, and honor, praise, and dominion, both now
and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
GEntle Reader, some faults have escaped unespied, they are not many. Where
thou meetest them, lend thy helping hand to mend them, these few especially:

Page 49. line 18. read differs not page 3^3 in (...) Ego^, Ego* page 63^* last
line, as (...) page 68^. li. 16. for internal re^ integrall.

FINIS.

