TWO SERMONS THE ANGEL GVARDIAN.

THE LIGHT ENLIGHTENING.

PREACHED BY JOHN BAILEY ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S CHAPLAINS, GVARDIAN of Chrrists
Hospital in Ruthyn, and sometimes Fellow of Exeter Coll. Oxon.

AC: OX

SA PI ET FELICI printer's device of John Litchfield, incorporating the arms of
Oxford University (apparently not in McKerrow as such)

AT OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield Printer to the Famous University, A. D.
1630.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JEWS Lord Bishop of Bangor.
THe Angel of God which has hitherto protected your Lordship from many most
known and imminent dangers, tarry round about you and still deliver you. I am
the eldest son of your body, this is the eldest birth of my mind. By you I
have been consecrated unto Gods service, and do consecrate this mine again
by you unto his glory and the Churches good.

From my Chamber in Exon Coll. November. 6. Anno Dom. 1630. Your Son in all
obedience to be commanded. JOHN BAILEY.

PSALM. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him
and delivers them.
OF all Gods Creatures man is the most excellent and noble. With things
Inanimate, we have a being, and above them Sense, and above them Reason.

Man's nature by the hypostaticall union with the second person in the sacred
Trinitye is highly exalted above all principalityes and powers.

In heaven we shall be (...) as the Angels. Here we do, and there we shall
serve God with them, but in via God has ordained them to serve us. Matt. 22.30.
They are all ministering spiritts ordained for their sakes who are the elect of
God. Heb. 1.14.


It is not improbable, that pride was the Angels. sin. And their sin was
to refuse this service, not to adore the man Christ Jesus, when that decree of
the Incarnation was divulged, And let all the Angels of God adore him.

In regard of this same communion an (...) the Apostle calls it Ephesians. 1. ( but
Arith metice we are to understand it so, it is not rhetorice,) (...),
coadvnationem vox denotat, Angelorum and hominum veluti in vnam summam; as
Cameron observes. In regard of this communion, we have with the Angels here,
and shall have with them in the life to come here after, our Church does
yearly celebrate one day, this day that we may instruct, and the people may be
instructed concerning them.

That we may then do opus diei in die suo, the work of the day upon the day
appointed for the work; the text we are to entreat of, you shall find psalm:
34.7.

The Angel of the Lord encampeth etc.

Wherein we do observe, 1. That there is an Angel that does protect us, and
that by an encamping round about us, not all in general, but us, that fear
God, so the text is limited, They do encampe themselfes about those that sear
God and that secondly for their deliverance, and that is the end they aim at
in it.

The Angel of the Lord encampeth etc.

Semper sunt spiritus, non Angeli, sed quando missi (...): in Heb: and (...) in
Gr: does signify a messenger, Mal. 3.1.
and in this sense our Savior Jesus Christ although the Lord of Angels is
called the Angel of the Covenant in Malachi for he was Shilo missus a patre
sent with authority as well to meritt as to preach reconciliation unto men with
God in him.

And likewise the Ministers of the word and Sacraments in scripture are called
Angels Math: 11.10. Rev. 1.20. for they are missi a filio, Ite in vniuersum
mundum, to them (says the Apostle) is committed the Ministry of
reconciliation merited by him.

And again know ye not (as says the Apostle 1. Cor. 6.3.) that we shall
Judge the Angels, where by the Angels we understand the Diuills; for they are
missi a Deo sent of God to execute his judgment against the wicked, and for the
probation or trial also of the elect as in the story of Job.

Now to distinguish those Angels of whom my text intreates from Men-Angells or
ministers as we do call them. They are said to be spirits Heb: 1.7. he makes
his Angels spirits. And again to distinguish them from Christ the Lord of
Angels they are therefore said to be made, or Created spirits: And to
distinguish them from the Angels of darkness they are said to be his
Angels, Angels of light, Angels of God (in scrip:) by way of excellency.
The Angel of the Lord it is my text does speak of, for so the scripture does
usually term all whatsoever is excellent to be of God, because that all
excellency is from God.

1 Now in the general of protecting Angels, we must needs speak first of the
diverse orders or degrees of Angels, that in the second place we may know of
what order or degree those Angels are unto whom this office of our protection
is assigned. And then thirdly we shall enquire whether every one man has his
own special Angel as a Custos or a Guardian Angel to protect him. And
fourthly why it so pleased God to use the Ministry of Angels when of himself
he is Almighty; and therefore able, and as willing as able to deliver them
that fear him from danger; for he is most merciful again unto all those that
put their trust in him. For the first you know how the schoolmen, led on by
Dionisius Areopagita who by Valla, Erasmus, and all the learned world, is and
was long since branded for a counterfeite, have sorted the whole heavenly
society of Angels into three Hierachies every Hierachie containing three
orders and every order indefinite although not infinite numbers of Individual
spirits.

The first Hierarchy is of Seraph: Cherub: and Thrones. The second of
Dominations, principallities, and powers, the third of virtues, Arch-Angells,
Angels. So that the 3 Hierarchies contain nine orders or species or degrees
of Angels. And that it is so they prove it thus.

Distinct and diverse names cannot but argue diverse and distinct orders,
according to the number of names which in scripture are given unto the Angels;
but there are nine names only in scripture given unto the Angels, therefore
there can be no less, nor may there be more then those nine orders of Angels
only, which you have heard before recited.

We will let the proposition pass, but it is given, it is not granted,
Hieron. l. 2. advers. ^^v. c. 15.
for all that, and it shall be given, because as Hyerom: speaks, Sine causa
est diversitas nominum vbi non est diversitas meritorum. It may seem strange
that we should read of Arch-Angells, if there be no inferior order or
degree or sort of Angels under them.

But the assumption fails utterly to infer the exact number of nine only.
For the Angels are moreover honored in scripture with the name of Elohim, and
the sons of God in regard of the near Communion they have with him. They are
also called spirits as ready for to serve him. A flaming fire ardent to love
him, Job. 38.7. Heb. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 4.10.
and in regard of us moreover they are called watchmen, continually (as my
text speaks) encamping themselves about us.

To this it is replied, that these we have now lastly spoken of are names in
general given unto all the Angels. True, But is not the name of Angel it
self a general name? and why then should they make a distinct order of
Angels from the rest?

We do not deny but that there are diverse orders and degrees of Angels, God
is the God of order noe author of Confusion, he does not approve of ataxie.
There is order among all the creatures of God, even in hell it self there is
some unruly order, there is a Prince of darkness.

One star differreth from another in glory. 1. Cor. 15.40. and there are
diverse mansions prepared for the, Elect in heaven, and yet the elect shall be
(...) as the Angels be there. Math. 22.3.
It is not therefore unlike but that as the stars, and as the Saints, the
Angels may differ in mensura gloriae, among themselves in degrees of glory,
non gaudij though not of joys.

But to define (as you heard the schoolmen do) in particular wherein this
same diversitye consists as if they had come down from heaven to tell men
upon earth what order was kept there; we say things secret belong unto the Lord
our God, but things revealed, only unto us. Or with Saint Hierome dicant qui
possunt, let them say it that can prove it I confess I do not know it. Boni
Theologi est semper aliquid ignorare. This is ignorantia originaliter
invincibilis and therefore not Culpabilis. Why is it Esaias. 6.2. that the
Angels are there described thus, with one pair of wings they cover their
faces, and with an other pair their feet? doubtless to teach us, that we in
via are no way able to prye into the nature of the Angels, no nor the Angels
in patria into the essence and nature of God, who as he is infinite may not be
comprehended by them; they are finite. Difference there is of glory among the
Angels, but what that difference is we know not, the schoolmen will tell you
if they lie not; and further, of what order and degree those Angels are, which
(as my text speaks) do encampe themselfes about us. Which is the 2d point we
proposed to entreat of.

To this end they do distinguish those. 9. orders of Angels we speak of
into 2. general sorts. Some they make of the privy Chamber, as it were, and
some they place in the Lobbye some they tell us are assistant, and some are
ministering spirits. Assistant spirits are such as do continually reside about
and attend upon the throne of God. Ministering spirits are such as are sent out
or employed on errands in the inferior world.

Now the 4. first orders of seraph: Cher: throanes and dominations they state
to be assistant. The 5. later to be Ministering spirits. And yet I take it to be
no contradiction to say, That the same Angel, at the same time though not in
the same respect, is both ministering and assistant too: Greg. l. 2. Mor: c. 3.
faciem patris semper vident for their assistancye and tamen ad nos veniunt for
their ministrye. But Saint Paul makes this a mere tale Heb. 1.14. Where he
tells us of the Angels, that they are all ministering spiritts. Omnes sunt
administratorii spiritus, Heb. 1.14.
and ordina sic literam says Hugo Cardinalis upon that text,) read it thus.
They are all etiam de superiori ordine of the highest degree ministering spirits
sent out and that missione exteriori a Cherub: it was that was set to keep
the way unto the tree of life, and a seraphim it was who with a cole in his
hand did some times touch the Prophets lips. Esaias. 6.6.

Intelligere autem proprie debemus ea scripturae loca quae sine incommodo sic
possunt intelligi, (it is S. August. rule,) we must understand what the
scripture speaks according to the letter of the text, if we find no plain in
convenience of contradiction unto other places in it. Gen: 3.24.


You have heard then that there is no order of Angels (Supposing that there be
orders of Angels) exempted from encamping as my text speaks, about them that
fear God.

The third thing that we are to entreat of is whether there be one Angel
Guardian only or more assigned to attend us, pro singulis generum you must take
it.

The Platonists did teach (as I have read in Proclus) that every man had three
special Angels in this kind to attend upon him.

The 1. was sacer demon and he had chargde over the reasonable soul, to
inspire good thoughts and wholesome counsels, and to incline the will of them
over whom their chardge was, to perform that which they did suggest for good.

The 2d was Genius. And he had chardge over the outward life to promote and
further them unto whom he was assigned toward the attaynement of that fortune
indefinitely good or bad unto which as they spoke, the borne was destinate. He
therefore that had a good Genius was proverbially said to be been natus; Albae
Galinae filius, happy and fortunate in all his actions.

The 3d was spiritus Professionis and his office it was to help and further
men in their special callings and trades of life. Hence it was that if the
profession which men betook themselves unto, was also agreeing to the Genius
of their nativity or birth, such men (they taught) must needs be excellent and
singular in what they did apply themselves unto, as having both their Genius
inclining, and their spiritus Professionis to help them in it, vis vnita
fortior. But if any man should attempt a thing; Invita Minerva, contrary unto
his Genius, do his spiritus Professionis the best it can, he shall never evade
rare or excellent therein.

This I have related, not that I do aproue it, but that you may see, how that
the heathen did know ingenerall, although they erred in the particular
Concerning this doctrine of Angellicall protection we are now to entreat of.
Est Chorus Indigetum mortalibus additus agris, that we are protected by the
Angels that is true, but whether by one or more that is questioned by more
then one.

For sometimes in scripture we read of many Angels appointed unto one man,
sometimes of one Angel unto many men, and sometimes of one Angel unto one man
too.

Genesis 32.1. We read that Jacob saw a whole host of Angels round about him.
And 2. Kings. 6.17. Elishaes servant saw the mountains full of horses and
fire; full of Angels, about the Prophet.

Again. We read that an Angel, in the singular was sent to deliver all
Israel (and they were plural) out of Egypt. And at the seige of Jerusalem by
Senacherib, God sent an Angel that slew 185000. of the Assirians their enemies
in one night.

And again it is not improbable that unto every one man their is some one
particular Angel ( pro certo asserrere non Ausum, so Calvin, sententiam magis
probabilem dicit Zanchius Aquinas noster reformatus) it is not I say improbable
but that unto every particular man is assigned some particular Angel as his
Guardian and protector.

Our savior intimates thus much Math: 18.10: their Angels Distinctiue, so the
fathers do expound it, behold the face of my father which is in heaven. And
when S. Peter (whom the disciples thought to have bin fast enough in Herod's
prison) came unto the door where they were assembled Act. 12.15. they said that
it was not Peter, but his Angel, and they spoke doublesse according to the
opinion then commonly received in the Church, The Evangelist relates it as
approving of it. S. Peter did not after wards reprove them for it. The Jews
are of the opinion unto this day; and so are all the ancient fathers of the
Christian Church, nor may we but give great reverence unto their opinions in
such things as do not opugne the rule of faith, as this does not.

When as therefore we cannot deny but that there are many, and must needs
grant that there is one Angel at the least, assigned to attend, to defend, to
protect those that fear God.

The modern learned do subscribe unto Zanchius his conclusion. That there is
one Angel ordinarily assigned unto every one man as a Tutor or protector of
him in all his ways, via pueritiae, adolescentiae, aetatis virilis, mortis, ab
ovo ad malum even from his birth unto his death. but for our greater confort,
as it fared sometime with Jacob and Elisha when many enemies do bandie
themselves against us, we must believe (if we fear him as they did) God will
send whole legions and Hosts of Angels to assist us. But because God is most
merciful and therefore willing, and Almighty and therefore able of himself
without any such intermediat encamping of Angels to preserve them that fear
him: Nor are we to multiply entityes without necessitye: This doctrine may
peradventure seem to be superfluous; we proposed therefore to answer this
objection in the last place, which we do endeavor. thus.

Agents subordinate, we say, may well concur in the working of one and the
same effect. It Is God we grant that does protect us ratione g^ber nationis,
but by his Angels he does protect us ratione executionis, as the Fathers
speak.

For look into my text and it tells you not simply of any Angel, but of the
Angels of the Lord, with an addition, for the Angels perform not this office
unto us, but as they are sent and enabled for this cause from God. They encampe
not of themselves but where their emperor commands them.

Agens per medium est minus efficax in agendo, you may tell me that an agent
working by some intermediate means and not immediately or by it self is less
powerful for the effect. Sivtatur medio propter necessitatem. It Is true (we
say) if he do use that means as of necessity; But the omnipotency of God
needs not therein the ministry of Angels. God by his power can of himself
protect his servants without the means of any of his Creatures, he can arm
the meanest of them with sufficient strenght to free them from the greatest
dangers

1 But to express his singular love, his favor, and care over them that fear
him, Angels must not be exempted from this employment.

2 It is a glory and honor unto them that they should be employed in their
Creators service.

3 It makes moreover for the order and beauty of the world that things
superior less subject to mutation and to change should govern and rule the
inferior world more pliable to alterations. I will hear the heavens says God
Hos: 2.22. and the heavens shall hear the earth

Astra regunt homines and regit astra Deus. The stars rule men and God rules
them. And again for our comfort when peradventure (as Jacob travailing to
Haran) we are desolate and harbourlesse, forsaken and left of all, yet open we
but then the eye of faith, and we shall see as he did, the Angels of God
ascending, and descending, as ready to go, and to return with us, and God
himself standing above the ladder, Luke. 12.7. Luke 21.18.
by whose guidance the course of all our life is ordered to a hair; for they
are numbered, and not one of them can fall without his privitie and knowledge.

This of the Angel protecting. The 2. particular in the first general,
concerns, the manner how the Angels do protect us, and that is by encamping
themselves, and that round about us, as my text speaks.

This their castrametation, their encamping, or pitching of their tents about
us, must needs implie, that there are enemies always ready to assault us and
that the holy Angels are always ready to defend us, and that our life is but
militia a warefare upon earth.

The Devil as a roaring lion goes about night and day seeking whom he may
devour. 1 Pet. 5.8.
And the Angel of the Lord (says my text) encampeth, round about them that
fear him, the devil cannot harm them, for the Angels do excel in
strength. Psa. 103.

Seven Devils may assault thee; as well as Mary Magdalen, yet fear them not,
fear God, and his Angel shall give thee deliverance from them. Magna satanae
potentia est, sed sub Dei omnipotentia est. For behold they are bound and they
are bound, in chains, so that they may not do all that they can do, neither
can they do, all that they would do, Job. 26.
facit quod potest Diabolus Deo permittente, quod potest non facit deo
prohibente.

But shall we stand still, and be spectators only, Genesis 1.26. Gal. 1.2. 2.
Cor. 5.20. 1. Cor. 1.30.
whilst the Angels do thus bestirre themselves about us? He who made us by
his own power, and has redeemed us by his own most precious blood, and
justified us by his own free grace; he will not save us, without our own good
works, Deus vult hoc esse propter hoc, sed non propter hoc vult hoc esse.

We must arm our selves, put on the whole armor of God, as it is described
Ephesians: 6. and being armed, we must not fly, but stand to it, stand steadfast
in the faith we must, and we must not stand idle, noe, we must resist the
Diuill James. 4.7. and then shall the Angel of the Lord assist us, and God
himself (the fight being ended) crown us, vincenti dabitur Corona.

This of the manner how they protect us. The 3. thing we proposed to entreat
of, is who they are that are protected by the Angels, Those are they that
fear God as my text speaks.

There is a filial, and a servile fear, the one is the gift of the spirit,
arising from the love of God, the other is of our own corrupted nature,
arising from the guilt of sin. The one respects or looks upon God, as a
Father, the other as a judge, a good man fears to offend God, and a bad man
when he has offended fears to be punished of God. The Angel of the Lord
encamping round about them that fear him, bidds us not fear him with any
servill fear, for they encampe themselves about us for our deliverance from
evils. But that same filial fear, must needs remain in all them about whom
the Angels may encampe themselves. The Angel of the Lord therefore (says my
text) encampeth round about them that scare him.

Here, the schools dispute 1. whether those that do not fear God, have not
their Angels to protect them, and again whether those that do fear God, are
always attended by their Angels.

To the 1. they answer, that the wicked, those that are most wicked, and they
do instance even in Antichrist himself, have notwithstanding their Angel
Guardians with them.

1 To with-hould their malice, that they become not so extremely wicked, and
evil, as otherwise they would be. 2. in curbing or bridling in, the power of
the Divill, that he does not instantly as they for their wickedness deserve,
and he for his malice does desire destroy them. But were it so, yet we shall
find, that even this protection of the wicked by the Angels does most strongly
reflect upon the Godly.

For doubtless, it cannot be supposed, that the malice of the wicked is
restrained, that they should not be wicked, but that they by their wickedness
should not too much annoye the elect of God. Did the Angel do you think,
keep Balaam that he should not curse Israel, because he should not curse? no
it was because he should not curse Israel only. Nor is it again for their own
sake, that the Divill has not at all times power to confound the wicked. No,
but because it pleases God to continue them, as he did the Cananites in
Israel, to exercise the patience of his Elect, Apoc. 2.10.
and for the greater glory which shall be given unto them that overcome.

The 2. doubt respects those that do fear God themselves, for whereas (...),
the best of man falls not once but seven times, not in a year, but in a
day, so that the fear of God is not always before their eyes, quoad actum,
who yet quoad habitum we cannot say but that they do fear God. The question
is, whether at such times, the Angels do still continue, or else, forgo
their charge.

1 They do never leave to preserve our life from the malice of the Divill, and
from those many casual dangers, we are daiely subject to, and every man
alive, has had often experience of.

But sometimes, it pleases God to withdraw them from us: so that we fall then,
either in malum Culpae by sin, or in malum poenae for sin; then they do
leave us, but they do not then forsake us.

They stand aloof of, when we fall, but presently they come in again to take
us up. When we sin, they are at hand, to move us to repentance; for though
they hate our sins, yet they do love our souls; Nor can the divills malice
be so intense to harm us, as is their love to help us. Night and day he
travaileth, to effect his ends and the holy Angels, do continually encampe
themselfes about us, to defend us from them. The Angel of the Lordenca^peth,
as noting a pe^rpetuall being of them in the present, for our delivera^ce from
them. And that is the last thing we proposed to entreat of.

This deliverance, which Gods holy Angels do afford unto us, respects
either the body, or the soul. For the body, we read that they do fight for
us, and drive our enemies back from us Apoc: 12.7. Dan. 10.19.

Sometimes again, by way of rescue, they take us from them, when we are
overtaken with them; so did they deliver Lot out of Sodom, and Peter out of
Prison.

Sometimes, as Daniel in the Lions den, and the three Children in the fiery
furnace, they do preserve us from evil, although we live even in the midest
of evils. The one was preserved from the power of the Lions, though in the
Lions den. The other from the power of the fire, though in a fiery surnace.
And sometims as they dealt with Theodorus in Socrates, (of whom you may read
also in Theodoret,) and S. Paul in the peril of shipwreck, and Jacob in his
going and returneing from Mesopotamia, they are with us in trouble to comfort
and to assist us. Theodorus though he sweat for it If that same sweat be wiped
of with an Angels handkercheif, will seem rather a pleasure then a pain unto
him. So for the body. As for the soul they do persuade the will mediante
illuminatione, by illumining the mind, and that mediante phantasia by
suggesting good thoughts, and wholesome counsels, suggerunt bonum non ingerunt,
hortantur ad bonum non creant so they instructed Dan. 8.15. the Apostles Acts.
Dainel. 1.10. St John Apoc. 19.10.

And sometimes again though not immediatlye and by themselves, Soc. l. 20. c.
19. Theod l. 3.19.
yet by the ministry of men they deal thus kindly with us for our souls
health.

It was an Angel that did send Philip to instruct Candaces Eunuch Acts. 8. It
was an Angel that advised Cornelius to send for Peter to preach unto him Acts.
10. It was their Angel, (so the text tells us) that called forth Paul to
preach the gospel in Macedonia Acts. 16.

So is God good unto us thus to ordain such noble and excellent creatures to
attend upon us, creatures spiritual to attend on mortal, innocent on
sinful, the most glorious and excellent creatures upon men made of no better
mold then dust.

They do attend upon us, and they do see all our most secret actions: tu
autem audes illo Angelo custode present, quod me present non auderes?

As they rejoice at our weldoings, so are they aggreeved at out sins, tanquam
Apes fumo, as bees by smoke, so are they driven from us by them.

When we will not attend their holy counsels, but co^tradict and thwart their
good adviseme^ts, then when they cannot further us in good: Their whole
endeavor (as before I said) is that we become not so extrea^ly wicked as of
our selves without them we should be.

Lord what is man, ADAM made of earth that thou art thus mindful of him or
ENOSH the miserable son of man that thou so regardest him.

To God be Glory. etc.

FINIS.

