



The Manual of prayers, or the prymer in English, set out at length, whose
contents the reader by the prologe next after the Calendar, shall sone perceive
and there in shall se brefly the order of the whole book.

Set forth by Ihon late bishop of Rochester at the commandment of the
right honorable Lord Thomas Cru^wel, Lord Privy seal Vicegerent to the
Kings hyghnes.



The prayer of a ryghteous man. etc. Jacob 1.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum

John late Bishop of Rochester unto the right honorable, Thomas LOERE Crumwell
Lord Pryuye seal, viceregent to the kings hyghnes, wyssheth and desires
graet peace and health in God the father, by the holy Ghost through our LORD
Jesus Christ.
ALthough that the so^dry and diners sorts of prymers (my special good Lord
and singular friend) here before set forth as well (in many things)
supersticions, as derogatyue unto the true honor of god, might have enforced
(and did in deed) me to have desired a sincere correccion herein, yet the
fervent desire that I perceive in your lordeshyp to ye true honor of God, the
unite and weal of the Christian cominalte, has much more (as the prourrbe
says) set the spur unto the hasty runner and in manner compelled me to show
some token of my dew service toward gods honor, and toward your favorable
goodness, in setting forth this rude and simple work, as unto whom your much
and manyfolde favor has constrained and bound me, next unto almighty god and
my sovereign Lord the king, to your pressed and assidious service al my life
days. And for as much as we have of time in experience that a work takes no
small estimacion with the commen people, both of the aucthor and specially of him
unto whom it is dedicated. For this cause have I this my rude and gross
enterprise dedicated unto your lordeshyppes name, nod because I thought it to
be so exquisite and of so exact a judgment (as the learned would desire) and
worthy of so wise and learned a patron, but rather commyttyng it to the most
wysest judgment of the kings most sapient council, whereof ye are, that if so
be it should seem unto the same a thing worthy or mete to be had in common
usage, then by the judgment of the same approved, it might the rather and with
the more auidite be received of the people, if not, yet to be a toke^ of my
poor good will, and desire that I bare unto such a thing to be done of some
other, that are of more perfect judgment and lyterature, and also to be a
token of the of fyce and service that I owe unto gods sincere honor and to
your lordeshyppes sauourable goodness.

The prologe to the calendar.
THe straungenes of this Calendar, gentle reader, shall not move the to
meruayll very much the cause ones known, for the new fashion her of has a
double commodite. The one is brefnes, for where the other calendar had a great
nombre of saints without profit to the unlearned, this has but only such
feasts which are kept holy day and the Epistle and Gospel that are red in
the Church on such holy days set forth in the calendar. The second is that
where the no^bre of saints were set, there have we appointed wekely certain
places of the scripture, which the church does use to read at Matens, that the
reader may know what scripture the Church does use through out the year, and to
study and use the same. This the^ is the order of the calendar, the days of
the month are set in the mids of the side of the lefe, and on the right
hand are the saints days, and directly on the other side of the letter,
whereon the feasts fall, are set the epistle and gospel of the feast and so of
all feasts of Saints. As for example new years day falls on. A the first
day of the month on the one side of A. is the name of the feast, and of the
other side the Epistle and Gospel of the day. We have also appointed the
Epistle and Gospel for every sunday, but because that the sunday falls not
upon one letter always, we have set in the void places of the calendar the
names of the sondayes with their epistle and Gospel, so that the reader may
know first the name of the sunday, and seek in the calendar and then shall he
find there the epistle and Gospel.

An Almanacke for.xvij. years.
The date of the years. Easter day. Golden nombre. Dominicall letter. Lepe
year. M.D.xxxix vi. Apryll i E M.D.xl xviii. March ii C D M.D.xii xvii.
Apryll iii B M.D.xlii ix. Apryll iiii A M.D.xliii xxv. March v G M.D.xliiii
xiii. Apryll vi E F M.D.xlv v. Apryll vii D M.D.xlvi xxv. Apryl viii C
M.D.xlvii xviii. Apryl ix B M.D.xlviii viii. Apryll x G A M.D.xlix xxi. Apryll
xi F M.D.l vi. Apryll xii E M.D.li xxix. March xiii D M.D.lii xvii. Apryll
xiiii B C M.D.liii ii. Apryll xv A M.D.liiii xxiiii. March xvi G M.D.lv xiiii.
Apryll xvii F

KL January has.xxxi. days. The moon has.xxx. days.

New years day. A For the Tit. ij And when Luc. ij b On the sunday
within.viij. day of Christmasse, when ever it fall Read the epistle to tit.
and.ii. to Tim. c d And I say, Gala. iiij. And his Lu. ij e For the. Tit. ij.
When herod. Mat. ij The epyphany f Esa. lx. When Jesus was bor. Mat. ij g On
the sunday next after.xij. day. Read the epistle to the Romans A Rise up.
Esa. lx. The next day. Io. i b On ye second sunday after.xij. day I
beseech. To. xij. And when he Lu. ij c Read the epistle to the Corinthia^s d On
ye.iij. sunday, if there fall so many Seeing we have Romans xij e f And the
third Ioh. ij Read the.ij to the Cor. g On ye.iiij. sunday, if there fall so
many between.xij. day and going out of ma. A Read this weke to the Ga. and
the.i to Timo. b Be not wise in your Romans xiiij c When Jesus was Mat. viij d On
ye.v. sunday, if there be so many between Septuagesima and.xij. day e Read the
ephe. and Phi. f Owe nothing Romans xv g And he entered Mar. iiij Read to the
Thessalo. and to the Col A On ye.vi. sunday, if there be so many between twelfe
tide and septuagesima. b c Now therefore as elect i. Col. iij On this so^daye
the church begins to red ye scriptur in order d The kingdom of heaven is
Mat. xiij e f On the sunday when marriage goes out. g A Perceive ye not how
that i. Cor. ix b For ye kingdom of heaven Mat. xx c

KL February has.xxviii. days. The Moon has.xxix. days,

On Candelmasse day d Fast Malachy the third chapter e Ca^delmasse day. And
when the time of their Luc. ij f On the sunday called sexagesima g For ye
suffer fools i. Cor. ix A Read this weak with in ye church Genesis. When
much people were. Mat. xi b c d e f g On the sunday called quinquagesima A Read
Genesis this weke Though I speak with i. Cor. xiij b He took unto him the.xij
Lu. xviij c On Ashwednisdaye the epistle d Joel the second Chapter e When ye
fast be not Mat. vi f g On the first sunday in lent, whether it fall hye or
low, read this day this. A Read this weak still the genesis b We as helpers
therefore ij. Cor. vi c Then was Jesus led Mat. iiij d On saint Mathyes day e
Fast Malachy the third chapter f S Mathyes day And when the time of their
Luce. ij g The second sunday in lent Forthermore beseech i. These. iiij A
Read still with the church genesis. b And Jesus went thense Mat. xv c

KL March has.xxxi. days. The Moon has.xxx. days.

d e f g Read with the church genesis still this weke. A On the third sunday
in lent. b Be ye followers of God Ephe. v c And he was a casting out Luc. xi d
e f g Read here with the church the second book of Moses called Exodus. A On
mydlent sunday. b For it is written that Abraham. Ga. iiii c After that went
Jesus Ioh. vii d e f g Read this weke with the church the prophet Jeremy. A On
passion sunday. b But Christ being the hye Heb. ix c Which of you can rebuke
me Io. viii d e Fast. f The annu^cyacyon of our Lady g On the annunciacion of
our Lady. A Esaye the seuent Chapter. b And in the. vi month the Luce. i Read
still Jeremy. c On Palm sunday. d Let the same mind be in you Phil. ii e Ye
know yt after.ij. days Mat. xxvi f

KL Apryl has.xxx. days. The Moon has.xxix. days.

On Easter day. g Fast Purge therefore ye old seven i. Cor. v A Easter day
Mary magdalene and Mary Mar. xvi b Read this weak the acts of ye apostles. On
the monday in easter weke. c Which preaching Actuum. x d Behold two Luc.
xxiiii e On tewsdaye. f Ye men and brethren Actu. xiii g Jesus himself Luc.
xxiiii A Read this weke with the church the Apocalypses of Ihon. On the
wednisdaye. b Ye men of Israel Actuum. iii c After that Jesus Ioh. xx d On the
first sunday after Easter. e For all that i. Ioh. v f The same day at Ioh.
xx g Read this weak still the Apoca. On the second sunday after Easter. A
Christ also suffered for our i. Pet. ij b I am a good shepeherde Ioh. x c Read
this weke the epistle of James and of Peter both On the third sunday after
Easter, d Derely beloved I beseech i. Pet. ii e After a while ye shall not Ioh.
xvi f On saint Georges day g My brethren count James. i A S. Georges day I
am a true vine Ioh. xv b On saint Marks day c S Unto every Ephe. iiii d I am
a true Ioh. xv e Read this weak yecanonicall epistle of Iho^ and Jude On
the.iiij. sunday after Easter f Every good gift James. i g But now go I my
way Ioh. xv A

KL May has xxxi. days The Moon has.xxx. days

S. Philyp and James day. b On S. Philip and James day c Sapi. v. And he
said unto. Ioh. xiiij d On the sunday before ye cross days. e And se yt.
Ia. i. Verily verily. Io. xvi f On the mondaye in the cross weak Read of the
Acts of ye Apostles this weke g Knowledge your. Ia. v. If any. Lu. xi A On the
teusdaye. b Esaias. xix. And Jesus sat Mar. xii c On the wednisdaye. Fast d And
the. Act. iiij. These worcester. Io. xvij The Aascencion day e On the ascencion day
f In ye first. Act. i. After that. Mar. xvi g On ye sunday after the ascencion
day A Be ye.i. Pet. iiij. But when Ioh. xv b On wytsondaye even c It fortuned.
Act. ij. If ye lo. Io. xiiij d On wytsondaye e When ye fyfty. Act. ii. If a
man. Io. xiiii f On the mondaye g And he co^mou^d. Act. x. For god Io. iii Read
of the Acts A On the teusdaye b When the. Act. viij. Verily verily Io. x c On
the wednisdaye d But Peter. Act. ii No man can. Io. v e On Trinite sunday f
After this I looked and behold Re. iiii g There was a man of the Ioh. iii Read
of the Acts. A On Corpus Christi day b That which I gave unto ii. Cor. xi c
For my flesh is meat in deed Ioh. vi d

KL June has.xxx. days The Moon has.xxix. days.

e f On the first sunday after trinite g For God is love in this i. Ioh. iiii
A Read in ye first book of the kings with the church this weke. There was a
certain rych Luc. xvi b c d e f On the.ii. sunday after trinite g Meruayl not
my brethren i. Ioh. iii A Read with the church this weke the second book of
the kings. A certain man ordained Luc. xiiij b c d e On the. iii sunday
after trinite f Submyt therefore your i. Pet. v g Then resorted unto him Luce.
xv A Read this weak the third. On saint Ihon Baptistes day b Esaias the.xlix.
Chapter c Elisabeth time was come Luce. i d On the.iiii. sunday after trinite
e For I suppose that the Romans viii f Fast Be ye therefore merciful Luce. vi g
S. Ihon baptist On the.v. sunday after trinite A In conclusion be ye all i.
Pet. iij b Read the iiij. book It came to pass as the people Luc. v c On
saint Peter's and Paul's day d Fast In the time of Herod the Act. xij e S.
Peter and Paul When Jesus came into Math. xvi f

KL July has.xxxi. days. The Moon has.xxx. days.

g On the.vi. sunday after Trinite Read the kings yet A Remember ye not at
all Roma. vi b For I say unto you except Mat. v c d e f g Read this weke ye
Cronicles called Paralipo. A On the.vij. sunday after Trinite b I will speak
grossly because Romans vi c In those days when Mar. vij d e f g On the.viij.
sunday after Trinite Read ye Cronicles still A Therefore brethren we are Romans
viij b Beware of false prophets Mat. vij c d e On saint Mary Magdalens day f
Proverbs.xxxi. Chapter Mary Magdalens day g And one of the pharyses Luce. vij
A On the.ix. sunday after Trinite Fast. b That we should not lust i. Cor. x
Saint James day c There was a certain Luc. xvi d On saint James the Apostles
day. Read the Chronicles e Now therefore ye are no Ephe. ij f Then came to him
the Mat. xx g On the. x sunday after Trinite. Read the Chronicles A Ye know
that ye were i. Cor. xij b And when he was come Luc. xix

KL August has.xxxi. days. The Moon has.xxx. days.

c d e f g Read here the proueruerbes with ye church On the.xi. sunday after
trinite A Brethren as pertaynyng i. Corin. xv b And he put forth this Lu. xviij
c On the name of Jesus day d The name of Jesus Then Peter of the Actuu^. iiij e
While he thus thought Math. i f On the.xij. sunday after trinite. g Read here
ecclesiastes Such trust have we ij. Cor. iij A And he departed again Mar. vij
b Fast On the Assumpcion of our Lady. c Assumptio^ of our lady Ecclesiasticus
the.xxiiij. Chapter. d It fortuned as he went Lucx e f g Read here the hystory
of Job. On the.xiij. sunday after trinite A To Abraham and his sede Gal, iiij
b Happy are the eyes Luce, x c d Fast On saint Barthylmewes day e S.
Bartylmewes day Read the hystorye of Toby. Now therefore ye are no Ephe. ii f
And there was a strife Luce, xxij g On the.xiiii. sunday after trinite A I
say walk in the spirit Gala. v b And it chaunsed as he went, Lu. xvii c d B.
iii, e

KL Septembre has.xxx. days The Moon has.xxix. eayes.

f g On the.xv. sunday after trinite Read here yet Toby A If we live in
sprete: let us Gal. v b No man can serve two Math. vi c d Fast e On the
Natiuite of our Lady Natiuite of our lady f Ecclesiasticus, the.xxiiij. Chapter
g This is the book of the Mat. i Read Toby A On the.xvi. sunday after trinite b
Wherefore I desire that ye Ephe. iij c And it fortuned after that Luc. vii d e f
On the.xvij. sunday aftr trinite g I therefore which am in Ephe. iiij Read
here the story of Iudyth. A And it chanced that he Luc. xiiij b c Fast. d On
saint Matthewes day S. Matthewes day e Ezechyell the first Chapter. f And as
Jesus passes forth Mat. ix g On the.xvij. sunday after trinite. A I thank my
God always i. Cor. i Read here the hystory of Hester b When the Pharyses had
Mat. xxij c d e On saint Mychaels day f He sent and showed Reave. ij g The same
time the disciples Mat. xv

KL October has.xxxi. days. The Moon has.xxx. days.

On the.xix. sunday after trinite A Read the.i book of the makebites. And be
ye renewed in the Ephe. iiij b And he entered into a ship Mat. ix c d e f g On
the.xx. sunday after trinite A Read the.i book of the makebites. Take heed
therefore that ye Ephe. v b The kingdom of heaven is Mat. xxij c d e f g Reed
the second book of the makebites On the.xxi. sunday after trinite A Finally
my brethren be Ephe. vi b And there was a certain Ioh. iiij c On saint Lukes
day d S. Lukes day Ezechiel the first chapter. e After these things the
Lord Lu. x f g Read the second of the makebites. On the.xxij. sunday after
trinite. A And I am surely certifyed of Phi. i b Therefore is the kingdom Mat.
xviij c d On saint Simon and Judas day e For we know well that Romans viij f
Fast. This command I you that Ioh. xv g Simon and Judas day On the.xxiij.
sunday after trinite A Brethren follow me, and Philip. ij b Read Ezechyel.
Then went the Pharyses Mat. xxij c

KL Nouembre has xxx. days The Moon has.xxix. days

Fast Alhallowe^ day. d On the Alhallowen day e And I saw another aungel.
Reu. vii f When he saw the people Mat. v g On the.xxiiii. sunday after
Trinite Read Ezechyel A For this cause we also Colloss. i b While he thus spoke
Math. ix c d e f g On the.xxv. sunday after trinite Read Ezechyel A Jeremy
the.xxxiii. chapter b Then Jesus lift up his Ioh. vi c d e f g Read Ezechyell
A b c d e The sunday next unto S. Andrews day is ever the first sunday of
Aduent be it before or after. f g Read Isaie with the church. A This also we
know Roma. xiii b When they drew nygh Math. xxi c On saint Andrews day.
Fast d For the belefe of the heart Roma. x e As Jesus walked to the Mat. iiii

KL December has.xxxi. days. The Moon has.xxx. days

f g On the second sunday in aduent. A Read Isaie still. What so ever things
are Romans xv b And their shall be signs. Lu. xxi c On saint Nicolas day. d S
Nicolas Ecclesiastici.xliiii. chapter. e Fast For likewise a certain. Mat. xv.
f Concepcio^ of our lady On the conception of our Lady g Ecclesiastici.xviij.
Chapter. A Read Isaie still. This is the book of the Math. i b On the third
sunday of aduent. c Let men this wise esteem.i. Cor. iiij d When Ihon being in
preson. Mat. xi e f Read Isaie still until the first so^daye after new year
On the.iiij. sunday of aduent. g Rejoice in. Phil. iiij. And this. Ioh. i A On
S. Thomos the apostles day. b Now therefore ye are no. Ephe. ij c But Thomas
one of the.xij. Io. xx d Fast On Christmasse even. e Saint Thomas day Paul
the. To. i. The birth Mat. xvi f On Christmasse day. g God in time. Heb. i. In
ye begin. Io. i A Fast. On saint Steuens day. b Christmasse And Steven full of
faith. Act. vij c S. Steue^. Wherefore behold I send. Mat. xxiij d S. Ihon On
saint Ihons day. e Innoce^tes. Eccle. xv. Follow me peter tur. Io. x f On the
Innocents day g And Ilo. Reu. xxiiij. Behold. Mat. i A

I Have here set for the (most dear reader) a rude work, whom it has
pleased me to call the manual of prayers, because it is so commenly had in
hand with the people, which before was called the prymer, because (I suppose)
that it is the first book that the tender youth was instructed in. And in this
prymer were contained a great number of unnecessary prayers, and some very
superstycyous, but in especyall therein was the chief suffrages, that is to
say, the matens with the hours, euensonge with complene, appointed to be of
our Lady. For this cause so called (as some unlearned has both feigned and
taught) that she should use to say it, but how false and folyshe this is,
let the learned judge, but rather it was so called, because that all the
anthemes, hymns, lessons, responces, chapters, and collectes, were thought to
be of our Lady, yet were there many scriptures dystorted unto our Lady,
which in their own natyue sense are nothing mente of her, but of Christ, the
wisdom of the father. As for an example at the first how the Chapter is, in
omnibus requiem quesiui, written Ecclesiastici. xxiiii. with the chapters of
the hours and of complene. For this cause have I thought it my bond deute
toward Gods true and sincere honor to set forth such a manner of
prymer, wherein might be no such distorted scripture or false honor of that
most immaculate mother of God, least the youth should learnd to take such
scriptures to be of our Lady, which are of God, and to give such praise to her
as should only be given to God, but to know first the true honor of God,
and to know the honor that belongs to that blessed vyrgyne Mary and to the
holy saints. And for as much as the prymer is not had in hand of so many, but
all they, ye every Christian is bound first to learn to lead a christian
life, therefore have I here in the process of this prymer in manner poynted and
set forth the true life of a Christian, that as often as he shall handell his
prymer, he may so often learn and remember the true life toward God, which
life consysteth princypally and wholly, in faith, in prayer, and in good works,
and these three are not only taught in the three lessons of Matens, but al so in
the three parts of this prymer so divided. For in the first part thou art
taught things of faith, where in thou haste the Symbol or Creed of Athanase,
the.xij. articles or Creed, a lesson of each of the four evangelists,
putting the in remembrance of the faith that thou art bound to have to the
gospels and word of God. In the second part thou haste things concerning
prayer. First the beads, the pater noster, and the salutacyon, a prayer to be
said in the morning, grace before dinner, grace after dinner, grace before
supper, grace after supper, a prayer when thou goeste to bed, a prologe to
the Matens, with the, hours, than the Matens and hours, a prologe to
euensonge, Euensonge, a prologe to Complene, Complene, Salve rex misericordie,
O bone Jesus, Conditor celi, the.xv. Does, with their prologe, the seven
Psalms with the prologe, the Letany with the prologe, a treatise of the
sacrament of the altar with three prayers, the Dirige with his prologe. In the
third part thou haste things conce^nynge works, as the commandments set
forth at large with a declaracyon of the kinds of works, these have I set
out, both in English and Laten for the more part to the end that the devout
(for his choice) may read whether he will. But where there shall seem to the
reader in the Psalms any dyfference between the Laten and English, let the
same remember that the English is accordaunte to the Hebraicall Psalter
translated by saint Jerome, and the laten is the usual Psalter, which in some
places are not correspondent in all things, and thus have I joined them, that
such as delyteth in the English, might have the playner sentence, and that
the other that reads the Laten should not think that we should bring in any
strannge psalmony.

Moreover where as the Psalms and anthemes, hymns, lessons, which were
right good, are now changed, this did I, not that I should think them
worthy of reieccyon, other that I would be noted to be of such rare and
excellent judgment, that I would correct the use of the church so long
continued, but rather this have I enterprysed, because that in the said
anthemes, hymns, and lessons are such sentences, and in the said psalms is
such abscuryte and darkness, that the rude and the unlearned (which has
most the use of such kind of books as this is) might not comprehend the
misteryes of them, and here by had the less devotion, having therefore now
psalms, anthemes, lessons and hymns of more plain sentence, they may better
understand the same, and in understanding shall have more contemplacion and
devotion.

To avoid prolixite (which often time decays devotion) the great number of
memoryes of the saints used in the Matens, of the which some does plainly
derogate the honor of god, is omytted.

I omytted also the great number of saints commenly set forth in other
prymers in the Letany, not because that I would go about to teach here in,
the people that they should not pray to saints, other that I do mystrust the
holiness of the saints, that are here omytted, but that they (according to ye
kings graces iniunction) should have the greater devotion in the suffrages that
follows in the letany then in nombrynge so many saints.

In the Dirige set forth in other prymers, were made anthemes, responses, and
lessons applied for the dead which seemed more to be lamentacions of the
myserye of man's life then the prayers for the dead. I thought it conueniente
to change the same, and to declare by the three first lessons, and responses,
the miserable state of ma^s life, by the second, the condition of the
sepulture and by the three last lessons, to declare the resurrection general
that the devout reader encombred with the mysery of this present life, by
faith and hope of the last resurreccyon might with the more paciens
tolerate this journey abydyng Christ the judge of quycke and dead, which
lives and reygneth everlasting. So be it.

The Symbol or Creed of the great doctor Athanasius daily read in the
church.
WHo so ever will be saved before all things, it is necessary that he hold
the catholyke faith.

Which faith, but if every man will keep whole and inuiolate, without doubt he
shall eternally peryshe.

This truly is the Catholyke faith, that we worship one God in trinite, and
the trinite in unite.

Neither confoundynge the persons, Neither seperatynge the substance.

The person of the father is one, the person of the son another, the person
of the holy ghost another

But of the father, of the son, and of the holy gooste, there is no
divinity, equal glory to eternal majesty.

Such as is the father, such is the son, such is the holy ghost.

The father is uncreate, the son uncreate, the holy ghost is uncreate.

The father is immesurable, the son immesurable, the holy ghost immesurable.

The father is everlasting, the son everlasting, the holy ghost
everlasting.

And notwythstandynge there be not three everlasting but one everlasting.

Even as there be not three uncreate, not three unmeasurable, but one uncreate and
one unmeasurable.

In like manner is the father almighty, the son almighty, and the holy ghost
almighty.

And yet be they not three almyghtyes, but one god almighty.

So the father is god, the son god, the holy ghost is god.

And yet be there not three gods, but one God.

So the father is the Lord, the son the Lord, the holy ghost the Lord.

And yet be they not three Lords but one Lord.

For as we be compelled by the christian verytie to confess seperatly every
one person to be God and Lord.

So are we prohybyte by the Catholyke religion of Christ's faith, to say that
there be three gods or three Lords.

The father is made of none, neither created, nor gotten.

The son is from the father alone, neither made nor created, but gotten.

The holy ghost is from the father, and the son, neither made, created nor
gotten, but procedyng.

And so is there but one father, not three fathers: one son, not three sons,
one holy ghost, not three holy goostes.

And in this Trinite, there is none before or after another, nothing more or
less, but all the three persons be coeterne, and coequall to themself.

So that by all ways as now it has been above said, the Trinite in unite,
and the unite in trinite may be worshypped.

He therefore that will be saved, let him understand this of the Trinite.

But it is necessary unto everlasting health, that every Christian believe also
faithfully the incarnacion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It is therefore the right faith, that we believe and confess that our Lord
Jesus Christ the son of God is God and man.

He is God by the substance of the father gotten before all worlds, and he is
man by the substauce of his mother borne in the world.

Perfect God, perfect man being of a soul reasonable and of flesh humayne.

Equal to the father by his godhed, less than the father by his manhed.

Which though he be God and man, yet is there not twain, but one Christ.

Truly he is one not by the tournyng of his godhed into manhed, but by
assumptynge of his manhed into godhed.

Being one to all ententes, not by cofusion of substance, but by unite of
person.

For as the reasonable soul and the fleshly body is or makes one man, so God
and man, is one Christ.

Which suffered death for our salvation descended to hell, and rose fram death
the third day.

Which ascended to heavens sytteth at the right hand of god the father
almighty, from thence shall he come to judge the quycke and the dead.

At whose coming all men must rise with their bodies, and shall give
account of their own propre deeds.

And they that have done well, shall go into ever lasting life, they that have
done evil into everlasting fire.

This is the catholyke faith, which except every man faithfully and steadfastly
do believe, he ca^ not be saved.

The Creed, or the twelfe Artycles of the Christen says. The first article.
I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. The second
article. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. The third article.
Which was conceived by the holy gooste, borne of the virgyn Mary. The fourth
article. Suffered under Ponce Pylate, was crucyfyed, dead, buried, and
descended into hell. The.v. article. And the third day he arose again from
death. The.vi. article. He ascended into heaven and sytteth on the right hand
of God the father almighty. The.vii. article. From thence he shall come to
judge the quycke and the dead. The.viii. article. I believe in the holy ghost.
The.ix. article. The holy catholyke church. The.x. article. The communion of
saints, the forgyuenes of sins. The.xi. article. The resurrection of the
body. The.xii. article. And the life everlasting. So be it.


The Gospel of Saint Matthewe Mencyonynge the incarnacion of Jesus Christ.
THe birth of Christ was on this wise. When his mother Mary was married to
Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child by the holy ghost.
Then Joseph her husband being a perfect man and would not bring her to
shame, but was minded to put her away secretly. Nevertheless while he thus
thought, behold the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream,
saying: Joseph the son of David, fear not to take unto the Mary thy wife.
For that which is conceived in her is of the holy ghost. She shall bring
forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. For he shall save his
people from their sins. All this was done to fulfill that which was spoken of
the Lord by the prophet saying. Behold a maid shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son and they shall call his name Emmanuell, which is by
interpretacion God with us. Now when Joseph awoke out of sleep he did as the
angel of the Lord bad him, and took his wife unto him, and knew her not till
she had brought forth her first borne son, and called his name Jesus.

A lesson of the Gospel of S. Ihon declarynge the passion of our master
Christ. Ihon.xviii.
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his discyples over
the brouke Codron, where was a garden, into the which he entered with his
disciples. Judas also which betrayed him, knew the place for Jesus often times
resorted thither with his disciples. Judas than after that he had received a
bond of men, and mynesters of the high Prester and Pharyses, came thither
with lanternes and fire brandes and weapons. Than Jesus knowing all things
that should come on him, went for the, and said unto them: Whom seek ye?
They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto them: I am he. Judas
also which betrayed him stood with them. But as soon as he had said unto
them, I am he, they went backwardes, and fell to the ground. And he asked them
again, whom seek ye? They said Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered: I said
unto you, I am he. If ye seek me, let these go their way, that the saying
might be fulfilled, which he spoke: Of them which thou gave me, have I not
lost one. Simon Peter had a swearde, and drew it, and smote the high prestes
servant, and cut of his right ear. The sernauntes name was Malchus. Than
said Jesus unto Peter, put up thy swearde into his shethe: shall I not drynkc
of the cup, which my father has given me? Than the company, and the captayde,
and the ministers of the Jews took Jesus and bound him, and led him away to
Anna first: for he was father law unto Cayphas, which was the high priest
that same year. Cayphas was he that gave counsel to the Jews that it was
expedient that one man should dye for the people. And Simon Peter followed
Jesus, and another disciple that disciple was known of the high pressed and went
in with Jesus into the Palace of the high pressed. But Peter stood at the door
without. Than went out that other disciple which was known of the high pressed,
and spoke to the damsel that kept the door, and brought in Peter. Than said
the damsel that kept the door, unto Peter. Art not thou one of this ma^s
disciples? He said: I am not. The servants and the ministers stood there and
had made a fire of coals for it was cold, and they warmed them selves. Peter
also stood among them, and warmed himself. The high pressed asked Jesus of his
disciples and of his doctrine. Jesus answered him: I spakeopenly in the
world. I ever taught in the Synagoge and in the temple, where as the Jews
resorted, and in secret have I said nothing, why askeste thou me? Are them
which heard me, what I said unto them. Behold they can tell what I said.
When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers, which stood by, smote Jesus
on the face, saying: Aunswereste thou the high priest so? Jesus answered
him: If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil? If I have spoken
well, why smytest thou me? And Annas sent him bound unto Cayphas the high
priest. Simon Peter stood, and warmed him self. And they said to him: art
thou not also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said: I am not. One of
the servants of the high priest (his consyne, whose ear Peter smote of)
said unto him: Did not Ise the in the garden with him? Peter denied it again,
and immediately the cock crewe. Than led they Jesus from Cayphas into the hall
of judgment. It was in the morning, and they them selves went not into the
judgment hall, least they should be defiled, but that they might eat the
Paschall Lamb. Pylate than went out unto them, and said: what accusacyon
bring you against this man? They answered, and said unto him: If he were not
an evil doer, we would not have delivered him to the. Than said Pylate unto
them: Take ye him, and judge him after your own law. Than the Jews said
unto him: It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. That the words
of Jesus might be fulfilled which he spoke sygnyfyenge what death he should
dye. Than Pylate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus and
said unto him: art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus answered: Sayeste thou
that of thy self, or did other tell it the of me? Pylate answered: Am I a
Jew? Thine own nation and high prestes have delivered the unto me. What have
thou done? Jesus answered: My kingdom is not of this world If my kingdom were
of this world, than would my ministers surely fight, that I should not be
delivered unto ye Jews, but now is my kingdom not from hence. Pylate said
unto him: Art thou a king? Jesus answered: Thou say that I am a king. For
this cause was I borne and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear wytnes unto the truth. And all that are of the troth hear my voice.
Pylate said unto him: What thing is troth? And wha^ he had said that, he went
out again unto the Jews, and said unto them. I find in him no cause at all,
ye have a custom, that I should deliver you one lowse at Easter. Will ye that I
lowse unto you the king of the Jews? Than cried they all again, saying: Not
him, but Barrabam. That Barrabas was a robber. Then Pylate took Jesus and
scourged him. And the soldiers wound a crown of thorns, and put it on his
head. And they did on him a purple garmente, and said: Hayle king of the
Jews. And they smote him on the face. Pylate went forth again and said unto
them: Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know, that I find no
fault in him. Than came Jesus forth wearynge a crown of thorn and a robe of
purple, and Pylate said unto them. Behold the man. When the high prestes and
ministers saw him, they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pylate said
unto them. Take ye him and crucify him. For I find no cause in him. The Jews
answered him we have a law, and by our law he ought to dye because he made
himself the son of God. Wha^ Pylate herd that saying: He was the more
affrayde, and said unto Jesus, whence art thou? But Jesus gave him none
answer. Than said Pylate unto him: Speak thou not unto me? Know thou
not that I have power to crucify the, and I have power to lowse the? Jesus
answered, thou could have no power at al against me, except it were given
the from above. Therefore he that delivered me unto the, is more in sin. And
from hence forth, sought Pylate means to lowse him. But the Jews cried,
saying. If thou let him go, thou art not Cesars friend. For who so ever make
the him self a king, is against Caesar. When Pylate herd that saying, he
brought Jesus for the, and sat down to give sentence, in a place called the
Pauement, but in the Hebrew tongue Gobbatha. It was the Sabbath even, which
falls in the Easter feast, and about the Syxte hour. And he said unto the
Jews: Behold your king. They cried, away with him, away with him,
crucyfie him. Pylate said unto them. Shall I crucifye your king. The high
prestes answered we have no king but Caesar Than delivered he him unto the^ to
be crucyfyed. And they took Jesus and led him away. And he bare his cross and
went forth into a place, called ye place of dead men's sculles (which is named
in Hebrewe Golgatha) where they crucyfyed him: and with him two other on either
side one, and Jesus in ye mids. Pylate wrote his title, and put it on ye
cross The writing was, Jesus of Nazareth, king of the Jews. This title read
many of the Jews. For the place where Jesus was crucyfyed, was nyghe to the
city. And it was written in Hebrew Greek, and Latin. Than said the high
prestes of the Jews to Pylate. Write not king of the Jews, but that he
said, I am king of the Jews. Pylate answered and said: What I have written,
that have I written. Than ye sold yours wha^ they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments and made four parts, to every souldyer a part, and also his cote.
The cote was without seem, wrought upon throughout. And they said one to
another: Let us not divide it, but cast lottes who shalhaue it. That ye
scriptur might be fulfilled, which says: They parted myrayme^t amo^gea the^,
and on my cote did cast lottes: And ye soldyers did such things in deed. There
stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister Mary ye wife of
Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple
standing, who^ he loved, he said unto his mother: Woman, behold thy son.
Tha^ said he to the disciple: Behold thy mother. And from ye hour ye disciple
took her for his own. After that wha^ Jesus perceived that al things were
performed, yt the scriptur might be fulfilled he said: I thyrst. There stood a
vessel full of vynegre by. And they filled a sponge with vynegre, and wound
it about with ysope, and put it to his mouth. As Soon as Jesus had received of
ye vynegre he said: It is fynyshed. And bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.
The Jews tha^ because it was ye Sabbath even, ye the body should not remain
upon ye cross on the Sabbath day (for that Sabbath day was an high day)
besought Pylate yt their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken
down. Tha^ came the souldyers, and brake the legs of the first and of ye
other, which was crucified with Jesus. But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs, but one of the souldyers
with a spear, thruste him into the side, and forthwyth came out blood and
water. And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true. And he
knows that he says true, that ye might believe also. These things were done
that ye scripture might be fulfilled: ye shall not break a bone of him. And
again an other scripture says: They shall look on him, whom they pearsed.
After that Joseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for
fear of ye Jews) besought Pylate, that he might take down the body of Jesus.
And Pilate gave him license. And there came also Nicodemus, which at the
beginning came to Jesus by night, and brought of myrre and aloes myngled
together, about an hundred pound wayght. Tha^ took they the body of Jesus, and
wound it in lynnen clothes with the odoures, as the manner of the Jews is to
bury. And in the place where Jesus was crucyfyed, was a garden, and in ye garden
a new sepulcher, wherein was never man laid. There laid they Jesus because of
the Jews Saboth even, for the sepulcher was nyghe at hand.

The versycle. Thou that suffredest for us. The answer. Lord have mercy on
us.


A prayer.
O Lord which have displayed thine hands and fete, and all thy body on a
cross for our sins, and suffredest ye Jews to set a crown of thorn on
thy head, in despyte of thy most holy name. And for us sinners dyddeste
sufire five grievous wou^des, give us this day and ever the use of light,
sense, and understanding of penance, abstinence, paciens, humilite, and
chastity, and a pure conscience evermore. By the Jesus Christ sauyoure of the
world, which lyuest and reygnest with the father, and the holy ghost, God,
World without end.

O Lord for thy great mercy and grace,
Help thy people, that so feign would have,
Thy holy Gospel preached in every place,
And that thou thy flock may save.
From the danger of eternal fire,
For which all Christen people pray and desire.
So be it.

A lesson of the Gospel of Saint Luke mencionynge the resurrection of Christ
Luc. ^^iii^.
But upon one of the Sabbothes very early in the morning, they came unto the
Sepulcher, and brought the spices which they had prepared, and certain women
with the^. Nevertheless they found the stone rolled away from the
sepulcher, and went in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. And it
happened as they were amassed thereat, behold there stood by them two men in
shynynge garments. And they were afraid, and cast down their faces to the
earth. Then said they unto the^: What seek ye? the living among the dead?
he is not here, he is risen up? Remember how yt he told you when he was yet in
Galyle, and said: The son of man must be delivered into the hands of
sinners, and be crucyfyed, and the third day rise again. And they remembered
his words, and went from the sepulcher, and told all this unto the eleven
and to all the other. It was Mary Magdalene and Iohanna, and Mary James, and
the other with them, that told this unto the Apostles. And their words seemed
unto the^, as though they had been but fables, and they believed them not. But
Peter arose and ran to the sepulcher, and stouped in, and saw the lynnen
clothes laid by the^ selves and departed. And he wondered within himself at
that which had happened.

Thanks be to God.

A lesson of the Gospel of Saint Mark mencyonynge the ascenscion of Christ.
Mar. xvi.
AT the last, as the eleue^ sat at the table, he showed himself unto them, and
rebuked their unbelief, and the hardness of their heart because they believed not
them which had seen him risen. And he said unto the^: Go ye your way into all
the world, and preach the Gospel unto all creatures. Who so believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: But who so believes not shall be damned. As for the
tokens which shall follow the^ that believe, these are they: In my name shall
they cast out deuels: Speak with new tongues: drive away serpents: And if
they drink any deadlye thing, it shall not hurt the^: They shall lay their
hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. And the Lord after that he had
spoken unto the^, was taken up into heaven, and sytteth at the right hand of
God. And they went out, and preached every where. And the Lord wrought with
the^ and confyrmed the word with tokens followynge.

The second part of this Manual called prayer.
An order and form of bidding of the bedes by the kings commandment.
YE shall pray for the whole Congregation of Christ's Church, and specially
for this church of England, wherein first I commend to your devout prayers
the kings most excellent majesty, supreme head immediately under God of the
spiritualty and temporaltie of the same church, and for the prosperity of the
noble Prince Edward his son.

Secondely ye shall pray for the clergy, the Lords temporal and commons of
this realm, be sechynge almighty God to give every one of the^ in his degree
grace to use themselves in such wise as may be to his contentation, the kings
honor and the weal of the realm.

Thyrdly ye shall pray for the souls that be departed abiding the mercy of
almighty god that it may please him rather at the contemplacion of our prayers
to grant them the fruycion of his presence.

The seven peticions of the Pater noster.
The first peticion. OVre father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name. The
second peticion Thy kingdom come. The third peticion. Thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven. The fourth peticion. Give us this day our daily
bread. The fyfte peticion. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive the^
that trespace against us. The syxte peticion. And let us not be led into
temptacion. The seventh peticion. But deliver us from evil. Amen.
The salutacion of the angel called the Aue maria.
HAyle Marye full of grace: the Lord is with the. Blessed art thou among
women. And blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Amen.

A prayer to be said in the morning when you arise.
I Thank the my heavenly father by thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ yt
this night thou have given my sleep and rest, preseruyng me from al hurt and
peryls. I beseech the to keep me likewise this day, from sin and all euyls,
se that all my deeds, ye all my life might please the, I commyt myself both
body and soul, and all the things that I go about into thy hands. Thy holy
angel be with me, lest the deuell my adversary have any power over me. Amen.

The grace to be said before dynner.
THe eyes of all things look up and wait upon the (O Lord) and thou geuest
them meat in due time. When thou geuest it to them, then they gather it, when
thou openest thy hand, then are they well satisfied.

Thou openest thy hand, and replenysshest al things living with thy
blessing. Our father. O Lord God our heavenly father, bless thou us, and
these thy gifts which we here receive of thy blessing and bountuous goodness
through thy son Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace after dynner.
WE thank the (o Lord) our father, by thy son Jesus Christ our Lord for
all thy benefytes, which lyuest and raygnest from age to age, world without
end. Amen.

The grace before supper
Christ which at the last supper gave him self unto us, promising his body
to be crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sins, bless us and our
supper. Amen.

Grace after supper.
Honor and praise be to God the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, and
wise only for ever and ever. Amen.

God almighty father of all mercy, and God of all consolacion, give us grace to
consent together in the knowledge of thy truth through Jesus Christ, that we
may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

When thou shall go to bed say this.
I lay me down to rest, In the name of the father, of the son, and of the
holy ghost. Amen.

I Thank the my heavenly father by thy dear beloved son Jesus Christ, that
this day of thy ple^teousrych mercy, thou have thus preserved me. I pray the
forgive me all my sins which I have this day vnryghteously committed in
deed, word and in thought. And that thou would vouchsafe of thy gracious
goodness, to keep me this night, for I commyte myself both body and soul, and
all mine into thy hands. Thy holy aungel be with me, lest my deadly adversary
have intresse into me. Amen.

The abrogacion of the holy days.
First that the feast of Dedicacion of the church shall in all places through
out this realm be celebrated and kept on ye first sunday of the month of
October for ever, and upon none other day.

Item yt the feast of the patron of every church within this realm, called
commonly the Church holydaye, shall not from hensforth be kept or observed as
a holydaye as heretofore has been used, but that it shall be lawful to all and
syngular persons, resydent or dwelling within this realm to go to their
work, occupacion, or mysterye, and the same truly to exercise and occupye
upon the said feast, as upon any other work day, except the said feast of
Church holydaye such as must be else universally observed as a holy day by
this ordinance followynge.

Also that all those feasts or holidays which shall happen to occur, either
in the heruest time, which is to be co^pted from the first day of July unto
ye.xxix. day of Septembre, or else in ye term time at Westmynster, shall not
be kept or observed from hensforth as holidays, but that it may be lawful
for every man to go to his work or occupacion upon the same, as upon any other
work day, except always the feasts of the Apostles of our blessed lady, and
of Saint George, and the.iiii. Evangelists, and Mary Magdalene. And also
such feasts as wherein the kings Judges at Westmynster hall do not use to sit
in judgment, all which shall be kept holy and solemn of every man, as in
time past has been accustomed.

Provided always that it may be lawful unto all prestes and clerks, as well
secular as regular, in the forsayde holidays now abrogate, to sing or say
their accustomed service for those holidays in their churches, so that they do
not the same solemply nor do ring to the same, after the manner used in high
holidays, nor do commau^de or indycte the same to be kept or observed as holy
days.

Finally the feast of the natiuite of our Lord of Easter, of the natiuite of
S. Ihon Baptist, and of S. Mychaell archangell, shall be from hensforth
accounted accepted and taken for the.iiii. general offrynge days.

And for further declaracion of the premysses, be it known that Easter term
begins al ways the.xviii. day after Easter, reckoning Easter day for one,
and ends the mondaye next after the Ascencion day.

Trinite term begins always the wednisdaye next after the octaues of
Trinite sunday, and ends the.xi. or. xii day of July.

Myghelmas term begins the.ix. or.x. day of October, and ends the.xxviii.
or.xxix. day of Nouembre.

Hyllary term begins the.xxiii. or.xxiiij. day of January, and ends
the.xij. or.xiij. day of February.

In Easter term upon the Ascencion day.

In trinite term upon the natiuite of saint Ihon Baptyst.

In Myghelmas term upon Alhallowen day.

In Hyllary term upon Candelmasie day. The Kings judges at Westmynster do
not use to sytte in judgment nor upon any sunday.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Matyns.
A Preface to the Matyns and the other hours declaryng the (...) institution
of them, and for what cause they be received and accustomed to be said in the
church, and among other Christians.
OF long time (Christen reader) thath ben used in the church of God certain
hours to be appointed to the service of God and to proper, in the which
among (...) besy^es man should of his LORD God have a herty and fervent
meditacio^ and contemplacio^, and a remembrance of the manifold benefits and
bountiful goodness of god showed to him. The first limitacion or appointment of
hours was not by ma^s inuencio^ or deuyse, but (as I read) was of God. In the
second book of Moses I find that almighty God commanded that twyse to the
day they should do sacrifice, saying: Every day thou shall offer two lammes,
one in the morning, and another at tiyght. Of the which one was called the
morning sacrif^^^ the other the evening sacrifice, As we now call the morning
prayers Matens, and the evening prayers Euensonge, But that now our prayers be
distincted in seven hours I think it taken of David, which seven times in the
day testifyeth that he praised the LORD, which seven times he did not appoint
in one part of the day, but in diverse times, as in ye morning, in the mydday,
and at night, Vespere, mane, et meridie narrabo et annu^ciabo, et exaudiet
voce^ mea^, After who^ Daniel accustomed throse in the day on his knees to
pray, Of whom S, Cipriane does testify it was taken that these hours of
prime, the third, the syxt, and the nynth to be used in ye church, which thing
I think not to be true that only of him this use was taken, but also of ye
other (which we have rehearsed) which were before him, Saint Jerome accordingly
to Daniels manner and custom of prayer did divide the day in three hours, and
that by ymitacion of the examples of the new testament, that is in the
morning, which is the third hour, in the which time the holy ghost inspired
the Apostles, and in the syxte hour, that is at dynner time. As Peter did
which intending to catchis meat about the syxt hour ascended into the
garret to pray, And their hour at which time Peter and John ascended into the
temple to pray, which hour was called the, ix, hour of prayer, Occasion
taken by these places of scripture, and by the examples also of the same it to
be thought that these hours has (...) in the church,

depiction of the Annunciation Aue gracia plena dn^e tecum. Ecce ancilla dni^
fiat etc.

O Lord open thou my lyppes.

And then shall my mouth show forth thy praise.

O God bend thy self into my help.

For have the to help me.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now and ever shall be. So be it.
Praise ye the Lord.

The inuytatory Math. xi.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are lade^, and I shall refreshe you.

The.xciiii. Psalm. Venite exultemus.
COme and let us joyfully give thanks unto the Lord, let us rejoice in God
our saueoure, let us approach unto his presence with praise and thanks
geuynge, and sing we unto him in psalms.

Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I shall refresh you.

For God is a great Lord, and a great King over all gods, which shall not
forsake his people, in whose power are all the costs of the earth, and he
beholds the tops of the mountains.

And I shall refreshe you.

The sea is his, for he has made it, and his hands has facyoned the earth
also, come therefore and let us worship, and fall down before the Lord,
which has made us, for he is our Lord God, and we are his people, and the
sheep of his pasture.

Come unto me.

Now if ye hear his voice, se that you harde^ not your hertes, as they did in
the time of temptacio^ in wyldernes bytterly murmuring against god where your
fathers tempted me, and provoked me to anger, yet saw they my works.

And I shall refreshe you.

Forty years was I a neighbor unto this generation, wherefore I said ever,
their hearts are gone from me, they know not my ways, to who^ I swore in my
great anger, that they should not enter into my rest. Come unto me all ye
Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the. etc.

The hymn. Veni creator spiritus.
COme holy ghost O creator eternal,
In our minds to make visitation,
And fulfill thou with grace supernall,
Our hearts that be of thy creacion.
Which of Christ the comforter art named,
Thou the gift of the God most highest,
The living well and charity inflamed,
The spiritual unction that man's soul delytest.
Thou which art seue^folde in gift of munifice^se
And of God the father the finger full of might,
Enrychynge tongues with speches and eloquence,
According to the father, to ye promise full right.
Give light of our senses darkened with ignorance
And into our hertes infounde perfyte love,
Our infirm nature given to fleshly pleasaunce,
Strength in godliness by thy power above.
Repel the goostly enemy that he have no power,
And give us peace in our conscience,
Be thou our gyde and go us before,
That we may avoid sin our souls pestilence,
Thou sprete of truth, grant us through the,
Of the father to have the knowlegynge and also of the son,
And that thou of them both procedest in deite,
Make us to believe in every time and season.
Praise be to the father with the son,
And to the holy spirit also be praise,
Of whose graces as he has done Jesus Christ may send us always.
The.^. Psalm. Verba mea auribus.
Hear my words (O Lord) consider my calling.

O mark the voice of my peticio^ my king and my God, for unto the will I make
my prayer.

Hear my voice betymes (O Lord) for early in the morning will I get me unto
the, ye and that with dyligence.

For thou art not the God, that has pleasure in wickedness, there may no
ungodly person dwell with the.

Such as be cruel may not stand in thy syghte, thou art an enemy unto all
wicked doers.

Thou destroyest the liars, the Lord abhors ye blody thursty and deceytfull:

But as for me I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

Led me (O Lord) in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies, and make ye
way plain before me.

For there is no faythfulnesse in their mouths, they dissemble in their
hertes, their throat is an open sepulcre, with their tongues they deceive.

Punyshe them (O God) that they may perysh in their own ymaginacions, cast
them out, because of the multitude of their ungodliness, for they rebel
against the.

Again, let all them that put their trust in the, rejoice, yet let them ever
be geuynge thanks because thou defendest them that they which love thy name
may be joyful in the.

For thou (Lord) gyuest thy blessing unto the ryghteous and with the
favorable kyndnesse thou defendest him, as with a shield.

Glory be to the father, and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is. etc.

The.xxiiij. Psalm. Ad te domine.
VNnto the (O Lord) I lift up my soul, my God I trust in the (oh) let me
not be confounded.

Lest mine enemies triumph over me for all they that hope in the shall not be
ashamed.

But such as be scornful despysers without a cause they shall be put to
confusyon.

Show me thy ways (O Lord) and teach my the paths.

Led me in thy truth and learn me, for thou art the God of my salvation, and
in the is all my hope all day long.

Call unto remembrance (O Lord) thy tender mercyes, and thy loving
kyndnesses which have been ever of old.

Oh remember not my sins, and the offenses of my youth, but according to thy
mercy think upon me (O Lord) for thy goodness.

Oh how frendlye and ryghteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners
in the way.

He leads ye simple aryght and such as be meke, them learneth he his ways.

All the ways of the Lord are very mercy and faythfulnesse, unto such as
keep his testament and couenaunte.

For thy name sake (O Lord) be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

What so ever he be that fears the Lord he shall show him the way that he
has chosen.

His soul shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall possess the land.

The Lord is a sure ground unto the^ that fear him, and he shows them his
covenant.

Mine eyes are ever lokynge unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my fete out of
the net.

Turn the unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in mysery.

The sorrows of my heart are great, O bring me out of my troubles.

Look upon mine adversity and myserie, and forgive me all my sins.

Consider how mine enemies are many, and bear a malicious heart against me.

O keep my soul, and deliver me, let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in the.

Let innocensye and ryghteous dealing wait upon me, for my hope is in the.

Deliver Israel (O God) out of all his trouble.

Glory be to ye father. etc. As it was in the be. etc.

The.lxxxv. Psalm. Inclina domine.
Bow down thine ear (O Lord) and hear me, for I am confortlesse and poor.

O keep my soul, for I am holy, my God help thy servant that puts his
trust in the.

Be merciful unto me (O Lord) for I call daily upon the.

Conforte the soul of thy servant, for unto the (O Lord) do I lift up my
soul.

For thou Lord art good and gracyous and of great mercy unto all the that
call upon the.

Give ear Lord unto my prayer and pondre mine humble desire.

In the time of my trouble I call upon the, for thou hear me.

Among ye gods there is none like the (o lord) there is not one that can do
as thou do.

All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before the (O Lord)
and shall gloryfye thy name.

For thou art great and thou do wondrous things thou art God alone.

Led me in thy way (O lord) yt I may walk in ye truth o let my heart delight
in fearyng thy name.

I thank the (o Lord) my god with all my heart, and will praise thy name for
ever.

For great is thy mercy toward me, thou have delivered my soul out of the
deep of hell.

O God the proud are risen against me and the congregation of the mighty
seeks after my soul and set not the before their eyes.

But thou (O Lord God) art full of compassion and mercy long sufferynge,
great in goodness and truth.

O turn the the^ unto me, and have mercy upon me give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thy hand maiden.

Show some token upon me in good, that they which hate me may se it, and be
ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me, and conforted me.

Glory be to the father, and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The antheme. O wonderful exchange, the creator of man kind, taking upon
him a living body, has not disdayned to be borne of a vyrgyn. And he being
made man, without sede of man, has committed to us his godhede. The versycle.
Holy mother of god, and vyrgyn perpetual. The answer. Pray thou for us to
our Lord god celestial. The pater noster. Our father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be fulfilled as well in earth
as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive is our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And let us not be led
into temptacion. But deliver us from evil. So be it. The blessing. Lord we
beseech the of thy blessing. The answer. With a blessing perpetual.


Bless thou us father eternal.

The first lesson.
WE know that what so ever the law says it says it unto them which are
under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and that all the world may
be detter unto God, because that by the deeds of the law no flesh may be
justified in his sight, for by the law comes but the knowledge of sin. But
now without addyng to of the law is righteousness which avails before God
declared, having witness of the law and the prophets. But I speak of the
righteousness before God which comes by the faith on Jesus Christ unto all
and upon all that believe. For here is no dyfference, for they are all sinners
and want ye praise that god should have of them. But without deseruynge are
they made ryghteous, even by his grace, through the redemption that is done by
Christ Jesus whom god has set forth for a mercy seat through faith in his
blood, to show the ryghteousnes which avails before him in that he forgyueth
the sins which were done before under the sufferaunce of God, which he
suffered, yt at this time he might show the righteousness, which avails
before him, that he only might be ryghteous, and the ryghteous maker of him
which is of ye faith on Jesus Christ. Thou Lord have mercy on us.

Thank we God.

The responce. If we were reconcyled unto god by the death of his son, when
we were yet enemies, much more shall we be saved by him now yt we are
reconsyled. By whom we have now received the attoneme^t. The verse. Not only
that, but we rejoice also in God through our Lord Jesus Christ. The repeticion.
By whom we have now received ye attoneme^t. The blessing. Lord we beseech the
of thy blessing. The answer. O God the only begotten son help us and
bless us in every time and season.


The second lesson.
WHen thou prayest thou shall not be as the ypocrytes are. For they love to
stand and pray in the synagoges, and in the corners of the streets to be seen
of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But when thou pray est
enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door to the, and pray to thy father
which is in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward the
openly. And when ye pray babble not much as the Heathen do. For they think
that they shall be heard for their much bablynges sake. Be not ye like the^
therefore. For your father knows whereof ye have need before ye ask of him.
Thou Lord have mercy on us. Thank we God.

The responce. What so ever ye desire in your prayer. Believe that ye shall
receive it, and you shall have it. The versycle. And when ye stand and pray
forgive if ye have ought against any man, that your father also in heaven may
forgive you your trespasses. The repeticion. Believe that ye shall. etc. The
blessing. Lord we beseech the^ of thy blessing. The answer. The grace of
the holy spirit. Pourge and illumyne our heart and wit.


The.iii. lesson. Deuteronomy. v.
THese are the commandments, ordynaunces and laws which the Lord our God
has commanded, yt ye should learn the^ and do them in the land whyther ye go
to possess it, that thou may fear ye Lord thy God, and keep all his
ordynaunces and commandments which I command ye, thou and thy children and
thy chyldrens children all the days of your life, that you may live long.
Hear thou (o Israel) and take heed that thou do thereafter, yt it may go well
with the, and ye thou may multyply greatly, as the Lord God of the fathers
has promised the a land that flows with milk and honey. Hear (O Israel)
the Lord our God is one God only, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And those words
which I command the this day shall thou take into thy heart. And shall
rehearse them unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou syttest in
thy house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down and when
thou rysest up and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be a token of remembrance before thine eyes, and thou shalt write the^
upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy gates. Thou Lord have mercy on us.
Praise we God.

The responce. Hear (o thou Israel) the precepts of thy Lord God and in thy
heart write the^ as in a book and I will give to the a land flowynge milk and
honey. The very. Take heed therefore, and hear my voice, and I will be an enemy
to thine enemies. The repeticion. And I will give the a land flowynge milk
and honey.


Glory be to the father and to. etc.

And I will give. etc.

The song of Augustyn and Ambrose. The deum laudamus.
WE praise the (O God) we knowledge the to be the Lord.

All the earth do worship the, which art the father everlasting.

To the cry forth all angels, the heavens, and all the powers therein.

To the thus cries Cherubyn and Seraphyn contynually.

Holy art thou. Holy art thou. Holy art thou.

Thou art the Lord God of hoostes.

Heaven and earth are fulfilled with the glory of thy majesty.

The glorious company of the Apostles praise ye.

The goodly fellowshyppe of the prophets worship the.

The fellowshyppe of the martyrs praise the.

The holy congregation of the faithful throughout all the world magnifye the.

They knowledge the to be the father of an infinite majesty.

They knowledge thy honorable and only son.

They knowledge the holy ghost to be a comforter.

Thou art the king of glory O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting son of the father.

Thou when thou should take upon the our nature to deliver man, dyddest not
abhor the vyrgyns womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpnes of death, thou opendest the kyndome
of heavens to them that believed in the.

Thou syttest on the right hand of God in ye glory of the father.

We believe that thou shall come to be our judge.

Wherefore we pray the, help thy servants, who^ thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make the^ to be nombred with thy saints in joy everlasting.

O Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage.

Govern and also lift the^ up into bliss everlasting.

We praise the every day, and we worship thy name ever world without end.

O Lord let it be thy pleasure to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy lyghten upon us, even as we trust in the.

O Lord I trust in ye, let me never be confounded.

Between Septuagesima and Easter this psalm followynge is said in the stead
of Te deum.

The.li. psalm.
Have mercy upon me. etc.

Seek it in the seven psalms, it is in the fourth psalm.

This word (lauds) is as much to say, as praise. And the service followynge
is called so because it contains only ye mere lauds and praise of Christ
and the vyrgyn his mother.

The versycle. Holy mother of God, make thy petycion. The answer. That we may
deserve Christ's promyssion.


The lauds.
O God bend thyselfe in to my help.

Lord have the to help me.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.Ciij. Psalm. Benedic anima mea.
Praise the Lord (O my soul) and all that is within me praise his holy name.

Praise the Lord (o my soul) and forget not all his benefytes.

Which forgeueth all thy sins, and heals all thine infyrmytes.

Which saves thy life from destruction and crowns the with mercy and long
kyndnesse.

Which satisfyeth thy desire with good things making the young and lusty as
an egle.

The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all them that suffer
wrong.

He showed his ways unto Moses, and his works unto the children of Israel.

The Lord is full of compassion, and mercy, long suffrynge and of great
goodness.

He will not always be chiding another will he keep his anger for ever.

He has not delte with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
wickedness.

For look how high heaven is in comparyson of the earth so great is his mercy
also toward them that fear him.

Look how wide the east is from the west, so far has he set our sins
from us.

Ye, look as a father pytyeth his own children, eue^ so the Lord is
merciful unto the^ that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust.

That a man in his time is but as grass, and flouryssheth as a flower in the
field.

For as soon as the wynd goes over it, it is gone and the place thereof knows
it no more.

But the merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, upon the^
that fear him and his righteousness upon their chyldrens children.

Such as keep his covenant and think upon his commandments to do them.

The Lord has prepared his seat in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all.

O praise the Lord ye angels of his, ye that be mighty in strength fulfyllynge
his commandments, that me^ may hear ye voice of his words.

O praise the Lord all ye his hosts, ye servants of his, that do his
pleasure.

O speak good of the Lord al ye works of his, in every place of his
dominion. O my soul praise thou the Lord.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The song of three children.
Praise ye the Lord al his works, paryse and extol him for ever.

Ye angels of his, praise ye Lord, ye heavens praise the Lord.

Ye waters all that are above heaven praise ye Lord, all the powers of the Lord
praise ye the Lord.

The son and the moon praise ye the Lord, sterres of the fyrmament praise ye
the Lord.

The rain and the dew praise ye the Lord, all the wyndes of god praise ye
the Lord.

Fire and heat magnyfye ye the Lord, winter and somer, praise ye the Lord.

Dewes, and ye hoar frostes praise ye the Lord, frost and cold praise ye the
Lord.

Yse and snow praise ye the Lord, nyghtes and days praise ye the Lord.

Nyghtes and darkness praise ye ye lord lyghtenynges and clouds laud ye
the lord.

The earth might praise the lord, laud and extol him for ever.

Hills and mountains praise ye the Lord, al ye spryngeth upon the earth,
laud ye the Lord.

Ye wells and sprynges praise the Lord, sees and floudes praise ye the Lord.

Whalles, and all that moves in ye waters praise ye the Lord, all birds of
the air, praise ye the lord.

All beasts both wild and tame praise ye ye lord ye children of men praise
ye the lord.

Let Israel praise the Lord, laud him and extol him for ever.

Ye prestes of the Lord praise the lord, ye servants of the Lord praise ye
the Lorder

Ye spirits and souls of ryghteous me^ praise the Lord, ye holy and meke in
heart praise the Lord.

Anania, Azaria, Mizaell, praise ye the Lord, laud and extol him for ever.

Bless we the father, the son, with ye holy ghost praise we him and serve we
him for evermore.

Blessed art thou (Lord) in the firmament of heaven thou arth praise worthy,
glorious, and magnifyed world without end.

The.C.xlviij. psalm. Laudate dominum de coelis.
Praise ye the Lord of heuens, praise ye him in the high place.

Praise ye him all his angels, al his powers praise ye him.

Praise ye him son and moon, all sterres and light praise ye him.

The highest of heuens praise ye him, and the waters that are above the
heavens, let them praise the Lords name.

For by his word all things were made, by his commandments all things
were created.

He has stablysshed them euerlastynglye and in to the world of worlds, he
has set a law, that shall not exspyre.

Praise the Lord, ye draggons and all depenesses of the earth.

Fire, hale, snow, yse, storms of wyndes that do his commandment.

Mountains and all little hills wood berynge fruit, and all ceder trees.

Bestes and all manner of cattle serpents and fethered fowls.

Kings of the earth, and al people, princes and al judges of the earth.

Bachelors and maidens old men and young, let them praise the name of the
Lord, for the name of him only is exalted.

The knowlegyng of him above heaven and earth and he has exalted the horn of
his people.

Laud be unto all his saints, to the sons of Israel, to the people
approchynge unto him.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.Cxlix. Psalm. Cantate domino.
Sing ye unto the lord a new song, praised be he in ye congregation of
Saints.

Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, and let the sons of Syon tryumphe
in their king.

Let them praise his name with daunsyng let the^ sing unto him with tympany
and harp.

For the Lord is well pleased with his people, and has exalted the lowly into
salvation.

Saints shall tryumphe in glory, they shall make joy in their chambers.

The praises of God shall be in their mouths, and two edged swords in their
hands.

To do vengeans amongst nations and correccions amongst the people.

To bind their kings in fetters, and their nobles in manacles of iron.

For to execute on them the judgment written, this is glory unto all his
saints.

Glory be to the father and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it. etc.

The.C.l. Psalm. Laudate dominum in.
Praise ye the Lord in his saints praise him in the fyrmament of his power.

Praise ye him in his strength, praise ye him according to the almyghtynesse
of his power.

Praise ye him with the sound of a trumpet, praise ye him with rebekes and
organnes.

Praise ye him with clary symballes well soundynge, praise ye him with
Symballes of sweetness, let every sprete praise the Lord.

Glory be to the father and to the. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is. etc.

The antheme. Holy Mary most pure of virgyns all, Mother and daughter of the
king celestyall, So comfort us in our desolacion, That by thy prayer and
special meditacion, We may enjoy ye reward of the heavenly reygne. And with
Gods elect there for to remain. To the Ephesyans the.ij. The Chapter. By
grace are we made safe through faith and that not of our own selves, for it
is the gift of God, and comes not of works, lest if any man should boost
himself of his own deeds.


Thanks be to God

The hymn. Laudetur deus.
Praised be the God omnipotent,
Which through his benygnitie,
His most dear son has to us sent,
To dye for our iniquite.
Conceived he was by the holy ghost,
And borne of a vyrgyn pure,
Thus the God of myghtes most,
Abhorred not our nature.
And where we were right wretchedly,
Abiecte for our transgression,
In Christ are we set at lyberte,
By whom we have redemption.
O vyrgyn Mary most gracyous.
O mother of God incomperable,
To thy son pray for us,
That he after death be favorable.
Glory be to the Trinite.
The father, the son, and spirit living,
Which art one God and persons three,
To whom be praise without ending.
The versycle. Praised be the name of the Lord. The answer. From this time
forth, and for evermore.


The song of Zachary the prophet. Benedictus Dominus.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel for he has visyted and redeemed his people.

He has raised up an horn of salvation, unto us in the house of his servant
David.

Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy prophets, which were syns the
world began.

That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of them that
hate us.

To fulfill the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
testament.

To perform the oath which he swear to our father Abraham, that he would give
himself to us.

That we delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without
fear.

In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

And thou child shall be called the prophet of the highest, for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for remyssion of their sins.

Through the tender mercy of our god, by ye which spryngynge from the hye has
vysyted us.

To give light to them that sit in the darkness and in the shadow of death
and to give our fete into the way of peace.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. Christ most merciful has redeemed us, let us rejoice, and
always give thanks to God. The versycie. O Lord hear my prayer. The
answer. And let my cry come unto the.


The prayer.
GOd almighty and our merciful father, which have so excedyngly loved us thy
chosen children, that thou would vouchesafe to give us thy only and
well-beloved son Jesus Christ our savior to suffer death for our sins so
that all that stedfastlye believe in him, might not peryshe, but have life
everlasting, we beseech the for thy abundaunt mercy, and for the inestimable
love which thou barest to thy son Christ our savior, give us of thy grace
and pour thy favor into our hearts, that we may believe, feale and know
perfytely, that thou only art our God our father, and to us an almighty
helper, delyuerer and a savior from sin, from all the deuelysh powers of
hell and of the world, and from death and that by thy son our Lord Jesus
Christ.

So be it.

The memory of the holy ghost.
The antheme. Come holy spirit of God, inspire thou the hertes of them that
believe in the, and kyndle in them the fire of thy love. The versycle. Se^de
forth thy spirit, and they shall be made new. The answer. For so renuest thou
the soul of man.
The prayer.
O God which have instructed the hearts of ye faithful, by the inspiracion of
the holy ghost, grant that we in the same spyryte may favor the truth, and
evermore rejoice in his holy consolacio^. By Christ our lord. So be it.

A memory of the most holy Trinite.

The antheme. Deliver us, save us, justify us, O blessed Trinite. The versycle.
Bless we ye father, and the son, with ye holy gooste. The answer. Praise we
him and exalte we him evermore.


The prayer.
Almighty and everlasting God which have granted to thy servants, through
confession of the true faith, for to acknowledge the glory of the eternal
trinite, and to honor ye, one god in thy almighty majesty we beseech the yt
through our steadfastness in ye same faith we may be always defended from all
aduersytie which lyuest and reygnest one God, world, without end. So be it.

A memory of our Lady

The antheme. O glorious mother of God, O perpetual vyrgyn Mary, which dyddest
bear the Lord of al lords and alone of all other dydest give suck unto the
king of angels, we beseech the of thy pytie to have us in remembrance, and to
make intercession for us unto Christ, that we being supported by his help may
come unto the kingdom of heaven. The versycle. O holy mother of God perpetual
vyrgyn Mary. The answer Pray for us unto the Lord Jesus Christ.


The prayer.
Grant, we beseech the O Lord God that thy servants may enjoy contynuall
health of body and soul, and through the gracious intercession of blessed Mary
perpetual virgyn, that we may be delivered from this present heaviness, and to
have the fruycion of the eternal gladness. By Christ our Lord. So be it.

A memory of all saints.

The antheme. All ye blessed saints, and elect servants of God, have us in
remembrance before God that through the help of your prayers it may please
him us to assocyate with you. The versycle. Rejoice in the Lord you that be
justified. The answer. And be you all glad that in heart be rectifyed.


The prayer.
WE beseech the good Lord that thou being pleased with the prayer of all thine
holy saints, wylt both grant us pardon of our defautes, and give us also
perpetual remedy for them. By Christ our Lord. So be it.

A memory of the passion of Christ.
HE that is the great profounde sapience,
And divine truth of the father on hye,
Which for mankind of his benyuole^ce,
Himself has made both God and man verily,
Was sold and bought by the Jews traitorously,
And about mydnyght perturbed and taken,
And of his disciples anon forsaken.
The versycle. We worship ye Christ with praise and benedictio^. The answer.
For thou redemest the world by thy holy passion.


The prayer
Lord Jesus Christ son of the living God, set thy holy passion and death
between thy judgment and our souls, both now and at the hour of death, and
more over vouchesaufe to grant unto the living mercy and grace, to the
dead, pardon and rest, to thy holy church peace and concord, and to us
sinners life and joy everlasting, which lyuest and reygneste God with the
father, and the holy ghost world without end. So be it.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us from fearful
heaviness, and bring us to the joys of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of the compassion of our Lady.
The antheme.

HOly Mary, of all godly women the godlyest,
Pray for us, of all holy women the holiest,
That he our prayers accept may in good wise,
Which of the was borne, and reygneth above ye skies
By whose charity, and merciful grace,
Our grievous sins may take no place.
The versycle. Holy mother of God, and virgyn perpetual. The answer. Pray
thou for us to the Lord celestial.


The prayer.
HOly Lord Jesus son of the most sweet vyrgyn Mary which suffredest death
for us upon a cross, show unto us thy mercy, and grant unto us and unto all
that devoutly have in remembrance the compassion of thy most holy mother, by
her prayer prosperous life in this present world, and through thy grace
eternal glory in the world to come, wherein thou do reygne one god with
the father the holy ghost world with out end. So be it.

The glorious passion of a vyrgyns son. Bring us to the bliss of the heavenly
kingdom. So be it.

The pryme.
O God bend thyselfe into my help.
Lord have the to help me.
Glory be to ye father, and to the son
and to the holy ghost.
As it was in the beginning, and as
it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.
Praise ye the Lord.
COme holy ghost, O creatoure eternal,
In our minds to make vysytacion,
And fulfill thou with grace supernall,
Our hearts that be of thy creacion.
Remember Lord author of salvation,
That sometime of a vyrgyne pure,
Without help of man's operacion.
Thou tokest upon the our frail nature.
And as thou of thy cleme^cy and mere mercy specyal
Above her deserts have chosen among all other,
And took her to such favor, and grace supernal,
That thou would be her son, and she to be thy mother.
So we beseech the Christ most tender,
Grant that thy servants, with a devout mood,
May oftymes swetely remember,
The effusion of thy precious blood.
O vyrgyne Mary most gracyous,
O mother of God incomperable,
To thy son pray for us.
That he after death be favorable.
Glory to the Lord of myghtes most.
That of a vyrgyn was bore,
Glory to the father and the holy ghost,
To them be praise for ever more. So be it.
The.liij. psalm. Deus in no.
Help me (o God) for thy name sake, and deliver me in thy strength.

Hear my prayer (o God) consydre ye words of my mouth.

For strangers are risen up against me, and the mighty (which have not God
before their eyes) seek after my soul.

But loo, god is my helper, it is he that vpholdeth my soul.

He shall reward evil unto mine enemies, and in thy truth shall thou destroy
them.

A free will offrynge will I give the, and praise thy name (O Lord) because it
is so confortable.

For thou haste delivered me out of all my troubles, so that mine eye sees his
desire upon mine enemies.

Glory be to the father and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xvii. Psalm. Confitemini domino.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracyous, and his mercy endures for
ever.

Let Israel now confess, that his mercy endures for ever.

Let the house of Aaron now confess that his mercy endures for ever.

Ye let him now that fear the Lord confess that his mercy endures for ever.

I called upon the Lord in trouble, and the Lord heard me at large.

The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man does unto me.

The Lord is my helper, and I shall se my desire upon mine enemies.

It is better to trust in the Lord, tha^ to put any confydence in man.

It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in princes.

All the Heathen compassed me round about, but in the name of the Lord I will
destroy them.

They kept me in on every side, but in the name of the Lord, I will destroy
them.

They came about me like bees, and were as hot as fire in the thorns, but in
name of the Lord I will destroy them.

They thrust at me that I might fall, but ye Lord was my help.

The Lord is my strength, and my song, and is become my salvation.

The voice of joy and myrthe is in the dwellynges of the ryghteous, for the
right hand of the Lord has gotten the victory.

The right hand of the Lord has given me the preeminence, the right hand of
the Lord has gotten the victory.

I shall not dye, but live, and declare the works of God the Lord.

The Lord has chastenyd and corrected me, but he has not given me over unto
death.

O pen me the gates of righteousness that I may go in there through and give
thanks unto the Lord, this is the door of the Lord, the ryghteous shall enter
in through it.

I thank the that thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.

The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the head stone in the
corner.

This was the Lords doing, and it is merueylous in our eyes.

This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be glad with joy in it.

Help now (O Lord) O Lord send us now prosperity.

Blessed be he that comes in the name of the lord we wyshe you good luck ye
that be of the house of the Lord.

God is the Lord, and has showed us light, O garnyshe the solemn feast with
grene branches, even unto the horns of the altar.

Thou art my God, and I will thank the, thou art my God, and I will praise
the.

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is. etc.

The.cxiv. psalm. Lauda anima mea.
Praise the Lord (O my soul) while I live will I praise the Lord, ye as
long as I have any being I will sing praises unto my God.

O put not your trust in princes, nor in the children of men, for there is no
health in them.

For when the brethe of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth,
and so all his thoughts shall peryshe.

Blessed is he that has the god of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in
the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is.

Which keeps his promise for ever, which helps them to right that suffer
wrong, which fedeth the hungry.

The Lord louseth men out of preson, the Lord gives sight to the blind.

The Lord helps them up that are fallen, the Lord loves the ryghteous.

The Lord cares for the strangers, he defe^deth the fatherles and wydowe, as
for the way of the ungodly he turns vpsyde down.

The Lord thy God (o Sion) is king for evermore and through out all
generacions.

Glory be to the father, and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. Let us not put our trust in princes nor in the children of men,
nor in nothing that is erthly, but in Jesus Christ the only son of the
vyrgyn by whom we have all salvation. The versycle. O Lord hear my prayer.
The answer. And let my cry come to the.


The prayer.
O Lord which by the annunciation of thy angel have given us knowledge of the
incarnacion of thy son Christ (we beseech the) pour thy grace into our
hertes, yt we trusting in him through his passion and death may be brought
to the glory of the last resurrection. By the same our lord Jesus Christ,
which lives and reygneth one god with the in unite of the holy ghost worlds
without end. So be it.

A memory of the passion of Christ.
The antheme.

The first hour in the morning early, Jesus was brought by the hands of the
Jews. Before the judge Pylate, to be judged cruelly, Where many a false
witness, did him accuse, In the neck they him smyt, his bands the hands did
bruise, They spyt and defiled there his godly face, The light of heaven, replete
with all grace.

The versycle. We worship the Christ with praise and benediction. The answer.
For thou redemest the world through thy passion.


The prayer.
Lord Jesus Christ the son of ye living God, which for our redemption dydest
vouchesaufe to be borne, and circumcysed of the Jews to be reproved, of Judas
with a kiss to be betrayed, to be taken, to be bound, and with bands before
Anna, Cayphas, Herod, and Pylate, to be presented, and before them to be
illuded with buffettes blows, scourges, and with a read to be bete^, thy face
to be covered, with spyttynges to be spytted, with thorns to be crowned, of false
records also to be accused, of evil judges to be judged, and as an innocent
lamb berynge ye cross to be led, with nails to be through persed, with eysel and
gall to be given drink unto, and to be lift up in the cross among thieves to
be deputed, with the most vylest death to dye, and with a spear to be wounded,
thou Lord by these most holy pains which we thy unworthy servants do
render and by thy holy passion deliver us from the pains of hell, and
vouchsaufe to bring us wretched sinners, whyther as thou broughtest the
penytent these crucyfyed with the. Which lyuest and reygnest with God the
father in the unity of the holy ghost for ever worlds without end. So be it.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us from sorrowful
heaviness, and bring us to the joy of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of the compassion of our lady.

The antheme. Holy mother of god, maiden immaculate.
Of whom it pleased god to receive our nature,
And to dye for us wretches and sinners deplorate.
We beseech the heartily vyrgyn most pure,
To pray to thy son, that it may be his pleasure
To grant us his favor, by thy intercession
And to be partakers of his most holy passion,
The versycle Holy mother of God, make thy petycion. The answer. That we may
obtain Christ's promyssion.


The prayer.
O God which unto mankind, by the fruit of the vyrgynytye of the blessed
vyrgyn Mary have given the gifts of eternal health. Grant to us we beseech,
that she for us may pray by whom we have received the author of life the
Lord Jesus Christ which with the lives and reygneth God world without end.
So be it.

The glorious passion of the vyrgyns son, Bring us to the bliss of the
fathers kingdom. So be it.

The third hour.
O God bend thyselfe into my help.

Lord have the to help me.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

Praise ye the Lord. The hymn.
COme holy ghost, O creator eternal,
In our mind to make visitation,
And fulfill thou with grace supernall,
Our hertes that be of thy creacion.
Remember Lord authoure of salvation,
That sometime of a vyrgyn pure,
Without help of man's operacion,
Thou tokest upon the our frail nature.
And as thou of thy clementie and mere mercy special.
Above her deserts have chosen among all other,
And took her to such favor and grace supernall,
That thou would be her son, and she to be thy mother.
So we beseech the Christ most tender,
Grant that thy servants, with a devout mood,
May oftymes swetely remember,
The effusion of thy precious blood.
O vyrgyn Mary most gracious,
O mother of God incomperable,
To thy son pray for us,
That he after death be favorable.
Glory be to the Lord of myghtes most,
That of a vyrgyn was bore,
Glory to the father and the holy ghost,
To them be praise for ever more. So be it.
The.xxxij. Psalm. Exultate iusti.
Rejoice in the Lord O ye ryghteous for it becomes well the just to be
thankful. Praise the Lord with harp, sing psalms unto him with the lute
and instrument often strings.

Sing unto him a new song, ye sing lustely unto him, and with a good
courage.

For the word of the Lord is true, and all his works are faithful.

He loves mercy and judgment, the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all hoostes of them by
the brethe of his mouth.

He gathers the waters together as it were in a bottell, and lays up the
deep in secret.

Let all the earth fear the Lord, and let all them that dwell in the world
stand in awe of him.

For look what he says, it is done, and look what he commands, it stands
fast.

The Lord brings the counsel of ye Heathen to naught, and tourneth the
deuyses of the people.

But the counsel of the Lord endures, and the thought of his heart from
generation to generation.

Blessed are ye people that hold the lord for their god, and blessed are the
folk whom he has chosen to be his heritage.

The Lord looks down from heaven, and beholds all the children of men,
from his strong sete he co^sydereth them that dwell in the world.

He only has fashyoned all the hearts of the^, and knows all their works.

A king is not helped by his own great host, another is a giant saved by the
might of his own strength.

A horse is but a vain thing to save a man, it is not the power of his
strength yt can deliver him.

Behold, the eye of the lord looks unto the^ that fear him, and put their
trust in his mercy.

That he may deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in the dear
time.

Let our soul patiently abide the Lord for he is our help and shield.

So shall our heart rejoice in him, because we have hoped in his holy name.

Let thy merciful kyndnesse (O Lord) be upon us, like as we put our trust in
the.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the. etc.

The.C.xviij. Psalm. Beati immaculati.
BLessed are those yt be undefiled in the way which walk in the way of the
Lord.

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole
heart.

Which walk in the ways and do no wickedness

Thou have given strayte charge to keep thy commandments.

O that my ways were stablyshed to keep thy statutes.

So should I not be confounded, while I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

I will thank the with an unfeigned heart, because I am learned in the
judgments of thy righteousness.

I will keep thy statutes, o forsake me not utterly.

Where withal shall a young man cleanse his way even by rulynge himself after
thy word.

With my whole heart do I seek the, O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments.

Thy words have I hyd within my heart, that I should not sin against the.

Praised be thou (O Lord) O teach me thy statutes.

With my lyppes will I be telling out all the judgments of thy mouth.

I have great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all manner of
richesse.

I will exercise my self in thy commandments, and have respect unto thy
fotepathes.

My delight shall be in thy statutes, I will not forget thy words.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xlvi. Psalm. Laudate dominum.
Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing, to sing praises unto our God, ye
a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful.

The Lord shall buyld up Jerusalem, and gather together the outcastes of
Israel.

He that heals the co^trite in heart, and byndeth up their wounds.

He that tells the nombre of the stars, and calls them all by their names.

Great is our Lord, and great is his power, ye his wisdom is infinite.

The Lord sets up the meke, and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

O sing unto the Lord with thanks geuynge, sing praises upon the harp unto
our God.

Which covers the heaven with clouds and prepares rain for the earth,
which makes the hey and grass to grow upon the mountains to the service of
men.

Which gives foder unto the cattle, and fedeth the young ravens that call
upon him.

He has no pleasure in the strength of a horse, nether delyteth he in any man's
legs.

But the Lords delight is in them that fear him and put their trust in his
mercy.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the begynnyne, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. The Lord is merciful ye so merciful that ye earth is full of
his mercy, by the which he has sent his son borne of a woman, and made
bond unto the law to redeem them that were under the law. The versycle. O
Lord hear my prayer. The answer. And let my cry come to the.


The prayer.
O Lord which by the annunciation of thy angel have given us knowledge of the
incarnacion of thy son Christ (we beseech the) pour thy grace into our
hertes, yt we trusting in him through his passion and death may be brought
to the glory of the last resurrection. By the same our lord Jesus Christ,
which lives and reygneth one god with the father and the holy ghost world
without end. So be it.

A memory of the passion of Christ
About three hours after the son ganne spring,
All the Jews cried, Jesus to crucifye,
And in skorne they him clothed with purple clothing
And instead of a crown, on his head they did tie.
A crown of thorn that prycked cruelly,
And had him forth to a place where he dyed,
And with a howghe cross on his sholders they laid.
The versycle. We worship ye Christ with praise and benedictio^. The answer.
For thou redemest the world by thy holy passion.


The prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living God, which from the bosom of the
father from heavens dydest descend to the earth, and on the wood of the
cross dydest suffer five wounds, and shed thy precious blood for the
remission of our sins, we mekely beseech the that in the day of judgment we
may be on the right hand, and hear thy sweet sentence: Come ye blessed of my
father, enjoy ye the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. In the which kingdom thou lyuest and reygnest God with the father for
ever. So be it.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us from sorrowful
heaviness, and bring us to the joy of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of our Lady.
HOly mother of God which him haste conceived,
That of all the world could not worthily be received,
Thy son beseech thou with humble intercession,
Us for to purge of our transgression,
That by thy son redeemed, we may to the place ascend,
Where thou dwell with him world without end.
The versycle. Holy mother of God, make thy peticion. The answer. That we may
obtain Christ's promyssion.


The prayer.
O God which would thy son to be incarnate of the womb of the blessed
vyrgyn Mary, grant to thy meke peticioners, that we which believe her verily to
be the mother of God by her prayers before the, we may be helped. By the same
our Lord Christ. So be it.

The glorious passion of the vyrgyns son, Bring us to the bliss of the
fathers kingdom. So be it.

O God bend thyselfe into my help.

Lord have the to help me.

Glory be to ye father, and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

Praise ye the Lord. The hymn.
COme holy ghost, O creatoure eternal,
In our minds to make vysytacion,
And fulfill thou with grace supernall,
Our hearts that be of thy creacion.
Remember Lord author of salvation,
That sometime of a vyrgyne pure,
Without help of man's operacion.
Thou tokest upon the our frail nature.
And as thou of thy clementie and mere mercy, special.
Above her deserts have chosen among all other,
And took her to such favor and grace supernall,
That thou would be her son, and she to be thy mother.
So we beseech the Christ most tender,
Grant that thy servants, with a devout mood,
May oftymes swetely remember,
The effusion of thy precious blood.
O vyrgyn Mary most gracious,
O mother of God incomperable,
To thy son pray for us,
That he after death be favorable.
Glory to the Lord of myghtes most.
That of a vyrgyn was bore,
Glory to the father and to the holy ghost,
To them be praise for evermore. So be it.
The antheme.

Taste and se how frendely. etc.

The.xxxiij. psalm. Benedicam dominum.
I Will always give thanks unto ye Lord his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

My soul make her boost in the Lord, the poor oppressed shall hear thereof,
and be glad.

O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnifye his name together.

I sought the Lord, and he heard me, ye he delivered me out of all my
troubles.

Draw ye nere unto him, and be ye lyghtened, and your faces shall not be
ashamed.

This poor man cried unto the Lord, and he herd him, ye and delivered him
out of all his troubles.

The angel of the Lord pytcheth his tent round about them that fear him,
and delyuereth them O taste and se how friendly the Lord is, blessed is the man
that trusts in him.

O fear the Lord ye that be his saints, for they that fear him, lack
nothing.

The rich shall want and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall
want no manner of thing that is good.

Come hither (O ye children) harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

Who so lysteth to live and would feign se good days.

Let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lyppes that they speak no gyle.

Let him eschew evil and do good, let him seek peace and ensue it.

For the eyes of the Lord are over the ryghteous and his ears are open to
their prayers.

But the face of the lord beholds them that do euel, to destroy the
remembrance of them out of the earth.

When the ryghteous cry, the lord hears the^, and delyuereth them out of al
their troubles.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are contryte in heart, and will help such as
be of an humble spirit.

Great are the troubles of the ryghteous, but the Lord will deliver them out
of all.

He keeps all their bones, so that not one of them is broken.

But mysfortune shall slay the ungodly, and they that hate the ryghteous shall be
gylty.

The Lord will deliver the souls of his servants, and all they that put
their trust, in him shall not offend.

Glory be to the father and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. Sa be it.

The.C.xviii. Psalm. Retribue seruo tuo.
O Do well unto thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy words.

Open thou mine eyes, and so shall I spy out wondrous things in thy law.

I am a stranger upon earth, O hyde not thy commandments fro me.

My soul breaks out, for the very fervent desire that I have always unto thy
judgments.

Thou rebukest the proud, cursed are they that depart from thy
commandments.

O turn fro me shame and rebuke, for I keep thy testimonies.

Princes also sat and spoke against me, but thy feruaunt was occupied in thy
statutes.

For in thy testimonies is my delight, and they are my councellers,

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the begynnyge, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xvi. Psalm. Laudate Dominum omnes.
O Praise the Lord all ye Gentyles, laud him all ye people.

For his merciful kyndnes is evermore and more toward us, and ye truth of the
Lord endures for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. Taste and se how frendely the Lord is, blessed, is the man that
trusts to him, for our fathers (lord) hoped in the, they trusts in the,
and thou dydest deliver the^, they called upon the and were helped, they put
their trust in the, and were not confounded. The versycle. O Lord hear my
prayer. The answer. And let my cry come unto the.


The prayer.
Lord which by the annunciacion of thy angel have given us knowledge of the
incarnacyon of thy son Jesus Christ pour thy grace into our hertes, that we
trustyng in him, through his passion and death may be brought to the glory
of the last resurrection. By the same our Lord Jesus Christ which lives and
reygneth one God, with the father and the holy ghost world without end. So be
it

A memory of the passion of Christ.
THe syxt hour spryngynge before ye myddaye, Jesus hands and fete, to the
cross they nailed, With the shamefullest death that they contryue may, They
ho^ge him between two thieves, that the blood down trayled, And than for pain
great thurst him assailed His thurst for to quench, they proffered him gall,
This lamb so illuded bought our sins all.

The versycle. We worship the Christ with praise and benedyction. The
answer. For thou redemest the world by thy holy passion


The prayer.
Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god which for our redemption in ye
syxt hour dydest ascend the patyble of the cross, and shedest thy blood
through thy five wounds for ye remyssion of our sins, we mekely beseech ye
that after our death through the merit of that same passion we may enter the
gate of paradyse which lyuest and reygnest God with God the father in the unity
of the holy ghost, world without end. So be it.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, deliver us from sorrowful
heaviness, and bring us to the joys of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of our lady:
O Blessed Mary, and holy vyrgyn,
Which dydest conceive of the holy ghost,
The gouernoure of the tryple engyn,
The son of god of myghtes most,
Remember us of charity, which of God haste contemplacion,
To pray for us to the deyte,
To turn from us his indygnacion.
The versycle. Holy mother of God make thy peticion. The answer. That we may
obtain Christ's promyssion.


The prayer.
TO our fragylyte merciful God, grant thy help that we which of thy holy
mother of God and virgyn Mary do make remembrance by the help of her
intercession we may rise from our iniquites through Christ our Lord. So be
it.

The glorious passion of the vyrgyns son, Bring us to the bliss of the
heavenly kingdom.
O God bend thyselfe into my help.

Lord have the to help me.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

Praise ye the Lord. The hymn.
COme holy ghost, O creator eternal,
In our mind to make visitation,
And fulfill thou with grace supernall,
Our hertes that be of thy creacion.
Remember Lord authoure of salvation,
That sometime of a vyrgyn pure,
Without help of man's operacion,
Thou tokest upon the our frail nature.
And as thou of thy cleme^cy and mere mercy specyal
Above her deserts have chosen among all other,
And took her to such favor, and grace supernal,
That thou would be her son, and she to be thy mother.
So we beseech the Christ most tender,
Grant that thy servants, with a devout mood,
May oftymes swetely remember,
The effusion of thy precious blood.
O vyrgyne Mary most gracyous,
O mother of God incomperable,
To thy son pray for us.
That he after death be favorable.
Glory be to the Lord of myghtes most,
That of a vyrgyn was bore,
Glory to the father and to the holy ghost,
To them be praise for evermore. So be it.
The antheme. The Lord is. etc.


The.lxvi. psalm. Deus misere^.
GOd be merciful unto us, bless us and show the light of his countenance
upon us and have mercy upon us.

That we may know thy way upon the earth thy saving health among all
Heathen.

Let the people praise the (O God) yet let all people praise the.

O let the people rejoice and be glad, that thou iudgest the folk ryghteously,
and gouernest the nations above the earth.

Let the people praise the (O Lord) let all people praise the, ye earth has
brought forth her fruit. God (even our own God) give us his blessing, God
bless us, and let all the ends of the world fear him.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.Cxviij. psalm. Adhesit pauimento.
MY soul cleueth to the duste, o quycke^ thou me according to thy word.

I knowleged my ways, and thou heardest me, O teach me then thy statutes.

Make me to understand the way of thy commandments, and so shall I talk
of thy wondrous works.

My soul slo^breth for very werynesse, O set me up according to thy word.

Take fro me the way of iniquite and grant me mercy according to thy law.

I have chosen the way of truth, thy Judgments have I not forgotten.

I stacke unto thy testimonies, o Lord confou^de me not.

I have run the way of thy commandments when thou have comforted my heart.

Glory be to the father and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xliiii. Psalm. Exaltabo te deus.
I Will magnify the (o my Lord and king) I will praise thy name for ever and
ever. Every day will I give thanks unto the, and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Great is the Lord and merueylous worthy to be praised, there is no end of
his greatness.

One generation shall praise thy works unto an other, and they shall declare
thy power.

They shall be talking of thy worship, and thy glory, and shall show forth thy
wondrous works.

So that me^ shall speak of the might of thy merueylous acts and tell of thy
greatness.

The memoryall of thy abundaunte kyndenesse, shall be showed and men shall sing
of thy righteousness.

The Lord is pacient and merciful, long sufferynge and of great goodness.

The Lord is loving to every man, and his mercy is over all his works.

All thy works praise the (o Lord) and thy saints give thank unto the.

To show the glory of thy kingdom and talk of thy power.

That thy power, thy glory, and myghtynesse of thy kingdom might be known
unto men.

Thy kyndome is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures through out
all ages.

The Lord is faithful in all his promyses, and holy in all his works.

The Lord vpholdeth all such as should fall, and lyfteth up all them that be
down.

The eyes of all wait upon the, and thou gyuest them their meat in due season.

Thou openest thy hand and fyllest al things living with plenteousnesse.

The Lord is ryghteous in all his ways and holy in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all the^ that call upon him, ye all such that call upon
him faithfully.

He will fulfill the desire of the^ that fear him, he will hear their cry and
will help them.

The Lord preserves all the^ that love him, and will scatter abroad all the
ungodly

My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, let all flesh give thanks unto
his holy name for ever and ever.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, ye all such
that call upon him faithfully, wherefore to ye (O Lord) faithfully will I
pray. The versycle. O Lord hear my prayer. The answer. And let my cry come
unto the.


The prayer.
Lord which by the annunciacion of thy angel have given us knowledge of the
incarnacyon of t^y son Jesus Christ pour thy grace into our hearts, yt we
trusting in him through his passion and death may be brought to the glory of
the last resurrection. By the same our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and
reygneth, one God, with the father, and the holy ghost world without end. So
be it.

A memory of the passion of Christ.
OUr merciful Lord Jesus Gods son,
Calling unto his father almighty,
Yielded up his soul, and full upon noone,
The sprete departed from that blessed body,
The son waxed dark, ye earth quoke wondersly,
Great merueylous things to behold and hear.
And yet a knight perced his heart with a spear.
The versycle. We worship ye Christ with praise and benedictio^. The answer.
For thou redemest the world by thy holy passion.


The prayer.
ALl thy passions and thy affliccions most merciful Lord Jesus Christ help
us and defend us from all trouble, and anguyshe from al sorrow and heaviness,
from al perils and wrethchednesse, from all sin and heart uncleanness, from
al sclaunder and infamy, from evil dyseases of soul and body, from sodeyne
death, from all persecucio^ of our enemies vysyble and inuysible, for we well
know that by thy passion we shall be saved. Therefore with a confydence of the
large and inmesurable pytie, we beseech the most merciful savior for thy
most benyngne and holiest passions that thou will protecte us by thy gracious
help, and keep us from all evil, and give us grace that as we thus do
remember thy passion and death in the which thou dydest slay our sin in thy
body, so we may also mortifye our sins in our bodies, and on our backs
take thy cross and follow the, which lyuest and reygnest world without end.
So be it.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us from sorrowful
heaviness, and bring us to the joy of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of our Lady.

O Mother of God most gracyous,
To whom Christ Ihon did commend,
Saying: mulier ecce filius tuus.
Thy sorrows that he would amend,
Then shortly after he said,
To Ihon behold thy mother,
Thus in him the trust was laid,
To comfort the above all other,
With like pytye comfort us,
In this vale of mysery,
And pray to thy son Jesus,
To bring us to eternal glory.
The versycle. Holy mother of God make thy peticion. The answer. That we may
obtain Christ's promyssion.


The prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ which being among men were found as man having the
experyence of all our myseryes, only that thou lackest sin, for that
exceadynge charity which so far ouercommed the, take pyty on us, and grant
us by the intercession of thy glorious mother (who^ so interely thou dydest
love) to be void of all the mysery of sin and al other worldely aduersytes
with the pacyently to suffer, which lyuest and reygnest God world without
end. So be it.

The glorious passion of a vyrgyns son, Bring us to the bliss of the
heavenly kingdom. So be it.

The euensonge.
What is meant by this word Euensonge.

Like as the service that we be daily accustomed to say in the ^ornynge is
called (Eue^songe) Even so is the service used to be said or long toward
^nynge called (Euensonge.)

O God bend thyselfe into my help.

Lord have the to help me.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. O how much ought. etc.


The.C.xi. Psalm. Beatus uir qui timet Dominum.
BLessed is the man that fears the Lord, and has great delight in his
commaunmentes.

His sede shall be mighty upon the earth, the generation of the faithful shall be
blessed.

Richesse and plenteousnesse shall be in his house, and his righteousness
endures for ever.

Unto the godly there aryseth up light in ye darkness, he is mercyful,
loving, and ryghteous.

Well is he that is merciful and lends gladly, and pondreth his words with
dyscrecion.

For he shall never be moved, the ryghteous shall be had in an everlasting
remembrance.

He will not be afraid for any euel tidings, his heart stands fast and
believes in the Lord.

His heart is stablyshed, he will not shrynke until he se his desire upon his
enemies.

He has delte abroad and given to the poor, his ryghteousnes remains for
ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.

The ungodly shall se it and it shall grieve him, he shall gnashe with his teth
and consume away, the desire of the ungodly shall peryshe.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xii. Psalm. Laudate pueri dominum.
Praise ye Lord (O ye servants) o praise the name of the Lord.

Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.

The Lords name is worthy to be praised, from the rysynge up of the son unto
ye going down of the same.

The Lord is hye above all heathen, and his glory above the heavens.

Who is like unto the Lord our God that has his dwelling so hye which
humbles himself to behold that is in heaven and earth.

Which take up the simple out of the dust, and lyftest the poor out of the
mire.

That he may set him among the princes, even among the princes of the people.

Which makes the baren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of
children.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xiij. Psalm. Inexitu Israel de Aegypto.
When Israel came forth of Egypt and the house of Jacob from among the
strange people.

Judah was made his sanctuary Israel his domynyon.

The sea saw that and fled, Jordan turned back.

The mountains skypped like rams, and the little hills like young sheep.

What ayled the (O thou see) that thou fleddeste, and thou Jordan tournedest
back.

Ye mountains that ye skypped like rams, and ye little hills like young
sheep.

The earth trembled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob.

Which turned the hard rocks into a stondyng water, and the flynt stone into
spryngyng wells.

Not unto us (o Lord) not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise, for thy
loving mercy and faythfulnesse.

Wherefore shall the Heathen say where is now their God.

As for our God he is in heaven, he does what so ever it pleased him.

Their images are but silver and gold eue^ ye work of men's hands.

They have mouths and speak not, eyes have they, but they se not.

They have ears and hear not, noses have they but they smell not.

They have hands and handel not, fete have they but they cannot go, nether can
they speak in their throat.

They that made them let them be like unto the^, and like all such that put
their trust in them.

But let the house of Israel put their trust in the Lord, for he is their
socoure and defense.

Let the house of Aaron put their trust in the Lord, for he is their socoure
and defense.

They that fear the Lord: let the^ put their trust in the Lord for he is
their socoure and defense.

The Lord is myndefull of us, and blesses us he blesses the house of Israel,
he blesses the house of Aaron.

Ye he blesses all them that fear the Lord, both small and great.

The Lord increase you more, you and your children.

For ye are the blessed of the Lord which made heaven and earth.

All the whole heavens are the Lords, but the earth has he given to the
children of men.

The deed praise not the (O Lord) nether all the^ that go down into silence.

But we that are alive will praise the Lord from this time forth for evermore

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The C.xxxiiii. Psalm. Laudate nomen domini.
O Praise the name of the Lord, praise it (o ye servants of the Lord.)

Ye that stand in the house of the Lord in the courts of the house of our
God.

O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracyous, o sing praises unto his name
for it is lovely.

For why the Lord has chosen Jacob unto him self, and Israel for his own
possession.

For I know that ye Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.

What soever the Lord pleases, so does he in heaven and in earth, in the sea,
and in all deep places.

He brings forth the clouds from the ends of the world, he tourneth the
lyghtenynges unto rain.

Bringing the wyndes out of their treasures, which smote the first borne of
Egipte both of man and beast.

He has sent tokens and wonders into the myddest of the (o thou land of
Egypt) upon Pharao and all his servants.

Which smote diverse nations and slew mighty kings, Sion ye king of Amorytes,
Og the king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan.

And gave their lands for an heritage, unto Israel his people.

Thy name (o lord) endures for ever so does thy memoryall (o Lord) from one
generation to another,

For the Lord wylauenge his people, and be gracyous to his servants.

As for the images of the heathen they are but silver and gold, the work of
men's hands.

They have mouths and speak not, eyes have they but they se not.

They have ears and yet they hear not, nether is there any breath in their
mouths.

They that make them let them be like unto them and all they that put their
trust in them.

Praise the Lord ye house of Israel, praise the Lord ye house of Aaron.

Praise the Lord ye house of Leui, ye that fear the Lord praise the Lord.

Praised be the Lord of Syon which dwells at Jerusalem.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.Cxxxv. Psalm. Confitemini domino.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord for he is gracious, for his mercy endures
for ever.

O give ye thanks unto the God of all gods, for his mercy endures for ever.

O thank ye the Lord of all Lords, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which only does great wonders, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which by his wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which laid out the earth above the waters for his mercy endures for ever.

Which has made the great lyghtes for his mercy endures for ever.

The son to rule the day, for his mercy endures for ever.

The moon and the stars to govern the night, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which smote Egypt with their first borne, for his mercy endures for ever.

And brought out Israel from among them, for his mercy endures for ever.

With a mighty hand and stretched out arm, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which divided ye reed see in two parts, for his mercy endures for ever.

And made Israel to go through the mids of it, for his mercy endures for
ever.

But as for Pharao and his, he overthrew the^ in the reed see, for his mercy
endures for ever.

Which led his people through the wilderness for his mercy endures for ever.

Which smote great kings, for his mercy endures for ever.

^ee and slew mighty kings, for his mercy endures for ever.

Sion king of the Amorites, for his mercy endures for ever.

And Og the king of Basan, for his mercy endures for ever.

And gave away their land for an heritage, for his mercy endures for ever.

Even for an heritage unto Israel his servant, for his mercy endures for
ever.

Which remembered us when we were in trouble, for his mercy endures for ever.

And has redeemed us from our enemies, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which gives food unto all flesh, for his mercy endures for ever.

O give ye thanks unto the God of heaven, for his mercy endures for ever.

O thank the Lord of all Lords, for his mercy endures for ever.

Glory be to the father and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The antheme.
O How much ought we to give thanks to God, which has not spared his own
son, but gave him for us all, and he borne of an immaculate virgyn was made
man and redeemed us from our vain conuersacio^ which we received by ye
tradicio^ of their fathers, not with corruptyble silver and gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ as of a lamb undefiled and without spot, to him
therefore be continual praise, whose mercy endures for ever.

Matthew.i. Chapter.
THe Angel of the lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream, saying: Joseph ye
son of David fear not to take unto the Marye thy wife, for that which is
conceived in her is of the holy ghost, she shall bring forth a son, and thou
shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.

Thanks be to God. The hymn.
LEt us praise the Lord omnipotent,
Which on his people is so tender,
Magnifye him with heart diligent,
For due thanks we can not render.
From the heavens he descended,
In the womb of a virgyne pure,
He shed his blood our fautes to amend,
And of our sick souls did the cure.
No thy child o mother make thy peticion,
Our infirmite having in remembrance,
That he by grace may amend our condition,
And thou by prayer to make intretaunce.
Now Christ which have paid the price,
Of our sin and preuaricacion,
Se us not dampened in any wise,
Which thou have bought by thy passion.
O vyrgyne Mary most gracyous,
O mother of Christ incomperable,
To thy sweet son pray for us,
That he in deaths hour be favorable.
Glory be to the son of myghtes most,
That of a vyrgyn chaste was bore,
Glory to the father and to the holy ghost,
To them be praysynge for evermore. So be it.
The versycle. Grace in thy vysage increases evermore. The answer. Thou have
ben blessed of God therefore. The antheme. O Lord most. etc.


The song of the blessed Mary. Magnificat anima.
MY soul magnifyeth the Lord.

And my sprete has rejoiced in God my savior.

For he has looked on the low degree of his hand maiden, behold now from hens
forth, shall all generacions call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has done to me great things, and blessed is his name.

And his mercy is always on the^ that fear him through out all generacions.

He has showed strength with his arm he has scatered them that are proud
in the ymaginacio^ of their hearts.

He that put down the mighty from their seats and has exalted them of low
degree.

He has filled the hongry with good things, and has sent away the rych
empty.

He has remembered mercy: and has helped his servant Israel.

Even as he promised to our fathers Abraham, and to his sede for ever.

Glory be to ye father, and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. O Lord most merciful God which of thy mere mercy have chosen
the blessed vyrgyne Mary to by the mother of thy son Jesus Christ, whom thou
so enkyndlest with thy love and replenyshedest her with grace that not only
her mouth but also her soul did magnifye the o lord and set forth thy
praises. Grant us Lord to have a fervent love toward the that feigned
devotion set aside we may also with our souls magnifye the, and give
continual thanks for the redemption that we have by Jesus Christ. The
versycle. Lord God hear my prayer. The answer. And let my cry come to the.


The prayer.
O Lord which by the annunciation of thy angel have given us knowledge of the
incarnacion of thy son Christ pour thy grace in to our hertes, yt we
trusting in him through his passion and death may be brought to the glory
of the last resurrection. By the same our lord Jesus Christ, which lives and
reygneth one God with the father and the holy gooste world without end. So be
it.

The memory of the holy ghost.
The antheme. Come holy spirit of God, inspire thou the hertes of them that
believe in the, and kyndle in them the fire of thy holy love. The versycle.
Send forth thy spirit, and they shall be made new. The answer. For so renuest
thou the soul of man.


The prayer.
O God which have instructed the hertes of the faithful, by the inspiracion of
ye holy ghost, grant that we in the same spirit may favor the truth, and
evermore rejoice in his holy consolacion. By Christ our Lord. So be it.

A memory of the most holy Trinite.
The antheme. Deliver us, save us, iustifye us, O blessed Trinite. The
versycle. Bless we the father, and the son, with the holy ghost. The
answer. Praise we him and exalte we him evermore.


The prayer.
Almighty and everlasting God which have granted to us thy servants
through confession of true faith, for to acknowledge the glory of the eternal
Trinite, and to honor the, one God in thy almighty majesty, we beseech the
that through our steadfastness in ye same faith we may be always defended
from al adversity, which lyuest and reygnest one God, world without end. So
be it.

A memory of our Lady.
The antheme. O glorious mother of god, o perpetual vyrgyn Mary, which dydest
bear the lord of al lords, and alone of all other dydest give suck unto the
king of angels, we beseech the of thy pytie to have us in remembrance, and to
make intercession for us unto Christ, yt we being supported by his help may
come unto the kingdom of heaven. The versycle. O holy mother of God perpetual
vyrgyn Mary. The answer. Pray for us unto the Lord Jesus Christ.


The prayer.
Grant we beseech the O Lord God that thy servants may enjoy contynuall
health of body and soul, and through the gracious intercession of blessed Mary
perpetual virgyn that we may be delivered from this present heaviness, and to
have the fruycion of the eternal gladness. By Christ our Lord. So be it.

A memory of all saints.
The antheme. Al ye blessed saints, and elect servants of god have us in
remembrance before God that through the help of your prayers it may please
him us to assocyate with you. The versycle. Rejoice in the Lord you that be
justified. The answer. And be you all glad that in heart be rectifyed.


The prayer.
WE beseech the good lord that thou being pleased with the prayer of all
thine holy saints, will both grant us pardon of our defautes, and give us
also perpetual remedy for them. By Christ our Lord. So be it.

A memory of the passion of Christ.
THe dead corpse of Christ that blessed man,
From the cross was loused and taken away,
At euensonge time, but alas where was the^
His crown of glory and his great strength yt day,
Full privily within the godhed it lay,
Yet would he his cruel death suffer thus,
The true medicyne of life to bring to us,
The versycle. We worship ye Christ with praise and benedictio^. The answer.
For thou redemest the world by thy holy passion.


The prayer.
Lord God from God, and light from light. which according to the
commandment of the father dyddest, vouchsafe to redeem mankind with thine
own blood in the patible of ye cross, we mekely beseech the by the virtue and
power of so glorious a passion that thou wylt not do unto us according to our
sins, but after thy mercy save us thy unworthy servants, thou also rise up
to our help, and be to us the tower of stre^gthe and the inexpugnable bukler
of righteousness, again the face of both corporal and spiritual enemy. And
also mercyfully deliver us from all sin and pain of the same, and from all
aduersite of body and soul mercyfully defend us, which lyueste and reygnest
one God world without end.

So be it.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us from sorrowful
heaviness, and bring us to the joy of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of our Lady.
HOly Mary pray to thy son,

The weke in spirit to encorage,

To socoure the miserable in their affliction To comfort the sorrowful their
sorrows to aswage. And to his people abundantly, Of his graces to give, and his
verite, to the clergy to preach incessantly.

And to women, the to follow with humilite.

The versycle. Holy mother of God make thy peticion. The answer. That we may
obtain Christ's promyssion.


The prayer.
O Lord God omnipotent extend thy mercy on us, and grant that we which
makes a memoryal of thy son and his mother may have always the mind to
follow them in this present life, and after to come to the life everlasting by
Christ our Lord. So be it.

The glorious passion of a vyrgyns son, Bring us to the bliss of the
fathers kingdom. So be it.

What is meant by this word (Complyne.) This word complyn, is no more to say
but an accomplishement or fulfyllynge. And for so much as of all the seruyces
that are daily done in the church, this is the last, therefore it is called
complyne, as who should say, that in the same, all the holy service of the
day is fullye complete and ended.
Convert us (O God) our sauyoure.

And turn thy wrath away from us.

O God bend thyselfe into my help.

Lord have the to help me.

Glory be to the father, and to ye son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. O Lord, etc.


The.iiij. Psalm. Cum inuocarem exaudiuit.
Hear me when I call (O God) of my righteousness, thou that confortest me in
my trouble.

Have mecy upon me, and harken to my prayer.

O ye sons of me^, how long will ye blaspheme my honor, why have ye such
pleasure in vanite and seek after lies.

Know this that the Lord deals meruelously with his saint, and when I call
upon the Lord he hears me.

Be angry, but sin not, common with your own hertes upon your beds, and
remember your selves.

Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the lord, there
be many that say, who will do us any good?

Where as thou (O Lord) have showed us ye light of thy countynaunce.

Thou reioysest mine heart, though their increase be great both in corn and
wine.

Therefore will I lay me down in peace and take my rest, for thou Lord only
set me in a sure dwelling.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.xxx. Psalm. In te domime speraui.
IN the (o Lord) is my trust, let me never be put to confusion, but deliver
me in thy righteousness.

Bow down thine ear to me, make have to deliver me, be thou my strong rock
and a house of defense, that thou may save me.

For thou art my strong hold and my castle, O be thou my guide, and led me
for thy names sake Draw my out of the net that they have laid preuely for
me, for thou art my defense.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou haste delivered me (O Lord) thou
God of truth. Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xxxiii. Psalm. Ecce nunc benedicite dominum.
Behold, O praise the Lord all ye servants of the Lord, ye that by night
stand in the house of the Lord.

O lift up your hands in the night unto the sanctuary, and praise the Lord.

The lord that made heaven and earth, bless the out of Sion.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xxxvii. psalm Confitebor tibi domine.
I Will give thanks to the (O Lord) with my whole heart, even before the
gods will I sing praises unto the.

I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name.

Because of thy loving kyndnesse and truth, for thou have magnifyed thy
word, according unto thy great name.

When I call upon the, hear thou me, and endew my soul with much strength.

All the kings of the earth shall praise ye (o lord) when they hear the
words of thy mouth.

Ye they shall sing in the ways of the lord that great is the glory of the
Lord.

For though the Lord be hye, yet has he respect unto the lowly, as for ye
proud he beholds him a far of.

Though I walk in the myddest of trouble, yet shall I not fear, for thou
refreshest me, thou shall stretche forth thine hand upon the furyoufnesse of
mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.

The Lord shall make good for me, ye thy mercy (O Lord endures for ever,
despise not then the work of thine own hands.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be.

The antheme Have mercy on me Lord, and hear my prayer.


The Chapter.
THe benignite and humanite of God our savior has appeared, not for the
deeds of righteousness, which we wrought but after his great mercy he saved
us, by the fountain of the new birth and renuynge of the holy ghost which he
shed on us abundauntly, through Jesus Christ our savior.

Thanks be to God. The hymn.
O Lord of the world the savior.
Which have this day saved us
In this night, be our protector,
And in all times be gracious.
Mercyfully help us now,
And spare us to the prayenge,
Our sins away also do thou,
And our darkness thou lyghten.
Thou of our sense the renuer,
With hearty desire we do pray,
That with chaste mind and pure,
From our beds rise we may.
O vyrgyn Mary most gracyous,
O mother of Christ incomperable,
To thy son pray for us,
That he in the hour of death be favorable.
Glory be to the Lord of myghtes most,
That of a virgyn chaste was bore,
Glory be to the father and to the holy ghost,
To them be praise for evermore. So be it.
The versycle. Keep us Lord as the apple of the eye. The answer. Under the
shadow of thy wings defend us.


The song of Simeon. Nunc dimittis seruum tuum domine.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
promysse. Lord my eyes have seen thy saving health.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

Light to be showed unto the Gentyles, and to ye glory of thy people of Israel.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The antheme. O Lord, save us waking, and keep us slepynge, that with Christ
we may wake, and quietly to rest in peace. The versycle. O Lord hear my
prayer. The answer. And give hearing to my clamoure.


The prayer.
Lord which by the annunciacion of the angel have given us knowledge of the
incarnacyon of thy son Jesus Christ pour thy grace into our hearts, yt we
trusting in him through his passion and death may be brought to the glory of
the last resurrection. By the same our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and
reygneth, one God, with the father, and the holy ghost world without end. So
be it.

A memory of the passion of Christ.
THe hope of our life ever to endure,
Of Jesus the noble and blessed body,
At co^plyne time was brought to sepultur
Spyced and adorned, fragant and swetely,
Of scripture complete was then the mystery,
Therefore Jesus grant me thy wounds tender,
And thy death busely still to remember.
The sum of the whole or fynall prayer.

O blessed Christ these hours canonical,
To the I offer with meke devotion,
For as thou have suffered those pains all,
In thy grievous agony, by like season,
So by the remembrance of thy passion,
Make me, according to thy busynes,
Partener of thy crown and glory endless,
The versycle. We worship the Christ, with praise and benediction. The
answer. For thou redemest the world from all afflitio^,


The prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, in whose power al things are put, and there is none that
ca^ resyst thy will, which dydest vouchsafe to be borne to dye and to rise by
the mysterye of thy most holy body, and by thy five wounds, and by the
effusion of thy most precious blood, have mercy on us, even as thou knoweste
to be necessary for our souls and bodies, deliver us from the temptacio^ of
the deuell and from all things, with the which thou know us to be troubled
with, and keep us and strength us in thy service, unto the end, and give us
true amendemement and space of true penance, and of our sins, also grant
us remission, and make us brethren and systerne, friends and enemies to love
together, and with all thy saints in thy kingdom without end to have joy,
Which lyuest and reygnest God, with God the father, and the holy gooste,
world without end. So be it.

Let us praise the Lord. And give him thanks with one accord.

The glorious passion of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us from sorrowful
heaviness, and bring us to the joys of paradyse. So be it.

A memory of our Lady.
The rod of Iesse has floryshed,
Replenyshed with the holy ghost,
Which upward to go us has monyshed,
In passing the hills to Zacharies coast,
The versycle. Holy mother of God make thy peticion. The answer. That we may
obtain Christ's promission.


The prayer.
WE beseech the Lord Jesus Christ, that the most holy vyrgyn Mary thy mother
may pray for us unto thy holy mercy, now and in the hour of death, whose
soul in the hour of thy blessed passion the swearde of sorrow perced tho row,
which yet in thy glorious resurrection exceeding gladness made joyful, which
lyuest and raygnest for ever.

The dolorous passion of the vyrgyns son, Bring us to the bliss of the
fathers kingdom. So be it.

O merciful father have pytie therefore,
On us poor wretches miserable and thrall,
Seeing thy son that vine cluster pressed sore,
And from the pestylens of death eternal,
Keep us by voydynge the fend infernal,
And join us with them which rewarded be,
With eternal life, seeing the deytie.
The versycle. We do pray the, and do pray the father of Christ most
merciful. The answer. That thou intend and defend us from death that is
most sorrowful.


The prayer.
Grant us we beseech the father almighty thy grace, that we which of the
incarnacion nativity, passion, glorious resurrection, and marvelous ascencion
of the son, of the coming also of the holy gooste with reverence do make a
remembrance, by the grace of the same holy ghost we may rise from the death
of the soul and with the life an eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. So
be it.

A prayer of Christ our sauyoure.
HAyle heavenly king, father of mercy, our life, our swetnes, our hope, all
hayle, unto ye do we cry which are the banyshed children of Eua unto the do we
sygh, weeping and waylyng in the vale of lamentacio^, come of therefore our
advocate, cast upon us those merciful joys of thyn and after this our
banyshment show unto us the glorious light in thy heavenly kingdom, o mercy
full, o holy, o sweet sauyoure.

The prayer.
Almighty eternal God which by the operacio^ of the holy ghost dyddest
wonderfully prepare the body and soul of the glorious vyrgyn and mother Mary,
to the end it should be a mete habitacion, for thy only begotten son, grant
that we may be saved from all instante euylles and eternal death through the
inestimable merits of him in the remembrance of whose death we take joy and
comfort. By the same Christ our Lord. So be it.

TO the holy and indivisible trinite, to the humanite of Jesus Christ crucified,
glory infinitely be given of every creature world without end. So be it.

Blessed be the sweet name of our Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the glorious
vyrgyn Mary for evermore.

And the souls of all true beleuers being departed through the mercy of God
may rest in peace. So be it.

Praysynge be to God, peace unto the living, and rest unto the dead. So be it.

Here after follows a devout prayer unto Jesus our savior.
O Bontefull Aesu, O sweet Jesus, O Jesus the son of the pure virgyn Mary full
of mercy and truth, O sweet Jesus after thy great mercy have pity upon me, O
benygne Jesus I pray the by the same precious blood, which for us miserable
sinners, thou wast content to shed in the alter of ye cross, that thou
vousafe clean to avoid all my wickedness, and not to despise me humbly this
requyrynge, and upon thy most holy name Jesus calling. This name Jesus is
the name of health. What is Jesus but a sauyoure? O good Jesus that have me
created, and with thy precious blood redeemed, suffer me not to be dampened who^
of naught thou have made. O good Jesus Christ let not my wickedness destroy
me, that thy almighty goodness made and formed, O good Jesus reknowlege that is
thine in me: and wype clean away that aleneth me from the. O good Jesus, wha^
time of mercy is, have mercy upon me, and destroy me not in time of thy
terryble judgment. O good Jesus, though I wretched sinner for my most grievous
offenses, have by thy very justice deserved eternal pain: Yet I appell from
thy very righteousness, and steadfastly trust in thy inefiable mercy: So that
thou as mylde father and merciful Lord will take pitye upon me. O good Jesus
what profit is in my blood, sith that I must dyscende into eternal
corruption? Certainly they that be dead shall not magnifye the, nor likewise
all they that go to hell. O most merciful Jesus have mercy upon me, O most
sweet Jesus deliver me, O most meke Jesus be unto me sinner favorable, O Jesus
admytte me a wretched sinner in to the nombre of the^ yt shall be saved, O Jesus
ye health of them that believe in the, have mercy upon me, O Jesus the sweet
forgyuenes of all my sins, O Jesus the son of the pure vyrgyne Mary, endue
me with thy grace, wisdom, charity, chastity, and humilite, ye and in all
my aduersyties steadfast pacie^s: so that I may perfectly love the and in the to
rejoice and have my only delight in ye world with out end. So be it.

The antheme
O Glorious king which amongst thy saints art laudable and nevertheless
ineffable thou art in us Lord, and thy holy name has been called upon by us,
therefore do not forsake us Lord God, and in the day of judgment vousafe to
bestow us among thy saints and elect, o blessed king.

A prayer unto Christ.
O Maker of heaven and earth, king of kings and Lord of Lords which of
nothing dyddest make me to thy image and lykenes and dyddest redeem me with
thine own blood, whom I a sinner am not worthy to name, nether to call upon,
humbly I desire the, and mekely pray the that gently thou behold me thy
wicked servant and have mercy on me which had mercy on the woman of
Canane, and Mary Magdalene, which dyddest forgive the publicane, and the these
that hanged on the cross, unto the I confess, oh most holy father my sins
which if I would, I can not hyd fro the. Have mercy on me Christ, for I
wretch have sore offended the, in pride in covetous, in glotony, in lechery, in
vayn glory, in hatred in envy, in adultery, in theft, in lyenge, in
bacbytynge, in sporting, in dyssolute and wanton laughing, in idle words, in
hearing, in tastynge, in touching, in thinking, in speaking, in workynge,
and in always in, which I afrayle man and most wretched sinner, might sin,
my fault, my most grievous defaulte. Therefore I most humbly pray beseech thy
gentelnes, which for my health, descended from heaven which did hold up David,
he should not fall into sin. Have mercy on us (oh Christ) which dyddeste
forgive Peter yt did forsake ye. Thou art my creatoure, my helper, my maker and
my redemer my governor, and my father, my lord my god, my king, you art my
hope, my trust my gouernyng, my help, my comfort, my strength, my defense, my
redemption, my life, my health, my resurrection, you art my stedfastnes, my
refuge or so coure, my light, my desire and my help, I most humbly and
hertly desire and pray the, help me, defend me, and make me strong, and
comfort me, make me steadfast, make me merry, give me light, and vysite me,
revive me again which am dead, for I am thy making and thy work.

Oh Lord dispice me not, I am thy servant thy bond man, although evil,
although unworthy and a sinner. But what soever I am, whether I be good or bad
I am ever thyn, therefore to whom shall I fly except I fly unto the? If thou
cast me of, who shall or will receive me, if thou dyspise and turn thy face
from me, who shall look upon me? and recognize and knowledge me, (although un
worthy) coming to the for although I be vile and unclean, thou can make me
clean if I be sick thou can heal me. If I be dead and buried, thou canste
reuyue me, for thy mercy is much more the^ my iniquyte, thou can forgive me
more than I can offend. Therefore (oh Lord) do not consider, nor have respect
to the nombre of my sins, but according to the greatness of thy mercy
forgive me, and have mercy on me most wretched sinner. Say unto my soul I am
thy health, which saydest I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
live and be converted. Turn me (oh Lord) to the and be not angry with me, I
pray the most meke father and for thy great mercy, I most humbly beseech ye
that thou bring me to the bliss, that never shall cease. So be it.

The.xv. prayers called the xv. Ooes.
The.xv. prayers followynge called commonly the.xv. Ooes are for forth in
diverse laten prymers with goodly prynted prefaces, promisynge to the sayers
thereof many things does folyshe and false, as the delyueraunce of xv. souls
out of purgatory, with other like vanities: yet are the prayers self right
good and virtuous, if they be said without any such supersticious trust or
blind confidence. And for as much as these prayers are a goodly and godly
meditacion of Christ's passion we have not thought it nether to us grievous,
nether to this prymer superfluous to set them in this place.

The.i. prayer.
O Jesus endless swetnesse to all that love the, a joy passing and exceadyng,
all gladness and desire. Thou sauyoure and lover of al repentaunt sinners,
that lykeste to dwell (as thou saydeste thyselfe) with ye children of me^, for
that was the cause why thou wast incarnate and made man in ye end of ye
world. Have mind blessed Jesus of all ye bitter sorrows that thou suffered in
thy manhood, drawing nygh to thy most wholesome passion, the which passion
was ordained to be in thy deuyne heart, by counsel of the holy trinite for
the raunsume of al mankind. Have mind blessed Jesus of all ye great dreades,
anguyssh^s, and sorrows, that thou suffredest in thy tender flesh, before thy
passion on the cross, when thou wast betrayde of thy disciple Judas, to the
Jews which of singular affeccion that thou haddeste to them should have been
thine especyall people, after time that thou had made thy prayer upon ye
mount of olyuete, and swettest there both blood and water. Also have mind of
the great anguyshe that thou wast in, when thou waste taken of the false Jews
and by false witness accused. And at Jerusalem in time of Easter, in the
floryshynge youth of thy body, without trespass receauedest thou thy judgment
of death upon the cross unjustly, where also thou wast dispoyled of thine own
clothes, blyndfelde, buffeted, bound to a pyllar and scourged, and with
thorns crowned, and with a reed smytten on the head, and with innumerable
pains thy body was all to bruised and torn. For mind of this blessed passion I
beseech the benygne Jesus grant me before my death very contricion, true
confession and amendment of my life, and of all my sins remissyon. So be it.
Our father. etc.

The.ii. prayer.
O Blessed Jesus maker of all the world, that of a man may not be measured,
which closeste in thy hand all ye earth. Have mind of thy bitter sorrow first
when the Jews fastened thy blessed hands to the cross with blunt nails.

And to increase more thy pains they added sorrow upon sorrow, to thy bitter
wounds when they perced thy tender fete because thou woldeste not accord to
their will. And so cruelly they drew thy blessed body in length and breadth, to
ye measure of the cross, that all the joints of thy lymmes were both loused
and broken, for mind of thy blessed passion. I beseech the benygne Jesus give
me grace to keep with me both thy love, and thy dred. So be it.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

The third prayer.
O Jesus heavenly physician, have mind of thy langour, and blewnes of thy
wounds and sorrow, that thou suffered in the heygh patible of the cross, when
thou waste lift up from the earth, that thou wast al to torn in all thy lymmes
whereof there was no lymme abydyng in his right ioynte so that no sorrow was like
to thine, because that from the souls of thy fete, to the top of thy head,
was no whole place: and yet forgetting in manner all those grievous pains, thou
praydeste devoutly, and charitably to thy father for thy enemies, saying:
father forgive it the^ for they wot not what they do. For thy charitable
mercy that thou shewedest to thine enemies, and for mind of those bitter
pains, grant me that this mind of thy bitter passion be to me plenary
remission and forgiveness of all my sins. So be it.

Our father which art in. etc.

The.iiij. Prayer.
O Jesus very fredome of angels, the paradyse of all goostly pleasures. Have
mind of the dread and hydeous fearfulnes that thou suffered when all thine
enemies, like unto most wodde lions compassed the about, smyttynge the, and
spyttynge on the, scratchynge the, and with many other grievous pains
tormentynge the, for mind of all these dispytfull words, cruel beatynges, and
sharp torments, and all the cruel pains which thine enemies put the to. I
beseech the (blessed Jesus) deliver me from al mine enemies bodily and goostly,
and give me grace to have the defense and protection of health everlasting,
against them, under the shadow of thy wydges.

So be it. Our father which. etc.

The.v. prayer
O Jesus myrrour of the dyuine clerenes have mind of that dread and heaviness
which thou had, when thou hangest naked and miserable on the cross, and
all thy friends and acquayntaunce stood against the, and foundest comfort of
none but only thy most loving mother faithfully standing by the with great
bytternes of heart, whom thou dyddest betake to thy well-beloved disciple,
sayenge-Lo woman thy son, and likewise to ye disciple. Lo thy mother. I
beseech ye blessed Jesus, by the swearde of sorrow that the^ persed her heart, to
have compassion on me in all my troubles and afflictions bodily and goostlye,
and give me comfort in all time of tribulacio^. So be it.

Our father which art. etc.

The.vi. prayer.
O Jesus, king most worthy to be loved, and friend most to be desired. Have
mind of ye sorrow that thou had when thou beheldest in thy myrroure of thy
most clear majesty, the predestination of all thy chosen souls, that should
be saved by the merytes of thy passion, for mind of the depnes of thy great
mercy which thou had upon us lost, and dysperate sinners, and namely for
the great mercy that thou shewedest to ye thief that honge on the cross,
saying this: This day thou shalt be with me in paradyse. I pray the
(benygne Jesus) to show thy mercy on me in ye hour of my death So be it.

Our father which art. etc.

The.vij. prayer.
O Jesus well of endless pytie that saydest on the cross of thy passion by
inward affection of love (I thirst) that is to say the health of man's
soul, for mind of this blessed desire I beseech the benygne Jesus kyndell our
desire to every good and perfyte work: the thyrst of concupyscence, and
burning of al worthy love in us utterly kole and extynguyshe. So be it.

Our father which art. etc.

The.viij. prayer.
O Jesus swetnesse of hearts and goostly pleasure of souls, I beseech the for
the bytternes of the aysell, and gall, that thou tasted and suffered for us at
the hour of thy death grant that we may worthily receive thy most blessed
body and blood the which was betrayde and shede for the remedy of our sins
and comsorte of our souls. So be it Our father which art. etc.

The.ix. prayer.
O Jesus royal strength, and goostly joy: have mind of the anguyshes and
great sorrows, that thou suffered, when thou cried to thy father with a mighty
voice, for the bytternesse of thy death, and also for the scourgynge of ye
Jews, saying this: O my God, O my God, why haste thou forsaken me? By this
paynfull anguyshe for sake not us in the anguyshes of our death, our blessed
God. So be it.

Our father which art in. etc.

The.x. prayer.
O Jesus beginning, and end, way, life, and virtue in every mean have mind
that fro the top of thy head unto the sooles of thy fete thou suffredest for
us, to be drowned in ye water of thy payneful passion, for mind of this great
pain, and namely for the depenes and wydenes of thy wou^des. I beseech the
blessed Jesus, teach me the large precepte and commandments of love, which am
drowned al in foul sin. So be it.

Our father.

The.xi. prayer.
O Jesus depnes of endless mercy, I beseech the for the depnes of thy wounds that
went through thy tender flesh and thy veins that thou vouchsafe to draw me
out being drouded in the depnes of sin. And hyde me ever after in the holes
of thy wounds, from the face of thy wrath, unto the time Lord that thy
dredful fury be passed. So be it.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

The.xij. prayer.
O Jesus myrrour of truth, token of unity, and sure bond of charity. Have mind
of thyn innumerable pains and wou^des which from the top of thy head, to ye
soole of thy foot, thou wast wounded, and of the wicked Jews thou wast all to
torn and rent. And all thy body made read with thy most holy blood, the
which great sorrow (blessed Jesus) in thy clean virgins body thou suffredest.
What myghtest thou do more for us the^ thou dyddest? Therefore (benygne Jesus) I
pray ye heartily to write al thy wou^des in my heart, with thy most precious
blood, that I may both read in them thy dread and thy love. And that I may
still continue in praysynge, and thanking the to my lives end. So be it.

Our father which art. etc.

The.xiii. prayer.
O Jesus most mighty Lion king immortal and most victorious. Have mind of
ye sorrow that thou suffredest when al ye powers thy heart and body failed the
utterly: and then thou enclynynge thine head, saydest thus: It is all done.
For mind of that anguyshe and sorrow: Have mercy on me, when my soul in the
last consummacion and departing of my breath shall be anguyshed and troubled. So
be it.

Our father which art. etc.

The.xiiij. prayer.
O Jesus the only begotten son of almighty God the father, the bryghtnes and
figure of his godly substance. Have mind of that entyer commendacion, in which
thou dyddest commend thy sprete into the hands of thy father: and with a
torn body, and broken heart showing to us for our ransom, the bowels of thy
mercy for the redemynge of us dyddest give up thy brethe. for mind of that
precious death, I beseech the (king of saints) comfort me to with stand
the fend, the world and my flesh, that I may be dead to the world, and
loving goostly toward the. And in the last hour of my departing, fro the
world, receive my soul, coming to the which in this life is an outlawe, and
a pilgrim So be it. Our father which art. etc.

The.xv. prayer.
O Jesus very true and plentuous vine, have mind of the most exceadynge and
abundaunt effusion of blood that thou sheddest most plenteously, as if it had been crusshed out of a ripe cluster of grapes, when thou upon ye cross dyddest
tread that press alone gave us drink both blood and water out of thy side,
being perced with a knights spear, so that in all thy body was not left a drop
of blood nor of water, then at the last like a bundel of myrre thou wast
hanged on the cross on high, where thy tender flesh waxed wanne, the lycoure
of thy bowels was dried up For mind of this thy most bitter passion (sweet
Jesus) wound my heart that the water of repentance, and tears of love, may
be my food both night and day. And (good Jesus) turn me whole to the, that my
heart may be ever to the a dwelling place, and that my living may be ever
plesaunt and acceptable, and that the end of my life may be so commendable,
that I may perpetually praise ye with all thy saints in bliss. So be it.

Our father which art. etc.

I believe in God. etc.

Here after follows the seven penitential Psalms.
Why that these.vii. psalms following are called penitential, and be chefely
noted above other, the common opinion and mind of many writers is and has been, that the king and prophet David co^puncte or s^ryken with hearty
repentance, of his grievous adultery committed with Bersabe, and the detestable
murder of vrye her husband, being his knight and servant (after he was
admonyshed by Nathan the prophet of God) should make them specially to declare
his inward sorrow, and deye contricion, that he took for the same. But whether
it were done upon that intention or not, that I refer to the judgment of
other. Yet this is very certain, that they may well and of good co^gru^nte be
called penitential for because that penance in them is so diligently so often
and manyfestly treated, repeted, and commended as in the self psalms is easly
to be perceived.



The antheme. Remember not. etc.


The.vi. Psalm. Domine ne in furore tuo.
Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, neither chasten thou me in thine anger.

Have mercy on me Lord for I am sick, heal me lord for my bones are bruised.

And my soul is very sore troubled, but how long Lord.

Turn the Lord and deliver my soul, save me for thy mercy.

For there is none in death that have mind of the and in hell who will knowledge
the.

I have labored in my sorrow I shall every night wash my bed, with tears shall
I wete the place where I lie.

Mine eye is troubled with woodnesse, I have waxed old among all mine enemies.

Avoid from me all ye that work wickedness, for the Lord has herd the
noise of my weeping. The Lord has herd my prayer, the Lord has herd my
petycion.

Let all mine enemies be ashamed and confounded let them be ashamed and
confounded very quyckely. Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the
holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.xxxi. Psalm. Beati quorum remiss.
BLessed are they whose iniquityes are forgeuen, and whose sins be covered.

Blessed is the man to whom God shall not impute sin, nether in his sprete is
dysceyt.

For I have holde^ me still, my bones have waxed old, whiles I cried all the
day.

For day and night have thine hands ben imburdened upon me, I was turned in
my trouble whylest my back bone was stryken.

I have made my fault known unto the, and have not hyde my unrighteousness.

I have said I shall confess my unrighteous against my self to the lord,
and thou have remytted the wickedness of my sin.

For that, shall every holy person pray unto the, in time convenient.

Nevertheless in the great flode of many waters they shall not approach unto
him.

Thou art my refuge from tribulation that has enclosed me, my joy deliver me
from them that compass me.

I shall give the understanding, and shall enstruct the in the way that thou
shalt go, I shall fasten mine eyes upon the.

Be ye not made as the horse, and the mule in who^ is none understanding.

Bind the mouths of them in snafles and brydles, that will not draw unto the.

Many are the plages of a sinner, but him that trusts in the Lord, he shall
compass with mercy.

Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye ryghteous, and rejoice all that be
vpryght in heart.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is. etc.

The.xxxvii. Psalm. Domine ne in furore.
Lord reprove me not in thy fury, neither in thine anger correct thou me.

For thine arowes are fastened in me, and upon me, have thou enforced thy
hands.

There is no health i^ my flesh, inregard of thy wrath is there no rest in my
bones, because of my sins. For mine iniquites are over passed mine head, and
are laid upon me as a heavy burden.

My wounds are puryfyed and festered by reason of my folyshnesse.

I am made wretched and crooked unto ye end, all day did I go sorowfully.

For my loins are full of illusions, and there is no health in my flesh.

I am sore afflycted and brought low, I did rore out for the sorrow of mine
heart.

Lord before the is all my desire, and my mourning is not hydden from the

Mine heart is troubled, my strength has left me and the sight of mine eyes,
and the very same is not with me.

My friends and my neighbors drew together, and stood against me.

And they that were next me stood far of, and they that laid wait for my
life set upon me.

And they that sought for me, spoke euel unto me, vanities and disceytes they
ymagened all day.

But I as one being deaf, did not hear, and as one that were dombe, not
opening my mouth.

And I was made as a man not hearing, and having countercheckes in his mouth.

For in the lord have I trusted, thou wylt hear me my Lord God.

For I have said, lest any time mine enemies tryumphe upon me, and whylest my
feet slide they spoke great things against me.

For I am prepared unto the whyppes, and my doloure is always in my sight.

For I confess my ungodliness, and shall take thought for my sin.

But mine enemies live, and are made strong over me, and they are multiplied,
which hated me unjustly.

They that requyte evil for good, detracted me because I followed goodness.

Forsake me not (O Lord my God) neither depart thou from me.

Intend toward my help, o Lord god of my health.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.ii. Psalm. Miserere mei Deus.
Have mercy upon me (Oh God) according to thy great mercy.

And according to the multitude of thy compassions, wype away mine iniquitye.

Wash me more from mine iniquitye, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge mine iniquitye, and my sin, is ever before mine eyes.

Against the only have I sinned, and have done evil in thy sight, that thou
may be justified in thy words, and vanquyshe when thou art judged.

To I was begotten in wickedness, and my mother conceived me in sin.

To thou haste loved truth, the unknown and secret things of thy wisdom,
have thou uttered unto me.

Sprynkle me Lord with ysope and so shall I be clean, thou shall wash me and
then shall I be whyter then snow.

Unto my hearing shall thou give joy, and gladness and my weykened bones shall
be refreshed.

Turn thy face from my sins, and wype away all my wickedness.

A pure heart create in me (oh Lord) and an vpryght sprete make a new within
me.

Vaste me not away from thy face, and thy holy sprete take not from me.

Restore unto me the gladness of thy salvation, and strengthen me with a
principal heart.

I will instruct the wicked that they may know thy ways, and the ungodly
shall be converted unto the.

Deliver me from bloudes (Oh Lord) the God of my health, and my tongue shall
exalte thy righteousness.

Lord open thou my lyppes, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

For if thou had desired sacryfyces, I had surely given it, but thou
delyteste not in burnte sacryfyces.

A sacryfyce to God, is a lowly spyryte a contryte, and an humble heart, thou
shalt not despise (O god.)

Deal gently of thy favorable benyuolence with Syon, that the walls of
Jerusalem may be buylte again.

Then shall thou accept the sacrifice of righteousness, oblacion, and burte
offrynges, then shall they lay calves upon thy altar.

Glory be to the father and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.i. Psalm. Domine exaudi orationem meam.
Lord hear my prayer, and let my clamor come unto the.

Turn not thy sace from me, when so ever I am troubled, and bow thine ear
unto me.

In what so ever day that I call on the hear me quyckely.

For my days have vanysshed as smoke and my bones waxed dry as a fire bronde.

I am stryken and my heart wythered like hay, because I forgate to eat my
bread.

With the noise of my mourning my bone has cloued to the flesh.

I am made like unto a Pellycane of wilderness, and am made like a night raue^
in a house.

I have waked and am made like a sparow solitary in the roufe of an house.

Al day did mine enemies rail upon me, and they that praised me conspyred
against me.

For I did eat ashes as bread and myngled my drink with weeping.

In regard of thy wrath and indygnacion, for thou taking me up dyddeste cast
me against the ground.

My days have faded as a shadow, and I have wythered like hay.

Thou Lord abydeste for ever and thy memoryal is from one generation to
another.

Thou Lord arysynge shall have mercy on Sion for it is time to have mercy on
it, for the time comes.

For ye stones thereof have pleased thy servants and they shall have ruth on
the ground thereof.

And the people shall fear thy name O Lord, and all the kings of the earth
thy glory.

For the Lord has builded Syon, and shall be seen in his glory.

He has regarded the speech of the humble, and has not despised their prayer.

Let these be written in another generation, and the people that shall be
created shall praise the Lord.

For he has looked down from his high holy place, the Lord has looked
down from heaven unto the earth.

For to hear the waylynge of them that be fettered, for to louse the sons of
the^ that were slain.

That they should in Sion declare the name of the Lord, and his praise in
Jerusalem.

In assemblynge of people together, and kings for to serve the Lord.

I answered him in the way of his virtue, show unto me the shortenesse of my
days.

Call me not back in the mids of my days into the euerlastynges of thy
year.

From the beginning thou Lord haste laid the foundation of the earth and the
works of thine hands are the heavens.

They shall peryshe, but thou abydest, and all shall wax old as a garmente.

And as a covering thou shall change the^, and they shall be changed, but thou
art one, and the same and thy years shall never peryshe.

The sons of thy servants shall dwell together and their sede shall be
directed for ever.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.C.xxix. Psalm. Deprofundis clamaui.
FRom the deep places have I called unto the (O Lord) Lord hear me.

Let thine ears be intentyue to ye voice of my prayer.

If thou (Lord) wylt look so straytly upon sinners O Lord who shall abide it.

But there is mercy with the, and because of thy law have I abyden the, O
Lord.

My soul has abyde^ in his word, my soul has trusted in the Lord.

From the morning watch unto night, let Israel trust in the Lord.

For with the Lord there is mercy, and his redemption is plenteous.

And he shall redeem Israel from all the iniquytyes of it.

Glory be the father and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.C.xlij. Psalm. Domine exaudi orationem.
Lord hare my prayer, with thine ears perceive my desire for thy truth sake,
hear me for thy righteousness.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for every person living
shall not be justified in thy sight.

For the enemy has persued my soul, has brought low my life in earth.

He has set me in darkness as the dead men of the world, and my sprete
was vexed, my heart was troubled within me.

I have been myndefull of old days, I have studied upon all thy works and in
the deeds of thy hands I mused.

I have stretched forth my hands unto the, my soul unto the as earth without
water.

Hastily hear me (O Lord) my sprete has failed me.

Turn not thy face from me lest I be like to men descendynge into a pytte.

Cause thy mercy to be herd of me betymes, for in the have I trusted.

Show me the way where I may walk, for unto the have I lift up my mind.

Deliver me from mine enemies Lord unto the have I fled, teach me to do thy
will, for thou art my God.

Thy good sprete shall conduce me into the land of ryghtfulnesse, for thy
names sake Lord thou shalt reuyue me through thine equyty.

Thou shalt bring my soul from trouble, and through thy mercy destroy all
mine enemies.

And thou shall destroy all that molest my soul, for I am thy servant.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The antheme.

Remember not (O Lord) the faults either of us or of our parents, nether
take thou vengeance on our sins. Spare (O Lord) spare thy people which thou
have redeemed with thy precious blood. Be never more angry with us.

Here after follows the xv. Psalms.
The.C.xij. Psalm. Ad dominum cum tribularer.
I Cried to the Lord, when I was in trouble, and he heard me.

O Lord deliver my soul from lyenge lyppes, and from a disceytful tongue What
may be given the, or what may be laid against the, thou disceytful tongue.
The sharp arowes of the mighty, with whote sparkelynge coals.

Woe is me for my resting place is prolonged, I have dwelled with the
inhabyters of Cedar, my soul was long in exyle.

I was peasably with them that hated peace, when I spoke unto them they
assaulted me causeless.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.C.xx. Psalm. Leuaui oculos meos.
I Lift up mine eyes into the hills, from whence help shall come unto me.

My help comes from the Lord, that made heaven and earth.

He shall not suffer thy foot to slype, neither shall he that keeps the, fall
into a slombre.

Lo he shall neither fall a sleep nor slombre, which keeps Israel.

The Lord keeps the, the Lord is thy defense, more then the right hand.

The Son shall not burn the by the day, nor the Moon by night.

The Lord keeps the from all evil, the Lord keeps even thy soul.

The Lord keep thy going in and going out, from this time forth and
evermore.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning.

The.C.xxi. Psalm. Letatus sum.
I Reioysed in those things that were said unto me, we shall go into the
lords house. Our fete were standing in thy gates Jerusalem.

Jerusalem which is builded like a city, whose particypacions is within it
self.

For there ascended the trybes even the trybes of the Lord, the testimony of
Israel to acknowledge the Lords name.

For there sat the sytters in judgment, even the seat of the house of David.

Pray ye for ye peace of Jerusalem and abundau^ce is to them that love the.

Let peace be made through thy virtue and plentuousnesse in thy houses.

For my brothers and kynreddes sakes, I prayed peace for the.

For the house of our Lord god I besought good things for the.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The.C.xxij. Psalm. Ad te Ieuaui oculos meos.
Unto the have I lift up mine eyes, which inhabytest the heaven.

Even like as the eyes of servants wayt at the hands of their masters.

As the eyes of an handmayde be at the hands of her maystres, even so be our
eyes upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy on us.

Have mercy on us O lord, have mercy on us for we are fulfilled with much
vylynesse.

For our soul is filled very much, being scorned of the rych, and despised of
the proud.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is. etc.

The.xxiij. Psalm. Nisi quia dominus.
Except the Lord had been among us (let Israel now speak) except the Lord
had been among us.

When men rose against us, peradventure they might have swallowed us up quycke.

When their fury was great against us, peradventure the water might have
souped us up.

Our soul has passed over a river, our soul peradventure might have
passed over a water in tolerable.

Blessed be the Lord, which has not suffered us to be caught with their teth.

Our soul has been delivered even as a sparowe from the foulers snare.

The snare is worn out, and we are delivered.

Our help consysteth in the name of the Lord which made heaven and earth.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xxiiij. Psalm. Qui confidunt in domino.
THey that trust in the Lord, as a mountain of Sion, he shall never more be
moved, which inhabiteth Jerusalem.

Mountains are in the cyrcuite of it, and the Lord is in the cyrcuitye of his
people, from this time forth and evermore.

For the lord shall not leave the rod of sinners upon the lot of the just,
lest the just should extend their hands unto sin.

Do well (O Lord) to the good and vpryghte in heart.

But those that swarne the Lord shall bring into bonds with them that work
wickedness, peace be upon Israel.

Glory be to the father and to the son and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xxv. Psalm. In conuertendo dominus.
When the Lord turns again, the captiuitye of Syon, then shall we be like
unto them that dream.

Then our mouth is filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.

Then shall it be said among the heathen, the Lord has done great things
for them.

Ye the Lord has done great things for us already, wherefore we rejoice.

Turn our captivity (O Lord) as the river in the South.

They that sow in tears, shall repe in joy.

They that went forth weeping and sowed their sede, shall come with joy an
bring their sheues with them.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.C.xxvi. Psalm. Nisi dominus.
Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but vain that build it.

Except the Lord keep ye city, the watch man waketh but in vain.

^t is but lost labor that ye rise up early, arise after your sitting ye
that eat the bread of soroufulnesse.

Then he has given sleep to his well-beloved, lo the heritage of the Lords
children, the reward of the fruit of the women.

^yke as the arrows in the hand of the gyau^t, even so are the children of
smyters.

Happy is the man that has his desire full of the^, he shall not be ashamed
when he shall speak with his enemies in the gate.

Glory be to the father and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xxvij. Psalm. Beati omnes qui.
BLessed are they that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways.

For thou shall eat the labors of thine own hands, o happy art thou and it
shall go well with the.

Thy wife shall be as a fruytfull vine upon the walls of thy house.

Thy children like the Olyue braunces round about thy table.

Lo thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

The Lord bless the out of Sion, that thou may est se Jerusalem in prosperyte
all thy life long.

Ye thou may se thy chyldrens children and peace upon Israel

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc,

The.Cxxviij. Psalm. Sepe expugnauerunt.
MAny a time have they fought against me from my youth up may Israel now say.
Ye many a time have they fought against me from my youth up, but they have
not overcome me.

The ungodly builded upon my back, and prolonged their iniquite.

But the ryghteous Lord has hewn the necks of the ungodly in pieces.

Let them be confounded and turned backewarde as many as have evil will at
Syon.

Let them be even as the hay upon the house tops, which wyddereth before it
be plucked up.

Whereof the mower will not fill his hand, nether he that byndeth up the sheues
his bosom.

So that they which go by, say not so much as ye Lord prosper you, we wyshe
you good luck in the name of the Lord.

Glory be to the father, and.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.C.xxix. Psalm. De profandis clamaui.
OVt of the deep called I unto the Lord (O Lord) hear my voice.

O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaynte.

If thou (Lord) wylt be extreme to mark our iniquities (o Lord) who may
abide it?

But there is mercy with the, and because of thy law have I abyden the (O
Lord.

My soul has abyden in his word, my soul has trusted in the Lord.

From the morning watch until night, let Israel trust in the Lord.

For with the Lord there is mercy and his redemption is plenteous.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.Cxxx. Psalm. Domine non est.
Lord I am not hye minded, I have no proud lokes.

I do not exercise myself in great matters, which are to hye for me.

If I did not think mekely, but did exalte my soul.

As a wenelynge is from his mother, so is the retrybulacion of my soul.

Let Israel trust in the Lord from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to the father and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The.C.xxxi. Psalm. Memento domine David.
Lord remember David and all his troubles. How he swear unto the Lord and
vowed a vow, unto the mighty one of Jacob.

I will not come within ye tabernacle of my house nor clyme into my bed.

I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lyddes to slombre.

Until I find out a place for the Lord, an habytacion for the God of Jacob.

How herd the same at Ephrata, and found it in in the woody feldes.

We will go into his tabernacle, and fall down before his fotestole.

Arise (O lord) into thy resting place, thou and the arc of thy strength.

Let thy prestes be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints rejoice.

For thy servant David's sake turn not away the presence of thine anointed.

The lord has made a faithful oath unto David and he shall not shrynke from
it, of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon thy seat.

If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testymony that I shall learn
them.

Their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore.

For the Lord has chosen Syon to be an habytacion, for himself has he
chosen her.

This shall be my rest, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

I will bless her wedowes with increase, and will satisfy her power with
bread.

I will deck her prestes with health, and her saints shall rejoice and be
glad.

There shall I make the horn of David to floryshe I have ordained a lantern
for mine anointed.

As for his enemies I shall cloth the^ with shame, but upon himself shall his
own floryshe.

Glory be to the father and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be. So be it.

The.C.xxxij. Psalm. Ecce quam bonum.
Behold how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to dwell together in
unite.

It is like the precious ointment upon the head that ran down upon the
beerde, even unto Aarons beerde.

And went down to the skyrtes of his clothyng.

Like the dew of Hermon, which fell upon the hill of Sion.

For there the Lord promised his blessing, and life for evermore.

Glory be to the father and to the son and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is. etc.

The.C.xxxiij. Psalm. Ecce nunc benedicite.
Behold, o praise the Lord all ye servants of the Lord.

Ye that stand in the house of the Lord in the house of our God.

O lift up your hands in the night to the sanctuary, and praise the Lord.

The Lord which made heaven and earth, bless the out of Sion.

Glory be to the father and to the son and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and as it is now, and ever shall be So be it.

The antheme.

Remember not (o Lord) the faults either of us or of our parents, nether take
thou ve^geau^ce on our sins, spare (o Lord) spare thy people which thou
have redeemed with thy precious blood be neuermore anger with us, but mercyfully
hear us cryenge unto the. And grant also all the saints besely to pray for
us and vouchsafe mercyfully to hear us by Christ our Lord. So be it.

The signification of this word (Letany.
Mamercus Bishop of Vienne, what time that a terribl^ earthquake fellin his
prouynce. Leo the first then being bishop of Rome, caused the people to
assemble and to go together to a long Array, prayeng and calling upon God,
which thing now we call procession* because we use in the same to proceed or go
forth. Here of it came that when any grievous plage was either send by god
among the people or any sodeyn chaunse of gladness chaunsed, procession has
always ben used, sometime to pacify gods wrath and sometime to thank him of his
benefettes. For this cause did Agape^us bishop of Rome first institute that
procession should be done every sunday throughout the year, and after him
Gregory in the time of a common pestilence caused more solemn order and
singing to be used therein, and ordained this service called (Letany) which is
a greek word, and as much in Englyssh to say as (suplycacion or prayer) whereof
it has taken his name, because that in our general processions and rogacion
days prayer and supplycacion is made unto God for the people, and for all
estates, according to the counsel of Saint Paul. 1. Timothei. ii. and diverse
other examples of scriptures.

Lord have mercy on us.

Christ have mercy on us.

Lord have mercy on us.

God the father of heaven, have mercy on us.

Gods son redemer of the world. Have mercy on us.

God the holy ghost. Have mercy on us.

Holy Trinite one God have mercy on us.

Holy Mary vyrgyn and mother of God.

Pray for us.

Saint Mychael. pray for us.

Saint Gabriel. pray for us.

Saint Raphael. pray for us.

All holy angels and archangels. pray for us.

All order of holy spretes. pray for us.

Saint Ihon baptiste. pray for us.

All holy Patryarches and Prophets. pray for us.

Saint Peter. pray for us.

Saint Paul. pray for us.

Saint Andrewe. pray for us.

Saint Ihon pray for us.

Saint James. pray for us.

Saint Thomas. pray for us.

Saint Phylyp. pray for us.

Saint James. pray for us.

Saint Matthewe. pray for us.

Saint Bartholome. pray for us.

Saint Simon. pray for us.

Saint Tathe. pray for us.

Saint Mathye. pray for us.

Saint Barnabe. pray for us.

Saint Mark. pray for us.

Saint Luke. pray for us.

All holy Apostles and evangelists. pray for us:

All holy disciples and innocents. pray for us.

Saint Steven. pray for us.

Saint Clement. pray for us.

Saint Timothe. pray for us.

Saint Dionise. pray for us.

All holy martyrs. pray for us.

All holy confessors. pray for us.

Saint Anne. pray for us.

Saint Elizabeth. pray for us.

Saint Mary Magdalene, pray for us.

Saint Martha, pray for us.

All holy vyrgyns, pray for us.

All holy saints, pray for us.

Be merciful, spare us Lord.

From all evil, Lord deliver us.

From the waytes of the deuell, Lord deliver us.

From endless dampnacion, Lord deliver us.

From imminet parel of our sin, lord deliver us.

From the assaults of deuels, lord deliver us.

From the sprete of fornication, lord deliver us.

From the desire of vain glory, lord deliver us.

From all uncleanness of body and soul, lord deliver us.

From wrath and hate, and all evil will, lord deliver us.

From unclean thoughts, lord deliver us.

From blyndnes of heart, lord deliver us.

From lightening and tempest, lord deliver us.

From sodeyne and unprovided death, lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnacion, lordr deliver us.

By thy natiuite, lord deliver us.

By thy circumcision, lord deliver us.

By thy baptyme, lord deliver us.

By thy fasting, lord deliver us.

By thy cross and passion, lord deliver us.

By thy precious death, lord deliver us.

By thy glorious resurrccion, lord deliver us.

By thy marvelous ascencion, lord deliver us.

By the grace of thy holy ghost, lord deliver us.

In the hour of death, lord succoure us.

In the day of judgment, lord deliver us.

We sinners pray the to hear us.

That thou give us peace, we pray the to hear us

That thy mercy and thy pytie may ever preserve us, we pray the to hear us.

That thou vouchsaufe to govern, and keep thy church, we pray the to hear us.

That thou give peace, concord and victory to our king and princes, we
pray the to hear us.

That thou keep all our bishops and prelates in holy religion, we pray the
to hear us.

That thou keep all the congregation of saints in thy holy service, we pray
the to hear us.

That thou preserve all Christian people which thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood, we pray the to hear us.

That thou give all our benefactours everlasting benefytes, we pray the hear
us.

That thou wylt deliver the souls of us and our parents from eternal
damnation, we pray the to hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to give and preserve the fruits of the earth, we pray the
to hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to cast upon us thy merciful eyes, we pray the to hear
us.

That thou do cause the obsequy of our service to be acceptable, we pray the
to hear us.

That thou do pluck up our minds unto heavenly desires, we pray the to hear
us.

That thou vouchsaufe to behold and releue the mysery of the poor and the
captive, we pray the.

That thou give everlasting rest to all that believe in the, both quycke and
dead, we pray the to hear. That thou vouchsafe to hear us, we pray the to
hear us.

Son of God, we pray the to hear us.

Son of God, we pray the to hear us.

Son of God, we pray the to hear us.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sin of the world, hear us Lord.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sin of the world, spare us Lord.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sin of the world, have mercy on us.

Lord have mercy on us.

Christ have mercy on us.

Lord have mercy on us.

Our father. And lead. But deliver us. etc.

The versycle. We have offended with our father. The answer. We have done
wrong and committed iniquetie. The versycle. Lord do not with us according
to our sins. The answer. Nether reward thou us after our ungodliness. The
versycle. Lord show us thy mercy. The answer. And give us thy saving
health. The versycle. And let thy mecy come upon us Lord. The answer. Thy
saving health according to thy promise. The versycle. Lord save the King and
the realm. The answer. And hear us in the day where in we call unto ye. The
versycle. Let thy prestes do on justice. The answer. And let thy saints
rejoice. The versycle. For our brothers and systers. The answer. Save (O God)
thy servants both men and women that trust in the. The versycle. Let us pray
for all Christen people. The answer. Lord save thy people and bless thine
heretage, and rule them and exalte them evermore. The versycle. Lord send
peace through thy virtue. The answer. And great abundaunce in every country.


The souls of all faithful departed by the mercy of God, let them rest in
peace.

The versycle. Lord hear my prayer. The answer.


And give hearing to my clamoure.

For remyssion of sins.

GOd to whom it is apropryed to be merciful ever and to spare, take our prayer
and and let thy pytiefull mercy assoyle them that are bond with the chain of
sinners.

By Christ our Lord. So be it.

For mercy.

Lord we beseech ye to show unto us thyn unspeakable mercy, that thou both
purge us from all our sins, and mercyfullye deliver us from the pain that we
deserve for the same. By Christ our Lord. So be it:

For the king.

Lord God of hoostes, king most mighty and strong, by whom kings do reygne,
in whose hands are the hertes of all kings. Grant unto thy well-beloved
servant H. our king continual health of body and soul, that his heart
always enclynynge to wholesome and godly counsayles, and the enemies of the
common welthe being vanquyshed, we may long inioye under him perpetual
peace, and brotherly concord.

By Christ our Lord. So be it.

ALmighty eternal god which alone do great wonders, grant unto thy
servants the bysshoppes and to al congregacions committed unto the^, ye
sprete of grace, and that in ye truth they may please the, power out on the^
ye perpetual dew of thy benediction. By Christ our Lord,

So be it.

For the people and all estates.

FOr thy pytie (Lord) we beseech ye to louse the bands of all our sins, and
through ye prayer of the blessed glorious virgyn Mary, with al thy saints,
keep us thy servants and our king and all Christian people in all holiness,
and all that by kynred of blood familiaritye, confession or prayer be alyed
unto us, cleanse them Lord of all vices, light the^ with virtues, peace and
health give unto us, avoid from us all our enemies, as well visible as
invisible, give thy charyty to our friends and to our enemies, and expel all
pestylence and famyne, and to all christian people quycke and dead, grant life
and endless rest. By Christ our lord.

So be it.

For Charytye.

O God which doste power the gifts of charytye into the hearts of the
faytfull, through grace of the holy gooste, grant unto thy servants both men
and women (for who^ we pray unto thy mercy, health of body and soul, that they
may love the with all their power, and perform with al love the things that
be pleasyng to the. By Christ our Lord. So be it.

For peace.

O God from whom all holy desires, all good counsels and all just works do,
proceed give unto us the same peace which the world cannot give: that our
hearts being obedyent to thy commandments (and the fear of our enemies
taken away) our time may be peasyble through thy proteccion. By Christ our
Lord.

For the souls departed.

GOd that art creatoure and redemer of all faithful people, grant unto the
souls of all true beleuers being dead, remyssion of all their sins, that
through devout prayers they may attain thy gracyous pardon which they have
always desired. By Christ our Lord. So be it. (*)

An instruction of the manner in hearing of the Mass, showing how and to
what intent it should be herd, the which instruction I have (by occasion)
prevented with a declaracion to the instablyshmente of the Christen faith,
concerning the Sacrament of as the altar which is consecrated in the Mass.
THe order taken of me in this prymer, (most dear reader) sets here
followynge certain meditacions to be said at the sacrynge (as we call it) of
the mass, and in the mass time, which mass is a consecracion of the body and
blood of Christ by the power of God workynge secretly in the words that are
spoken of the pressed, and institute for a special memory of Christ's passion,
set forth with certain ceremonies, and devout suffragies, to the enkyndlynge
and styryng up of the deuocions or devout minds, not only of the pressed, but
also of the hearers: to the intent that they may impende a dew honor, as
concerning their deuty to the same blessed sacrament. And for as much as
diverse people dyuersly do hear it, some for custom, some by shame compelled,
some with small devotion, some contented to hear and se what the pressed does,
thinks it enough to be present in the church while it is a doing, but not
so many (as I would wyshe) does hear the same to the end that Christ did
ordeyne it to be done for. And specially a great sort (which is worst of all)
makes this most holy sacrament. of no estimacion nor reverence, pernycyously
affyrmynge that in that sacrament is not the presence of the body and blood of
Christ. I have thought it conuenyente and some what necessary both to make a
declaracyon to the devout readers of the faith that belongs to the same, and
also to give instruccyon to what use or purpose they should frequent the
consecracyon and mynistracyon of it. Which entrepryse (gentle readers) I take
in hand, not because think my self of such excellent judgment, and
learning, that I can exquysytely and suffycyently declare and satysfye the
reader of the misteryes of so excellent and high sacrament: but that only I
would show some token of my deuty to my even Christen in the distribucion unto
him of such talent which God has lent me. And first shall I rehearse the
scriptures which the sacramentaries go about to enstablyshe their heretical
opinion, as concerning the body of Christ, presence of the same sacrament,
declarynge such places of scripture (that they have chosen) in their own
natyue sense ye hereby may appear both yt they distort ye scripture for their
singular opynio^ and also yt their opinion is no less then an heresy, and
therefore utterly to be forsaken of every true christian. Sco^dely will I
infer ye scriptures with the consent of a few sentences of the most ancient
Doctors, to the confyrmacion of the vpryght and infallyble truth and veryte.
With what evil spirit were they inspyred and inflated, which to prove that the
presence of the body of Christ is not in the sacrament of chaulter, brought in
this text of Christ written in Math. xxiiii. Then if any man shall say unto
you, lo here is Christ, or there, believe him not. What readers is ignorant to
what purpose Christ spoke these words. Christ lamenting the desolacion and
distruccion of Jerusalem which he premonished surely to ensue. Matthew.xxiii.
The Apostles came to him, and desired him to know what time these things
should come to pass. To whom Christ made this answer. Take heed that no man
deceive you, for there shall come many in my name and say: I am Christ, and so
shall deceive many. For Christ as a loving master to his disciples wyllyng
their constancy in the faith, before any such temporal trouble, premonysshed
them, that many false Christ's, many false prophets should come, to the intent
they should not be deceived. Such Antichrists of truth, (according to Christ's
saying) there were as in the Acts the.v. chapter. We read of one Theudas which
boastyng him self to be the great Prophet of God, promysyng great wonderful
things, as by his commandment to deuyde the floude of Iordayne, there cleued
unto him a nombre of men about. iiii C which he shamfully deceived. Judas also
of Galilye, of whom in the same Chapter we read, being an auctor of a sect,
and a false teacher drew many people after him, and brought them to perdicion.
Was not also Simon Magus by the means that he had bewytched the people, called
of the left and the greatest, the power of god, which is great. Act. viii. Did
not Herod also syttyng upon his judgment seat in his kyngely apparel, and
setting forth himself with a goodly oratyon made to the people, so blinded
the^ that they took him as a God. Act. ii. For the which he being inflated and
usurping to himself gods honor, the angel of the LORD smote him and was
eaten up with worms and so dyed. What shall I stand in the rehersall of many?
as of the Sorserer called Bar Jesus a false Prophet as in the Acts the.v.
Chapter does testyfy which being with Sergius paulus, withstode the preaching
of Christ's name and sought to turn away Sergius from the faith, and also of
certain other like of the which Josephus does make large mention. Again such
false Christ's and false prophets speaks Christ, for well he knew that
after his Ascencion such would come in his name and deceive many for this
cause said he unto his Apostles (to the intent they should avoid them.) If any
say unto you: lo here is Christ, believe the^ not, for there shall arise false
Christ's and false Prophets, and shall do great tokens and wonders, insomuch
that if it were possible the very chosen should be brought into error. Behold
now gentle readers, and judge if this text make any thing against the presence
of the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar. But that Christ here
only premonisshed his Apostles (as thou may now easly perceive) of false
Christ's, and false Prophets, left by them, workyng portantes, wonders and
signs, it might have chaunsed the Apostles to have been deceived, and not of
the sacrament of the altar, for in this text he minded nothing less.

With this text so and after such a forte distorted, they may prove that
Christ is not in heaven. For to be in heaven is by a like argument (after our
manner of spech) to say here or there, then if a man should say according to
the article of his faith, that Christ is syttyng on the right hand of his
father, ye should not believe him, nor yet should ye believe Steven which said as
in the Acts the.vii. Chapter does testifye, that he saw Jesus on the right
hand of God. Thus if I would deuelyshly wrast this text and with carnal
reasons persuade the same, it might be proved that Christ is no where. For if
ye say that Christ is in heaven, in the earth, in the sacrament of the altar
or any other where, this text (as they apply him) wylleth that you shall not
be believed. Yet as the one is abominable heresye so is the other, and the text
makes as much for the one as for the other.

If we had no more probacion of their falshed but this, I think it were
enough, for he that can bring no text truly aleged, but sekyth some wrastyng
work, he were to be suspectyd, and it is a vehement suspicion that his matter
is not good, which seeks a false probacion to maintain it, for the truth has
of her own, and seeks not to make falsehed her friend. Yet not in this text
alone you shall only find the maynteners of this opinion worthy to be
reprehended, but in many other as in this text also which for the setting
forth of their said opinion, they triu^pha^tly bring in. Christ to his
dysciples (murmuring against the pourynge of the precious ointment upon his
head) said, ye shall have always the poor with you, but me shall ye not have
always If we shall not have Christ always, then is he not in the sacrament
of the altar, in the which always we believe him to be.

Ye I would stand in the bare contencion of this matter, and would not labor
to confou^de the falshed and set forth the truth, I would only bring this
text of Matthew the.xxviii. Chapter, against them, which Christ after his
resurrection said to his Apostles, and lo (said he) I am with you every day
unto the end of the world, which text as the other says, that we shall not
have Christ always, where by they conclude that we have not Christ in the
sacrament of the altar, even so does it say that he is with us every day
unto the end of the world, where by we may conclude that he is in the
sacrament of the altar, and in it being present with us every day unto the
worlds end. But contencion set aparte I will as nigh as I can come to the pyth
of the truth. It is to be noted and understand that Christ (as I say in
the.xiii. Chapter of him did prophecy as concerning his first state in the
manhood was the most simple and dispysed of all which had good experience of
sorrows and infirmities which should be rekened so simple and so vile that
some should hyde their faces from him, whose pouertye in that estate was such
that as he himself does testifye Luke.ix. he had no place to put his head in,
for whose infyrme condition and low estate. Paul to the Philyppians
declarynge the complyshment of I says prophecye, testifyeth that he made
himself of no reputacion, and took upon him the nature of a servant, became
like another man, and was found in his shape as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto the death, eue^ the death of the Cross, so that Christ in
this estate was full of infyrmities, was passible and mortal (in all things as
Paul says found as man) only that in him was no sin. Wherefore when the
disciples murmured that Mary Magdalene did pour the sweet and precious
ointment upon Christ's head, he said: Ye shall have poor men with you
always, to whom when yelyst ye may do good, but me a poor man and a
passible man (as I am now) to whom you may do such corporal obsequye, you
shall not have always. For Christ after his resurreccion had no mortal body,
no passible body, no body endued or infected with infirmities, but he had then
an immortal body, an impassible body, and a glorified body, in the which body
he being present with his disciples, and speaking with the^, counted him as
though he had not ben with the^. For as Luke.xxiiii. reherseth he said: these be
the words which I spoke unto you while I was yet with you. For it must be all
fulfilled that was written of me in the law of Moses, in the Prophets, and
in the Psalms.

Note deligently how Christ says while I was with you, countynge him self
not then to be with them, with whom he was present, and to who^ he then spoke
because the^ he had not a such like body, which then endued with infyrmityes,
as theyrs were, but an immortal and inpassible body. By this text euydentlye
may be proved the right and true understanding of the other text, which they
falsely do allege, which is that Christ is not, nor will be with us always with
a presence of a mortal body, or of a despecte body. But he is with us by his
power and with a presence of an immortal body.

What should I stand in rehersall of many of their wrested aucthorities, which
a very young reader may sone deprehend that they are not taken in their natyue
se^ce. If the places of their auctorities be so exyle and feeble, much more is
their carnal and blind reasons (which take none effect in matters of faith)
are very feeble. Wherefore I think it but wast labor to rehearse any more of
the^ seeing they are but freuolous and may sone be assoyled of any true
christian. Yet these to rehearse I have thought it expedient, to the intent that
the reader may know and perceive by wrastyng of these auctorities, that all the other that they allege for this purpose be of like condition. Wherefore if
there be any auctoryte or reason brought or made against you, suspecte it and
think (as you may very well) that it is false though you for lack of
learning or knowledge can not deprehende the falshed thereof, or discuss the
parts of it.

The truth of this, is, and has been ever sense Christ's supper certainly
evident and void of al doubt to the, which with meekness do read the
scriptures, deferring the power of their own wits, and wholly commyttyng
them selves and their understanding to god, and to the instruccio^ of the grace
of his holy spirit. For in the understanding of the scriptures all fantasies,
quyddities, and inuencions of men's brains (in the which some of late days to
depely have labored) repelled and forsaken, in whose place are ye substanciall
truth, simplicite, and gods grace to be received and amplexed christ's words
syncerly to interpretate. They were to nyse in their pretty little faith which so
properly denyenge the possibilyte of Gods power enterprysed with a quydditye
to change Christ's word, that where as Christ said by manifest sentence, This
is my body. They say that he would have said, this signifies my body. But
Christ at that time was no babe, he could well speak that, that he meaned or
thought, specially to his Apostles, to whom it was given to know the
mysteries of the^ kingdom of god. Luc. viii. And to whom he used no parables,
but expounded of his own mouth. Or else they were very nigh of Christ's
council, when they can (at the least) they take upon the^ to know Christ's
thought having no part of his word to declare the same to them, ye they seem
to make Christ such one that he would say one thing and think another, and
in conclusion his word to be clean contrary to his thought. What should I stand
so long in the co^futacion of their vayn reasons in this little thing, which
(dear reader) I set forth only for a monicio^ of such heresies and for a
confirmacion of the truth to the unlearned, that they by this may learn to
beware of their deuelyssh reasons, and be confirmed in the true way, and be
enstablyshed in the same. And not for an absolute or exquisyte work which
asks much more learning and wisdom in sentence then I have here expressed.
Yet notwithstanding for the favor of the upright truth and setting forth of
the same (all their heretical inuencions and tryflyng reasons omytted and set
aparte) I will in this matter set forth grossly and plainly that I may instruct
the rude by Christ's act, word and learning.

First as saint Paul says: The shadows and figures are gone and we have the
body, we have not therefore the figure of Christ's body and blood but the self
same thing. Exodi. xvi. We have not Manna as the Jews had in deserte: We have
not the show bread of the Temple, for that manufact temple and the golden
table are passed. We have not the bread that Hely had prepared by the angel
which strengthed him forty days.iii. Reg. xix. Neither have we the bread and
wine that Melchysidech the pressed of the highest offered unto Abraham. Gene.
xiiii. For these are passed and gone before as shadows and figures, and in
their stedes have succeeded the veryte, for Christ has fulfilled all the law
and prophets (that were of him) in himself and his acts, why then should we
abide any mo fygures of him, except the estate and condition of our church be
no perfecter then the Jews sinagoge which had nothing but fygures, but that
ca^ not be. Wherefore I let pass this Jews interpretacion of Christ's words
with all their fygures and will declare by these words, the act, and learning
of Christ that in that most blessed Sacrament is (not as in a figure) the very
body and blood of Christ. For he being the wysdom of the father and very God,
equal with the father knowing all things to come, by his everlasting
knowledge, he perceived the time to draw near in the which he would suffer, he
said to his disciples. Mat. xxvi. Ye know that after two days shall be easter,
and the son of man shall be delivered, to be crucified. And I have hertely
desired to eat this easter lamb with you before I suffer. The^ he sitting
with his apostles took the bread gave thanks, and brake it and gave it to the
disciples and said: Take, eat this is my body. And he took the cup and
thanked, and gave it them, and said: Drink ye all thereof. This is my blood
of the new testament that shall be shed for many, for the remission of sins.
This do in the remembrance of me. These words mark well and let no vain nor
carnal reason seduce the. But let faith be thy guide in this matter for reason
can not apprehende the knowelege of faith, for faith is above reason it
excedeth reason, it depends not of reason. Faith as saint Paul Heb. ii. does
defyne, is a sure confidence of things which are hoped for, and a certaynte of
things which are not seen. Which faith also as saint Paul does testifye.
Romans x. comes unto us by hearing, and hearing comes by the word of God.
Thy reason and wit therefore captyue in the obsequy of Christ, and styre up
and quycken thy faith by the hearing of the word of God. The word of God as
it is above mentioned does declare that Christ taking the bread said it was
his body. Seeing then that gods word does say that Christ did transmute the
substance of the bread into his body. Give a faith to it though reason can
not attain the knowledge of it, and cease according to resons motion, to
question as the Caphernaites did. When they asked of Christ, how can this man
give us his flesh to eat, for there is nothynpe impossible to god. In these
words of Christ thou may note the institucion of the consecracion of the
body of Christ, and the auctoure and founder of the same. The auctoure and
founder of the same was no light fantasyed man. He was no lyenge man, he was
no man that by setting forth of a new sect or of a new opinion sought his
own glory. But it was Jesus Christ, the son of the eternal living God,
God and man, in whom was everlasting wysedom without decay. Everlasting
constancy without mutabilite, he being not only true, but also the very
truth, whom the voice of the father from heaven did commend saying: This is
my dear son in who^ I delight, hear him. When therefore Christ being both
true and the very truth in whom was no doublenes of spech, but playnes and
simplicite, whom the father speaking from heaven wylled us to hear) taking the
bread and blessyng it, said: This is my body, and blessyng the cup, said: This
is my blood. We ought as Christ is plain, true, and without doublenes, so
without tropys, methaphors, similitudes, signifycacions and all other crafty
quyddities and logical intencions, plainly, truly, and without doublenes to
take and receive the words as Christ has spoken them. Christ plainly by
demonstracion taking the bread, said: This is my body. What should we then
enterprise to say against him that there was not his body. The institution then
of the co^secracion of the body of Christ, was by the word of Christ, saying:
This is my body. This body, in the form of bread of Christ consecrated (for as
much as he was then departing from them: and from their eyes) that mortal and
sensible body should be subtracted, he distrybuted then being present with them
his body in that form and sort, of the which after his departing they should
take no mistrust. But that by their faith they might se him always present. By
the which they should take comfort and also by the contemplacion of that
always to have a fressh memorial or remembrance of his passion and death.
Wherefore he said to the^ Lu. xxii. This do you in the remembrance of me. In
these words we are not only monyshed to have a contynual remembrance of
Christ's death, but also it is omytted us (as for a cause of that same
remembrance. For Christ said (hoc facite. This do you. Observe therefore
diligent reader and note that Christ had (as I have above said) given them his
body they received it, he wylled them that they should do it in the
remembrance of him. What should they do? that they received at Christ's hand.
What received they at Christies hand? they received his very body.

Then Christ would they should do this, that is to receive his body (and not only
a piece of bread) in the remembrance of him. It may be further questioned,
where should they have Christ's body he being ascended into ye heavens, and
syttyng on the right hand of his father? Verily in the Sacrament of the alter
by his power now consecrated as it was before his power being no less now then
it was the^, for he that wylled them to receive his body, and drink his blood
in the remembrance of him, wrought then, and now also by his power works
the consecracion of his own body, or else how should they do that thing which
Christ wylled the^ to do. Actu^. xxii, That the very body of Christ was
received of the Apostles and of other Christians after that he was ascended it
is manifest not only in the Acts of the Apostles but also in other places, as
namely first, in the first epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians. In the
which place Saint Paul exortynge them from ydolatry certyfyeth them that as
yet the has no te^ptacion overtaken them, but such as follows the nature of
man. Wherefore he wylleth them not only to fly from ydolatry, but al so from
the partakyng of ydolatytes, that is from such meats as were offered to ydols.
Which vice he counts not to follow the nature of man, but rather to come of
deuelyssh malyte. Now to avoid the partakyng of ydolatytes. He compares or
rather makes asimilitude of the LORDS table, and the table of the deuell,
declaryng that as the partakers of the body of Christ are one body in Christ,
so the partakers of ydolatytes be one body in the deuell, and begins his
purpose after this manner. Wherefore my dearly beloved fly from ydolatrye or
fly from the worshyppyng of ydols. I speak (says he) unto them which have
discrecion. Judge ye what I say, the cup of thankesgyuyng, wherewith we give
thanks, is it not the partakyng of the blood of Christ? The bread that we
break is it not the partakyng of the body of Christ? For we many are one
bread and one body, in as much as we all are partakers of one bread. For the
proof of his sentence, that is that the receyuers of the one or of the other
are in the fellowship of the same, he says. Behold Israel after the flesh.
They that eat the sacrifyces are not they partakees of the altar. And then he
comes to the other party, in the which after he had declared that the
offrynges of the Heathen were to deuels and not to God. He says now would I
not that ye should be in the felowshyppe of deuels. And why? Because these can
not stand together and immediately he says: Ye can not drink of the cup of
the LORD and of the cup of the deuels, ye ca^ not be partakers of the LORDS
table and of the table of the deuels. So now dear reader, what express
sentence Paul has written of the body and blood of Christ which after my
censure is of such strength for the presence of the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, that it can not be iustlye resysted. Yet not withstanding if ye
lust not to give credyte to my exyle and weke judgment, give crede^ce to the
judgment of Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose, Theophelacte, Thomas, and Erasmus,
which expoundyng this place I am sure do take Saint Paul here to have spoken
of the body and blood of Christ. Whose sentences I would have here inferred,
but for auoydyng of prolixite, let the learned search the Doctors, and try
the truth. In the second chapter to the Corinthians, Saint Paul also after he
had rebuked the enormityes and abuses of the Corinthians about the receyuyng of
the body of Christ, he taught them the true use of it. In the setting forth of
the which he makes a very euydent mention of the same body of Christ, which
document and learning, which ordinances also that he delivered them, he
certifyeth them that he received it of the LORD, after the rehersall of the
words of Christ which I desire the diligent reader there to read, he does
infer godly monicions for the receyuyng of the body of Christ and declares
the danger of the evil receyuer, saying: Who so ever shall eat of this bread
and drink of this cup of the LORD unworthily shall be gylty of the body and
blood of the LORD. But let a man examyne him self and so let him eat of this
bread and drink of this cup. For he that eats and drynketh unworthily,
eats and drynkethe his own dampnacion, because he makes no difference of
the LORDS body. I can not a little marvel that me^ so malyciously and
erroniously will fall from the truth having such a clear sentence of Saint
Paul which so manifestly does declare and open the veryte of the body of
Christ in the Sacrament, that to a Christian reader as I suppose there is no
doubt nor diffycultye as concerning his faith in this matter left vndesolued.
Yet although this place be so good, and full of strengthlest? should offend
with prolixite, or discorage with tediousnes brefly nothing with me two
things in S. Paul, I hertely desire you pondre his sentence. First note that
where as saint Paul in ye beginning of his sentence, speaking of ye
sacrament, according to our sensible knowledge does call that bread, in the
end of the sentence as an exposicion to his first word calls it the body
and blood of Christ. And in the last sentence where that he says that the
unworthy receauer of the bread, does receive it to his damnacion, subuertynge
the cause adds an exposicion of his word and says: Because he makes no
difference of the Lords body. Note then and behold that S. Paul does not
call the sacrament only bread. But also namynge the same calls it the body
and blood of the Lord and the LORDS body. So bread it may be called
according to our sensible knowledge, for we se nothing but bread, we taste
nothing but bread, we feel nothing but bread, but by faith we believe the
body of Christ and no bread, for bread has no place with the body of
Christ. The other that I do note is of the unworthiness of the receauyng, and
of the pains taxed for the same S. Paul counceleth the receauers of this
sacrament to examen themselves left they should receive it unworthily, for in
so doing they shall receive it to their damnacion, and be gyltye of the body
and blood of the LORD, because they make no difference of the body of the
LORD. Now if there be not the body of Christ in the sacrament of the alter,
why does Paul council the receauers to examen themselves? should they do for
to eat a piece of bread? Or why more for the eating of this bread, then of
other bread. Further how should a man eat a piece of bread unworthily? except ye
will say that he has taken excess of it, or as the comme^ saying is that a
man is unworthy to eat of ye bread because he labors not for it which
unworthiness takes no place here in this matter. Moreover if there be not ye
body of Christ but bread, why should ye receauers for the receauynge of a piece
of bread be gylty of the body and blood of the LORD? And how should they
receive it to their dampnacion? There is no comparyson betwexte the fact and
ye pain, if it be nothing but bread, I suppose yt the justice of god will
not make a man gylty of the body and blood of the Lord for eating of a piece
of bread, without an ordinance or a law going before. Also how in the
receyuyng of a piece of bread should the reaceyuers make difference of the body
of the Lord, if the body of the LORD be not there. But for as much as S,
Paul wills us not to receive the Sacrament unworthily, for if we do, we
receive it to our da^nacio^ because we make no dyffere^ce of the body of ye
LORD. I take it that in the sacrament of the altar is the very body of Christ,
in the respect of whom we receive it worthily or unworthily, and by whose
presence if we receive it with the examynacion of our selves, we make a
dyfference of the body of the LORD. And for as much as Christ blessyng the
bread, and geuyng it to his Apostles, said: This is my body. I believe that in
the Sacrament is his body, for sure I am that he (being the truth) can not lie.
Yet for as much as the malice of heresy is not so sone quenched, but always
seeks to withstand the truth, and peradventure as the Pharisyes did against
Christ, not having what to say to him, fell to calumniacion. So will they yet,
and will say although it has been so taken for a small time, yet we have
swerued from the prymatyue church. Therefore we shall here infer the sentences
of some of the eldest and most ancient Doctors of the church, which were very
nygh to the primatyue church, by whose uniform consent we may perceive the
troth of the matter to be the surer. Tertullyan one of the ancient writers of
Christ's church next to the Apostles against Marcio an here like says these
words. Christ when he had said, that heartily he desired to eat the Easter
with his disciples. The bread taken and distrybuted to his Apostles. He made
his body, saying. This is my body. If this ancient writer being so nygh to the
prymatyue church which knew the very truth as it was received of the Apostles.
And knew also how they did, says confyrmably to our faith, and to our
understanding of the scripture it is an argument that we are in a good way and
that we truly do interpretate the scripture although a sort whotelynges think
the contrary. Saint Cyprian also a holy martyr and an ancient writer makes a
hole sermon of the supper of the LORD, in the which among many goodly
sentences of the Sacrament) as indede there is plentye) he has this sentence.
Christ this sacrament sometime does call his body, sometime his flesh and
blood sometime bread. This commen bread ye changed into flesh and blood does
procure life. etc. Although this is very manifestly spoken, yet more playnlyer
he speaks in another sentence. This bread (says he) that the Lord gave unto
his disciples through the omnipotency of the word changed not in figure or
in outward form but in nature is made flesh and as in the person of Christ
the manhood was seue and the Godhed hyd so in the visible Sacrament the deuyne
nature invisible infundeth himself to the intent that unto the Christian
religion about the Sacraments should be devotion. Is not this as plainly
spoken as any man can speak: To this man being so ancient an holy martyr, we
should and ought to give credence before. v C. Swynglins or any such other. Yet
that we may se the argument of many good men which yet were in diverse times
some other shall be recyted S. Ambrose differreth not in sentence from these, he
said: Because that by the death of the LORD we are delivered of it we declare
our selves to be myndefull in that we eat his body and drink his blood
which were offered for us. In the.vi. book of the sacraments, he does treat of
the same also. He also says: if the word of Helyas was of such power that he
causes ye fire to come down from heaven. Shall not the word of Christ be of
such power that it shall change the substance of things (that is) the
substance of bread and wine into the substance of his body and blood. It
is read of all the works of the world that he said the word, and they were
made. Therefore the word of God (that is) the son of God which could of
nothing make all things that were, can not he chasige the things that be
into it that they were not? Thou see gentle reader the sentence of S.
Ambrose, thou may perceive that he agrees with the other. S. Hierome also a
man both of great learning, and holiness, dissenteth not from this doctrine, he
says: After that the figuratyue Easter was fulfilled, and Christ with his
Apostles had eaten the Easterlambe he took the bread which conforteth the
heart of man and went to the true Sacrament of Easter that even, as in the
prefiguracion of him Melchysedech the priest of the high God did, offrynge
bread and wine, he also would set forth the truth of his body and blood. Saint
Austen also a famous man both of life and of lernyng varyeth not from those
men, but says, this in the form of bread and wine, which we se we do honor
things that we do not se (that is) the body and blood of Christ. Behold the
sentences both faithful and godly, And for as much as the wrytters of them
were men to be reputed and not disdayned, esteem them of authorite. S. Gregory
also a man of good authority followed the same trade, saying: As the
divinity of the word does fill all the world so in many places is the body
of Christ consecrated and yet be there not many bodies of Christ, but one
body and one blood. Eusebius Emisenus also a man not to be despised, says
this: The invisible pressed with his word by a secret power does change ye
visible creatures into the substance of his body and blood, pondre now
gentle readers the vnyforme consent of these doctors which (as for a certain
of them although they were in diverse times and contryes yet the holy ghost
their scole master and the master of truth taught them all (as concerning
the points of our faith) one lesson of truth. So that they all do agree in this
truth, that in the Sacrament of the altar is the very body of Christ. Many mo
mayebe rehearsed that do agree in this point which plainly were enough to fill
a hole book. Therefore shall they be omytted trusting that these few (if their
ancient holiness and learning be pondered) with the places of scripture above
rehearsed are sufficient to stay a Christians heart if he be not already
drowned in heresye. Seeing then that the scriptures which can not be but one,
and these famous doctors agreyng to the same do teach that in the sacrament
of the altar is the body of Christ. Let every true Christian (not with a
dissemblyng mouth for fear of pain, but with an unfeigned heart for the love
of the truth, not only profess, but also believe that in that sacrament is
the very body of Christ. This sacrament consecrated (not by the power of the
minister the priest) but by the power of God workyng in his word spoken of the
pressed, people should frequent for ye purpose for them which Christ did institue
it. Christ when he hab^^ consecrated his body, and delivered it to his
Apostles, said: This do you in the remembrance of me. Then should all
Christians frequent this sacrament for the rema^braunce of Christ. To what
remembrance of Christ: Verily to ye remembrance of his death and That every
Christian seeing or receyuyng his body should remember, and always have before
their eyes, that Christ's body for they: sake (which of themselves, were
unable, and insufficient to make amends) was delivered to his enemies, and for
their offense which they by none of their merits could put away was he
whypped and scourged, beaten and deluded, nailed on the cross, and with a
spear through the heart perced, and this freely out of that sweet vessel to
wass he away the offense, he shed water and blood. This to them by his
passion redeemed, and by the same to the father reconcyled, he has given the
merit of his passion, which unfeignedly, has, is, and shall be sufficient for
the sins of all the world, for he said: This is my body, which for you shall
be delivered. And this is my blood, which for you shall be shed. After this
sort al ye Christians, when you se or receive the Sacrament, have of Christ
such a remembrance and forget not to be thankful. For to this purpose you
shuldese or receive it, and not to make a gasyng stock of it and when you have
seen you have all done. So that you think you have no more to do, but to se it
or to receive it. And this that thankeful remembrance of that blessed death or
passion with the acknowlegyng of the fruits and benefytes of the same is
forgotten, and though as no part of our duetye, which of troth is the chief
part of our duty, as often as we by faith do se the body of our savior
Christ in that Sacrament. And further when the death of Christ is thus
remembered, then should men also remember that as Saint Peter says i. Pet. iii.
Christ has suffered, leaving an ensample unto you, that you should follow his
steps, which is as he did bear the Cross, so you must bear your Cross. As
he mortifyed our sin in his flessh being crucified on the cross. So ought
you to mortyfy and slaye sin in your bodyees, crucifyeng your flessh with the
lusts and desires. For as Saint Paul says Gala. v. they that are Christ's,
has so crucified their flessh. Wherefore dear reader coming to the presence
of the blessed body of Christ of these things be not forgetful, but above
all be not unfaithful, let faith in this matter be thy guide. And when by
faith thou beholdest Christ's body, by a thankful remembrance. Remember also
the death and passion of the same body remembrynge the death of the body, in
the which thy sin was slain, being Crucyfyed on the cross. Remember also
to mortifye sin in thine own body, by crucyfyenge it with the Iustes and
desires. To this purpose dear reader thou should hear mass, therefore note
well and mark this lytie rude thing that by it thou may be stablyshed in
thy faith, and learn by the hearing of mass, so to remember Christ's death
and passo^ that like a true Christen thou may bear Christ's cross in this
life that by the merit of Christ's death suffered on his cross thou mayeste
come to the eternal life. Vale.

A prayer to be fayde before mass.
O Lord Jesus Christ which art our very bishop and dyddest offer thy self
unto God the father a pure and immaculate host, on the altar of the cross
for us miserable sinners which also gave thy flesh unto us to eat, and thy
blood to drink, and made this mysterye of thy body and blood in the power
of thy holy sprete for a remembrance of thy most holy passion, (saying:) As
of ten times as ye do these things, ye shall do them in the remembrance of
me, I therefore (o lord) un worthy sinner of a devout mind have repared
hither unto thy temple (although a sinner) to hear and se that blessed
sacrifice of praysynge which thou thou thyselfe commaundest to be done for a
memoryall of thy holy passion, to the intent ye I mygh^ sture up in me a fresh
remembrance of thy most blessed death, and to give the thanks for yt most
merciful charity, that moved the to bye and redeem my soul with so great
price.

Grant me (most merciful Lord) not only to se this mysterye with my
bodily eyes, but specially to se it with my inward eyes of faith, and thereby
to have, holly a lovely and a thankful remembrance of that blessed passion
and death, and there in to continue until the hour of my death. So be it.

A prayer to be said at the eleuacion time.
HAyle very body, incarnate of a vyrgyne,
Nailed on a cross, and offered for man's sins,
Whose side being perced, blood ran out plenteously
At the hour of death let us receive the bodily,
O sweet, O holy, O Jesus son of Mary.
A prayer to be said after. the mass.
O Lord God omnipotent which (not of our deserts) but through the
inestimable merit the blessed passion of thy son Jesus Christ have redeemed
man and reconcyled him to thy favor, grant unto me most miserable sinner
which have here under the form of bread and wine, by faith seen the body
and blood of my saueoure, in the remembrance of him, so to remember his death
and his saying, that I may take his Cross and follow him all the days of my
life, that I may all flesshly Iustes and sinful living utterly forsake, that
I may al aduersite, afflyccion, and persecution patiently suffer. And so
following thy son Christ here with my cross, may also continue in thy
favor, unto the which I am reconcyled, by partakynge of the merits of his
blessed passion, and finally that I may come unto thy glory which thou haste
promised unto thy elect through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son. Which lives
and reyghneth with the in unite of the holy ghost world without end. So be it.

The Prologe to the Dirige.
We read in sondrye places of the Bible (most dear reader) that the antique
people, the Hebrews had a certain manner of lamentation for the dead, as we
read, how Jacob was lamented and of Aaron and of Moses in the last chapter of
Exodus how they were lamented of the people certain days, in like manner we
have of the funeral that was among the Jews, as in the last of Genesis, we
have how Joseph was inbawmed, and in the gospel how the holy weme^ prepared
sweet spyces to the funeral of christ of those old Iewyssh customs, has
there exepte into the church a custom to have a certain suffragies for the
dead called dirige of Dirige the first antheme hereof, but by whom or when
these suffrages were made, we have no sure evidence of writing, but diverse
auctors do ascrybe it to diverse as some to S. Isodore some to Saint Gregory,
some to Pelagius, but whether he or the other made it, or this time or that, it
forces not much, for this we are suere, of that Saint Paul taught us that we
should no use such lamentacion or mortnynge for the deabe, as though we were
without hope, but we should rather rejoice, as in them that cest in the stepe of
peace. And as for such suffrages as are set forth in the Dirige, the collettes
excepted, they are no more to be applied for the dead tha^ for the quycke. But
whether these were ordained at the first to be said for the souls departed
or no, I will make no doctrine oftt, but this I know well that the reader of
these may have a great learning and knowledge of the miseries and shortness
of the life of man, and may learn hereby to dye well, and to have a hope and
trust of the last resurrection And for this only cause have I also set
forth in this primer a dirige of the which the three first lessons are of the
miseries of man's life, the myddell of the funeral of the dead corpus, and the
last three are of the last resurrection. For the office of the funeral
although it profit not the soul, yet here in we not only do testifye our
faith that we have in the last cysynge, but also do accomplysshe the work of
charity in buryenge of the dead.

The Euensonge of the dirige.
The antheme. I shall please.


The.C.xiiii. Psalm. Dilexi quoniam.
I Am well pleased that the lord has heard the voice of my prayer.

That he has enclyned his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long
ts I live.

The snares of death compassed me round about, the pains of hell gate hold
upon me, I found trouble and heaviness.

Then called I upon the name of the lord, o lord deliver my soul.

Gracyous is the lord and ryghteous, ye our God is merciful.

The lord preserves the simple, I was brought down and he helped me.

Turn again then unto thy rest (O my soul) for the lord has given the thy
desire,

And why? thou haste delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my fete from falling.

I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living.

The antheme. I shall please the lord in the region of ye living. The
antheme. Vo is me.


The.C.xix. Psalm. Addominum cum.
When I am in trouble, I call upon ye Lord and he has herd me.

Deliver my soul (O Lord) from lyenge lyppes, and from a deceytfull tongue.

What reward shall be given or done to the thou false tongue.

Even mighty and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals.

Woe is me that my banyshment endures so long, I dwell in the tabernacles of
the sorrowful.

My soul has long dwelled among them that be enemies unto peace.

I labored for peace, but when I spoke thereof, they prepared them to battle.

The antheme. Woe is me, for that my banyshment is prologed.


The.C.xx. Psalm. Leuaui oculos meos.
I Lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help.

My help comes from the lord, which made heaven and earth.

He shall not suffer thy foot to slyppe, neither shall he that keeps the, fall
into a slomber.

To he shall neither fall a sleep nor slomber, which keeps Israel.

The Lord keeps the, the Lord is thy defense, more then the right hand.

The Son shall not burn the by day, nor the Moon by night.

The Lord keeps the from all euel, the Lord keeps even thy soul.

The Lord keep thy going in and going out, from this time forth and
evermore.

The antheme. The Lord keeps the from all evil, he keeps eue^ thy soul.
The antheme. If thou.


The.C.xxix. Psalm. De profundis.
OVte of the deep called I unto the (O Lord) Lord hear my voice.

O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaynte.

If thou (Lord) wylt be extreme to mark ouriui quities (O Lord) who may
abide it?

But there is mercy with the, and because of thy law have I abyden the (O
Lord.)

My soul has abyden in his word, my soul has trusted in the Lord.

From the morning watch until night, let Israel trust in the Lord.

For which the Lord there is mercy, and his redemption is plenteous.

And he shall redeem Israel from al his iniquities.

The antheme. If thou (lord) imputest men's sins unto them: Lord who shall
abide it? The antheme. The works.


The.C.xxxvii. Psalm. Confitebor tibi domine.
I Will give thanks unto the (o lord) with my whole heart, for thou have
heard the words of my mouth, even before the gods will I sing praises unto
the.

I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, because of thy
loving kyndnes and truth, for thou have magnifyed thy word, according unto
thy great name.

When I call upon the hear thou me, and endue my soul with much strength.

All the kings of the earth shall praise ye (o lord) when they hear the
words of thy mouth.

Ye they shall sing in the ways of the lord, that great is the glory of the
Lord.

For though the Lord be high yet has he respect to the lowly, as for the
proud he beholds him afar of.

Though I walk in the myddeste of trouble, yet shalt thou refreshe me: thou
shalt stretche forth thine hand upon the furiousnes of mine enemies and thy
right hand shall save me.

The Lord shall make good for me, ye thy mercy (o Lord) endures for ever:
despise not then the work of thine own hands.

The Antheme. Lord despyce not the works of thine hands. The versycle. From
the gates of hell. The answer. Lord deliver their souls. The antheme. I
heard a.


The song of blessed Mary. Magnificat anima mea dominum.
MY soul magnifyeth the Lord.

And my sprete has rejoiced in God my sauyoure.

For he has looked on the low degree of his hand maiden, behold now from
hense forth shall all generacions call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has done to me great things, and blessed is his
name.

And his mercy is always on the^ that fear him, through out all generacions.

He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered them that are proud
in the imagynacio^ of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seats, and has exalted them of low
degree.

He has filled the hungrye with good things, and has sent away the rych
emptye.

He has remembered mercy, and has helped his servant Israel.

Even as he promised to our fathers, Abraham and to his sede for ever.

The antheme. I have herd a voice from heaven saying: blessed be the dead
which dye in the Lord.


Lord have mercy on us, Christ have mercy on us, Lord have mercy on us.
Our father.

The.C.xlv. Psalm. Lauda anima.
Praise the Lord (O my soul) while I live will I praise the lord, I will
praise the Lord as long as I shall remain.

O put not your trust in princes nor in the children of men, for there is no
help in them.

For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth,
and so all his thoughts peryshe.

Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in
the Lord his God which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that there in is.

Which keeps his promise for ever, which helps them to right that suffer
wrong, which fedeth thy hongry.

The lord louseth men out of preson, the lord gives sight to the blind.

The lord helps them up that are fallen, the lord loves the ryghteous.

The lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherles and wedowe as
for the way of the ungodly he turns it vpsyde down.

The Lord thy God (O Syon) is king for evermore, and through out all
generacyons.

The versycle. From the gates of hell. The Answer. Lord deliver their souls.
The versicle. I trust to se the goods of the lord. The answer. In the land
of life. The versicle. Lord God hear my prayer, The answer. And give
hearing to my clamor.


Let us pray.
GOd to whom it is approbried to be mercyful ever and to spare, be merciful to
the souls of thy servants of each kind and forgive them all their sins,
that they being lowsed from the bonds of death, may ascend unto life.

O God the Lord of pardon, Grant unto the soul of N. thy servant (the
years mind, of whose death we have in remembrance) a place of rest, the
blessed full quyete, and clerenesse of the light.

O God which haste caused thy servants in pontifical dignity, to be
accounted among the prestes apostolyke. Grant we beseech the, that they may
enjoy in heaven the contynuall company of them, whose office they did bear
sometime hear in earth.

O God the graunter of pardon, and the lover of man's salvation, we beseech thy
mercy, that thou wylt suffer the congregation of our brothers, and systers
being departed out of this world, through the intercession of blessed Mary
the vyrgyn, and S. Michel tharchangell, and all holy saints to come to the
congregation of everlasting felicite.

O God that art creatoure and redemer of all faithful people. Grant unto the
souls of all true beleuers, being dead remission of all their sins that
through devout prayers they may attain the gracious pardon, which they
have always desired, which shalt come to judge the quycke and the dead, and
the world by fire. So be it. God have mercy on al Christen souls. So be it.

The antheme. Matyns of the Dirige.


Direct good. The.v. Psalm. Verba mea.
Hear my words (O Lord) consider my calling.

O mark the voice of my petycion my king and my God, for unto the will I make
my prayer.

Hear my voice (O lord) by times, for earlye in the morning will I get me
unto the, ye and that with diligence.

For thou art not the God that has pleasure in the wickedness, there may no
ungodly person dwell with the.

Such as be cruel may not stand in thy syghte thou art an ennemy unto all
wicked doers.

Thou destroyeste the liars, the lord abhors the blood thrusty and
deceytfull.

But as for me I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

Led me (O lord) in thy righteousness because of mine enemies, and make the
way plain before me.

For there is no faythfulnesse in their mouths, they dissimble in their
hearts, their throat is an open sepulcre, with their tongues they deceive.

Punyshe them (O God) that they may perysh in their own ymaginacions, cast
them out, because of the multitude of their sins, for they rebel against the
lord.

Again let all the^ that put their trust in the rejoice, ye let them ever be
glad and dwell thou in them, because thou defendest the^ that they which love
thy name may be joyful in the.

For thou (lord) geueste thy blessing unto the ryghteous: and with thy
favorable kyndnesse, thou defendest him, as with a shylde.

The antheme. Dyrecte good lord, my way in thy sight. The antheme. Turn the.
etc.


The.vi. Psalm. Domine ne in furore.
Lord rebuke me not in thy furye, nether chasten thou me in thine anger.

Have mercy on me lord for I am sick, heal me lord for my bones are bruised.

And my soul is very sore troubled, but how long lord.

Turn the Lord and deliver my soul, save me for thy mercy.

For there is none in death that have mind of yt and in hell who will knowledge
the.

I have labored in my sorrow I shall every night wash my bed, with tears I
shall wete ye place where I lie.

Mine eye is troubled with woodnesse, I have waxed old among all mine enemies.

Avoid from me all ye that work wickedness, for the lord has herd the
noise of my weeping.

The Lord has herd my prayer, the lord has herd my peticyon.

Let all mine enemies be ashamed and confounded let them be ashamed and
confounded very quyckely.

The Antheme. Turn the Lord and deliver my soul: for he is not in death that
has mind of the. The antheme. Lest any.


The.vii. Psalm.
O Lord my God, in the do I trust: save me from all them that persecute me and
deliver me.

Lest he catch up my soul like a lion and tear it in pieces, while there is
none to help, that can save me.

O Lord my God if I have done any such thing: if there be any unrighteousness
in my hands.

If I have rewarded evil unto them that dealte frendely with me, or hurt the^
that without any cause are mine enemies.

Then let mine enemy persecute my soul, and take me, ye let him tread my
life down in the earth and lay mine honor in the dust.

Stand up (O Lord) in thy wrath, lift up thyselfe over the furyous
indygnacion of mine enemies, arise up (for me) in the vengeance that thou have
promised.

That the congregation of the people may come about the for their sakes,
therefore lift up thyselfe again.

The Lord is judge over the people, avenge me then (O Lord) according to my
righteousness and innocence.

Oh let the wickedness of the ungodly come to an end, but maintain the just
thou ryghteous god that tryest the very hertes and the raynes.

My help comes of God, which preserves the^ that are true of heart.

God is a rygteous judge strong and pacient, and God is ever thretenynge.

If men will not turn, he has whet his swearde, and has bent his bow and
made it ready.

He has prepared him the weapens of death, and ordained his arrows to
destroy.

Behold he trauelleth with unrighteous and has conceived sorrow and brought
forth iniquity.

He has graven and dygged up a pyt, but he shall fall himself into the pyt
that he has made.

For his unhappiness shall come upon his own head, and his wickedness shall
fall upon his own pate.

As for me I will give thanks unto the lord for his righteousness sake, and
will praise the name of the Lord the most highest.

The antheme. Lest any time he may rauyshe my soul as a lion when there is
none that will redeem it nor save it. The versycle. From the gates of hell. The
Responce, Lord deliver their souls. Our father. And lead us. But deliver us.


The first lesson. Job. vij.
IS not the life of man upon earth a very batayl? Are not his days like the
days of an hired servant? My flesh is clothed with worms fylthynesse and
duste, myskynne is wythred and crompled together: my days pass over more
spedely, then a weuer can weue out his web, and are gone or I am aware. O
remember that my life is but a wind, and that mine eye shall no more se the
pleasures thereof, ye and that none other man's eye shall se my any more.

The Response. My days have be^ more swyft the^ a runner they are gone
suddenly, and have seen no good thing. The versycle. They are passed away as
ye ships that be good under sail, and as the egle that hastes to ye pray.
The repeticion. They are gone suddenly. etc.


The second lesson. Job. xiiij.
MAnne that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
diverse myseries. He comes up and falls away like a flower, he flies as it
were a shadow, and never continues in one estate.

Thynkeste thou it now well done to open thine eyes upon such one, and to
bring me before the judgment? who, can make it clean, that comes of an
unclean thing? No body, The days of man are short, the nombre of his
months are known only unto the, Thou have appointed him his bonds, he can
not go beyond them.

The Responce, Esaias. xl. All flesh is grass, and all the bewtye thereof is as
the flower of the field, when the grass is wythered the flower falls away.
The versicle. Even so is the people as grass when the breath of the Lord
blows upon them The repeticion. When the grass is wythered the flower,


The.iii. lesson. Job. xiiii.
IF a tree be cut down there is some hope yet that it will spring, and shut
forth the branches again: for though a root be waxen old, and dead in the
ground, yet when the stock gets the sent of water it will bude and bring
forth boughs, like as when it was first planted. But as for a man when he is
dead, peryshed and consumed away, what becomes of him? The floudes when
they be dried up, and the ryuers when they be emptye, are filled again through
the flowynge waters of the sea, but when man siepeth he ryseth not again
until the heaven perysh he shall not wake up nor rise out of his slepemaye a
dead man live again all the days of this my pilgrimage: am I lokynge when my
chaungynge shall come, if thou woldeste but call me, I should obey the, only
despyce not me the work of thine own hands, for thou haste nombred al my
goynges, yet be not thou to extreme upon my sins.

The Responce. Lord what is man that thou haste such respect, unto, or ye
son of man that thou so regardest him man is like a thing of naught and his
days passes away like a shadow. The versycle. He is even a vapoure that
appears for a little time and then vanysheth away. The repeticion. Man is
like.


The.xxij. psalm. Dominus regit me and nichil.
THe Lord is my shepeherde, I can want nothing.

He fedeth me in a grene pasture, and leads me to a fresh water.

He quyckeneth my soul, and brings me forth in the way of righteousness
for his name sake.

Though I should walk now in the valley of the shadow of death yet fear I
no evil, for thou art with me: thy staff and thy shepehoke conforte me.

Thou preparest a table before me against mine enemies: thou anoyntest my
head with oil, and fyllest the cup full.

Oh let thy loving kyndnesse and mercy follow me all the days of my life,
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

The antheme. In a place of pasture, there has he set me. The antheme. The
default.


The.xxiiij. Psalm. Ad te leuaui animam meam.
Unto the (O Lord) I lift up my soul, my God I trust in the: oh let me not
be confounded, lest mine enemies triumph over me.

For all they that hope in the shall not be ashamed: but such as be scornful
despysers without a cause they shall be put to confusion.

Show me thy ways (o Lord) and teach me thy paths.

Lead me in the truth, and learn me for thou art the God of my salvation, and
in the is my hope all the day long.

Call to remembrance (o Lord) the tender mercyes, and thy loving kyndnesses,
which have been ever of old.

Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according unto thy
mercy think upon me (o Lord) for thy goodness.

Oh how friendly, and ryghteous is the lord? therefore will he teach sinners in
the way.

He leads the simple aryght and such as be meke them learneth he his ways.

All the ways of the Lord are very mercy, and faythfulnesse, unto such as
keep his testament and covenant.

For thy name sake (O Lord) be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

What soever he be ye fears ye lord he shall show him the way that he has
chosen.

His soul shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall possess the land.

The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he shows them
his covenant.

Mine eyes are ever lokynge unto the lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

Turn the unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in mysery.

The sorrows of my heart are great, O bring me out of my troubles.

Look upon mine aduersitye and mysery, and forgive me all my sins.

Consider how mine enemies are many, and bear a malycious hate against me.

O keep my soul, and deliver me let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in the.

Let innocencye, and ryghteous dealing wait upon me, for my hope is in the
delyuerer of Israel (O God) out of all his trouble.

The antheme. The defaultes of my youth, and my ignorancyes remember not O
Lord. The antheme. I trust to se.


The.xxvi. Psalm Dominus illuminatio mea.
THe Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom should I fear? the Lord is
the strength of my life, for whom then should I be afraid?

Wherefore when the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me, to eat
up my flesh, they stombled, and fell.

Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid: and though there rose up war against me yet will I put my trust in
him.

One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, namely that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
fair bewty of the Lord, and to vysyte his temple.

For in the time of trouble he has hid me in his tabernacle, ye in the
secret place of his dwelling has he kepete me, and set me upon a rock of
stone.

And now has he lyfted up my head above mine enemies, that conpassed me round
about.

Therefore will I offer in his dwelling the oblacion of thanks geuyng: I will
both sing and speak praises unto the Lord.

Harken unto my voice (O Lord) when I cry unto the: have mercy upon me and
hear me.

My heart speaks unto the, my face seeks ye, ye Lord, thy face will I seek.

O hyde not thou thy face from me, cast not thy servant of in displeasure.

Thou art my succourre, leave me not, another forsake me, O God my saueoure.

For my father and my mother have forsaken me but thc Lord has taken me.

Show me thy way (o Lord) and lead me in the right path because of mine
enemies.

Deliver me not in the wylles of mine adversaries, for there are false witness
up against me, and they ymagyned myschefe.

Nevertheless I believe verily to se the goodness of the Lord, in the land
of living.

O tarry thou the lords leisure be strong, let thine heart be of good
comfort, and wait thou still for the Lord.

The antheme. I trust to se the goodness of the Lord: in ye land of the
living. The versycle. The ryghteous shall be in eternal remembrance. The
answer. He shall not fear evil speaking. Our father. And lead us not. But
deliver.


The.iiij. lesson. S. August.
ALl these things (that is to say) the busynes of dead, the condition or
manner of the sepulture, the pomp of the Dirige they are more the comfort of
the live, then the help of the dead, if a sumptuous buryall does avail the
wicked, then a small or none shall hinder the good, to that purpuled rich man
the company of his servants, did exhybite solemn exequies in the sight of
men, but much more solempner exequies did the mynistery of angels exhibit to
the poor scabed Lazarus in the sight of God, which angels carried him out not
into a marble tomb, but they carried him up into ye bosom of Abraham.

The responce. The dead bodies of thy servants have they given unto the
fowls of the air to be devoured and the flesh of the saints the beasts of
the land. The versycle. Their blood have they shed like water on every side
of Jerusalem, and there was no man to burye them. The repeticion. And the flesh
of thy saints have they given unto the beasts.


The.v. lesson. Of S. August.
NOt yet for all that, are the bodies of the dead to be contemned and cast
away specially of the ryghteous and faithful, the which as vessels and organs
to al good works the holy ghost did use. The corse of the old ryghteous men
with a diligente godliness were taken head unto, their exequies celebrated
and sepultures provided, and they when they lived of their bodies to be buried
or transferred to their children gave commandment. And Toby in buryenge the
dead, the angel being wytnes gate thanks of god. The lord also yt the
third day would rise again does openly declare ye good work of the devout
women, and wylled it also to be declared and yt she did it to the buryall of
him, and they also laudably are remembered in the gospel which took his body
from the cross and did there endeavor diligently and honorably to cover and
bury it.

The responce. Gene. xl. Joseph said unto his brethren: I dye, and God will
vysite you and bring ye out of this land to the land that he swear unto
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Therefore took he an oath of the children of Israel,
and said: When God shall vysite you then carry my bones from hence. The
versycle. So Joseph dyed when he was an hundredth and ten year old, and they
embalmed him and laid him in a chest in Egypt. The repeticion. And God shall
vysyte you, then carry my bones from hence.


The.vi. lesson. S. August.
THere are said many dead men to have appeared in dreams or other ways to ye
living: But it is to be answered that for all that it is not to be thought that
the dead does things perceive. Because they are seemed such things to ask,
or to tell, or show. For the living also do often times appear to other alive
being aslepe when they themself do not know that they do appear, and yet they
hear the^ that has this dreamed say yt they have seen the^ in there dreams
speaking or doing sumwhat. If the^ any man ca^se me in this dream tellyng hi^
what is already done or showing hi^ before hand, what is to come and I nothing
knowing of it, and nothing at al mynding or passing not only what he dreameth,
But whether he wake while I sleep, or whether I wake while he sleep, or whether
at one time we do both sleep, or both wake when he saw this dream, in the
which he saw me, what marvel is it if the dead not knowing nor perceyuyng
these things, or yet se that of the living in their dreams. And somewhat do
say which when they walk do know to be true.

The Responce. O Lord judge me not after my deeds. I have done nothing worthy
to be accepted before the wherefore I beseech thy majesty which art the only
God to cleanse me from mine iniquitye. The versicle. And yet again wassh me
from mine unrighteousness, and cleanse me from my sin for I confess I have
only trespassed against the. The repeticion. Wherefore I beseech the


The.xxxix, psalm Expectans expectaui.
I Waited patiently for the Lord which enclyned himself to me, and herd my
calling. He brought me out of the horrible pytte, out of the mire and claye: he
set my fete upon the rock, and ordained my going.

He has put a new so^ge in my mouth, eue^ a thanks geuyng unto our God.

Many men seeing this shall fear the Lord, and put their trust in him.

Blessed is the man that sets his hope in the lord and turns not unto the
proud and to such as go about with lies.

O Lord my God, great are the wondrous works, which thou have done: and in
thy thoughts toward us, there may none be lykened unto the.

I would declare them, and speak of the^: but they are so many that they can
not be told.

Sacrifice and offrynge thou woldeste not have, but a body have thou ordened,
burnt offrynges and sacrifice for sin, thou have not allowed. Then said I: Lo
I come.

In the beginning of the book it is written of me that I should fulfill thy
will o my God, and that I am content to do: ye thy law is within my heart.

I will preach of thy righteousness, in the great congregation: Lo I will not
refrain my lyppes (o Lord) and that thou know.

I do not hyde thy righteousness in my heart, my talking is of the truth, and
saving health: I keep not thy loving mercy and faythfulnesse back from the
great congregation.

Turn not thou thy mercy from me o Lord, but let thy loving kyndnesse and
truth always preserve me.

For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me that I am not able to look up.

Ye they are more in nombre then the heers of my head, and my heart has
failed me.

O Lord let it be thy pleasure to deliver me, make have o Lord to help me.

Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul to destroy it,
let the^ fall backward and put to confusion that wyshe me evil.

Let them be soon brought to shame that cry over me, there there.

But let all those that seek the, be joyful and glad in the, and let all
such as delight in thy salvation say always, the Lord be praised.

As for me I am poor and in mysery, but ye lord cares for me.

Thou art my helper, and redemer, make no long taryenge, O my God.

The antheme. Pleasynge be it unto the (O Lord) for to deliver me, Lord have
regard to help me. The antheme. Heal my soul.


The.xl. Psalm Beatus qui intelligit super.
BLessed is he that co^sydereth the, poor the Lord shall deliver him in the
time of trouble.

Thou shall preserve him and keep him alive, he shall make him to prosper upon
earth, and shall not deliver him to the will of his enemies.

The lord shall refresh him wha^ he lies sick upon his bed, ye thou make
his bed in all his syckenes. I said lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul
for I have sinned against the.

Mine enemies speak evil upon me: when shall he dye, and when shall his name
peryshe.

Though he came in to se, yet meaned he falshed in his heart, heapynge myschefe
upon hymfelfe.

All they that hate me run in together against me, and ymagyne evil against
me.

They have given a wicked sentence upon me, wha^ he lies, he shall rise up no
more.

Ye even mine own familier friend who^ I trusted, which did eat my bread
has lift up his hele against me.

But be thou merciful unto me (O Lord) raise thou me up, and I shall reward
them.

By this I know thou fauourest me, that mine enemy shall not tryumphe over me.

Thou have holden me because of mine innocence, and set me before thy face for
ever.

O blessed be the Lord God of Israel from hence forth and for evermore. So be
it. So be it.

The antheme. Heal my soul Lord for I have sinned against the. The antheme.
My soul.


The.xli. Psalm. Quemadmodum desiderat ceruus.
Like as the heart desires the waterbrokes, so longs my soul after the O
God.

My soul is thursty for God, ye even for the living, when shall I come and
behold the face of God.

My tears are my meat day and night, while it is daily said unto me, where
is now thy god.

Now when I think there upon I pour out my heart by myself, for I would
feign go hence with the multitude, and pass out with them unto the house of
God, in the voice of praise and thanks geuynge, among such as keep holy day.

Why art thou so full of heaviness (O my soul) and why art thou so unquiet
within me?

O put thy trust in God for I will yet give him thanks, for the help of his
countenance.

My God, my soul is vexed within me, therefore I remember the land of Iordane,
and the little hill of Hermony.

One deep calls another with the voice of thy wystles, all the waves and
waterfloodes are gone over me.

The Lord has promised his loving kyndnesse daily, therefore will I praise
him in the night season, and make my prayer unto the God of my life.

I will say unto God my stony rock: why haste thou forgotten me, why go I
thus heuely while the enemy oppresses me.

While my bones are broken, and while mine one myes cast me in the teth daily
saying unto me: where is now thy God.

Why art thou so heavy (o my soul) and why art thou so disquyeted within me?

O put thy trust in God, for I will yet thank him for the help of his
countenance, and because he is my God.

The antheme. My soul thrusted for god, the living fou^tayne when shall I
ones come and appear before the face of God. The versycle. Give not the souls
unto beasts that praise the. The answer. And never forget the souls of thy
poor. Our father which art in. etc.


The.vii. lesson.i. Cor. xv.
Behold I say unto you a mystery, we shall not al sleep, but we shall all be
changed, and that suddenly and in the twynklynge of an eye, at the time of the
last trompe. For the trompe shall blow, and the dead shall rise
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on
uncorruption, and this mortal must put on immortalite But when this
corruptible shall put on incorrupcion and this mortal shall put on immortalite,
then shall the word be fulfilled: Death is swalowed up in victory.

The responce. We shall all be brought before the judgment seat of Christ
where every on of us shall give accomptes for himself unto God. The versicle.
And he shall reward every man according to his deeds. The repeticion. Where
every man shall give account. etc.


The.viii. lesson.i. Tessa.iiii.
WE would not brethren that ye should be ignorant concerning them that are
fallen aslepe that ye sorrow not as other do which have no hope, for if we
believe that Jesus dyed and rose again. Even so then also which sleep by Jesus
shall God bring with him, for this we say unto you in the word of the Lord,
that we which live and are remaining in the coming of the Lord, shall not
come yer they which sleep, for the Lord himself shall come down from heaven
with a shoute and voice of the archangell and with the trompe of God and the
dead in Christ shall arise first, than shall we which live and remain be
caughte up with them also in the clouds to mete the Lord in the air, and so
shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort yourselfe one another with
these words.

The Responce.i. Cor. xv. Now is Christ risen from the dead and is become the
first fruits of the^ that sleep, for by one man comes death, and by one man
the resurreccion of the dead, for as they all dye in Adam, so shall they all
be made alive in Christ, but every one in his order. The versycle. The first
is Christ then they that belongs unto Christ when he comes. The repeticion.
Every one in his order.


The.ix. lesson. Ioh. v.
Verily verily I say unto you, who so hears my word, and beleuethe him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and comes not into dampnacion, but is passed
through from death unto life. Verily verily I say unto you the hour comes,
and is now already that the dead shall hear the voice of the son of god,
and they that hear it, shall live, for as the father has life in himself, so
likewise has he given unto the son to have life in him self, and has
given him power also to execute judgment, because he is the son of man.
Maruayle not ye at this, for the time comes, in the which all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, and shall go forth they that have done good
unto the resurreccion of life, but they that have done evil, unto the
resurreccion of dampnacion.

The Responce. O Lord deliver me from everlasting death at the dreadful day,
when heaven and earth shall be altered whiles thou shall come to judge ye
world by fire. The versycle. Now Christ Jesus we most humbly beseech the to
have mercy on us, and that thou which art come to redeem wretches from sin
and thraldom, wylt not cast away them, whom thou have so derely redeemed. The
responce. O Lord deliver me from everlasting death at ye dredful day, when
heaven and earth shall be altered whiles thou shalt come to judge ye world by
fire. The antheme. My bruised.


The.li. Psalm. Myserere mei deus.
Have mercy upon me (Oh God) according to thy great mercy.

and according to the multitude of thy compassion, wype away mine iniquity.

Wash me more from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before mine eyes.

Against the only have I sinned, and have done evil in thy sight that thou
may be justified in thy words, and vanquyshe wha^ thou art judged.

Lo I was begotten in wickedness, and my mother conceived me in sin.

Lo thou have loved truth, the unknown and secret things of thy wisdom have
yt uttered unto me.

Sprynkle me Lord with ysope, and so shall I be clean, thou shall wash me,
and the^ shall I be whyter then snow.

Unto my hearing shall thou give joy, and gladness, and my weykened bones
shall be refreshed.

Turn thy face from my sins, and wype away all my wickedness.

A pure heart create in me (Oh Lord) and an vpryght sprete make a new within
me.

Vast me not away from thy face, and thy holy sprete take not from me.

Restore unto me the gladness of thy salvation, and strenthen me with a
principal heart.

I will instruct ye wicked yt they may know thy ways, and the ungodly shall be
converted unto the^.

Deliver me from bloudes (oh Lord) the god of my health, and my tongue shall
exalte thy ryghteousnes.

Lord open thou my lyppes, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

For if you had desired sacrifices, I had surely given it, but thou
delytest not in burnt sacrifices.

A sacrifice to God, is a lowly sprete, a co^tryte and an humble heart, thou
shall not dispyse (O God.)

Deal gentelye of thy favorable benevolence with Syon, that the walls of
Jerusalem may be buylt again.

Then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of righteousness, oblacion, and burnt
offrynges, then shall they lay calves upon thy altar.

The antheme. My bruised bones Lord shall be refreshed. The antheme. Hear Lord.


The.lxiiii. Psalm. Te decet hymnus.
THou (O God) art praised in Sion, and to the is the vow performed.

Thou hear the prayer, therefore comes all flesh unto the.

Our misdeeds prevail against us, Oh be thou merciful unto our sins.

Blessed is the man whom thou chosest and receauest unto the, that he may
dwell in thy court: he shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even
of thy holy temple.

Hear us according unto thy wonderful ryghteousnes of god our salvation: thou
that art ye hope of all the ends of the earth, and of the broad see.

Which in his strength sets fast the mountains and is gyrded about with
power.

Which stylleth the ragynge of the sea ye roarynge of his wawes, and the
woodnes of the people.

They that dwell in the vttermoost parties are afraid at thy tokens, thou
makeste both the morning and evening stars to praise the.

Thou vysitest the earth, thou watterest it and make it very plenteous:

The river of god is full of waters, thou preparest man his corn, and this thou
prouydest for ye earth.

Thou waterest her forowes, thou breakest ye hard clottes thereof, thou make
it soft with the drops of rain and blessest the increase of it.

Thou crowneste the year with thy good, and thy footsteps drop fatnes.

The dwellynges of ye wyldernes are so fat also, yt they drop with all and
the little hills are pleasant on every side.

The feldes are full of sheep, ye valyes sto^de so thyck with corn yt they
laugh and sing.

Antheme. Hear my prayer o Lord, unto the shall every creature come. The
antheme. Has received.


The.lxii. psalm. Dens deus meus.
O God thou art my god, early will I seek ye.

My soul thyrsteth for the, my flesh lo^geth after in a baren and dry land
where no water is.

Thus do I look for the in thy sanctuary, that I might behold thy power and
glory.

For thy loving kyndnesse is better the^ life, my lyppes shall praise the.

As long as I live will I magnify the, and lift up my hands in thy name.

My soul is satisfied even as it were with mary and fatness, when my mouth
prayseth the with joyful syppes.

In my bed will I remember the, and when I wake my talking shall be of the.

For thou have ben my helper, and under the shadow of thy wings, will I
rejoice.

My soul hangs upon the, thy right hand vpholdeth me.

They seek after my soul, but in vain for they shall go under the earth.

They shall fall into the swearde, and be a portion for foxes.

But the king shall rejoice in God, all they that swear by him shall be
commended, for the mouth of liars shall be stopped.

The.lxvi. Psalm. Deus miseriatur nostri.
GOd be merciful unto us, bless us, and show the light of his countenance
upon us.

That we may know thy way upon earth thy salvation among al Heathen.

Let the people praise the (O God,) yet let all people praise the.

O let the people rejoice and be glad, that thou iudgest the folk
ryghteously, and gouerneste the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise the (O God,) let all people praise the, the earth has
given her fruit.

God even our own God, give us his blessing.

God bless us, and let all the ends of the world fear him.

The antheme. Lord thy right hand has defended me. The antheme. From the
gates.


The song of Ezechias. Esaias. xxxviii. Chap. Ego dixi in dimidio dierum.
I Thought I should have gone to the gates of hell in my best age, and have
wanted the resydue of my years.

I said within myself, I shall never visyte God in this life, I shall never se
man among the dwell lynges of the Lord.

Mine age is folden up together, and taken away from me like a shepeherdes
cotage, my life is hewn of, like as a weuer cuttes of his web.

While I was yet taking my rest he hewed me of, and made an end of me in one
way.

I thought I would have lived unto the morrow, but he bruised my bones like a
lion, and made on end of me in one day.

When chattred I like a swallow, and like a crane and mourned as a dove.

I lift up mine eyes into the heyght, O lord (said I) vyole^ce is done unto me,
be thou suerty for me.

What shall I speak or say, that he may do this? that I may live out all my
years, ye in the bytternesse of my life.

Verily (Lord) men must live in bytternesse, and all my life must I pass over
therein, for thou raysest me up and wakest me, but I wysbe well content with
this bytternesse.

Nevertheless my conversation has so pleased ye, that thou would not make
an end of my life, so that thou have cast my sins behind thy back.

For hell prayseth not the, death does not magnifye the.

They that go down into the grave praise not thy truth, but the living: ye
ye living acknowledge the like as I do this day, the father tells his
children of thy faythfulnesse.

Deliver us (O Lord) and we will sing praises in thy house all the days of
our life.

The antheme. From the gates of hell, Lord deliver their souls. The antheme.
Let every sprete.


The.Cxlviiij. Laudate dominum decelis.
Praise ye the Lord of heavens, praise ye him in the high place.

Praise ye him all his angels, all his powers praise ye him.

Praise ye him son and moan, all stars and lyghe praise ye him.

The highest of heavens praise ye him, and the waters that are above the
heavens, let them praise the Lords name.

For by his words al things were made, by his commandment all things were
created.

He has stablyshed them euerlastyngly and into the world of worldes-he has
set a law, that shall not exspyre.

Praise ye the Lord of the earth ye dragons, and all depenesses.

Fire, hayle, snow, yse, storms of wyndes, that do his commandment.

Mountains and all little hills, woods bearing fruit, and all cedre trees.

Beasts and all manner of cattle, serpents and fethered fowls.

Kings of the earth, and all people, princes and all judges of the earth.

Bachelors and maidens, old men and young, let them praise the name of the
lord, for the name of him only is exalted.

The knowledgynge of him is above heaven and earth, and he has exalted the
horn of his people.

Laud be unto al his saints to the sons of Israel, to the people
approchynge unto him.

The.Cxlix. Psalm. Cantate domino.
S^nge ye unto the Lord a new song, let the congregation of saints praise
him.

Let Israel rejoice in him that made him and let the sons of Sion tryu^phe in
their king.

Let them praise his name with daunsyng let the^ sing unto him with timpany
and harp.

For the lord is well pleased with his people, and has exalted the lowly into
salvation.

Sayntas shall tryumphe in glory, they shall make joy in their chambers.

The praises of God shall be in their mouths, and two edged swords in their
hands.

To do vengeans amongst nations and correccions amongst people.

To bind their kings in fetters, and their nobles in manacles of iron.

For to execute on them the judgment written, this is glory unto all his
saints.

Laudate dominum.
Praise ye the lordein his saints, praise him in the fyrmament of his power.

Praise ye him in his strength, praise ye him according to the almyghtynesse
of his power.

Praise ye him with the sound of a trumpette praise ye him with harp and lute.

Praise ye him with tympany and dau^synge, praise ye him with rebeckes and
organnes.

Praise ye him with clary symballes well soundynge, praise ye him with
Symballes of sweetness, let every sprete praise the Lord.

The antheme. Let every sprete give praise unto the Lord. The versycle. From
the gates of hell. The responce. Lord deliver their souls. The antheme. I am.


The song of Zachary the prophet. Benedictus dominus. Luce.i.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has vysited and redeemed his
people.

^e has raised up an horn of salvation, in the house of his servant David.

Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy prophets, which were syns the
world began.

That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of them that
hate us.

To fulfill the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
testament.

To perform ye oath which he swear to our father Abraham that he would give
himself to us.

That we delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without
fear.

In the holiness and ryghteousnes before him all the days of our life.

And thou child, shall be called the prophet of the highest, for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for remyssion of their sins,

Through the tender mercy of our god, by ye which spryngynge from that hye has
visited us.

To give light to them that sit in the darkness, and in the shadow of death,
and to gyde our fete into the way of peace.

The antheme. I am the resurreccion and life he that believes in me ye all
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall not se everlasting death. Lord have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on
us. Lord have mercy on us. Our father. And lead us not. But deliver us:


The.xxix. psalm. Exaltabo te domine.
I Will magnify the (O Lord) for thou have set me up, and not suffered my foes
to triumph over me.

O Lord my God I cried unto the, and thou have healed me.

Thou Lord haste brought my soul out of hell, thou have kept my life, where
as they go down into the pytte:

Sing praises unto the Lord (O ye saints of his) give thanks unto him for a
remembrance of holiness.

For his wrath is but the twynkelyng of an eye, and his pleasure is in life,
heuinesse may well endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

As for me when I was in prosperitye I said: tusshe, I shall never fall more.

And why? thou Lord of thy goodness had made my hill so gronge.

But as soon as thou turnest thy face from me, I was brought in fear.

Then cried I unto the (O lord) ye unto the lord made I my prayer.

What profit is there in my blood, if I go down into corruption.

May the dust give thanks unto the? or shall it declare thy faythfulnesse.

Hear (O Lord) and have mercy upon me, Lord be thou my helper.

And so thou have turned my heaviness into joy, thou have put of my
sackecloth, and gyrded me with gladness.

That mine honor might sing praises unto the without ceasynge.

Lord my God, I will give thanks unto the for ever. From the gates of hell,
Lord deliver their souls. I trust to se the goodness of the lord, in the
land of the living. Lord hear my prayer, and and let my clamor come unto
the.

The prayer.
O God which by the mouth of Saint Paul thine apostle, has taught us, not to
be sorry for them that sleep in Christ: Grant we beseech the that in the
coming of thy son our lord Jesus Christ, we with all other faithful people
being departed, may be graciously brought unto joys everlasting, which shall
com to judge both the quycke and the dead, and the world by fire.

Almighty eternal God, to whom there is never any prayer made, without hope of
mercy, be propiciable to the soul of thy servant N. that seeing it departed
from this life, in the confession of thy name thou wylt cause it to be
associate to the company of thy saints.

By Christ our Lord.

O God of whose mercy there is no nu^bre, admyt our prayers for the souls of
thy servants the Bishops, and grant unto them the land of pleasure and
light in the fellowship of thy blessed angels. By christ our lord.

Lord enclyne thine ear unto our prayers wherein we right devoutly call upon
thy mercy yt thou wylt bestow ye souls of thy servants, both men and women
(which thou have commanded to depart from this world) in the country of
peace and rest, and further cause them to be partakers with thy saints.

By Christ our Lord.

WE beseech lord that the prayer of thy suppliantes may avail to the souls
of thy servants of either kind that thou wylt both purge the^ of all their
sins, and cause them to be partakers of thy redemption, which lyuest and
reygnest God, world without end.

So be it.

The third part of the prymer treating of works.
Works are diverse some right good and necessary which must needs be observed,
as the commandments of god. And these most chefely ought to be regarded and
had in price and not compared with other works, but esteemed above them all.

Some are works of men's tradicion, yet agreeable and co^sonant to gods
word, and these ought to be observed, but not had in like reverence with the
works commanded of God.

Some works are tradicions of men, not agreeable to gods word, but
repugnaunt which another ought to be regarded nor observed.

Of these brefly shall be somewhat said, but for as much as the works commanded
of God are to be reputed as the chefeste, they shall be recyted in the first
place.

The commandments of God given by Moses, and expounded by Christ
sentencially taken, and here with their whole sentences set forth as they have
spoken them, very necessary and expedient for youth to learn, and for all
estates to know and observe the same.

The first table.
I Am the LORD thy god which have brought the out of the land of Egypt, and
out of the house of bondage.

Thou shall have none other gods but me. Thou shalt not make to thy self
any graven image, nor any likeness of onythyng that is in heaven above, or in
earth beneth, nor in the water underneath the earth, thou shalt not bow down
to them, nor worship them. For I the LORD thy god, am a gelouse god and
visyte the sin of the fathers, upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me: and yet show mercy unto thousands among
them that love me and keep my commandments Christ. Hear Israel our LORD
God is one Lord, and thou shall love thy Lord god with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. Thou shall
worship thy Lord god, and him only shall thou serve

Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord god in vain.
For the Lord will not hold him gyltles that takes the name of the Lord his
God in vain. Christ Ye have herd how it was said to them of old time: Thou
shall not forswear thy self but shall perform thine oaths to the Lord. But
I say unto you, swear not at all: neither by heaven for it is gods fete,
nor yeat by the earth, for it is his forestole, neither by Jerusalem, for it is
the cyty of the great king: Neither shall thou swear by thy head because thou
can not make one white hear or a black. But let your communicacion be, ye
ye, and nay nay: for whatsoever is more than that comes of evil.

Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day.
Six days may thou labor and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt do no manner work,
neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, neither thy man servant, nor
thy maid servant neither thy cattle, neither yet the stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is and rested the seventh day. Wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Christ. It is lefull to do a good deed on the Sabbath day. For the son of
man is Lord, even of the sabbath day. The Lord says by his prophet Esaye
that his sabbath is hallowed and kept when we rest and cease to do our own
will, to follow our own ways, and to speak our own words, when we in
word, thought and deed, fulfill his will, and not ours: and we suffer him to
do his works in us, that at the last we may come to the Sabbath and true
rest, even eternal life, which Christ the Lord of the Sabbath, has obtained
for us by his blood.

The second table.
Honor thy father and thy mother.
That thy days may be long in the land which the LORD thy god gives the.

Christ Honor thy father and thy mother,

Paul Honor thy father and mother, this is the first commandment yt has
any promise, yt thou may be in good estate, and live long on the earth. By
this commandment Christ teaches us not only to have our father and mother in
reverence and to obey them as he himself was subject unto his mother the
virgyne Mary, but also to ministre unto there necessityes.

Thou shall do no murder.
Christ. Ye have herd how it was said unto them of the old time: Thou shall
not kill. Whosoever kylleth, shall be in danger of judgment. But I say to you:
Whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of judgment. Whosoever
says to his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of a council. But whosoever
says, thou foul, shall be in danger of hell fire. Ite^ ye have herd how it
is said: Thou shall love thy neighbor: and hate thine enemy. But I say to
you love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you: that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven. For he
makes the son to arise on the evil, and on the good, and sends his rain
on the just, and on the unjust.

Thou shall not commyt adultery.
Christ, Ye have herd how it was said to them of old time: thou shall not
commyt adultery. But I say to you, that whosoever looks on a woman lustyng
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Let wedlock be had in all price, in all points, and let the chamber be
undefiled, for horekepers and aduouterers God will judge.

Thou shall not steal,
Christ. Steal not, defraud no man, if any man will sue the at the law, and
take thy cote from the, let him have thy cloak also: give to him that asks,
and from him that would borowe turn not away. Paul Now is there utterly a
fault among you because ye go to law one with another? Why rather suffer ye
not wrong? Why rather suffer ye not your self to be robbed? ye even your self
do wrong and rob and that the brethren. Let him that did steal, steal no
more, but let him rather labor with his hands some good thing, that he may
have to give unto him that needs.

Thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor.
Christ. Bear no false witness, I say unto you that of every idle word,
which men shall have spoken, they shall give account, at the day of judgment.
Paul. Wherefore put away lyenge, and speak every man truth to his neighbor,
for as much as we are members one of another. Let no fylthy commuicacion
proceed out of your mouths. But that which is good to edyfye withal, when need
is, that it may have favor with the hearers. Let all bytternes, fearcenes and
wrath, roaryng and cursed speaking, be put away from you. Let no fylthynes,
folyssh talking, nor testynge (which are not comely) be ones named among you:
but rather geuyng of thanks.

Thou shall not coueyt thy neighbors house, neither shalt thou coueyt thy
neighbors wife, his man servant, his maid, his ox, his ass, or ought that
is his.
Christ. What so ever ye would that men should do to you: even so do you to
them, To love a man's neighbor as him self, is a greater thing, than all
burnt offrynges, and sacrifices. Be not overcome with lusts, for the care of
this world and the deceytfulnesse of riches, choke the word.

Paul. Let your conversation, be without covetousness, and be content with that
ye have already. Godlynes is riches, if a man be content with that he has. For
we brought nothing into the world, and it is a plain case, that we carry
nothing out, When we have fode and raiment, let us therewith be content. They
that will be rych, fall into temptacion and snares, and into many folyssh and
noisome lusts which droune men in perdicion and destruction. For covetousness
is the rote of all evil: which while some lusted after, they erred from the
faith, and tangled themselves with many sorrows.

The.x. commandments compendiously extracted and brefely set forth according
to the form of the last setting forth.
i. Thou shall have none other gods but me. ii. Thou shall not take the name
of the lord god in vain, iii. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.
iiii. Honor thy father and mother, v. Thou shall do no murder. vi. Thou shall
not commit aduoutry. vii. Thou shall not steal. viii. Thou shall bear no
false wytnes against thy neighbor ix. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors.
etc. x. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife nor his servant nor his
maid, etc.
THese are the words which every christian ought both to know and to do, and
about this should a devout mind be busied, and ocupied, and not about vain
works of our own heads for ye knowledge of ye which we have be^ right
ernestly intent and given diligence in these commandments of God neglected
which would of us not to be forgoten, but always had in heart, as these
sentences following does testyfy. These words which I command the this day
shall be in thine heart, and thou shall were them on thy children and shall talk
of them wha^ thou art at home in thyn house, and as thou walk by the way,
and when thou lie down, and when thou rysest up: and thou shall bind them
for a sign upon thy hand. And they shall be papers of remembrance between
thine eyes and thou shall write the^ upon the posts of thy house and upon the
gates. Take heed and hear all these words which I command the, that it may
go well with the, and with thy children after the for ever, when thou do
that which is good and right in the sight of the LORD thy God.

Se thou do that which is right in the sight of the Lord, that thou may
prospere. Deuteronomy. vi.

Ye shall do after nothing that ye do here this day, every man what seems him
good in his own eyes. But what so ever I command you, take heed ye do, and
put nothing thereto, nor take ought therfrom. Deuteronomy. xii.

Cursed be he that continues not in all the words of this law to do them.
Deuteronomy. xxviii.

Christ. if ye love me keep my commandments. Ioh. xiiii.

Christ, Happy are they that hear the word of god and keep it. Whosoever
keeps the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is gylty in all. For he
that said. Thou shall not commyt aduoutry, said also: Thou shall not kill.
They that fear the Lord keep his commandment. Eccle. ii.

THe second state of works is of man's tradicion. which be with gods words
or at the lest not repugnaunt to gods word, they are to be received, as the
prescription of certain days to be kept holy, or to be fasted, the
lemytacion of certain hours to be appointed in the church for the people to
pray, certain of ceremonies about ye ministracions of the sacrament with
such other, for the receyuynge of the which and such other like S. Peter
gives us counsel, saying* Submyt your self unto all manner of ordinance of
men for ye Lords sake, for the ordinances of men according to the condition
of men, and the time are very expedient. Wherefore Paul among the corinthians
made many ordinances, as that a man should not pray or prophecy having any
thing upon his head, and that no woman should pray or prophecy with an
uncovered head: That they should come to the suppers of the lord in an order,
and that in the congregation they should not all prophecye at ones, but that one
should prophecy after another, that wives should keep silence in the
congregation, for it becomes not women to speak in the congregation. And for
a conclusion he says, let all things be done honestly, and in order, if then
Paul made such tradicions among the Corinthians, such may be made among us,
and as he made them to be observed, so ought this lawful ordinances to be
observed. But as Paul did not command the^ to be observed as works of
righteousness, but as comely ordinances, as concerning a poletyke order, so
ought the tradicions now received in the church to be observed as cyuyle
pollyces, and not as works of righteousness. Wherefore the supersticious holiness
of many may here well be noted, which always thought them selves very holy,
if they observed such cyuyle ordinances, the commandments of God
neglected. Was that not counted holiness every sunday to receive holy bread
fasting, was not he counted holy that would fast every saints even, and keep
the day holy (as they call it) that is to put on the best garments, and be
idle all the day or else give themself to abhominacion. Were not these more
regarded, or may I say be they not now better esteemed then the
commandments of God. The fasting days and holidays, be they not every
sunday in the church proclaimed, the commandments of god till these latter
days not one day spoken of, for holidays and fasting days the people
diligently enquired of their curates, because they have a fere of the breakyng
of them, but of the commandments of God they nothing require because they
regard not the transgression of them. There is a great nombre that makes great
danger to eat white meat in lent, yet they make small danger to
transgress gods commandment. These things are not rehearsed (gentle reader)
to the intent that such tradicions should be utterly contemned, but to show
the abuse how they are more esteemed, then the true holiness of an christen man's
life, which is to be collocate in the faith of Christ and the commandments
of God, but these were preferred before gods commandments in ma^s
estimation, yet plainly they are but trefels to the^ in reputacion, for as God
is above man, so is his commandments above the commandments of men.
Regard Gods commandments above all man's tradicions, yet receive and observe
men's tradycions that be lawful, but much more receive and observe first
Gods commandments, and then the lawful tradycyons of the heads. For
Christ rebuked not the Pharyses because they did observe the smaller things
of the law, but that they observing them, did omytte the greater things of
the law saying: Woe be unto you Pharyses, and Scrybes, ye ypocrytes, which
tyth mynte anyse and commyne, and leave the wayghter matters of the law
behind, namely: judgment, mercy and faith, these ought to have been done
and not to leave the other behind, leave not then the commandments of God.
But let them (for as much as they are the wayghter deeds) be first observed
and done, and the other also as it is before said: not to be omytted, as Paul
counceleth. Let every soul submytte himself to ye auctorite of ye hyer
powers, for there is no power but of god, ye powers yt be are ordained of God,
so yt who so ever resysteth ye powers resysteth ye ordinance of god, and they
that resyst shall receive to themselves da^pnacio^. Warn the^ yt they submytte
themselves unto princes and to the hyer auctoryte, to obey the officers and to
be ready to all good works. Be yet aduertysed gentle reader that thou put no
trust in those works, no nor yet in the externe works of Gods
commandments to be justified by them only, but rather because that they come
of faith are they accepted for of only works is no man justified, also David
says: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. By the deeds of ye law no flesh may be justified in
his sight. The kyndnes and love of God our saueour to ma^warde, has appeared
not of ye deeds of ryghteousnes which we wrought but of his mercy he saved us.
etc. When ye have done all these things whieh are commanded you, say we are
vnprophetable servants, we have done which was our deuty to do.

These places with many other that might be here inferred which now to avoid
prolixite are omytted do manifestly wytnes, that by works is no man saved, yet
be not discoraged, another say with thy self, what shall I do good works seeing I
shall not be saved by them, then they will do no good. Many things moves a
true christian to work first his faith, for as the tree can not bring forth
fruit, if he has life in him, so can not the faithful, but bring forth good
works, if he have a perfect faith in him, wherefore if that, thou work not be
assured that thou lackest faith, a perfect faith seaseth not from works.

A Christian also should work to give ensample as in the fyfte of Mathewe
Christ says: Let your light so shine before men, that they may se your good
works and gloryfy your father which is in heaven, se that ye have honest
conversation among the gentels, that they which backbyte you as evil doers
mayese your good works and praise god in the day of visitacion.

Itt moves also a christian to work that bytwyxt god and us is a covenant
made, that he shall reward not for the dignite or worthiness of the work but
for his couenauntes sake, for the worthynes of the work does not receive such
a reward when the reward is an hundredth fold better then the work in this
conuenaunt of Christ, as whosoever forsakes houses, or brethren, or systers,
other father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my names sake* the
same shall recyue an hundredth fold, and shall inheryte everlasting life. Many
are the conuenauntes made betwyxt god and us, and when Christ said: happy are
the mercyful for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the poor in spirit
for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven. etc. If ye shall forgive other men their
trespasses, your heavenly father shall also forgive you. If thou wylt enter into
life, keep the commandments, by these conuenauntes thou may perceive
(Christian reader) that unto work is a reward promised by conuenaunt.
Wherefore if thou delight to work for a reward, be of good there and cease not
to work thou shall have a reward, not for thy merits deserts or worthynes
of thy work (as is before said) but for thy conuenauntes sake.

But the chief motyue to good works is or shall be the very pure love of God,
for upon love does Christ found the obseruacion of his commandments, as it
may be gathered by his saying: if ye love me, keep my commandments. So then
the obseruacio^ of gods commandments is the effect of the love of god, as
in the same chapter it is expressed of Christ saying. He that has my
commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves me. So that a true
christian ought to do good works, not for the love of eternal life, another for
the fear of eternal death, which ensues the transgression of gods
commandments, but for the very love of God which faith has wrought in him.
By this it may be perceived yt although by faith only, and not by works man
is justified in ye sight of god, yet good works are not thought to be
despised, and that man should not work (as some falsely has imputed to
preachers) but rather that all good works shall be besely exercysed to the glory
of god.

The third sort of works are of the tradicion of man, which are not in the
scripture of God, nor yet consonaunt to the scripture of god, but plainly
repugnaunt, as pardons, pylgrymages, kissing of images, offryng of candels,
knelyng and crouchyng to stocks and stones, and such other which ought not
to be received nor observed, for it is rather to be obeyed to god the^ unto
man. Acts. v. the aucthours of such tradicions, as Christ says does worship
him in vain teaching doctrynes, which are nothing but men's precepts. Mat.
xv. Of these precepts and men's laws, seek the.xxviii. and.xxix. chapter of
Esaias, in the which ye shall perceive these pleasures of God for them.

The office of al estates.
BE wise now therefore (O ye kings). Be warned ye that are Judges of the
earth. Psalmus. iiii.

Serve the lord with fear, and rejoice before him with reverence. Hear
therefore (O ye kings) and understand. Sapien. vi. O learn ye that be Judges
of the ends of the earth, give ear ye that rule the multitudes and delight in
much people, for the power is given you of the Lord, and the strength from the
highest, which shall try your works and search out your ymaginacions. Sapi.
vi.

Unto you therefore (O ye kings) do I speak that ye may learn wysdo^, and
not go amysse, for they that keep righteousness, shall be ryghteously judged, and
they that are learned in ryghteous things, shall find to make answer, wherefore
set your lusts upon my words and love them, so shall ye come by nourture.

To the leage people of al estates unto their prince.
LEt every soul submyt himself to the aucthorite of the hyer powers. for
there is no power but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God, so that
whosoever resists the powers, resists the ordinances of God. Roma. xiii,
And they that resyst shall receive to themselves dampnacion. for rulers are not
to be feared for good works, but of evil. If thou wylt be without fear of the
power do well then, and thou shall have praise of the same, for he is the
minyster of God for thy wealth. But if thou do evil then fear, for he bears
not the sweard for naught. for he is the minister of God, a taker of
vengeance, to punysh him that does evil, wherefore ye must needs obey, not only
for punysshement, but also because of conscience, for this cause must ye give
tribute also, for they are gods ministers, which maintain the same defense,

Submytte your self unto all manner of ordinances of men for the Lords sake.
whether it be unto the king as unto the chief head, or unto rulers as unto
them that are sent of him, for the punishment of euel doers, but for the
praise of them that do well.

The Bysshoppes.
A Bishop must be blamles. Tit. i. as the steward of God, (...) wylfull,
not angry, not given to much wine, no fyghter, not gredy, of fylthy lucre, but
harbarous, one that loves goodness, sober minded, righteous, holy, temperate
and such a one as cleueth unto the true word of doctrine, that he may be
able to exorte with holsom learnyg. and to improve them that say against it.

The Elders of Par^ones.
THe elders which are among you I exorte which am also an elder and a wytnes of
these afflyccions in Christ, and partaker of the glory that shall be opened.
Feade Christ's flock which is among you, and take the oversight of them, not
as though ye were compelled thereto. but wyllyngly, not for the desire of fylthy
lucre, but of a good mind, not as though ye were lords over the parisshians,
but that ye be an example to the flock: and when the chief shepherde shall
appear, ye shall receive the incorruptible crown of glory.

Rulers.
Ye that are rulers of the earth, se that ye love righteousness, and that ye
commyt no unrighteousness in judgment. Thou shall not have respect to the
person of the poor, nor honor thou the countenance of the rych, but judge
thy neighbor righteously.

Every christian to his even christen.

Ye shall not deceive your brethren, neither with weight nor measure, but ye
shall have balaunces and true weyghtes, for I am the lord your God, Ye shall not
steal, neither lie, nor deal falsely one with another Ye shall not swear
falsely by my name, so to vnhallowe the name of thy god, for I am the Lord.

Thou shall do thy neighbor no wrong, nor rob him.

The workemannes labor shall not bide with the, until ye morning.

Thou shall not cu^e the deaf. Thou shall not put no sto^blyng block before
the blind, but shall fear thy God, for I am the Lord.

Husbands.
HVsbandes love your wives even as Christ loved the congregation, and gave
himself for it to sanctify it, and cleanse it in the fountain of water,
through the word to make it to him self a glorious congregation without spot
or wryncle or any such thing. So ought men to love their wives. as their own
bodies he that loves his wife loves himself, for no man yet ever hated his
own flessh. but norished it. etc.

Wives.
Wives submyt your self to your own husbands, as unto the Lord for the
husband is the wives head, even as Christ is head of the congregation. Therefore
as the congregation is in subieccion to Christ, likewise let the wives be in
subieccio^ to their husbands in all points

Fathers and mothers.
Ye father move not your Children to wrath, but bring them up with the
nourture and informacion of the Lord.

Chylhren.
Children obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord for it is right, and
honor thy father and mother, that is the first commandment that has any
promise. that thou may be in good estate and live long on the earth.

Masters.
Ye masters do unto your servants that which is just and equal puttyng away
all bytternes and threatenynges knowing that even ye have a master in heaven.

Servants.
Servants be obedient unto your bodily masters in all things not with eye
service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart fearing God, and what so
ever ye do: do it hertely as though ye did it unto ye Lord, and not unto men.
For as much as ye know that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of
inheritance for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Wydowes
She that is a very wydowe and frendles puts her trust in God, and
continues in supplication and prayer night and day.

The sum of all.

Love thy neighbor as thyselfe, and what soever ye would that other should do
to you, do you even the same to them, and what ye would not that other should do
to you, se that ye do it not to them,

The conclusion of Saint Peter upon al states.

In conclusion be ye all of one mind, one suffer with another, love as
brethren, be pateful, be curteyse, recompense not evil for evil, neither
rebuke for rebuke, but contrarywyse, bless and know that ye are called
thereto, even that ye should be heirs of the blessyng.

(...)

There were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you likewise which privily shall bring in damnable sects, even
denyeng the Lord that has bought them, and shall bring upon them selves swyfte
dampnacion: and many shall follow their dampnable ways, by whom the way of
the truth shall be evil spoken of: and through covetousness shall they with
feigned words make marchaundyse of you, upon whom the judgment is not
neglygent in taryeng of old, and their dampnacion slepeth not. They count it
pleasure to live deliciously for a season: Spots are they and fylthynesse,
living at pleasure and in deceyuable ways, feastynge with that which is
yours, having eyes full of aduoutry, and can not cease from sin, entysyng
unstable souls, having an heart exercysed with covetousness: they are cursed
children, and have forsaken the right way, and are gone astraye, following the
way of Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the reward of unrighteousness,
but was rebuked of his iniquite.

Imprynted in bottoll lane, at the sign of the whyt bear by me Ihon Maylerfor
Ihon Waylande, and be to sell in powles churchyard, by Andrewe Hesterat the
whyt horse, and also by Mychel Lobley, at the sign of saint Mychell. Cum
priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. 1539.


