THE SHEPHERDS STAR, OR THE MINISTERS GVIDE.

By Richard Bailey late Minister of Crawley in Sussex.

Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever, and ever.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell at the Sun in S. Pauls-Church-yard,
1640.

Concio ad Clerum. THE SHEPHERDS STAR. OR THE MINISTERS GUIDE.
Textus, Apocalypsis Cap. 1. Verse. 16. (...). And he bad in his hand Seven
Stars.
MOst of the parcells of the book of God like the River, whose waters issued
out of the Sanctuary, do sometimes run with a more shallow stream where the
weakest eye may find a bottom. Sometimes again they fall into deeper
channells above the reach of the tallest heads. Only this last love-token which
Christ bequeathed unto his Church with some other parts of divine writ, are as
the maine Ocean, full of nothing but deeper mysteries, where the highest
Elephant may Swim, they are not for Lambs to wade in. S. Hierome no sooner
viewes this Sea, but he thinks he may safely say, Tot Sacramenta, quot verba.
The Apocalypse contains as many mysteries as words. But S. Austine somewhat
mitigates the Apprehension of such difficulty, In Apocalypsi multa obscure
dicuntur, ut mentem legentis exerceant. Many things are here involued in a
cloud of obscurity, that the mind of the Reader might be exercised with
greater diligence. The deeper search of a more industrious hand may find out
those Gemmes and mines of Gold, which the slothful eye cannot discern upon
the surface of the ground. The difficulty of these abstruser truths made some
in Vide Don Ep. in Euse. Et Hier. ep? ad Card^n.
those primitive times of the Church unjustly to thrust them out of the Canon
of their Faith. Nazianzene Catal. Slci.
Sure we are, Christ never sent this oriental Pearl as Primasius calls it,
his last present unto his Spouse, that she should keep it under the key of
silence and concealment. In the beginning of the prophecy, we are invited by
a blessing pronounced to them that read it, and in the end a special command
is laid upon John, seal not up the sayings of this book. Cap. 22.10. Cap,
22.10.
Search them then we may with the more deliberate judgments of sober minds,
but not with the rawer phansies of immature heads. John.
Christ would have his beloved Disciple to outlive the rest of the Apostles
that in his older age, he might reveal these darker secrets unto Gods Church.
It is for the gravest years and ripest heads to dive into the Sea of these
hidden Revelations. Yet when the Spirit of God himself shall please to be our
Pilot, we need not fear the Rocks of errors, younger eyes may have light
enough to see what these seven Stars are in the right hand of Christ, when
the spirit itself tells us, C. 1.
( Ver. the last.) The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches. What
these Angels are, the whole body of expositors will speak out of the mouths
of Primasius, and Rupertus, The Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia, Et eorum
nomine praesules totius Ecclesiae Spirituales, and in their name, the
spiritual Governors and Ministers of the whole Church; these are the Stars
in the right hand of Christ.

Ap.
I could wish some Star of greater magnitude then my self unworthy of the
honor of this title, were now confined within this Orb, to cast upon you the
rays of his more divine and deeper knowledge. It were fitter for my self to
be a hearer, then a speaker in this grave assembly. Only give me leave to make
my apology for that which superior power has pleased to impose, in those
words of Saint Hierome unto Julian, Epist. ad Iulianum.
Athletae suis incitatorib. fortiores sunt, and tamen monet debilior ut pugnet
is qui fortior ^st. The wisdom of your Candid well tempered judgments shall
make me think that you will judge no Star too mean, to lead you unto
Christ, this Son of man in that Text; Qui habebat in dextra sua stellas
septem, who had in his right hand seven Stars. Which words will yield
themselves divided into these two parts. First, Divis.
that appellation or title given, seven Stars. Secondly, the situation or
orb, wherein they move, the right Hand of Christ. First, of that first, the
Appellation.

Seven Stars.
To descant on the number Seven is more fit for Pythagoras his school then a
divine Pulpit. It was ever held the number of perfection; and surely noe small
part of the worlds perfection lies in these Stars. It may be sufficient for
us to know, that under that finite number here expressed, is included the whole
company of the Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel. These are the Stars in
the right Hand of Christ. Quare Stellae.


If you please to lend me your attentions in the drawing of eight lines, you
may behold your selves running parallel with that caelestiall Star, Quare
Stellae, Octo ratio ves. Prima.
as your compleatest pattern.

First, the Stars are ordained to give light unto the world in the nights
darkness.

The Ministers of Christ also are appointed to dispell the darkness of this
present night of ignorance by the splendor of their Heavenly doctrine, which
must resemble the light of the Stars in these two respects. Primum Membrum
primae Rationis.
First, the Stars shine with no other borrowed light then that which comes
from the Sun their fountain; and all the light of the Ministers doctrine
must be such as is derived from the Sun of righteousness. Aretas observes
that the Holy Ghost has called the Churches (...), In Apocalypsc. 1.12. v.
Candlestickes and not Candles, they have noe proper light in themselves, but
are (...), as Charriots only to convey the light which is derived from above.
We know the Candlestick is the proper seat of Candles, and not of Stars.
And yet the Ministers of Christ which shine in these golden Candlestickes, must
be called Stars, and not Candles. For the light of a Candle is drossie and
impute, borrowed from this inferior Earth. But the Ministers doctrine must be
like the more pure and heavenly splendor of the Stars, such as is derived
from the Sun of righteousness. When Moses and Aron are joined Commissioners in
Gods Embassadge unto Pharaoh, they must speak no other words then God shall
put into their mouths. Exodus 4.15
Balaams first speech smelt of the condition of a true Prophet, had he kept
himself to his own words, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and
gold, I cannot go beyond the Word of the Lord my God, to do less or more.
Numb. 22.18. Number. 22.18.
The people may desire good Micaias mouth to learn the language to utter words
like the words of one of the false Prophets, and to speak that which is good
and pleasant. But the prophet knows it is not for such a Star to shine with
any other light then what is derived from Heaven, as the Lord lives, what the
Lord says unto me, that will I speak, 1. Kings. 22.13, 14. When Paul is made
a Uessell to carry Gods Name unto the Gentiles, he dares not to deliver any
thing unto the Church, which himself has not received from the Lord Christ.
1. Cor. 11.23. 1 Cor. 11.23.
The Ministers of Christ should always fear to make the people receivers of
such pretended truths, as are stolen out of the Shop of men's private fancies.
What the civil Law speaks of the woman is true of them, Vxor lucet radiis
mariti. They are noe longer Stars in the right hand of Christ, then they
shine forth by the beams of his light. These Stars noe sooner fall from the
Firmament of heavenly truths, but they become burning lamps. Rev. 8.10
Flamma proprii sensus and igne ambitionis accensi, says Carthusian, set on
fire with the flame of self conceit and fond ambition, their doctrines are noe
longer like the natural light of the Stars which comes by Gods creating, but
like the artificial blaze of a smoking Lamp, which is made by man's devising.
Scaliger Scaliger.
commends Eruditam quandam ignorantiam a certain learned ignorance, when we
make Gods revealed Will the bounds of our prying knowledge. There are some
deeper mysteries, which may well require Bernards Bernard.
rule. Credere pietas, scrutari temeritas. It will be better piety to believe
then search them; In these we should wade noe farther then the Hand of Gods
direction leads us in his blessed Word. Not (B) as if the Book of God must of
necessity be the only, though chief object of our contemplations: We are not
so confined within these limits, but that we may sometimes step into humane
learning without breaking the hedge of Gods permission, we find in
Ecclesiastical History, amongst many cursed devises, which Iulians head
plotted against the Christians, Iulians plat.
this was none of the lowest stamp; His prohibiting them to learn humane
Authors in their public Schools, that so they might no longer pierce the
Gentiles with their own quills. ^n Socrates.
Socrates reciting the History spends a whole Chapter in the defense of humane
learning. The Fathers indeed in the primitive Church being to encounter with
heathens had more frequent use of such learning to convince their errors out
of their own principles. For as Socrates says well, (...). The enemies is then
worst hurt, when he is wounded with his own weapon. But we being eased of that
labor, must be more sparing, yet when we shall find such speeches dropped from
the quills of heathens as are more befitting a Christians mouth, then their
Pens, I know no reason, why we may not take those jewels out of dung-hills,
and place them in more convenient caskets. Nazianzen was not afraid to blame
some Christians in his days, Nazian. Orat. fun. in Basilium.
that cried out upon humane learning, (...), as dangerous, as deceitful, such
as usually drives men farther off from God. We have not learned (says he) to
contemn the Sun, and Stars of Heaven; because some have abused them,
(...), Worshipping the things of God in the place of God. Our better wisdom
will be this, to leave the danger, and take the profit unto our selves. For we
may say of humane Authors, ^heoph. Alex.
what Theophilus Alexandrinus spoke of Origens books. They are (...), like a
field of all sorts of Flowers. Our wisdom should be to gather such fair
Roses as may adorn the Garland of truth, and leave the thorns behind as
unsefull. The Bees (says Basil) do not fasten upon all Flowers, Basil. de
legendis Lib. Gent.
and of those, on which they fall, they take nothing but what is (...),
Profitable to make their Honey. Moses was first learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, Acts 7.2^
before he was made Gods messenger unto Pharaoh. Daniel was first taught the
learning and the tongue of the Chaldeaens, Daniel 1.
before he came to interpret divine visions. Though the Apostles first learning
was in their Fish-nets, yet the Holy Ghost must descend upon them in the shape
of cloven-fiery tongue, before they shall be dispersed abroad to teach all
Nations. Acts 2.4, 5.
Paul himself had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and such was his
sacred eloquence, Acts 22.3.
that he was esteemed by the Infidels a Mercury, the god of eloquence, (...),
says Chrysostom, Act 14.12.
because he excelled so much in speaking, wearing the garland before the
chiefest Orator. Heresy indeed has noe better weapons to defend her self
then humane eloquence: Therefore Vincentius Lyrenensis observes, that Origens
and Tertullians transcendent learning made their erroneous tenants, the more
dangerous. The Syren-tunes of such eloquence are no better then Tertullians
Stillicidia mellis de libalunculo venenato, Te^tullian.
as that critical Father speaks, drops of Honey out of a poisoned Lymbeck.
But when humane learning is used only as an ornament unto truth, she will never
dislike, that her nakedness should be covered with such garments. S. Augustine
confesses, It was that eloquence of Ambrose, which first wrought upon his
young affections. And Mr. Zanchy thinks it noe part of an indiscreet Cook so
to prepare his dishes, that the pleasantnes of the sauce, may make those
truths to relish with the palates of some, which otherwise would distaste them
as unsavory. The bitter pills of more sharp and piercing instructions, rolled
in sugared eloquence may be swallowed with greater ease. Only (B) here our care
should be, to account Salomons porch our best Athens, Tert^l.
and to keep our usual walk within the circuit of Gods book.

They report of Carolostadius, whose first education was in popish Schools,
that he was, Octo annorum doctor, when he came to the reading of the
Scriptures, and yet was registered in the public acts of the University,
Sufficientissimus, one most sufficient to be a teacher of Gods Church. Such
popish Method will scarce make good Divines. The Apostles knew nothing unless
(...), the heavenly inspired Scriptures able to make the man of God perfect,
and furnished unto every good work, 2. Tim. 3.16. 2 Timothy 3.1^ 17.
17. Hereby only we shall deserve S. Hieromes praise of Nepotian, ^n Epist. ad
Heliodorum.
Lectione assidua and meditatione diurna pictus suum fecerat Bibliothecam
Christi. Our continual study, and daily meditation on Gods book will make our
breasts as the Libraries of Christ, that so whatsoever truth proceeds from our
doctrines may be like the light of the Stars derived from the Sun of
Righteousness.

Secund^ Sec. 1 ae. Rationis.
Secondly, the light of Stars is always accompained with some quickening
heat, so should the light of the Ministers doctrine be ever warmed with the
kindly heat of true zeal. Faithful Moses can no sooner see the people
dancing about the Calfe, Exodus 32 20.
but the fire of his zeal shall quickly melt that golden vanity. What
Nazianzen reports of Basil, Orat: fun. ^n Basil.
is a fit emb^^me of a Minister. A pillar of fire, with this Motto, Talis est
Basilius. So Nazianzene says of him, that he was, (...) as a fere amongst
Thorns, soon consuming the strawie manners of the wicked with the heat of
his burning zeal. We read of Phinehas, Ps. 106.30.
that he stood up and executed judgment, and the Plague stayed. What a stay
would there be of the plague of sin, how would Satan's kingdom be
straightened, if our spiritual Phinehasses, were all knit together as one man,
like those Israelits at Gibeah. Judges 20.11. Judges 20 11.
To publish judgments against the rebellions of the people. Trembling fear
would not suffer the Drunkard to hold his Cups; the Swearer, and Adulterer
would be wearyed with continual pursuites, did the Trumpets of Gods Sanctuary
never cease to proclaim war, and destruction against such sins. We love
too much that our Pulpits should echo forth the sweeter sounds of mercy, and
not the harsher tunes of judgment. But Gregory Nyssen tells us, Greg^^y Nyssi^
that the dead Snakes are never raised unless by a clappe of thunder. The
secure sinner will scarce be raised out of his dead sleep, unless by those
louder clappes of judgments which come from James and John, (...) sons of
Thunder. Chrysostom.
Its observed of Chrysostom, that he reprooved sin as if it had been an
injury done unto himself; ^hrysostome Vide Centu^ Magdebu^.
We should never want words of reproof, if we could make the peoples sins,
our own injuries. We read the zeal of that holy Father, and cannot but admire
his valor. Zozomene Zozomene.
tells us, the disfavour of the times were the portion of his Cup, that makes
us fearful to walk in his steps. We love the praises of men, more then the
praise of God, but Hierome thinks, Epist. ad Nepotionum.
Lachrymae auditorum lauds tuae sint, The hearers tears will be the best
praises of our Pulpit Oratory. (...) was Paul's rule for Titus, 1.13. Titus 1.13
Its a sharpe-cutting word, written in Vinegar, and will not please the palates
of most men. But sure we are, we should discover the skill of weak
Chirurgions, if we should never use the knife of the Law to cut off putrifyed
members, as well as the gentle. Oil of the Gospel, to poare into lesser and
fresher wounds. Not (B) as if their breaths should always smell of the
sowrenesse of the Law, and never of the sweetness of the Gospel. It was
Luthers Luther.
excuse to those that reproved his sharpe-teeth'd Sermons, Cortex meus amarus,
nucleus v. dulcis, under the bitter rind of Gods severer Justice, we should
include the more pleasant kernel of his mercy. In the Arc of the Tabernacle
(says Gregory) Virga Simul and Manna, Gregori s ib. 3. mor.
Arons Rod and the Manna were laid up both together. We must feed the people
sometimes with that sweeter Manna of the promises as well as strike them with
the Rod of more bitter threatenings. Thus should the light of our doctrine be
like the splendor of the Stars, both driven from the Sun of Righteousness
and warmed with the heat of zeal, that so we may be true Stars in the
right Hand of Christ, to dispell the darkness of this night of ignorance.

Secondly, Ratio Secun.
the Stars of Heaven not only in their light, but in their well ordered
motion do speak forth the praises of their Creator. These Stars in Christ
Hand must be the Glory of Christ by the regulate motion 1 Cor 8.23
of a holy life as well as by the shining light of sound doctrine. (...).
We may observe that the Lord made his ancient Prophets to preach by their
outward practices as well as by their words. Noah must be a Preacher of
Righteousness by the building of an Arc; ^eremy 27.^ and 28.
Jeremy must put yoakes on his own neck when he brings news of Babylonish
bands. Jonah must first practice Repentance in the Whales belly before he can
well preach Repentance to sinful Nineveh. ^onah. 1.17 ^, 4.
Beda observes that Moses did first sanctify the Sons of Aron by washing,
Exodus 40 12.13.
and anointing, before he would cloth them with the holy garments of the
Priesthood. Beda.
Sacerdotum animi abluendi, deinde sacris ordinib. Vestiantur. A Minister is
then fit to be invested with sacred orders when his soul is washed from the
silth of a sinful life. The holiness of our lives is that only which will make
both our persons honored, and our doctrines powerful, unto Gods glory. This
was Paul's rejoicing. 2 Cor. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.13
That he wrote noe other things unto them then what they might read in him.
This will be a Ministers chiefest honor, when there is nothing written in his
tongue, which the people may not read in his life.

If Origin will have his name spread in Gods Church with a sweet smeling odor,
this only must do it; Eusebius. de Origene lib. 6. cap. 8.
Hic est, qui vivit ut docet, and docet ut vivit, as Eusebius reports of him.
The Apostles care was in nothing to give offense, (...). 2. Cor. If Momus can
espy faults and scandalls in Paul's life, 2 Cor. 6.3.
he will soon fasten the teeth of censure, and contempt upon his Ministry.
Surely the eloquence of our tongues will little prevail with our hearers,
unless as Beda speaks of Chunibert, Bedae de Ch^mberto dictum.
Quae agenda docebat, ipse prius agendo praemonstrabat. We show forth the
truth of that by action in our life's, which we preach should be done in our
Pulpits. A. Gellius de Lacedaem.
Aulus Gellius observes a custom amongst the Lacedaemonians, When a good
sentence proceeded out of an evil mouth, (that it might have the greater
force,) they retained the sentence, and changed the authors name. For most
true is that of Gregory. ^regory.
Loquendi authoritas perditur quando vox opere non adjuvatur. We shall soon
loose the authority of our speaking, if our words be not helped forward with
our works. I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God, was the language of
that unclean spirit, Mark 1.24. Mark. 1.24
It was the holiness of Christ's person which made the Devils tremble. Erasmus
in one of his Epistles mentions a story of the Devils lifting up one of his
creatures to the top of a Chimney in that Town of Shiltach in Germany, Epist.
lib. 27 Epist. 20 and ex eodem Bucholcerus anno. 2533
that at the turning of a pot, which he put into her hands, the whole Town
might be set on fire. The blindness of those times sent for two Priests to lay
down the cursed spirit with their charms, and to quench those intended flames
with their holy-waters. But the Devil could soon answer, that he feared not
their threatening words, Quod alter esset Scortator, uterque Fur. When one of
them was an Adulterer and both of them Thieves. The wisest charms from the
mouth of a loose-liver will little prevayle to cast the Devil out of his
strong possession of a sinners heart.

I cannot deny, but the master may send a good work of charity by the hand of
a bad servant, and sometime says Cyprian, Per alium licet impenitentem,
misericors dominus alium revocare vult ab impenitentia. Some like the plaster
may heal the wounded hearts of others, and themselves at last be cast into
the fire; Like the water of Baptism (to use Gregory's Expression) quae peccata
Baptizatotorum diluens illos ad regnum Caeleste mittit, and ipsa in cloacas
descendit. In Hom. 2
Howsoever those only are most likely to pull down Satan's strongest holds,
which bring the sword of the spirit in the hand of a holy life. Camerarius in
Theodoreti Histor
Camerarius observes of Athanasius, Mores illius and oration plus nocuere
adversariis quam scripta, he hurt his adversaries more by his good life then
great learning. Our spiritual adversary Satan will be sooner vanquished with
the unspotted sanctity of our life's, then the learned eloquence of our tongues.
It is indeed the most received opinion, that the Caelestiall Stars do
virtually produce that heat in this sublunary world which is not inherent in
themselves. But the more ancient searchers into natures secrets could not well
conceive how they should have power to give that unto others, which they wanted
in themselves. ^en. 1 ^1. aec opino ^ridet ^heodoreto, (...) prima ^rat. de
^rovid.
Therefore Plato somewhat alters the phrase of Moses, In the beginning God
created (...), The Earth and the Heaven, in his opinion a Globe of purer fire,
whereof the Stars are the more condensed parts. Sure we are, our spiritual
Stars will have small or not virtue to produce the heat of holiness in the
breasts of others, if their own hearts were never yet baptized with the fire
of the spirit. We may bring more hurt then profit to GODS Church, Bernard.
if we be, Catholici praedicando, haeretici vero vivendo, as Bernard speaks,
Catholics, in our doctrines and Heretics, in our life's. For of the two,
(says Isidore Pelusiota) (...). Isidorus.
The bad example of our loose life's may carry more souls to Hell then the good
words of our golden tongues can convey to Heaven. Theodorete Theodoretus
has observed in his first oration de providentia that God has given the
Stars not only to enlighten the nights darkness, but has made them also by
the position, and order of their motions, (...), as so many marks and foot
stepps to guide the wary mariner thorough the untrackt paths of his watery
voyage. Christ would have his spiritual Stars to be such in the order and
motion of their life's, that those which sail on the Sea of this world may by
the guidance of their good example be ledd safely to the Haven of future
happiness. But when that light of grace which should shine forth in their
life's shall be turned into the filthy vapor of an Ignis Fatuus, it will
quickly lead many followers with them into pitts of destruction. Natures
instinct teaches the people to make their leaders life as their looking glass,
whereby they dress and attire their own manners. Therefore it was (as Minutius
Faelix conjectures) that the Devils policy made the Poets feign their
heathenish gods guilty of the worlds pollutions, Minutius Faelix page ^78.
Vt vitiis hominum auctoritas quaedam pararetur. That the vices of men might
get some authority from their example. The falls of higher Cedars will destroy
those lesser shrubs which grew under the shelter of their boughs. Caput malum,
Caput mali, is the physicians rule, An evil head is the head of evil, vicious
humors will quickly flow thence to mar the health of the whole body. Jeremy
23.28, 15.
From the Prophets in Jerusalem will prophanenes soon go forth into all the
land: Augusti. Confess.
let not then (B) S. Augustines complaint of his days be any longer true of
ours, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt Caelum, and nos cum doctrinis nostris
excludimur. Why should we carry our literature about with us as Vriahs letter
to be our own destruction? 2 Samuel 14.12.
Suetonius reports of Julius Caesar, that when he was slain in the Senate
house there were those letters found about him, which if he had but read might
have discovered his plotted death. Pity it were that any should dye in Hell
with those letters, that learning about them, which if they had read in
practice, might have discovered a way to have escaped that eternal misery. Why
should not the same boat convey the ferry man as well as the passengers to the
other side of Jordan into the Land of Canaan? Levit. 10.3. Number. 11.11.
Surely God will never endure unholy lives in those which are near him and
which should sanctify him before the people. Moses showed some want of faith in
the matter of the quails. ( Numbers 11.21.) yet this being done in private
obtained the Lords connivence. But when his more public unbelief dishonours
God in the sight of the people, noe less then the loss of an Earthly Canaan
must be his punishment.

Christ will ever look that those which he honors be Stars in his Number. 20.
right hand should praise him in the regulate motion of a well-ordered
conversation as well as in the light of sound doctrine.

Aelian tells us that the High Priest among the Egyptians was wont to wear
about his neck an ornament of a saphyre stone, which was called by the name of
(...) or truth. Vrim and Thummim, (...), manifestation and truth, as the
septuagint have it, are such ornaments which should be ever found in the
breasts of Gods Priests, (...) (so the septuagint render their Vrim and Thummim
on the breast of the high Priest under the Law) manifestation and truth are
such ornaments, which must never be wanting from the breasts, and hearts of
GODS Priests.

Ratio. 3.
Thirdly, the Celestial Stars besides their light and motion have a secret
influence into the deeper bowels of the Earth, whither their light cannot
reach. These spiritual Stars in Christ's Hand must have some good influence
into the hearts of those, to whom their light of Doctrine or example and motion
of life cannot extend, and that by their prayers, Influence by Prayer.
and by their Charity.

He is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, was the language of elder times
Genesis 20.7. Genesis 20.7
And it should be the dialect of our days: God forbid that Samuel should ever
sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for 1 Samuel 12 23. Lu^her of Prayer.
Israel. Prayer is one of Luthers three things, which concur to the making up
of a good Divine, and am sure it is the best conduite-pipe to convey every good
and perfect gift from above into the Church beneath. How would Amalek fall
before the face of Israel, did the firm stone of constant devotion keep up
the hands of faithful Moses in continual prayer. Exodus 17.11, 12.
When good Alexander spends the whole night in Prayer, Arrius that blazing
Star shall sooner go out with an ill smell then come to be enthroned in a
chair of expected honor. Vide Socratis Hist. lib. 1. We know not (B) what
wonder working efficacy there is in the fervent Prayer of a righteous heart.
James 5.16
Memorable is that story mentioned by Xiphilinus the contracter of Dion, X
philinus de Marc. Anton.
and we find it also in that Epistle of Marcus the Emperor in that work of
Iustine Martyr. When that Emperors Army not overcome by their enemies sword
was like to perish for want of water; The prayers of a band of Christians in
the army brought down thunderbolts on the heads of their enemies, and a cooling
shower to refresh their own wants. Were the prayers of Gods faithful Ministers
the Charriots, and Horsemen of Israel, shot forth with all their strength,
they might be able to cross the Seas and like that (...) fall with the sweet
influence of a refreshing shower upon the Tents of Gods Israel, and as hot
thunderbolts upon the heads of their Egyptian Enemies.

Influence by charity.
But our Prayers also must be winged with Charity, or else they will scarce
bring the true Olive branch of comfort in their mouths unto poor distressed
Christans. Sic men's per compassionem doleat, ut and larga manus affectum
doloris Ostendat, is Gregory's rule. The mind must so grieve over the miseries
of others by compassion, that the affection of the heart be showed in the
largenes of the hand. Good wishes are the breaths of Charity, they may bring
some cooling blasts of lesser comforts; but they are the hands of action must
afford the truest help. The Stars above enjoy not their influence to
themselves, but cast it forth into the bowels of the Earth where they produce
precious mineralls and heaps of gold in those earthen Coffers. These
spiritual Stars in Christ's Hand should not please themselves in a self
fruitio^ of their goodness, they should by some secret influence of their
Charity produce golden mines of comforts in those fleshy cabbinets, the bowels
of poor dejected Christians. Aurum habet Ecclesia, Ambrose.
non ut servet sed ut eroget, is the judgment of S. Ambrose. God gives the
Church her wealth not to imprison within iron bars, but to help the
distresses of the poor. The stomach receives not the meat to keep it to her
self, but sends it abroad into the other parts. Stomachus Eccles. Auth ^p.
imperf. in Matthaeum.
The Ministers are as the stomach of the Church, they receive not the mercies
of God to be locked up within the narrow confines of their own sole injoyement,
but to transfuse them thorough the veins of Charity amongst all the members of
Christ's body. Luke 10.32.
It should not be said in our days, Levites pass by on the other side, when
Samaritans stand still to power the oil of Mercy into wounded travailers. This
will be ever expected from the Stars of Christ, that they should have some
good influence into the hearts of others by their prayers and by their Charity.

Ratio. 4.
Fourthly, the Stars of Heaven are ever restless in their motion, and yet
never wearyed. These Stars in Christ's hand must imitate the diligence of
their pattern by the practice of an unwearyed patience in the motion of their
restless function. The office of a Minister did never yet consist in
idleness. 1 Timothy 3.1
He that desires the office of a Bishop desires a good work. Laborem, non
delicias; ut intermissa Rachelis decora facie intret ad Leam oculis lippam, as
Hierome speaks. A work it is, and not a play; 1 Timothy 4.15
a leaving of Rachels fair face to enter into bleare-eyed Lea. (...). Our
whole selves may be well employed in the service of this work. 1 Timothy 6.12.
Timothy will never find it a matter of ease, (...). Many bitter agonies attend
the calling of a Minister. Those indeed which have learned the art of casting
their whole burden upon the backs of others reserving nothing to themselves,
Bernard. sic and Ch^ysost. voc^t (...). lib. 3. (...) Sacerd.
know not whether S. Bernard speaks sense, when he calls the Ministry, Onus
ipsis angelis formidandum, a burden under which the Angels may well tremble.
The Poets fained of Pallas, that she left off her Trumpets when she saw her
cheeks began to swell with blowing. It must not be true of Christ's Ministers
that they cease to sound the Trumpets of the Sanctuary, when their faces begin
to swell with the fatness of the Earth. We shall be then most enemies to our
own graces, when we do least good unto the people. Clemens Alex.
Clemens Alexandrinus compares the graces of Gods Spirit unto wells of living
waters. Those wells which are continually drawn. (...), send forth their water
more clear and resplendent. (...). But those turn to corruption of whom no
man partakes. We are all as lesser Cisternes partaking of the fullnes of
Christ, Simile.
the Fountain of all Grace. The water standing continually in the Cisterne may
quickly corrupt and putrify, but the oftener we turn the cock to power out of
those waters upon the parched ground of the peoples hearts, John 4.16. v.
a new supply of grace for grace will flow from Christ our Fountain. It may
seem not without a mystery, that God would have the Sheepfold, the first
School of instruction unto his kingly Prophet, and the fishnets, the first
academy unto his blessed Apostles. Amongst all the callings of men, where more
bitter labors then in the Shepherds hook, and the Fishers net? Luke 5.5.
Peter could pass the whole night in patient watching of his nets, and catch
nothing. Jacob was content to be consumed with drought by day, and with frost
by night, least Labans sheep should be stolen and his Lambs miscarry. Genesis
31.40.
What then must be the patience of Gods Ministers in their sharpest labors,
least the souls of Men, more worth the^ Lambs should miscary and fall into
the hands of that devouring Lion? If a shepeard loose a Sheep, 1 Peter. 5.8.
though his Mr. should not grant him pardon, yet says Chrysostom. its but (...),
his purse may redeem the loss. Chrysostom. de Sacerd. lib. 2
Only those which are entrusted with (...), the reasonable flock of Christ, if
the Sheep perish through their default, the punishment extends beyond the
purses reach, to the loss of their dearest souls. If a man had the blood of
Christ in a Violl committed to his charge, how chary would he be in the keeping
of so rich a Pearl? We have (says Bernard) the souls of men committed to our
charge, Ezekiel. 3.18.
more dear unto Christ then his own soul, and shall we be careless keepers
of such precious Jewels? Surely (B) the danger cannot be small, which hangs
over the neglect of those which watch over souls, as they that must give
account as the Apostle speaks. Heb. 13.17. Heb. 13.17
Such was Chrysostomes apprehension of this danger, that he professes of
himself in his sixth book, de Sacerdotio, (...). He could never read or
think of that giving account, but it filled his heart with fear and his
joints with trembling. The bitter judgments of God upon some have made them
feel the smart of this truth. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 22.
Eusebius observes in his eighth book, That it fell as a part of divine
Justice upon some Ministers in the persequution of Dioclesian, that for their
not taking heed to the flock of Christ whereof the Holy Ghost had made them
overseers, Acts 20.28
they were made (...), keepers of Camells instead of pastors of Christ's sheep.
Lutherus de Canonico Erphordiensi.
And Luther speaks of one whose unfaithfulness in his Ministerial function
made his dying tongue to taste the Gall of that bitter wish, O utinam fuissem
omni vita mea subulci famulus. I shall never wish that any in this assembly may
ever have cause to give the English of this harsh Latin. What sudden shame
will cover the faces of some at the last day, when Christ shall demand of them
as John the Evangelist did of that Bishop in Eusebius, whose remiss care had
been the ruin of the young man committed to his custody, Age depositum nobis
read, where are those many souls deposed into your hands and lost under your
careless soule-starving education? If the warmest blood in our hearts were
dissolved into drops of sweat, it were not too much to gain souls. Aron
was to wear the names of the Children of Israel on the breast plate of
judgment upon his heart. Exodus 18.29. The care of his peoples souls can never
sit too near the heart of a good Minister. He must be willing to learn Paul's
language to the Galathians 4.19. Gal. 4.19.
(...), to carry his people in the secret womb of dearest affections, and
feel no less then the throes of a woman in travayle, till Christ be formed in
the hearts of his hearers. Such was the care of good Luther, Lutherus.
If waiting on my Ministry all my days (says he) I could gain but one
soul, Eo contentus Deo gratias agerem, content with that as a sufficient
reward of all my pains. I would give God the thanks. For were a man able to
see the beauty of a soul (as Catharina Senensis, a religious woman once spoke)
Centies in die pro illius salute subiret mortem. Siquis videre posset
pulchritudinem unius animae. Catharina Senensis.
He would not think a hundred deaths in one day too much to save one soul.
Howsoever (B) this be our portion in the short night of this present world, to
be in continual motion like the Stars, or herein rather like the Candle (
Alciats emblem of a minister) to wast and consume our selves in giving light
unto others, yet there will be (...) as Theodorete calls it elegantly, Orat.
^rima de provid.
A day without an evening, that shall never end in the darkness of any sorrow;
this shall sufficiently recompense our greatest pains, when as the silk Worm
having spent and work't out our selves we shall end in the soft silk of
eternal happiness. Mat. 5.12
Our Master bids us rejoice in this; great shall be our reward in Heaven, Dan.
12.1
when those which turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars in
glory. Si labor terret, merces invitet, says Bernard. Bernard.
If the labor of our Ministerial duty affright us, yet let the greatness of
reward encourage us to be like the Stars, in the restless, and unwearyed
motion of our spiritual function.

Fifthly, Ratio. 5.
the caelestiall Stars keep their continual motion within the circuit of
their Heavenly Orbs. The Stars in Christ's Hand should have their
conversation in Heaven far remote from these earthly vanities. Their life's
should flourish like the Palm Tree, Psa. 92.12
as the Psalmist speaks, of which Tree S. Gregory observes, that she grows
least in the body or truncke near the Earth, and biggest in her boughs which
are nearer Heaven. Our affections should be like the fashion of the heart; as
nature has laid it in that body narrow, and close shut in that part which is
to the Earth, more broad and open toward Heaven. Timothy will never please him
that has chosen him to be his spiritual Soldier, if he do suffer himself
(...), to be entangled in the affairs of this life. 2. Tim. 2.4. 2 Timothy 2.4.
The birdlime of earthly thoughts will keep down the wing of the soul from
mounting upwards by heavenly contemplations. The cloggy body of the Earth
interposed between our hearts, and Christ, will soon eclipse the beauty of our
Starrie-lights. It were well for the Church if the generation of those were
quite extinct of whom Erasmus Erasmus.
speaks, Decimatores potius quam praedicatores, their tything tables are
oftener in their hands then Gods Book before their eyes: But Clemangis thinks
it no wonder if some such be more greedy after the gain of wealth then souls.
Clemang. de corrupto ecclesiae statu.
Quib. pastores fieri tam charo constitit. When they bought their shepherds
hook at such dear rates. We see (B) nature has so framed the eyes of our
body, that we cannot look up to Heaven and down upon the Earth at the same
time. Surely the eye of our Ministerial function will seldom look up by
heavenly Meditations, when the eyes of our mind are continually fixed upon the
Earth. Therefore Cyprian makes this the cause, Cyprian. Epist.
why the Levites had no lot of inheritance with the other tribes, Vt in nulla
re avocarentur, nec cogitare aut agere sacularia cogerentur. And Sulpitius
Severus in his first book of his sacred History, Sulpit. Severus li. 1. de
Histo.
thought good to commend the same example as a looking-glass to the Clergy in
his time, which (says he) too much unmindfull or at least ignorant of that
precept, Inhiant possessionibus, praedia excolunt, emunt venduntque: quaestui
per omnia student, and quasi venalem praeferunt Sanctitatem. It were well we
might not read the meaning of this complaint in our english practice. For in
the judgment of Synesius, so to conjoyne worldly dealings with Priestly
actions is. (...), To weave Woollen, Synesius Epist. 57. contra Andronicum.
and Linen togegether in the garment of an Israelite. I admire their skill
(says the same Father) which can deal in both these, (...), for my self, I
find it beyond the reach of my power to serve two such masters, as God, and
Mammon. Not (B) that we should strippe our selves of all care after the things
of this world. 1 Timothy 5.^8. v.
So we might run the hazard of being worse then Infidells in not providing
for our own. Only let not covetousness make this a mask for unjust and
undecent practices. The Devil will soon catch us with a golden hook, if we
suffer him to angle long in our hearts with tentations to worldly-mindednesse.
It will be a hard matter for the light of these spiritual Stars, like the
beams of the Sun to lie amongst the dung, and dirt of the Earth, and yet
receive no tincture of defilement. Our beauty of holiness may be soon
defaced, if the affections, the feet of our souls stir much in the dust of
the Earth. Vide Epiphanium de Meletis.
Epiphanius observes of the Meletians, though they were Orthodox in their
Faith, yet by Communion with Arrius and his faction, they were not (...), free
from the filthy dung of some corrupt manners. Too much familiarity with the men
and matters of the world will quickly bring contempt upon our persons, and cast
some soil upon our manners; We shall be then most like the Stars our
pattern, when we keep our selves within the Orb of Heavenly contemplations,
far remote from this inferior, and baser Earth.

Sixthly the Stars of Heaven shine brightest in the darkest nights. Ratio. 6.
These Stars of Christ's Hand in the darkest nights of persecution or
affliction should send forth their brightest beams. Persecution has ever been
the reward of Prophets from the hands of wicked men.

If Jeremy will be faithful in his embassadge, Ier. 11.21.
prophesy no more least thou dye, will be the peoples voice. So true is that of
Hierome against Iovinian, Amara est Veritas, and quisquis eam praedicat,
amaritudine satiabitur. Truth is of a bitter relish with the palate of most
men, and and whosoever preaches it shall be filled with bitterness. Howsoever
in the blackest nights, these Stars must not withdraw their light. Aelien.
Cynosbat^s.
Aelian reports of the Herb Cynosbatus, that in the day time it lies hid
amongst other herbs and is not discovered, but in the night it appears like a
glorious Star. Those graces of Gods Spirit, in the hearts of Gods faithful
servants should shine as bright Stars in the obscurest nights of affliction
which in the clearer sunshine of prosperity did not appear with that perfect
luster. When blessed Paul cease to be an agent in the Churches persecution,
at the next news we hear him a patient in the Churches troubles. What is that
catalogue of his often perils. 2. Cor. 11. but as a picture of the unquiet Sea
full of the swelling waves of persequutions beating upon the back each of
other, the least whereof may suffice to break the earthen Pitcher of humane
frailty? This joy wants words to express it.
Yet in all these sufferings, (...) (2 Cor. 7.4.) is the strange Swan-like tune
from the mouth of this dying, and afflicted saint.

Luthers Theorome, Schola Crucis, Schola lucis, The light of superabundant joy
shining thorough the black clouds of abounding afflictions is a harsh sounding
paradox in the ears of the world, and a truth which is only found in the
school of Christ's cross.

Paul's body may be cast into fetters, 2. Ep. Tim. 2.9. v:
but the light of his Gospel will admit no bonds. Modestus may use his best
skill to entangle Basil in the Arrian subtleties, but at last he shall carry
news unto Valens of a strange valor, as Nazianzen reports it, Nazianzen. in
Orat. fun. de Basil.
(...). Such (says he) is the resolute courage of Basil, that words cannot
overcome him, threatenings cannot shake him, Stella C^dentes.
and all allurements cannot draw him. They are still false lights or meteors
hanging in the Air of ambition, not fixed in the Firmament of truth, which
every wind of trouble is able to cast upon the ground of a new Faith. Vide ad
finem, Egypt. P^n^.
Quis tibi verum audebit dicere, si sacerdos Dei non audebit? says Ambrose.
Ambros.
When the Wolf comes, whose voice should be heard, if not the Shepherds? The
people must needs be as lost sheep when the Shephards flight causes them to
go astray. Jeremy 50.4.
Whereas the example of a well-sinewed patience and valor in the leaders,
might steel the hearts of weaker Christians to follow them in the same steps.
We find a passage in Luke 23.26. Luke 23.26.
they lay hold on Simon a Cyrenian, and on him they laid the Cross, that he
might bear it (...) behind Jesus. The word is derived from (...) (says
Eustathius,) as if it were (...). Therefore have some conceited, that he
followed after Jesus bearing some part of the Cross, himself going before and
bearing the greatest part. The examples of constant patience shining forth in
the blackest afflictions of Gods Ministers, would be as so many Cyrenians to
bear a part in the crosses of weaker Christians, that they might not faint
under the burden of their heavy pressures. We shall forget what we are, Stars
in the right hand of Christ, if in the darkest nights of persecution or
affliction, we should not send forth our brightest beams.

Seventhly, Ratio 7.
the Stars above differ amongst themselves in their quantity, and in their
quality. These spiritual Stars of Christ's hand are not all alike in the
gifts and endowments of the spirit. Some are like Barnabas, fittest to draw the
milk of consolation out of the breasts of the sweetest promises to still the
noise of the crying conscience. Others like Boanerges, most skillful to awaken
the sleepy conscience of the secure sinner.

Some are most apt in school controversies, like Austin, Mallei Haeraeticorum,
Augustinus. malleus Hae^eticorum.
fit hammers to beat down heresies. Others more practical, like S. Ambrose,
to strike down the sins of the people with the rod of Discipline. God would
not have every land to bring forth all commodities, to keep up commerce and
traffic. The Lord has planted his gifts diversely in the hearts of his
servants to maintain a spiritual traffic of dearest affections in the
mutual exchange of their gifts, and graces. The blunt whet-stone may sharpen
the keener Knife, and some more dull in knowledge may set a sharper edge of
zeal on the subtle conceits of more refined wits. Acts 18.24, 26.
Apollos mighty in the Scriptures might learn something from Aquila, and
Priscilla meaner persons. The Jewish Rabbines confess, they came to understand
that place in Esai. 14.23. Esai. 14.23
(...), I will sweep them with the besome of destruction, by hearing an
Arabian woman speak of a Broom in her language to her maid. All this
diversity of gifts come from one and the same spirit, for the firmer union of
the Church in love and concord. The Stars seem to us sometimes to eclipse
the splendour each of other, yet no jarring contention amongst themselves.
Lessen.
If the bright splendor of another grace should seem to lessen the shining of
our weaker lights, yet let not bitter contention mar the harmony of our
spiritual Stars. It came from the Pen of that Grecian Orator (...);
Demosthenes
If any man have much, and do us no wrong, what cause have we to cast upon him
the malignant aspect of an envious eye, and to bite him with the teeth of envy?
Judges 5.20.
The Stars which disagree not among themselves, joined in one to fight in
their courses against Sisera, and his Host. Civil wars can never be good,
when a public enemy is at hand to encounter with us. Our best wisdom will be
to leave off private discords and to join our mutual forces against that
common Sisera, Satan the grand Captain of all those troops of enemies, which
war against the peace of Sion. It Is full time (B) for Abner to cry unto Ioab,
shall the sword of brotherly dissension devour for ever? know we not that it
will be bitterness in the latter end. 2 Samuel 2.26. 2. Sam 2.26.
It Is a bad presage of the bodies destruction, when (...), as Nazianzen
speaks, Nazianzen. Orat. 1 a.
the members contend amongst themselves. That towering City will be soon turned
into a Babel, when once the builders are divided in their tongues. One calls
forbrick, and they bring him mortar; another lays a stone in the building, and
a fourth pulls it down. How should the towers of Gods Jerusalem come to any
perfection, when the spiritual builders are divided in their hands, and
tongues? What happy success would crown the building of the Temple, were all
the workmen Vnius labii of one lip. Genesis 11.1.
God has distinguished the members of the same body into several functions.
Yet as Theodorete well observes, (...). Orat 6. de providen.
Every part keeps natures operation peculiar to it self, but the profit is
extended in common for the good of the whole body. It should be for the good
and perfection of Christ's body, the Church, not the division of his Coat: that
diversity of gifts has made these spiritual Stars like their pattern, not
all alike in their quantity, nor in their quality.

Eighthly, the Caelestiall Stars, Ratio 8.
though they be great in themselves, yet they appear small and little unto
others. The greatness of honor in these spiritual Stars of Christians
should be so termed, that others may judge them little in appearance in their
own eyes by the practice of humility. Paul was no sooner made a Star of the
primest magnitude, not inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles, but he
appears in his own eyes (...) Ephesians. 3.8. ^ Cor. 12.11.
Less then the least of all Saints. Non est magnum esse humilem in abjectione
says Bernard; Bernard.
the Low dejected estates of some men constraynes them to put on a forced
humility. Magna prorsus and rara Virtus humilitas honorata. This is the rarest
virtue, when honor and humility are concentred in one breast. This will be our
chiefest ornament, when the honor and dignity of our calling is graced with
this attendant of humility. The dignity of the person may quickly mingle the
Eagles Feathers of mounting pride amongst his choycest graces. This Moth will
soonest breed in the finest cloth of the best wits. When Paul is lifted up to
the third Heavens, there is some danger of being carried beyond himself,
unless Stimulus in Carne a good in the flesh drive him back. Master Fox was
much delighted in that seeming paradox, Mr. Foxes paradox.
that his graces did him most hurt, and his sins most good. The sight of his
black feet was a means to keep down the spreading of his white plumes,
whereas the continual thought of his graces might have blowed up his heart
with windy pride above the pight of other men. (...), Chrysostom.
as Chrysostom well observes. The subtle Serpent knows how to cast his poison
upon our best actions; to make good Hezekiah swell with ostentation of his
treasures. This poison is that which distempers the eye of our judgment and
makes us account that pride in some, which we would esteem ornaments of grace
in our own hearts; the eye infected with a false color will soon misjudge all
things like her self. A proud eye will acknowledge no man humble. Humility (B)
would be the best glue to join the hearts of Ministers in the nearest union of
concord and affection. When Epiphanius and Chrysostom yield too much unto a
self opinion, they may soon fall into sharp contentions. Let Epiphanius never
come into his own Country, and let not Chrysostom dye a Bishop, were the
breathings of a secret pride. The Devil has wrought mischief in the Church
by nothing more then by sowing the tares of dissenting pride amongst the
Clergy. Parker.
Some have observed that no less then fourscore and eight kinds of heresies
arose in the Church in the first 400. years after Christ; they all sprung from
an ambitious desire after the chair of honor, and the authors selfe-pleasing
pride in the conceits of their own brains. Psalm. 25.9.
The Psalmist tells us; the humble are those whom GOD will teach his ways. We
know the descending into the lowest pits, and deepest wells, is the ready way
to see those Stars at noonday, which others above us cannot behold; when we
keep in the low vault of humility, we may discover those Stars of divine
truths which others higher then our selves above us cannot so well discern
when their eyes are swelled with pride. It is no small honor that you are
Stars in the right hand of Christ, but remember the greater you are in
dignity, others should behold you like the Stars, the lesser in appearance,
by the practice of humility.

Applicatio ad populum.
We have hitherto looked upon our selves in this Starry glass: I must in the
next place desire to fasten the peoples eyes upon these Stars by some
application unto them.

Applic.
Are the ministers of the Gospel as Stars in the right hand of Christ? then
(B) what joyful praise should fill the hearts and mouths of that people,
whose eyes are blessed with the light of these Stars? when the morning light
appears, it tears off that mourning garment of sorrow which the Sable night
had cast upon the body of the Earth. The time was, when the darkest night might
have showed you some similitude but no equality unto that dismal spiritual
darkness which tyrannized over our whole Nation. Alas what joy could the
Egyptians have in their pleasant Land? what comfort could Pharaoh take on his
stately throne when palpable darkness clouded their faces? But since the
Stars of CHRIST sent from Heaven, which at the first found (...), as
Chrysostom speaks, a Land full of the works of hellish darkness, by the
preaching of the Gospel, (...), they have turned it into a lightsome Heaven.
How can their hearts be void of joy which were once dark, and are now light?
How should their mouths be void of the sweetest tunes of praise and
thanksgiving, which were once closed up with the silence of ignorance, but are
now opened with the beams of saving knowledge? Hier^nym. ^. Vigil.
Hierome tells Vigilantius, that the Christians in his time were wont to light
up Candles at the reading of the Gospel, ad ad laetitiae signum demonstrandum,
to hang forth a sign of their joy. We little consider the darkness of our
Forefathers in that night of former ignorance, if we cannot rejoice when the
Stars of Christ cast upon us the rays of his glorious Gospel. It was the
conceit of Aristotle, that if the Angels should cease moving those Caelestiall
Orbs, men on Earth could not be able to moove a hand or foot. How could we
moove the least finger with any joy, should the Angels of the Churches cease
their spiritual motions whereby they convey that light of comfort to dispell
the darkness of our greatest sorrows? Chrysostom in one of his Epistles
reports of the Taurocilicians, Chrysostom. in Ep^st.
that they came about him in his banishment with weeping eyes, and said, (...).
It had been better, that the Sun should have withdrawn her beams, then
that the mouth of Chrysostom should have been stopped with silence: better it
were (B) that the Sun of all the earthly joys should dissolve into nothing
then that the light of these spiritual Stars should be withdrawn from you.
Micah thought there was cause enough to grieve, when his God, and his Priest
were departed from him. Judges 18.24. Judges 18 24.
Ye have taken away my gods, and the priest and ye are gone away, and what
have I more? What is this that ye say unto me, what ayleth thee? We need not
ask a people, what ayleth them, we need not demand a cause of their bitter
lamentation, when God shall depart from them, by taking away those heavenly
Stars which were wont to shine upon them with the splendour of saving truth.
What have they more to comfort them in the midst of such sorrows?

The light of the Stars which in the nights darkness are our best comforts,
will quickly vanish at the arising Sun. In the night of this present world,
your chief happiness flows from the Stars in Christ's Hand; When indeed the
Sun of Righteousness shall appear in the morning of the Resurrection, there
will be no more need of these lesser lights. Number. 27.21. Eph^d. 1. Sam. 30.
When once ye arrive at Canaan the clearer glass of a more divine light the
Deity, better then the Priests Urim shall represent things to the view in
bigger letters; but whilst ye travayle thorough the Wilderness of this world,
your eyes should be continually fixed on the Law of God in the mouth of his
Ministers, these pillars of fire to guide you in your rightest way. Those which
labor amongst you in word, and doctrine, account them worthy of double honor,
is the Apostles precept. Honor and subsidium is Hieromes interpretation. The
honor of your hearts and the help of your maintenance is the reward due unto
the labors of these Stars. When we look upon the manners of our days, they
give us cause to complain with Nazianzen. (...). A Minister is now is now
become a bare empty title, Orat. 1.
as if there were no honor due unto his function. The greatest sort love
indeed that language of that Grecians in Homer. (...), To reverence the Priest,
Iliad. 5: in tuit.
and receive his gifts. Their fair presents, and large gifts may procure them
some respect, whereas otherwise Reverence should be no companion to their
persons. Bid informs us, that the time was when the rarity of preaching had
taught our forefathers such an esteem of Gods Ministers, that when the Bishop
of the Province did at any time send one of his Presbyters, or Ministers
amongst them, they flocked about him with greatest joy, Et ut Deum
venerabantur, and worshipped him as a god sent from Heaven. Were the Sunshine
of the Gospel a little with holden from you, ye would soon learn a higher
account of the Ministers: which like the light of the Sun, the more common,
the less esteemed. And with the honor of your hearts you must adjoyne also
the help of your Purses for the maintenance of these Stars. It was the
conceit of the ancient Naturalists, that the celestial Stars are fed with
exhalations arising from the Earth as a supply of Oil unto those heavenly
Lamps, which shine for the good of this inferior world. Sure we are, these
spiritual Stars must be nourished with a supply of your maintenance, for
whose eternal well-fares they spend their best strength. If we sow unto you
our spiritual light, is it any great thing, if we reap your temporalls? The
blind Egyptians were so devoute as not to suffer the bitter famine to compel
their Priests to sell their Land. 1 Cor. 9.11.
And shall such pinching famine fall upon the Ministers of the Gospel in some
places, that they must be compelled to sel^ not their Lands, (of that they have
none*) But their books, and study-furniture to buy them food? When the
devotions of men in the days of Constantine had enriched the Church with large
endowments, there was a voice heard from Heaven (if we may believe Nauclerus)
Hodie Venenum infusum in Ecclesiam, This day is poison dropped into the Church. I
am sure a far worse poison is spread in the hearts of many, they can turn
the Churches patrimony left by their Fathers devotion, into a monopoly of their
own possessions. Our age is full of such Dionysius's which are willing to
rob the Church of her golden Coat, least it should make her proud: they
think a woollen garment will keep her warm enough and make her humble. Gods
Ministers are fallen under the power of such cruel taskemasters, that the tale
of brick is expected without diminution, and little or no Straw is left to
work with. The woeful experience of many families has made it a true
observation, that the Eagle seldom or never steals a piece of flesh from Gods
Altar, but she carries a coal along with it, which sets her nest on fire,
howsoever the glorious Sunshine of their instant prosperity, may make some
ready to think that in earnest which Dionysius in Lactantius speaks in jest
unto his companions. Videtisne quam prospera sacrilegis navigatio ab ipsis diis
immortalib. tribuatur? You see how the Gods bless sacrilegious persons with
the pleasant wind of a prosperous navigation. The sweetness of the Glebe
distempers their palates that they cannot judge of the bitterness of the
sin. Their present felicity makes them think sacrilege, a blessing and not
a curse. Yet sure we are, Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away then the
least (...) of Gods Word shall fail. It is a snare to the man that devoureth
Holy things. Prove. 20.25. Pro. 20.25
How many souls will cry out for vengeance against them, when (as God tells
those extortioners, Jeremy 2.38.) in their skirts, in their broad wings and
golden lace, is found the blood of poor innocents.

Genesis 9.4. Levit. 17.12.13, 14.
The old Law thought it not fit that Gods people should eat the blood of any
beast. Surely the Gospel will never judge it lawful, that Christians should
feed, and cloth themselves with the blood of souls. Therefore (B) it will be
your best wisdom to walk worthy of the light of these Stars whilst ye do
enjoy them, Esaias. 22.1.
least God in his just displeasure should remove them out of our golden
Candlestick. We see, that the Stars above keep no one continual place in
our Hemispheare; the evening shows them in the West, and the morning finds
them in the East. These spiritual Stars are in the right hand of Christ, the
hand fittest for motion. He may quickly send them to enlighten those Eastern
parts, which were once light, shining with a glorious light, when we our selves
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death: Esa. 22.1.
our valley of vision may be soon covered with the darkness of our former
ignorance if we begin to contemn the Starre^ whence our light proceeds. All
your happiness comes by the light of the Gospel, therefore you may well bestow
the honor and the maintenance upon these Stars in the Right hand of Christ.

And now if the time would give leave, I should crave your attentions unto the
Orb where these Stars are situate Dextra Christi, that there you might
behold their honor and their safety. The right hand is the place of chiefest
honor, and of greatest strength to defend our friends. It is no small honor
to these spiritual Stars, that they are with Bathsheba placed at the right
hand of Solomon. 1 Kings 2.19.
And they shall ever find sufficient strength in this hand to defend, and
protect them safe from the close-contrived projects of their wisest enemies.
But I must not be unmindefull of the other occasions; therefore, let us desire
of God, a blessing upon the word heard, that after our days in the Kingdom of
grace, we may be placed, as Happy Stars on the right hand of Christ in glory,
(...).

FINIS.

