A Commentary UPON THE FIRST AND SECOND CHAPTERS OF SAINT PAUL TO THE
COLOSSIANS.

WHEREIN, THE TEXT IS CLEARLY opened, Observations thence perspicuously
deducted, Uses and Applications succinctly and briefly inferred; sundry holy
and spiritual Meditations out of his more ample Discourse extracted.

TOGETHER WITH DIVERSE PLACES of Scripture briefly explained.

By Mr. PAUL BAYNE. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger, for NICHOLAS BOURNE, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Royal Exchange. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RELIGIOUS AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY MARY, Countess
Dowager of Westmorland.
HONORED MADAM:
SAint PAUL'S glory and exceeding great cause of rejoicing, was this; that as a
wise Master Builder he had laid the foundation, whereupon the whole building
of Christianity is established. Though not to lay the groundwork or Principles
of Religion, yet to be fellow-workers with GOD and His holy Apostles, is now
the glory and rejoicing of the Ministers of the Word in these latertimes.
Amongst the rest a sincere, faithful, and judicious Divine in these Works of
his never yet before extant, is presented to your Honors view and approbation.
His abilities were such as became a Successor of a worthy and religious
Predecessor, in his ministerial function in the University of Cambridge, by
him performed, unto GOD's glory, the good of others, and his own comfort. The
first he unfainedly desired and propounded as the utmost scope of all his
endeavors, that GOD might be glorified by him both in life and death: the
second as subordinate to the other, he procured, not aiming at his own
advantage so much as their salvation that heard him, not seeking theirs, but
them. The last was an effect of the two first, this must needs be a consequent
where the others are precedent: for, GOD forgets not our labor of love, to
Himself, or others. Sensible experience hereof had this holy man, who found
much comfort by his Ministry in himself, and by the fruits of it in others.
There be many that spend much time in studying, are never weary in well-doing,
are instant in season, and out of season; but with how small success! for it
is in vain to rise early, and sit up late, except GOD give a blessing: Paul
planteth, and Apollos waters, but GOD gives the increase: if GOD put not His
hand to the work, there will be but a Babel of confusion: He knew it very
well, who prayed continually for the divine assistance to make his ministerial
work effectual. He prayed, and his prayer was heard: he wrestled with GOD
(as Jacob did) and overcame Him. He fulfilled his desires and granted his
requests, and made him a spiritual Father of many children by him begotten
unto GOD. Should I say more? I will add this only: what in him was
praiseworthy, let it be applauded; what was in him for Instruction and a godly
life, let us imitate: Let us learn of a dead man to live. Dead do I call him?
Though the body die by reason of sin, yet the spirit lives unto GOD, through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Let us therefore learn of him to live spiritually, that
with him we may live eternally. I have showed in some sort what he was, and
what it concerns us to be. And this the rather, presuming of your Honors
favorable acceptance, not so much of him that Dedicates these following
Expositions, as of him by whose incitement he was encouraged thereto, his
worthy friend, Your Ladyships humble servant; that for his sake, and the
Authors, You would vouchsafe to cast over this Book the wing of Your
protection. This is his desire, who shall ever remain

Devoted to your Honor in all humility, JUSTINIAN STUBBS.

TO THE READER.
THE Mother of Nazianzene (as himself relates it) was so beneficial to the
poor, that a sea of wealth was not sufficient for her. What was her industrious
diligence in relieving of outward necessities, was this religious Pastors in
supplying the wants of such as are spiritually poor, thinking no time to be
well employed, which was not a testimonial of his pious life, in word, in
conversation, 1 Timothy 4, 13.
in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity: or of his wholesome doctrine, in
reproving, correcting, 2 Timothy 3.16.
instructing in righteousness. Thus thundering in doctrine, and lightening in
conversation, he left no stone unmoved that might further the building of the
new Jerusalem. For living in these last days, the very dregs of time, when
iniquity abounds, and GOD is provoked every day, so that fin cannot be more
sinful, nor wickedness more wicked; by his Praecep a ducunt, exempla trahunt.
Sen.
exemplary deportment he fastened the nail, which was driven by judicious
Instruction; in Precept and Practice A MAN OF GOD, a Beacon on an hill, a
burning and a shining Lamp. His method and matter were plain and perspicuous;
yet so as (if occasion served) he had meat for strong men, as well as milk
for babes: he became all unto all, to gain some. Blessed Saint! -- quae sparsa
per omnes, In te multa fluunt: -- what could thou more have done, than in
leaving nothing undone, to receive at thy Masters hands, an Euge bone serve,
Well done good and faithful servant! His well-doing and well-being is an
invitation unto us to do, and to be the like: which whosoever desires, let him
seriously survey these ensuing Expositions of Scripture, composed with
Laconicall brevity, yet including in them the immense treasures of divine
Speculation. I suppose there is none will malign them that understand them. If
there be any others; as it was once said unto Philip King of Macedon, passing
unjust sentence, between sleeping and waking; I appeal, o King, from thy
self to thy self: So let them read with judgment and deliberation; and then
whatsoever fault was imputed to the Author, will become their own. In a word,
whosoever thou art that carpest at these following Treatises, whatsoever in
them thou deemest either frivolous or superfluous, -- emendes illa, vel ede tua.

I. S.

THE DOCTRINES OF THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE OF Saint PAUL to the
Colossians.
Verse 2. 1 EVery true member of the Church is a Saint. 2 GOD gathers and
supporteth His people in all places. 3 In distributing holy things, we must
put a difference betwixt men; betwixt sound and counterfeit. 4 Christians are
knit together by the straitest bond. 5 We are to wish our selves and others
favor from God, and peace of Conscience, as the chief blessings. 6 The
fountain of all true Peace, is the favor of God testified to us in Christ. 7
All good things are to be sought from God the Father, and the Son.
Verse 3. 1 DVtie binds us to pray for others, and to give thanks for others
as for our selves.
Verse 4. 1 Spiritual graces bestowed upon any, must move us to thankfulness,
and to make request for them. 2 Faith lays hold only upon Christ lesus for
life everlasting. 3 Our love must specially be showed to the Saints.
Verse 5. 1 THe recompense which God has in store for us, should quicken us to
all duty. 2 Our riches of glory are kept for us in the heavens. 3 The hearing
of the Gospel brings us to be possessed of our hopes. 4 The promises of the
Gospel are infallible and certain.
Verse 6. 1 THe Gospel does visit us, not looking after it. 2 The
faithfulness of God in His promises, and the piercing force of His heavenly
truth. 3 The Word of God is effectual, it never wants His fruit where it
comes. 4 It is good dealing with men, to come home to their own experience. 5
Before we can have the fruit of the Word, we must hear the Word. 6 Not all
hearing, no nor all knowing, but the true, inner, powerful, affectionate
knowledge, is it which is fruitful.
Verse 7. 1 ALbeit men are not graced with great titles, yet their work is not
in vain in the Lord. 2 We must speak the best of all, but especially of
Ministers; though not outwardly glorious.
Verse 8. 1 WE are to speak such things of man to man, as may tie them in love
more nearly one to another. 2 The best intelligence and news fittest for
Ministers to speak and hear of, is, how it fares with the souls of the
faithful. 3 We are to tell what good things God works in our people. 4 Our
love must be hearty and unfeigned.
Verse 9. 1 MInisters must not only teach and admonish, but pray for their
people. 2 We must not delay going to God, when occasion is offered. 3 We must
persevere in Prayer. 4 Our Prayers must be fervent. 5 We must wish those that
are called, a blessed proceeding in grace.
Verse 10. 1 Our pleasing of God must be in all things. 2 We must be fruitful
in good works. 3 We must increase in the knowledge of God.
Verse 11. 1 CHristians have need of spiritual strength to walk with God in
their spiritual conditions. 2 We have not need of strength only, but great
strength. 3 All our strength comes from the strong God. 4 Long-suffering is
an argument of great spiritual strength. 5 We have need of patience and
long-suffering.
Verse 12. WE must as well give thanks for the things given us, as beg for
that we want. 2 By nature we are unfit for God's Kingdom. 3 That matter God
calls us unto (viz) an heavenly inheritance, must move us to bless Him. 4
Only Saints shall inherit the glorious inheritance. 5 Our inheritance in
heaven for substance and nature, is light.
Verse 13. 1 NOne living in the state of darkness can be inheritours of God's
Kingdom. 2 We are all by nature under the power of the Devil, the prince of
darkness, and are in all kind of darkness. 3 It is special matter of
praise, that God has put us under the government of Christ.
Verse 14. 1 THe singular love of Christ our King, that He has bought us with
His blood. 2 The greatest blessing we have by Christ our King, is, that He does
procure us pardon of our sin. 3 Before we can have any blessing from Christ,
we must be partakers of Christ.
Verse 15. 1 IT is matter of praise, that we have such an one to be our King
and Savior, who is God with the Father. 2 It is a wonderful benefit to us,
that we are made subjects to such a King as is the Lord lesus Christ.
Verse 16. 1 THese creatures which we see, do give testimony to the invisible
God whom we see not. 2 Christ has just title to the Lordship and inheritance
of all the creatures. 3 Christ our King is the Creator of all things. 4 God
has His places and ministers attending about Him unseene and unknown to us. 5
Our Lord Jesus Christ is the Creator of Angels. 6 As by Him, so to His honor
all the creature was made.
Verse 17. 1 Our King is ancienter than all creatures. 2 All things are
preserved in their being, moving and order, by Christ.
Verse 18. 1 CHrist has not Lordship over the creatures only, but also over
the Church. 2 We have such a Head given us of God, who is God with the Father.
3 Christ has a most near, compassionate, and beneficial superiority over His
Church. 4 Only the Church and people of God have Christ so near, and so
beneficial to them. 5 All the Church is the body of Christ. 6 The dignity of
the faithful in having so near conjunction with Christ. 7 Christ's
Resurrection has special privilege above all others.
Verse 19. 1 Whatsoever the manhood of Christ is advanced unto, it is the
mere grace of God, not the merit of the creature. 2 It is an admirable glory
to which our nature is exalted, that God should dwell personally in our nature,
and take it to Himself, so as to be of the substance of His person.
Verse 20. 1 THat which gave occasion to the incarnation of the Son of God, was
our enemy-like estrangement from God. 2 God follows froward man. 3 Christ
must first have the God head dwell personally in Him, before He can take up
the matter betwixt God and us. 4 The dear Son of God is the worker of our
reconciliation with God. 5 All our peace is grounded in the bloodshed of
Christ Jesus. 6 The Fathers of old were reconciled to God by the blood of
Christ. 7 The Fathers were in heaven before Christ's Ascension.
Verse 21. 1 WE must not only teach in general, but apply in particular the
things of the Gospel. 2 We must not forget our miserable condition by nature.
3 A most miserable condition not to be a member of the visible Church. 4 We by
nature are enemy-like affected to God and His people. 5 Our naughty actions
discover our enemy-like affections.
Verse 22. 1 AS we must look with one eye down to our unworthiness, so we
must cast the other up on God's mercies to us. 2 The grace of God is most free
and large. 3 Every one who finds his sin forgiven in Christ, shall one day
be made glorious before Him.
Verse 23. 1 Whosoever is partaker of the benefit of reconciliation by Christ,
must persevere founded and established in Christ. 2 We must be well grounded,
and lay a good foundation. 3 He loses his hope that is removed from his
profession. 4 The Gospel has been preached through the world. 5 Paul was a
special instrument thereof.
Verse 24. 1 IT is no new thing for the Ministers of Christ to be afflicted for
the Gospel. 2 The Church loses nothing, but gains much by the sufferings of
the godly. 3 The Church is the body of Christ.
Verse 25. 1 TThe Ministers of CHRIST are the Ministers of the Church. 2 Their
ministry is committed to them by the most wise and holy government, whereby
God governs the Church His house. 3 A Minister must have a care of every part
of his charge:
Verse 26. 1 THe Gospel is a mystery not to be attained by any wit or
learning. 2 It is the privilege only of the Saints to know the mysteries of
the Gospel.
Verse 27. 1 THe Gospel preached to the Gentiles is a mystery full of glory. 2
CHRIST is the subject of this glorious mystery of the Gospel. 3 CHRIST is
among us in the preaching of the Gospel. 4 CHRIST is He in whom we look and
wait for glory.

The end of the Doctrines.
A COMMENTARY' UPON THE FIRST Chapter of Saint PAUL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 1. VER. 1, 2.
VER. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus our
brother.

VER. 2. To them which are at Colosse, Saints, and faithful brethren in
Christ: grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.


IN these two Verses there is laid down the Salutation: wherein you have, the
Persons saluting, the Persons saluted.


The Persons saluting, Paul and Timotheus. Touching the description of Paul,
from his Office and calling; I pass it by, having spoken of it in the first
Verse of the Epistle to the Ephesians.

For the meaning [Saints] here are those who are already actually sanctified,
Verse 2.
called Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. Washed in CHRIST'S blood. There are Saints by
predestination, as there are Sheep, not yet gathered and brought home to the
fold of CHRIST; I have other Sheep which are not of this fold; Ioh. 10.16
but he writes to such, as had received the spirit of sanctification.

Colosse,] a City near Laodicea and Hierapolis in Phrygia, a City of the
Gentiles, inhabited with Idolaters.

And faithful brethren,] not false brethren crept in, but faithful, which
must be understood by a Synechdoche, comprehending all faithful, whether men
or women.

Grace and peace;] Grace notes GODS free favor which gives all good things.
2. It signifies the effects of his grace in us, viz. All good things
spiritual and corporal, which may as fruits testify the good will of GOD to
us: his kindness and all the fruits of his kindness, especially grace
pardoning sin; and enabling us to do good, as also grace exciting and moving
us to work, when now we are made able, that we may not receive the former
grace in vain.

Peace] is the effect of grace in us; for Gods grace forgiving sin works in
us peace of conscience, in regard of the accusation which would be in it. 2.
The habits, or qualities of grace, Peter calls them The divine Nature; 2 Pet.
1.4
this grace given us, we have quiet from the rage of corruption in us; which
while it tyrannizeth in us, fills all the powers of the soul with
disturbance: this is called peace of sanctification, the quiet fruit of
righteousness. 3. Heb. 12.1^
When GOD shows his favor in giving all outward things that are good; there
is Peace eternal in regard of our outward condition: and if Gods grace in any
of these ways be ^id, instead of peace, we feel disturbance: Thou hiddest thy
face and I was troubled.

To come to the Observations.

Every true member of the Church is a Saint. Saint: Every thing does bind to
it.

1. Our God is holy, therefore we must be holy ones. As he which has called
you is holy, 1 Pet 1.15
so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. 2. It is the end of our
predestination: Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy,
etc. 3. Our calling binds us, 1 These. 4.7. 1 These. 4.7.
God has called us, not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. 4. Our
Redemption: Christ gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
to redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us unto himself. 5. The grace of
God which we taste for the present, and the things we look for hereafter, do
teach us this lesson. Tit. 2.11, 12.
The grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, teaching
us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope,
etc. And, having such promises, 2 Cor. 7.1
let us grow up to perfect holiness. 6. The final judgment, and our own
glory which we look for, do likewise persuade us to become holy: Seeing all
these things shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3.1^
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation, And whosoever
has the hope of eternal life, 1 Ioh. 3.3.
he purges himself even as Christ is pure. And all believers are called a
Holy Nation. 1 Pet. 2.9.
7. The right constitution of the Church, while the vigor of discipline
flourishes, does not allow that any should abide in her but Saints; profane
persons being to be separated, as Dogs from partaking in holy things; Mat. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast Pearls before Swine.
1. Pope, in restraining this common to all believers while they live, to some
few in comparison, whom it pleases him to Canonize, after they are dead. 2. We
see the lewdness of many profane Esaus, who disclaim, yea, scoff at this
name, using such Proverbes, These are the holy ones. Young Saints prove old
Devils. Shall we have a Saint of you? 3. We must remember what kind of men we
must be: even such as must profess and practice holiness, according to our
calling.
At Colosse.] God gathers and supporteth his people in all places. Job in VZ
We say truly, Where God has his Church, the Devil has his Chapel; and we
may say as well, Where the Devil has his Throne, there God often has his
people; lie they where they will, nothing shall keep them from God: I will say
to the North wind give, and to the South, keep not back, bring my Sons from
far, and my daughters from the utmost parts of the earth.

Despair of none, God, if he have a purpose to call them, they shall come home
in despite of all the malice and power of the Devil; for God is more able to
save

(...) But why should we pray for them that have grace already?

Because the Devil is most bent against them;

To rebuke our carnal minds, whose lands, etc. these things sometime the
world will be thankful for; but of faith, repentance, and the work of grace,
not a word with them. A fool takes more pleasure in color of counters, and a
painted dagger, than in gold and true treasure: Such fools are many found
amongst us who are affected with these earthly vanities, and are altogether
careless of the true treasure.

If we be risen with CHRIST, This in General.

Particularly mark: 1. What it is which faith lays hold on, only CHRIST
JESUS: this is the only matter that Faith claspeth for righteousness before
God, and life everlasting: So God loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in Him should not
perish, but have life everlasting. He is lifted up as the brazen Serpent, that
eying Him crucified, we might be healed. Romans 3.25
Him has GOD set forth for a reconciliation through faith in his blood. True
it is, the same saving faith believes all that is set down of GOD in the
Scripture, all particular promises for the passing of this life: for these
distinct offices do not make three distinct faiths in us: as the reasonable,
sensitive, and natural functions, do not make three souls in man, but one;
whose effects are threefold: Nevertheless Faith though it lay hold of all
truth as it is taught, yet so far forth as it justifies, it builds and
leans it self on Christ only; like as the Israelites, they with their eyes
did see diverse things, and look on sundry objects as occasion served; but so
far as they got themselves healed of the stings of fiery serpents, they looked
with their eyes at nothing but the serpent lifted up.

To rebuke the worldlings faith, Dagon will not stand together, CHRIST and this
stubble will not agree.

We may try the truth of our faith this way, Ephesians. 3 17. Phil. 3.3.7.
brings Him to dwell in the heart, rejoices in Him, counts all things
dross in comparison of Him.

Toward whom our love especially must be showed, to Saints. Gal. 6.10. Romans
12.13.
Do good to all, especially to the household of Faith. Distribute to the
necessities of the Saints. My good reaches to the Saints, Psalm. 16.
all my delight is in them. All in their order are to have the fruits of our
love, but those most who are nearest us, as in nature every one is next
himself: then next to such as are of his blood, in nearest degree, or
otherwise made one body with him, as the wife with the husband: Thus in grace,
after GOD and our own souls, the Saints are nearest us, as who are by faith
and love fellow members knit to CHRIST, the Head of us all. Again, a wise man
will sow his seed in the best ground, which will return it with most increase:
So a Christian will sow the fruits of his love chiefly on the Saints; for GOD
takes that which is done to them, as done to Himself.

Again, this love of the brethren, the Saints, is a token we are translated
from death to life: for as this is a token the world does not know GOD, and so
have not life everlasting in them, because they know not His children: So it is
an evidence, when we acknowledge such as are begotten of GOD, that God has
brought us to know him who is the begetter of them.

To stir us up to our duties,

This rebukes the weakness of some: Nicodemus, they have some good affection
and liking to the godly, yet they dare not be seen to hold any near communion
and familiar converse with such, lest they should be thought Puritanes and
favorers of men in disgrace with the State: Blessed is he that is not offended
at CHRIST in His poor members.

This rebukes the profaneness of othersome, Sampson when they would be
merry: So, out must some Saint come, and bear their flouts and derision, when
they are more pleasantly disposed; Ismaeliush mockers of Isaak. Yea, others,
worse than the former, hate the Saints, wish there were not one in a town of
them; like Cain, who hated his brother to death, because his works were better
than his. It is an evidence of a godly heart to cleave more affectionately to
those, who are more godly than other: And it savours of a carnal heart, in a
great measure, when any one does equally impart his favor: If any have points
of service, and can apply themselves to their humor, though they have small
acquaintance with GOD, they shall be countenanced; this makes their religion
linsey-woolsey: this confirms the hands of such in their carnal course, this
makes those that are good more remiss than they should be, should they find
from Christians better encouragement. David's delight was in the Saints: Psalm.
16.3. Ps. 101.6.
he did purge his family of such as were unprofitable and graceless, he set
his heart on such as did set their hearts to please GOD in all things; not such
as could get the length of his foot, were precious in his eyes. Can a loyal
wife take pleasure in such men who are observant and officious about her, but
devoid of all respect to her husband? Are your souls betrothed to GOD in
CHRIST, and can you abide their service about you, who are careless in duty
toward your LORD, with whom you are by faith contracted? this shows there is
but a form of godliness, or that it is much decayed, when we can like of
men, not as we see them sincerely serve GOD, but as their behavior is more or
less pleasing and contentful to our selves.

VERSE 5. For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard
before in the Word of truth, the Gospel.
FOr the hope.] Hope is put for the quality of hope, or the thing hoped for; we
are to take it here in the latter sense. Observe hence: What is a spur
quickening us to all duty, the recompense which our GOD has in store for us.
Heb. 11.25, 26.
Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of CHRIST greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of
reward. We faint not, knowing that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. If
the Lord kept nothing in store for us, we might think, as good play for
nothing as work for nothing: but no office of love, no not a Cup of cold water
shall go unrequited. How does this provoke to obedience? but we must not hence
think we merit, and grow mercenary minded, serving for our Penny, not of love
to our Father; for we look not at these hopes, this recompense of reward, as
at a thing we are able to deserve by our working, but as at a free gift of
inheritance which GOD will give us out of his Fatherly mercy: to look at it as
deserved wages makes a mercenary servant; to eye it as a Patrimony given of
grace, makes a Child-like and free obedience. Though therefore we have not the
thought of merit, yet we have this benefit by our heavenly inheritance, that it
is a motive to us inviting to all duty.

We see hence what makes such cold working and cold devotion amongst men, even
this, the rich recompense which GOD will give, those things of Grace: did we
see that GOD will for earthly things give us heavenly, we would part with
them, and count that dearly sold, that were so given: did we see the harvest
of Glory, how would we willingly abide the sweat all the day long? No, men
think, though they will not say so, that it is in vain to serve the Almighty,
what profit is there?

We see how we may provoke our selves to suffer and do the Lords pleasure,
God: we are al for what will you give me, as Peter, said Lord what shall we have
that have left all to follow thee? If thou be all for what shall thou have,
see these hopes of eternal Glory which GOD will give thee. None pays better
wages, none like to thy GOD. I know worldly men think a bird in hand better
then many in the wood; that they may have in hand, they only care for like
profane Esau, esteeming a mess of pottage forth with better then a
Birthright; but the wise hearted will look at the time to come, and esteem a
good thing, though in reversion, better then of a present trifle.

Laid up for you in heaven] Obser. Where our riches of glory are kept for us,
in the heavens. Ephesians. 4. Hebt. 11.
whither CHRIST ascended. Our substance, our best and most enduring wealth, is
in heaven: 1 Pet. 1.4.
Our inheritance, we hope for, is rest in the heavens for us and that fitly;
for where should our house and land and treasure, our whole patrimony be, but
where our Country is, where our Father dwells? now GOD is our Father, and he
dwells in heaven which is our own Country, who are here but Pilgrims for a
season. Again what is this hope, but the glorious life we look for? Now where
should the life of the branches of a Tree be kept but where the root is? So
where should our glorious life be hid, but where CHRIST the root of us all
is with him: yea this is most meet and behoofefull for us: If an English man
should sojourne in France a while and had great treasure to receive, would he
not choose rather to have it paid him at the Exchange in his own Country then
to have it there, far from his home, and stand to the hazard of transporting
of it. So it fares with us; it is safer that our wealth should be paid us in
heaven our own Country, then here where we are but strangers wayfaring for a
season.

To make us see how safe our heavenly treasure is: Dives and Lazarus: if we
have worldly wealth, we count it a great benefit to have sure custody for it,
where the rust cannot eat it, nor thief dig through and steal it; now
there is no fear of that being safe which is kept in heaven.

This must make us heavenly minded: Coffers and Counting houses; where the
treasure is, there will the heart be also: So if we have wealth in heaven, let
us Converse in heaven; Our conversation is in heaven.

This is a comfort against all present necessities which the Saints know: I
shall come to my lands one day: Children will wear homely clothes more
contentedly, when they think they have better laid up in their Mothers Chests.

Whereof you have heard] Obser. What brings us to be possessed of those
hopes, that is by the glad tidings of them, which GOD does send us by his
messengers: our Savior Jesus Christ has brought life and immortality by the
Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10.
For look as we cannot know what is done in France till some come over thence
and tell us the news there: So, we cannot know what is done in heaven, till
GOD send down the news of it unto us; for the Gospel is nothing but news
from heaven, touching righteousness and life eternal through faith in Christ
Jesus: And as when things are lost, we cannot come by them till we have word
from the Crier or others that they are found: So our life which we have all
quite lost by nature, we cannot get it again, (...).
till GOD by his * Cryers Preachers, send us word of it.

To stir up our attention to this word which discovers such wealth; Gospel
tells us of all blessedness in this life and that to come through faith; the
unsearchable riches of Christ, to which all the wealth in India is but dross
and dunge: Ephesians. 3.8.
all this is reveiled in the Gospel.

It shows us how we should love the Gospel: as never eye saw, nor eart has
heard, nor never entered into the heart of man to conceive.

In the word of truth] Obser. lastly from this verse, How infallible and
certain, all the promises of the Gospel are, they are a true word. The
Gospel is called sometimes by general names, as Law, Testimony, Doctrine,
etc. Sometimes from the efficient, the Gospel of GOD: Sometime from the
property, a wholesome word, a word of truth: The things we speak of are not
yea and nay, but Amen, constant and true: This is a true saying and worthy of
all acceptance. 1 Timothy 1
For the Gospel is His Word who cannot lie: whose Knowledge, Works, and Words
are all true. Qu. But why is this called the Word of truth, when all the Word
of God is true, purer then silver seven times refined? Answ. Because this is
the most principal part of Gods Word, and therefore the common property of the
Word is given it by a kind of excellency, as we call the plague, the
sickness, not that a headache is not a sickness; but it has by a kind of
excellency the common name of all other given it, because it is the chief of
other. 2. This Gospel was published by Jesus Christ Himself immediately, in
His own Person, who is truth it self, I am the truth. 3. It is so called to
prevent our unbelief, who do with this as with other good news; we say it is
too good to be true, who by nature count it to be foolishness: the Holy Ghost
therefore to take us by the hand, does style it a Word of truth.

This serves to strengthen our faith in the particular promises, that is
somewhat strange, shall interlace this asseveration, I assure you that it is
very true, I speak no more then I know, we do the better believe him in it;
much more when GOD shall bind Himself by His Word and oath and seal to it.

It shows us the power of this Gospel, Popery and Heresies; Mighty is Truth,
we can do nothing against it but for it.

It does convince the unbelief of GODS Children and the profane scorn of the
wicked,

VERSE 6. Which is come unto you, as it is in all the World, and brings forth
fruit, as it does also in you; since the day ye heard of it, and knew the
Grace of GOD in Truth.
HOw the Gospel by Gods providence does visit us, not looking after it, it
comes to us wenot minding it, all the things of the Gospel are not once in
our thoughts by nature, every one of us have this Word sent to us, as the whole
World had at the first publishing of it: How was this? they sat in darkness,
as our Savior says: Mat. 4.16.
The people which sat in darkness saw great light, and to them which sat in
the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up; we all were estranged from
the life of God through ignorance, Ephesians. 4.18.
Committing sin with greediness. God looking on this their misery, sent His
Ambassadors, His Apostles; Mat. 28.
Go teach all Nations, etc. God also did direct them, and moove them in
executing this His command, sometime by fitness of circumstance, sometime by
brethrens information, sometime by instinct of his spirit guiding them hither
and thither, and hindering them (as Saint Paul from Bithynia,) from such places
as stood not with his pleasure. We cannot make the Sun rise nor set, that
gives light to our bodies, God does make it rise, etc. So much more does it
belong to Him to raise up this light of the Gospel, and carry it by His
Ministers (the Vehicula of it) whither He pleases: and it is an argument
hereof, that it is sent by God, not sought for of us, because it comes where
it is gaine-said. As God says, Romans 16.21.
All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and
gaine-saying people.

To show us how it is with our selves;

We must acknowledge from hence the free grace of God,

We must rejoice in it,

The faithfulness of GOD in his promises, and the piercing force of this
heavenly Truth; God has promised long ago to give Christ, a light to the
Gentiles, and a witness to the end of the World: accordingly we see it here
made good; the world is visited with the Word of truth. And as it lets us
see that God keeps touch, so the force of this Word is commended by this
Circumstance, that this Doctrine should go through the World in so short a
space, yea and be fruitful, this argues a Divine power in it: that like as
the Sun gets up like a Giant, runs from East to West in a short space;
So this Sun did scour it apace through all the Coasts of the earth. The light
is a piercing Creature, even bodily light, much more this which is Spiritual.

This may be further opened by showing how this is to be meant, that it is
come through the World. 2. What reasons there were furthering it. For the
first: We must not understand every hamlet, Town-ship, much less every
Creature in the world, but the most principal parts by a Synechdoche are put
for the whole; as we say, all the world do thus or thus, when the most parts
of it do the thing; and thus it might be prooved by the acts and story how the
Gospel was preached in all the quarters of the earth, yea in the most remote
Northern parts. Crescens in France, Thomas in Germany, as Sophronius writes,
Simon Zelotes in our Country, as Nicephorus says, Joseph of Arimathea, as
Gildas, yea Paul himself, as Theodoret and Sophronius witness.

The reasons of it may be taken partly from the great abundance of light
which is in the Gospel above the old Scriptures, they being as a Candle in a
dark place, which could not cast its light far, and therefore was bounded
within one Nation: This being like the Sun for cleerenesse, speading forth
the beams of it more abundantly, but in vain the Sun shines to blind men:
The principal cause therefore was in the abundance of the spirit powered forth
upon the Resurrection of Christ.

The isntrumental causes. 1. The fidelity of those primitive Pastors. 2. The
lively Communion of the primitive Christians, who did not hide their Candle
under a Bushel, but did shine as lights to others, and labor the Conversion
one of another. See what Paul says, 1 These. 1.8. of that people, From you
sounded out the Word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also
in every place your faith toward God is spread abroad.

The promises fulfilled are seals to us that the rest shall be accomplished.

We may amplify our unworthiness, Pastors, Christians careless of all heavenly
comfort, chiefly that we have grieved the spirit so with our unfruitfulnesse,
that he does not delight to joy in us.

That the Word of God is Effectual, it never wants His fruit where it
comes: Wherever God does send it, He has some fruit to gather to Himself,
some whom He will make heirs of Salvation. It was not the ordinance of God to
send the Apostles only to ring an empty sound of the Gospel, Ioh. 15.16
but to gather fruit which might abide to everlasting life. Ephesians. 4.8.
God gives Pastors and Teachers to gather the Saints, and to build His body.
Though God does send some as Esaias speaks, for further hardening of a people,
yet to some it is a sweet savor to God; Some in whom His Word shall be
fruitful to salvation, whom He chiefly regards by it. The Word is compared
to Snow and showers, which never fall in vain. Esaias 55.10, 11.
As the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may
give seed to the sower and bread to the Eater: So shall my Word be that goes
forth of my mouth, it shall not return to Me void, but it shall accomplish
that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

Que. Now if it be asked what was this fruit?

Answ. It was the reclaiming men from Idolatry, ignorance, all sensual lusts
of ignorance, and bringing them to the living God, to saving knowledge, to the
endeavor of true Holiness. This Word is the Lords net to catch souls, the
immortal seed that begets us to God, the arm of God to Salvation.

To comfort those that have the dispensation of the Word,

To make us all enter into our selves and see what the Word works in us; for
if not to life, it will be effectual to death: 2 Cor. 2.15.16.
For we are to God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them
that perish: For to the one we are the savor of death unto death, and to the
other the savor of life unto life. Examine what power the Word has had upon
you for the killing the unfruitful works of darkness, and the bringing forth
the fruits of the spirit in you.

As it does also in you] Mark how he does apply and confirm the general from
their particular case. Obser. hence, That it is good dealing with men to come
home to their own experience. Saint Paul frequently does appeal to the
knowledge, judgment and experience of those he deals with, know you not?
judge you, etc. Men do fruitfully apprehend and easily condescend to things
thus convinced: Thus to instance in these points, Gods preventing us with His
Word, the power of GOD's Word; what Christian in his own experience may not
subscribe to the truth of them. This closing with our audit ours is a thing too
much neglected.

Since the day ye heard of it] Observe hence, That before we can have the fruit
of the Word, we must hear the Word. A diligent care is no small blessing; no
man can feel the strength of meat without taking down; none shall find the
fruit of the Word without hearing it: Harvest without seed sown shall as soon
be seen, as true grace without the Word heard. This therefore, Prove. 2.3. is
made a condition, without which we cannot come to wisdom, viz. to hearken
with our ears unto her. True it is, that many that lend the ear of the body
are not fruitful, because, though this be something, yet it is not all: but
though giving the ear is not enough to make us fruitful; yet denying it, it
shall always be able to hold us under unfruitfulnesse.

This convinces such as through pride think they can do well enough without
hearing,

To stir us up to hear. As a plant,

Lastly, That not all hearing, no nor all knowing, Observe.
but the true, that is, the inner, powerful, affectionate knowledge, is it
which is fruitful in us: The greatest Clerks are not always men of greatest
conscience; knowledge and conscience are often divorced: the Devil knows
more than we all: There is a double knowledge; the one literal, when one
conceives of things, but has no feeling of them in himself, nor is not
affected with them: now this knowledge does not alter a man. There is another
knowledge which is spiritual, lively, affecting the soul, this breeds the
fruits of true obedience, true desire of increase, etc. To read of the nature
of Honey in a book, leads a man into some conceit of it, but nothing
affects him; but to taste an honey-combe, this makes him know more
freelingly, and desire to taste further: So it is in knowledge. Sapientia is
sapida scientia, true knowledge is savoury knowledge, that relisheth in the
soul.

It lets us see our misery for the present, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to those that perish. 2 Cor. 4.3
If a Physician comes to a man sick, and with all his art can do him no
good, it is a token the patient is desperate, even a dead man: So when the
spiritual Physician has been long with thee, and thou mend not, it is
fearful. I know men think, they know as well as the best, and can say as
far in a matter as another: But if thy knowledge move thee not to obedience,
it shall help thee to so many more strokes, and prove thee a worse fool than
the idiot that knows nothing.

VERSE 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who is for
you a faithful Minister of CHRIST.
Mark, he brings in Epaphras, as through whom they had been fruitful;
which teaches us: That such as are not graced with great titles, their work
is not in vain in the LORD. Epaphras was neither Apostle, nor Evangelist, nor
yet the chief teacher of them: the Lord does often choose such as are for
outward circumstance foolish and weak ones; that whatsoever is wrought, may be
apparently perceived not to be theirs, but the work of GOD in them. He knows
we will easily dwell more in the man that speaks, than on Him who fendeth,
and the matter spoken; like as many gaze more on the casket when it is curious,
than on the jewels within it: and men look at Cups rarely wrought, admiring
and commending them, so that they delay to drink the liquor in them.

We must not be offended at want of carnal circumstances in those who teach
us; the foolishness of GOD is wiser than men.

We must not be dismayed,

From the fact of the Apostle commending Epaphras: That we must speak the best
of all, but especially of Ministers, though not outwardly glorious: Nay, the
less glorious they are, we must put the more upon them; that their ministry
through such good testimony might be more effectual. As in the natural body,
the face has no cover, the less honest parts have: So in the mystical body.
This is required in the ninth Commandment, to give good testimony and put
honor one on another.

2 We must the rather commend others, because ordinarily they may neither
praise, for that were pride; nor yet dispraise themselves, for that were folly.

3 It does strengthen their hands in the work of the ministry, and makes
them better regarded with their people. CHRIST Himself refused not John's
testimony in this regard; and Paul, lest he should run in vain, did come to
Peter, that he might have testimonial from him.

Now we must give them testimony.

1 So far as we know, else we should not say true. 2 Not to their face. 3 To
some good end, as to glorify GOD in winning authority to those we commend.
To teach us our duties,

The Apostle his fact convinces such as will detract, etc. yea, if they see a
man down the wind, will betray him with silence, dare not speak what truly
they may on his behalf.

VERSE 8. Who declared unto us your love in the Spirit.
THe doctrine of this Verse is to be gathered on a double ground: 1 As it is
the relation of the Apostle to the Colossians. 2 As it shows the fact of
Epaphras by the Colossians.


Now that the Apostle writes to the Colossians such a good part of Epaphras,
as might further increase their affection to him; it does teach us: That we are
to speak such things of man to man, as may tie them more nearly in love one
to another. We must not like envious men, sow tares of discord, and whisper
such things as may set them further and further out, like as whisperers and
back-biters who will speak this and this, if you will keep their counsel,
which tends only to make debate. But let us wisely report such things which
may heal and conglutinate the bond of love, somewhat loosed. Blessed are the
Peace makers.

For Epaphras his fact: 1. We must consider him as communing with the Apostle.
2. As affected toward the Colossians, of whom he speaks. Mark from the
matter which the holy apostle, and he, a faithful Minister, entreat of; Observe.
What intelligence and news are the fittest for Ministers to speak and hear
of, viz. How it fares with the souls of the faithful, what grace of GOD is in
them: How they walk this way: look into Paul's communication, and the
Brethrens that came from the Churches, with him; all is about this point. We
see how in Princes, as in our Kings, you have Ambassadors from all States
sometime, France, Venice, Low Countries, etc. and there are politic relations
of strength, wealth, civil deliberations and occurrances in Kingdoms: So
Paul, a great overseer in the Church, had his intelligence, as his care was
over them all, so from them all, but the matter altogether spiritual: what
oppositions against the Gospel; what success, how the Churches walked, etc.
Happy overseers that lie in the wind only for this news.

As Epaphras does make good report of grace in his people, viz. their love; his
example is our instruction, That we are to tell what good things GOD works in
our people. It is GOD's glory, when His gifts are confessed, it is their
encouragement. It is a fruit of our love, and evidence to them, that we give
them good allowance. Parents delight to speak of their childrens good
qualities: So Ghostly Fathers.

Lastly, mark how he bears the witness of love in the Spirit, that is,
spiritual, inner hearty love; whose example teaches us, That our love must
be hearty and unfeigned. Saint Paul, Romans 12.13. requires that love be
without dissimulation. So Saint Peter, Love with a pure heart. Saint John, Love
not in word and show, but in deed and truth. And such love was in Paul and
other Saints: they had desires one to another, even from the heart-roots. The
effects are more common, but the affection of love is exceeding rare. We must
chiefly labor for this: GOD is a Spirit, and he loves the spirit in our
works. Again, the affection of love is proper to the Saints; the work others
may do likewise.

To lay our selves to them,

For exhortation; He who is love it self, effect it. What is our love, but
formality and external complement? doing one good turn for another, bidding
to meat such as reinvite us. Loving not so much our friends, as our selves in
them; a copy of the countenance without hearty affection. But what is this but
a gilded potsheard (as Solomon says) a golden glister without, there being
nothing within of any worth?

VERSE 9. For this canse we also since the day we heard it, do not cease to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of His
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.
I Told you in the third Verse, how the Apostle propounds his fact of
Thanksgiving and Prayer, digressing hitherto as matter did occasion. Now he
returns to expound and open to them the form and sum of them; the order
inverted, first of his Prayer, which was last mentioned in the third Verse,
then of his Thanksgiving. His Prayer to the twelfth Verse. His Thanksgiving
with the occasional opening of a head of doctrine, to the eighth Verse of the
second Chapter. In the Prayer these points lie in order.

1 The occasion, For this cause. 2 The Persons, the Apostle with other, We. 3
The time, From the first hear say of it.
The manner in two points: 1 Incessantly, not ceasing. 2 Fervently, which is
infolded in this double word, We pray, we desire.


Lastly, here is the matter of his Prayer, which respects them either as they
were to do GOD's will, or to endure his pleasure.

For the first, The grounds of obedience. The obedience it self. The fruit of
it.
For the first, The grounds of obedience, are: 1. The gift of knowledge, that
they might know the will of GOD fully. 2. Gifts or graces practical, with
wisdom and spiritual understanding. The obedience it self follows, first
set down in general, That they might walk worthy the LORD: Secondly, opened
by two particulars, pleasing Him, fruitfully; the fruit of this obedience, is a
growing up into more familiar acquaintance with, or knowledge of GOD. Now as
they were to endure many things, he wishes them a convenient grace in this
regard: 1 Setting down the grace it self, That they might be strengthened
with all might. 2 The fountain, GOD's glorious power. 3 The End, which is
double: as trials sometime are strong and long; so against the one we must
have Patience, against the other long sufferance, accompanied with joyfulnesse.


Thus is the Prayer.

The thing that needs explication most, is in those words, with wisdom and
spiritual understanding. This Greek word (...), as cockmah in the Hebrew, to
which it answers, has a double acception: Sometime it notes out the
knowledge of hidden heavenly things, thus it is expounded, Prove. 30.3. one end
of the verse does interpret the other, wisdom in the beginning is construed by
the knowledge of holy things in the end. So in 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom
amongst the perfect, that is, points of hidden knowledge, the great mystery of
CHRIST; and thus only profane Authors take it, as Aristotle, Tully.

2 This word Wisdom, is put for that practical virtue, which does deliberate
about, and move us to do things behoofefull, commands and orders actions:
And the Septuagint use this word (...), for the same which the Philosophers
signify only by (...). Now in this place it is thus to be taken: for it
cannot be put for the theory of GOD's will, because it is annexed as a
different thing from that which we expressly asked in the words before.
Again, in the third Chapter, Col. 3.1^.
Wisdom seems to be that which makes a man teach and admonish himself, and
so bring into act that which he knows out of the Word. Now if you ask what
it differs from understanding; and how spiritual understanding differs from
knowledge? To the first, Wisdom makes us put the thing in execution:
Spiritual understanding does perceive and judge aright of that which Wisdom
consulteth on, and executes: And this differs from knowledge, because this
as Wisdom is about matter of fact gotten by experience, whereas Knowledge
conceives only things in themselves, not considering of them as they are
here, and now performed.

Now for the doctrines from the ninth Verse.

First in general, the Apostles example does teach; That Ministers must not
only teach and admonish, Observe.
but pray for their people. 1 Samuel 12.23.
GOD forbid that I should cease to pray for you. Moses, Aaron, and Samuel were
thus styled, such as called on His Name: the Priest was as well to offer up
incense, and bless in the Name of the Lord, as to slay the sacrifice. Again,
all our watering and planting is nothing without GOD's increase; which how can
we look for, if we will not ask it? Spare to speak, and spare to speed.
Moses Prayer did more against the Amalekites, than all Isreal's weapons.

Such therefore as bow not their knees to GOD in secret for their people, The
Priest has forgot his Prayers.

We must be admonished of our duty: We Pray.

From the time, Observe.
mark, we must not delay going to GOD when occasion is offered; that precept
every where pray: (...), is thus fitly construed, Pray in every opportunity;
let it not slip thee: It is good taking the season in every thing, striking
while the iron is hot, for time and tide stay not: from that day he heard; he
did take the occasion of devout remembering them to God. Delay is here always
dangerous. For at the first coming of occasions, we are affected with them;
but if we work not with this motion, like as fire not blowed nor fed with
fuel, it goes out. Again, wisdom bids us redeem the opportunity. Ephesians.
5.^5.^6.


Here therefore men are to be taxed, and quench the spirit, whose modo and modo
non habet modum, who are ever in purpose, never in performance, who cry yet a
little sleep, a little folding the hands, sleep over their spiritual harvest.

We must from his example be exhorted, for as he followed CHRIST, so far
forth we must follow him.

Mark thirdly, that he prays uncessantly; Observe.
which teaches us, how we must persevere in Prayer: not like them who a day or
two will begin this duty, and then lay it by all the quarter: the Apostle
bids every one of us persevere in prayer for the Saints; Ephesians. 6.18.
not that we must keep hours stinted, as if those hours pass us, we must
not pray that day, or like the Euchites never cease pattering; but we must
daily, at fittest seasons take up this duty. This not ceasing, speedeth with
GOD, gives Him no rest, out-wrastleth Him: this CHRIST by a double Parable
calls us to; one of the widow: Luke 18.3, 4. Luke 11.5.
the other of the friend in the nightime importuning his friend. For GOD does
often delay, to see if we will follow Him, and not give Him over.

Those then who are set down with fainting hands,

From this that he does not pray howsoever, That our prayers must be fervent:
He does not continue a form of words without affection; for it is not vox,
but votum, that sounds in GOD's ear; I^^. ^.16.
The prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent. Our SAVIOR does
reach, that these only speed, these fervent prayers, by that trebled phrase,
Ask, Seek, Knock, all importing the same matter, hearty calling on GOD. If
one ask us a thing, but being indifferent, does rather to prove us, than that
he cares; when we discern it, we hold our own. So GOD etc.

To rebuke lukewarm devotion;

To stir us up in this duty: etc.

From the Matter in general, he wishes their proceeding in grace, obedience,
and patience. Observe hence, Observe.
What things we are to wish those that are called, even these here named: The
Apostle knew how many begun in the spirit, but ended in the flesh; he knew
that if they did not gather, they would scatter. He well perceived how busy
Satan would be to steal this grace out of their hearts. For as thieves watch
them that have treasure and great charge about them, letting penniles
travelers alone: So does Satan, he is busy to rob those whom GOD has trusted
with His graces.

VERSE 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please Him in all
things, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of
GOD.
NOw follows the obedience it self, set out by the practice of it that he
prays for. 1. In general. 2. More particular. In general, it is to walk
worthy of the Lord; what this is may be understood by comparing it with like
places. Ephesians. 4.1. Worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called. Phil.
1.27. As it becomes the Gospel. 1 These. 2.12. Worthy of God, who has called
you to His Kingdom and glory. To walk worthy of the Lord then, is to live and
behave our selves as becomes those to whom God has vouchsafed so great
mercy, that passing by thousands and ten thousands, for deserts all as good,
and in outward respects many of them better than they, He has of His mere
grace and free love in CHRIST, chosen and called them out of the World, to be
partakers of Eternal life and glory with Him; and for this cause has caused
His Gospel to be preached unto them, and by His spirit has made it effectual
in them: we must therefore seriously consider (1) the dignity of our calling,
(2) the excellency of the Gospel whereby we are called, (3) the kingdom of
Glory whereto we are called (4) and our most Holy and glorious Lord God, by
whom we are called, and accordingly with due regard of all these things, carry
our selves in this present world: let others then live as they list, walk in
sin, and wallow in filthiness, such a course may sort with their condition;
but for us, we are by the grace of God of another dignity, of an higher and
more holy calling, and such as wait for a Kingdom prepared for us, even an
Eternal Kingdom in the heavens: This walking worthy of the Lord, he
expresses by the end that it respects and aims at, namely a pleasing of
Him in all things, or a full and entire pleasing of Him. If then we will walk
worthy of the Lord, we must study to please Him, and to give Him contentment in
all things, not accounting of pleasing any man, yea or al men, with displeasing
him. 1 Cor. 4.3. And good cause, for life and death depend on Him, He has
power to save and destroy; yea He has done such great things for our souls
already, and assured us of so great glory hereafter, that we are the most
unthankefull and impious Creatures that ever breathed (our selves being judges)
if we study not to please Him in all things. Wherefore let others addict and
give themselves over, dedicate devote and consecrate themselves to serve and
please, to bow and beck, to kneel and crowch, and in all points to observe
this or that great man on whom they depend, by whom they live, from whom they
expect their advancement and rising in the world; let us study and strive how
we may please the Lord our GOD. He is to us in stead of all, yea all inall.

Here Observe, That this pleasing of GOD must be in all things, Obs.
or it must be whole and universal, for he that seeks not to please Him in
all things, seeks not to please Him in any thing; and he that labors not
to give Him an universal contentment, labors not to give Him any at all,
according to that of Saint James, Sam. 2.10.
Whosoever shall Keep the whole Law and yet offend in one point, is guilty of
all; for the same God has commanded all; as well that He leaves undone, as
that He does; and therefore if out of conscience toward God, he has care of
doing any, he would have conscience of doing all.

Which serves notably to convince those who reforming and conforming
themselves to the will of God, as they would have it thought in many things,

Having thus set forth this pleasing of God in general, he expresses it after
in two particulars.

Bringing forth fruit,
Increasing in the knowledge of God.
For the bringing forth of fruit, being an expressing of our duty to please
God, specially in an outward manner before God and Men, may be called not
unfitly one particular of pleasing God. Observe Hence, Obs.
We must be fruitful in good works, as Trees and plants are fruitful in
their kinds (for from thence is this speech taken) for being planted by Gods
own hand, in His own Orchard or Garden, yea in His own house, Psa 92.14
being also kept and dressed by Him, as our Husbandman, Ioh. 15.3. Esa. 27.3.
Ioh. 15.3.
being watched over night and day, and watered every moment; finally being
branches of CHRIST the true vine, from whom by the virtue of His spirit, we
receive sap and juice, good reason we should be fruitful; and if not, we
shall be surely cut down and cast into the fire. Mat. 3.10. Ioh. 15.6. Luke
13.7.
For who among us would endure an unfruitful Tree in his Garden? who would not
say with indignation, Cut it down why cumbreth it the ground? If that were
rooted up, I might have another planted in the place of it, that might bring me
forth good fruit. When the wicked see us grow livelesse, powerless,
sapplesse, they say, what matter is in them and in their profession? It is a
shame, that they should say, I had rather live with any, deal with any, have a
promise from any than from a Professor.

Their condition is incurable: Carpenter has cut and hewn, and sees it will
not fit his turn, there is no remedy but it must be cast into the fire. My
spirit shall not always strive with man. Genesis 6.3.
Esaias 5. GOD calls a counsel; What shall I do with my Vinyard? A hedge Lord
will do it good; send them prosperity and security, that they have had; A
winepresse Lord will do them good, that they have had; afflictions will not
work upon them. When no plaster will cure the Leg, it must be cut off;
when the Gospel will do thee no good, nothing can do thee good.

See the ground and cause of all our evils; Cor. 11. For this cause many are
weak, and many sick and many sleep; as if he should say, you blame the
air, you say such a distemper was the cause: no, no, it was your unprofitable
coming to the Sacrament, that has brought this plague upon you. Our
unprofitablenesse is the cause why the Lord is still hacking at the Tree of
England. How many great Families are perished, and yet by no ill husbandry or
great improvidence; no, no, they were too good to favor the Gospel, to pray
in their Families. The cause of our ruin is not three years, but sixty
years unfruitfulnesse: nay is it not better to be any thing, than fruitful?
do not many begin to say, what need so much fruit? I wonder how you can
bear with such a fellow? how can you stand to his bent? preach and pray,
repeat in Families, confer and meditate, etc. What ado is here? what, so
much fruit will break the boughs. Alas, is this to answer the cost that God
has bestowed on us? The better the Land is compassed, the more tedious; yea
the more odious it is to the Husbandman, if it answer not his expectation with
a fruitful increase. Oh my brethren, lay this near to your hearts; would you
be content to part with the Gospel, with your Lands, with your Children? If
you would not, then bring forth the fruits of the Gospel. Your grounds cry
out unto you, master be fruitful, or we shall be laid desolate; your Wives
and Children cry, be fruitful, or we shall perish.

Consider the unnaturalnes of this sin; must none kill your Children but your
selves? none give your wives to be ravished but your selves? but Lord pardon
us then you will cry; no, go to your lazy proud hearts for comfort; you have
despised the bowels of Christ, and are you not justly left to men that have no
bowels? But is there no hope? read Psalm. 81, 13, 14, 16. The Lords compassions
have rolled within him many a time, and he cries, how shall I give thee up, Oh
England, as the Palatinate, how shall I make thee as Bohemia? as God did be
speak Ephraim, Hos. 11. v. 8.

But how shall we do to become fruitful?

Keep thy soul abiding in CHRIST. Lord Jesus earth enough in thy heart.

Keep the little succors about the Tree fresh, skin, if that be off, it
dies, that suckes moister from the earth, which is the cause of growth.

Keep close to the rivers of water:

Take heed of wild beasts, and cold Northern blasts: the commission of
sins will be as the letting in of wild beasts into the Vinyard; these
blasts are cold company, Act. 2.40
save your selves from this untoward generation; the Apostle speaks to them as
to men a drawing, to whom a rope is cast. The Gardener desires to plant the
Apricocke tree against the back of a Chimney, where the heat of the Sun may
come most directly on it, and where (besides the benefit of reflection) it may
have warmth from the Chimnie.

The other particular is, Obs.
that We must increase in the knowledge of GOD. Of that which the Scriptures
teach concerning the essence, property, works and Ordinances of God: this is
also commanded 2 Pet. 1.5. Join moreover to your faith virtue, and to your
virtue knowledge: faith and virtue could not be without knowledge. It is
clear then that he means an increase of knowledge: So 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ. This is very worthy to
be noted here, that having prayed before, that they might be filled with the
knowledge of His will; he now adds increasing in the knowledge of God, and
adds it as a practice of former knowledge. We should never cease to grow in
knowledge, the rather because when we know all we can attain, we know but in
part. 1 Cor. 13. And our knowledge is but like the knowledge of Children in
comparison of the perfect knowledge we shall have in the world to come.

This checketh all that are negligent herein, knowledge of God, is a part of
practice: Such also are here to be rebuked, whose office being to plant and
increase knowledge in others, do either neglect increasing in knowledge
themselves, or which is much worse, discourage the people from so doing;
persuading that they should content themselves with the knowledge of the
principles, and for other things, depend on them that have the guiding and
leading of them: verily this bewrays they mean not well, that they are loath
to have the people have too much knowledge, they sin against this Doctrine.

VERSE 11. Strengthened with all might, according to His glorious power, unto
all patience, and long suffering with joyfulnesse.
NOw because they that do but sincerely labor thus to be filled with the
knowledge of God, and to walk worthy of the Lord, as has been said, shall
be thought to be strange men in the world specially by their old consorts, 1
Pet. 4.4. and shall be sure to be scorned, taunted and diversely ill entreated
in the world (for all that desire to live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
perfecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. that they may be like their Head,) therefore in the
close of his prayer, he desires that they may be strengthened to all patience
to bear these afflictions, be they never so great, or many, and
long-sufferance, be they never so long in continuance; and because there is a
singular measure of strength required herein, he asks that they may be
strengthened with all might, that is, with abundance of strength, according to
His glorious power, which being in Him infinitely, is expressed mervailously in
His works, that so they may be able to bear these things, not with patience
only, but even with joyfulnesse, rejoicing that hereby they are made like to
Christ, and counted worthy to suffer any thing for His Name sake.

Christians have need of spiritual strength to walk with God in their
spiritual conditions. Hence S. Paul, Ephesians. 6.10. Be strong in the Lord and in
the power of His might.

This spiritual strength stands in two things. Ephesians. 6.10.


1 That the principium or cause of this strengthening be from the spirit. 2 That
the object of it whereabout it is conversant be spiritual things.
To strive with God a little in Prayer is a sign of some strength; but to
wrestle with God as Jacob did, not to let Him go without a blessing, shows
great strength. To believe a promise wherein there is a little difficulty,
shows some strength; but for Abraham to offer up his Son in whom the promise
was made, shows great strength: to bear a little injury without desire of
revenge, shows some patience, but to endure great and manifold persecutions
and reproaches, and with Saint Paul and Sylas to rejoice in afflictions and to
sing in Prison, shows great strength. To go away clear with all that
presses us, and make a play of them, this shows excellently glorious:
blessed therefore was that strength of GOD which made the Apostle rejoice in
infirmities; blessed of God are ye that carry your burdens cheerfully; and
such who are heavy in spirit, who go mourning, oppressed with sorrow,

But what strength can make us rejoice in afflictions, James 1.3.


Some think this a fruit of the spirit, given in times of extraordinary
trial; but Saint James his precept seems to bind in every season, count it
all joy when you fall into diverse temptations. Afflictions therefore must be
distinguished; either they are for castigation of some sin which lives in
us, being used too gently; or of some guilt unrepented of; or else they are for
manifestation of graces: the Author to the Hebrews speaks of those former,
wherein GODS brow is bended and His angry countenance toward us, for so the
word signifies, and the conclusion insinuates, afterward they bring the quiet
fruit of righteousness: in the second, which are accompanied with Gods
favorable countenance, we may rejoice: these are like sunshine showers,
wherein the Sun is more pleasant, then the showers tedious. Do we not feel
when we would be best occupied, evil then most present? If Gods inward
strength should not uphold, we could not endure. If we have afflictions to
suffer, we are white-livered, and the least word of a wenches mouth, would make
us be ready to deny with Saint Peter: and as in this regard we have need, so
how can we walk to the glory of God, if we be not resolute and valorous? do
such soldiers credit their Captain, which will faint and fly for any thing,
and leave a man on the plain field rather then suffer any incumberance? could
any master endure to be so jaded with a servant, that would upon the least
pain or hardship show him a pair of heels?

Wherefore the use of this is to stir us up to beg strength which may make
us courageous in all evil, Puritan, you dash them out of countenance, they
cannot endure any displeasure from men. O cowardice, o naked Christians, whom a
little paper shot from a pot gun, does dismay, and cause to shrink in from the
colors of their God! you timorous hearts, were you truly just, you should be
confident as Lions.

With all might] We have not need of strength only, Obs.
but great strength; as Paul bids Christians get co^pleate furniture, to cover
them, the whole armor of God. We are every where weak; could we see the enemies
we have, what strength we have need of by us that we may not be daunted; could
we mark what foyles we take; what need we have of strength to renew our
battle, and charge them again, standing up from our falls; if we consider
the manifold adversities, the allurements with which the Devil does fight,
what might is sufficient to keep us, that our minds be not broken neither
with one or other? The LORD open our eyes, then we who take no thought of
these things, we will seek to that heavenly armory for this spiritual
ammunition.

Let us therefore by this be stirred up; if we heard, Armado were coming
against us, would we not raise all the strength of the Land to encounter with
them? Shall we make skar-crowes of the flesh, the world, and legions of evil
spirits, that we neglect to levy any forces, to provide any strength wherewith
to resist them?

According, Observe.
or by his glorious might] Observe from whom comes all our strength, even
from the strong GOD. It is GOD that strengthens us to suffer afflictions;
Phil. 4.13. Psalm. 18.2.
we are able to do every thing in Him strengthening us: He is the rock, He is
the strength of Israel blessed for ever. Like as a valorous Captain, when his
soldiers droope, does with speeches of encouragement put new souls, as it
were, into them, animating them to battle: So our heavenly Captain, further
than He does inspire and create strength in us, we are void of it: We by nature
are of no strength this day; Romans 5.1^.
the LORD must give it us: He gives strength to His people; yea, He must, when
we have it, stir us up to use it, girding our loins to this battle,
teaching our fingers to war, and our hands to fight, or else to draw it
forth; I have heard it twice that strength is of the Lord. Psalm. 18.34 Psalm.
62.11


This teaches us where to seek our supply, in poverty of spirit to come unto
the Lord, who is the Fountain: Courage for evil we have, but no courage for
good: It is thou, Lord, must make our faint hearts courageous, thou must
inspire them. We can trouble our selves with many things, and go away with it,
but if any thing be to be affected or suffered for thy Namesake, we cannot
abide it.

This shows to whom all praise is to be returned, from Him, and to Him are
all things; the waters that come from the Sea return unto it.

Now for the consequent of this strength in us, it is set down in three
effects, the one Patience, the other Long-suffering, which have annexed a
companion, even Ioyfulnesse in afflictions. These three are daughters of
spiritual courage, though they are not twins, all got at once in us.

First then mark, Observe.
What is a fruit of Christian strength needful for us, even the Patient
abiding of all evils; Patience is such a virtue as makes us stand under, not
fainting. If we should see a man bear two or three thousand weight, would we
not gather, surely that man had great strength? If we should see one standing
his ground, being assailed with an hundred, would we not say, he were very
strong that could ward off all these assaults? needs then must that Patient be
strong that stands under evils heavier than the sand, evils within, evils
without, that endures when hell and the world, yea, our own treacherous
hearts do lie heavy on us. So Solomon concludes of impatient fainting under
afflictions, that it is a token of weakness. If thou faintest in the day of
adversity, thy strength is small; as if we should see one that should sink
when any thing were laid on him, we would say, he were but a weak man,

Which convinces that valor, falsely so called;

Mark how Long-suffering is an argument of great spiritual strength: Absalom;
but a continuance of true patient bearing our cross: to lift up a quarter of
wheat or two, were rare strength, though one should stand under it but a while;
but to carry it four or five miles, were a token of ten-fold strength: So to
bear our burdens any time is a fruit of glorious strength, but to carry them
at length, argues treble virtue.

To convince the false estimation of men touching this matter.

To assure those that long have endured,

Now as Paul desires these three things for the Colossians; so he teaches us
thus much, That we have need of these virtues, we have need of Patience (says
the Scripture) Heb. 10.36. need indeed to bear our evils, to forbear and
expect, the receiving of our good things we look for; a Porter whose calling
is to bear, had need of shoulders: So we that are called to bear many
afflictions, had need of patience, but we have no less need of
long-suffering; for so deep are our stains, that they will not come out,
unless we be long dowsed in these waters of afflictions, which makes GOD many
days continue our evils. Now how shall we hold under long afflictions without
long-sufferance? yea, we have need of the joy of the HOLY GHOST: No life can
last without delight, and though to the being it be not so necessary, yet it is
altogether needful for the well being of us, that like Paul and Silas we sing,
not able to sleep for joy.

To seek these things, Lord to give thee wisdom patiently to endure his will,
he will give it, and not upbraid thee: think how though thou art patient now,
yet ever and anon it is ready to be crazed, yea, broken in thee, pray for
long-suffering; treasure up joy against evil hours; fire does well against
winter, and while thou may, take it, deny thy foolish rejoicing, exercise
thy heart with godly sorrow. Such as sow in tears, Psalm. 126.5.
shall reap in joy. We live neither having exercise of these things, nor
feeling want of them, nor seeking after them; our hearts love to be in the
house of vain mirth; woe will be to this security, and this laughter shall end
in mourning: Woe to you that now laugh, Luke 6.25.
ye shall weep.

VERSE 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
THus having laid down his Prayer, he comes to mention expressly the matter
of his thanksgiving, which was first named in the third Verse.

In it two things are to be considered.

1 The fact it self of giving thanks, with the person to whom they are
offered, of which we have spoken something above, Verse 3. 2 The arguments
moving him, or the things for which he is thankful.
The first in those words, Giving thanks to GOD the Father: The matter is
twofold first a benefit, a great good thing given them, even an inheritance;
Part in an inheritance, which is set down with three circumstances.

1 Their qualification, which makes them capable, this goes before. 2 From
the quality of their being fellow-heires with whom they were joined, the
Saints. 3 From the matter of this inheritance, in light.
The second argument of his thankesgiving, is a great evil from which they
were delivered, in setting down which: 1 He shows the point or pass from
which GOD did deliver them: From the power of darkness. 2 The state to which
he brought them; and has translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son.


Now to amplify the greatness of this last benefit, he describes the Son,
first from the effect, Verse 14. which is propounded; in whom we have
redemption: after expounded, that is the remission of Sins. Secondly, he
describes the nature of His Person to the nineteenth Verse, three ways: 1 As
He was in reference to GOD, Who is the Image of the invisible GOD. 2 As He was
in relation to the creature in general, in those words, The first begotten of
every creature, Verse 15. and sustainer of them. Verse 16, 17. 3 As He is in
regard of His Church; And He is the Head of the body, the Church: Then
follows the reason, how came this man to be personally GOD the Creator of all
things, the Head of the Church, It pleased the Father that in Him all fullness
should dwell, Verse. 19. How come we to have redemption by Him? It pleased the
Father by Him to bring us to these benefits: the benefit is repeated. First in
general, Verse 20. Secondly, with application to the Colossians, Verse 21, 22,
23. Where first he sets down what they had, their state antecedent:
Secondly, their state present, where we have the work of their reconciliation,
and the manner of working, Verse 21, 22. Thirdly, to shake off security, the
condition of all is annexed, Verse 23. Whence the Apostle takes occasion to
digress in signifying his Apostolical affection to them, to the eighth Verse
of the second Chapter.


Giving thankes] Observe first, From his suffixing thanksgiving; Obs.
That we must as well give thanks for the things given us, as beg for that
we want. Many are suitors when any necessity presses, but few return to give
thanks: we see it in the ten Lepers; one only returned to give thanks. Eaten
bread is soon forgotten, that we have we take no further thought of, but we
must remember to couple these together.

For first, in this is GOD's chief honor, He that offers praise honors
me. Psalm. 50.


This is forcible to make us speed in that we entreat;

We have more cause when GOD has given us faith, etc. to give thanks, than to
entreat; If we are reconciled to GOD by the death of His Son, which is the
greater; To. 5.1^.
much more shall we be saved by His life, which is the lesser. To pardon a
traitor when he is enemy-like affected to us, and take him to favor, is more
than when he is a friend, to give him a preferment.

To beget and bring forth a son,

That we by nature are unfit for GOD's Kingdom: Unless we be borne anew, Ioh.
3.^
we cannot enter into GOD's Kingdom. What disposition can be in such, as are
the children and thralls of the Devil, to be the sons and heirs of GOD? No
there is nothing in us but enmity against God, Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the
flesh is enmity against God; and in the one and twentieth Verse of this
Chapter: now who can make me owner of that which I am not, nor cannot be
willing with? We see in outward affairs, an outlandish man, a forreiner,
cannot have inheritance in our Land until he be naturalized: the son of a
traitor, whose lands are confiscate, cannot inherit them as before, till his
blood be restored: So it is with us, we are all strangers by nature to God and
heaven where He dwells, we are a tainted blood, rebels from the womb; and
therefore till God do restore us and make us fit, we cannot have part in this
heavenly inheritance; we love our hell as well as if there were no other
heaven; Ezekiel. 16.
we are such as have an Amorite to our father, an Hittite to our mother, such
as lie weltering in our blood. It is the work of God alone that must prepare
and fit us for this blessed inheritance, all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3.5
we are not able to think a thought this day. No man can beget himself, and
therefore what man can fit himself for the heavenly estate? none but the
Father of spirits can effect this matter: he that only can draw us, changing
our wills, who can purge us, beautify us, adopt us, etc. he has begotten us to
this inheritance.

Which lets us see Gods exceeding grace to us: and scorn this heavenly
birthright, as Esau did his earthly, that then he should look lovingly toward
us, and allure our hearts to Himself, make us sons and daughters, who can
sound the depth of this love? Suppose a King should take some youth up by the
highway, all in rags, ill-favored, ignorant of all liberal education, ill
mannered, such a one as loved a rogueing humor more than a kingdom; were it
not strange love in him that should fit such a one, win his good will, and
proclaim him heir apparent to the crown? So stands the matter betwixt GOD and
us.

This serves to humble us and make us walk modestly,

3 That you may further see His love, and what cause we have to give thanks;
mark what it is He puts upon us, Verse 17. an inheritance.

Observe then, That as GOD's manner of taking us up, so the matter he takes us
unto, must move us to bless Him: The Lawyers know that the title of
inheritance is the greatest title: to give a stock of money to one is much, to
bestow an office, to let to farm rich things upon easy rent; all are
beneficial, good estates; but to make one my heir, this is far greater:
this made Saint Peter so break forth, Blessed be GOD the Father, 1 Pet. 1.3.
who has begotten us to an inheritance immortal, undefiled, that fades not
away: From whence it may be further amplified; for if one were made an heir of
some three half penny possession, the benefit were not much to be stood on; but
to such an inheritance as there is described, who can utter this mercy? Look
at men on earth, can they do greater displeasure that to dis-inherit their
children? Can they show any further love than to write this or that man the
heir of all their estates? It is so with God; what greater love than this can
He show, than to make us heirs unto Him?

The use of this is to stir us up to al thankfulness,

We must labor to look into this our inheritance; Esau, for a little sinful
delight, forgo our inheritance.

This comfort the Saints;

It might be marked that he says; To take part: it teaches: That every Saint
has but a childs part. GOD gives not as men, all to one, the rest have
nothing; but he gives every one a several part, as He sees meet. Some have
greater, some have less, though all shall be blessed, not knowing lack of any
good thing in that they possess, nor envying any thing they see in others, and
have not: in the principal all are equal, though in the accessory of degrees,
it shall be otherwise. We inherit partly Re, partly Spe. This inheritance is a
glorious life or condition, which to all the heirs of it, is here begun; in
the Resurrection is perfected. That which is begun is the life of grace, which
is given us from CHRIST our Head from what time we truly believe on Him, with
so much right in the creature, as makes for GOD's glory and our souls health.
Now for the perfection of glory and Lordship over all the creatures, this in
some sort we have, in other regard we have not. First in our Head we are seized
of this; CHRIST GOD and man, our Head, as man is in heaven infinitely glorious,
Lord over all the creatures. Secondly, we have this presently in regard of
right to it, though we have not right in it, as an heir in nonage, ward to the
King, he has presently right to all his lands; though till one and twenty they
come not into his hand: So we have right presently to the whole state which is
given us, though we shall not come to it till the coming of CHRIST. Glory is
here begun, though perfected hereafter. And truly so it is: we are the sons of
GOD, though it appear not what we shall be, 1 Ioh. 3.1. whom GOD has
justified those He has glorified, Romans 8. that is, has given them the first
fruits of the Spirit of glory in their sanctification. Even as parents do
sometime trust their children while they yet live, with some pensions, stocks
of money, as part of their patrimony, trying how they will husband it, and
reserving their full inheritance to be given hereafter: whether we look at the
title or state of our inheritance, in part we have it: the Spirit of Sons is
sent into our hearts, the title of children confirmed to us. What is it to have
the inheritance of a Baron? But to have the title with the lands, this should
more comfort us; we love in earthly things to have something down in hand.
Thirdly, we have the things themselves present to our faith, which is the
evidence of things not seen.

With the Saints] Observe hence, Observe.
Who they are that are inherit ours in this glorious inheritance, Saints. If
you ask me why we have this inheritance, I will tell you: it is GOD's free
gift for CHRIST His sake, the natural Son and Heir, on whom we believe. But
if you ask not why we have, but who shall have, then I tell you the holy man
only. Look Act. 20. 32. Matthew. 5.
and Act. 26.18.1 These. 1.10. No unclean thing shall enter into GOD's
kingdom: The Pure in heart shall see GOD. Will a wise man leave his estate to
one whom he sees to be of lewd qualities? Shall GOD part these heavenly
riches to profane miscreants, covetous earth-wormes? No.

Again this inheritance is called a Crown of righteousness: though it be not
deserved by our righteousness, yet it is a recompense which GOD of grace
gives to righteousness only.

Wherefore this puts in a caution against all those that are children of
this world, their heavenly Father, but loving covetousness, lusts, pride, etc.
Do you look for an inheritance? Will a man give a childs part from amongst
his wife and children to base broods of some harlot, or of his sworn enemy?
Shall GOD give you inheritance with his children who have amity and are the
brood of the world, an old adulteress? Ye that do live in these sins which
are the works of the Devil, and therefore are his children, and here mock
Saints, that walk after their lusts; may see that they shall have no place but
in utter darkness with the Devil and his Angels.

It is added, in light] Mark, Obs.
What for substance and nature our inheritance is, it is light. For if I should
speak thus to one of my children, you shall be heirs with my other children in
my money, goods, lands, etc. I express the matter of my substance in which he
should be coheire with the rest. Earthly men leave earthly substance: But our
God is a Spirit, the true light, dwelling in that light to which there is no
access: like as himself is, like is the matter of his inheritance; it is
light. We by nature are in darkness and the shadow of death, (as we shall
speak in the next Verse.) God does make us all manner of light in Himself,
does give us our parts, even while we live here, 1 Pet. 2.9.
in a mavelous light. Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.8.
and stand up from the dead, and CHRIST shall give thee light. What light are
we in? Even in the light of Gods countenance, which is as the Sun to the
world of spirits. We are in the light of knowledge, Ye are light in the Lord;
In the light of holiness, light of joy, 1 Pet. 1.
even joy of the Spirit, unspeakable and glorious. Object. But we cannot see
this light. Answ. Not because it is not light, but because thy owle-like eyes
are not able to look against the brightness of it.

To moove us to thankfulness, He. 12.23.
of our Christ the mediator, of Angels, ministering Spirits about us, of the
spirits of just and holy men, in the heavens, of those blessed habitations and
that blessed City whose maker is God?

It teaches us,

VERSE 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
THe order follows in which God wrought the former benefit, set down 1. From
the state out of which we were delivered. 2. From the condition to which He
brought us, of mercy.


For though this follows in the text, yet it goes before in Nature, and
shows how God did make us meet; and therefore you have this first set down,
Acts 26.18. First in the coherence we see, Obs.
That none living in the state of darkness, can be inheritors of Gods
Kingdom. Till we come from under the powers and Principalities which rule in
darkness, we cannot be heirs unto God: for beside that we cannot live
thrall to the Devil and be heirs to God at once, the matter (as I showed) of
our inheritance is light: Now how can a man be altogether darkness, and yet
have light at the same instant? these would make contradictions true at once.
Could Joseph have been a Prisoner clad in his base apparel, and yet have
been the second potentate in Pharaohs Kingdom? No, he was first brought out
of prison; then the King caused his old garments to be laid aside, that change,
even rich ones should be given him: so does GOD with us.

Which does further assure the consciences of such as live in their natural
estate;

From this, that these when now they were truly converted are said to be
brought out of the power of darkness; note, What is our estate by nature; Obs.
we are under the power of the Devil, the Prince of darkness, and are in
all kind of darkness; ye were once darkness, says Saint Paul to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.
darkness of ignorance, none understands, none seeks after God; darkness
of lusts and ungodliness, Tit.
we by nature served lusts even as others; darkness of condition, GODs anger
abides on every one that does not believe; O most dreadful Cloud! yea His
curse, and all kind of misery does threaten them. Temporal Princes, if men
rebel treasonably against them; shut men up in dark dungeons, where they are
denied outward comforts, and live waiting their fearful execution. God is a
spirit, we have all rebelled against Him in the Loins of our first Parents; we
lie before him guilty from the womb: God has His spiritual darkness, He
gives men into the hands of Satan, His jailer, He takes away His spiritual
light from them, letting the Devil hide them in chains of ignorance, lusts,
fearful expectation of judgment. I, but we feel no such thing. Answer, It
is because we are all darkness, and never saw nor heard, some of us, other;
that makes us think there is no such matter: those that are in hell wot there
is no other heaven, (as we say in the proverb.) Our first parents were less
miserable then we in this regard; for they knew that the glorious light was
gone from them, and that their souls were in all kind of darkness, because
they had left that lightsome and blessed condition: but we that never knew
other, we think there is no other. If men at forty years of judgment should
be shut up in a dark dungeon, they could perfectly know what a comfortable
world, what goodly heavens, what a fruitful earth they were deprived of: Say
they should get a Child in this dungeon, he could not tell further then he
were told, and so conceive by hearsay that there were such a matter: Suppose
a child that never saw other should hear nothing, he would verily think
there were no other light, he could not imagine other estate or liberty then
that which he had prooved from his birth upward: So it is with us, because we
are borne and bred up in Spiritual darkness, we think there is no other
light.

To show how none but God can help us,

This also lets us see the truth of the Doctrine, God alone? the strong man
will keep his own till a stronger come.

We must learn to lament and take to heart this miserable estate:

It must stir us up to bless GOD, God for this spiritual enlargement from
the most woeful prison, the hardest keeper, most doleful chains and fetters
that ever were felt by the sons of men?

Lastly; What is matter of much rejoicing and praise, Obs.
even this, that GOD has put us under the government of His CHRIST; this is a
benefit of GOD every way. It is no small thing to live under the regiment of a
gracious Prince in earth: yet the good we reap by them is bodily. But what a
blessing then is it to live a Subject in the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST, who
saves from all evils, and gives all good things temporal and eternal? if
the King should take a Traitor out of the Tower, release him of his danger; it
were a great favor and Princelike clemency: but to prefer him to a good
place under Prince Charles, and to make him far greater hopes then his
present preferment, this were unspeakeable bounty: Thus it is with us; our
gracious GOD has not only set us free from the dark holds we were in, but
has preferred us to an happy condition for the present, and to most rich
hopes for hereafter under His beloved Son. The men of GOD foreseeing this, it
is strange to see how they provoked all the creatures, even things senseless
to exultation. The Lord reigns, Psa. 97.1. Psalm 98.7.
let the earth rejoice; let the Searoare, let the floods clappe their hands;
for the Lord is come to judge the earth; that is to reign over us. The
immunity from all fear of evils, the abundance of all good things in the
Kingdom, cannot be uttered. CHRIST is the Prince of true peace, He gives
His Subjects deliverance from the fear of all enemies, of sin, death, hell;
here is salvation: He is the Judge, Lawgiver, the King that must save us. Esaias
24.23. All enemies are subdued in this Kingdom: here is justice against
oppressors both spiritual and corporal; here is store of all good things,
spiritual graces, and corporal blessings so far forth as is good for our
salvation.

To provoke us in this consideration to be more thankful; stand upon any
ground, such is our exultation; yea we bless GOD for them, do we not keep
holy days in thankful remembrance to God for their Coronations, protections?
and we do well: they are our bucklers; our peace, and defense is from them;
they cloth us with scarlet, and through them we enjoy many a pleasant thing:
they are the breath of our nostrels, and we know, that even the government of a
tyrant is better then an Anarchy. But if for man's government we be thus
thankful, what praise should we offer to our God for bringing us under the
Kingdom of His dear Son? If we had some grievous Tyrant ruling over us, and
God should take him away and set a Prince of singular Clemency over us, should
not the blessing of all the kingdom come upon him for so singular a change?
But when he takes the Devils iron yoaks off our necks and brings us under
the Kingdom of that most meek King who will not bruise a broken reed, nor
quench the smoking flax, here none in comparison is thankful.

This gives us to consider of our happy estate, Psalm. 72. To live in such a
Kingdom were a great felicity, but no more to be compared with this then the
shadow with the substance. What a blessing is it that we have His spirit to be
a law in us? good laws in a Kingdom are no small benefit: What a blessing is
it that we have true peace from accusation of sin, from fear of death, from
disturbance which the remnants of sin do cause, before they be better
mortified? Say I am spiritually opposed and molested, yea have great corporal
enemies; what a mercy is this, that looking to CHRIST our King and crying for
help, we have succor? they are weakened; defeated, scattered; we are
strengthened and comforted. I see that I am besieged with enemies too mighty
for me, yea with Traitors in my own bosom; what a favor is this that we
should be protected, our King being such a wall, and as a mighty flood about
us, that they cannot come near us? I want things; looking to CHRIST, I have
supply: I fear time to come; looking to Him, I hear it spoken, This is our
King, Psa. 48.14
He shall lead us, to death.

VERSE 14. In whom we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of
sins.
NOw follows the description, to show the excellency of this former blessing,
from the excellent benefit we have by him, and the worthiness of his Person.
[In whom] in which dear Son: and this phrase in whom, notes both the Author
of the benefit next adjoined, and likewise the order or mean by which it
comes to be applied in us, viz, we being by faith in Him: in whom, then is,
through which Son, we being set into Him by faith, we have redemption; which
word is taken Actively or Passively. Actively, for the act of CHRIST His
working it; Passively, for the receiving of it into us, or the applying of it
in us that are believers: so it is here, as if it were said, we are redeemed.
The force of the Word is, ransomed, brought forth of some miserable penal
condition: a price or ransom paid for us, which was His blood. See Ephesians. 1.7,
14. 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave Himself a ransom for all. He construeth this
redemption to be Pardon of sin; freedom from all that penal condition to
which we were subject by reason of sin. For to pardon sin is to release
the punishment to which the guilt of sin does bind us.

What is the singular love of our King unto us; even such that He has bought
us with His blood, we are ransomed by Him, and not with silver or gold, but
with His precious blood. 1 Pet. 1, 18, 19. If that a King should empty all his
coffers, and alienate all his Crown Land to rescue his Subjects, he should
show himself a natural Prince: but what is this to that ransom which our
King has tendered?

This does let us see what cause we have of thankfulness for CHRIST; not
only in regard of his love, God for such a one as should purchase our liberty
with some sum of money? How much more to be released from that woeful
captivity in which the Devil does hold us through sin, and the curse of
God, whereof he is the executioner?

This lets us see our duties toward CHRIST, Peter on the same ground
infers this exhortation. For as much then as CHRIST has suffered for us us
in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
arm your selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in
the flesh, has ceased from sin; that He no longer should live the rest of His
time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. If men do but
small matters for us, ^ we are theirs to be commanded, their servants, theirs
while we live, to the utmost of our power: but God may come from heaven, take
thy nature to the fellowship of His Person, shed the precious blood of His
manhood, and when He has done all, have no thankful duty acknowledged.

Lastly we see hence our woeful estates by nature; God, the truth set us free.

Remission of sins] Observe hence, Obs.
What is the greatest blessing which CHRIST our King does procure us, pardon of
sin: great indeed, binding us to be thankful for our King. We see how Kings
at their Coronations, when they enter upon their people, they do every way
endeavor to win their hearts, testify their princelike bounty and clemency;
hence come the customs of giving pardons to sundry, even of capital offenses,
of releasing subsidies and such like dues otherwise, of giving and enlarging
and confirming charters to sundry places: thus our Savior that King of glory,
does give a full pardon to His Subjects, a general pardon; for it is said
indefinitely, none excepted, that in Him we have forgiveness of sins: which
Saint John does conster in these words, the blood of CHRIST cleanses us from
all sins; 1 Ioh. 1.9.
original, actual, past, future, the most royal Charter that ever was given
to the sons of men. This is the grace promised, I will be merciful to their
iniquities, and remember their sins no more. It is the justification and
absolving of us sinners by God for that satisfaction or redemption which Christ
tendered, we are justified (says Saint Paul) freely by His grace, that is, we
are set free from our sins through Christ His redemption. Romans 3.21
Christ was made sin, that is, a sacrifice or surety for sinners, bearing all
our sin, that we might be made Gods righteousness, righteous before God in
him. Again this remission is a general never-revoked pardon, I will be
merciful to them and remember their sins no more.

Why do we then still ask forgiveness?

We ask not every day to be anew justified, Christ His blood; they derogate
from that worthy Sacrifice, and abridge our royal Charter.

To show us what cause we have to bless God for this dear Son: God has
forgiven us all our debts, that CHRIST has paid the uttermost farthing? Hence
comes all our boldness, whereas before we durst not show our heads: now we
say, it is God that justifies, who shall condemn us? What can comfort a man
which is ready to suffer, if not this, to see his pardon sealed him from the
King?

Lastly, mark that he says, in CHRIST we have these things; which notes not
only CHRIST His meriting and effectual applying, but our being in Christ by
faith, which is a necessary antecedent, before we can have them applied in us.
Observe.
Whence observe, That before we can have any of these blessings, which come
from Christ, we must have Christ by faith. All benefits may be conceived as
they are gotten by CHRIST, as they are applied in us, begun, continued,
perfected. Now our redemption CHRIST has begged or rather bought of His
Father; yet we are in our selves, as if there were no such matter till by
Faith we come to be in Him. Suppose there were twenty traitors in the Tower
lay condemned: Say again, the Prince should yield his Father such satisfaction
for some whom he would save, wherewith the King his Father should be
contented, and give him their pardon thereupon; here the thing is done betwixt
the King and his Son, yet till the Prince send to them, write to the Keeper to
deliver such and such to him, they are in the state they were in, and so
continue: So it is with God, Christ and us: the redemption is all concluded
betwixt God and His beloved Son; yet till this is effectually made known to
our hearts, so that they believe on this grace of CHRIST; we are as we were, in
hold, in the fear of our condemnation; we are justified through the redemption
in CHRIST: but so that before it can be applied in us, we must have faith in
His blood, being set forth unto us in the Word preached. Can we have the
strength of bread without eating bread? no more can we have any benefit by the
bread of life without believing on Him. In Christ by faith we have these things.

Wherefore rest not in your natural conditions, even to dwell in your hearts
by faith, and all is yours. We see Princes do give pardons; but yet if men
according to the form will not sue out their pardons, and take them out of my
Lord Keepers Court, they shall have no benefit by the Kings mercy, and most
worthily; for they debase the benefit; for we deem that an ill benefit that is
not worth the fetching: So you, if by faith and true repentance you do not sue
forth this free pardon of God; then woe be to your souls, you shall have no
benefit by His mercy.

We that have our part in CHRIST,

Thus much for the benefit.

VERSE 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first borne of every
creature.
NOw follows the description of His Person, first compared to God; this His
dear Son is said here to be the Image of the invisible God: still he
continues to amplify the greatness of this benefit for which he so blessed
God, that we are got into the Kingdom of His Son, to be such a kingdom,
whose King is not man only, but God blessed for ever with the Father and
Spirit; who is Lord even by right of Creation, over all the creatures; who is
head of His Church: to be of His Kingdom is matter worthy all thanksgiving:
this is the scope.

See then, What is matter of Praise, Obs.
that we have such an one to be our King and SAVIOR, who is God with the
Father. Thus much is laid down in this spoken of this Son, that He is the
Image of the invisible God: this phrase indeed is spoken sometime by man, as 1
Cor. 11.7. Man is the Image and glory of God; though there only: for we are
said to be made according to the image of God, not to be the Image of God: But
we must understand these diversely; when spoken of this dear, well beloved,
proper, only begotten Son, natural Son; and when of us that are made sons by
grace of adoption through faith on Him, Ioh. 1.12. He has the selfsame
invisible Godhead or divine nature with the Father: We have only created
qualities, which have some proportionable resemblance of Him. When I say Prince
Charles has the King his Fathers Image, I mean one thing; and when I take a
shilling and say, this money has the Kings Image on it; the one is a picture
having some resemblance, the other is a natural Image that has the same
substance. So Heb. 1.3. He is called the brightness of His glory, and the
express Image of his Person. And besides, that it is clear by plain
testimonies elsewhere, we may convince it out of this Text; for He is so the
Image of God, that He is no creature, but the Creator of all creatures: this
then is the matter of praise, that we are in such a Kingdom whereof not man,
but God is King. Israel the type of us, they had Kings indeed, but all of them
were flesh, served their times, and dyed: But our King is God, whose Throne is
for ever; this the men of God foresaw and rejoiced in, Thy God reigns, O
Sion, etc. And in truth this is altogether it which does so credit this
kingdom of ours, this is all the glory of our Israel. We see in earthly
Kingdoms the Persons and qualification of Princes is the chief grace and
ornament of them: This does augment the felicity of England, that God has
given us such a King so graced with mental endowments; a great Potentate and
most Christian King: if God had given us one, though of obscure parentage, it
had been a blessing, but much obscured even by this circumstance: So if that
noble quality of the person ruling has this force in earthly States; what a
thing is this, that we have one anointed over us, who is God over all? Now as
this increases our happiness, and is matter of thanksgiving; So it must
augment in us all reverence and duty, all holy confidence of obtaining good,
of getting aid and deliverance against and out of all evils. We see the more
excellent the gifts are, as the strength, wisdom of our King, the more awfully
they are respected, the more obsequious we are to them, the more confidently we
promise our selves all things under their regiment. Look at Solomon: one part
of wisdom made fear fall on all Israel; see their subjection, though he
taxed them heavily, yet none durst quitch against him: What shall we be to our
God, who in his abasement was greater than all Salomons? This shall suffice to
have observed out of the scope.

Now for the words themselves; 1 For the opening of them. 2 The deductions or
use of them.
(1) He is said to be an Image, but coessentiall with God the Father, whose
Image he is. (2) He is: that is Christ. whole CHRIST, God and man is said to be
this Image of the invisible GOD, and that not only as invisible GOD with the
Father, but as man visible. But this must be warily understood: not that
CHRIST man has qualities of other nature than we have, for more and less
change not the kind; but because the man is taken into personal union with
God the Son: So that this man secundum Esse personale, is God. (3) It is to be
marked, of what he is the Image; not of the personal difference in the Father,
but of the invisible Godhead, common to the Son with the Father: as the child
is the image of his parent, not in regard of the characteristicall property
which his father and every one has in singular to themselves, but in respect
of the same substance and nature derived by generation from the Father (Look
Heb. 1.3. Character Personae) and that derived by generation from the Father.

We may learn to see the reason of that truth which our Savior utters to
Philip; Philip, He that sees me, sees the Father.

This teaches us how we must come into the knowledge of God invisible, God
is, but that which personally is God; if one had seen where the HOLY GHOST
was, and a figure with which He did extraordinarily and temporarily testify
His presence, yet he should not have seen the HOLY GHOST, because the Dove was
not so taken in one Person with the HOLY GHOST; but this humane nature is taken
into fellowship of Person with GOD, and so is become GOD. He that sees this or
that body, he sees the man, though he sees not the spiritual nature in man,
because he sees that visible nature, which is a part, and belongs to the
person of man: So, who so sees this visible nature of God the Son, may be said
to see God, though he see not the invisible Godhead, because he sees the
nature which is joined in unity of Person with God. 2. By looking at the divine
works which this man wrought, we come to conceive of the Godhead in this
Person; as in His giving sight to the blind, raising the dead, stilling the
Sea, I come to see that He is Almighty, a quickening Spirit.

Setting before me that which He speaks of Himself, Moses by Faith saw the
invisible God:) Considering such sentences, who comes down from heaven, but
the Son of man which is in heaven? Ioh. 3.
I see an omnipotent nature, I am the resurrection and the life. When He knew
their thoughts, Lord thou know all things, who can subdue all things to
Himself: In these and such like sentences let me see the Image of an
All-knowing, Omnipotent, Life-giving Nature. Now thus seeing CHRIST in regard
of both Natures, I come to see the Father, who has the selfsame Nature, and
the Spirit: for in this Son is the Father, and the Father in Him; in the
Son and Father is the Spirit, and they in the Spirit.

This shows us the gross idolatry of the Papists,

This is an introduction to us how we may come to know the Father and Spirit;
get CHRIST, Son, then thou feast the Father and Spirit, for they are in Him:
as if we could suppose three Persons, all subsisting in one only soul and
body; he that should see the one, should see the other; for the same soul and
body which one has, the other two have also. Now follows his description in
regard of that respect He has to the Creature, set down in this Verse. He is
the first begotten of every creature: Secondly, He is proved both to be the
Coessentiall Image of God, and first begotten of the Creature by three
arguments: 1 His creating all Creatures. 2 His antiquity and being before all
Creatures. 3 His susteining all Creatures.


But these words are doubtful. Two principal constructions are these: the
one, that these words note Christ's eternity, begotten before all Creatures, of
the Father, by eternal generation. Secondly, these words may signify Him to
be Heir of the Creatures, the Lord of them, by a metonymie of the subject for
the adjunct, the right of inheritance and dominion belonging by God's Law to
the first begotten: and this I take to be the true meaning, for these reasons.
1. CHRIST's eternal existence before all Creatures, is laid down in the next
Verse save one, in plain words. 2. The Holy Ghost construeth this being the
first begotten, as having this annexed, the preeminence over other. 3. Hebr.
1.2. He is said to be made heir of all things, and this follows; For by Him
all things were created, as a reason both of His being the natural Son of God,
with God, and true Heir; as here the same words are set down to prove Him the
Essential Image or natural Son, and the first begotten, that He is Heir or
Lord of all the Creatures.

Mark for explication, first begotten of all the Creatures; Israel God calls
His first begotten; sending to Pharaoh to dismiss Israel His Primogenitum: So
Hebr. 12.33. all the elect are called the first begotten; but this is spoken of
them in comparison of the inferior creatures and rest of mankind only. 2. By
participation from the first begotten, who is the native Heir, and for
distinction is here called the first begotten, or Lord of the whole Creature.

The thing then to be marked, is; Obs.
What a wonderful benefit this is, that we are made subjects to such a King;
who is the Lord of all the Creatures: what can we want that are under Him who
is the Heir of all things? What can hurt us, who are His subjects that is Lord
of all the Creatures? We see this does greatly make for the subjects felicity,
the ample Provinces that are subject unto them: It was a circumstance that made
much to the dignity of Salomon's Kingdom, that he should reign from Sea to
Sea: But what is this to our King, who is Lord and Heir of all the Creatures
in heaven and earth, seen and unseene? All power is given me in heaven and
earth, says CHRIST; God has set CHRIST in the heavens above all
Principalities and Power that is named in this world, or that which is to come.
We must make use of this.

And first learn to be thankful to God, glad of it; Lord of all the Creatures
in heaven, earth, and hell.

This makes much for our encouragement who are CHRIST's true subjects, that
our King is the Mighty, Alexanders protection, when now he was Monarch of the
whole world, how safe did they think themselves? who could hurt them, that had
such a Protector? Hence it is that lesser States think themselves secure when
they have gotten some mighty Potentate, such as his Majesty, to undertake
their Protection: But how safe are we that keep close by faith to our Lord
Jesus, who is the first begotten, even the Lord and Heir of all the Creature,
strong by Sea, strong by Land, glorious in Heaven, dreadful to the powers of
darkness? So it assures us we shall want nothing.

This shows us whence we derive our title and estates which we have in the
Creatures, Lord of all. Suppose the King had the selfsame title in all his
Countries which he has in his Crowne-lands, no man could justly hold or lay
claim to any thing further than he could show right from the Princes grant,
demise, etc. or prove himself an heir to the King. So it is with us; first
all property is in God of all things, they are His own, He may do with them
at His pleasure. 2. God the Father does give to His natural Son, made manifest
in the flesh, all the Creatures, making Him Lord, and giving Him all judgment
in heaven and earth, under Himself. 3. CHRIST the natural Son and Lord does
take some out of mankind as brethren to Himself, and gives them state of
inheritance, as who by faith on Him are become joint heirs with Him: To others
He gives of His Creatures, partly to testify His patience and clemency; as
the King gives allowance to traitors in the Tower, till they are to be brought
to execution. 2. As a temporary reward of some temporary service in them, he
makes them a grant of some portion of His creatures: the world therefore has
title both in jure fori, and jure poli, to that they lawfully have; but by the
title of inheritance, the Saints hold only.

This does show us how we should seek to please our King: Lord give us
wisdom, we miss not the right door, we bring not our griest to a wrong mill.

Lastly, hence the consciences of such may be shaken, Lord. A fearful thing
to lift up hand against a King; yet one might do it, and flying forth of his
dominions recover safety: But whither will thou fly that disobeyest Christ? all
the Creatures will attach thee, and arrest thee of high treason; for they are
at His beck, He is the Lord of them.

VERSE 16. For by Him were all things Created that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities, or powers; all things were Created by Him and for Him.
NOw he comes to prove Christ both GOD and LORD, and together opens the
ground of this His Title of inheritance to the Creature, thus: He that made
all Creatures, is no Creature; but GOD blessed for ever is Lord of all
Creatures: but by Christ all the Creatures were made: therefore He is GOD and
most justly heir to all; who can lay so good a claim to them? 1. Then mark
in general from the coherence, That these Creatures we see do give testimony
to that invisible GOD whom we see not, these do speak aloud, that He who has
Created them is God; for the work does argue a most Almighty and wise
workman: and it is made ( Ier. 10.11.) the effect distinguishing all false
Gods from the true; the Gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, are
no Gods. If we should see fair buildings, excellently contrived, we would say
they were excellent workmen that framed these: So seeing this world, the
heavens, the earth with the furniture of them; we may well conclude, He could
not be without a divine power that built all these things. Iovis omnia plena,
praesentemque refert quae ibet her^a deum.
Again these visible things have in them prints of the invisible things in
God; His power, wisdom etc. is graven in them. For look as the finest
artisans, who make the most curious works, as watches, etc. They write their
names in some part of them, that the making and the Author be discerned: So God
has written Himself every where in His Creatures, that they might be known
for His workmanship, and He for the workman of them.

The use of this is,

That as He hence prooveth Him God, so He shows what just Title He has to
the Lordship and inheritance of all the Creatures: It had been enough if he be
granted the only begotten Son of the eternal Father, to prove Him heir
justly; but He that together with the Father created all the Creatures, as
Christ did, Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1.3. the case is clear, He must needs be Lord of
all: but if these were too weak, it might be strengthened with a third, even
the redeeming of the Creatures, subjected to vanity through sin; yea a
fourth, Heb. 1.3.
His bearing up of all with His mighty power.

Let us therefore give glory to Him,

This, for the coherence.

Now for the matter of this first reason, viz. His creating all things is first
set down, then each part; the order inverted has his amplification set down
in these words, by Him all things were created, expounded in the words
following: And first, what those all things are, which are set down by a
double distribution; the one of the subject or place, the other of the
property, in heaven and earth, all visible or invisible. 2. By a particular
enumeration of those spiritual creatures, which of al other might seem to be
exempted from the common law of creation; which point also soon after
Valentinus and Basilides did contend for, viz. That these were not created but
begotten of God. Now they are described from the ministeries in which God does
employ them for the administering of this world to the good of his Church. 2. He
repeateth the other, that by Christ all things were created; opening the manner
of his working and adding the end; for (...) does signify that Christ was not
a secondary instrument by whom the Father made all things, unworthy of
Himself; but a formal worker of all the creatures, which is confirmed also,
that He is made the finis reductionis, the end to which all the creature is
reduced to Him, to His glory; whereas if He had been to His Father as a
hatchet is in the hand of a Carpenter, the end of the creature should not have
been to have served His glory.

1 Then we see, Observe.
that Christ our King is the Creator of all things. Ioh. 1.3. All things were
made by the Word, and without it nothing was made. Heb. 1.1. It is most clear:
for what ever the Father does, He also does work; for the self same will is
in all the Persons, that what one works the other must work also.

Which consideration of CHRIST, believe on the Father, believe also in Me: we
do believe many things which we see not, yea which we find much in
disposition, making desperate in us: but here is a proppe of faith, we know
whom we have believed, even the beloved Son; who though there be no print
appearing of them, is able to create them, He created these things of nothing:
who, though we be indisposed to receive things we believe, yet this is no let
to Him, who out of darkness and a confused Chaos, brought light, and this
goodly harmony of all things. Therefore look to CHRIST the Author and finisher
of thy faith, stand thy ground, fear not, the Creator of heaven and earth is
He that has spoken: lay it at His door, and there rest thee; thou shall find
all Amen: as He has promised, so He is able to perform: shall not He who has
made all the Hosts of the invisible Angels so bright in knowledge, so burning
in love, so uncessant in action, shall not he be able to effect in thee that
small measure of Sanctification which Himself has promised and thy heart
desired? be confident in Him that is made of God thy Sanctifier.

This, Creator of us, does teach us our duties; even to offer our selves up
unto Him: if He never had done any thing to redeem us, yet we owe our selves
unto Him, for that He is our Creator; how much more when that three fold cord
comes, His Redemption by His blood, and saving us by sending His spirit into
our hearts? those that give us our lives as our Parents, we say, we owe them
our lives: those that save out lives, as when we are ready to be executed, we
hold our selves their bounden servants for ever. Christ the Father of eternity
has given thee thy life by creation, has saved thee by redemption.

It lets us see the decency of the order enacted in that great Council of
the Trinity, should redeem us; for what could be more fit then that He by whom
we were made, by Him I say we should be restored?

That there is no creature whereof Christ is not the Creator; both high and low
are the work of His hand. It is in correspondence to that, He is the first
begotten of all the Creature, Lord of it: and reason good, for He was the
Creator of all of it; and this must be understood with Saint John's limitation,
by Him were made all things that were made; for defects of sin and penal
evils, as death, etc. which are not matter poysonfull as serpents, but the
destruction of things that have being; these are not made by God, but come from
the suggestion of the Devil, the will of man falling sinfully from God the
fountain of life and well being. It does not debase Gods glorious power to
create small things; as we see, He caused Jonas his gourd to come up; but often
sets it forth, when all the strength of the creature cannot quicken a fly:
And we see that in the lice the finger of God was acknowledged by them whom
greater things did not convince. Yea it is needful; for if any thing could
have being without, it were God with Him.

We must sanctify His name in all things, Solomon speaks in another case, so
we may truly say, he that despises or abuses any creature, abuses his
Maker. Say our selves have made any thing, if any mar it, and unlawfully
(otherwise then our mind stands) uses it, do we not hold it an injury? so
will God hold Himself abused in such misusing His workmanship.

We must learn to consider of the least creatures, look into the natures of
them; if a workman do make a fly finely in silk, we will view it, admire,
commend it: and what new thing does art invent, the sight whereof we will not
rather pay for, then be without? yet for Gods creatures, we pass them over, as
contemptible, that have things in them admirable: a Spider, an Ant, a little
kind of Mouse, the Holy Ghost sets these as it were into the Pulpit to
read a Lecture to the wisest of us.

It follows, that are in Heaven and that are in earth; visible and invisible:
by heavens He means not only these aspectable ones which our eyes see, but
those supreme ones, where God, His Angels, and the spirits of the just abide.
How that God has His places, Ministers attending about Him, unseene and
unknown too; many such things has He, which the eye of man has not seen, nor
have not fully entered into man's heart. We that live far remooved from that
heavenly Court, we can know but little, and that by hearesay only. Take some
hamlet of poor subjects that live. Northward, remote from the Court; what do
they know of Kings Manor houses, of His Court at White Hall, of the furniture
of his rooms, the state of his attendance and service, the solemnities of his
Triumphs, the manner of his going to the Parliament House? we that creep here
below, live in a remote place, occupied in mean affairs, we cannot imagine
the glorious Majesty of that high Court, where our God, our Mediator, with the
Angels and spirits of the just, display their glory. True it is, we that are
truly faithful, we are come a little nearer; for we are got into the Suburbs
of this City, we are come nigher to God, in comparison of the world, nigher to
our Mediator; we converse in heaven, we are adjoined to the innumerable
multitude of Angels and spirits of the just. But yet we have but the report,
and so a sight by faith without evident view of these things.

These things must teach us first, Sadduces; for Spirits and Angels, they
think them fancies. O fool, do thou see the wind, an elementary thing, yet
too subtle for the eye to behold? do thou see thy own soul? and yet thou
feel it; yea when thou sleep, ere-while it wakeneth and is in action: but
the spirits of these men are incarnate, the things we see are nothing to the
things that are not as yet seen.

Wherefore in the second place, etc. If one should open a piece of some rare
workmanship; we could not be quiet till we got the rest unfolded: yea this
makes some of better abilities, which dwell in the utmost parts, that once in
their lives they will go up to London to see the City, Court, King, etc. How
should this provoke us and check us as sluggards, who care not to see further
off, these most glorious works of nature and grace, which our God has begun
to unfold, that long not to see the City of GOD and our Prince His dear Son,
and with Him to make our glorious aboade?

To think of these invisible things about us, God is looking with a broad eye
upon us: good Angels, armies of them about our bed; bad Angels, the stars not
so thick in the firmament over our heads, as they are hovering to spy their
advantage: o shall not we grieve that we cannot see them? should thy Father and
all thy brethren stand by, would thou not mourn to have so sick a sight as
could not discern them? and art thou contented with such weak eyes as cannot
behold thy heavenly Father, thy brethren and fellow servants? would it not
grieve thee to be as Sampson with the Philistines, thy enemies about thee, and
eyes out? will thou not grieve to have innumerable evil spirits about thee,
not being able to perceive them? pray to God to open thy eyes, look into the
nature of thy own soul, that will be a good introduction; if thou can find
thy own soul at the rebound of it, abstract thy self from sensible objects,
ponder things intellectual.

Further it is to be marked, That our Lord CHRIST is the Creator of all the
Angels; all these excellent creatures were created as the matter of heaven and
earth, the soul of man, they were not begotten of GOD, The Devil would by
those Primitive monsters have broached to the disgrace of the only begotten
Son of God, though the Scripture calls us begotten of God, Iam. 1.18.
in regard of our regeneration; yea, they were created by CHRIST, who is
therefore called the Lord of hoasts. If He had created the inferior things
only, it had not been such an argument of His power and equality with His
Father: But when the most divine creatures are the works of His hands, O how
glorious is He! This does greatly tend to the Majesty of our King, into whose
government we are translated. O we admire, and our eyes dazzle at the luster and
pompous magnificence of earthly Kings, who at their Coronations make Knights,
create Earls, Marquesses, Dukes: how glorious do we count them, who can give
such degrees? But what are these? All of them flesh: What are we to these
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Angels, Archangels, which our King
has created?

It might be asked when He made these?

The day cannot certainly be defined,

The use of this here so plainly set down, Moses affords; in all the story
of the Creation, they are not expressly named, their weak sights not able to
endure discourse of such brightness: but our Apostle, who had been wrapped up
into the third heaven, does specify things which under the Testament lay
veiled.

This does let us see with how good reason our King in regard of His humane
Nature is Lord even of all the Angels,

This gives us security that we shall have sent us the help of good Angels in
our necessities; Lord of them; He has the command of them at His pleasure. We
see if the subject in the furthest part of our Country be assailed with foreign
power, which does over-match it, the King will levy an army from the City,
and places near him, and so send them succor: Even so our King will send
these His heavenly Citizens, when the powers of darkness do assail us. They
are ministering spirits sent forth for their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation.

Lastly, Lord's work out of His hands.

Again, here is occasion given to speak of the distinct ministeries of
Angels: but nescire oportet quod nec scire possumus nec debemus: The clear
knowledge of these things is reserved till we shall be (...), Luke 20.36.
in the heavens.

Lastly observe, That as by Him, so to His honor the creature was made. Obs.
Whence we mark, first, that the Son works not as a servile Minister, but as
a joint Author in making all the creatures. Indeed the Scripture gives an
equal authority to CHRIST with the Father, in working: As the Father
quickens, Ioh. 5.21.
so does the Son whom He will. That which I, as the Principal, do use my
servant to do, is not for his sake, but my own: But the end of all these
things was no less the honor of CHRIST, than of the Father. It is enough to
note, that the equality in Nature of this Son with the Father may be
conceived.

Mark hence, That glory is due to CHRIST from all the Creatures; the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, all one God, have made all things for their glory, Romans
11. For of Him and by Him, and for Him are all things, to Him be glory for
ever. God has made all for Himself, the wicked for the day of evil. More
particularly, CHRIST both as God and man is the end of the Creature; as God He
is with Father and Spirit the last end of all; as man every thing serves for
His praise, both works of nature and grace; yet so that even Himself as God
man looks to a further end, the Father, Spirit, and Himself absolutely
considered: the harmony of all is made on four strings.

The Creature, And this is the sweet concord of all, when the Creature serves
man, and is for Him; He CHRIST's, and CHRIST GOD's. The Man, And this is the
sweet concord of all, when the Creature serves man, and is for Him; He
CHRIST's, and CHRIST GOD's. The Christ, And this is the sweet concord of all,
when the Creature serves man, and is for Him; He CHRIST's, and CHRIST GOD's.
The God. And this is the sweet concord of all, when the Creature serves man,
and is for Him; He CHRIST's, and CHRIST GOD's.
All is yours, you CHRIST's, and CHRIST GOD's. A wise man does not work that
which he has no end in, much less God: neither could God have any other end
than Himself; for there was nothing but Himself, when this work was intended.

We may see how injurious we are to God,

We must labor to give praise to God from every thing: God's honor when we
do but with devotion eye His workmanship. Secondly, you must learn to see and
publish the wisdom and power of Him, and His goodness and mercy, which is
over all. When I see it rain, I may think what a mighty wise good God is this;
that as a gardener waters a bed with his spout-pot, so waters all the earth
at once so sweetly: why are ye, snow, hail? etc. these bid us to praise the
Lord: Have these tongues? No, but it is meant that they should show matter to
us, who have tongues to magnify His Name.

We must learn from them, God has written lessons upon them; the Ant, the
Ox, the Ass, they would teach us instructions.

VERSE 17. And He is before all things, and by Him all things consist.
NOw follows His Antiquity: He that is before all things must needs be God
and Lord of the Creature. Observe then, Obs.
That our King is antienter than all the Creatures: He was before the
beginning, in which all these were made: Ioh. 1.1. JESUS CHRIST yesterday, to
day, and for ever, Hebr. 13.8. His goings forth were from everlasting, he is
((...)) and ((...).)

Which does still serve to amplify the dignity of our King, the eternal of
days: What Herald can set down His descent? No, He is of antiquity which
surpasses the thought of all the Creature, He was from all eternity, is, and
shall be for ever. And as it augmenteth His glory; The Angels are called sons,
Job 38.7.
and we are called sons; but besides that we are equivocally so termed, we are
also younger brethren; and therefore the Lordship and inheritance belongs not
to us: I mean that which is primary and universal.

This teaches us our duty, God which is eternal, to whom all ages past are
but as yesterday, how foulely is he wanting to himself?

It is added, by Him all things consist. Which word notes not only their
being; but that they keep with their being, their sweet order and melodious
consent one with another, through Him.

Observe then, That all things are preserved in their being, Obs.
moving, and order by Him: He does continue the selfsame creature and order
which Himself made first and appointed: And as the former gave the glory of
Creation to Christ, so this gives the glory of preservation and providence to
Him also: This is plain by Scripture, Hebr. 1.3. He bears up all things by
the Word of His Power. In God we live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17.
Not because He does work them only, but because He does conserve them in us;
Christ does not leave His work when He has made it, as a Carpenter leaves
his house when it is built: but that is true he speaks, Ioh. 5.17. My Father
works hitherto, and I work. That He did, though without labor, put forth
His power in the preserving of all things; for all things that have not being
and moving of themselves, but from another; they cannot be nor move longer than
that first cause does preserve them in it: As let us bear up a thing, that
cannot stand of it self longer than we hold it up; the thing cannot but fall.
So take a thing that moves not of it self, make it move; while you stir, it
stirs; cease your motion, it stands still: So all these things, they have
not being of themselves, and moving of themselves, but from God, and therefore
longer than God does bear them up and move them, they cannot consist in
either. Take for comparison the air: this is not light of it self, as we see
in the night; yet it is enlightened by the Sun with daylight: when the Sun
therefore comes, and continues, the air waxes light, continues so while
it continues, and returns to darkness when the Sun sets: So God, being
the fountain of being and motion, which are not of themselves, does begin
these things, does make them stand in their state; and if He should totally
withdraw himself, they would return to nothing.

Now this does first much make unto the dignity of this our dread Sovereign.
Geneva, etc?) But if this be so full of renown, how then is He to be extolled
that bears up the whole frame of Heaven and earth, and all the hoasts of
them? How blessed are they that have so mighty an Emperor over them?

This lets us see what cause we have to cleave unto our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
Son, seeing that we have our being in Him, all our good is in His hand. We
see in what respect we have such from whom we have our maintenance, who support
the small matter of state we have in the world: How much more should we win and
keep to us His favor, that susteineth life, being; yea, though we see Him
not, gives us our lots, and maintains our portion?

This strengthens our faith on Him touching our preservation: Paul
strengthens the weak Christian thus: He shall be confirmed, for God is able,
able indeed. Shall He that carries up the whole world, not be able to support
thy poor spirit?

Lastly, God as the upholder of the being of things, the preserver and chief
worker in all this ordinary course of Nature: God makes the Sun to rise, God
raineth on the just and unjust, Psalm. 134.7, 8. For God calls the Sun
forth, Esaias 46.26. And though vapors dissolved are means of rain, yet God
chiefly does prepare and work it in them; whatsoever the second causes do,
God does it much more, for these are but instruments to Him: the Sith cannot
be said to cut down grass so properly as the Mower; nor these causes to do
any thing so properly as God, who does it by them.

VERSE 18. And He is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning,
the first borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence.
NOw he comes to describe His Person, as in relation to the Church, which he
sets down 1 Generally, He is the Head of the Church. 2 Particularly, in
regard of a particular preeminence which he had in respect of the dead, with
the consequent of it: The first fruit, and first borne of the dead, that in all
things He might have the preeminence.


First then we see, Obs.
that CHRIST has not Lordship over the Creatures only, but over the Church
also; which does still according to the scope in the whole description
intended, amplify the excellency of His Person: the Church is the Lords
peculiar select treasure, though all the earth be His besides: how great
therefore is he that has not the Lords dearest possession excepted from him?

Secondly, Obs.
for our selves, mark hence, What kind of Head is given us of God; even such
a one as is God with the Father, the Lord of all the Creature, the Creator of
Angels, eternal, the upholder of all the Creature. He it is that is made of
God the Head unto us His Church. So Ephesians. 1.22. Who is far above all
Principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, under whose
feet all the Creature is put, He is our Head; given of God.

Which does argue the exceeding love of the Father unto us, in giving us such a
mystical Head, an Head of pure gold indeed, if we may allude to those words of
the Spouse.

This must teach us to rest only upon Him as our Governor,

Secondly, there can be no ministerial head; for the work of ministry CHRIST
has bestowed not upon Popelike monachs, but upon Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians.
4.11.
Again, none is able to do these things which the nature of an head
inforceth, as to quicken us, to govern us by internal influence; which when
the Papists confess no man can do, why should they enforce an head under
CHRIST, as Kings have viceroyes under them: for a Lord Deputy can do what the
King in person should do; but no man can do what the Head of the Church is to
do. Again the Wife is next in authority to the Husband; the Church visible is
the spouse of Christ, not one man; but the whole Church has all authority next
to Him. Is it fit the Wife should be kept under the government of a flagitious
servant? such as the Papists grant Popes may be. Let us therefore take heed,
that while we set up other heads then Christ over the Churches, we do not
reject this glorious Head Jesus Christ from ruling over us: as the Israelites
when they refused that Aristocraticall government in which God ruled, and
would have a King like other Nations; the Lord charge them not only to have
cast off Samuel, but himself: and what is more foolish then to think it
needful to have a visible universal high Priest on earth, because CHRIST is
in heaven invisible to us touching His corporal presence? should the people of
Israel have erected another High Priest to themselves, when Aaron was at any
time in the Holy of Holies, where he was not visible to them? so we stand here
below in the entry, our High Priest is but gone into the Holiest Sanctuary, and
we though His Divine nature be with us, will set up another. Sooner shall the
heaven have two Suns, then the Church two heads: and though metaphorically one
may be said to be the Head of a Church, for the name of God Himself is thus
Communicable, yet in proper analogy none can be so termed: For then the Church
might be said His body properly; which is such sacrilege, as He, I think, in
whose forehead blasphemy is written dare scarce commit. A double head and a
double husband become not the Church: the latter is not for her honesty, the
former fitteth not to decency. Thus much who is over us.

2 Mark from this, Observe.
that He is called the Head of His Church; what near compassionate and
beneficial superiority or authority that is which Christ has over His Church.
He is the Lord of all Creatures, yea the hellish fiend must bow the knee to
Him. But He is not an head to every creature, if we take it in that proper
analogicall accommodation which the Scripture looks to in this term. The
head has the highest place and power in the body; but yet it is so intimately
conjoined with every member, so amiable and beneficial a superiority, that the
like cannot in nature be shown.

For first look at the head; it is by sinews and other ligaments straitely
conjoined to every member: so is Christ through the spirit of faith coupled
with us.

Secondly from this union the head comes to have a sense, if any part be
disturbed: so has Christ, He knows how to compassionate our infirmities;
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?

Thirdly, the head what ever it has, has in a sort for the good of the body.
The perfect comeliness of the head, is the ornament of that body whereof it is
the head; the body being but a deformed trunk if the head be remooved. Again,
the sense and motion which are originally in the head as a fountain, they are
derived from it to every member.

Fourthly, The head gives full direction to the other members: So Christ is
our glory; He quickens us, He gives us direction both inward and outward. We
see then that His superiority He has is most intimate, fellow-feeling and
commodious unto us.

Which first does let us yet farther see what cause we have of thankesgiving,
who are come into His kingdom, Pater then Rex Patriae, is greater: but to have
one who should so affect his subjects, as to condole with the poorest of them,
this were a miracle.

This must breed willing subjection to CHRIST our Lord:

This must strengthen our affiance toward CHRIST,

Mark, Who they are that have Christ so near, so beneficial to them, viz.
the Church; that is, such only who are truly faithful, who shall one day be
presented glorious in the heavens; such as shall at length have salvation by
Him. There are in the visible Church many who are by outward profession members
of Christ; but if they have not learned Christ as the truth is in Christ, they
shall be found not to be of His body; though they seem so a while. A glass
eye, may be so set into the head, that one would take it verily to be a
natural part of the head; yet it has but an external insition which art
affords, and is nothing less then the natural eye. So many are externally
by the Sacrament and external profession tied to Christ, which are not native
members, and have no spiritual combination with Him. Nay, if like some
temporisers thou do get some quicknance of the spirit of Christ, yet not such
as purifieth the heart, brings thee above all things to rejoice in Christ
Jesus; thou art not of His body, nor a true member having Him thy head; but art
like a wenne or warte, mole or such like thing, which has a life in the body,
but is no member of it.

Wherefore as you would have any benefit by Christ, wooden legs, but to be
living members, such as have Christ living in you, teaching you by His spirit
to think, speak and do all things: it is good being members of good
Corporations which have good endowments, privileges and Charters; but there is
not a body like to this, which has all the unsearchable riches of JESUS CHRIST
given it, in which only there is salvation.

That nothing is betwixt Christ and His body, and that all the Church is his
body; and every one in the Church a member of the body, not a substitute head
unto it. Where then shall we find the Pope? let him take heed, least while he
strive to be a secondary head, he do not deprive himself of room in the body
out of which there is no salvation. I know a Papist will say that the Pope as
he is referred unto Christ, is a member of the body; but as he is referred to
men subjected to him, he is a head under Christ. Answer, that every one is a
member, we read it, and therefore believe; that any one is a head to all but
Christ, we read it not, and therefore reject it. Beside, it is likely that
betwixt Christ and the visible Church, Saint Peter should have come in thus;
God is Christ's head, Christ of the Spirits with Him, and Saint Peter and his
successors, the Churches head: but this is no where found, yea the contrary;
God over Christ, Christ over the Church, the Churches above Cephas. Objection,
Emperors are for the people, yet not inferior to them. Answer, Emperors are so
for the people, that they are Lords over them; and the people are for them,
even their Subjects and bodies politic: but Saint Peter nor no Apostle are so
for the Church, that they are Lords of it, and that the Church is their Church
and body mystical; therefore they are so for the Churches, that they are
inferiors to them. Object. Was not Saint Peter and the rest immediate legates
from Christ, Churches were to obey? Answer. They had, yet their persons still
under the Church, and their work of Ministry not to domineere over the
Churches: the reason is because it was the message and order of the Churches
Husband, which was of authority above her, not their persons that did relate
it. If a man send one of his servants with a command to his Wife; the servant
when he has got this errand, is not a Lord over the Wife, but a servant under
her, though his message from her Lord is such which she may not gainesay.

Fifthly Observe, Obs.
the dignity of the faithful, and their near conjunction with Christ, they
are the body of Christ: not the natural body united to the second person, nor
the Sacramental body, but a mystical body; such who by force of Christ His
Spirit are knit to Him, and receive all things from Him proportionably, as the
body natural does from the head. Many other comparisons, as of Vine and
branches, Man and Wife, etc. do set it down; but none more lively then this
which is the oftenest frequented.

To show us the excellent condition to which we are brought; Christ's love: who
ever hated His own flesh? He that touches you, touches the apple of Mine eye.

This lets us also see the fearfulness of abusing the godly that are
truly faithful;

Lastly, Obs.
seeing Christ is risen from the dead: we must labor and strive thither also:
if a Captain has made a breach and entered the hold of the enemy; will not
the soldiers press after, and ambitiously affect who should get next him? so
we: Christ has led us the dance, and broke through the gates of death into
the City of God: we should affect to come after, as Saint Paul did; strive for
conformity with Christ in this point; both in the first and second Resurrection.

The third point is: Observe.
That Christ's Resurrection has special privilege above all others: for all
others before were not begotten from among the dead, because they were raised
up with mortality tending to death again: but our Savior Christ in that He
dyed, He dyed at once, not long to be held of it; but in that He is risen, He
is raised to live for ever, death shall no more have dominion over Him.

2 All other rose as private and singular men, not as public persons in the
name of other, making hope to all the dead of their resurrection; therefore
they were not the first fruits duly gathered, but like a singular ear of
corn by occasion more timely gathered. Now Christ is risen, as He dyed, not
for Himself only, but for all us: so Christ is risen in all our names; so that
as we all dyed in Him, so we all are raised in Him: as a Burgess of a
Parliament, what he does or speaks, it is in the name of the Corporation, who
does it in him. When God created Adam, He made all mankind, in as much as He
made him who was to be a Principle of natural generation to all mankind,
conveying life and being to them in their order: so when He raised Christ, He
raised us all, in as much as He has raised up a second Adam, a Principle of
spiritual regeneration, even of the first and second resurrection to all Gods
chosen in their order. Hence it is that Paul says, Ephesians. 2.6. We are raised up
in Christ, and set in heavenly places in Him; that Peter says, 1 Pe^ 1.3.
God has begotten us to that happy hope in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Lastly, He raised Himself, as who was the Lord from heaven, the quickening
Spirit: Destroy this body, and in three days I will raise it up. Great
therefore every way is the prerogative of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; even in regard
of that Nature which was dead, but now is alive: He was slain before the
foundation of the world; He is raised up as the hope, and forerunner of all
our immortality. Thou look at His death, as thy death, and against all guilt
of sin and terror of conscience threatening the Curse, do say, I have
borne the Curse in my Lord, Gal. 3.13.
made a curse for me: So against all terrors of bodily death hold this; I am
raised up in CHRIST, for He is risen in all our names who believe on Him. If
we believe that JESUS is dead and risen again, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
so also God shall bring those who are slept in Jesus (say to life eternal)
with Him.

VERSE 19. For it pleased the Father, that in Him should all fullness dwell.
NOw he comes to give a reason of the former, opening the fountain, where
the Man JESUS CHRIST found such grace, as that in Him all of us should be
redeemed; that He should be God in Person, over all creatures, yea, the Head
of His Church, filling all in all. Now the Reason is here set down to be the
good pleasure of God the Father. First, that the fullness of the Godhead (for
so it is best construed out of the second Chap. Verse. 9.) and not only that the
fullness of created gifts should dwell personally in this humane Nature, as a
Temple. 2. That this Person, God-man, should by the Sacrifice of Himself,
reconcile all unto God.

First then in general, we see; Obs.
That whatsoever the manhood of CHRIST is lifted up unto, it is the mere grace
of God, not the merit of the Creature. What could this Man do, which could
deserve this grace, that it should be personally united with God, and so lifted
up to be incomparably above all the Angels in heaven? And therefore Saint
Augustine does not doubt to make CHRIST the Sampler of GOD's free
Predestination; the free grace of God appearing in none so much as in Him which
is the Head of all. This CHRIST looks to in His members; Lord I thank thee
that thou have been pleased to reveile these things unto babes and sucklings,
and have kept them from the wise and learned: Even so (O Father) because it
pleased thee. Yea, I doubt not, but as God did predestinate him of grace to
this honor of being God in fellowship of Person, and of being the Prince of
our salvation: So God in the Covenant He did make with Him, and the
commandment He gave Him of laying down His life, did strike it, and fulfill
it of grace, not requiring any thing He imposed on His Son more than duties
of free obedience, which should of grace have that acceptance, and the glorious
fruit which followed upon them; and therefore the Scriptures, yea, CHRIST
Himself referres all those benefits to God's grace, which upon the death of
CHRIST are given us. For it was the fatherly love of God, which made Him
pleased in the death of His Son, and smell a savor of rest: not that the
merit of His death did extort so much derigore justiti^. And truly that the
second Person should ever be so joined to our Nature was unspeakable grace: the
Nature of Angels more excellent than ours, found not this favor; He took not
the Angelical Nature, but the seed of Abraham. If a King do but light and
rest Himself in some mean Cottage, it is no small favor: But for the
immortal God to dwell by indissoluble bond of union personally in such an
house of clay as our Nature is (sin excepted) it is grace that cannot be
comprehended: The greater, if we consider how that God full of all Majesty and
glory, by His incarnation, thus dwelling in the form of a servant, did empty
Himself, by vayling under this flesh the brightness of His glory.

We are then hence to learn; God's grace, and with CHRIST to rest in this;
Father it has pleased thee to give me CHRIST, this or that benefit in CHRIST,
yea, to do all both in me and CHRIST my SAVIOR, to the glory of thy rich
grace: all must come hither, God has made me good in His eyes for this or
that. As for the Papists merit, even in rigor of justice, not only in
gracious fidelity, it is prejudicial to God's grace, I think, not to be found
between the Father and the Son, much less betwixt our God and us, with whom
it were woe, if all our merits were not free mercies. This in general.

Now for the matter affirmed, which first is the Qualification of the Person to
be a Mediator. 2. The work of mediation, touching which, 3. Things must be
opened.

1 How we are to conceive of the Person here spoken of in Him. 2 What is meant
by all fullness. 3 What is meant by dwelling.
For the first, Son as Man; as of the Person of CHRIST, as incarnate: the
reason is, because the Son of God, absolutely considered as the second Person
in Trinity, has all fullness; not by voluntary dispensation, but by natural
necessity; in as much as the eternal Father, never was nor could be without
His eternal Son, God with Himself; this thing never was in the power of His
free will.

For the second, Christ His Person a threefold fullness: The first
fundamental; the other two following, as derived from it.

The first is the fullness of the divine Nature, which does personally dwell
with that Manhood in Christ: whence it comes to pass, that this Man is
truly called God, that is, the Manhood taken into fellowship of the
selfe-perfect and eternal Person of the Son of God; so that it is become as
a part of His Person.

The second fullness is the fullness of Office; to which even Christ Man is
called, of being our Mediator, Priest, Prophet, and King: For in regard of his
humane Nature now united to the second Person, He is as Man called to be the
Christ of God, that is, Anointed.

Thirdly, the fullness of created or habitual graces, wherewith the divine
Nature does fill the soul of Christ; which are not the divine Properties, but
effects which the Godhead works distinct from it; as the soul gives the
body a life, which is not the life wherewith the soul lives (for then when
the body dies, the soul should die likewise) but is an effect of it. Now all
of them may be here understood, for they are all antecedent qualifications
fitting him for this work, which in the next words is mentioned, especially
the first.

Now for the dwelling of all fullness in Christ Man: viz. the Godhead, does
dwell in Christ Man, not as in the Saints, 2 Cor. 6.23. I will dwell with you,
you are the (...), the habitation of God, of God by the Spirit; the Temple of
the HOLY GHOST, which is only a dwelling by relation of love and communion of
the effects of it in grace; nor yet as God dwells in the glorified Saints, 1
Cor. 15. when God shall be all in all, which is likewise a dwelling together in
regard of abundant love manifested in the gift of glory; nor any such simple
cohabitation; but it dwells with this manhood as with a Nature which is
taken to Unity of Person in the Son of God, and so is through grace become of
the substance of the second Person; So that He is now as truly said to be Man
also, as before He was said to be God only: Now then the sum is; Christ as
Man, or the Manhood of Christ has the second Person of Trinity, God with the
Father and Spirit dwelling personally in it; So that this Manhood is
essentially and substantially coupled with the Deity in unity of one
selfeperfect and eternal Person.

Secondly, it is anointed with fullness of Office and of Created gifts; that
Christ God-man, that every way filled, might be a fit Person to work our
reconciliation following, and to be an Head replenishing His Church, which went
before.

First then from the matter we see, what an all-sufficient Head we have: Look
to thy Nature in heaven. Such a man as has Plenitudinem Potestatis, in regard
of office, full of all habitual graces, which our nature can receive, far
above all Angels, yea, full of that never drying Fountain of life, grace and
glory; it being taken into one Person with God, neither could he else be an
Head quickening His Church. He that must fill all the blessed Angels and all
the redeemed peculiar people of God, had need to have the Fountain of life
residing in him.

Which does both refute that presumptuous usurpation of the man of sin,
Christ could not be our Head, were He not God as well as Man.

As also it teaches us our duty,

As likewise it teaches where to offer praise for the measure of grace we have
received; we should be affected as receivers, in thankfulness to GOD, in
humility toward men; For what have we that we have not received?

Lastly, this is very comfortable, for if there be such a fullness in CHRIST,
then what though there be abundance of sin in us and guiltiness, yet there
is a fullness in Him to remove it, and take it away; a fullness of mercy to
hear our supplications, a fullness of merit to make a full atonement for our
foulest sins, a fullness of favor to prevail with His Father in any
request; if therefore there be such a fullness in Christ as there is, be not
discouraged: though thy sins abound, yet his grace abounds much more, they
cannot be so out of measure sinful, as he is merciful. Remember but the two
metaphors in Scripture, I will scatter your sins as a mist: I will drown them
in the bottom of the Sea. Now the Sun, by reason of his force, can scatter
the thickest mist, as well as the thinnest vapor: and the Sea, by reason of
his great vastness, can drown mountains as well as mole-hils. So CHRIST, by
reason of the great vastness of grace that is in Him, is able, yea, forward
and willing to forgive the greatest, as well as the least sins; For mercy
though it be a quality in us, yet it is a Nature in God; now that which is
natural, there is no unwillingnesse nor weariness in doing of it, as the eye
is not weary of seeing, the ear is not weary of hearing: therefore though our
sins be never so great and many, His grace is all-sufficient for the pardon
of them. Now I beseech you take not this exhortation in vain; for there is
nothing more effectual to heal a rebellious disposition, and to cause a sinner
to change his course, than to be fully persuaded that he shall be received to
mercy, and that his sins shall be forgiven him in Christ. Therefore let this
fullness of mercy in Christ be an effectual motive to us all to come in, and
to give up our selves wholly to Christ, to serve Him with perfect hearts all
our days.

Secondly, Obs.
mark, Into what glory our nature is exalted, that God should dwell personally
in our nature, and take it to Himself, so as to be of the substance of his
Person: It is an unspeakable dignity; all the conceits of men and Angels put
together, cannot devise an higher exaltation of it: See what love the Father
has showed us, 1 Ioh. 3.1.
that we should be called the sons of God; having the title and thing through
grace of adoption; but that our Nature should be made the true Natural Son
of God, of the substance of His Person, what admiration is here sufficient?
Which must be taught diligently to the people, for this is the rock to see the
Son of God, God with the Father blessed for ever, Personally existing in this
our Nature which He has taken unto Him: to see God dwelling in this His own
soul and bodic no less now through free grace of His Person, than my soul
and body are of mine. This is the rock against which Hell-gates cannot
prevail, this is the only rock of Israel. But there is place of speaking
more fully of this in the next Chapter.

VERSE 20. And by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself, and to set at
Peace through the blood of His Cross both the things in earth, and the things
in heaven.
NOw follows the benefit: he had said before, In Christ we had pardon, and
were received to favor: Now he shows the ground of this, viz. It pleased
God, as to qualify the Person of Christ in manner abovenamed; so to do it,
to this end, that we might by Him be reconciled: The benefit is first simply
propounded, then applied: The simple propounding has two parts: 1 The thing to
be done by Him; To reconcile all things to Himself. 2 The manner of doing in
those words, Pacifying all things by His blood.


Mark first in the coherence; Observe.
What gave occasion to the incarnation of the Son of God, viz. our enemy like
estrangement from God. We see here that to the intent God might reconcile us,
He calls His Son to be a Mediator: Evil manners give occasion, as we say,
to good laws. You know what brought forth first that secret of the Gospel,
The Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: Genesis 3.
This is the nature of God, to bring light out of darkness, to overcome evil
with good: As there is nothing so good which the Devil will not draw evil out
of; as when he perverteth this grace shown in Christ, to become a cloak of
wantonnesie; which Gregory observing, exclaimeth, O foelix flagitium! and
indeed the event to the faithful is happy; but we must not take heart to do
evil, that the miracles of grace might be discovered: you know what the
Apostle says; Shall we sin that grace may abound? Romans 6.^
God forbid; though the Physician restore life with poison, none will therefore
eat it who is wise; but let us express the virtue of our heavenly Father, who
has called us out of darkness into His mavelous light; and learn out of
evil to do good, and to wound the Devil with his own weapon.

Secondly mark, that whereas we were the offenders, and should have sought to
God, He does, when we go on in our enmity, seek out a way to reconcile us.
Observe then, Obs.
How God follows froward man, He had never done but good by us, we had
revolted to the devil from Him, highly provoking Him, yet see He seeks us. O
gracious Shepherd of souls, that come down from heaven to seek stray
souls; that are as willing to wander as they wickedly strayed! God was in
Christ reconciling the world, you never heard the world first sought Him; mark
it, for it sets out His love, He is feign to love us first, and to overcome
our peevish wickedness with love, or we should never leave our enmity.

It teaches us our duty, rebuking the pride of many, God should have stood on
such nice terms with you? Let us overcome evil with good; do good to those
that hate you, Seek Peace, and follow after it, when through peevishness of
men she is running from you.

Thirdly mark, Obs.
That Christ must have the Godhead first dwell personally in Him, before He
can take up the matter betwixt God and us. Whence note, what it is that makes
the death of Christ accepted for all our reconciliation, even this, that He is
not bare man, but God also. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
Himself; who not being God durst have ventured on this work? 1 Samuel 2.25. If
man offend, the Judge can determine; but if a man sin against the Lord, who
will plead for him? who could have endured the wrath which was to be borne,
before atonement could be made? whose death could have been a sufficient
pacification? the Scripture does hold out this with emphasie; God has redeemed
us with His blood: Act. 20.28 Tit. 2.14.
the great God has given Himself for us, to redeem us and purify us to
Himself a peculiar people Zealous of good works. Romans 8.
It is God that Justifies.

Which does first serve for confutation of the Papists, Christ God-man, yet
will have His sacrificing, praying, etc. only to come from His humane Nature;
whereas all the efficacy comes hence, that the divine Nature, and the humane
are conjoined, as the body to the soul, the humane nature being but an
instrument to the divine: neither is it absurd that the same Person who as God
is to be prayed unto, should as God-man pray to Himself, as God absolutely
considered with the Father and spirit: for Christ susteyneth a double person,
one as God absolutely considered with the Father and Spirit and offended by
man, as they; another as God-man undertaking to reconcile man offending to the
Father Himself, and the Spirit offended.

This does teach us what we must look at in Christ: God, who goes between us
and God; this does still the conscience, and fill it with good hope. When we
have offended some great personages, if some mean one should moove them in our
behalf, it would not so stay us: for we know they will often not hear them
speak; or have them in light regard, if they do give them the hearing; but if
we can procure such as are their peers to deal effectually for us, we doubt
not but that things shall be well compounded; what will they deny to such as
shall be equal to themselves, and most nearly acquainted with them? so with
us, etc.

Now in the coherence it self these things being marked, come we to the
action it self, where are three things.

1 The reconciler, by Him. 2 The thing to be reconciled. 3 To whom these things
were to be reconciled, to Him: which is to be supplied out of the ver, before,
where either (...), indefinitely, or (...), may be understood: out of the
first and third circumstances, we gather these things jointly.
By Him: Obs.
Observe hence; Who is the worker of our reconciliation with God; even this
dear Son: the Father testifies from heaven, saying; this is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: So Romans 3.25. Him has God set forth (speaking
of Christ) as a reconciliation, as a propitiatory sacrifice in which He would
return into favor with us. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
Himself. The Father and the spirit reconcile us to themselves, but by Christ;
Christ immediately by Himself does procure us favor: and this was it which
all the attonements made by propitiatory sacrifices did presignify unto us;
even how this High Priest Jesus Christ should with the sacrifice of His blood
make God and us one again in mutual love, as He and His Father are one.

Which does let us see what we must look to in all terrors of conscience
caused by apprehension of God; wrath, even to Jesus Christ. He has with His
blood quenched this wild fire, for Gods wrath is a consuming fire. We with
screenes do keep the fire from face and eyes; but they are wise which put
between their souls and Gods wrath this screene of Christ His reconciliation,
least this fire burn to the pit of destruction.

This must make us cleave unto Christ, Christ has healed worse things betwixt
God and thee, love Him with all thy soul. If one should interpose his
mediation to the King for some malefactor, say a Thief that has greatly
wronged some man in his estate; the King will say, out of justice thou must see
the damages done be made whole, and undertake that he shall leave that course
of life; else in justice and wisdom, I cannot but refuse the suite: even so if
Christ had not given such satisfaction as was accepted and undertaken, to kill
the reign of sin and enmity against God for the time to come; this blessed
reconciliation could not have been concluded.

The use of it is to stir us up, God reconciled to us, to make sure that our
sin is covered, and that there be no enmity raging in our hearts against Him
for hereafter. As he said to Iehu, peace Iehu? he answered, how can there be
peace whiles Iezabels fornications are not revenged? Say thou to God in thy
enemylike courses, not subject to his commandments, art thou reconciled Lord?
He will say, how should I? thou have that uncovered in thee which makes all the
quarrel; for I cannot see iniquity so as to like of it, I am God that hate it.

This teaches us what is the true way of reconciling,

Mark, in what all our peace is grounded, the bloodshed of Jesus Christ: the
phrase is to be noted, by the blood of the Cross; by Him; the latter pointing
at the excellency of of His person, as the thing which made His bloodshed so
forceable. 1 Ioh. 2.7.
This purges all our sins says Saint John. This does work a death of
sin, our sinful life being crucified in Him and through Him; this makes way
for the Father of all mercies to exchange (and that without wrong to His
justice) His just wrath with fatherly favor, yea the conspiring Angels, with
the heirs of salvation, and joy they have in them, yea peace with all the
creatures; yea inward and outward agreement of man with man must hence be
derived: for what breaks down the partition wall; what kills sin in us,
but this alone? o precious blood that cryest not for revenge, but speak
better things then the blood of Abell! But here three things are to be laid
down for the clearing of this point.

1 The true order of our reconciliation. 2 What is meant by the blood of His
Cross. 3 Why the Scripture does attribute this every where to His blood and
external sufferings.
1 To the first, we are reconciled in this order: (1) All cause of inward and
outward enmity is taken away, the matter of enmity betwixt God and us being
sin; betwixt man and man, Jew and Gentile, the ceremonial law; now Christ by
His death did take both away: (2) This done away, God does lay aside wrath, and
is quieted toward us. God is said to smell a savor of rest in Christ's death:
so that He says, wrath is not in Me. (3) He does come to take us to grace, and
shows us the favor of a most merciful Father, and in this is perfect
reconciliation.

2 For the second, this phrase is a Synechdoche, blood is put for a bloody
death upon the Cross; and bloody death on the Cross does together note the
curse of the Law felt in His soul who endured it, Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us. Now
though Christ's intercession has His place in appeasing God, and other actions,
yet His death is chiefly named, because the force that other things have to
pacify God, is derived from this sacrifice, which Christ the Sacrificer
Himself offers. Again, He so often names blood, not to exclude inward
sufferings, but because this was more easily known being visible. 2. The
cursed manner in which it was shed, that is, how it was shed, so that His soul
did feel the wrath of God against sin, the curse of the Law, for in these
two stands the virtue and excellency of Christ's Passion.

This Doctrine is a looking glass to us, wherein we may see the heavy
displeasure of God against sin: God.

It lets us see CHRIST His love to us,

It gives us to understand in what precious account we are to have this
benefit; are bought, not with silver, and gold, but with the precious blood of
CHRIST.

Mark lastly, Observe.
the thing in which the Fathers were reconciled to GOD, it was CHRIST His
blood. for what spirits were at Christ's sufferings in heaven, which did need
reconciling to God by blood, but the sin of the just, who were dead in the
faith of CHRIST to come? Now as we see, they by the faith on this blood had
salvation, Acts 15.11.

How can they be said to be reconciled to GOD by Christ's sufferings, God before
He suffered?

This is said, Testament are said to be forgiven in Christ's death, Heb. 9.15.
because then that was done for which they were pardoned, though the pardon was
given forth before. 2. Because these things were now actually passed twixt God
offended and God man our surety and Mediator.

This lets us see how Christ has been in all times the only atonement
twixt God and us.

Lastly mark hence, Obs.
that the Fathers were in heaven before Christ's ascension: Psalm. 73. Thou
guidest me by thy counsel, and take me to glory. The Saints dying, go into
everlasting Tabernacles, now what is an everlasting mansion, never to be
changed, but heaven?

VERSE 21. And you which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your
minds were set in evil works, has He now also reconciled.
NOw He comes to set down this benefit with application to them unto whom he
wrote.

1 Making way to it, by remembering their former misery. 2 He mentions the
benefit applied in them with the manner of working it. 3 Opens the end of it.
4 By way of caution adjoyneth the condition of perseverance. verse. 22.
First then in general from the Apostle his example, note thus much: That we
must not only teach in general, Obs.
but apply in particular the things of the Gospel* So Saint Paul does every
where: the nigher they are brought, the more they affect. To tell a whole Town
there are privileges bestowed on it, does not so much move, as to tell them of
this or that household that such and such things are bestowed upon them. And
therefore that Sacrament which comes nearest, Take eat, this is my body
given for thee, it is most helpefull to particular affiance. Beside, such is
the infirmity of many of Gods Children, that if like a Nurse, you do not feed
them, putting the meat of their soul by particular application into their
mouth, you may famish them, at least keep them low in this heavenly grace.
Again, there is such an indiligent carelessness that we let them hang in the
air, unless they be brought the nearer to us: that which is said to every
body is said to no body, let it therefore be exemplary for our imitation.

2 Mark how the Apostle does call to their remembrance, what they had formerly
been taught: teaching us, Obs.
that we must not forget our miserable condition by nature: worldly advancement
makes mean ones forgotten, the Priest (as we speak) forgets he was
Clerk: but our spiritual dignity must therefore be with bearing in mind our
natural misery. 1 Co. 6.11.
Such were some of you, but now ye are washed, etc.

1 For this is a ground of meekness, it is like the Swannes black foot,
which when we behold, will humble us. 2 It stirs up holy groans,
O'miserable man that I am! Romans 7.24. 3 It is a good sallad, and makes Christ
with His benefits taste better. 4 It is a good spur to fruitfulness for the
time to come. Romans 6.19.
As you have given your members servants unto uncleanness, and to iniquity, so
now give your members servants unto righteousness in holiness. 5 Again, it
is the ground of a holy blush wherewith all must walk before God. Romans 6.21
What fruit had ye in these things, whereof ye are now ashamed?
We must therefore hear on this side, when we are told of our natural
estates: Gods mercy, to further meekness, and holy shame-facednesse in us.

Now for the particular, he sets down their misery two ways.

1 In regard of their external constitution, you who sometimes were strangers:
Supply it out of the Ephesians. 2.12. from the Common wealth of Israel* that is,
you who sometime were not so much as members with the Church by outward
profession and society, John says, they were amongst us, but not of us,
therefore they went out from us.) 2 In regard of their more inward condition:
partly standing in the quality and disposition of their mind, which is here set
down, enemies in mind: partly in conversation, in evil works; in which we
have set down.
What is a most miserable condition, viz. Obs.
not to be a member of Gods visible Church, to be a stranger to the societies
where Gods word is preached, discipline practiced, where those duties flourish,
to which the communion of Saints does tie us. They that are estranged from Gods
Church, can have no society with God: He is walking amongst the golden
Candlesticks, amongst His Saints only, where two or three are met together in
His Name, He is present among them.

As they have no acquaintance with God, so they are under the power of Satan,
Paul calls excommunication, the giving up to Satan: He that has not the
Church for his Mother, cannot have God for His Father: In a word, heaven and
earth the Eden and Paradise of God, is His Church: So that miserable is that
state: nevertheless this was ours sometime in our predecessors. We were all of
us alients from Israel, but God has kept us for happy times.

Let us therefore be thankful and bring forth fruits least he take away our
Candlestick,

Let us not leave our fellowship, from the communion of Saints, this is
lamentable indeed: being alients from this Common wealth of the Church, they
have nothing to do with the covenants of grace and of the Gospel; but
strangers from all means of salvation.

This lets us see that all true comfortable affinity, Christ only, and in
the Word and Ordinances: count all strangers that are not allied to us in Him;
count them forreyners that will not communicate with us in the Word and
Ordinances of GOD; strangers, as men of another Nation, though never so near
allied in Nature: and let our nearest society, fellowship, and acquaintance be
with Saints and holy Christians, in the word and ordinances, as our nearest
kindred; our spiritual brethren in CHRIST. Therefore Abraham after he was
called of GOD and sanctified, was commanded to come out from his kindred and
fathers house, to count them Aliens and strangers, to seek new kindred, a new
Nation of his own nature and blood, the generation of the righteous. Why
should we like prodigalls withdraw our selves from our fathers house, and bring
upon our selves, by such singular separations, this great misery, to be
estranged from them who are Gods true Israel?

Again he says, they were enemies in mind and works, affection, and action:
note hence: What is our estate by nature, Observe.
we are enemylike affected to God and His people: the wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God, Romans 8.
it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. In his Judgment,
he counts the things of God foolishness, in his affections he does not
savor them, he counts of His Commandments as a yoke intolerable, and
makes a tush at sincere obedience: so for the Saints, the righteous is an
abomination to the wicked. Gal. 4.29.
Were not the Jews a mocking in the mouth of the heathen? did they not
reproach them for their circumcision?

To let us see our selves: we have a law in our flesh rebelling against the law
of our minds; not enduring the spiritual obedience of Gods law. What is all
our love of this world: know you not that the amity of the world is enmity with
GOD? If a woman cared not for her husband, but were bent to the embraces of
other men, were she not enemylike affected to him? so we to God: what is enmity
if this be not? not to care for him and his ways, to incline and look another
way: for the Saints, they are our enemies as we think, and they are hateful
of all other to us: our spiritual frenzy like not them of all others, whose
presence does bind us in some sort.

We must labor to be changed, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Seek to GOD to put enmity against the seed of the Serpent, and to circumcise
thy heart, making thee love Him. Deu. 30.6.
Who ever hardened his heart against GOD and prospered?

Your minds were set in evil works:] By repeating the words from the part of
the sentence before, it teaches thus much: Obs.
What it is that makes discovery of this enemy-like affection, our naughty
actions, when we do that which crosses God's will; that evil work is the
trial of the inward affection; He that loves me, keeps my Commandments: he
that keeps them not, and says he knows me, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him. As the tongue is the interpreter of the mind, so is the action to the
affection. A traitor, we see, may be a traitor in heart and not in attempt; but
when his treason breaks forth in some disloyal action, then it is manifest
that he bare a traiterous heart: So it is with this inward corruption, when now
ripe, it practices the rebellion of it in the works of unrighteousness.

Which meets with such as will say they love God, God; but if we look at
their course of life, they leave the ways of God, and will have leave to walk
in their own ways: This is to give God good words, and speak Him fair, but
indeed to deny Him.

But we have no such intention in any thing we do.

If we through ignorance sinfully contracted, God, when we do, this mitigateth
not our offense. If one should make himself drunk, and after practice against
the life of the King and State, would this excuse him from being a traitor if
he say I had no such meaning in that I did, I meant the Kings person no hurt?

Lastly, mark hence, That men by nature are altogether occupied in evil
works; None does good, no not one, the thought of man is evil only, and
continually. It is strange how the natural man is devoted to his own ways,
which are all evil. He museth mischief on his bed, he sleeps not, if he
have not done his mind. For his mind is as meat and drink to him, and he is
fasting, not able to take rest when he has not effected it; He commits
sin, and does his own will with greediness, he hates to be reformed in
these ways. Finally, does not only do things evil, but applaudeth others
that do so with him. Which things may open this truth, that naturally a man
converseth, and makes a trade of evil works; for figs cannot be gathered
from thorns, nor an evil tree cannot do other than bring forth evil fruits.

We are no murderers, adulterers? etc.

There are two sorts of evil works: many things glorious in man's eye, are
abomination before God. Would not every one condemn such a course in a
servant, if he should spend his time, doing things that had no hurt in them,
but out of his own head, never vouchsasing to know his masters mind in any
thing; if he should do the things bidden him, but when his master would have
them done thus, he will do them after his own fashion: and when his master
says, do such things first and chiefly, after take these in hand, he shall
let the principal alone, and only be occupied in the other; were not this a
wicked course in a servant? This is the course of every honest natural man,
that is no more than honest world-ward.

To urge upon men the unrighteousness of their ways,

To show us the difference of one converted and not converted:

VERSE 22. Has He now reconciled, in the body of His flesh through death, to
make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in His sight.
HItherto of their former Condition. Now he having beaten them down in
remembrance of their misery, does raise them up in recounting GOD's mercy.
Observe hence in general: As we must look with one eye down to our
unworthiness, Observe.
so we must cast the other upon GOD's mercies to us. These two do well
together; the one corrects the other: so that both as wholesome purging
medicines without interlacing restoratives, will weaken too much. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Such were some of you, but now ye are washed, etc. Ephesians. 2.13. Now in CHRIST
JESUS, ye which once were a far off, are made near by the blood of CHRIST.
Tit. 3.3, 4. We also in times past were unwise, disobedient, deceived, etc.
But, when the bountifulness and love of GOD our SAVIOR toward man appeared,
etc. This is to be noted from this: that Paul does not show them their estate
of Nature alone; but being a bitter pill, does gild it over with annexing their
comfortable condition in CHRIST.

We must learn to compound these meditations, taking a course in remembering
our wretched estate; now refreshing our selves in recounting the blessed
benefits we have by CHRIST: as men will walk in some garden or orchard, or go
a while to some pleasant exercise, when they are wearied with bodily labors.

2 From this, that such are reconciled, Obs.
mark the free and large grace of God: if we had been enemies in heart only,
it had been much to find favor; but where we have made a trade of evil
works, and lived all our lives in open rebellion, how undeserved and how rich
is the grace which gives pardon. If the King do pardon one whose good will is
doubtful, and take him to grace, it is much: but when one has lived in making
attempts on his person, then to forget and to forgive, were more than credible
clemency. The love of God is seen in this, Romans 5.10
that when we were enemies, He gave His Son to reconcile us. It is the greatest
love that ever the sons of men enjoyed. 1 Ioh. 3.16.
Hereby we perceive the love of God, because He laid down His life for us.
Herein is love, not that we loved God; but that He loved us, 1 Ioh. 4.10.
and sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins. See how the holy
Apostle speaking of the love of God, still lays his finger upon the matter in
this: not in noble birth, in high Parentage, no, no, away with that carnal
plea, I hope the LORD loves me, why? because He has kept me to this day, and
He has given me wealth and health. No, in this it appears, that He died for
you; make this good to your souls. In the time of the old Law, there were as
it were some shadows and glympse of Gods love; but now CHRIST is come, the
Sun shines in his full brightness. The blessed Apostle who was almost as
near CHRIST's heart as his body, stands admiring at this love; So God loved
the world; as who should say, Ioh. 3.16.
so wonderful it is, I cannot express it, it even ravisheth my heart to
think on it; but so it was, that God should stoop to man, and Majesty to
meandness, and Heaven bow to earth. The Reasons hereof are diverse.

The first is taken from the Party that loved us, God blessed for ever: had He
sent to a poor man, in time of misery and poverty, honor or money, it had not
been such a wonder; but that he should send his Son, and that to die for us,
this is miraculous: It has bin heard that a man has sent a Pearl to his
friend, but this was never heard that any should send his whole treasury; but
God has not spared to send all His whole treasure. Coloss. 2.3. the Text
says, that in Him are all these treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Hear this
all you poor creatures that have any part in CHRIST: you complain you are
poor, comfort your selves in this, you have a treasure better than the best
gold in India, you have the treasures of heaven, how then can you be poor?
Consider this: when the least favor was too much for us, and the smallest
mercy more than we deserved or desired; yet God accounted the greatest favors
too little for us: earth He has given to us, and that is not enough; heaven He
has prepared for us, with the joy and glory thereof, and yet that is not
enough; He has sent His Spirit to guide us, His CHRIST to redeem us, nay, He
has bestowed Himself upon us, has laid down His life for us, that by His
death we might live.

As the person is incomprehensible, God Himself. The excellency of it
appears in two particulars: 1 In regard of the difficulty thereof: had the
Lord sent CHRIST to have been a King over us, or a Ruler among us, what a
comfort had it been? Should a King send one of his favorites to a poor
creature in prison, how would it comfort him? but to send his son, he would
think it unspeakable and transcendent love: The LORD JESUS has done much more
than this; He came down from heaven, where He sat at the right hand of God,
and is now blessed for ever, he suffered here by most wicked wretches the
cursed death of the Cross; that Blessedness it self should be accursed, that
Life it self should dye, that Glory it self should be ashamed, that
Happiness should become misery; Nay, yet to go further, that He should be
content to lose for a time the sense and feeling of the love of His Father, not
only to forsake His being, but thus to be tormented for a company of traitors;
He that bare up the whole frame of heaven, was scarce able to bear the burden
of our sins, but was even crushed under the weight thereof, in that He was
forced to cry, My God, my God, Psalm. 22.1.
why have thou forsaken me? It Is true as He was a Son, He was always beloved;
but as He was a surety, He was not so; if this be most free love and large
grace, judge you. 2 Add to this the good of the work, it is that which gives
good to all other goods, so that without this we never had enjoyed any good
truly good. There are two things that hinder our good: 1. The poison of sin
that defiles us, and poisons all the creatures. 2. The just anger of God for
our sin, and that curses all; had not CHRIST dyed, these would never have
been removed.


Consider the unworthiness and baseness of those for whom He dyed. mercies;
I may say of CHRIST, what Saul of David, Who finds his enemy and stays him
not? but who finds his enemy and dies for him? Had He dyed for Angels, it had
been no great wonder, but for a Son to dye to redeem a slave, to pardon a
traitor, to free a rebel, this is unspeakable.

To show the abundance of grace, Where sin abounds, grace abounds much
more, Romans 6.2.

To show us presidents of mercy, Paul says of himself.

Here we have matter of admiration, David call earnestly upon thy soul to
praise the Lord, Psalm. 103.1.
Praise the Lord O my soul; again and again, awake O my soul and praise the
Lord; when we have done what we can, it is not enough, oh that we could do
more when we have done what we can, call upon the Angels for help, Praise the
Lord all ye Angels and hoasts of the Lord. Let a poor soul go aside and
think with himself, Good Lord, how comes this, that the Lord Jesus should dye
for me? if it had been a creature, or an Angel that had done it, it had not
been so much; but a Son, the beloved Son of God to do all this! heaven and
earth, Angels and men can never sufficiently admire this.

If this be so, God's love is so great to us, Brethren what will ye do now for
God? I will say nothing, your hearts shall speak: Has CHRIST done thus for
me? then I will labor to walk answerably to his love, and in some measure
worthy thereof; that is the right use. Had a man but common reason, or good
nature in him, he must needs think it a vile thing to be a traitor again to
that God that has been so merciful to him. Be not content sometimes when the
fit takes to stumble upon a good duty, but think all too little for Him, that
thought not His heart blood too little for you; be frequent in prayer, and
abound in holy duties, live no more to your selves, but to CHRIST. CHRIST dyed
for us; But wherefore? that we should live in sin still? No, but that we
should dye to sin, and live henceforth not to our selves, but to Him: Nay,
says he, the love of CHRIST constraines me: Most mercy requires most duty,
the greatest kindness asks the greatest thankfulness at the hand of the
receiver. It was that which Moses pressed upon the children of Israel, to
remember always to praise the Lord for His goodness, that had so miraculously
delivered them from the hand of the Egyptians, and carried them through the red
Sea: Oh how much more should we praise Him for this? that He not only redeemed
us from Egypt, but from Hell, not only from Pharaoh, but from Satan?
therefore above all admire this, and yield your souls and bodies, and all you
have, wholly to the service of the Lord: when any temptation violently presses
in upon you, speak to your hearts, and tell them, as sometime the Apostle Paul
did the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Know ye not, that your bodies are the
temples of the HOLY GHOST, which is in you, and that you are not your own? as
who should say, ye know it full well, that ye are not your own, ye were bought
at a dear rate, even with the blood of CHRIST; why then do you follow sin,
and serve your lusts? for shame away with this ill dealing, and give every man
his own: let GOD have His, and the Devil his: down with this hatred and
Pride, send them packing to the Devil from whence they came; and resolve to
say thus, if sin press in upon you: I am not mine own, the Lord has bought
all, and therefore He shall have all. Say to Satan, I am pressed to serve the
King, I have received presse-money at the hands of the Lord Jesus Christ;
therefore be gone.

Imitate Him, Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you.

Not to despair of Gods grace for others without,

To assure us that He will not fail us,

Now for the Particulars in this benefit repeated: 1 He sets down the fact
of reconciling us. 2 The instrument, in the body of His flesh, that is, His
humane Nature; a Synechdoche. Heb. 5.7. In the days of His flesh He offered up
strong cries to God. For this our Nature is an instrument personally united,
wherein the second Person works, and by which, as by a conduit, He conveyeth
our spiritual life. 3 The manner, by death. 4 The end of this our
reconcilement, that He may present you holy etc. that is, Pure: for holiness
is nothing but an universal godly pureness; then negatively, by denying any
remainder of spot or corruption inherent which dwells in us.


From the end mark thus much: Obs.
That every one who is come to find sin forgiven in Christ, shall one day be
made glorious before Him: This is thus gathered; Christ does reconcile us to
God, to this end that He may present us glorious before Himself: Now either
Christ must be frustrate of His purpose, for which He spends no less than
His blood, or else all true believers reconciled to God through Christ His
blood, for this purpose shall obtain this end in due season. Which is so
certain, that Saint Paul doubts not to affirm, according to the
prophetical manner, Such whom He has justified, He has glorified; because
he has begun it in the work of grace, and will not leave till He have set
them with Christ glorious in the Heavens. See Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Christ gave
Himself for His Church, that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water, by the Word, that He might present it to Himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be
holy and without blemish. If we buy a thing at a dear rate for this or that
purpose, will we when the thing is bought and paid for, not use it to that
end? it must be because we were not provident enough to see the best use, our
after-thoughts proving wiser, or because some difficulty comes betwixt us,
which we cannot overcome, or that we are inconstant, or that we did purpose it
not absolutely, but conditionally, which condition was out of our hand, in the
power of another: But for inconstancy, impotencie, or improvidence, who dare
ascribe them to the only wise, eternal and unchangeable God? Would a man with
all his substance procure himself contracted with purpose of marriage, and when
he had brought it hither thus dearly, leave her then, and not take her to
house? Shall God with His blood bring us to be contracted to Him by faith, get
His Fathers liking through Him, and shall He not when the Father and all is
pleased, take us home to dwell with Him where He is? This shall suffice to show
the truth of it.

Now for the manner of it: Thou must know then that for good purpose, it is an
ancient custom, that Contracts go before marriages, both to try the
constancy of the couple, to increase their mutual desires; after a certain
time thus passed, they are publicly presented one before the other, and the
man takes the woman home to house: Thus it is with the Lord Jesus; He is
contracted to us, but yet to try us how we will hold to Him, and because our
wedding garments are but in making, He stays till He come to Judgment, and
then all being finished, we shall be presented before Him, and be taken to
house, even those heavenly mansions with Him for ever.

VERSE 23. If ye continue, grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have heard, and which has
been preached to every creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am a
Minister.
THere follows now an exhortation to perseverance, delivered conditionally,
If ye continue, etc. Where first it may be demanded, whether we be not
reconciled to God absolutely and freely, without any condition of persevering?
Whereunto I answer; that if you look to the cause of our reconciliation, we
are reconciled freely and absolutely by the blood of Christ, not by any thing
in us past, present, or to come, and our reconciliation has always
perseverance joined with it: But if you look to the proof and trial of it,
whereby we know who is reconciled, and who is not; then reconciliation has
with it a condition of persevering and continuing, that is, no man is
reconciled, but he continues. So that perseverance is a condition not causing
reconciliation, but proving it.

Observe hence, Obs.
Whosoever is partaker of the benefit of reconciliation by Christ, must
persevere founded and established etc. and whosoever continues not, but is
removed from the hope of the Gospel, has no portion in this reconciliation by
Christ. Mat. 24.13
He that continues to the end shall be saved. To him that overcommeth I will
give a crown of life. Rev. 1.10.
As the Israelites that desired to turn back into Egypt, though they came
out of it with joy and gladness, never entered into the Land of Canaan; yea,
Genesis 15.17.
Lot's wife that did but look back with a mind set upon the riches and
pleasures of Sodom, is left as a fearful example unto all revolters. Let us
therefore cast our accounts beforehand, and beware that we be not removed
from our profession.

But what need we to be admonished or exhorted hereunto, it is not possible
that the Elect should be seduced. Matthew. 24.


This doctrine of the certainty of our continuing, God has promised never to
destroy the world again by water, but that there shall be seed-time and
harvest to the end of the world; shall we not therefore sow nor reap our
corn? When Saint Paul was in danger of shipwreck, the Lord promised by an
Angel, Act. 27.31.
That not a man among them should be lost; yet when the mariners would have
left the ship, he cried out, except these men stay, ye cannot be safe.

Now two things are requisite to make us continue, viz.

1 A steadfast purpose of heart to cleave to God, Act. 11.23. 2 A diligent,
constant, and religious use of the means.
Who so observes these two things, shall never fall; contrariwise, who so
fails in either of these, can have little hope to persevere. For first, what
likelihood he shall continue, who has not so much as resolved with himself so
to do?

And secondly, how little worth such a resolution is, without a careful use of
the means, may appear by the example of S. Peter, who having a strong
resolution not to deny CHRIST, yet fell into it for want of using the means,
in a very gross and shameful manner. And this resolution and use of the
means, is that in effect which the Apostle teaches and requires in the two
words following, where he shows the cause and means of this continuance, by
two comparisons: The first is taken from the foundation of an house, grounded
or founded, teaching that a wise builder first seeks a good ground, and
lays a sure foundation, and there builds boldly and safely upon it; For
though the winds arise, the rain falls, and the floods beat upon the house,
yet it falls not, Matthew. 7. So must we do in the matter of our profession.

Let us be sure therefore we lay a good foundation, etc. all and every of these
things will surely fail us: but let us so hear and learn and be moved with
that we hear, and make conscience of it, that if it cost us all that we have,
yet we never shrink; that if our Teachers themselves should fail or fall
away, yet we shall stand.

The second is taken from a seat, We must be settled and established.
or any thing surely seated or settled and established in any place. That which
is in motion, or stirs to and fro, is easily moved: but we must be in our
profession as men settled and established, that every of us may say, here I
stand, or rather, here I sit, here I am settled and established, and that by the
hand of God Himself, and therefore it is impossible, that any fraud or force,
craft or cruelty of man or Angel should remoove me hence.

Expressing and declaring this by the contrary, he says, and be not remooved
from the hope of the Gospel: meaning the life and glory which the Gospel
promises and teaches us to hope for; thereby teaching: Obs.
That they that suffer themselves to be remooved from their profession, give
over the hope of their salvation. For what hope of life remains when we
forsake that which quickens and gives us hope?

This Doctrine of the Gospel, he commends, The Gospel has been preached
through the World.
by the large extent and spreading of it, affirming that it has been preached
to every creature under heaven; that is, to all Nations, Jews and Gentiles,
and to all sorts, and sexes, Noble, base, Learned, or unlearned, bond, or free,
whereof see before. verse 6.

Finally, he adds, whereof I Paul am a Minister, Obs.
both because he was a special instrument of this large spreading of the
Gospel, where of see Romans 15.15, 16. and that he might hereby take occasion to
commend his Ministry and labors, which he does from this place to the third
verse of the next Chapter, to make way for that which there he begins to
speak, concerning the errors crept in among them. Now in that he says he is a
Minister of the Gospel, which is common to all other Ministers since CHRIST
His resurrection: he teaches; that the matter or subject which the Ministers
of Christ are to treat of, and to deliver to the people, is the Gospel and
nothing but the Gospel, and therefore not opinions and constitutions of men,
etc. I deny not but they may lawfully publish some such things upon occasion,
which yet should be done very sparingly.

VERSE 24. Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.
THe sum of this verse is this: that the Apostle having answered that which
might be objected concerning his sufferings, commends his Ministry to the
Colossians: the parts are two.

1 An answer to that which might be objected touching his sufferings. verse 24.
2 A commendation of his ministry. ver. 25.
Minding to commend his Ministry to them, to make way to that he had to teach,
he first prevents that which might be objected against the same.

This is so far from derogating any thing from me or my Ministry, joy and
do rejoice therein; for thereby I make supply of the sufferings of Christ, and
that for the good of the Church in general and of you particularly. Wherein
first observe: Obs.
That it is no new thing for the ministers of Christ to be afflicted for the
Gospells sake. The Apostle was seldom in any other condition; the like was the
state of other Apostles and of the Prophets that were before them, and of all
other sanctified Ministers. The Disciple is not above his Master, and all that
will live godly in Christ must suffer persecution; then much more they that
teach men so to do: yea this is so ordinary to faithful Ministers, and so
usual a companion to their faithfulness, that a man may worthily doubt of
that Ministers faithfulness, that finds not this entertainment in this
world.

They are therefore men either of weak understanding,

It is their peevishness, want of judgment, and discretion, etc. that is the
cause of their trouble.

There may be some such fault in some, Paul and other the Apostles and
Prophets, yea and CHRIST Himself? were they peevish? It is therefore some
other thing that is chiefly the cause of Ministers molestations, even the
inveterate hatred of the old Serpent and his brood.

It is for instruction, Iam. 1.2. My brethren, count it exceeding great joy,
when ye fall into diverse temptations. And Acts 5.41. Rejoicing that ye are
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for CHRIST. Indeed men ought not to be without
sense of their afflictions. How then shall they profit by them? Indeed as they
are Gods chastisements, they ought to be grieved at them, and humbled under
them. But the joy conceaved at the cause of them, and the honor God
vouchsafes to us in them, ought to swallow up, or at least overcome that
sorrow. Many are the reasons why we should rejoice in this kind of affliction.

But let us consider the reasons alleged by the Apostle in this place.

The first is, because therein he made a supply of Christ's afflictions. Christ
are not sufficient, but had need to be supplied and patched up by our good
works, doings or sufferings.

CHRIST and His members make but one Christ. Cor. 12.12. and therefore that
which they suffer He suffers. Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?
And He will suffer in His members, that He may be also glorified in them. 2 Timothy 1.11. Romans 8.17. It is therefore a very comfortable thing, to suffer for
the truths sake: And they that fly it by unlawful means, being called to it,
eschew their own comfort, and in seeking to save their life, shall loose it.

2 His second reason, is, because it is for the good of the Church in general,
and of them in particular.

Then the martyrdom of the martyrs in suffering,

The afflictions of the godly, Church, to the confirmation, comfort, and good
example of it: but as for merits, it neither needs any but the merits of
CHRIST, neither if it did, could they avail.

But the Papists that would wring these things from hence, are evidently
discovered to be blasphemers of God and of CHRIST His Son. The Apostle
opposes this everywhere. 2 Timothy 2.10. Therefore I suffer all things for the
elects sake, that they might also obtain the salvation which is in JESUS
CHRIST with eternal glory: 2 Cor. 1.6. whether we be afflicted, it is for your
consolation and salvation. And Phi. 1.12, 13. He wills them to understand, that
his sufferings turned to the furtherance of the Gospel: his bonds for Christ's
cause were famous in Court and Country; whereof there was this excellent fruit,
that many of the brethren were imboldened; and not as men would think
discouraged, and did more boldly speak the Word. Here therefore we are taught:
Observe.
that the Church loses nothing, but gains much, by the sufferings of the
godly, specially the ministers.

Which should encourage and comfort us greatly in our sufferings,

And here behold the admirable wisdom and goodness of God, defeating the
plots, and turning upside down the pretenses of the Devil and his cursed
instruments in their persecutions of the Ministers, turning that to the
singular good, comfort and confirmation of the Church, which they intend and
directed to their ruin and overthrow.

Here further observe: Obs.
That the Church is called the body of Christ; we are as nearly knit to Christ
as the body is to the head, so Ephesians. 1.23.

To comfort us who are so nearly knit unto Him, bone of His bones, and flesh
of His flesh. How can we perish if He be our head? or what affliction can
separate us from Him? Romans 8.

And ought not this to make us ready to suffer for the Churches sake,

VERSE 25. Whereof I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God,
which is given to me for you, to fulfill the Word of GOD.
HAving thus remooved that which might have been objected, he comes now to
the commendation of his ministry, wherein he sets forth: 1 The object and
causes of it, verse 25, 26, 27. 2 His diligence and faithfulness in the
execution of it, verse 28, 29.


The object of his ministry is here noted to be the Church, whereof he
says, of which Church I am become a Minister: In which words he resumeth that
he had said in the end of the twenty third verse: for the twenty fourth verse
is interposed to prevent an Objection.

The Ministers of CHRIST, Observe.
are the Ministers of the Church, which Church is the body of CHRIST, this
company of men, this selected and choice company, as the Word translated, the
Church, (...)
does signify such as labor in the work of the Gospel, and none but these;
these are given of Christ for the repayring and building up of the Church. Ephesians.
4.11, 12.


Wherein appears the great dignity of the Church,

It shows the great account Ministers ought to make of their people,

How unkind and unnatural a thing it is for this Church or any member of it,

The causes of his ministry are two, The efficient. The causes of his
ministry are two, The end.
The efficient is, the dispensation of GOD given him: Observe.
whereof the meaning is, that his Ministry was freely committed unto him by
the most wise and holy government of GOD, wherewith He governs His Church as
His own house, so much the Word (dispensation) signifies, and appoints His
Ministers as overseers and stewards thereof. GOD is the Lord, the Church is His
house, the ministers His stewards, the Word and Sacraments, the food and
raiment which they must from God minister to their brethren and fellow servants.

This should make the Ministers wise and faithful: happy is that servant, Mat.
24.46.47.51.
whom when his master shall come, shall find so doing. 1 Cor. 4.2. It is
required in stewards, that a man be found faithful. But if that evil servant
say in his heart, my master deferreth his coming, and shall begin to eat
and drink and to smite his fellows; the Lord of that servant will come in a
day, that he thinks not, and will cut him in pieces, and give Him his
portion among hypocrites.

And this should make the people diligent and dutiful in receiving their
spiritual food and raiment, Heb. 13.17
that they may do it with joy and not with grief; for that is uncomfortable
indeed to the minister, and unprofitable to the people.

Of this dispensation he says: That it was given to themwards, or for them.
His ministry doubtless was given for the use and behoof of the whole Church:
for his commission (as of the rest of the Apostles) was general, Go teach all
Nations, Mat. 28.20 2 Cor. 11.28.
etc. and he professes, the care of all the Churches lay upon him; howbeit
having now to do with the Colossians he applies it to them, affirming that it
was given him for them, as if it had been for them alone: teaching, Obs.
That the Minister should have such care of every part of his charge, as if his
Ministry had been committed to him for their behoof and profit only: and
that every one pertaining to a Ministers charge, every family and every person,
should make such use of their minister, as if he had received his ministry for
them alone. And great reason there is of this latter, especially seeing God
has so disposed, that the speech of the Minister reaches to every one in the
assembly, being within compass of hearing, as sufficiently and effectually, as
if there were but one person standing before him; so as every one may reap as
much profit as if GOD and His Minister respected none but him.

The end of his Ministry was to fulfill the Word of God, that is, to
accomplish the promise of God made concerning the exhibiting of CHRIST, and the
calling of the Gentiles; which God fulfilled by sending the Apostles to preach
CHRIST unto the Gentiles. Look Romans 1.1, 5. and Romans 16.25, 26. In regard
hereof the Apostles are said to have entered upon the Prophets labors, Ioh 4
37, 38.
and to have reaped that which they sowed, because they were sent to perform
and publish the performance of the things which God has promised by the mouths
of His Prophets. Hereby then we learn: That the Ministry, especially of the
Apostles (and consequently of Pastors and Teachers in a proportion) is
appointed of God; not only to deliver and publish the promises of God, but by
their ministry to perform and fulfill them.

Which serves greatly to commend our Ministry above the Ministry of the
Prophets.

It may serve to confirm men's faith in the promises not yet performed, which
we preach and publish;

VERSE 26. Even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from
generations, but now is made manifest in His Saints.
THis Word of God, that is the Gospel, he commends by the quality of it,
calling it a Mystery, as he does also, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.9. which is a word
borrowed from the superstition of the heathen, specially the Egyptians, whose
religion was called a mystery and a secret, because their religion was kept
hidden from the people and was known only to themselves, being expressed by
pictures of birds and beasts, so as the people might not understand it: wherein
the Papists agree well with them, who would not have the people acquainted with
their religion, but to depend upon their Teachers. Observe hence, Obs.
The Gospel is a mystery that cannot be attained to by any wit or learning of
man. All the Philosophers and wisest men, of profoundest learning, were never
able to discover these mysteries of the Gospel: they are such secrets as could
never enter into the heart of any man to conceive. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh: To know the
Fatherly nature, good will and mercy of God in CHRIST, to know the eternal
purpose and counsel of God to save us and bring us to glory, (us I say) that
are by nature sinners, rebels to His Majesty, for us to be reconciled to God;
here was a mystery to the world beyond all apprehension of men and Angels; that
Christ should be borne of a Virgin, that the eternal Son of God, the Lord of
life should suffer death, and be raised up again by His own infinite power,
that we should be justified by the righteousness of another, that these bodies
after a dissolution to dust, should be raised up in their numericall parts and
live again with God in glory etc. Well may we understand these glorious and
transcendent mysteries, but we cannot possibly comprehend nor conceive them;
but cry out, o the depth of the wisdom of God, etc.

Now the Gospel may be called a mystery in three regards.

1 Absolutely, because it is a thing of it self within the will of God, which
no creature by it self is able to know: if a thing within my mind be such that
no creature can know it, further then I make it known; none knows the things
in man, but the spirit of men: how great a deep and secret is that which is
within God Himself? Thus it ceased to be a Mystery, when GOD did first reveile
it. 2 But yet a Mystery still, in regard of the spare revelation and small
number of those to whom it is made manifest. For a thing is not only hid while
I keep it in my self; but while I show it only to some few persons more near
me, it is a secret matter still. If the King acquaint some two or three of his
most near favorites with a secret, it remains hid still, and a secret in
comparison of things commonly known. Thus was the Gospel a mystery when it
was made known to the people of the Jews only; but continued no longer a
mystery in this sense, when now it was notoriously published to all nations. 3
The Gospel is still a mystery when it is now divulged, in regard of those
whose eyes are not opened to see it, and their ears boared to attend to it; as
news so common every where, that they are no news, are still secret to such,
who being deaf, have never heard of them: thus it is at this day a hidden
riddle to many, Christians by outward profession.
No mervaile then to see so many men, Gospel; it is not every man's case to
understand a mystery, until the spirit of the Lord come: there is a veil over
our eyes that we cannot possibly discern the wisdom of God: Saint Paul was
quick sighted, no Cyclop, that held the truth in unrighteousness, but in all
the learning of the Pharisees very exact; yet he could not discern these
matters till the Lord pulled down the scales from his eyes, and shined to his
heart with a glorious light from heaven.

We see what we must impute our not profitting unto; Gospel are not dark in
themselves, but that they light into the hands of such dark expositors as we
are, in whom is nothing but darkness; so that we had need to pray with David;

Lord open mine eyes, Psalm. 119.
that I may see the wonders of thy Law.

We see what great cause we have to mervaile at the goodness of God toward
us,

Of this mystery, he says, that it was hidden from eternity and from all
ages. Observe.
Observe: The mystery of the Gospel was hid from all ages before Christ. Romans
16.25. and Ephesians. 3.9. Touching the Gentiles, Romans 16.25.
it is clear that this mystery of the Gospel was hidden altogether from them;
and concerning the Jews, although they had the Promises; yet both had them
obscurely shadowed in types and figures, and they saw not the performance of
them until Christ His time: therefore it was, that at first they made such
opposition to the Gospel; and when they began to submit themselves to it, and
embrace it, yet they could not for a good space conceive how it could be that
the Gentiles should be partakers of eternal life with them.

Secondly, That it was now made known, not to all but to the Gentiles, that
is, to those who being justified by faith in CHRIST, give themselves to the
study and practice of sanctification. Where appears, how greatly we are bound
to Almighty GOD, who has vouchsafed, Obs.
not to equal us alone with the Jews, His ancient chosen people: Us, I say,
who were profane and uncircumcised Gentiles, without CHRIST, aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, strangers Ephesians. 2.11, 12.
from the Covenants of promise, without hope, without GOD in the world, but
even to prefer us before them, giving us to see and hear those things, which
many Kings and Prophets among them desired to hear and see, but had it not
granted to them. O LORD, who were we, or our fathers fathers houses, or what
were their or our deserts toward Thee, that Thou should be pleased thus to
deal with us, and thus highly to exalt us? And shall we turn back again to
the ways of our former blindness? GOD forbid; yea, rather how ought we in
knowledge, faith and holiness, to exceed those before whom our gracious GOD
has so far preferred us? Here note the great privilege of the Saints to
whom GOD is pleased to reveal this mystery, passing by all other men, of what
degree or dignity soever. Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to
them that fear Him. The Sun shines and the rain falls upon other men;
but His mysteries He opens not, but to those that love Him, being before
beloved of Him.

But we see many wretched men understand the mystery of the Gospel,

Their knowledge is no knowledge,

To stir up to thankfulness and all holy endeavor to walk worthy of it:
Ephesians. 1.9. Having made known to us the mystery of His will, according to His
good pleasure, which He purposed in Himself.

VERSE 27. To whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory.
Unto this mystery of the Gospel now spread abroad among the Gentiles, he
ascribes glory; yea, riches of glory, that is, abundance of glory: thereby
teaching, That the Gospel preached among the Gentiles, Observe.
is not only a mystery, but a mystery full of glory. Even that wherein the
glorio^us power, goodness, and wisdom of God is set forth: For what power,
goodness or wisdom is any thing comparable with that which appears in man's
redemption? Verily all the glory of earthly Kings, wherein they set forth their
power, goodness, wisdom, is but a childish thing in comparison of this. Let
men therefore of shallow understanding, admire and magnify the glorious shows
and actions of earthly Kings: Let us admire and adore this mystery of the
Gospel among the Gentiles; and the rather, because we our selves are partakers
of it, and by it transformed into the Image of God.

This glorious mystery is set forth by the subject of it, Obs.
which is Christ; for Christ is the only subject of the Gospel. Whosoever and
whatsoever teaches CHRIST, teaches the mystery of the Gospel; and whosoever
teaches not Christ, teaches not the Gospel.

Of CHRIST he says, that He is among us Gentiles; Obs.
for so should this word, (...), be here rendered as it is immediately before,
among the Gentiles; for by the Gospel we have Communion with God and with
Christ his Son: 1 Ioh. 1.3.
He dineth, and suppeth, and lodges with us; we see, and hear, and feel, and
taste, and eat, and drink Him: How glorious then is the Gospel, by which
JESUS CHRIST is communicated with us? And how glorious is the Church? Even the
Temple of God. When Jacob going down into Mesopotamia, slept, and in his
dream saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven, the Angels ascending and
descending, and the Lord standing at the top of the ladder; being awakened, he
said, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I was not aware of it: So may we
say, surely the Lord is among us, even the Lord Jesus Christ, and we consider
it not.

Let us therefore put off our shoes from off our feet, for the ground whereon
we stand is holy ground: Let us sanctify our selves, for the Lord of all the
world is among us. And henceforth let us be ashamed to profess that we have
communion with Him, and yet hold fellowship with Him and sinners.

Let us also with comfort consider our dignity and honor, Son of God is, and
by Him the Father also is pleased to dwell.

And what then though we be forced to live among thorns and briars, Lord
Jesus Christ lives amongst us, and in us, by His Holy Spirit, and will be with
us to the end of the world.

This CHRIST he describes by His effect toward us, calling Him the hope of
glory; that is, He in whom, and by whom, we hope and look for glory: So, 1 Timothy 1.1. He is called Our hope. Observe.
CHRIST then is He in whom we look and wait for glory. God, which cannot lie,
has promised to give us further assurance of it, He has lift up CHRIST on
high, placed Him at His right hand far above all Principalities, etc. and
made Him partaker of His glory: When He shall appear, then shall we also
appear with Him in glory: this we wait and look for, this is our rest.

What then though reproach and shame befall us in this evil world? Yet a
little while, and He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Behold He
comes in the clouds, and His reward of glory is with Him.

In the mean time let us live as those that look for His glory,

VERSE 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
THe Apostle having commended the Gospel unto the Colossians, by the
excellencies ascribed unto it; that it is a mystery and a Secret, known only
of a few; then from the antiquity of it, hid since the world began; and from
the peculiarity of this privilege; only to the Saints, not to the rest of the
world, in respect of the saving virtue and power of it:

Now he presses his exhortation to embrace and receive it; and the rather we
should be induced hereunto, if we consider the cause moving God thus to deal
with us, viz. not for any thing in our selves, not for our worthiness, for our
parts, our wit, or wills, or any thing else, or any other creature; but merely
of His own good will and pleasure, to whom God would: What should move to make
this difference between men, seeing all naturally are in the same case and
condition? even his own will and good pleasure.

Hence observe: That the cause why the Gospel is revealed to us, and not to
others, is the will and good pleasure of God. So CHRIST says; Matthew. 11 25. I
give thee thanks O Father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes. Even so,
O Father, because such was thy good pleasure. Were it any dispositions
foreseen in men, then those should be called and taught, who were of the best
capacity and towardness, who were for civil carriage most unblameable; but
not many wise, not many of great wit, but babes and simples ones are called;
yea, Publicans and Harlots had these things made known to them, when
Philosophers and Pharisaicall Civilians were excluded. To show it in
particular, as it is a grace of God to give His Laws and ordinances; so it is
His mere Grace that they are bestowed on any, rather than others: This is
showed in giving them to Israel, who were worse than Tire and Sydon, than
Niniveh, than the Nations; I do not send thee to a Nation of a strange tongue,
Ezck. 3.3.
they would hear thee. Had these things been done in Tire and Sydon, they
would have repented. Niniveh repented at the preaching of Jonah, Lo a greater
than Jonah is here: Yea, God is forced every where to upbraid them with
stiffe-neckednesse, a neck of steel, with hard hearts, hearts like Adamant,
with brazen foreheads; yea, to call them a gainsaying and rebellious people.
Even as His pleasure carries rain to one place and to another; So He makes
His Ministers drop the Word of Wisdom amongst some, and not amongst other
some. Matthew. 10.6. Go not into the way of the Samaritans. So, Acts 16.7. Go
not whither thou intendedst, but into Macedonia. Now if man's outward teaching
be affoorded out of mere grace, how much more God, inward teaching; yea, His
opening the eye of our minds? As no reason can be given why one man's eyes were
opened, one dead man raised, rather than all the rest: So no man can give a
reason why these who now see and believe, should be made to see rather than
others.

This serves to confute those who think the Word to be given or deteyned
according to something in them to whom it is given, or from whom it is
deteyned, in them or their progenitors. But we have showed sufficiently, that
it is first sent amongst any freely, and if it be withheld from any, it must be
for their own deserts, or some who have been before them, parents to them:
not for their own deserts; for many of the heathen were not so hard hearted
and impenitent as the Jew; and for their Parents fault it could not be
withheld, unless we would make particular Parents to stand for themselves and
their Children; yea, some think that the inward teaching, which does so teach
that it changes the mind, that this teaching I say, is given to such whom God
does see as fit to work with it and use to this purpose: as a Captain sets
a man on a horse whom he does see will manage him well. But this does
presuppose a connaturall Correspondence in corrupt nature, to the supernatural
grace of God, and a power in nature to use grace aright, which has long since
been condemned as a Pelagian error, from these grounds; that we cannot do any
thing which profits to salvation, out of Christ, that we are not fit to
think a good thought.

Let us acknowledge Gods free grace that we have these things opened and
revealed to us; woe be to thee, thou were lifted up to heaven, but I will throw
thee down to hell.

What is the riches of the glory of this mystery] Unto this mystery of the
Gospel now spread abroad among the Gentiles, be ascribed glory, yea riches of
glory; that is, abundance of glory: That the Gospel preached is not only a
mystery, but a mystery full of glory. Even that wherein the glorious power,
goodness and wisdom of God is set forth: for what power, goodness or
wisdom is any thing comparable with that which appears in man's redemption?
verily all the glory of earthly Kings, wherein they set forth their power,
goodness, wisdom, is nothing in comparison hereof. The Gospel is not only
of great excellency in it self, but it puts glory and excellency upon all that
do sincerely profess and embrace it; it makes them to shine gloriously in all
their conversation before God and men: Pro. 4.8.9
so says Solomon; Exalt wisdom, and she shall exalt thee, she shall bring
thee to honor: if thou embrace her, she shall give thee a comely ornament
unto thy head, yea she shall give thee a crown of glory.

Let us then admire and adore this mystery of the Gospel;

This glorious mystery he sets forth by the subject of it, which is Christ;

Whence observe, what the maine subject, and substance of the Gospel is, it is
Christ. Whosoever and whatsoever teaches Christ, teaches the mystery of the
Gospel; and whosoever teaches not Christ, teaches not the Gospel.

Of Christ he says, that He is among us; for so should the particle (...) be
here rendered, as it is immediately before (among the Gentiles.) For by the
Gospel we have communion with God, and with Christ His Son.

Observe hence; That CHRIST dwells in His members, in all true believers: He
lives in them, He dines and suppeth and lodges with us; we see and hear, and
feel, we taste and eat Him. How glorious then is the Gospel, by which Jesus
Christ is communicated with us, and how glorious is the Church, even the
assembly of GODS people among whom CHRIST the Son of GOD dwells? For better
clearing of this point, I will show you what it is to have CHRIST dwelling in
us, viz. When He does exist after another manner then He did before; when there
are other effects then there were before; when He does show Himself kind and
favorable, when He does manifest His comfortable presence, as he did in the
Temple. It is seen in four particulars.

1 When as He comes into the heart to be there, He is united unto it and made
one with it. 2 He continues in the heart, where once he begins to dwell; and
that is the reason why we continue in the state of grace. 3 He delights in
us, he delights to dwell in the place where He dwells: For a man cannot
properly be said to dwell in a place, except he delight to dwell there. A man
may be in a prison all his life long, yet cannot be said to dwell there,
because he has no delight to be there, he would not be there, if he could
choose. 4 He is said to dwell in us, because he is so operative there, he
works efficaciously in all the parts and faculties of the soul: He dwells in
the soul as fire in the iron, He is in every part thereof.
If it be objected; how can Christ so dwell in us,

He dwells in us as the Sun in the house, of grace into our hearts; so that
though He be absent, yet He dwells there. By these effects Christ discovers
Himself to be in us.

But what do the Saints get by His coming?

Many special privileges and benefits come thereby:

1 Where CHRIST dwells, He makes that person glorious, He fills his heart with
glory; and this I take out of Psalm. 24.7. Be ye lift up ye everlasting deeres,
that the King of glory may come in. Where CHRIST comes into the heart, He
comes as a King of glory, He comes not as a man that is glorious, who keeps
his glory to himself, but He communicates His glory to us. And herein is the
difference betwixt CHRIST and an earthly Prince: When a Prince comes into a
house, the house is the same still, he keeps his glory to himself: But where
Christ comes, He changes the heart, he alters the house, He makes that
glorious; He beautifies and decks the soul with such excellencies as makes us
seem glorious to our selves, and appear so to others. So Moses face did
shine, because God did communicate His glory to him; now that outward glory was
a type of this inward glory, which Christ communicates to the soul of him in
whom He dwells.

Where Christ comes in, Psalm. 24. Be ye lift up ye everlasting doors
(speaking of the soul.) For Christ where He comes, He comes like a King, He
rules as a King, He brings His kingdom with Him: As Satan rules in the
children of disobedience; so CHRIST rules in the children of obedience; He
guides and orders the spirit the right way.

3 Where Christ enters in and dwells, He refreshes the heart, He comforts the
heart, He brings a great deal of joy with Him. So says the Prophet Esaias Chap.
57. Esaias. 57.^^.
Thus says the High and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is
Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of contrite ones.

Here are two benefits laid down, To refresh. To give life.


He does refresh the spirit of the humble, that is, when the spirit is drooping
and the heart is made sad and dejected, meditating upon nothing but fears
and dangers, then Christ comes into the heart and calmes all, sets all at rest,
brings tranquillity and refreshes the soul; even as a man that fears death,
is refreshed when a pardon comes. He fills the heart with joy where He comes;
as the Sun does bring light where ere it is present: and no more can a man
have Christ in his heart without joy, then he can have the Sun without light.
For He brings matter of joy with Him, He brings salvation with Him, as when He
came home to Zaccheus, He said, Luke 19.
this day is salvation come to thy house; and it Christ so say to any man, He
brings matter of great joy. Again when he comes, He brings the spirit of joy,
called the refore the joy of the Holy Ghost for where the Holy Ghost is, He is
full of joy. Again, where He comes, He brings His kingdom with Him, and that
conlists of joy; Romans 14.17.

4 Where Christ dwells, He gives life, He makes them living men: for He
dwells in His Saints as the Vine in the (...), and every man that is in Him
is a branch in the Vine: All the properties of life we have from Him: our sense
and motion is from Him: in Him we live and moove and have our being: from Him
is our life derived. He that has the Son, has life. 1 Ioh. 5.1^.
For as the old Adam did communicate corruption to us to make us active in
sin: So the second Adam does communicate grace and life to all that are borne
of Him, and therefore is called, the quickening spirit. For, as a man does then
live, when his soul comes into his body; So does the soul then live, when
CHRIST comes into the soul: and therefore He is said to be, the Resurrection
and the Life, for where He is, there is Life.

5 The last benefit is Defense, He defends those in whom He dwells, He is a
buckler to them, He preserves them from all crosses, at the least from the
evil of them. And herein is the difference betwixt CHRIST and other
Inhabitants: Other Inhabitants are defended by their houses, but He the
Inhabitant defends the house. And good reason, for though He dwell in our
hearts, yet, Psalm. 90.1.
He is our Habitation. This is excellently expressed, Esa. 4.5, 6. Upon all the
glory shall be defense; that is, upon all the people that are glorious: I will
be to them (says God) a Covering and a shadow in the day from the heat, and
for a place of refuge, and for a Covert from storm and rain. That is, You
shall be as men within doors, others shall be as men without doors. And the
Apostle says. 1 Cor. 3.17.
Him that destroys the Temple, him shall God destroy. For, it is His Temple,
and Christ will not suffer His house to be pulled down over His head, for it
is the place where He dwells; He will protect and defend them.

If you would therefore have a greater measure of grace comforting and
refreshing you, life and grace, then fasten your eyes upon Christ the
fountain. But it is your fault, you desire grace, remission of sins, and the
parts of Sanctification abstracted from Christ, we go to God and think not of
Christ: but get Christ into your hearts, get Him knit to you, and then you
shall receive grace from Him. Look as it is with a Wife in marriage of her
husband, she must not think of the Titles, wealth and honors that he brings
separated from her husband; if she do, it is an adulterous thought: but she
must first take her husband, and then take those things that are derived from
him: So let us first get our selves united with Christ, cleave to Him, live to
Him, get our hearts moove to Him in holiness and righteousness; and then
look for remission of sins, adoption and reconciliation, and every
particular grace from Him: If a man will have the treasure, he must first have
the field, he must not think to have the treasure abstracted from the field,
but first get the field, and then dig for the treasure: First get Christ in
whom are hid all treasures, and then receive them from Him. Remember still that
Christ must first dwell in your hearts: for although the spirit do immediately
act all, yet it is CHRIST. Labor therefore to be knit to Christ more and more;
and as you are nearer in union with Him, so He dwells more in your hearts. As
there are degrees of light from the Sun as it is higher or lower: So there
are degrees of Christ's Union and habitation, and of all the effects of His
cohabitation: labor therefore to get Christ into your hearts more and more.
How shall we do that?

1 Labor for a contrite and humble spirit; for there CHRIST dwells, and
delights in such a soul. Esaias 57.15. He has but two places to dwell in, the
highest heavens, and an humble heart. 2 Again, the less you love your selves,
and the more you empty your selves, the more will Christ dwell in you; the
cleaner you keep your hearts, the more unspotted, the more pleasure and
delight will He take to dwell in you. 3 The larger spirit any man has, the
more rich in grace any man is, the larger the house is, the more Christ will
delight to dwell there.
Which is Christ in you the hope of glory] This Christ he describes by His
effect toward us, calling Him the hope of glory: that is, He in whom and by
whom we hope and look for glory.

Observe hence: Christ is he in whom we hope for glory. Hereupon He is called
Our hope: 1 Timothy 1.1. God that cannot lie has promised to give us further
assurance of of it, He has lift up Christ on high, placed Him at His right
hand, far above all Principalities and Powers, and made Him partaker of His
glory: when He shall appear, then we shall appear with Him in glory; this we
wait and look for, this is our rest.

What then though shame and reproach befall us in this world? Christ we shall
overcome them all, and be more than conquerours, and in the end be crowned with
a crown of immortal glory. There wants nothing but a little waiting; Yet a
little while, and He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: Behold He
comes in the clouds, and His reward is with Him. In the mean time, let us
live as those that look for His glory, and not dishonor our selves with base
actions of sin, who are appointed for such glory.

VERSE 28. Whom we preach, admonishing every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
HAving thus by occasion of speaking of his ministry ( Verse 25.) expressed
the subject of it, namely the mystery of the Gospel, He returns now to
speak of his ministry again, and of his faithfulness and diligence in the
execution of it.

First, that which was common to him with Timothy and other Apostles; ( Verse
28.) Then that which was proper to himself ( Verse 29.) His faithfulness and
diligence appears almost in every word of these two Verses.

Where first observe generally; that these two things, Faithfulness and
diligence, are required of every Minister in his place and calling; they are
required of every man in his calling, but of a Minister in a special and
singular measure. For whether we look to the Lord that has put him in trust,
or to the things committed to his trust, not crowns nor kingdoms, but the
souls of men; who should be faithful if not he, who diligent if not he? To
whom or wherein will he be faithful, that is not faithful to God? and in
these things to whom or wherein will he be diligent (for conscience sake) that
is not diligent in serving the Lord in these things? And if he be cursed that
does the work of the Lord negligently, withholding his sword from blood; how
much more is he accursed, that does the work of the Lord in saving men's
souls, negligently? Which our SAVIOR would have done with such expedition,
that He forbade His Disciples, going about that business, to salute any man by
the way.

Particularly, their faithfulness appears: both in the subject matter; and
in the manner of preaching. For the matter, it must be in general with all
the Word of God, concealing nothing that is convenient. Act. 20.20. I kept
back nothing that was profitable unto you, etc. I will give you Pastors after
mine own heart, Ier. 3.15.
and they shall feed you with wisdom and understanding. But Principally they
must instruct them in the doctrine of repentance and remission of sins in the
Name of Christ.

Secondly, in the doctrine of Faith in Christ; for He is the Bread of life;
Repentance is but the sour salled, it is the Lamb that makes the feast, 1
Cor. 2.3. I cared to know nothing amongst you, but Christ crucified.

Thirdly, with the doctrine of good works: 1 Timothy 15. Let them that have
believed, have care to show good works; teach these things, they are good and
profitable. This is for the matter.

The faithfulness of a Minister is seen also in the manner; Tim. 2.15. Study
to show thy self a workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the Word
of truth aright.

Now this stands in teaching the truth abovenamed, with respect of due
circumstance; considering what is fit for weak, what for strong, for young,
for old; therefore there must be a Word of wisdom, as Well as of knowledge, 1
Cor. 12.8. Wisdom which must enable a steward of God's House, so to distribute
food, that every one may have his due portion. (...).


Thirdly for the Time; we must feed often, be instant in season and out of
season: not only when all things are fit, but out wrestling difficulties which
would hinder; a Minister is bidden to continue in doctrine, and Saint Paul was
night and day occupied in his duty, Acts 20.

Now as a Minister must teach by word, so also by example; five times in the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus there is charge given, That they show themselves
presidents of all virtue. For a sheep of all other is a plain creature, they
will follow one the other to die for it: So our sheep, they feed as much at
the eye as at the ear; which made so many halt for company when Saint Peter
halted, Galath. 1.

Now if Christ, who is the riches of that glorious mystery, God and
godliness, and biting most the most godly and religious, and in the Pulpit
maintaining bad persons and causes: Or that the people would seriously consider
this, who either hear seldom or hear unreverently, or are not effectually
moved with that they hear.

Their faithfulness and diligence appears in the persons to whom they
preached, every man: that is, men of all Nations, Jews and Gentiles of all
sorts, of all ages and sexes.

Where note, The goodness of God, who would have every man taught, that he
might be saved: who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth; 1 Timothy 2.4.
and therefore offers salvation to all men. Tit. 2.11.
So that no man is exempted, no man excluded, but he that exempteth and
excludes himself, and refuses the grace of God so freely offered, and
intended to him.

Which is a ground of great comfort to poor sinners of all sorts; that no sin,
exclude us from the free offer of grace and salvation by the Gospel. God
looks for nothing, nor requires nothing at our hands, but only to be humbled,
to repent and come in and receive a pardon.

It leaves all impenitent and unbeleeving wretches,

2 Hence observe: That it is the duty of the Minister, not once to teach and
admonish his whole flock in gross and general, but also every one in
particular, as he may have any good opportunity or occasion offered. How far
are they from this, that do it not so much as in general? Or how can they
perform this, that come at their flocks but now and then, and that to milk
and fleece them principally? for though they feed them now and then when they
come among them, it is evident wherefore they come, by the time when they come,
viz. at shearing time, at Easter, and harvest.

3 Their faithfulness and diligence appears in their manner and kind of
preaching, both teaching and admonishing; which is the duty of every Pastor:
for it is a small thing to inform the understanding with doctrine, except also
the heart be reformed by exhortation, whereof admonition is one kind, and here
put for all; and it goes well with us when we can be reformed by both.

The manner also of performing these things, declares their diligence and
faithfulness, namely [in all wisdome] for as the Word of CHRIST should dwell
amongst us richly in all wisdom, Col. 3.16. So the Minister should minister it
in all wisdom, wisely considering each ones capacity, age, sex, condition,
applying the Word unto them accordingly: for to the Pastor the Word of wisdom
is committed, 1 Cor. 12.8. The shepherd may not feed or drive the young lambs
and the strong ones of the flock, alike; neither may the Minister deal alike
with the weak and strong. Those that have little knowledge, must be gently
taught, babes must be fed with milk; those that have knowledge, but want
conscience, must be sharply rebuked, that they may be sound in the faith; they
that are cast down, must be supported and raised up, the bold and presumptuous
must be beaten down; upon some we must have compassion, putting difference,
others we must save with fear, plucking them out of the fire, Jude verse 22.
Public sins must be rebuked openly, that others may fear: Sins less
known, are to be censured more privately: An elder man or woman, is not to be
rebuked, but exhorted as a father and mother; the younger men are to be dealt
with more freely, but as brethren, 1 Timothy 5.1, 2. Public persons are to be so
dealt with, that their authority be not brought into contempt: Private persons
may without hazard be more roundly dealt withal.

The want of this wisdom in the Minister, oftentimes brings his ministry into
contempt, and his person into hatred, danger, or both. Let every Minister
therefore pray, and by all good means labor for this wisdom.

Finally, the end which they propounded to themselves in all their labors,
proves both their diligence and faithfulness; for it was, That they might
present every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS, that is, That they might be filled
with knowledge, faith, and holiness; which the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.13. calls a
perfect man, and one that is come to a ripe age, and full growth and stature in
CHRIST. This then ought to be the scope of every man's ministry, to beget men
to CHRIST by the immortal seed of the Word; and to nourish and feed them more
and more, till they come to a perfect growth: to initiate and to enter men into
CHRIST, and by little and little to perfect them, that so they may present them
perfect unto GOD, in CHRIST JESUS. Esteeming that they have never done their
duty, till they had presented them perfect men in CHRIST.

Now how great labor and care, diligence, and assiduity is to be had to work
so great a work? Do they propound this scope unto themselves that preach not?
Secondly, That preach seldom? Thirdly, That preach carelessely? Fourthly, That
preach corruptly, vainly and ambitiously? But these men have their reward:
they do their own work, and they shall be paid their wages accordingly.

VERSE 29. Wereunto I also labor, striving according to His working which
works in me mightily.
HItherto of that which the Apostle affirms of himself and Timothy, or his
fellow Apostles together: Now follows that which he affirms particularly of
himself alone; which is, that he aimed at this mark, laboring with hard and
sore labor, (for so does the word signify) using great endeavor and
contention, as they do that strive for the best gain. Where, besides that
which has been before observed, we learn; That the work of the ministry,
being rightly performed, is a painful and careful work, full of hard labor
and much striving. Hence they are compared to harvest laborers: to soldiers,
2 Timothy 2.4, 5. and to those that strive for masteries. 1 Timothy 4. They are
charged to preach, to be instant in season and out of season. Surely the sweat
of the Ministry exceeds the sweat of other callings; and with the sorest
labourer, the Minister eats his bread in the sweat of his brows. 1 Thessalonians.
5.12. Now we beseech you brethren, know them which labor among you. Men
ordinarily will not know them, nor know their labor: Yet GOD Himself takes
notice of it for a labor. Revel. 2.2. I know thy works and thy labor. God
acknowledges the Ephesian Angels labor. The Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5.17.
let them be counted worthy of double honor, especially they that labor in
the Word and doctrine. We shall find, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. two sore words joined
together, (...); Ye remember our labor and our travel. The pastoral toil
in the cure of Souls, is no less than was Jacob's in keeping of Labans
sheep, Genesis 31.40.

To stop the foulest mouths of such persons, Math. 6.28. They labor not. But
the point is not, what is the labor of some persons, but of the calling and
office. And yet indeed many may be said to labor hard enough, and yet are
guilty of idleness: We labored day and night, viz. even with our hands: So
far go many with Saint Paul; painful and laborious in worldly affairs,
but remiss and most careless in the work of their ministry to build up the
Church of God, and to edify the people committed to their care and charge.

See then ye Pastors what the Lord requires of you, 1 Pet. 5.4.
that When the Arch-Pastor shall appear, ye may of Him receive an
incorruptible Crown of glory.

And you people committed to their charge, etc. in those that He appoints
over you. And you that have such, magnify the goodness of God in giving them,
and strengthen their hands and encourage their hearts unto the work of their
ministry. And you that want them pray for such, and for remooving of those
that are unsufficient and scandalous.

Finally, that no man might attribute any thing to himself, to his own virtue
and power, as if he had done all these things; he attributes it wholly unto
God, saying, it was according to his working, which works in me mightily.

Observe: The love, diligence and faithfulness of a Minister in the labor of
his calling, is from Gods gracious working in us, and is to be ascribed wholly
to Him.

Wherefore where these things are not,

And let all men, seeing that the gifts of the ministry,

FINIS.
THE DOCTRINES CONTAINED IN THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Verse 1. 1 WE must warily prevent that which may be misconstrued of us in
speeches. 2 In some case we must report our love, and that we do in love for
others. 3 We must not only seek the good of those we know, as familiars, but
of those who have no outward acquaintance with us.
Verse 2. 1 MInisters must see what they must chiefly help forward, even the
spiritual rejoicing of their people. 2 Belief of the Gospel may be where the
consolation of it and rejoicing of it appears not. 3 The Spirit works in
believers not a hollow, but a hearty rejoicing. 4 The Gospel of CHRIST must
be the matter of sound joy. 5 Soundness of love and fullness of affiance and
understanding bring us to hearty rejoicing. 6 True Christians may be much
wanting in love, confidence and Spiritual understanding.
Verse 3. 1 ON fit occasions we must publish the glorious properties of Christ.
2 Ignorance of CHRIST makes us listen to deceivers. 3 Christ our Lord is the
storehouse of all wisdom and knowledge. 4 It is not yet apparent to us, that
Christ is so full of wisdom.
Verse 4. 1 THe practice of false teachers is to bring us out of liking with
the faithful servants of Christ Jesus. 2 We must be careful to keep our
people out of the hands of deceivers. 3 The force of seasonable speeches is
such, that it preserves the people. 4 False Teachers fight with deceit, and
show of reason, not sound reason. 5 False Teachers use flattering and glozing
language.
Verse 5. 1 THere is a presence whereby Saints are one with another, though
never so far disioyned. 2 The nature of love is to rejoice in the truth, in
the work of grace, where it is discerned. 3 All things in the Primitive
Churches were most orderly constituted and carried. 4 It is a most joyful
sight to see souls cleave to Christ.
Verse 6. 1 TRue faiths property is to receive CHRIST. 2 True belief on Christ
has with it perseverance, and a life obedient unto Him. 3 Our good beginnings
must be a band to us to make good proceedings.
Verse 7. 1 BY constant going on in Christ we come to have firm conjunction
with Him. 2 Resolved persuasion in the Doctrine we profess and grace we
believe, grows out of a constant course in faith and obedience. 3 Constant
walking in Christ, will bring us to abound in persuasion.
Verse 8. 1 TO yield to erroneous Doctrines which corrupt reason teaches, does
take us from Christ. 2 The wisdom renowned of the world, has been an engine
against the faith. 3 Satan by empty shows of religion, standing in vain
rites does prevail against many. 4 All religious observancies contrary to the
word of God, are but deceitful vanity. 5 Error and false worship become
infectious, because they are carnal, savoring of the flesh. 6 Whatsoever is
merely grounded on tradition, and what is carnal and sensual in GODS
service, is contrary to Christ.
Verse 9. 1 THis must make us rest in CHRIST only as all sufficient, that we
know Him GOD blessed for ever. 2 All the fullness of GOD is communicated with
CHRIST as man, the whole entyre Nature of GOD. 3 Not created gifts, or
miraculous effects of the divine nature, are united with Christ man; but the
deity it self, the fullness of it. 3 The same singular Nature is in all the
three persons. 5 The manner of GODS dwelling in CHRIST man, is personally; so
as that GOD the Son is thereby become personally man.
Verse 10. 1 CHrist man does send out all the streams of grace and good things
to all His members, in that the fountain dwells in Him. 2 Being in CHRIST we
receive all kind of graces, and benefits, that we lack nothing. 3 The
dignity of CHRIST, who is all to us, is this, that He is the chief above all
the creatures.
Verse 11. 1 AN excellent mean to hold us fast to Christ, is, to remember what
great evil of sin, He has subdued for us. 2 Christ has given us a spiritual
Circumcision. 3 No outward action of the hand of man, reaches to the clensing
of the soul. 4 Sin and grace is to the soul, as apparel is to the body. 5
Spiritual circumcision stands in putting off all our corruptions. 6 The
soul of the natural man is clad with sin. 7 We must forgo, not some part
of our corruption, but the whole body of sin. 8 Our mass of corruption
contains many sins. 9 JESUS CHRIST it is who works in us this spiritual
circumcision.
Verse 12. 1 What Circumcision was to the old people, that Baptism is to us.
2 From our union with CHRIST, dead and buried, we come to have the body of
sin crucified. 3 GOD does unite us with CHRIST, even by our Baptism. 4 To
consider of our resurrection, which we have through CHRIST, is a forcible
motive to make us cleave to Him. 5 Faith on Christ makes us rise to new life.
6 The omnipotent action of God which raised Christ from the dead, is it that
begets faith in us.
Verse 13. 1 Our quickening in CHRIST is such a benefit which we must not
quickly have done with, and lightly pass over. 2 Ministers must amplify to
their people the benefits bestowed on them. 3 Sin both original and actual
is the death of the soul. 4 The life of a natural man is even a death in
trespass. 5 Our course in actual sin does sink us deeper and deeper in
death. 6 We are far from being prepared to receive the grace showed us by
God, when we are quickened to believe. 7 The way to bring men to
acknowledgement of GOD's grace with thankfulness, is to make them see what
they were, when God first showed it. 8 All believers have a new life in and
through Christ. 9 In order of nature first we have pardon of sin, before we
have the life of grace begun in us. 10 God the Father, Son and Spirit do
properly forgive sin. 11 God's pardon is of mere grace to us. 12 We must
remember what God has done for us, while we show to others the things bestowed
on them. 13 The grace of God in forgiving our sins, is exceeding large.
Verse 14. 1 NOt only our sin which is our debt, is answered, but whatsoever
may show any thing against us, is done away in Christ. 2 By Christ the
ceremonial Law is taken away. 3 The Jewish ceremonies as they were purely
legal, were as bills testifying the debt of the people before God. 4 Christ by
suffering on the cross has abolished these things.
Verse 15. 1 GOd does set us free from the power of Satan, before we are made
alive in Christ. 2 God in Christ has crucified and disarmed Satan. 3 Christ in
His death made a scorn of all the power of darkness; and exposed them to open
shame.
Verse 16. 1 WE must not make account of men's sinister judgments, as any way
giving place unto them. 2 To put no difference in meats for conscience sake, or
religious respect, is no sin. 3 Such as doat upon Mosaicall rites, are ready
to condemn such as are not done right in them.
Verse 17. 1 THe legal ceremonies were shadows of that is done in Christ and
His Church.
Verse 18. 1 FAlse teachers are led with a spirit of arrogancy, which makes
them usurp judgment over others. 2 The natural man does judge and condemn
what does not agree with him. 3 Our softness and pusillanimity does make us
subject too much to take to heart men's sinister judgments. 4 Wicked deceivers
will seem to stand for virtue, and challenge those that are truly godly as
wanting it. 5 Adoration of Angels and Saints masketh under the vizor of
holiness. 6 All religious worship of Saints or Angels is unchristian. 7 The
property of a seducer is to speak that he knows not. 8. The cause of
vouching and diving into hidden things, is Pride.
Verse 19. 1 LOoking to the creatures for help and grace, does make us fall
from Christ. 2 We have not many, but one Head. 3 In Christ mystical there is
nothing but the Head giving growth, and the body receiving growth. 4 For the
whole multitude of believers, there is sufficiency in Christ. 5 Before we can
take spiritual growth in Christ, we must be knit to Him. 6 Every true believer
grows up in Christ, not stands at a stay. 7 It is God who makes us as begin,
so grow in grace.
Verse 20. 1 CHRIST by His death has freed us from the Ceremonies of the Law.
2 True Christians must not live in that Christ dyed to take away. 3 Gods
children live out of the world, while in it.
Verse 21.22. 1 MEn are exact in outward observancies, who know not the power
of godliness. 2 Hard to forgo old rites, to which we are accustomed. 3 Bodily
observancies profit nothing. 4 We are not to give credence to any thing not
taught in God's Word.
Verse 23. 1 VIce and error may have a show of truth and virtue. 2 Will Worship
has a plausible show of wisdom. 3 Lowliness of mind argues wisdom. 4 False
teachers will make a show of humility. 5 To keep the body in subjection
argues wisdom. 6 False teachers make show of mortification. 7 Exercises much
regarded with men, are of no esteem with God. 8 Bodily external things are
not of worth with God.

The end of the Doctrines.
A COMMENTARY, UPON THE SECOND Chapter of Saint PAUL to the Colossians.
COLOS. Chap. 2. VER. 1.
VERSE 1. For I would ye knew what great fighting I have for your sakes, and
for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my Person in the flesh.


WE have had from the three and twentieth Verse of the former Chapter, from the
end of it, a digression, the sum whereof consists in declaring Paul's
calling. Secondly, his executing this calling, Verse. 28, 29. of the former
Chapter.

Now lest this report should seem to drop from him unadvisedly, for ordinarily
another mouth must praise us, not our own, lest it should thus be
misconstrued; he repeateth the strife he had, with a more particular
enumeration of the Persons for whom he thus contended, v. 1.

2 The matter for which he labored with GOD for them, Verse 2, 3.

3 The end why he tells them these things, or makes such request, V. 4.
Namely, that no Impostor might deceive them, and draw them from that state
wherein they were, or persuade them, as if the Apostle knew nothing of their
matter, nor yet took any care of them; for the fourth Verse may be conceived
as a reason of either of these; you must know we are in good cafe before you
can wish us established in it.

But they might object, Paul how we stand, how can you take care lest we be
deceived?

Though my bodily presence is free from you,

The first Verse then has to be marked in it a deliberate asseveration of that
he had in general spoken; I would have you know. 2. A more particular
repetition of this his strife applied in special to some certain persons;
first definitely, you and your neighbors about you, those of Laodicea: then
indefinitely; and all that have not seen me in the flesh. 1. Then we learn
this point of wisdom from the Apostle: That we must warily prevent that which
may be misconstrued of us in our speeches: The Colossians might think him
vainglorious in signifying such things as tended to his own praise, at least
that his pen went too fast, and he a little forgot himself in setting down
such personal matter: the Apostle therefore goes over again with it, and
shows a reason of it Verse. 4. That he might wipe away the surmise of
unadvisednesse, and vainglorious humor. To speak any thing either to the
praise or dispraise of our selves is subject to imputation; for it is a tickle
theme, hard to do either without a spice of vanity in the one, or
dissimulation in the other: the Apostle knowing this well, had the hynt of
their thoughts given him, and therefore does prevent them wisely: There is
great reason for this practice frequent with the Apostle.

For the just mainteyning of our own honor with GOD in the fifth Commandment
does lay it on us.

Secondly the preventing of false witnesse-bearing by sinister surmises in my
neighbor,

Such therefore as give out speeches subject to misconstruction without any
qualifying of them and salving such things as in probability are like amiss to
be gathered by them,

2 Mark hence; That in some case we may report both our love, and what we do
in love for others. The Apostle tells them now he out of his love to them,
strove in their behalf. There is reporting of kindness, which out of proud
displeasure upbraydeth those to whom we speak, and this begets
unthankfulness in them whom we have pleasured. There is again a reciting of
that we do, out of religion, love and wisdom, which begets further love in
those who hear it: Out of religion (I say) for it is to Gods glory; that we
should tell such things, as not we so much as His grace works in us;
especially when He does so stand by us, that we are called to contend and
strive in prayer with him, in prayer for the good of any. Out of wisdom, as
when it breaks the neast of such as labor to slander us behind our backs
with others. Out of love to God and my brother, when I tell it that God may
have glory from my brother knowing it, that his confidence may be strengthened,
that his love to me may be further kindled: thus Saint Paul recites that
matter, thus Romans 9. He does not simply protest his love to his Country men,
but does bind it with an oath, that he might mollify their displeasure, and
wind in with them. Yea we read of the Saints, who before God have orderly and
holily made appeal how they have walked before Him. Though therefore such as
either proudly, or out of unadvised levity, or contumeliously sound out their
own praises, are not to be justified; yet neither on the other hand must we
censure all speeches of this nature: a man's neighbors may dwell so far off,
or be so malignant, that he that would keep silence in this kind, should
betray Gods glory, the truth, his own honor and neighbors safety.

3 Observe, That we must not only seek the good of those we know as
familiars, but of those who have no outward acquaintance with us. Ephesians. 16.18.
Pray for all Saints. If our natural Parents travailing to other places (we
being left behind) should beget other children; would we not upon the hearesay
of it be affected to them as our brethren? So when we hear that our heavenly
Father has begotten Himself other children here or there; though we have not
seen them, yet we should in all love embrace them, and seek their welfare;
yea there was great need why he on whom lay the care of all the Churches,
should pray fervently for these; because these might (even in this regard) more
easily be seduced, as who had not known him and seen his conversation, who was
the great Doctor of the Gentiles; for such as knew what kind of man he was that
delivered these things, were hence somewhat strengthened and encouraged in
their way.

But how may we be rebuked who are far from striving for those we know? Gods
people, who know us not? let us do to others as we would have them do to us.
He were a graceless child that would never pray for his Mother; and we would
think he would do little for us that would not lend us a good word here or
there: So when we remember not the Church, and will not open our mouths one
for another to God, what love is there? Let us therefore frequent this duty,
not in word or show, but in deed and truth. From the practice of this duty it
comes to pass that a Christian is like a rich Merchant, who has his factors
in diverse Countries: So a Christian has in all places of the world some that
deal for him with God, that never saw his face, who are petitioners for him
unto God.

VERSE 2. That their hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in love,
and in all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to know the mystery
of God, even the Father, and of Christ.
THis Verse opens the matter for which he strove with God by all means; in
it two points: 1 The thing it self. 2 The antecedents or means leading to it.


The thing is, that their hearts might be comforted at the knowledge of the
mystery of God the Father and of Christ, that is of the Gospel, which told
them that Jesus Christ God-man was made light and salvation to them, as to
other Gentiles: for the incarnation of the Son of God, and the calling them
to be a people who before were none, were hidden mysteries, till God reveiled
them. Now to this end he prays, that they might be knit together in love, and
a more full knowledge, having with it fulness of persuasion.

The better to understand it, we must remember that these Colossians were
brought by Epaphras to know the Gospel in truth. Secondly, you must know that
they had love, yea true love. Thirdly, that they did not feel the joy of the
Holy Ghost so plentifully as others, first because through the Devils tares of
dissension, there was not that soundness of love which should make them fully
of one heart.

Secondly, because though they knew the Gospel, yet they knew it not so
plentifully, being in part ignorant of their Christian liberty, of the all
sufficiency of Christ's sole mediation, as who looked and listened a little to
the help of Angels this way.

Thirdly, from hence it came; that being weak in knowledge, they somewhat
staggered: the Apostle therefore wishes them the taste of heavenly joy more
fully in that they knew, and to this end wishes that all impediments of
heavenly joy, as dissension, doubting, ignorance being remooved, they might be
one in love, rich in knowledge, and fully persuaded and resolved in the things
they knew.

First then, Paul's example: Ministers must see what they must chiefly help
forward, even the spiritual rejoicing of their people. It is a great matter of
their office to serve Christians this way. What are we (says S. Paul) no Lords
over your faith; but (...) Co-workers with GOD furthering your joy: this he
prayed for, Romans 1.10.12.
this he made the intent of his journeyes, to give, and take comfort in them.
To this end, Ephesians. 6.21, 22.
he dispatched messengers to comfort their hearts. True it is, that sometime
they are forced to make sad, as Saint Paul did the Corinthians; but this is
not their principal intent: for they do this, not for it self, but that it
may make way for rejoicing; as a Physician is forced to make his Patients
sick, that thus he may restore him to health.

There is great reason for this.

We are bound every one by the Commandment that says, we shall not kill,

2 Again Saint Paul knew how many things the Saints have to press them down,
through the malice of Satan, and keep them from knowing the sweet fruit of
the spirit.

3 He knew that this was a friendly Sun, which makes all graces thrive the
better in the heart where it is.

4 That if GOD should not refresh them this way by letting them feel this
power of that life which is to come, they were in danger to shrink from Christ
in the midst of such discouragements, with which this world abounds: For as
we say, without this, vita is not vitalis, no man lives, or can live without a
delight and joy. As we see kind men, when they taste a thing that pleases them
more then ordinary, will invite others to taste it with them: So the
Communicative love of this Apostle was such, that finding in his own experience
what a sovereign thing this was, he could not but wish it unto others.

5 Lastly, S. Paul knew that this was forcible to draw others to the
profession, when men should mark this in it, that it filled those that
embraced it, with gladness of heart, and that in the midst of the greatest
evils, by seeing the joyfulnesse of such who were converted.

Wherefore it is a slander of sinful men that think a Preacher of the Gospel
kills all good company,

Ministers must set an edge upon this grace and stir up their people to it:
God has touched them a little, they are afraid of progress; they think they
are brought into bondage, because they meet with discouragement; and turn
again to sin, because they find more sorrow in goodness then they did in
ill. So there be others that are affrayd to enter into Gods way, least they
should come out of Gods comforts: these are like the spies that brought an ill
report of the good land: it was a good land and fruitful, but there were
Giants, Anakims, Number. 14.
etc. and for this they never entered into the land of Canaan; save only two
faithful, Caleb and Joshua. So these people speak ill of the way to heaven,
even of heaven upon earth: Oh say they, the land is good, the Kingdom of
heaven is a glorious place, but the way thither is by a sad life, so full of
troubles, that a man were as good be dead, as live so. But mark, because they
said they could not enter, the Lord swear, they shall not enter. Secondly,
mark here; That belief of the Gospel may be, where the consolation of it,
and rejoicing of it appear not. Saint Paul need not to pray for this on their
behalf, but that he does intimate that many of them wanted it. We read indeed
of first conversions of Christians accompanied with the grace of spiritual
joy: as the City of Samaria very glad and full of joy, Mat. 13.46
So the Merchant in the Gospel finding the Pearl in the field, went away
rejoicing. But this is a fruit that lasts all the year, yea a babe in
CHRIST may be borne crying; as we say of tears, Esau may have them that
wants true repentance, and another truly repenting may want them: So it is
true of joy; a false Convert may have it, Luke 8.13
as the stony ground received the Word with joy; Herod heard the Word gladly;
when a true Christian ere-while is without the fruit of it. The fruit I say,
for he has in him the seed of rejoicing which will budde forth, blossom, and
show the fruit in due season; Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for
the upright in heart; but the harvest of it lasts not all the year without
interruption. CHRIST tells His Disciples that after His departure they should
be heavy, though afterward their heaviness should be turned into joy.
Sometimes chastisements which lie heavy upon us, do over-cast our comfort,
Heb. 12.11
for the present they are not joyous. Sometime inward laws of evil with which
we conflict make us cry, o miserable! To. 7.24.
Sometime grievous falls whereby we have wounded our consciences; Psa. 51.12.
Lord restore me to the joy of thy salvation. In a word, as civil rejoycings
are upon many occasions damped, though life continue; so is spiritual joy,
though faith and grace fail not in us.

The use is to strengthen and support by this consideration such weak ones as
do call in question the truth of their faith through want of this comfortable
taking which the Scripture much speaks of, and they see others enjoy. One
complained to me, that sure if his faith were right and living, he should have
more joy: So I asked him, what he would say to this reason; living men are
merry: and go cheerfully about their business; but you are sad and full of
grief and heaviness, surely you are not alive; you could not be thus
mournful, sadd and heavy, if you were: even as natural life and natural joy
are not always coupled; so spiritual life and spiritual joy, till we come to
heaven, are not joined together inseparably. There is a wonder in Spain, of a
river that runs fifty miles under ground: this river though it be sometimes
unseene, yet it is continual, and it breaks out again: So the consolations
of GOD are sometimes unseen, not only of others, that go away sad when they
see us want the comforts of GOD; but also to our selves, the Lord hiding the
sweet Sunshine of his countenance from us, which is yet in the sky, and gives
some measure of light to us; like as the Sun, though sometimes it be
darkened, yet there will be a time of reviving again.

Thirdly observe, What kind of joy the spirit works in believers, viz. not a
hollow; but a hearty rejoicing: he makes our hearts glad, and spirits rejoice
in God our Savior. As the groans Gods spirit helps us with are inward, such
as cannot be uttered: So is the joy hearty which in believers it works, 1
Pet. 1.8.
yea a joy unspeakeable and glorious. Why glorious? partly in respect of the
principal object of it, which is the glory of the life to come; and partly in
respect of the quality and kind of it, as it is opposite to that contemptible,
beggarly, base and filthy rejoicing of beggarly, base and filthy persons. There
is a joy that men are ashamed of; such is the joy of sinners, that have
overgrowen the control of Nature it self. Otherwise take them in their
meriment, let there come in a man of gravity or civil honesty, and you see
what a dampe he casts upon the joy of carnal and wicked men, as if he had taken
all their tongues from them; some go one way, and some slinke another way,
they are afraid he has overheard some words that they have spoken. What a base
joy is this, that men are ashamed of? Such is the joy of all natural men,
compared with the joy and rejoicing of a sanctified man; it is base and
contemptible joy. He can go no higher then to rejoice in his riches, because
he is rich; in his ease, and that he has a good house: he feels no evil,
money comes in apace, trading lasts well, and the like: a poor base joy. What
are these things to the things of eternity? what is thy house, thy plate, thy
furniture, what are these riches and these houses of clay, to the house, whose
builder and maker is God? what are these riches, which the moath shall eat or
the canker corrupt, to those riches which are eternal and glorious? The joy of
worldlings, yea of temporizers reaches not beyond the teeth; it is but the joy
of a deluded dream, which a man waking, finds nothing so. Hence Solomon
compares carnal laughter to the cracking of thorns under a pot; it is a
widows blaze, as soon almost extinct as kindled and this is it that causes
the wickeds joy soon to come to an end: His joy is like seed that has no
depth of ground, it deweth not his heart; and therefore wanting this deep
rooting, it fodainly fades away.

Wherefore if ever any would be glad at heart indeed; God through His Spirit
who must work this in him; he cannot, till the Lord give it him, through the
knowledge of Christ be truly joyful.

True it is,

But alas!

Finally, from the thing entreated in the end of the verse, joined with the
beginning, that their hearts might be comforted, in their coming out of the
darkness of sinful ignorance, for that is the force of the Word (...), to
know the mystery of God in Christ.

Observe hence: What must be the matter of sound joy, the Gospel of CHRIST.
The Gospel is called glad tidings, because it makes glad; no wonder: good
news as ( Solomon says) from a far Country is very delightful. What then
is news from heaven? of Gods mercy to a sinful soul in the pardon of his
sin, in giving him a Title to a Crown of everlasting glory? A carnal man
joyeth when his bags are full, when Corn and Wine and earthly commodities
abound with him: but the Saints have another joy, set upon matters so high,
that in comparison of them, they count all dross and dung.

But one may say, Gospel?

Yes, in the novelty of it, John was a burning Candle, and ye would for a
while rejoice in his light; or from a lick and taste which they may get of
sweetness in it. Hebr. 6. They may have a taste of the powers of the life to
come; they may have a flashing and momentany lightning of joy in them: Or
finally, from an ungrounded overtly persuasion that they shall have pardon of
sin, and salvation by CHRIST; they may show forth for a time great gladness:
but soundly to take joy in these things is only proper to true believers, who
humbled in sight of their unworthiness and guilt, rejoice in Christ as the
only Sovereign salve of their souls; not as a thing of rare and pleasant
knowledge.

Secondly, as they have not a lick, but by belief bring CHRIST to dwell in
their hearts, and abide with them; so their joy is a permanent, abiding, and
durable joy. No man's building can be better or firmer then his foundation; nor
no man's rejoicing better then the matter of his rejoicing: if it be but meat
and drink, both that and thou shall perish, and what shall become of thy joy?
yea, if thou had a stately palace, like that of Nebuchadnezar, which he
built for his royalty; what is that to thee? where is thy rejoicing, when
either thou shall be taken from it, or it shall be taken from thee? This is
the state of all worldly comfort, and of all things, till we come to that which
is above all, that is to say, the favor of GOD, the eternal grace of GOD in
our Lord Jesus Christ; My peace I leave with you, not as the world gives: the
world gives a peace, but what manner of peace? why, like the world it self;
but another manner peace is that which I give: I give eternal peace and
consolation, as the Apostle calls it, God has given us good hope and
everlasting consolation.

Thirdly, as they do not by vain presumption apply CHRIST, but by humble
belief joined with care of forsaking the love of all sin; so their joy
stands firm like a sure foundation, when the other is turned into shame and
confusion, because it was grounded upon misconceit.

Wherefore labor if you be true believers, God become a Father, and take no
contentment in them? When a poor soul apprehends this, it gives a man enough.
As Jacob said of his son Joseph, I have enough that my son is alive: So the
soul of a believer can speak it in the presence of God; My God lives, I have
enough: my Lord Christ has redeemed me, I have enough; the Spirit of God has
sealed me to the day of redemption, I have enough; Psalm. 16.
that I may say; My line is fallen in a fair ground, I have a goodly heritage.

Now for the means, Being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the
full assurance of understanding; that so they might come to joy in the
knowledge of that mystery.

Observe hence: That soundness of love, and fullness of affiance and
understanding, bring us to hearty rejoicing. This may be showed by the
contrary: for these three things are great impediments to true believers
intercepting that joy which otherwise they might have.

1 Want of love, when there creeps in some little strangeness, that they are
not one, as they should be, all of one heart, Act. 4.32.
as the multitude of believers. Look as a family full of contentments while
all are friendly and linked in love; let some spice of discord enter, all the
music of the house is marred; every thing as doleful, as before joyful: And
no doubt but this hindered the Colossians joy, some leaning to mediation of
Angels, Ceremonies; some keeping to CHRIST only: difference of opinion bred
variance of affection, as it commonly falls out. For Satan striveth nothing
more than to disband the Church, we being knit by sinews; if he can but cut
the sinews of love and doctrine, and cross it, he has enough. And as light
vapors or exhalations, being drawn up from the earth, come down with great
tempests; so from light differences in opinion (if not a great measure of
grace) do proceed often great storms, and tempests of wrath and envy.

2 Want of full Persuasion, eclipseth joy; for tell a man never such joyful
things, if he cannot resolve himself that they are so, he will take no
pleasure in them. The things are good he will say, but I am afraid too good to
be true. Nay, let a man be troubled in matters of less moment, with a
scrupulous conscience, being at a stand whether to do this or that, or not to
do it; it is such a sickness, as till it be out-growen, does much weaken the
joy of the spirit: Even as a man that has a stone in his shoe cannot travel
comfortably.

3 Finally, want of knowledge does much hinder joy; for further then we know
things, we cannot be glad of them? beside, want of understanding breeds
scruple, as in young children, who will be afraid of any thing almost through
weakness of understanding: But say they were fully persuaded; yet if we want
understanding wherewith to give a reason of that we believe, it is a great
damping to us: whereas on the contrary, love of our brethren, O quam bonum and
jucundum; Psalm. 13 3.1.
How good and pleasant a thing is it to see brethren to live together in unity!
It is as pleasant as a fragrant ointment, it makes a sour sallad better than
a stalled exe, and it prepares and fitteth us for that GOD of joy and love, to
come and dwell with us, se^led persuasion and plentiful knowledge, in one word
fullness of faith; for faith is nothing but an affianced knowledge, this
brings joy. Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope, fill you with all joy and peace
in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.
By faith we rejoice in afflictions. For as in earthly things the further we
come to get assurance, and to know good things toward us, the more we take joy
in them: So in heavenly things, the further we grow up in the apprehension of
them, the more are our hearts cheered and revived.

Wherefore, be of one mind, 2 Cor. 13.11.
to come as near as possibly they can to the Unity of Faith; He does be seech
them by virtue of this bond, Ephesians. 4.1, 2.
to walk worthy of the Lord; and how should that be? in all long-suffering,
and lowliness of mind, supporting one another in love; endeavoring to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. Lowliness of mind and Patience
will bring men to Unity; as Pride, and self-love, and impatience, does make
men easily dissent in affection and opinion. Again, private Christians are
like the Coninthians, very contentious, to law for every trifle; joy dwells
not in disagreement.

So for the second, here is much unbeleefe, we fix not our persuasion, nor
provoke not our hearts confidently to rest and trust in GOD's promises, we
fight not against doubtings; we cry not for eye salve which might heal our
fight, that all scales done away, we might see clearly, to our comfort, the
things of our peace.

Let us, Christ and all that are His, in full persuasion, and to get ripe
understanding: As love to CHRIST increases, so joy increases. If any woman
had the greatest Potentate on earth to her husband, if she love him not, what
pleasure has she in him? If she love him but little, she takes but small joy,
but the more fervently she loves him, the more abundantly she rejoices in
enjoying of him: So with us, the more we get up to love CHRIST and His, the
more shall we rejoice in our Union and communion one with another: Hence it is
that when knowledge shall be perfected in fight, and when love shall be
absolute, lacking nothing, then our joy shall be full in the highest degree of
it.

Secondly observe, when he prays for these things; In what things true
Christians may be much wanting, viz. in love, confidence, and spiritual
understanding. Had there not been a defect this way, henceded not to have
labored them in their behalf. We see how it was in Corinth; schisms took
place, rents, divisions and uncharitable contentions ever amongst believers;
even as brethren together agree not often: So it is in the body of Christ, the
members are often jarring. So for assurance, it is weak in Christians; even as
babes so hold this or that, that they may be easily brought to be of another
mind: So a weak Christian, has a levity and unsetlednesse dwelling in great
measure, with the persuasion which he has in the points of his faith: Thus
the Galathians for this cause, who before had gladly received Paul's truth,
were quickly turned to a new Gospel. Galath. 1.
Thus Israel wanting this fullness of persuasion, quickly corrupted themselves,
and made a molten calfe. Finally, we see what doubtings and scruples are
frequently found with true believers. In the third place, for understanding;
how ignorant a great while were the Apostles after the beginnings of grace in
them? As the understanding in civil things, it comes not all at once, but is
little in childhood, and so gets up as years ripen: So it is in the babes
of GOD: Yea, our want of giving assent, and confident resting upon that GOD
reveals, does keep us from understanding; for believing things upon God's
Word, which I am not able to understand, at length I come understandingly to
know those things, which above that I could conceive, I religiously believed.

Wherefore we must not be dismayed to see these things in Christians,

Lastly, what we must all labor for, viz. soundness of love, fullness of
persuasion, and understanding: That which any asks for us, or we ask for our
selves, that we must strive for: to pray for things we endeavor not to, is to
mock GOD. Seeing then the Apostle does strive with GOD for these things; it
does show that these are things we must labor after, things which faithful
ones shall in their time come unto: Strive to perfection; I forget that which
is behind, and strive to that which is before, for the price of the high
calling of God in CHRIST. Look at little ones: were it not a shame for them
still to continue falling out, coming with complaints for every trifle, as
they will, while they are young ones, to be afraid of bug-beggars, and made
believe every thing, to be ignorant always as in childhood? So it were a
shame for us to have no more love, no more settlednesse in our persuasion, no
more understanding, than when we first believed.

Which meets with Papists, and carnal Gospellers: for riches of knowledge,
they think to be able to repeat the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Commandments are
enough, to know they are baptized and serve God at home and at Church; deeper
knowledge than this belongs to Doctors and teachers in the Church; men of
corrupt minds, who would have God's people lie in darkness of ignorance, lest
their own darkness should be discerned. Yea, how many of the people that not
being willing to obey the ways of God, care not for knowing them? they are
willing to keep without light, that they may sleep more quietly. Such finally
who are babes in knowledge, though for time they might be teachers, who are
ready to wagge at every wind of doctrine, who upon every cross and temptation
are ready to call into question God's love, forgiveness of sin; must hence be
rebuked.

In the second place,

I,

1 Labor to know that experimentally which thou know: God by His Spirit to
witness to thy spirit the truth of it, to make thee in His light to see light,
and to feel the power of it working in thee, and thy affections moved, as the
nature of the word requires; that which a man thus knows, you cannot beat
him out of it with all the show of reason that can be pretended. 2 We must
acknowledge the corruption of our mind, which will not yield assent further
than we see reason; and deny our reason, becoming fools, that God may make
us wise. Nay, we must know, such is the vanity of our minds, that we can
sooner persuade our selves of any fabulous matter, than of that God reveals
to us. 3 We must hang upon CHRIST, the Author and finisher of our faith, and
pray Him to heal this trembling palley of our souls. 4 We must be good
husbands with the knowledge we have, obeying it carefully. Ioh. 7. If ye obey,
ye shall know my doctrine whether it be of God. 5 We must attend upon the
public ministry of the Word, which God has appointed for the edification of
the Church, Ephesians. 4.
VERSE 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge.
NOw follows a description of CHRIST, named in the end of the former verse,
taken from the infinite wisdom and knowledge in Him. [In whom] may be referred
to the mystery (...).
; but it is fitlyer conceived of CHRIST (...).
: because the intent of the Apostle in this Epistle, being to stablish the
Colossians in the faith of Christ, from whom Angels, Ceremonies, and the depth
of Philosophical wisdom did through Satan's working, assay to withdraw the
believers; therefore the Apostle does upon all occasions amplify the dignity
and all-sufficient riches of CHRIST JESUS.

Again, having before wished them all riches of understanding, he does fitly
describe CHRIST from His Omniscience, that he might thus point them at the
fountain whence they were to draw that which he mentioned, even all riches of
understanding, which they wanted.

Thirdly, as in the third Chapter, our life is said to be hidden in CHRIST; So
here all wisdom and understanding are said to be hid in Him. Beside the reason
following may be respective to these words, I say thus: For in spirit I see
you, that none may draw you from your solid faith in CHRIST.

1 Then we learn hence: That upon fit occasions we must publish the glorious
properties of JESUS CHRIST: the Apostle does rarely mention Him, but he
recites something or other which tends to glorify Him; the LORD commanding
us no way to dishonor His name, but by all means to seek the glory of it,
does tie us to this duty: especially then we are to do it, when the subtilty
of the enemy does labor to obscure the account of CHRIST, and seduce us from
Him. And if we are bound to challenge the credit of our neighbor, by lending
him the best testimony we may, and not suffering his innocence to be wronged;
how much more must we do this, when the honor of our God in some sort hangs
on it?

Which must rebuke the barrenness of Christians this way:

2 That Paul to stablish them in holding on Christ, does no other thing but
tell them the excellencies of Christ here and every where.

Observe hence: What makes us listen to deceivers, our ignorance of Christ.
Did we know the excellency of His Person, the riches of His Nature, the
offices and all sufficiency of Him; our hearts would be armed against all
seducements, then we would reject them and say, We knew whom we have trusted;
but dimly seeing these things, 2 Timothy 1.12.
it is otherwise with us. A fool that knows not how good, he and his money
are soon parted: So we, like little children, not knowing so fully what a rich
Pearl this our LORD JESUS CHRIST is, listen too much to such beguiling
suggestions, as the Devil by his instruments whispereth in our ears.

Wherefore,

Mark again, Who is the storehouse of all wisdom and knowledge; namely,
Christ our Lord. We know the treasury is it, from whence we fetch for all
occasions: Our treasuries are stores sufficient to furnish our particular
necessities: So God has made Christ a treasury and storehouse, as of all other
spiritual gifts, so of wisdom and knowledge, that from His fullness every
member might be served: The Spirit of wisdom and knowledge rested upon Him
above measure. As the light is fully in the Sun, that Moon and Stars might
thence borrow: So the fullness of this, and every supernatural gift is in Him,
that thence it might be derived. There is as in Christ a double Nature, so a
double treasure of wisdom and knowledge. The first is uncreate, that
omniscient wisdom of God, which knows perfectly, and fully comprehends all
the divine Nature; and not only all which have been, are, and shall be
hereafter, but all things which are possible to be done, if God were so
pleased. Secondly, there is, as the nature of man, so proportionably a created
wisdom and knowledge, whereby Christ knows God more fully than all the
creatures, though not so fully as God may be known, and is known of Himself.
For a finite nature is not capable of an infinite, so as to comprehend it; for
nothing can receive above that which it has capacity to receive.

Again, He knows in God, as in a glass, all things which have been, are
and shall be, so far as agrees with His happy estate, and the execution of
His Offices which are committed to Him. Thirdly, He knows within Himself,
and by experience above all that can be uttered; for He is filled with these
gifts not only for Himself, but that He might send from Him into all His
members. Christ therefore as man, though He know not God so fully, as God is
known of Himself, and know not all things which are possible to be done;
because this cannot be known, but by a full comprehension of GOD's
omnipotency, which being infinite, no finite nature can fully comprehend; yet
His knowledge is above all knowledge of Angels and men, and is unmeasurable
after some sort, though not simply infinite, that from it all of us might be
supplied. This then thus opened:

First confuteth the Lutherans,

In Christ are all treasures of wisdom and knowledge;

He does not say in Christ's humane Nature, Christ:

Now in Christ is the divine Nature, as well as the humane:

CHRIST has it:

Therefore His humane Nature has it, follows not: a toto ad partem. In a man
is reason:

Therefore in His body.

Besides [all treasure] may be said simply or respectively, compared with that
other Creatures have, and thus Christ-man has all treasures, that is in
comparison of wisdom in any other, an unmeasurable treasury, whence all other
His members derive that they have.

We see hence, Christ; Mine is wisdom, Prove. 8.
mine is understanding, subtilty dwells with me, Come ye fools, and
understand, says this essential wisdom of the Father to us, by His servants.
The Queen of Sheba went a great way to hear Salomons wisdom: and we have
many that travel countries to hear the readers here and there. How should we
seek to Christ in all means He has directed us to, that through Him we
might be made wise? He is made of GOD our wisdom, He is the Author and matter
of it.

Lastly mark, that these treasures are said to be hid in Him: Whence observe:
That it is not yet apparent to us that CHRIST is so full of wisdom; for it is
believed to be a treasure under earth, not found out yet, because we, though
we believe it, yet we see it not, and the world neither see, nor believe any
such thing. Hence it is that they count the preaching of CHRIST a foolish
thing; for affecting depth of wisdom, it is so hid that they cannot epsy any
such thing in Christ. Yea, from this hiding it comes to pass, that in some
philosophical subtilties, they seem to find far greater knowledge than in
all that is told of Christ.

Again, our wants do make it not seen to us; though we believe it, yet we
behold it not present: For though we are made wise, yet it appears not how
wise we shall be; as Saint John says in another case, 1 Ioh. 3.2. We know in
part, and great are the relics of folly which dwell with our wisdom. Now as
we say of a man who having great wealth, and yet makes no great show, he is a
hidden man: So Christ not manifesting this abundance of wisdom in us His
members, is said to have it treasured up, and hidden within Him.

Wherefore let us not be offended at the simplicity which now is in CHRIST,
Christ should not be wise, if he did otherwise: A man that is of the greatest
learning in the world, when he teaches an A. B. C. man, he does not run over
his Tongues and Arts; but only applies himself to the capacity of his
scholar, keeping the other within himself, till his scholar growing riper,
shall be fitted to receive them: So does our Lord Jesus Christ deal with us;
we are Grammar scholars, not yet taken to that University of the Saints in
glory; and therefore Christ out of wisdom does keep hid in Himself those
treasures here named.

This is a comfort to us, Christ, as He says of our life, Chap. 3.3. We shall
in time have it. If we knew not some secret which we desired, yet if we had
some friend, that knew it, who should further tell us, that he in time would
show us all the matter, it would make us rest the better contented: Thus it is
with Christ; we have great wants in knowledge, but He has all treasured in
Him, and will in His time make us know, as we are known. And thus this
doctrine might be passed over. But the Papists do hence gather, that even
Christ newborn had the fullness of wisdom. But the Answer is, that Saint
Paul speaks not of the Manhood of Christ only, but his whole Person.
Secondly, he speaks not of the Person according to His Manhood in the time of
His humiliation, when He was subject to ignorance, so far as it was an
infirmity without sin, but of Christ as now glorified. While He was in state of
humiliation, He did grow up in wisdom; both His habits being more confirmed,
and His experimental knowledge to His end increasing in Him: He knew not the
barrenness of the Fig Tree, the day of judgment, not only in this sense he
knew it not to tell us: True it is, He was anointed above His Brethren with
joy, wisdom, etc. but hence it follows not, therefore He was actually
forthwith having all joyful bliss and wisdom: For CHRIST'S anointing
signifies three things: 1 That this Manhood was after a sort infinitely
blessed, in regard that it was personally assumed of God the Son. 2 That it
was called and destinated of GOD to have all the fullness of spiritual graces
given it, the right of them was made His. 3 That He had actually given Him all
such gifts in every age, as might fitly stand with the mystery of His
humiliation. David was anointed King before he actually had the power of a
King: Neither is it as absurd to say that the wisdom of God in His humane
Nature wanted, while he voluntarily would not make show of Himself, but
emptied Himself: for why may not this be said as well as the Lord of life
wanted life, that the God of strength who is neither weary, nor hungry, was
weary and thirsty.


VERSE 4. And this I say, least any should beguile you with entising words.
NOw follows the reason rendered of that which goes before [this I say] this
may be referred either to the description of CHRIST, into which he digressed,
or to the whole sentence from the beginning of this Chapter: this I tell you,
how I strive for you in prayer, what I labor for on your behalf, even that by
the means abovenamed, your hearts might be comforted: and I cannot but extol
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that you, knowing both the truth of my love, and
excellency of CHRIST, may not by seducers be lead through flattering
detraction into false conceits of me his servant and Apostle, and so of him
whom I serve. I take it roundly with reference to the whole antecedent matter
in this Chapter. Now as this has coherence with that branch in the words next
before, it teaches that before noted: That the knowledge of Christ's excellency
is a preservative against all seducing spirits.

2 Again, as this has reference to that ( verse 1) I would have you know my
strife for you, and so gives a reason why he mentions his care, It does let
us see, what is a practice of false Teachers, even to bring us out of liking
with those that are faithful servants of CHRIST JESUS. This Saint Paul
suffered almost everywhere at their hands, in Corinth, Galatia, Philippi; where
did not the Devil by slanders labor to weaken his authority with the
Churches? thus he has always done; Moses, yea CHRIST Himself escaped not.
Revel. 12.15. The Serpent, that is, the Devil, is said to cast out of his
mouth, water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away of the flood; that is, of the reproaches which he spit out at the true
Church of God. As one that would win the love of a woman, does insinuate
dislikes of her husband, that having loosened her affections at home; he might
the more easily bring her to his lure: So does Satan by his instruments weaken
the affections of people toward Christ's servants, that he may after bring them
to Himself and His Prophets: thus he now buzzes into peoples ears that the
faithful Ministers are so proud, so censorious, that it is no living with
them, so strict they will allow no liberty, enemies to all good neighborhood
and fellowship where they come.

But knowing whereto these things tend,

2 This coherence teaches us, When it is lawful to protest our own care,
love and faithfulness to our people, when it serves to break the snares of
beguilers, and such as lie in wait to seduce.

But to come to the matter: The verse lays down two things: 1 The Apostle
his caution. 2 The evil which he does so warily keep off: The first, [this I
say] warily preventing: The second, [that you may not be deceived with
flattering speech.] The evil is set down by a double cause:


The one inward, to be gathered out of that word (...), that is craft and
wiliness of false teachers: for this word signifies to deceive sophistically
with show of reason, which has not sound reason under it.

The second outward, persuasive speech fitted to seduce and deceive.

The Sum is: I speak this out of a cautelous fear I have, that no evil
instrument may deceive you either by wyles, or glozing words, with which these
use to lie in wait for to pervert and corrupt unstable souls.

1 Observe hence: How careful we must be to keep our people out of the
hands of deceivers: hence come all those faithful watch-words; when a Prophet
arises, if daughter, wife, or any withdraw you from God, though they foretell
things or work wonders, believe them not. Our SAVIOR CHRIST gives this
advertisement: Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing.
Many false Prophets shall come, and false Christ's which shall deceive the very
Elect if it were possible. Often Saint Paul, be not deceived, let no man
deceive you. No wonder; is not a faithful Shepherd shy of Woolves? If flocks
of five pounds a score be so carefully kept; how much more must we be
careful of our souls, whom Christ has redeemed with His precious blood?

This then must teach Pastors wisdom: Paul's example is their instruction:
every bad leven which any spreads, is doctrine of devils: we must encounter
these Woolves, and keep our charges untouched of them. What a pity is it,
when so many do by life and doctrine adificare ad geheunam; that none is
found, who has courage once to bark at it? we fail herein of that charge the
Apostle gives; Take heed to the flock of God, Acts 20.28.
whereof the Holy Ghost has made you over seers.

2 Mark the force of seasonable speeches, they preserve the people: A word
spoken in season is like Apples of gold with pictures of silver. In civil
dangers the bark of a dog frayeth a thief, and awakeneth a family, and so
saves a household: how much more shall the voice of the Lords Pastors affright
these wicked impostors and awaken the Saints: Their voice, with which God
Himself goes, is able to make hell shake at the sound of it.

Wherefore let us awaken our selves, Lord open our mouths who are His watchmen
every where, that we may speak in this kind: The thief (I mean the Devil)
spoyleth at pleasure while we keep silence.

3 Mark, what false teachers fight with, namely, with deceit, 1 Co. 11.3.
show of reason, not sound reason; I am affrayd (says St. Paul) least any by
subtilety has beguiled you, as the Devil did Eve: Ephesians. 4.
Be not carried about through the deceit of false teachers; wherewith they lie
in wait to deceive. Lying Sophistry is the Devils logic: His logic is
made only of fallacyes. Thus look at the Papists; what are all that Goliath
his volumes, but very sophistry, shows of Scripture, of councills, Fathers,
reasons, as is at large prooved by many of our Writers?

Let us not then be carried away with babie cards,

Let us whet up our diligence by it,

Lastly observe, what kind of language they use, such as is full of flattery,
and glozing. Even as a foul faced Whore paynteth her face; so do they their
bad cause with eloquent insinuation, and such kindness and curtesy as smells
strong of craft and subtilty in a wise man's senses. They are said, To. 16.18.
(...).
with fair speeches and flatterings to deceive the hearts of the simple: this
is their sheeps garment, at least a part of it: this is the Iezabels painted
face. All false Prophets dwell at Placenza (as the Italian speaks) they will
speak pleasingly, sometimes tickle itching ears with such count elegancies as
may make them admired; sometime fawning, and pretending such kindness as the
Devil their father did to our first Parents, you shall be like Gods, when
indeed he knew they should become like Devils. Yet all persuasive force of
speech is not to be condemned; which Saint Paul himself frequenteth, I love
you from my heart root: what is our glory, our crown of rejoicing, but you in
the day of the Lord Jesus? But when a man labors by affected Rhetorique and
sweet eloquution, without the power of Gods spirit and evidence of matter to
win an acclamation to that he proposes; touching this says Saint Paul 1
Cor. 2.4. My word, and my preaching stood not in the entising speech of man's
wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and of power. Otherwise Apollos
was (...), eloquent; and who a better orator then Chrysostom? Neither is it
unlawful to give kind words to people, but when one speaks all to flatter,
and beyond truth speaks pleasingly, will no where offend, nor freely rebuke,
and still does this that he may work them to the liking of the opinions he
falsely venteth; In brief, when it is made a cup of fine wine to carry to the
heart more effectually a cup of deadly poison; whereas the faithful ones,
they commend good things in us that they may more equally in their just
reproves be heard of us. As a Physician guildeth a pill that it may be taken
the better, or to encourage them, and excite them to thankefullnesse, or some
such purpose.

To teach us godly wisdom,

VERSE 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in Spirit,
rejoicing, and beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ.
NOw he comes to prevent an objection: Why Saint Paul (might they say) you
know not us how we are in belief; (it may be these Ceremony-masters told them
he was one that thought least of them) to which S. Paul answers, though I have
not been with you in body, yet you are in my heart; I, in my mind, by relation
of others; know how it is with you, I am in mind with you rejoicing, and fixing
mine eye on your order, and the solidity of your faith toward Christ.

Mark hence first: There is a presence whereby Saints are one with another,
though never so far disjoined: Saint Paul absent in body, with the Colossians
present in spirit. We believe the communion of all Saints. Now were there no
way for them by which they might be each with other, how could they
communicate together? but as we say, where the mind is, there is the man: Now
the mind may be in heaven, in the utmost corner of the earth; wheresoever the
thought and affection is, hither we are transported in spirit: thus Eliah says
to Iehu, was not my spirit with thee? because God by vision showed him what his
servant did. For look as a man may be corporally present without his mind
there: so he may be in mind here or there where his body comes not. By the
mind is to be understood the operation of the mind, namely, the thought and
affections.

This therefore does show us an excellent privilege of Gods people; Christ is
with us all to the end of the world, so we are with him, and one with another.
For His bodily presence is not with us, but the presence of spirit and power
never forsakes us.

Yea this must teach us one to be in the thought of another,

Rejoicing and seeing] That is in spirit discerning as an absent thing, but by
the image of it made present to the mind; for this is the difference of the
Greek words (...) and (...). and with joy seeing their order and faith.

Observe first: The nature of love, it rejoices (as Saint Paul speaks) in
the truth, in the work of grace where it is discerned: John 3.4.
thus Saint John; what greater joy have I then that you walk in the truth? How
glad are loving Nurses and Parents of all comeliness and lovely qualities in
their Children? Even so those who have Gods Nurceries, and are Fathers in Him,
they joy in nothing more then in the external and internal graces of his
children. On the contrary, how was Saint Paul grieved, when the Church of
Corinth had such a blemish as that incestuous one uncast forth.

Alas, we want spiritual love! God, our spirits moove not: if we perceive not
forwardness of grace, we like Joseph's brethren envy it, rather then take
comfort in it; censure it as pride, humor, singularity; nay Pulpits sometimes
speak this english.

Your order] Observe hence: That all things in the Primitive Churches were most
orderly constituted and carried. Look at the government, at the
administrations, at the conversations of Christians, all you shall see were
full of order. First there was an order of government; for where there is no
government, there is no order. If all were one member, there were no order in
the body: there were some governing, some governed. Governors such as labored
in word and Doctrine publicly, and ordinarily, receiving calling thereto from
Christ; by his Church: or else such as attended the inspection of manners, not
dealing ordinarily with the Word and Sacraments, but as occasion required, not
by authority directly from Christ; but as delegates from the Pastors. There
were Deacons, ministering in careful oversight of the poor. Finally, the
assembly, which was governed by their leaders. For ministrations all were
comely in their holy native simplicity which became; all seemly circumstances
of time, and place observed in them. As I have received of the Lord Jesus
Christ, so have I delivered unto you. 1 Cor. 11.23.
Let all be done decently. For their conversation, they went out and in about
their own businesses; keeping their own ranks: If one did walk inordinately
but as an idle tattler, he was noted, and they severed from him. 2 These. 3.11.
They did go by rule, as in an orderly march (...) Gal. 6.16. they did (...).
1 These. 4.12. walk honestly toward them that are without.

Hence we may learn to mourn at the disorder every where,

Lastly, What a joyful sight it is to see souls cleave to Christ, and hold by
him. A true hearted subject cannot but joy to see the subject cleave fast in
all allegiance to his sovereign Lord the King: So it feeds the hearts of the
true servants of Christ to see others stand fast to Him. If you stand fast, we
are alive. It is a pleasant sight to see a valiant man, being assaulted on
every side, stand his ground and quit himself bravely: But for a soldier of
Christ by faith on Christ to subdue all hostility of Satan, and not give back
a foot is much more goodly and glorious to behold. Thus Saint Paul, now he saw
the Devil brave them with terms of learning, the depth of philosophical
speculation, and offering to make them ashamed of the simplicity of their
profession, sometime foysting Jewish ceremonies of the Law, that so he might
adulterate the sincerity of their profession; sometime by advancing the dignity
of Angels, offering to withdraw them sometime, from the meanenes of their
Teacher, who was no Apostle nor pillar of account, laboring to beat off this
hand of faith from holding the Lord Jesus, yet by the strength of Christ, they
standing against all.

But you will say,

True;

Besides, this solidity does rather note the soundness as opposed to
hypocrisy, then the undoubted persuasion of it.

Let us therefore be glad that GOD has kept this Church; that all the Popes
malice,

VERSE 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
Him.
THus far you have heard the Doctrinall part of this Epistle with the
digression annexed to it, from the four and twentieth verse of the first
Chapter to the sixth verse of this Chapter. Now follows the Second part of
this Epistle, which is exhortatory, and it reaches from this sixth verse of
the second Chapter to the seventh verse of the fourth Chapter. The exhortations
are of two sorts.

Some general, that is, containing matter which all sorts and sexes, and
conditions are to obey; which beginning in this verse reaches to the
eighteenth verse of the third Chapter.

Some particular, that is, which do not concern all men and women in this or
that particular calling of life, as Wives, Husbands, Masters, servants, to the
seventh verse of the third Chapter. Where the conclusion begins.

To return unto our general exhortations, they are

Principal,

Or,

Secondarie, serving to the principal.

The Principal main one, in the sixth and seventh verses: the other
following. First you have the duty it self, walk in Christ. Secondly the
manner or consequents following on this their walking, described by two
Cardinal virtues.

1 Confirmed faith: 2 Thankfulness.
The first he does not simply propose, but premiseth their good beginning,
which has the force of an argument thus:

Those who have received Christ Jesus the Lord, as their only Savior, Priest,
Prophet, King; they must in their whole course only acknowledge Him. But ye
have received Him, that is, believed on Him as your Lord and Savior: Therefore
as you have received Him, so walk in Him.

Mark first: What is the property of true faith; it receives Christ: even as
the hand does take a thing from another reached unto it; So does Faith take
Christ offered unto us, and given us by GOD the Father in the ministry of the
Word and Sacraments: thus Galath. 3.14. CHRIST was made a curse, that we by
Faith might receive the blessing of Abraham, the spirit promised: mark,
receive by Faith, not into knowledge; for the Saints do not know only that
the spirit is given of GOD to His children, but that it is poured on them in
their measure, and received to dwell in them. John 1.11, 12. The Jews received
Him not, that is, they believed not in Him; but so many as received Him, He
made them the Sons of GOD, even so many as believed on His Name; the latter
words expound the former, yea faith so receives Christ, that He comes to
dwell in the heart. Ephesians. 3.17. Hence it is, that faith is said to put on
Christ; Romans 13.
to engraft us into Him, to unite us with Him, as the members and head are
coupled. For faith does not only know and assent unto, but it has a hearty
affiance in it, which makes us rest upon Christ, as made of God every thing
unto us; 1 Co. 1.30
Wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

It condemns the Papists; Christ as a Savior, without any confidence resting
upon him as a Savior: whence their Schoolmen dispute, that a man may be sound
in faith; and in a damnable despair at the same instant. Now this faith
leaves Christ in the air, does not at all apply him unto us. For as if one
hold out a thing unto me and say, it is thus and thus; my sight, and conceiving
what it is, without reaching my hand to it, does not at all receive it: So
while faith with the eye of it looks on, and conceives what GOD offers,
but does not by trust and confidence reach that which God offers into the
soul; we receive nothing, and therefore have no benefit by CHRIST. For as
medicine, meat, clothes seen only and conceived on, but not taken in and
put on, profit nothing: So in Christ, our medicine, our meat, our apparel, to
heal us, nourish us and cover us in the sight of GOD. Wherefore labor for
this effectual justifying faith, let the confidence of your hearts be toward
Christ, that having Him within you spiritually, all his benefits may be yours
likewise.

This may serve to inform us something in the Doctrine of faith; Christ to a
sinner is warrant sufficient unto a sinner for to receive Christ. It is not
then for a poor soul when he would settle the first ground of his faith, to
look for something in himself that should make him worthy of Christ; but in
this business there is nothing to be done, but for a man to go out of
himself, and to take Christ with an empty hand, as He is offered; that is, to
save sinners, to seek the lost, to heal the wounded, to feed the poor: The
sense of nakedness and poverty is warrant enough for a man to receive Christ.
This being well understood will be very avayleable to settle the faith of
Christians, to keep them from wavering in believing, whereunto they are
exposed by Satan's malice; they cannot think Christ will save them, GOD will
not look upon them, GOD will vouchsafe no such privilege unto them, because
they are poor, blind, and naked: But I say, for that cause receive Him, and
take Him for that end He is offered: therefore when the Lord convinces the
Church of Laodicea, thou art wretched, poor, blind and naked, then I counsel
thee to buy of me eye salve, that thou may see, and white raiment that thou
may be clothed: Say not, Christ is not mine, I dare not apply Him, because I
am a sinner; indeed if thou have a purpose to go on in sin, thou must not
venture to apply Christ: But if thou be humbled in the sight of thy own
unworthiness, and do account it the greatest favor of GOD to be freed from
sin, thou have good warrant to receive Christ thus offered; for so the LORD
JESUS does invite poor sinners; Mat. 11.28
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you.

It may serve to teach us, a thing done with the whole heart: It was a question
which the Apostles were wont to put when they received any man to be baptized,
Acts 8.
Do you believe with your whole heart? as Philip said to the Eunuch. It must
be a receiving of Christ with the whole soul.

2 True faith apprehends Christ such a Savior as the spirit of God in
Scripture sets Him out to be, Hebr. 7.25.
a perfect Savior, who is perfectly able to save all that come to Him through
faith. As He alone trod the wyne-presse of Gods wrath: So He alone works our
salvation. This the Apostle presses, because of the false Apostles that were
crept into the Church: they would grant that Jesus Christ, the Son of Mary,
was the true Christ, in whom the Jews and Gentiles should trust; yet they
would have something else to be joined with him, they would have Moses joined
with Christ, and the Law with the Gospel in the matter of salvation; against
which the Apostle much labors, and to settle their hearts only upon Christ,
excluding all other causes and things from having any hand or share in being
meritorious causes of man's salvation.

3 All is not done when the judgment is informed that Christ is the only
Savior, and a perfect Savior without any act of ours concurring to merit
salvation; there is another thing to be added which must fasten upon the
affections: Christ must be received with the whole heart; not only with the
understanding, but the will and affections, the whole soul must incline to it,
thus to rest only upon Him, to prize Him only for Himself, faith fixes upon
the person of Christ, and takes all other things as consequents deduced from
that which is in Christ: So the joy of a Christian, the delight of a Christian,
the love of a Christian, should be fixed only upon Christ.

4 There is yet another thing to be done: to receive whole Christ into the
whole heart, is to receive Christ in all His offices, Ioh. 14.6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life; He is our way, He is our Peacemaker,
so He is our Priest: He is the truth, as He is our Prophet, to lead us into
all truth: and He is our life, as He is our King, and mighty Lord to work
effectually in the hearts of all that shall be saved. Take Him thus: expect not
only peace by Him, but truth also; nor knowledge of the truth only, but life
also and ability to walk in obedience to that truth: thus you must receive
whole Christ; not only as a Savior to free you from the wrath of God, but also
as a Lord and King to rule over you and to guide you. Hereby you may know
whether you have received CHRIST or not.

2 Mark hence: That true belief on Christ must have with it perseverance, and
a life obedient unto Him. A true believer on Him must be a constant believer,
and a good liver in Him; for to walk in Christ is every where to converse as
those who must in all things acknowledge Him. As Christ is the author and
object of our faith; so He must be the Sovereign commander, the chief worker,
the end of all those works which I walk in, and occupy my self about through
my whole life.

But the phrase is worth the opening.

1 It signifies as much as to do all we do after the rule and command of
Christ, the same with (...). after CHRIST. verse 8. He is our only law giver,
we are in all things to hear Him, and to attend His pleasure, not stirring
without His warrant. 2 It signifies continuing in Him, in faith on Him, to
which He has brought us; not to recoyle or give in. 3 To walk in Christ is
to set before our eyes His glory, as the white we shoot at in all our affairs
great and small: Whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of GOD; and so of
Christ. I count not my life dear, that I may fulfill the ministry which the
Lord Jesus has given me: whether in my wits or out, etc. I am to the Lord. And
what is more equal? when a woman has married a man, must she not live to Him
alone? Is she to be commanded by others? Is she not to seek to please him? to
obey him, honor him in all things, with fear? How much more meet is it, that
we being by the hand of faith contracted to our Lord, should live to Him? And
as a woman new married must not start, but for better or worse continue where
her faith is plighted: So must we, having given our faith not go back from
Christ our husband, that has bought us dear, and given us in jointure, heaven
it self.
Wherefore this must both admonish us of our duties, Christ, but live not in
Him, look not to His will, deny not themselves, seeking for His strength,
labor not to set forth His glory. Nay they are at the command of men, what
such and such like of, is their ten commandments, yea walk in the flesh, in
obeying the lusts of their own hearts, following their own corrupt minds and
affections, and the examples of others like themselves. O wretch heart thou not
ashamed? have thou the face of an honest man, and would thou not blush to
take a woman to thee, and make no conscience of following every trull, and
leaving her so as she scarce from the beginning of the week to the end comes
into thy thoughts? thus thou servest thy husband Christ.

Observe lastly: That our good beginnings must be a bond unto us to make good
proceeding. Have you begun (says Saint Paul) in the spirit; and will you end
in the flesh? have you suffered so many things in vain? So he exhorts
Timothy even from this that he had been brought up in the Scriptures of a
child, and had made a good profession before many witnesses. We see that
children, when that they have done already, is commended, it does hearten them
to further diligence. Besides it is a secret shame to leap from pale to
sprigge, and with the Moon to change our beliefes: Therefore even in this
regard it inforceth continuance, to remember us what we have begun in.
Besides, be that sets his hand to Gods plough, and looks back, is not fit
for His kingdom.

Wherefore we must the rather (I say) hold on. good and holy? Oh thou have
forgot this, who have lost thy first love, who have been more zealous, more
careful of good duties; who have embraced CHRIST more powerfully and
affectionately than now thou do: Why do thou mar good beginnings with
such slothful proceedings?

VERSE 7. Rooted and built up in Him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.
NOw follows the manner of their walking on in JESUS CHRIST, which is
described from the augmentation of their Faith, and their thankfulness for
CHRIST, and the doctrine which brought the knowledge of Him unto them: The
growth of Faith is described: 1. From the effects. 2. From the quantity. The
effects of a proceeding faith, and obedient course of life led in Christ, are
two: 1. A more firm union with Christ; this is set down by a double
comparison: the one taken from trees fastening their roots lower and lower: The
other from buildings, wherein matter is surely laid upon the foundation. The 2.
Effect is the more full persuasion of the doctrine of CHRIST and grace of God
brought them in the same, which is set down by the manner how it was to be
held of them, firmly, even so as they had been taught by Epaphras. The
Quantity follows, abounding in your confirmed persuasion above named.

The second thing follows, which is also a fruit of increasing faith, even
thankfulness for CHRIST and His benefits bestowed on us, and now more
certainly perceived by us. So that this verse may be thus conceived: It
describes our coustant walking in CHRIST, and our Faith in Him, by these
particulars.

1 A more near Union with CHRIST; we fixing the roots of our affiance more
deeply in Him: and like as it is in buildings; So we being living stones
which more and more settle, as it were, by constant walking in CHRIST, on Him
our Foundation. 2 Our constant course brings us hitherto, that whereas we
were wavering, touching the points of doctrine and God's grace, as they were
taught us; we (I say) constant by walking in Christ, come to be strongly
persuaded in all the matter of faith, as we first learned it from faithful
teachers. 3. This shall accompany your proceeding in Christ; that we shall
abound in our persuasion of doctrine, and GOD's grace toward us. 4. That better
knowing the things bestowed on us, and eased of our doubting, which unbelief
excited, we grow to unfeigned thankfulness for CHRIST and His benefits.
The sum therefore is now easily set down:

Continue in the faith you have begun in, and live according to His will, and
through His strength on whom you have believed, growing by this constant
persevering to be more nearly knit to Him, rooted and builded; more fully
persuaded of the doctrine, as it has been taught you, for measure more
abundant both in knowledge and confidence; finally, heartily thankful for so
great things given you of GOD.

Observe first, What fruit we get by constant going on in CHRIST; we come to
have more firm conjunction with Him. When a young plant is newly set, the
roots are of small depth in the earth, one may well pull them up with an hand,
but as the tree shoots up in sight, and bearing fruit, so it strikes the
roots deeper and deeper downward; yea, both together, though it be not
perceived: So that no force can move it: So in a building stones new laid while
the mortar is yet green, may be pecked out; but when the cement is dried, and
they are sunk down, and thoroughly settled upon the foundation, they are more
closely joined to it, then they cannot be easily moved: So it is in us; we
have not for degree so firm and near conjunction with Christ, but the more we
live in Him, like good trees spreading in the sight of all men, and bringing
forth the fruit of righteousness, the more we come to take root downward by a
more firm confidence, which does bring us to have a firmer conjunction, and
more near union with Him. Our Union is answerable unto that which uniteth us.
As the cause is in degree greater or lesser, the effect is answerable: Now at
the first faith is weak, like a bruised reed and smoking week; but while
Faith holding Christ, does draw the Spirit from Him, which makes it fruitful
in good works; the more it exercises, the more it is strengthened: even as in
babes, their powers every way at first are feeble; but the more they feed and
exercise, the more they waste the redundant moisture, which before enfeebled
their faculties, and put forth strength in all their operations. Saint Peter,
when faith was weak in him, at the voice of a Damsel was shaken: by walking
in Christ awhile, he was so rooted, that threatenings, whippings, imprisonments,
conventings before great power, martyrdom, nothing could shake him.

Wherefore, let us walk on without fainting, in Christ: this will bring us
further and further into Christ. What if thou stand not so firm? what if
little winds seem to shake thee? go on, thou shall grow rooted in him thou
know not how; yea, while thou do thus (though thou shakest) thy root does
strike lower and lower into Christ. Many are moved to think how weakly they are
fastened, how slenderly they are rooted in Him, but to be rooted is not every
believers state, I mean thus deeply rooted: this is the condition which they
attain who have long walked in Christ.

But what then if Christians be not at first rooted?

True, David may shrewdly totter.

Hence may be showed men why they are so weakly grounded in Christ;

2 Mark when he says; Walk on in Christ, confirmed in faith, growing to be
settled in ^ull persuasion of the doctrine and grace brought unto you.

Observe hence; That resolved persuasion in the doctrine we profess, and grace
we believe, grows out of a constant course in faith and obedience. To be
fully persuaded, is not attained the first day; Lord I believe, help my
unbeleefe: Faith is mixed with doubting at the first; but in progress of time
we come to out-grace this wavering, of which all believing hearts complain at
times justly: This was Abraham's prerogative, he was fully persuaded of that GOD
had promised him, without once making question of it. There is no man learneth
any Art, who at first can see how every thing is true, which others skillful
therein tell him; but oportet discentem credere; believing that which his
master says, and going on with it, he comes in the end most fully to
discern, and be persuaded of all things: So it is in this Art of arts, and so
much the more, by how much it is the more divine, and surpassing all natural
capacity than others. When a man recovereth some long sickness, and begins
to walk; he walks with great feebleness and faintness: but going on in
exercise and diet, nature overcomming the remainders of sick matter which were
left, he goes strongly, and feels not his former imbecility. So when God
heals an unbeleeving heart, there are at first such relics of unbeleefe as
make him full of doubting; but going on in CHRIST, the Author and Finisher of
his faith, GOD does so assist his faith, that it subdueth this contrary form;
so that the man walks confirmed in those things which he believed sometime
very waveringly.

The use of this is, burn more clearly: So thy faith thus knocked with these
doubtings, shall when it gets up, be so much more confident.

Here we are given to understand,

As ye have been taught] viz. As you have been taught by Epaphras: Note
hence, a point of wisdom in Saint Paul, and mutual honor, confirming and
countenancing Epaphras a faithful labourer. Which is our Pattern for
imitation: the honor we owe our brethren requires it: the love we bear the
truth, does require we testify for it; yea, the care of others salvation does
move us every way, to make God's wholesome truth grateful to them. For men of
note having heard some of less reputation preaching after them; it is not
amiss to have recourse to their matter and sayings, and mention them with
honor.

Again, it seems insinuated hence, that the Devil did a little move them to
unbeleefe, even from this circumstance, though they doubted not of the Gospel;
yet whether, as he taught it, or no, it was true that might be questioned:
which if it be; we may see that continuing in faith and obedience, will make
us out-grow such carnal exceptions, at which sometimes we stumbled. If the
Devil cannot bring us to say, the meat is naught, yet he will make us to
think it is not aright handled, the Cook is not as he should: Thus many
think, though they cannot gainsay the matter, why the man is no great
scholar, no Doctor in schools, he preaches plainly, not a testimony of
Fathers, nor sentence of any Author. Well, if thou have an honest heart, go on
in CHRIST, and these things shall vanish. This by the way.

3 Mark he says; abounding in it] whence we learn, What constant walking in
CHRIST will bring us to, and what we must endeavor to, not only to be well
confirmed, but to abound in persuasion. Let every man abound in this sense. If
we do any thing of things indifferent, or believe any thing, it is good to
abound in the persuasion of it. A man cannot trust God too much; a man cannot
go too far in this which does glorify God, and put to His seal that He is
true, and good in all He speaks to us. We must therefore endeavor it.
Beside, as waters a while dammed down that they could not have course, when
once they break through, they overflow all far and wide: even so does Faith
borne down a while with doubting, so much the more abundantly break out, and
drown all scruples in us: Or as fire long smoothered and smoking, at length
breaks out with flames that touch the sky, and like another Sun enlighten
the air; So does true faith, when it swimmeth from under these waves of
doubting, which sometime over-whelme it.

The same uses which before, may serve for this point.

Especially this confuteth Papists: Oh, say they, God speaks of true faith,
as if this were the only measure to keep no measure. Indeed carnal
presumptions, as faith on our own worthiness, works, etc. we cannot too
much abandon, but belief grounded on God's truth is not this; while they hang
it upon the Churches yea and nay. But Saint Paul speaks of the Gospel, and
this faith he calls for, which did root them in Christ.

But who can be sure of repentance and faith?

He that has them may know them,

Lastly, mark; What walking in CHRIST has at length going with it, hearty
thanksgiving; while we know not through weakness, the things bestowed, there
is little thankfulness that can come from us; but as we grow up to see what is
given us, thankfulness gets up also. You see in babes, though their parents
do hang never such rich jewels and bracelets upon them, alas they cannot
thank them, for they know not how they are adorned; but let them come to some
knowledge, and give them a thing, then they will a little thank you; but let
them grow to ripeness of understanding, and give them some great precious
things, they will be much affected. Two things breed thankfulness; the one
knowing that the benefit is of worth: The second, that this thing so known,
must be given and received. Now knowledge and assurance that all the benefits
of CHRIST are made ours, these are faith; and as they do grow from one degree
to another, so thankfulness follows, even as the shadow the body, answering
proportionably.

This thus opened, pardon of sin, whether he has them in truth, or whether
those he have be counterfeits. Say one should give me a Diamond, but yet could
not know possibly whether it were a Chester-stone, not worth twelve pence could
I be thankful? Nay we must know for what first by their leave. Again, say one
showed me a thousand pound, but would not let me know he would give it me, only
leave it upon a peradventure; could a man be thankful for this? Nay, we would
say, I will thank you when I have it. If we have it not in possession or
certain hope, it is as nothing to us.

We must be stirred up to increase our thankfulness to GOD for these mercies:
Christ as we should, we know not what is bestowed on us.

VERSE 8. Beware left any spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceits,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
CHRIST.
NOw the Apostle comes to secondary exhortations, which are assistant unto
the great one, of walking in Christ; they are of two sorts. 1. Cautionary
prohibitions, warning from such things as draw us from Christ, to the end of
this second Chapter. 2. Precepts of Practice which must be observed, that we
may go on in Christ, from the beginning of the third Chapter unto the
eighteenth Verse. The first sort beginning in this Verse, is first set down
generally to the sixteenth Verse, after more specially to the end. In the
general prohibition we first see the dehortation: after the reason. The
dehortation contains two things: 1 The evil they were to avoid. 2 The means
of breeding the evil.


The first, Let none make a prey of you; that is, carry you away who are the
sheep of Christ, from His fold, the true Church, into their own, which are
Synagogues of Satan, that is the force of the Word. The means tending hither
are two:

First, Philosophy, which does Synechdochically note all humane wisdom
unsanctified, with the doctrine it teaches, and the show it makes.

Secondly, Vain deceit, which might signify sophistical Logic: but this is
a principal part of Philosophy. Some think it to be thus meant, Philosophy,
which is vain deceit; but the conjunction does show that here a distinct thing
is meant: therefore I take vain deceit here for all religious rites which
carnal wisdom inventeth, and obtrudeth, called so; first because they miss
the end of pleasing God, at which they aim: Secondly, they are empty of that
grace being not sanctified by GOD, which they seem to have, and therefore are
empty deceits; in which regard Saint Paul calls these rites disanulled by
God, and affected by men, (...), beggarly elements; not having a jot of true
grace of the Spirit going with them, and no doubt but this is here meant: For
the Apostle specisying the things after which are (...), Verse. 20.22. he has
the intercession of Angels, and the Jewish rites, which some would have put
upon them, (...); the reason taken from the original quality of these things,
which is set down adversatively thus: These things come from man, they are
carnal and worldly, not after Christ, that is, having Him their Author, not
spiritual. And first these words do seem to intimate whence these things
come to have such efficacy of deceiving; even from hence, that they are
countenanced with humane authority, and are for their quality carnal and
worldly things. 2. Here is a reason included thus: Those things which are not
after the rule of Christ, we must not follow, who have received Him, and
professed that we will walk in Him: But Philosophy and empty rites of
religion, are after man's wisdom and the world, not after Christ; therefore we
must not let any deceive us with these things. In the Verses following, to the
sixteenth Verse, is a double prosyllogisme proving the first part of this
reason (for the second is passed over as evident) it stands thus:

That which is not after Him in whom is all the Godhead personally, that you
must not receive:

In CHRIST is all the fullness of the Godhead personally:

Ergo, etc.

Secondly; that which is not after Him through whom, and in whom you come to
receive the fullness of spiritual gifts, as the removal of guilt, and blot of
sin, and quicknance with the life of GOD, freedom from the yoke of the Law,
victory over spiritual wickedness: what agrees not with Him in whom ye have
such benefits, that ye must not receive, unless you would forsake these
unvaluable blessings: Now admit that; unless you will leave Him, and forgo
these great benefits ye have in Him: this is the disposition of the argument
to the sixteenth Verse.

Now to return, observe first from this eight Verse: That to yield to
erroneous doctrines which corrupt reason teaches, do take us from Christ. See
you be not made a pray, led away captive, as those that are vanquished in
battle: therefore it is plain that the yielding to such things, does make a
man a spiritual captive, and lead him from Christ: this is it that makes the
Apostle say, Gal. 5.2. If ye be circumcised, and seek salvation by the Law,
you are cut off from Christ, Christ shall profit you nothing: For look as
evil weeds do suffocate good corn, and Ivy kills the heart of Oak: So
heresies and false worship will kill grace, if they should be fully
entertained; which makes Saint Paul say of Hymenaus and Philetus, who denied
the Resurrection, that they had subverted the faith of some who attended unto
them; prevailing against their faith, they could not but withdraw them from
CHRIST, with whom we are coupled by faith only.

But two things may be objected: 1 That much stubble may be builded on the
foundation, and therefore CHRIST and such things stand together. 2 That true
grace cannot be prevailed against.


Answ. To the first, it is true, many opinions may be received, and erroneous
rites used, and yet CHRIST be held:

But, 1 It must be done ignorantly. 2 With a mind teachable, and ready to give
place when light does evince it. 3 In points not directly fundamental, that
is, such as are so maine, that without them there is no salvation; or of so
clear consequence from them, that who so truly is persuaded of the one,
cannot but see the other: As that CHRIST is both GOD and perfect man in one
Person, is a point fundamental: That Christ has two wills distinct, is of
clear consequence; for who so is GOD, has a most free and almighty will as
GOD, and who is perfect man, has a humane will like man. For as not every
wound kills a man, but if the heart or brain be pierced, life perishes: So
it is here; if the soul in things fundamental be truly touched, it is
divorced from Christ. It is answered then to the first, that stubble may stand
while it is admitted ignorantly, with a prepared mind to disclaim it, if it
be found such not directly crossing the foundation: Now it is not fully
received in a mind thus qualified; It is seen in experience that a man going
where the plague is, not witting of any such thing, takes no hurt often: So in
this matter.


To the second, it is manifest, that as those who have that precious faith of
the Elect, which fails not, cannot be prevailed against: So GOD does never
leave them to yield unto any herefies directly fundamental, or wittingly and
willingly against eviction, to persist in them.

This is to be marked against such as think it no such danger to reconcile in
many points with Papists:

Again, God has a remnant known to Himself; yet the general estate of that
Church, cannot but be comfortless: because since Luthers time, and the
Council of Trent, the pillars of that Church representing the whole, have
against most clear light withstood the truth, and have joined such pertinacie
to error, that they anathematize whatsoever shall be brought against them.

2 Mark, What has been an engine of Satan against the faith, even the
wisdom renowned of the great of the world, Philosophy: This kept many from
entering the faith: When Saint Paul disputed of the Resurrection, the Athenians
mocked him. This made many, brought to the faith, stagger, when they could not
answer the plausible sophismes, they were dazzled with the curious subtilty that
did shine forth in it; this drew many from the faith, and be got heresies (for
heresy is an error held with pertinacie by them who sometime have been
believers.) Hierom says, Philosophi sunt primogeniti Aegypti: and other of the
Ancient do brand it bitterly. No wonder; for then it was generally received as
the wisdom of the world, every quarter of the earth, as it were, having their
Philosophers, whom as Sect-masters they followed: then there were
Peripatecians, Platonists, who, as it is likely, troubled these Colossians,
Stoics, Epicures. What bred heresy in the article of the Resurrection, but
this? What in the point of the Trinity, three Persons, and one Essence? What in
the Person of Christ, why not two Natures in one Person, the one being an
Essence without being, (...), this or that thing subsisting by it self,
because the like is not in all Nature. What made Arrius sow his conceit?
prefidence in his Logic, for he was (...), as story reports. Finally, what
makes the Papist he will not believe that a man is formally righteous before
God, by righteousness in Christ's Person only imputed? Even this, because in
all Nature every thing is that it is formally by something inherent in it
self. No man wise with another wisdom, etc. this is the fruit that Scotus
exclaimeth on, Doctores theologiae Philosophiam cum theologiae maximo cum
fructu miscuerunt. If Saint Paul would show what this fruit is, he would
doubtless answer, much error; which Trithemeus well-witnesseth, Sacra
Theologia Saecular is Philosophiae mutili curiositate faedatur: This is
sufficient to show that this humane wisdom if unsanctified has always been
a Moabitish minion, whose aspect is so amiable to a carnal mind, that he has
woone unto himself by it not a few; and no wonder, for the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity to GOD, and the reason of it so far as corrupt, must be
captivated to Christ.

But some may say,

Philosophy is double, that which is truly, God for Himself, yet enjoying His
benefits, do more ardently affect Him; this use Christ gives us to understand;
Spirits have not flesh and bones as I have: their own sword kills them: Thus
Saint Paul evinceth the Corinthians out of nature, who through natural reason
impugned the resurrection of the dead. To know the creature, is of it self
good, a ladder to heaven, a spectacle wherewith heavenly things may be better
discerned; yet our corruption abuses this, priding it self therein, as if
there were no higher, fixing it self on this beauty it discerns, neglecting
to go to the top, while it lodges it self with delight and admiration in the
workmanship of the stayres by which it should ascend. Sometime by knowing the
excellency of the creature, it does grow to think that there is no higher
happiness then to posses it and the delight of it. As a beautiful complexion
is the good creature of God, yet often misleads a corrupt eye: So this mental
Helene (if I may so call truesecular knowledge) does too much enamor our
carnal understanding.

The use of this is first (though we must not reject the seeking, Gospel, and
of Philosophical sciences, as if a man could not be a good Theologue that were
not skillfull in them: as if supernatural divinity stood in need of
philosophy, as the understanding does of inferior senses; whereas it is
nothing so: for the supernatural gifts of the spirit inlightning by the word
of God that makes a divine, not any humane literature: and therefore we read
of few wise of the world converted, when babes and the foolish ones in
comparison were enlightened this way: Besides the Apostles themselves were this
way not trained, as Ambrose says, Credimus piscatoribus, non dialecticis, this
is an extreme as well as the other. Yea often the Lords children may too much
stand upon it; for our understandings being more natural then spiritual, are
ready too too much to incline to that which is connaturall unto them, I mean
an object proportioned to their natural forces. Hence in the primitive
Churches the Christians were too much dejected in the want of it, and too
little prized their own knowledge, for the simplicity which to carnal
judgment seems to be in it. Even as Christians in poor bodily rayments are
not so much comforted in the clothing of their souls, as dejected in the mean
attire of the outward man, withal too much esteeming the pompous rich apparel
in which others ruffle: So in the mind; for the soul is cladde with light of
knowledge, as the body with bodily raiment. When it wants this secular
glorious raiment of Philosophical sciences, it is more often cast down then
it should, and too much esteems the presence of it in others. Yea hence
sometime they grew to be weakened in faith, when they could not answer those
difficulties which the wisdom of the natural man objecteth, whereas they
should have counted the voice of Angels (if opposite to the Gospel) utterly
accursed. True it is that grace turns this complementall knowledge to the
further confirming of us; but it is as true, that the same spirit does make the
want of it an occasion also of greater affiance: even as all earthly means of
working this or that, help a heart sanctified in belief, so the absence of
all means occasion faith to be more intensively set on God, from whom comes
our help.

And vain deceit] Observe hence: That Satan by empty shows of religion,
standing in vain rites, does prevayle against many. For this vain deceit is
nothing but the empty, and deceiveable practice of religion, whereby he drew
many from the simplicity of the Gospel. How did he ensnare those primitive
Churches, but with obtruding upon them beggarly elementall services and bodily
austerities which profited nothing? And how has he brought the Papists to this
pass in which they are, but by foysting in all kind of empty toyish rites that
either Iudaisme or Paganism could afford, and by magnifying such canonical
austerities to which their Monks and Anachorets were addicted? There is nothing
to be seen but such empty deceitful toys in all their service of GOD, their
mass, their precessions, Palm branches, ashes sprinkled, their whippings,
hair clothes, holy water, censings, pilgrimages, adoration of relics, etc.
For look as children will be quickly woone with fine puppets and babies, and
joy in these things more then in substantial matters: So these who are without
all heavenly wisdom, or have but infantlike understanding, such ware as this
is very saleable in their eyes, and does easily ensnare them.

Wherefore let us,

2 Observe hence: All religious observances contrary to the word of GOD, are
but deceitful vanity: vain deceit. In vain do you worship, Mat. 15.9.
framing religion, after the precepts of men; says Christ.

For first, they have not any grace accompanying of them; as enlightening the
mind, confirming the faith, stirring up devotion: for these things accompany
outward services by force of Gods spirit working in them, not of themselves:
now Gods spirit does not work in any other then the Lords Ordinances.

2 They go for religion, but are not so indeed; for true religion, the soul
of it, is not simply to do this act, but to do it with relation to GOD
commanding; now this cannot be in things God requires not.

3 They miss the end which is pretended in them, for they please not GOD;
wherefore as we say of wares deceitful, which look well, but want the
substance, such are al things intrinsecus defectuosae, as they are called; as
for example, counterfeit money, which has the color, stamp and touch sometime,
yet is inwardly no such thing, we may say such things are vain deceit, for
they are but shows that mock such as they are put upon: So in this matter;
even as the Papists confess it of their false relics which are not such as
they are affirmed; So we may truly say of all their religious practice in a
manner.

The use is therefore to make us wary that we be not cheated and beguiled this
way.

According to the tradition of men] Observe hence: That the authority of man in
matter of doctrine, and religious observance, is not to be respected, against
the Word of GOD. Jews so erroneous, the authority of their great Rabbines; and
traditionary divinity was so embraced by them, as CHRIST says, It was said of
old, but I say: So likewise concerning matters of rites, their washing hands
with signification, they call it a constitution of their fathers; this was in
the Primitive Church continued, that many were so addicted to some men, that
they would receive the things fathered upon them, though discrepant from the
Evangelicall doctrine: So that in Tertullians time many did defend that the
Apostles did not write all truth for us to know, but that there was a more
perfect divinity, which was traditionary; Lib. 1. cap. 23, 24.
yea in Ireneus time before Tertullian. For this is the property of Heretics,
to calumniate the perfection of the Scripture, neither do they ever fly to it,
but only to the bark of the outward syllables, that they may so avoid the
substance and matter of it, which is most manifest. And so Arrius did fly from
the wholesome phrases and manner of speaking in the fathers, to the express
syllables of Scripture, in which he would have (...) showed him quoad (...);
and the authority of antique tradition is so forcible that it beguiled some of
the Fathers, drawing them to use some ceremonies utterly ungrounded in the
word, as milk, and honey in baptism, giving the Eucharist to children, not
kneeling, from Easter to Whitsunday. But how did Tertullian then show that
traditions were not to be regarded which were beside the authority of the Word,
in matters of faith and manners? even thus: The Apostles were sent by Christ;
If therefore they did not publish things faithfully, either they wey were
unable, or not sincere, and Christ blameworthy that would send those so
qualified: we may say either they could, and would not, would, but could not,
or else were willing and able, but might not.

That they could not is absurd, who had the gifts of the Holy Ghost so
abundantly.

That they would not, is unlikely, who were so faithful, and who suffered all
things, yea death it self for the Churches good.

That they might not, least holy things and that more perfect should be too
much divulged, and so Pearls cast before Swine; for Christ bid them speak all
things they heard from Him (yea though in secret) upon the house tops. And as
for Dogs and Swine, there is no fear; for the Bible, though open, is a
clasped book to them: as for others, all the counsel of God belongs to
them. Thus you may see the truth of this, that humane authority has been a
back to error, and an allurement from the faith.

Let them not deceive you with things after the tradition of men.

First then by this we come to discern the deceived estate of the Roman
Church;

2 This must teach us not to stand too much upon the bare authority of men, as
to pin faith upon their opinion: Omnes patres, and tota schola are not the
Old and New Testament. We all incline to speak as they. Which of the Rabbis
and Doctors of the law believe in Him? and to reject that which comes not
ushered in with humane testimonies; whereas we should not receive any thing
because men affirm it, nor deny any thing in this regard simply, because
great Clerks are of another judgment; though we must not on the other
extreme pass by Antiquity and modern judgments, upon a self willed fancy,
as if they were not to be heeded.

You will say then, what use are we to make,

Say I conceit this or that opinion, but I see, 1 I am so far to respect
this, not as therefore to discard it, and judge of it as erroneous; but only
not to precipitate any determination against them. 2 I am to have the more
jealousy of that which by opinion I conceive. 3 I am to excite my self to the
more full inquiry, to see what grounds they had, what verisimilitude at least
for their sentence. 4 If I find my self in the truth, I am with the more
humility and thankfulness to embrace it, when I see that even men of greater
parts had it not showed unto them. So on the other side the Fathers say this
unanimi consensu; I do not therefore believe it, this were humane faith; but I
account it a presumption, that the thing is true. Secondly, I search the
grounds of it with more alacrity and confidence. Thirdly, I having grounded my
faith on GODS Word, am in this regard, more confident in my persuasion.


Lastly this must teach us to adore the fullness of the Scripture, God,
speaks without understanding; for whatsoever any knows out of his natural
wisdom is foolishness in Gods matters; but what he knows without the Word
he has it out of his own wisdom: there is no shift unless we will say there
is place for revelation, without the means of the Word; therefore what he thus
speaks is foolishness: the Word conteyneth all things, if not in syllables
yet in sense, that are needful for faith, and manners, yea directions for all
indifferent things, which are variable.

According to the elements of this world] Observe first: What makes error, and
false worship so infectious, even because they are carnal savoring of the
flesh; and after the fashion of this world; like lips love like lettice: now
we are by nature in error, and therefore Saint Paul says that heresy is a
work of the flesh. Again we are sensual, and therefore delight in such
fashion of worship as is not spiritual, but feeds the sense, and hangs us
so up by the senses, that we ascend not to spiritual contemplation. Many
mervaile why so many profess and daily fall to Popery; but they might as well
marvel why frogs love the fennes: for the truth is, it is natural to the
corrupt man, all is sensual, and of this World: Such a Prince-like Clergy,
such sumptuous Temples, and goodly pictures, heavenly music, odoriferous
incense, al exercises such as their own strength may undertake, every thing of
this world: the world cannot but love his own; and therefore unregenerate men
cannot but affect these things; yea we need no better confirmation then that
petitioner, who did prefer this as one motive for tolleration in commendation
of their religion, that it was sensual; it had to please the sense in it, and
is the reason why the sincerest reformed Churches, that have cut off all these
fleshly services, are by all sorts of worldly men the most maligned, because
they have the least with them to feed the senses; nay nothing but that which
CHRIST has left, which because it is commanded, is therefore odious.

The use is, Paul says of men, so we may say of religious observancies: if
they then please corrupt men, and suite with their corruption, they are not the
ordinances of CHRIST. Yea even hence they are to be resisted, because they are
after the guise of this world. The Primitive age kept it, that they would not
admit the least Pagan rite or Jewish ceremony; they would not have a Sermon on
Saturday, and allowed a kind of trading on Sunday; out of exercises on this
ground: Ages following were not so cautelous.

Again, seeing these words do not only point at that which makes these
deceits effectual, but also give a reason to us that are in CHRIST why we
should beware of them, That upon this ground we are to resist all false
superstitious rites of religion, because they are after the fashion of this
world. The things of this world are enmity to GOD: and in this that exhortation
takes place, Romans 12.2. Fashion not your selves to the World: The not
observing of this rule has brought all miseries upon the Church: when men to
gain the Gentiles would take up their rites a little altered, when they would
come to the world a little, thinking they should never meet till they yielded
a little. Thus many now a days think it wisdom to retain some things,
though altered, common with the Papists, that we might gain them more
commodiously. But though there be place for some indulgence this way, and
therefore for a while tolleration and practice of some thing more indifferent,
yea and so far as edification and avoiding offense, a law made for such things,
yet this must be in indifferent things only, and that for a time only, least
they plead themselves as perpetual by a kind of prescription; which was the
ground of the Nazarites heresy, as S. Augustine thinks.

Wherefore when we would heal men, maxim, contraria contrarijs curantur. Let
us recover them with giving them an example of spiritual worship; least
admitting a little poison, we hurt our selves more then with all our good
beside, we can help them. You that will walk in CHRIST, be not deceived with
things after this world.

Lastly mark by the opposition: That what is merely grounded on tradition,
and what is carnal and sensual in Gods service, is contrary to CHRIST. In
CHRIST all things are new, the old carnal worship is changed into a
spiritual, according to that John 4. and for all pure humane traditions in
GODS matters, they are accursed. Gal. 1 9.

Which is to be marked against the Papists, Christ, who will also have all
their carnal rites agreeing with Christ.

VERSE 9. For in Him dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily.
NOw he sets down the reasons why these things not being after Christ must
be avoided: the first taken from the alsufficiency which he has in himself;
the second from his alsufficiency to us.

You must not listen to others besides him, who is not man only, but very GOD,
in one Person: But such is CHRIST; or in CHRIST dwells the fulness of the
GOD- head Corporally; these are all one in sense.

To open the words, before we come to the Doctrine.

In Him] That is, in Christ-man, or in that person whom we know to have had a
body and soul like us, is the same divine Nature which the Father, and the
Spirit have. Or it may be constred thus: in Christ, that is, the humane Nature
of Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, that is, God the Son with
His infinite deity, which comes to no more then this, God the Word was made
flesh. But the former is better, because this phrase, the fullness of the
deity, does note the divine Nature, without any personal relation of it:
whereas the second sense does necessarily take it to signify the Person of God
the Son with His Nature. Secondly, Christ man is fitly called God, and
therefore in Christ-man the Godhead is said to dwell properly: But CHRIST His
humane Nature may not be said God, and therefore the Godhead is not so fitly
said to dwell in the humane Nature as in the person denominated after it, that
is, in Christ-man.

All the fulnesse] That is, the whole infinite indivisible Nature of GOD.
bodily] that is, (...) or (...) Essentially, or Personally: the Greeks call
(body) as we in our vulgar tongue; here is no body, that is, no person: so we
say, bodily peril, for such danger as touches ones person.

The sum.

For in that man Christ Jesus the whole infinite Nature of God dwells: not as
in all believers, who are His habitation; nor as in His beloved Prophets, in
whom he spoke, and gave His Oracles, nor as in a material Temple, which is
different from the substance of him that inhabiteth; but bodily, that is so
that this Divine Nature with the humane makes one Person.

For the Doctrines.

1 We see in general: What must make nerest in Christ only as alsufficient,
even this; that we know Him God blessed forever: Shall not God allsufficient in
Himself, to Himself, to all the creatures, shall not He undertaking to be our
King, Priest, and Prophet be allsufficient for it? We fitly leave men seeking
supply at God; but to turn from God to men, is to dig puddles, and leave the
spring of living waters.

Hence then first gather to thy self,

Let us likewise confirm our selves in our resting only on Christ, even from
hence that He is God; Peter, Whither shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life; thou art the natural Son of God, thou art allsufficient.

In particular mark three branches of this Text: 1 In whom this dwelling is
said to be. 2 What is said to dwell. 3 In whom.


1 Note: That we must not look at Christ as mere man, but life up our minds
to that invisible nature which is in him. Those that saw Him on earth, whose
eyes God opened not, they saw nothing but man; and therefore not knowing any
thing else, they crucified the Lord of glory: And thus we al naturally are
ready to know him after the fresh; but when God gives us that eagles eye of
belief, the evidence of things not seen; then we see that God is with this
man, as being now substantially united to Him, and made a part of His person.
This makes Christ say, when Saint Peter told Him: Thou art the Son of God:
Flesh and blond has not reveiled this to thee, Peter. And what does make the
Apostle often inculcate such descriptions, but that we are slow of heart in
considering this point? For as many see a house or a tent that see not the
inhabitant, and as the body is hid when the apparel is discerned: So this
humane nature, unles we get the better eyes, may be seen, when the deity which
dwells in it, is not perceived.

2 Mark: That all the fullness of the Godhead is communicated with Christ as
man, the whole entyre nature of God. I understand by communicated as much as is
united: dwells bodily; that is, in unity of person with Christ-man, or in the
same person with the humane nature. For the divine Nature is a thing most
simple, not having bodily quantity, one part out of another, nor yet any
composition in it. Now that which is not compounded of parts cannot be divided.
If a man have house and land, he may give to one Son one part, to the Wife
another: but when the divine Nature is communicated, it is all of it given, or
none at all: Thy soul cannot be divided one part from another; thou can not
cut the light, how much less can thou divide the Divine Nature?

And this is to be marked against the Lutherans, be divided, one part being
where another is not.

3 That he faith, the fullness of the Godhead is in Christ; hence it is to be
noted: That not created gifts, or miraculous effects of the Divine Nature are
united with Christ man, but the deity it self, the fullness of it, yea the
whole fullness: which is to be noted against Arrius, and all such spirits.

Again, this shows, that the same singular Nature is in all the three
Persons; for he speaks of the Godhead in the singular number, as being but
one; and as it is in the Father without controversy, so it is wholly in the
Son also: as but one Sun in the firmament, in which the whole kind of the
creature subsisteth: So there is but one Divine Nature, neither indeed can be:
for the Divine Nature is most perfect, infinite, omnipotent, the most absolute
thing that can be imagined. Now were there many Gods having every one a
distinct deity, none of them were most perfect, powerful, for every one had
but his own, wanting that which is with others; as no man has all the
perfections of mankind, for he wants all that which is out of himself in
others.

This is to be marked; for hence we come to know that there is but one God,
though three persons; because the same fullness of the Divine Nature that is in
the Father, is in the Son; and the same that is in the Father and the Son, is
in the spirit; for He is called Iehova, and it may as well be all the fullness
of it in the spirit, with them both, as in the Son with the Father; as well be
the essence of three as two. Now hence it is manifest that these three persons
are but one God: for as John, Richard, and Thomal, if they all had but one body
and one soul, should all be but one man: So these all having but one
Godhead, can be but one God. To be three Gods there must be not only three
Persons, but three distinct Natures, differing the one in number from the
other; for so many men as you have, so many souls, and bodies must be
multiplied in which stands the nature of man.

But how can three persons be one in nature?

I answer, we are content to know it is so, though how it is so, we know not:
aspici Deus potest, introspici non debet. Though why not three persons in one
nature, as well as three Natures in one Person, which is in Christ: A bodily, a
spiritual, created as His soul, a spiritual increate: And as the same light
is originally from no other, in the Sun, and secondarily by communication in
the ray or beam of it: So what hinders, etc.

Dwells bodily] Obs. The manner of GOD's dwelling in this man, He does dwell
personally in Him, that is so, as that GOD the SON is thereby become
personally man, as he was from all eternity personally God with the Father and
Spirit: the Godhead so dwells in this man, that with the manhood, it makes
but one Person, even as the soul and body in man make one man: So this divine
Nature and humane are now jointly but one Person of CHRIST: He which was a
complete Person from everlasting, in fullness of time creating within His own
Person a singular body and soul, such as we have (sin excepted) as a
substantial part of His Person, not a part, which made up the Person of God,
as before imperfect, but a part; because a new thing substantially, that is
personally assumed to that which before was perfect: thus much this word
[Bodily] or personally, teaches; For it puts a difference (1) between God
dwelling in every thing as an efficient and preserver of them; (2) between His
dwelling in the Saints and Prophets, by His assistance and works of grace in
them. (3) Between His dwelling in the Saints in heaven, God shall be all in
all by His presence of glory; and this dwelling in CHRIST, which is by being
united personally with this humane Nature. As the Arrians abuse the similitude
in the first Chapter, when CHRIST is said to be the Image of His Father, they
gathered that therefore He had not the same substance with Him: for we see a
man's image or picture is not of the very same substance with the man whose
picture it is, not distinguishing betwixt natural things properly so called,
and these artificial ones which are but respectively and abusively so termed:
So here Nestorius, Lo, says he, GOD dwells in CHRIST man, therefore he is
not personally united with man, For a man is no part of person with the house
he dwells in; not distinguishing betwixt common inhabitation, and that which
is personal. But we see here the Text is plain, that He so dwells in this
Nature, that it is essentially, or substantially united to Him, as a part of
His Person. Again, He so dwells, or does (...) in our Nature, that He is
made flesh, the Word was made flesh, which cannot be understood of a simple,
but bodily, or personal inhabitation.

This therefore does first serve to confute all erroneous opinions touching the
union of Christ: Arrius his opinions overturned, who granted that there were
most divine qualities in Christ, and wonderful effects wrought by God in the
man Christ, but would not yield Him true God: Mark; all the fullness of the
Godhead (...), not (...), the divine Nature, as Saint Peter speaks, dwells
in Him.

All Eutiches his scholars, God Himself was man, but they say, that this
Union stood in that the divine Nature did swallow up the humane; for they could
not else see how they could make up one Person. The Monothelites granted two
Natures, but one action: For they could not see how diverse actions would not
conclude that there were many Persons: But mark, the divine Nature dwells in
Christ: Now the inhabiting and the inhabited are not confounded; therefore both
the Natures and their actions are distinct; and if there were such a swallowing
up of the humane Nature, then flesh were made God, not God flesh, by force of
the Union. As for diversity of Persons, it does not follow upon the diversity
of actions; for there may be as well three actions in one Person, as there are
three Persons all having but one action. If the multiplicity of action did come
from the number of Persons, then there should be three several Wills in the
Trinity. Again, there is no conversion of these Natures; for that which
dwells with another is not converted into it: And all Nestorius his dream of
two distinct divided Persons, said to be one through singular assistance, love,
dignity, consent, for the Text says [Bodily] and Saint John says, They so
dwell together, that God is made flesh; which cannot be said by virtue of any
Union which is not substantial.

We see what reason we have to hold to CHRIST: Moses, or Daniel, or Saint Paul
upon the earth, with whom the LORD pleased to dwell so abundantly by the
effects of grace, and gifts of prophecy; Oh how would we stick to them, how
would we rest in their words or oracles? but behold him who is the substantial
flesh of our GOD.

This shows us whither we must come, God, to no other but this Temple. All
old worshippers under the Law, they went to the Temple when they would come to
God, and before the Temple was built, to the Arc, and Tabernacle; but these
were but types, here is the true Temple: look to CHRIST-man, to that body, of
which he said, Destroy this Temple, and I will build it again in three days;
Look hither, and God shall over-shadow thee, for the God head dwells with
Him personally.

Consider the wonderful love of God,

And thus answering briefly an objection of the Lutherans, we will come to the
next Verse.

The Nature in which God dwells, is every where, God is: but God dwells in
the humane Nature, viz. Christ-Man, then in the humane Nature.

Let this answer the first part of the reason: God dwells, as a thing
contained in a place containing, that must needs be where ever God is, not that
in which God dwells in other manner, as here he does, or that in which God
dwells per aequipatentiam. I illustrate the vanity of their argument with
this: That in which the light dwells, that is every where, where the light
is: But the light dwells in the body of the Sun: Therefore the body of the
Sun is every where, where the light is.

VERSE 10. And ye are complete in Him, which is the Head of all Principality
and Power.
NOw he comes to the Reasons taken from the allsufficient benefits we
receive in Him, which first are laid down in this tenth verse indefinitely;
after by particular enumeration: The reason from this verse, stands thus:

You must not look to others, leaving Him in whom you have the fullness of all
grace behoovefull given you:

But in Christ who is the Head of all Principality and Power, you are complete:

Ergo, etc.

The Verse then contains: 1 Our most full blessedness in CHRIST. 2 A
repetition of His dignity, from whom we are replenished.


Now in the Verse, we must first mark the coherence. In whom having all the
fullness of the divine Nature, in Him you are complete, or full.

Observe hence: Whence it is that CHRIST- Man does send out all the streams of
grace, and good things to all His members, even hence, that this fountain
dwells in Him. Did not the divine Nature, which is the fountain of all life
natural and supernatural, Psalm 36.9.
For with Him is the Well of life; Did not this dwell with this man or humane
Nature; we could not be enlightened and quickened by it. So that when we read,
Ioh. 6.
he that eats my flesh, has life in him, we must know that these things are
spoken truly of the manhood: not that this Nature of it self can do these
things; but because the Deity dwells with it, and by it, as by an instrument,
joined personally with it, does properly, and efficiently work these things:
Even as we see the body of the Sun does enlighten all, but as an instrument
of the first created light, which GOD has united to it. This must be held,
that neither the omnipotent power of ereating spiritual graces, nor yet the
omnipotent action which does produce them, is in the humane Nature, or
proceeds from the humane Nature: but in God only, and from God, in and with
this humane Nature, working to the same effects, according to the property of
it. As a Scrivenour writing with a pen, the effect, viz. writing may be
ascribed to the pen; for we say, this pen did write this: but the faculty of
writing, and the proper action which produces it, is in the scribe, and goes
not from the scribe into the pen: So here after some sort, for the pen has no
reason and will to work with the scribe in that to which it is used; but he is
an instrument having this humane understanding, and will whereby he works.

The pen is an external instrument without the person of Him that uses it;
God the Son, as a part of His Person; as the body of a man is to his soul;
yea, more nearely: for death severeth this, but not the other: yet in this they
are like, that one is the effect, viz. the thing written is properly and
efficiently from the Scribe, from the pen instrumentally with efficiencie of
inferior degree: So these divine works which CHRIST the Mediator works,
the chief virtue, and action which properly effects them is in God, not
communicated really with the other Nature, though it does work them in this
humane Nature with it; yea, and by it, as a most nearly conjoined instrument,
which within the person of God the Son has His proper actions concurring in
an inferior degree of efficiencie to that which the divine Nature principally
and properly works. GOD works graces, CHRIST-Man works the same. Saint
Paul by laying on of hands, gives grace, as to Timothy; the divine Nature that
creates them, and infuseth them into this or that man, through CHRIST Man,
being as a common conceptacle and conduit-pipe of them: the humane Nature
works them not by powerful creating them, but by taking away fin, and the
cause, that so way might be made for this promised Spirit, Galath. 3.14.

2 By interceding Mediator-like for them.

3 By willing the going of such graces from Him, as who is with God the Son
but one Worker, though a distinct principle of working, that is, though
distinct in Nature, yet the same in Person: He therefore works them as His
own works, from His own power; for God's power is by Unity of Person made
His, the divine power not being without Him, as the power of another Person
than He is; but being personally with Him.

Those things which His humane Nature works, Son of God. Saint Paul gives
graces by laying on of hands with Prayer: But, 1 Not as if this were any way
His work, but as entreating it from God in CHRIST, whose it is. 2 Not from
power any way within His person, but without Him; even the power of another. 3
Not conjoined with God, as the body with the soul, but as an instrument with
God; as when I use another thing or person in doing this or that without my
self: bence it is that CHRIST-Man does give graces authoritative and
effective; yea, according to humane action does effect them in the highest
degree that an isntrumental operation ca^n effect any thing.


Whereas Saint Paul gives them Ministerialiter, signifiing what God does in
Christ, rather than what Himself does. He that planteth and waters is
nothing, all the efficacy of his action is to get CHRIST GOD-Man give the
graces he entreats.

The use is, The flesh profits nothing, the spirit quickens, that is, my
humane nature could not give all these precious benefits unto you, unless the
quickening Spirit did dwell in it; in Him, in whom all fullness dwells, you
are complete.

2 From the words observe: That being in CHRIST, we receive all kind of
graces, and benefits, that we lack nothing. Ephesians. 4.11.
He is said to have ascended above all these aspectable heavens, that He might
fill all, viz. with the gifts of grace, as the context following clears. Ephesians.
1.3.
We are blessed in Christ with all kind of spiritual blessings: and they are
said to be full of love, and filled with all knowledge. Romans 15.14.
These gifts may all be reduced to these two, Ioh. 1.17. By Christ comes
grace and truth: GODs favor pardoning our sins, and restoring the life of
God, and true holiness; for so truth with Saint John often signifies. There
is a double fullness: the one of gifts infused into us, or to be given us: the
other of condition, when the state is so full, that there is no lack.

Now for the first: the Saints receive not that plenitude of inherent graces in
this life, though respectively in regard of such as have small degrees, others
may, and are said to be full; as the Romans, and others. 2. In regard of
condition, when we have all things so bestowed, that nothing is wanting; now
this in Christ all the Saints have: They have not that fullness in themselves,
but in Him their Head, who is made of God every thing unto them, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and this Text is most fitly
construed this way; they need no other Teacher, no other Lawgiver, no other
Mediator.

The use of it is against the Papists; Christ, other mediators, works, their
own righteousness, satisfactions, indulgences, imputing the sufferings of men
to them; they have left the LORD JESUS, and are run a whoring with their own
inventions.

This must make us rest only in Christ, Paul, caring to know nothing but Him,
counting all things dung and dross in comparison of Him: Fill your selves with
Christ, and there will not be room for ought else. Were a vessel full of any
liquor, it would receive no more: if a woman's heart be full of her husband, she
has no room for other lovers: So shall it be with you: if you see by faith
that your estate is full in Christ, lacking nothing, what will you care to
look further?

Lastly, Christ: how is the case altered, if a poor woman should marry the
Prince? So, if we blind, naked, beggarly things marry this Prince of glory,
our poverty shall be exchanged with riches.

Who is the Head of all Principality and Power] That is, of all supreme and
inferior powers which are seen in the creatures visible or invisible: What is
the dignity of Him who is every thing to us, He is the chief above all the
creatures; this is it we believe of Christ as man, ascending into heaven,
fitteth at the right hand of GOD, He is placed at GODs right hand in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 1.21.
above all principalities, and powers, and might, and domination, and every
name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that, that is to come.
1 Pet. 3.22.
Which JESUS is at the right hand of GOD, gone into heaven, to whom the Angels,
and powers, and might are subject. To whom of the Angels said He, Hebr. 1.
Sit at my right hand till I make thy enemies thy footstool? Which the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. construeth thus: He must reign, till His enemies be put
under His feet.

There are three Preeminencies subordinate.

1 GOD above all. 2 The Mediator under God, but Head over all the Creatures. 3
Creatures over other creatures, but under Christ and God.
Look as if a mighty King do marry any woman, he makes her Queen, next in
dignity to himself, above all subjects: So our great GOD JESUS CHRIST coupling
our Nature with Himself, has in so doing extolled it above all creatures,
which are but the workmanship of His hands, a part of whose Person this Nature
is.

The Use is, the more to bind us to Christ: any thing rather than their
Princes favor: the LORD make us all as careful to hold in this head.

Still remember from these descriptions, Christ, and all-sufficiencie of Him;
thus John, the Jews, Oh their Moses had seen GOD, CHRIST was not so ancient
as himself, they would leave him to follow Christ: Oh says John, He that
comes after me is before me: none ever saw GOD but CHRIST, all have received
from His fullness that they had, He is the Fountain of grace and truth.

VERSE 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with Circumcision made without
hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the Circumcision
of CHRIST.
NOw he comes to set down more definitely what blessings Christ had brought
them: they may be recalled to two heads.

1 The removal of their evil. 2 The conferring of good.
The first is in the eleventh and twelfth verses; the other follows.

For the former, three things are to be marked for the opening of it.

1 He sets down the benefit; In whom ye have been circumcised with
circumcision not made with hands. 2 He sets down in what this benefit did
formally consist, viz. In putting off the body of sins, viz. the flesh; the
original corruption dwelling in spirit and flesh, through Christ's
Circumcision. 3 He notes the manner or instrument by which Christ did further
work, and seal up in them this benefit mentioned, being buried with Him in
Baptism.
The intent of it is to confirm the former truth: That they were not to follow
any thing which is not after Christ, and stands not with walking in Him, thus:

You must not listen to any thing which draws you from Him, who has taken
from you the mass of your natural corruption.

But it is Christ in whom your hearts have been circumcised from self-love of
this world, and the things of it, and all other evil inclinations:

Therefore you must not follow the deceitful vanities which are not after
Christ, but seduce you from Him.

First then that the Apostle does to this purpose bring in this benefit; We see
what is an excellent mean to hold us fast to Christ, to remember what great
evil of sin He has subdued for us, and taken from us. Truly when we fall
from Christ, either to seducing errors in judgment, or errors in practice;
it comes hence, as Saint Peter intimates, We forget that we were washed from
our sins in His blood. Did we confidently weigh what we have received from Him,
we could not but cleave faster to Him. If a man did heal us of some deadly
leprosy, could we forget duty to such an one, while we remembered this great
good we had received from Him? So here much more; while Egypt kept in mind
what Joseph had done for them, they clave to him in those he left behind him:
but when new came up who knew not, or regarded not what good they had received,
they turned Turks to him in his Seed, whom they were to have honored: So here.

Wherefore, Christ, ponder upon the mercy He has showed thee, in healing in
some measure the corruptions of thy nature: Say with thy self, shall I start
from Him who has done such wonderful things, killed this life of my own in
sin, which I have felt so strong and lively in me, healed such a leprosy as is
above all I can speak or think? Do it the rather, for we are like those
Israelites, all their deliverance out of Egypt was quickly forgotten, and this
made them upon all occasions start aside like a deceitful bow.

Again, we are weak in judgment, babes in understanding, and know not the
things bestowed on us.

Thirdly, Satan is most malicious to keep us at least from thankful
considering of GOD's blessings, when he cannot hinder us from receiving them.

In whom ye are circumcised, with circumcision not made with hands.] What
Christ has done for us who are in Him, He has given us a spiritual
Circumcision.

Here are two things to be opened.

1 The Circumcision it self. 2 The Author of it.
The first is specified by this distinctive property, it was not made with
hands: that is, such a Circumcision as was spiritually wrought in their spirit,
not in their flesh: the old Testament distinguishes it by calling it the
Circumcision of the heart. Deuteronomy. 30.6 Ier. 4 4.
And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart. This is no small benefit, it
was a privilege to have Circumcision in the flesh, it was GOD's Cognizance, as
being the sign of a confederacy with GOD; it was a seal confirming him that
believed by it, that God would take away his sin, both by not imputing it, and
killing it; Romans 4.12.
for so Saint Paul says of Abraham's circumcision. But yet many had this whose
Circumcision was before GOD as nothing to them. Wherefore, if this were a
privilege, what a gift is this to have the heart circumcised with the finger
of God?

2 Again, for the Author of this benefit; in the Law the Priest did
circumcise the males brought the eight day; and it was no small thing that God
by His Minister should do so to an infant: but to have our High Priest in
Heaven, who is the great God, handle our leprous hearts, and by force of His
Spirit take off the corruption which sticks faster to our spirits, than our
skin does to our flesh; what a prerogative is this! this then must stir us
up to thankfulness.

It does show us whither we must have recourse when we feel the remainders of
our corruption cleaving to us, Christ, He is our Priest, who only can take
away this impure foreskin of our hearts; that even as they brought their young
ones in the Law to the Priest, so must we bring our selves by a renewed faith
every day to our LORD JESUS, and pray Him to go through with this His
Circumcision which He has begun in us.

2 This is to be noted, that he calls it not made with hand: Whence observe:
That no outward action of the hand of man reaches to the cleansing of the
soul: The hand of man puts forth no efficiencie to that which is done in
the heart: as nothing that goes into the body can defile it, so nothing that
is done to the body can sanctify it. This makes Saint Paul say, That he that
planteth and he that waters is nothing; for a bodily action can work nothing
but a bodily effect.

Which is to be observed against the Papists, God does by meats maintain our
life, He by His blessing giving that virtue to them, it cannot be truly said
that our life is sustained by meat and drink.

Now to the second thing, in the putting off: Observe: That sin and grace are
to the soul, as apparel is to the body; therefore he says, by putting off
the body of sin, that is, the flesh: the body] this is a borrowed speech,
because that as man's body is a systeme or a frame, not having one but many
kinds of members: So sin is such a frame of corruption, as contains in it
many distinct kinds, which are as members of this mass of corruption, Coloss.
3. ^^ Romans 6.

But it may seem strange, that he sorteth these metaphors of putting off a
body, when clothes, not bodies, are put off. But you must know that the body is
the souls raiment, as it were, and therefore the soul is most fitly said to
put off a body; the body of corruption, the flesh: this expounds the other as
a more known and frequent phrase in Saint Paul's Epistles, for so I take it,
as if he should say, my meaning is, by body of sins, the flesh, the original
corruption, in which is all kind of sin, or the body of sins of the flesh,
that is, of the flesh, or native corruption, which is a whole body of sinful
members, the corruption originally, and principally seated in the soul, is
called by the name of flesh, because the soul most manifests it self in the
flesh, the soul being incarnate after a fort, and living more in the flesh,
than in it self: For the life of natural man is little but sensuality, and
the Scripture makes the heart of man the Seat of the soul, because the soul,
in regard of his action, is rather natural than animal: For as a man
extremely loving here or there, lives in the person loved more than in
himself: so the foul fallen from God, is wedded in such impotent sort to the
love of its own flesh, that it lives there altogether:

Lastly, by Circumcision of Christ] Note that this phrase may be taken actively
and passively, passively Christ's circumcision is that Circumcision with which
Christ the eight day as circumcised: Actively, that Circumcision wherewith
Christ does circumcise in others, and this is here meant. Now this is the
meaning; You have been circumcised in CHRIST, insomuch as you have put off
that frame of sin, in which are many distinct kinds of sin; I mean the flesh
or original corruption, with which as a most filthy raiment, your souls were
sometimes clothed, and this not by virtue of legal Circumcision, or any
outward act, whereof man is Minister, but by virtue of that powerful
Circumcision wherewith CHRIST circumciseth.

These words, first in general lay open, In what stands our spiritual
Circumcision, viz. in putting off all our corruptions; our corrupt confidence,
the rebellion of our wills, the disordered frame of our affections; We (says
Saint Paul) are the Circumcision in the heart; Phil. 3.^.
who rejoice in CHRIST JESUS, and have no confidence in the flesh: this
depravation of our Nature is the foreskin of the heart, in the removal
whereof stands this Circumcision.

Let us then all seek to be thus circumcised: God requires, which has praise
with Him. If they that wanted Circumcision outward were cut off in Israel from
their people; what shall be done with us, if we get not this Circumcision
inward, without which none pleases God?

This in general; for having told them that they were circumcised, he does
tell them in what the matter of Circumcision stands.

Now in particular first observe hence; That the soul of the natural man is
clad with sin: putting off (you know) does imply that there is some thing, as
apparel, upon him, who is said to put off: And truly so they are, for what is
in the natural mind but ignorance, unbelief, curiosity, pride? What in the
will, but wicked propensity to evil, averseness and crossenesse to good; yea,
rebellion against light? What in all the affections, but inordinacie? What in
his eyes, but uncleanness, revenge? His ears, but itching after vanity? His
tongue, but rottenness? This makes the Prophet say, Psalm. 73.6, 7.
That Pride compasses about the wicked man as a chain, and violence does
cover him as a goodly garment. And look as the body is so covered, that it
cannot be seen for the raiment on it: So wicked men are so wrapped about with
sin, that the beautiful work of God in man's soul cannot be discerned for it:
yea as men think their apparel an ornament, so do sinners their sin.

The use of this is to warn us of our misery: Jesus, these filthy rags. Oh you
that will not let the least moth lie on your bodily garment, do suffer with
patience your souls to go thus filthily attyred! yea begin betime, for to
make thee unready asks time: So this garment of sin cleaves unto thee, and
hangs so fast on, that were not God with us in this business, we might
sooner put off our selves then these sinful qualities, so firmly they cleave
to us. The Christians when baptized, did in those primitive times lay aside
their old cloths, as testifying and speaking by this action, that they had put
off these rags of sinful lusts with which formerly their souls had been
clothed.

In putting off the body] Observe then: That we must foregoe not some part of
our corruption, but the whole frame of it. to put off the old man: mark; the
whole man, to show that our leaving off corruption, must not be by halves, but
entirely; old things are gone; in CHRIST all are new, we must when we come by
faith to CHRIST, forgo all our old corruption: Such as are all over filthily
apparelled, they will desire to have all new, all or none: for some old, and
some new, do worse then all old: but if the garment be so woven that one
cannot put off one part, but all will follow, then needs it must be that either
all of it be put off, or none at all: So it is in this body of sin, it does go
so together that he that puts one member off truly, he puts off all
other likewise; and therefore Saint James says, he that lives in sin against
one commandment, he breaks all, that is, he has in his soul that
corruption which inclines to break every one: he is not mortified to the sin
against any one, that is not mortified to every one. The body of darkness,
which is in the night, upon the first rising of the Sun, is in some degree all
at once scattered: So this whole body of spiritual darkness, when the Sun of
righteousness gets up in our hearts, is at once all in some degree
dispersed.

But you will say happily,

1 We are said to put it off, Christ. 2 Because we desire further to do it
through Christ strengthening us. 3 We know that Christ our sanctifier will
abolish all the relics which still hang with us. We must not therefore
think, because we have not perfectly for the degree put off all, therefore we
have not put off all; for we have parted with all, though not wholly; totum
exuimus corpus, sed non totaliter. The air in the morning has put off all her
sable weeds, that darkness which in the night did cladde her, but not
altogether, for it is clear and clear till Noone-tyde: so here, etc.
The use is to stir us up with honest hearts to renounce all corruption:
seem to leave other; one will not part with lustful affections, another will
keep covetousness: yea some put off the outward actions, but never care for
putting off their corrupt qualities, which are rooted in their spirits.

2 In the second place, hence assure thy self that thou art in Jesus Christ if
thou put off this body, love no evil, though sin hang about thee every
where, yet thou love and likest none of it, but hold CHRIST thy
sanctifier, and cryest to be uncladde, and freed from all this body of death.

3 Of sinnes] not sin: Observe hence: How our mass of corruption conteyneth in
it many kinds of sin. Even as the body natural is not all one kind of
member but has great variety: So this body of corruption; therefore he calls
it a body of sins, of many sins, being as so many members in it, ignorance,
unbelief, irreligiosnesse, pride, wrath, covetousness, untruth: Ephesians. 2.1.
hence it is that the Apostle says the Ephesians were dead in sins and
trespasses; and the old man is said to be corrupted through deceivable lusts:
Ephesians. 4.22.
that is, so corrupted as that now he expresses the image of diverse lusts, as
he was formerly created after the image of GOD, or else through lusts of many
kinds: And from hence it comes that our native corruption does bring such
variety of fruits as are mentioned Galath. 5.19, 20.21. Adultery, fornication,
uncleanenesse, wantonness, idolatry, withcraft, hatred, debate, etc. and
observed in experience, because it is a body which has diverse members, the
which bring forth diverse operations.

Which must make us both grow up in acknowledging our natural misery, in us:
to take from us one sickness, is mercy; but when a man is a very body of
diseases, has every member filled with infirmity, then to cure him, is much
more.

And let such know who are not yet in CHRIST,

By the circumcision of Christ] Observe hence: Who it is that works this
inwardly in us, Jesus Christ; He and none but He can remoove the filthy lusts
in which the heart is wrapped, as Saint John spoke of His Baptism, he
baptized with water, but Christ baptized with the spirit; and Saint Peter says
1 Pet. 3.21. Not the baptism, which is the washing of the flesh saves, but in
that a good conscience makes request to God, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Saint Paul says, he that planteth and waters is nothing; in regard
of force which does reach unto the soul it self.

This must be distinctly taught, that we may avoid the Papish snare, and that
we may glory fie God in ascribing to Him intyrely such works as these are,
which are no more communicable with men, then to create out of nothing another
World.

VERSE 12. In that ye are buried with Him through baptism, in whom ye are
also raised up together through the faith of the operation of GOD, which raised
Him from the dead.
NOw he comes to the third thing, buried with Him in baptism, or by
baptism: this is the modus action is, and agrees with those words, you have
been circumcised in Him, how? being buried with Him in baptism: It opens
both the manner, and may be as a proof, thus:

Such as are dead and buried to sin in Christ, they have put off all the body
of sin: But you have been buried with CHRIST by baptism.

First then from the context, we see; that what circumcision was to the old
people, that is baptism to us; for he says thus much, you have been
circumcised in being baptized, though in circumstantiall things these disagree,
as in the sex receiving the Sacrament; there men only, here women. In the
matter signified, Christ to come: in the degree of grace given: In the
external rite; yet the substance of the thing signified, manner of receiving,
general ends, they conspire.

Hence we may have a ground and warrant to prove the baptism of infants
lawful and warrantable by the Word of God:

The second thing is, that from our union with Christ dead and buried, we come
to have the body of sin crucified, and put away from us. This is thus
gathered; he says they were circumcised, that is, had the body of sin put off
them, while they were together buried with Christ, which baptism signifies
and seals up in them: from this then we come to put off sins, that we are set
into Christ dying, and buried for the abolishing of sin: and hence Romans 6.
Saint Paul shows that we cannot live in sin, as formerly we did, and have to
do with it, because we are dead to it, being set into Christ dying, and that
by baptism. The reason is, because that Christ has by his death killed the
sin of all that belong to Him, and therefore such as are set into His death,
they cannot but feel the death of this body of sins which before lived in
them. Even as when Adam sinned, and dyed to the life of God, all of us in him
are dead, and so soon as we come actually to be members of him, we feel the
effect of Adams death, even this, that being dead to the life of God, we lie in
the spiritual death of ignorance and lusts: So CHRIST the second Adam, He
dying to abolish sin, even that He might be the death of sin in all His
members, and lying buried under it, that He might so abolish it, as never to
rise again. Briefly then: Adam a root of mankind finning, brought death upon
all His. 1. By bringing imputation of sin. 2. Extinction of the life of grace.
3. A propagation of death in sin and trespass. Christ stands as a second
Adam in the persons of all given Him to be His members, and having their sin
imputed to Him, (1) He does take away the guilt of it. (2) Dyed to sin, and lay
under it in our nature, that we by virtue thereof might dye to it; the
omnipotent spirit of Christ working through that death in the behalf of all
His the death of the creature, so far forth as by the just judgment of God,
it has a power through Satan's working to draw us from God to it self. (3) A
death of our corruption; Galath. 6.15. By the Cxosse of Christ, the world is
crucified to me, and I to it, that is, by Christ crucified. Briefly; as Adam
becoming mortal and dying to this mortal life, we all so soon as we are
borne members of Him, are mortal, and tend to death by force of that mortality
in the root of us: So Christ dying spiritually to this world, and the sin of
all us His members that thus they might be abolished, we so soon as by faith
we are made His members, or are borne of Him, we begin to dye spiritually, till
in death we are fully mortified by virtue of that radical death in Christ our
Savior, who dying according to his flesh, did so work by His omnipotent
spirit, that as the guilt was at once remooved; so the life of it was
mortified, that it lost the reign, and was successively to be abolished in the
being of it, in all those who by faith should come to be engrafted into him, or
all those who should spiritually descend from Him. (4) Lastly, He brought into
our nature supernatural life, that so He in our nature might propagate it to
all who were His.

The use hereof is to stir us up above all things to seek with Saint Paul;
Adam, that I dyed in him, while I see my self mortal hastening every day to
death, as he is dead. The Lord Jesus make the scales fall off our eyes, that we
may see the virtue of His most powerful death toward all that are His.

This also lets us see what we must do when this world and the things of it
are forcible upon us,

Let us give glory to this glorious death which makes us all to dye: etc.

This shows us why it is that sin lives in so many men in the world,

Buried with Him in baptism, you have put off your sins] being set into Him
dying and buried, ingrafted with Him, buried in or by your baptism.

Observe hence: God does unite us with Christ, even by our baptism: the Lord
does by baptism signify to us, and confirm thus much, yea work it, as by an
instrument, namely, the putting His Christ crucified upon us, and our
ingrafting into Him dying and rising. Romans 6. (...). For first by baptism is
sealed our communion with Christ dying and rising: secondly our communion in the
effects, which are mortification and vivification: but yet we must not think,
though God uses outward baptism of His minister, that this ministerial
action brings forth grace, as the Papists do, who hold that God does so use
the ministerial baptism, that He lifts up that action as an isntrumental
cause to work grace; so that it neither comes solely from God, nor yet,
immediately: For this must be held, that the power and act of producing grace
is only and immediately from God.

There are two sorts of instruments: some work something with the Principal
worker, others do not operari aliquid but ad aliquid, they work to something,
but not any thing having force to cause that whereto they work; such are Gods
means which He uses, and coordeyneth with him self in working of all such
things which are not wrought but only by power omnipotent; thus he healed the
blind with clay and spittle, thus He overthrew the walls of Jericho with the
blowing of Rams horns.

But one may say, this is absurd,

Men use means which work something in that they do with them, Gods force
being alsufficient, it is not absurd for Him to take to Him self such
instruments in giving grace, which are of no force to produce it, especially
when hereby he exercises our obedience, faith, etc. He that planteth, and he
that waters is nothing, 1 Cor. 3.7.
in regard of working in the soul that they tend to: the Gospel is said to be
the power of GOD to salvation; Romans 1.16
because through GOD it is powerful, who accompanyeth it immediately, and enty
rely, working faith by it. Yet Papists will not say, that the Preachers
syllables are elevated by GOD to raise up the dead in sins and trespasses.

This then is to be firmly held that GOD uses baptism of engrafting us with
Christ and mortifying and quickening us in Him,

But it may be asked, adulti, who have faith in appearance, and so are already
in Him?

Things are said to be done when they are manifested and done in a further
degree then before they were; God coming into Him, while he uses it
faithfully, and his faith being more strengthened, the union is more confirmed.

The use is to stir us up that we would look back to our baptism, Gospel
sealed unto us in baptism? And seeing baptism is but a seal of other
matters, let us not content our selves with baptism alone, but make sure we
have the things which it serves to confirm. Men that have evidences of house
and land, they look not much at their deeds about it, but they hold the land
it self, and occupy that carefully: We contrarily stand upon the seal, but
let the heavenly estate confirmed be where it will.

2 Hence may be enforced upon men what is their estate, if they have received
baptism as well inward as outward, then as the Apostle says, know you not
that you are dead with Christ through baptism? If they are not dead with Him,
they have but the baptism of water, which is nothing before GOD; Circumcision
nor uncircumcision are any thing with Him, but a new Creature.

Now he comes to a second benefit we have in Christ, the benefit of a
spiritual resurrection and new life; in whom ye have been raised up] as they
had been circumcised: for though this (...) [in whom] may agree with (...), in
which baptism; yet it is fitly reduced to the more remote antecedent, Christ,
and to begin a new benefit opposite to that former, in whom we have been
circumcised: For the intent of this Scripture is to set out Christ, and the
benefits we have in Him; not to describe the virtue of baptism, which is only
named here so far forth as it serves to note the manner after which Christ
wrought in us the former benefit of our circumcision from sin: And if he had
broke off the subject of his speech thus, in which baptism, he would have
named Christ in the end of the verse, not [Him] as having reference to a plain
antecedent, and whether [(...)] in the next verse belongs hither (...) in
this verse, for these two seem but a repetition of this matter with some
application and amplification of it; make it therefore agree with (...) buried
with him; in whom also ye are raised up: The benefit is 1 Propounded in this
verse. 2 Applied more at large verse 13, 14.


In propounding it. (1) We have set down, our refurmetion it self in Christ;
(2) The manner of working it, by says.

For as the body lives formally, or is raised from death to life by the gift
of life created in it: So the soul dead in sin is formally made alive when
faith is created in it.

Secondly, you have faith described from the efficient cause, the potent action
of God which raised Him from the dead; in whom ye are raised.

The sum.

In whom, or in which CHRIST, ye are raised up with Him, the life of faith
being created in your dead souls by that omnipotent efficacy of God, by which
Christ being now dead for us all, was raised up.

First then, this being the scope, to make us cleave to Christ, thus: You must
not go from him in whom you bave been raised up to a new heavenly life: But
in CHRIST you are raised up. Therefore let none beguile you with deceits which
are not after Him.

The second part is here; the conclusion in the eight verse before. That to
consider of our first resurrection which we have through Christ, is a forcible
motive to make us cleave to Him. If Saint Peter said, whither shall we go?
thou have the words of life eternal; how much more may we say, how should we
start from thee Lord? thou have raised us up when we were dead: How did
Lazarus (think you) and others whom Christ raised up, love Him and rest in
Him, when thus, bodily life was again given them, though they were within a
while to dye again? But how much more would it bind us to Christ, if we saw
how He has raised our souls being dead, with such a resurrection, as that
they shall never dye again? When the Galathians were so fledge after their
legal ceremonies; Saint Paul thus reasons: Did you receive the spirit by the
ministry of the law, or by the hearing of faith preached? as if he would set
down this for a ground that is to be held unto, which does bring us the
quickening spirit; how then is CHRIST to be rested on, from whom, as the
fountain, all spiritual life flows unto us?

Now our resurrection may be considered two ways.

1 As wrought in our head. 2 As applied actually in us.
As we in regard of our natural life may be considered.

First as we have this life in our root, in our Parents, in whom we are
seminali ratione, as an ear of Corn is in the seed.

Secondly, our life may be considered as now in us received from them. Now
when they are said to be raised up in Christ, it may be understood both ways;
both in regard of their resurrection, as it was made in Christ the head of
them, and as it was in part applied in them: for all the resurrection we have
in Christ not yet received, we have it by faith hid in Him, even the
resurrection of our bodies.

We may hence then see what makes the Papists, Gospellers so fall from Christ,
even this: they know not, or consider not, who, when they were dead in their
sins, did raise them up: if they ever had felt that CHRIST had done thus much
for them, they would never doubt His alsufficiency, but wait upon Him to
accomplish their salvation. We see in Patients which have deadly sicknesses, if
a Physician do (when they were given over) even then rid their disease away in
part, and make them pretty well, will they think of looking to another, or be
desirous to join others with Him who has alone almost done all the cure? So
between our souls and Christ.

Let us then consider what we have had wrought in us through Christ:

Here in particular are three things to be opened: 1 That who so is truly in
CHRIST, is risen again. 2 That our souls are raised from death to life by
faith. 3 That the omnipotent power of GOD is the worker of faith.


Of each of these a little.

1 As Adam was a root of death to all that were his, neither were they borne
of him sooner then mortality did seize on them: So Christ is a root of
resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all dye, so in CHRIST shall all be made
alive. For we must not think that when Christ was raised, it was no more then
when Lazarus, or some other private person was raised; but His rising was all
our resurrections, in as much as it was in the name of us all, and had in it a
seed-like virtue to work the resurrection of us all: Hence it comes, that we
no sooner come to be in Him, but the power of His resurrection is felt of us,
making us rise to newness of life. 2 Cor. 5.17.
In Christ all things are new: Whosoever have learned CHRIST as the truth is in
Him, have so learned Him, as they are dead to sin; the life of the old man is
killed, and they are alive in the life of grace: For look as a member truly by
inward ligaments knit with a living head, has life in it; so we when we come
to be in Christ, raised up, and living to God in life glorious, we cannot but
live in Him.

Wherefore how woeful is the state of many that profess Christ, yet live in
ignorance, Christ: but like as glass eyes are set in the body, or wooden
legs, which being by outward means joined to it, do not receive life, and
sense with other members; We never knew communion with him who is the
quickening spirit, if we be dead in our sins.

2 Observe: What it is that makes us rise to new life, faith on Christ. We are
said to live by faith, because after some sort, it is life, but most properly
it brings life into us: He that believes, has everlasting life, fully in
Christ his head; inchoative or imperfectly in himself: For as in bodily death
the reuniting of the soul with it, does make it rise again and become a
living body: so faith, as a spiritual vinculum tying God, who is the soul of
our souls, again unto them, they which before were dead, are anew quickened.
Thus then as an isntrumental cause of our conjunction with God in Christ, who
is our life, it may be said to quicken us, or raise us up; though further faith
it self may be conceived as a part of this life: For as the soul died in
falling into ignorance of God, estranged from the life of GOD through ignorance
in them. Ephesians. 4.18. so coming by faith to know God, it begins to live;
Ioh. 17.3.
hence to know God in Christ (faith being an affianced knowledge) is life
everlasting. This then is the first thing which God works in us, as the
beginning, and isntrumental cause of our other following life: even as in our
waking from our natural sleep, which is a shadow of death, first the eyes
open, and then our senses and motions do come fully to us in their order: So
in awaking from this sleep of sin, first the eye of faith looks up to GOD,
and that invisible world; then our life returns more fully, the spirit of God
from Christ working it in us.

Mark then hence:

Finally,

The last thing here to be noted is: That the omnipotent action of God which
raised Christ from the dead, is it that begets faith in us. Ephesians. 1.19.
It is called the exceeding greatness of His power toward us, which believe,
according to the working of His mighty power. Faith is the eye of the soul, by
which we look upon CHRIST: it is the hand by which we receive all good from
Christ. Now if a man be borne blind, or borne without a hand, an eye that sees
but these aspectable creatures, and discerns not distinctly but things at
hand, a hand that cannot reach an ell or two from us, yet all the world cannot
supply these, nor no power but His only that created the body: how much less
then shall any power be able to give us that eye which looks within the
veil? that hand which claspeth Christ in heaven? but only the Almighty power
of God.

But what,

Yea, that power though daily continued, Adam and Eve, with the law of
propagating all the race of mankind, did, by that power which created and
coupled them, after a sort make all mankind: though the Father and Son and
spirit do still work in continuing that first power put forth: So here, GOD
raising Christ up in whom we all were that he might be a root and fountain of
supernatural life to us all, that power may be said fitly to raise us all.

Wherefore let us learn to admire and give glory to GODS power which works
our faith:

This teaches us whither we must fly for the strengthening and susteyning of
our faith, even to this power,

Lastly, we see hence how wide they are, Yea Papists, that if GOD offer, hold
it in the power of man to believe, when God shows the promise, and
inlighteneth the mind.

VERSE 13. And ye which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has He quickened together with Him, forgiving you all your trespasses.
NOw he comes to repeat this benefit, insisting more largely upon it: and
first he sets down the state of them before they were quickened: Secondly
the quickening of them: Thirdly the manner of the action, the order in which he
quickened them, which stands in a threefold antecedent in nature before this
their restoring to life.

The first is pardon of sin.

The second is cancelling the obligation against them:

The third is the setting them free from those jaylors and executioners in
whose keeping they were.

The two first are in this thirteenth verse, the latter in the end of the
thirteenth verse, and in the other two following.

The first of the antecedents in the end of the thirteenth verse.

The second in the fourteenth verse.

The third in the fifteenth verse.

To return to the thirteenth verse. And first in genenerall from this his
Commoration in this benefit, we note: That our quickening in CHRIST, is such a
benefit which we must not quickly have done with, and lightly pass over: The
Apostle cannot move from this till he have dwelt a while upon it, and
amplified and enforced on them the consideration of it: So it is, we lend it
little thought, but the more is our fault: we should, when we think on God's
benefits in Christ, make a stand, and dwell upon them, that so we might be more
affected.

2 Mark, What Ministers must do, they must amplify to their people the
benefits bestowed on them: how often does Moses this in Deutr. For, 1 It is for
the honor of God, that His benefits should be set forth. 2 It edifieth others,
and gains glory to God, while they are to know the things bestowed on them;
and they are by this means wrought unto thanksgiving. Again, we are like
children, we know not the worth of those great things wherewith GOD has
enriched us: As a young child that has great patrimonies and privileges,
does not to any purpose conceive the worth of them: yea, we are as forgetful,
as the eaten bread is quickly forgotten. And beside, a benefit while enjoyed,
grows no dainties with us: in all these regards we must use this practice of
the Apostle. If men have outward commodities, and abilities, and gifts of any
kind, they know them too well, even till they be proud of them; but in
heavenly things, it is quite otherwise.


Now for their condition, it is described from the state of death: You when you
were dead. 2. The kind of death, viz. in sin. 1. Actual, in trespasses. 2.
Original, in uncircumcision of heart; which is set down by a Synecdoche or
Metonymie of the sign for the thing signified: Outward Circumcision put for
outward and inward, which is more emphatical, when they were so dead, that
inwardly, and outwardly they did lie in evil: the meaning is, when you were
utterly dead in soul, mortal in body, subject to eternal damnation by reason
of your actual transgressions, and original corruption: You then He quickened,
that is, GOD the Father, out of the Verse before; with His CHRIST.

First then observe: That we are by nature dead to God: the same is Ephesians. 2.1.
We are not like a man in a sleep, nor like the Samaritan greatly wounded, but
we are stark dead in regard of the life of GOD. Romans 5. he says, We are of
no strength; not of feeble strength: and the natural man is often so called;
My Son was dead, and is alive: let the dead bury their dead. A man is every
way by nature dead, his body is mortal in dying from his birth: eternal death
of soul and body hangs over him: His soul is quite dead: for God in regard
of His presence of sanctifying grace going from a man, he dies in soul: As
the soul going from the body, the natural life is extinct.

But it may be said,

Every knowledge is not the life of God strictly so called, God, to trust in
Him, love Him; They that know thee, will trust in thee; otherwise the devils
do know God in their kind.

2 The knowledge of man is able to make him unexculable only, not able to make
him alive according to GOD: for these Heathens virtues, they were but pictures
without the soul and life of virtue in them, splendida peccata: good trees
they were not; and therefore their fruit could not be good, all is not gold
that glisters.

This then confuteth all doctrines of free will, any power in man, which helped
a little, can help it self: Dead men have nothing in them to help themselves
toward this world, so it is with us toward the other. Yea, we see hence, that
it is not suggestions to the mind, nor exhortations that will do it; we do
but tell a dead man a tale, and all in vain, till God create a new light in
the mind, and take away the heart of stone, and give us tender new hearts: let
us confess our utter (...), impotencie, and inability, and give glory to God.

Hence must be enforced to the natural man what is his estate, dead in his
soul; Jude speaks: yea, the relikes of this spiritual death hangs about
us all.

Mark, from this: that we who are alive through grace,

In sinnes] Observe; That sin both original and actual is the death of the
soul: Mors animae peccatum. Our sin in which we are borne and live, is the
death of our souls; and the demerit of further death: Death it is, to death it
goes. Now what is death? is it not the absence of life, the soul being gone
with the entrance of corruption? And what is sin? Is it not the absence of
saving knowledge, righteousness and holiness, with the corruption of the
mind, will, affections? so that the spiritual stinch of it streameth out; at
the eye lust, at the ear itching after vanity, at the mouth rottennes is the
best, I mean unfruitful speech, sometime bitterness. Look as holiness is
the beginning of life everlasting, which goes on till it end in glory: so is
sin the death of the soul, which does, if the grace of CHRIST heal it not,
never stay, till it come to everlasting damnation. As for sinful actions, they
are nothing but the stinch which comes from the dead corpse, I mean the body
of sin dwelling within us: For as heavy savours come from a putrified body: so
do these motions from a corrupt soul. And as a child, if he do swarve from
morality, and civil virtue, following whores, and abominable courses, be a
royoter, a thief; when thou see an absence of civil virtue, thou say, he
is even a lost child: what then shall we think of our selves, being without
all heavenly virtue of faith, hope, joy in the Spirit, godliness, temperance?
etc.

The use is, God make thee wise, that thou hear this day, how thou art dead
in spirit; and for us, we are glad when we escape some great bodily sickness;
and if there dwell relics of sick matter, we keep rules desanitate tuenda;
how much more should we be wise for our souls?

3 That he says, they were dead in trespasses] Observe What is the life of a
natural man, even a death in trespass: tota infidelium vita peccatum: like
tree, like fruit: now the very conscience of them is polluted. Tit. 1.15.
without faith it is impossible to GOD. True it is, that outwardly they do many
things that are laudable, but still they walk in the flesh, the Devil has
conjured them so into that circle, that they cannot stir forth of it: Look
as in the flesh of a beast, there is some part of greatuse, bought up at great
price, some that is cast to the pudding pits, yet all is flesh: so in the life
of the natural man, some works are of good use, and in commendation with man,
some are abominabl, but all are of the flesh. As a livelesse image has the
resemblance of a man, but is nothing less: So the virtuous actions of natural
men have that appearance of good, but want the soul and life of it in which it
consists.

This is to be marked against the Papists: Hippocrates observes; (...)
the one very light and toying, the other more sober and solemn, in which men
sit still musing deeply upon some fancies: Such a difference we have in
spiritual phrensies; some are very sober over other some, as we see the lives
of some natural men gravely ordered, and morally, in comparison of others, but
yet all is deluded frenzy before GOD.

2 Mark hence; That our course in actual sin does sink us deeper, and
deeper in death; when you were dead in sin; intimating thus much, that the
custom of their trespasses did hold them under death. Even as the more the
body putrifies, it goes further into death: So here, the more the soul does
exercise it self in evil, the deeper it sinketh into the death of it: It is
fitly likened to the stone of the sepulcher, this custom of actual sinning;
for it does seal us up, and keep us down more strongly under it: Upon this
ground the Prophet asks, How shall the Leopard change his spots? no more can
those that are accustomed to evil, learn to do well.

Which must make us take heed how we go on in a sinful course,

You has He quickened with CHRIST] that is, both perfectly in CHRIST, with
whom your life is hid, and initially in your selves, being joined with CHRIST.
Vos cum Christo convivificavit, conjunctos Christo. Observe hence, How far we
are from being prepared to receive the grace showed us by GOD, when we are
quickened to believe; Even as well disposed as Lazarus was for his resurrection
to this present life, of whom it was said, that he now stanke in the grave: No,
there was as much disposition in that Tohu and Bohu, that inanity and deformity
which was before the world, to the being, yea, the ordinate being of all the
Creature, as there is in our souls to the work of grace. We are as far from
this heavenly form of supernatural life, as the deformed Chaos of the
Creature was from this beautiful figure, before the LORD did bring it forth.
There is nothing in Nature can so dispose a man to grace, as that it should
necessarily follow: for only the principal agent which brings in the form
it self is able to work the immediate disposition upon which the form
ensues: As nothing but fire can bring combustible matter to be so spark as
that whereupon it presently burns; for such a disposition is the first point
of bringing in he form it self.

In this therefore many of the Papists are wide; yea,

2 That he does mention their estate before to illustrate GOD's mercy;
Observe, What is the way to bring men to thankful acknowledgement of GOD's
grace, to teach them to see what they were when GOD showed it. Thus Moses,
through the Book of Deuteronomie, often calls on them to think what they were
in Egypt; yea, from their coming forth of Egypt to that day wherein he
spoke, being now not many days from his death: So Ezekiel. 16.30. Saint Paul
everywhere.

The Papists do most wickedly derogate from GOD's glory, God; so good
preparations, and dispositions to this and that: But Moses otherwise; Not for
the goodness of thy heart, not that ye were more in number; though He cast
off others for their sins, He took not thee for thy deservings.

We may hence strengthen our selves, God's particular promises, though we find
our selves unworthy, nothing so fitted as we should be. Not unto us, O Lord,
but unto thy Name, etc. For my Namesake, not for your sake, O ye House of
Israel. As at the first, so after GOD does dispense His favors, that we have
still cause to confess our unworthiness: to His Name, to CHRIST our
Mediator, to His Truth, all is to be attributed, and from them all is to be
expected.

Has He quickened together with Him] Observe then, That all believers have a
new life in and through Christ.

Secondly, you must know, that CHRIST thus having us all with Him as members
belonging to Him through the gift of His Father, and having all our sin made
His, He dies for us all, and for the abolishing of all our sins; so that we
all lie dead with Him, and out sin is all crucified with Him; for it
begins not to be crucified when we dye to it, no, here was the beginning of
it.

Thirdly, CHRIST lying dead with all His dead in Him, having taken away the
guilt, and wrought the death of sin in all His, or the death of all His members
to sin; CHRIST with His body being dead, is raised, and receives that treasury
of supernatural life, which is to be derived in the order of it to all His; so
that CHRIST rising, all of us rise in Him, as our Head, for the members have
society in whatsoever is done in the Head.

2 As a thing may be said to be in the cause of it; so was all our resurrection
in His, which was to be the cause of all our resurrection: As Adam and Eve were
the cause of propagating a natural life to all mankind.

Fourthly, CHRIST thus raised and made the conceptacle, and fountain of
supernatural life, sends out His vital influence into such as belong to
Him: (1) By faith, giving them a being spiritual, or an union in Him; even as
Adam gave a natural being, or participation of his substance unto his members.
(2) He does send into them, thus united with Him, the Spirit of life from
Himself, that is, the HOLY GHOST to dwell in them by the created gifts of
grace, which is life supernatural; They shall hear my voice who are dead,
that is, they shall believe, and they shall live. (3) CHRIST does successively
perfect this life, never leaving till He have in soul and body conformed us
(for our module) to His blessed Soul, and glorious body. And these may serve
to open this point of belief. The difficulty of conceiving it, comes hence.
1. That we know not how straightly and nearly we are united to Him: for as all
were within the loins of Adam, by the determinate Counsel of GOD to come from
Him: so all the Elect by GOD's predestination and donation were within CHRIST,
as one in Him, and with Him. 2. We are not able to see that virtue of His
resurrection.

The use is first,

This also must make us hold to our head CHRIST,

We see whither we must have recourse for life, Come to me and your souls
shall live, to GOD in our Nature; look at thy own flesh in heaven, and draw
from it, as a Conduit-pipe, increase of grace sent thee from it, by the Spirit
which dwells with it.

Having forgiven you all trespasses] Now he comes to the order of our new
quickening, which he sets down by three antecedents which made way to it.

1 He pardoned our sin. 2 He crossed our Bill. 3 He freed us from the power
of Satan, and all infernal spirits.
Before I enter them, let this in general be premised to clear the text:
Suppose that we stood in great debt unto any; say again that he had to show
for all the debt under his own hand: Put the case, thirdly, that we were cast
into prison, and in the custody of some Gaolour, or any officers to that
purpose: If he at whose suite we are in hold, be willing to set us free, what
does he first? he does pardon the debt. Secondly, he does Cancel our bills and
bonds, for he that keeps our bonds seems not to forgive, nor willing to let
us go, otherwise than that he may have a saying to us when he pleases.
Thirdly, he does release his action, and sets him out of bands that held
him; and after all this, dismisseth him to his liberty: So here, we are in for
debt, such debt as touches life it self, the matter is under our own
confession; the Devil holds us under chains of darkness: GOD is willing to
restore us to life.

1 He pardons our faults. 2 Rendeth the Articles of our confession. 3 Takes
us out of their hands who were ministers of His justice in the close keeping of
us.
This shall suffice to illustrate it in general.

We see hence, That in order of nature, first we have pardon of sin, before
we have the life of grace begun in us; there must be a removal of evil,
before there can be a conferring of good. Thus in CHRIST Himself, He was
acquit from all our sin, which was upon Him before He was raised up; yea, if
the least sin of any of us, who are His, had been unanswered, He had not
been raised up; and for this cause, Romans 4.25. The raising of CHRIST is said
to be our justification; that is, God in raising Him up did manifest that He
was fully answered for all our sins, so that we now are quit from all our
sins, in CHRIST our Head: Even as if one lie sentenced a dead man for treason
against the King, he cannot have His life given him, but pardon of his fault is
first given: So here answerably, we are not restored to feel the life of God
take place in us, till our sins, which caused our death, are removed.

In a sinners restoring, this is the order: 1 God by faith sets Him into
CHRIST, who is His righteousness, in whom belongs to Him forgiveness. 2
God, when by belief He is in CHRIST, does pronounce Him just, or acquit Him
from sin. 3 The LORD does send the Spirit of His Son into His heart.


This is the order in Nature, though in time these things go together. This is
to be noted against the Papists, who, when a sinner has by deadly sin lost
the life of grace (as they say) though he after come to have never such love to
God, yet will not have the sin forgiven till the Priest has absolved him: As
if God did restore the life of grace before He gave the pardon of sin. This
out of the order.

The words have four things to be marked: 1 Who forgiveth, God the Father, He
raised up both CHRIST and us, when He had forgiven. 2 The manner of forgiving
in this word (...): of mere grace, and free favor. 3 The Persons, Us; which
is to be marked, for He had said, Who quickened you. Now he returns:


The Person speaking in the first Person.

4 The things forgiven, all sins; past, present, to come, original and
actual, of each a little.

We see who it is that forgiveth our sins, properly God the Father, Son and
Spirit; We pray to God therefore for forgiveness; and we see that the Scribes
and Pharisees kept this persuasion, that GOD only can forgive sins.

Concerning forgiving here, thus much.

1 We must know that forgiveness of sin properly is an act of God's will,
whereby He no longer holds our guilt, and keeps wrath against us, but
returns into favor with us. 2 That God forgiveth all penitent believing
sinners, holding the impenitent and unbeleever guilty. 3 That God uses in an
eminent manner His Ministers, for applying this forgiveness.
The question is; how far God uses them; whether to testify unto them what
GOD does, or has done to them repenting, and so to raise up their faith toward
Him, with whom is forgiveness: or whether God uses them judicially, that is,
as Judges, with power to forgive, Himself only executing what they determine,
ratifying that they pronounce, suspending all His action till the Priest pass
his sentence: so that as the Judges sentence does make one innocent, the King,
who gives the power, doing it by Him; yea, God Himself, (whose judgment was
after a fingular manner in the Commonwealth of Israel) not otherwise absolving
and condemning thus by them: So here God should forgive by His Priests, whom He
has delegated with power in these courses.

Now this cannot stand: For, 1 The Priest should more properly forgive than
God, though he do it as a Minister from God: As the King does not judge causes
in trial formally, but by his Judges in Courts, who have the power from Him,
though he does it, in some sort, because he gives the authority, ratifieth
it, and upholdeth the execution of it. 2 If God gave power to Priests as Judges
to absolve, that they had authority within themselves to do this, then they
could not fitly be said to pray to God to forgive those they absolve; as for
example: The King gives his Judges power to hear causes of this or that
nature, and to sentence them: now what a folly were it for a Judge who has,
per demandationem, power from the King to order this or that, to petition to
the King to order it? would not the King say, though of your selves you have no
power; yet, is not the Law in your hands? have I not given you power within
your selves, and am I not ready to ratify what you determine?


But a good Priests chief efficacy in pardoning, stands in his entreating
God to pardon; therefore he has no power judicially to do it, no, this power
is not delegable to creatures.

First, because it is a personal royalty which God cannot give to others,
unless He would make Himself an underling to others, and so suspend Himself
upon man, that His pleasure should sway Him: For the forgiving of sins is the
power of pardoning treason against His person: Yea, no inferior can determine,
and sentence the matter of a superior, till his superior have put himself in
that cause under his inferior.

Secondly, this is such an act wherein no man can be a competent Judge, as man
may be in causes betwixt man and man, which are civil: because a man cannot
know certainly the truth of faith and repentance in any, according to which the
sentence must be pronounced, if truly. All the Ministers can do, is to
certify what God does, not as a private Christian does, but as a public
messenger, who brings from God's Majesty the word of Pardon, as Saint Paul
says, the Word of reconciliation, that thus he may excite the faith of the
penitent believer to behold God pardoning him, and feel the pardon of God as
it were, sealed within him. My Lord Chancellor does not give the Kings pardon,
(which he gives to those that come to take it forth at his first entrance) he
does not, as a Judge, give them forth as his pardons, but delivers them as the
Kings sole deed, out of his Princely clemency: Thus the Priest in the Law did
not make a Leper clean, but did manifest him to himself, and to all Israel to
be that he was: The Minister of God has no power to pardon, but ministerially
he does cooperate with God, that God's pardon may be applied and sealed within
the consciences of them that believe.

Wherefore, God out; and as it is with the Pope himself, so would every one
thrust himself into the room of God. This is a fruit of their monarchical
ambition; they will in all their doings, not be content with an Oecumenicall
steward-like power, but challenge a regal authority over the LORD's heritage.

Let us seek to the Lord; who says, I am He that blot out your
transgressions, and forgive iniquity: Yet seeing that He makes Ministers His
Messengers, in whom He puts this word of Pardon; yea, such as cooperate
with Him in applying this His only Pardon unto us; let us likewise look to
them, as men of GOD, who can testify to us what he does in His Name.

Further, observe hence: That GOD's pardon is of mere grace to us; we are
justified freely by His grace, through the redemption in CHRIST JESUS; that is,
we come to have pardon of sin, and to be taken to favor freely: CHRIST
indeed bought it dear, we have it freely. Which is to be marked against
satisfactions, which are satisfactory to the Justice of GOD, the revenging
Justice of GOD. Satisfactions were indeed anciently used in reconciling
penitent ones, but they were to the Church offended, not unto GOD, whom none
but CHRIST can satisfy: And though GOD is said to have rested as satisfied in
some punishment taken at the hands of His children, yet this is the quieting of
a fatherlike, and temporary displeasure, not of a revenging justice with which
we have to deal in answering the guilt of the least sin.

Let us therefore hate this popish arrogancy, God only, of grace, or it is
buying our selves out, not seeking pardon.

3 That He changes the Person, You has He quickened, having forgiven us]
Observe hence: That we must remember what God has done for us, while we show
to others the things bestowed on them. The holy Apostle could not stand out
from the thankful acknowledgement of God's favors to him, when he tells
others what GOD had done for them. There are some like such scholars that can
learn their fellows lessons, but cannot say their own parts: they can tell
what God has done for others, as if they had kept a catalogue for them, and
yet in the mean while, see nothing into those favors which they themselves
have enjoyed: But let us learn hence so to be affected to God for that we have
received, that we fail not to tell what God has done for our souls, when we
are telling of His kindness.

Lastly, largeness of God's grace, forgiving all our sins; all past,
present, and to come. If any future sins were not forgiven us, we could not
have life eternal restored: For as one of our sins kept without pardon,
would have kept CHRIST from rising from the dead; so it would keep us from
feeling the power of His Resurrection, if all our sins were not remitted to
us. There is no condemnation to one that is in CHRIST; Rem. 8.1.
He has passed from death to life, and shall not come into condemnation: God
does not forgive as justifying us judicially but once; neither does he remit
all present to the believer, suspending the pardon of future, till he should
anew repent and believe, for this stands not with the nature of that
everlasting Covenant, I will remember thy sin no more. Again unless one
would hold a total, which must needs also be a final fall from CHRIST, it
would follow that one should be in CHRIST, and yet for a time in state of
damnation before God.

Why then do we pray,

That we may have continuance of our pardon, sense, and feeling of it, that we
may have pardon of God's Fatherly displeasure, and so of bitter corrections
which our sin might cause, not that we would have a new justification with
GOD.

How are those that are excommunicate made as Publicans,

The Church does not cut them off from all conjunction with GOD, God's secret
sight and estimation; and this censure of hers is ratified.

Hence then let us think of the Lord's wonderful love: God; hence Romans 5. God
amplifieth His grace, and makes it to glory above justice: justice condemned
in one sin, but grace is given to the pardon of many offenses.

This is to be noted against the Papists; God forgiveth all sins fully in
Baptism, only after Baptism God forgiveth not venial sins; and if we fall
into mortal, God forgiveth for CHRIST, the eternal punishment, but leaves us
to satisfy the temporal: Thus when God forgiveth us not all our sins, but
sins committed before Baptism, not all after, but mortal only, nor mortal
fully, but in regard of the eternal punishment; thus they infringe the Charter
of all the Christian world, that they may maintain their merchandise of
Pardons, and indulgencies: But this were to make God no pardoner, but a
mitigater of punishment. If the King now, when a traitor is condemned to dye,
do change his sentence of of death into perpetual imprisonment, he is not
said to forgive the treason, but to mitigate punishment: Privilegiasunt
amplianda. When God says, He forgiveth all, who but such enemies of mankind
would restrain it further than God Himself does? True it is that many
punishments do still lie upon GOD's children; but they are childe-like
chastisements, not judiciary penalties, whereby the Law might be satisfied.

VERSE 14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross.
NOw he comes to the second benefit, which went before our quickening: In
laying it down; 1 He sets down the benefit. 2 The manner of working it.


In describing the benefit, he does by a gradation set it forth.

1 He blotted out the handwriting against us. 2 He took it out of the way,
quite abolished it.
The manner of working, nailing it on the Cross.

But to clear the Text, some Questions are necessary.

It may be asked, handwriting?

The Apostle leads us to know it:

1 By the Quality, it was Contrary. 2 The Subject about which it was occupied,
in rites] which do define it sufficiently to be the Ceremonial Law: but it is
more evident by comparing it with Ephesians. 2.15. Abolishing the Law of
Commandments in rites; by that which he presently infers: Therefore seeing
that CHRIST has blotted out the handwriting in rites; let none condemn you
in legal rites, not obeyed by you. This illation does show that legal rites
are meant somewhere in the precedents: Further, Verse 20. he thus uses the
word (...): Why do ye use rites? as touch not, taste not, handle not.
It may be asked,

They have a double consideration; the one Evangelicall, Christ, thus they are
not; the other legal, purely Mosaicall, whereby they preached our guilt, and
the wrath belonging to us, thus they were hand-writings against us.

It may be asked, how Saint Paul can say, Colossians, and how he can name the
taking of them away as a benefit to the Colossians, seeing that nothing is more
evident than that the Ceremonial Law was laid on none by God, but the household
of Abraham?

Saint Paul says [to us] who was of the tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 3. and it may
be he changes the Person in the Verse before having respect to this. But to
pass this Conjecture, it may be answered; that the Jewish rites had a double
testification; the one direct, which respected their own persons, that
worshipped with them: the other indirect by force of Consequent only, and thus
they did witness the guilt of all the world: For if they testify that the
peculiar people of God were by nature in sin, and guilty of death, then a
fortiori, they witnessed all the world beside lay in sin and death: And thus
Saint Paul on the contrary makes those Scriptures which are spoken against the
Gentiles in the old Testament, to witness against the Jew by nature: the Jew
is no better than the Gentile: Now this was a benefit to all the Gentiles, the
abolishing of them, not that it eases us from any thing had been upon us, but
because it does save us from ever having this importable yoke laid on us; and
this I take to be the sound answer of this question.

What it means, God is said [to blot out and take them away?]

Because they are so answered in CHRIST,

Lastly, [nailed on the Cross?]

As we conceive our selves, Christ on the Cross: So all the specialties which
were to show against us; yea, all the conversation of us, as it was after this
world, is to be conceived with Him, that the whole old man with his debt, with
the deeds he had done, acknowledging this debt with his manner of conversing in
carnal rites; I say, all of the old man is to be conceived thus in CHRIST, and
crucified with Him, that all old things might be abolished.

Now to come to the Doctrines.

Observe first, That not only our sin, which is our debt, is answered; but
that whatsoever may show any thing against us is done away in CHRIST: not only
our debt, but every thing which might testify any thing, or breed us future
danger, is cancelled. If a debtor do know his debt is answered, yet has his
bonds and bills uncalled in, he is still in fear; but when he has all such
things as might speak any thing, crossed, torn, made utterly void, then he is
safe: for the LORD will have man do all things, so as he may show his true
meaning and wisdom in the dealing betwixt him; and our Lord Jesus Christ, does
give us example: for in CHRIST answering our debt, it had not been wisdom not
to have defaced, and abolished all such things as made acknowledgement of our
debt, and in GOD to have taken from His CHRIST satisfaction for us, and kept
with Himself such things which might witness us still indebted to Him, had
not so agreed with that single, and upright meaning which GOD shows in all
His ways. Again our peace had not been provided for; for the Devil our
restless enemy, would never have rested to have followed the suit on us, if
he had so good evidence as our own confession, whether in heart, word, or
under our hand, to show against us to that most just GOD.

The use of this is first to teach us the great bounty of God; yea, and to show
us a pattern of sincere dealing: Adrian, that seeking to win the favor of His
subjects in Rome and Italy, he for gave them all they were indebted to his
Exchequer; and the more to amplify his free pardon, he gave them out all their
bills and bonds by which they made acknowledgement of any due to him: Thus the
great God amplifying His love, deals with us, and teaches men what to do
when a debt is answered, even to keep nothing to show for it, that so their
sincere dealing may be witnessed.

This lets us see the fullness of CHRIST's redemption:

Lastly, this makes much for our comfort, beside the Ceremonial Law, there
are many other hand-writings, as it were, which the Devil will threaten
against us: what will he say, thou justified? Daniel, Saint Paul and others,
do they not confess they are sinners, miserable and wretched, their
righteousness (as Esaias speaks) like stained clothes? This confession of the
greatest Saints speaks against thee. Again, thy conscience does know that
thou art a grievous sinner; thou have not crucified the lusts of thy flesh, and
how often has thy own mouth said, thou have no true faith, no lively grace?
Nay, sometime he has got the hand to show for their own damnation: How shall
all this be answered? Even by granting that indeed there are such confessions,
and bills of mine own out against me; but my CHRIST He did answer them, and
take them away. This in general.

Now in particular: That by CHRIST the Ceremonial Law is taken away: Look
Ephesians. 2.15. and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which does set it forth at
large: for the Law was not given that it should be perpetual, but only till
the time of CHRIST, which is called the time of correction, or the setting
things straight, to that which they respected: As a Physician without changing
his art, gives one thing to a child, another thing to a man: And as a learned
Schoolmasters teaches one book to a novice, another to a riper scholar; so
GOD without any change in Himself, does change these ordinances, and did
always intend their ceasing in CHRIST. Now we must know, that when we say this
Law of Ceremony was abolished in Christ, the meaning is, that it does not bind
any unto obedience: As we see with us, when Statutes are repealed, they are not
blotted forth of bodies, and abolished from being monuments of advertisement,
but their force only taken away from constraining obedience, so here etc. not
that the doctrine and knowledge of it, nor yet the liberty of doing a rite in
it, while the edification of the Church so required, is taken away: the one is
perpetual, the other was by the Apostles for a time lawfully practiced. For as
the Moral Law is taken away from the use of seeking righteousness in it, yet
it remains as a rule of manners, instructing us in our duties, which we owe
in thankfulness: So this Law is taken away in regard of all the obligation,
and exercise of it; but remains for many uses, of doctrine, and instruction.

The Use is to let us see GOD's goodness to us;

It lets us see our happiness above the Jews,

We see hence, Augustine in his hundred and nineteenth Epistle to Ianuarius
complains of, that all was pestered with humane presumptions. And the Popish
religion is hence erected as a yoke, from whence by Christ we are redeemed.

The second thing to be marked here, is; That the Jewish Ceremonies as they
were purely legal, were as bills testifying the debt of the people before GOD:
The principal end to which the grace of GOD used them, was to shadow out
CHRIST, as follows; but nakedly considered as apart from this grace of the
Gospel, they did acknowledge our debt what we should pay, they did make
confession that we did it not: they did also acknowledge the mystery which
belonged to us in this regard: for it is to be noted, that nothing can be fitly
conceived here but the Jewish rites, not our agreement, and covenanting with
GOD in Paradise, or Mount Sinay, all these things will we do; this is the debt
it self, not Syngrapha, or Chyrographum, which does testify the debt: Now the
Ceremonies, some did testify their debt, Galath. 5. If a man be circumcised,
(say as seeking righteousness in the Law) he is a debtor to the whole Law:
Mark, that as a man by the bill of his hand, so the old people by the
Circumcision, did testify that they owed GOD obedience in all the Law. 2. Some
testified their guilt, as all their legal uncleanness and washings, their
sacrificings, both sin offerings and burnt offerings, the one showed their
guilt, the other that they were by nature altogether corrupted, and must be
killed, as they were themselves, that so they might come to live to GOD; such
were their humbling their souls annually. In conclusion, their whole worship
did testify that the perfect offering with which GOD's wrath was to be
appeased, was not yet come. 2. That Heaven was not yet opened, that they were
all in desert of death through sin; this was all they could do as purely
legal, as they are considered a part of the ministry of the Law, so far as
it is opposed to the Gospel, thus they were a ministry of condemnation,
beggarly elements, a Chyrographum against us. Yet the principal end to which
GOD used them, was to signify the sacrifices to come; this was the principal,
I say, because the Law it self is made a servant to grace; yea, justice in God
does put it self forth, that the grace of God may be more manifested, and it
may be therefore the Apostle here says they were a Chyrographum (...),
subcontrary, in respect that they had another end more maine which was with us,
though they wanted not this testification also: Now how this testification does
extend to us guiltless, is above showed.

The use of this may be first to admonish us whence it came, Answ. They were
still occupied in one rite or other which did testify uncleanness: their
services were hand-writings against them, they proclaimed their guilt aloud,
but showed the grace of God very obscurely. Again, we see what cause we have
to be glad of our LORD JESUS, who has freed us of these lamentable services.
If we have called in a bond or bill which we had abroad, it joyeth us, but we
know not our happiness, who have these bonds in statute reversed for us. And
we must take heed of this levin of Jewish ceremony, from which we were
redeemed so dearly: A little levin works through the whole lump; Ill weeds
grow apace. What an abundance are these rites grown to in the Church of Rome,
from beginnings far smaller!

But some may say;

The Ceremonies not only as Shadows of Christ, Spirit promised is not given,
that the times wherein we must worship in spirit and truth, that is a
spiritual manner, not carnal, that these times are not yet approached.

Lastly mark: That Christ has by suffering on the Cross abolished these
things: So you have it, Ephesians. 2.15. 1 Pet. 1.20. He has delivered you from your
vain conversation, received by the tradition of your fathers; Where it is to
be noted, that though the whole ceremonial Law might in some regard be called
[Vaine] for it was but a shadow of heavenly things, it brought not things to
perfection, yet he does especially note there the traditionary depravations of
doctrines; yea, and their Ceremonies significant, which they used by the
institution of men, to admonish them of inward holiness, as washing of hands,
Matt. 15. to put them in mind of inward cleanness: of which Christ says; In
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine men's precepts; as also their
corrupt conversation; for Christ suffering did crucify the vain, carnal, and
sinful life of our old man, that we might be even for the external manner
spiritual and holy to God, through Him.

This then as it shows us the love of CHRIST,

VERSE 15. And has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same Cross.
NOw follows the third thing which went before our quickening, that is, the
freeing us from him who was GOD's fearful doomes-man, having power of
executing death upon us by reason of our sin; Principalities and Powers do
signify all those superior and inferior powers of darkness with which
Christ combated on His Cross: The thing is set down by a gradation.

1 He did spoil them, which what it is shall be opened more. 2 He did make a
show of them, that is, expose them to ignominy and reproach; for so this word:
(...) signifies, Matthew. 1.19. (...). 3 He triumphs over them, within
Himself, or on His Cross, (...): supple (...).
The sum is. God in Christ has quickened us, when He had given us an
acquittance from all our sins, abolished all things which showed any thing
against us, when He had on the Cross of His Son disarmed, made a scorn, and
triumphed over all spiritual powers, who had us as executioners to His justice
before in their custody.

In the Verse three things may be considered: 1 The Victory it self. 2 The
Persons vanquished. 3 The Manner.


First in general we are to mark: That God does set us free from the power of
Satan before we are made alive thoroughly in JESUS CHRIST; He quickened us in
Christ; in what order? having subdued all Principalities and Powers that held
us; even as in Christ our Head, so in us this work proceeds: First, He died,
and by death conquered the Prince of this world: Then when his power was
broken, He raised Himself up again: In the same order are we, when we
believe, first translated out of the power of Satan, before we have our new
life infused from Christ: Even as a traitor cannot be safe from the sentence
of death, until he be first taken out of the hand of a cruel Executioner: So
here with us. Hence it is that, Heb. 2.15. Christ is said first, to abolish him
who has power of death, and then to deliver those, who through fear of death
were still subject to bondage.

But it may be asked, Christ, when we find them still encounter us?

Because they have no right in us, [subdued] not that they have not leave a
while to exercise us.

This then must make us rejoice in God our Savior, Armado in eighty eight was
overthrown, what a joy was it to all true English hearts? But this is the joy
of all joys to the Israel of God, to think how Christ has trodden on the
Serpents head, and captivated all their power, who sometime lead us captive.

In particular when he says, Who has spoiled] Observe hence: That God has in
Jesus Christ crucified and disarmed Satan, that he has no weapon against us.
It is the custom of conquerours to disarme their vanquished enemies, and make
a prey of what ever they have: so has Christ Jesus done with Satan.

For first, whereas they had sin and our own confessions against us; CHRIST
took away our sins, laying them on Himself, and satisfying for them.

Secondly, whereas they having power of death, did hold us under, CHRIST bare
the death in His own Person, that so this weapon might not hurt us.

Thirdly, whereas we by reason of sin and death, were in their power, He
stripped them off us likewise, making the mighty deliver these captives: for
sin and death being taken away, by which they held us in their power, they had
nothing to show why we should be detained: now this was the spoiling of him of
his freehold as he imagined.

This must teach us to stir up our selves in serving GOD confidently, for
why? We are delivered from our enemies, who are spoiled, that we might serve
the LORD without fear: Great are these spiritual powers in their nature, but
to those that are in Christ, they are disarmed, so that they cannot hurt us,
they are naked devils, and we being in Christ, are in a strong fort. Wherefore,
as for armed men being in a strong hold, it were too much shame to be afraid of
naked enemies that should offer, with nothing in their hands, to assail them:
So here. True it is, as children not knowing what is what, are afraid of
bull-beggars which cannot hurt them. So are we here, but the LORD makes us
grow up in His strength.

We see how to comfort our selves when we feel sin darted against us, or
seem to feel fear of death, Christ, tell Him, LORD thou have taken sin and
death out of the Devils hand, and took me from him likewise; Lord make my eye
of faith clear, that I may see this thy victory for me: thy victory I know is
full, though in my feeling it seem otherwise. Look with the eye of faith to
Christ, give glory to Him, that He has done it, and thou shall quickly see His
victory applied in thee: And though the Devil hold hard, fear not, all is
vain, he must yield the bucklers when all is done, to thy Lord Christ; his
prey must be delivered up, he has no right in it, nor power to hold: CHRIST
did discharge him of the one, and brake the other in his death.

He has made a show of them openly.] Observe hence; How Christ in His death
made a scorn of all the powers of darkness, they are exposed to open shame:
It is said of the wicked, Dan. 12.
they shall be an everlasting reproach; and it is a part of their deserved
punishment: So here, it was just that these wicked powers should be exposed to
all reproach.

But what was this open show of them?

The taking them captives, Paul says of Hymeneus, and Alexander, I have
delivered them up to Satan. 1 Timothy 20
Now as a serpent that leaves the sting in one, cannot sting again: so it was
with this old serpent; his sting was so stricken into Christ, that he could not
now any more sting us who are His: Nay more, the putting him under the feet of
such demie creatures as we are, and making him serve for our good, whom he
usurped over, as cruel Pharaoh sometime. Even as Conquerours taking their
enemies captive, do make them serve for base slaves in the basest ministeries,
lead them along pinnioned one to another: So does our Conqueror JESUS CHRIST.

This must the more make us magnify God,

Note again, that our SAVIOR has openly triumphed on His Cross; which does
let us see the perfect victory of Christ over all our enemies in His death;
this was the consummation of His Conquest, that the Victor did ride in His
Chariot of triumph, the vanquished captives of diverse Nations led beside him.
When the Emperor came home, he went up to the top of the Capitol, and there
in public view triumphed, as he says of Augustus: Ille triumphata Capitolia
ad alta Corintho, victor aget currum: This is the fullness of victory.

But here a Question arises.

He is said to triumph in regard He suffering, Christ who in His manhood lay
conquered, and humbled under death, the same Person in regard of His Godhead
was conquering and triumphing: for though to feign the same nature in contrary
taking, is a contradiction (as Schoolmen do, who will have the humane nature
formally in the greatest felicity, and greatest sufferings at one instant) yet
to affirm the same Person in diverse regards humbled extremely, and yet
triumphing, is no contradiction, because it is not understood secundum idem,
and in respect of the same, but a diverse nature.

Which must be all our rejoicing; heavenly news; that our King has subdued
all our spiritual enemies; yea, triumphed over: for this argues full
conquest; when no wise man will ante victoriam cantare triumphum.

We must hence strengthen our faith;

This lets us see what a potent,

Finally, that He says, in that His Crosse] We see hence; that in CHRIST
crucified all victory is obtained against these infernal enemies: this must be
read [in that Crosse] not [in Himselfe] For the antecedent in all these is GOD
the Father, working these things in His Son Jesus Christ crucified: In this
unlike those great Potentates: they never celebrated triumphs, while they were
receiving the assault of the enemy, but stayed till they were returned into
their own Countries to their Imperial Cities; as Claudius, who when he had
conquered this Country of Britain, he went home to Rome, there to rule in
triumph: But our LORD, while He receives all the hot assault of these powers
of darkness, triumphs: Nobile genus vincendi Patientia, to let them do all
their worst, and by His suffering it to overcome them, is a most triumphant
kind of conquest: The very fight it self is triumph. It is reported of the
Lion and the Unicorn, that there being deadly hostility between them, when
the Lion spyeth the Unicorn, he takes a tree; the Unicorn following him
eagerly, runs his horn into the tree, in which case the Lion spoileth him
at his pleasure: So betwixt our Lion of the tribe of Judah, God-man, and these
proud Unicorns, those spiritual sons of Pride, there being great hostility,
these Principalities hating GOD, and oppugning His glory in the salvation of
mankind, it pleased Him to dwell under the veil of our nature; even with such
a body and soul as we have, (sin excepted) that while the Devil did run
with all his strength, and lodge his horn, as it were, in this man; his power
might be broken for ever, every stroke he gave, returned on his own head;
being the death of this man, he killed himself, the head of him (in which you
know lies the life of a Serpent) was bruised for ever. And as angry Bees
foolishly stinging once, make themselves drones ever after: So these wily
Serpents (but foolish here, if ever foolish) stinging our SAVIOR CHRIST, have
made themselves stinglesse to all that are CHRIST's, for ever: their wisdom
had been not to have stirred up any sinful men to have attached this sacred
Person, they should have fled from Him to the most remote quarters of Hell,
rather than have made Him suffer the least thing from them: Had they done thus,
their power in the world had still remained: For as the sparkles of fire
lighting on water, are extinct; so sin and death falling on the GOD of
Holiness and life, were extinguished in Him.

The use is first to arm us, Savior dyed, was a man hanging upon a Cross:
Look by the eye of faith what victory was gotten by this Cross, what was the
powerful work of this death; and then it shall no more hinder us in
believing, when we know that GOD created light out of darkness: Nay, that our
GOD did thus by His death (as a second Adam) abolish spiritual death, and
bring immortality and life to mankind, is more wonderful than the Creation of
the world.

We see that when Satan seems the most to prevail on CHRIST, etc. all this
was against himself: Thus it is in all that are CHRIST's; when he thinks to
have the greatest hand over them, all turns to their good; when by death they
are stricken, death it self dies, and his power is almost quite abolished.
Wherefore, let us not faint in our straits, but stand still, looking to the
salvation of GOD: Thus that type of him, Pharaoh, when he sore tasked the
Israelites, they most increased; when he had them so hemmed in betwixt
mountains and seas, that there seemed no evasion, then was their deliverance
at hand, and his confusion.

VERSE 16. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect
of an holy day, or of the new Moons, or of the Sabbath days.
YOu have heard at the sixth Verse of this Chapter, that there began the
exhortatory part of this Epistle: and the Exhortations were general,
concerning all sorts, or special: The general you heard were either
principal, as that in the sixth and seventh Verses, or secondary pertaining to
the Principal: the less principal assistant to that great duty of [ walking
in CHRIST] were prohibitions of things to be avoided: In this Chapter are rules
of spiritual practice: in the next the Prohibitions are given, first in
general, Verse 8. Go not after Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, and elements of the world; the which general prohibition
has been propounded, and by reasons hitherto enforced. Now he comes to some
particular prohibitions, which do open unto us what things he meant by vain
deceit, which leans on man's tradition and is carnal. The dehortations are
twofold: 1 From a servile respecting the censures of men, so walking in
CHRIST, that they meddle not neither with Jewish nor Philosophical
superstitions, to the twentieth Verse. 2 He dehorteth them from the practice of
every carnal and elementary fashion of worshipping GOD, from the twentieth
Verse to the end of the Chapter.


To return; this dehortation in the sixteenth Verse may be divided into the
prohibition, and the reason. The Prohibition, Let no man condemn you in these
things] The Reason, they are shadows of things, which now in Christ and His
Church are exhibited: for this has a secret force enforcing what by the
Apostle is urged:

That which is a Shadow vanished, that is not so to be regarded, as to fear
lest you be censured in the neglect of it:

But these are such:

Therefore pass not, though you be condemned for omitting these.

But the former part of the sixteenth Verse may be diversely construed, Let no
man condemn you] First, it may sound to this sense; Let no person in heart
Iewishly affected take on him to condemn you, or no weak Jew condemn you in
not using these things: but this is not probably here understood, because the
Apostle deals with the Colessians, showing them their duty, as may be
gathered by the inference, and the next Verse. Again, weak converts of Jews,
it is not probable there were any with them. The second sense, Let none
condemn you] that is, do not take up these shadows, or continue the practice
in them, and so give occasion to other Churches of the Gentiles to condemn
you; but this, though a good sense, I do not allow for these reasons: 1
Because after the rule of the Apostle, Romans 14. Churches were not to condemn
Churches, though they were a little levened this way; if they did, it was a
fact not very warrantable. 2 Because in the twentieth Verse he dehorteth them
from detaining and using these rites. 3 Because, that as in the next Verse, he
does call them to stand their ground against Philosophical seductors: So here
against Jewish Ceremony-masters. I think then this is the meaning: Let none
condemn you; that is, stand in the liberty so dearly purchased, yield not
your selves for any man's condemnation in these matters, pass not if any man
condemn you for not using rites crucified in CHRIST. This is a way whereby we
suffer not any to condemn us, when we stand not to any censure of them,
challenging our freedom. Thus though we cannot keep the Pope from cursing,
excommunicating us, in regard of his deed and mind; yet we may truly be said
not to let him excommunicate us, in respect we submit not to any censure he
passes in kind: This then is the meaning: Pass not if Iudaising spirits do
condemn you, for not keeping a part of an holy day, a new Moon, etc. for all
these things are shadows, which in CHRIST and His Church, the substance of
them is accomplished.


1 Observe hence: That we must not make account of men's sinister judgments,
as any way giving place unto them. It is the property of erroneous spirits,
they will be prodigal in their peremptory condemning of all that dissent from
them: Thus you see how the Pope thundereth anathema's in every article against
us, and Papal spirits, subscribe not to every Canon, you shall be
excommunicate; yea, an anathema presently. Now then if we might not turn our
deaf ear, and contemn subjecting our selves to their sentences, we should
quickly shake in our belief: Thus our Savior taught His Disciples, When they
revile you, excommunicate you for my Names sake, pass not what they count of
you; great then is your reward: So when the Apostles told Him what the
Pharisees would except at; Tush, let them alone, they are blind leaders of the
blind, and how does Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 4.3. I esteem it the least matter of a
thousand to be judged of you or men: And we see how in the Primitive story,
when Victor would in the matter of Easter, condemn all the other Churches
differing from him; they gave no place, but rebuked his insolency, and
contemned his audacious censure. For we stand and fall to our own Master:
What have they to do to judge us? Yet this must be rightly understood: For
there is a sinful carelessness of others censure; when a man out of an (...),
a selfe-conceited, proud, pertinacious humor passes not for others; or when
one regards not this or that, because of the base account in which he has
the persons that speak it: or when one distinguishes not persons, but is most
careless of all alike: whereas we must never out of pride, or contempt (as
they in the Gospel) what do you stand upon that these old cursed people
think, that know not the Law? but from a good conscience testifying with us in
that we do before GOD, 1 Cor. 4.3. 2 We must distingush betwixt weak ones
misconceiving through weakness of judgment, and malicious ones: the latter
are not to be regarded; but for the other, though we must not cease from that
which is good necessarily to be done of us, yet we must pity it in them, and
seek at GOD to show them the truth.
The Use is to us, such who condemn us, holding to that which is the truth.
Hence then may be reproved that pusillanimity in many, who will give in, if
they be opposed in the least degree.

2 Observe. That to put no difference in meats for conscience sake, or religious
respect, is no sin: the text proves it: Let no man condemn you in meat] that
is, care not for their condemning you, when you put no religious difference
betwixt meats, as pure and impure; so in drinks. We know the Jews, if a
thing stood in a pot uncovered, were not to touch the liquor, it was legally
impure to them: for these things are all the good creatures of GOD, and all
these things in CHRIST are made pure to the pure. There is a fourfold
distinction of meats: 1 The one Natural. 2 The other Politic. 3 Religious. 4
Superstitious.


Some in regard of natural properties and wholesomenesse to our bodies good:

So politikely for the benefit of the fisherman,

A truly religious difference is, when GOD,

The fourth kind is, Montanus forbade all dry things, and would have them
religiously refrained, as coming from an evil beginning: Thus the Papists
forbid flesh, eggs and white meats, though not as evil in their nature, yet
as defiling the conscience of him that uses them, when now they are forbidden;
and that not only because he transgresses the commandment of the Church, but
because he neglects a thing which is good in it self; even as a religious
exercise: But this was the old opinion of the Pharisees, who did think that
some meats did defile them, not only which GOD had forbidden, but which they
refrained out of humane tradition: for they had their weekly fasts of their
own making; Matthew. 15.2.11.
but CHRIST tells them, That which goes into the mouth defiles not the man.
Secondly, they thought it a sin against the commandment of the Elders: Why
does your Master eat with unwashen hands, breaking the tradition of the Elders?
But our Savior by His fact shows that there is no such power in men, as to
make that a sin which GOD has not forbidden:

That for which we need not fear who condemn us, in that we sin not, nor
deserve no censure; for a caused condemnation must be feared:

But in these things, viz. the free use of all creatures as alike pleasing to
GOD, we need not care who condemn us:

Therefore we need not to be afraid of taking any creature, afraid (I say) as
if we should sin in so doing.

Which may serve to reprove the Papists putting a difference of meants,
Discrimen ^iberum cut di^rum nonja^ retinendum est a Christianis cum opinione
necessitatis, Sanctitatis, justitiae, ^ut (...). Epise. Daven. in (...). 16.
page 185.
than othersome, and more pleasing to GOD; Yea, making it a deadly sin to eat
an egg on Friday, as if the kingdom of GOD did stand in meats or drinks.

Let no man condemn you] Observe hence: What is the spirit of those that dote
on Mosaicall and Jewish rites, they are ready to condemn such as are not down
right in them: they are here deciphered, as if they would damn such as did but
fail in the part of an Holy Day: For you must know their Feasts began the
Evening before. Now all the day on the Feast-Eve men were free to labor; but
toward night, they began their religious observances: now they are here painted
forth as ready most deeply to censure such as should miss but the least part
of time, half an holy day, which they were accustomed to keep as holy.

Obs. Again: He does not say, do not refrain a meat or drink, or seem to
keep an Holy Day, but yield not your liberty to suffer your selves condemnable
in neglecting these things, upon necessary and urgent occasions, as if you had
omitted some thing you were bound unto upon absolute necessity. Whence note:
That the not using of rites, but yielding our selves bound to them, is the
thing we must avoid. Christ is said to have taken away the yoke of Ceremonies,
not as making it unlawful to do them with liberty, but as freeing us from the
obligation, and necessary obedience of them. Hence it was that Saint Paul
circumcised, shaved, etc. who yet would not in the least measure have betrayed
his liberty in yielding himself under any pretense bound unto them: Thus we
may use some Ceremony when discretion requires; and authority enjoyneth, for
decency and order in the Church; or to testify that we are not
schismatically affected, but love and desire to keep the peace of the Church.

VERSE 17. Which are a shadow of things to come: but the body is CHRIST.
OBserve hence: What all those legal Ceremonies were, even shadows of that
which is done in CHRIST and His Church; for I conster [CHRIST] here, CHRIST
mystical, as 1 Cor. 12.12. For if that of the Fathers may go for current,
that distinction of cloven footed beasts, and such as chewed the Cud, did
teach, that Christians must be discreet, and given to meditate on the Word;
though it is liker that the permitting them only pure creatures, did signify,
that we must desire the sincere milk and food of the Gospel: or creatures of
middle nature, did admonish us, how our spiritual food of knowledge, though it
be far higher than the world; yet it is far inferior to that we shall be
fed with, when we walk by sight.

To show us how justly these are all abolished;

This teaches the fondness of this world which embraces shadows and
neglects substance, Ixion: so does God plague men that will not receive the
substance of truth, but are wood-madde, in love with shadows, as these here:
And so we all do follow shadows of good, leaving the true good things indeed.

The Papists may hence be in part answered: object, that their Ceremonies are
not here condemned,

Though in other regards they are taken away then of signification (as shall be
noted hereafter) yet they must know, signification respecting CHRIST is
twofold: etc. (2) Of that which represents any thing to be done in the body
of CHRIST mystical, to be done spiritually of believers: Now their Ceremonies
are to be charged for sacrifice of the Mass, a shadow of CHRIST about to be
offered. For all the Ceremonies do shadow some spiritual thing in believers,
who are the body of Christ.

VERSE 18. Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by humbleness of
mind, and worshipping of Angels, advancing himself in those things which he
never saw, rashly puffed up with His fleshly mind.
NOw he comes to the second dehortation, which does further illustrate what
his meaning was in bidding them above take heed of Philosophy. In the
dehortation three things must be noted: the former two being branches of the
duty it self; the latter infoldeth reasons enforcing it.

The first is, that they would not stand unto man's arbitrament, nor pass for
man's arbitrary judgment in the matters following, Let no man determine upon
you.]

The second is the points wherein they were not to yield themselves to the
arbitrament of any, viz. in setting down what was humbleness of mind, and
what was the right way of seeking to God, and condemning you as not humble, and
not speeding in that you seek; because you do not worship Angels, and use
their mediation to God.

The third intimates reasons taken from the description of those moderatours
who would judge in these cases, which seem to prevent the Colossians in their
thoughts: thus shall we not regard their determining against us.

Why,

They tell you of points in which they have no understanding,

I,

It is their secret pride,

Let none bear rule over you] The Greek word [(...)] is borrowed from those
who sit as judges of sports; (...).
as when there is running of tilt before the King, there is some that sit by
with white wands or staves, who mark how every one breaks and hits,
according as the law of the sport requires, and thereafter give sentence with
or against the Champions: So we must remember that Prayer is a spiritual
wrestling with God: for the due manner of it, it is to be done in all humility
through Him who is our Mediator to God: this is a law of this heavenly
wrestling; the (...), the recompense of this strife is, that God bears us,
and will give us what we ask in the Name of His CHRIST. Now these false
seducers take upon them as judges in this case, and determine against the
Colossians, that they did not strive or serve GOD in humility, neglecting to
worship Angels, and to use them as intercessors to GOD; and in this regard did
make all their wrestling in vain, judging from them their reward, because this
law was neglected by them.

(...) Willing] that is, at His pleasure, it is fitliest reduced to that
former: Now follows the difficulty.

In humility and worship of Angels] These words may have, as I conceive, a
threefold accommodation: (1) They may note instruments wherewith those false
Apostles seduced, and the matter whereupon they grew thus censorious: Let none
deprive you of your reward, or take upon him to judge you through humbleness
of mind. (2) The second sense, they may be joined with the words following;
thus: Let none at his pleasure play the judge over you, entering into things he
neve saw, through show of submission, and through worship of Angels. The third
sense: These words may signify the matter, as I have noted, in which they
judged Christians defective, and therefore seeking in vain to GOD, thus: Pass
not you, nor yield not to the sentence of any who do condemn you in humility,
that is, as wanting humility, and in worship of Angels, that is, judge against
you, as not using any mediation of Angels, or intercession to them. The first
opinion I admit not, for these Reasons.

1 As he said above, Let none seduce you by Philosophy, (...), so he would
here have used the same particle rather than another. 2 I see not how a fained
humility is fitly made a ground or pretense of usurping judicial authority. 3
The Greeks put little difference betwixt this word [(...)] for the simple is
here put for the compound (...). Now [(...)] did note there the matter about
which their censure was occupied. The second interpretation I like not neither:
1. Our common Prosodie dis-joyneth them, making the former part of the sentence
all one Complexum. 2. Showing the means and ground of their going into things
they never saw, he tells us, it was their being puffed up with fleshly
wisdom. Wherefore with best correspondence this notes out the matter, as
(...), in the former Verse; the matter (I say) in regard of which the false
teachers condemned them, because herein they were not conformable to
themselves. Now to the Doctrines.
Mark first, That false teachers are led with a spirit of arrogancy, which
makes them usurp judgment over others: This was apparent in the Scribes and
Pharisees, who judged of CHRIST and His doctrine as a seditious noveltie, who
excommunicated all that would profess His Name: Thus the wise Gentiles judged
the Gospel to be nothing but folly: This having always been the practice of
lewd heretical spirits to speak evil of things they know not, Jude v. 10.
And herein the Papists excel, who challenge to their Pope fullness of power to
determine of truth, impose laws, to accurse all that come against his
determination in matter of religion, to translate Crowns, to open and shut
Heaven, and all at their pleasure.

But you will say;

She does, Gods truth, before her: but it is otherwise with these erroneous
spirits, who out of their own hearts, or selfe-willed pleasures do pass
sentence against that they receive not.

Let them not at pleasure bear rule over you] This is the property of the
natural man, he will take upon him to judge and condemn whatsoever does not
agree with him: much liarning makes thee mad (said Festus to Paul) and do
not carnal men account those that walk more conscionably than themselves,
proud, hypocrites, schismatickes, seditious persons, what not? For look as
fools and distracted persons will have a fling at every thing which does not
humor their crazed fantasies, whence we say, A fools bolt is soon shot: So
here etc.

This may serve further to inform us touching the manner of carnal men,

A second thing may here be added, that the Apostle gives them such a caveat
again and again, Let none condemn you] Let none take upon him as a judge
over you:] for in repeating these, He does not only show our duty above noted,
but bewrays our softness and pufillanimity, which does make us subject too
much to take to heart such sinister judgments. A quick horse need not be
spurred, and if we were not prone to yield too much in this nature, he need
not again and again to dehort us: Even as children, though they know and
conceive things aright, yet great words facing down the contrary, and calling
them children and fools to think thus, do so amate them, that they cannot
tell what to say: So we through childish weakness, the things which we have
truly learned, and quietly alone have received them into persuasion, when we
hear others cry them down, condemn them as heresy, schism, call us
reprochful terms for holding them, we let it sink so with us, that we cannot
tell what we may think of the matter.

Seeing then there is such infirmity in us,

In humbleness of minde] Observe hence: That wicked deceivers will seem to
stand for virtue, and challenge those who are truly godly, as wanting in it.

These lewd impostours took upon them to condemn those who in conscience of
their sin knew there was no sufficient Mediator for them in heaven or earth,
but Christ alone; they do pass judgment against these in matter of humility,
that is, they condemn them as not humble. Lying and tyranny are the Devils
weapons wherewith he fights; now to his lying this branch belongs of his
counterfeiting, that he will turn himself into an Angel of light: thus it is
in his children bearing his image, they will sometime go in sheep clothing,
make semblance as if they were meek, lowly, harmless; this we exemplified in
the Pharisees who were gulses of pride, and yet did gull the people with their
fasting, prayers, as if they had been lowly Saints: Nay, they do take up
Christ and His Apostles as transgressing the ordinances of antiquity, and the
Commandments of GOD, as when His Disciples did gather the ears of corn on
the Sabbath day. Thus the Papists do with us, they challenge us of pride in
this very point of dishonor to the Saints, because we will not make gods of
them; of Presumption, we believe the promise of GOD made to all penitent ones;
and therefore to us being penitent: Of all licentiousness in life; because we
will not allow that good works shall in strict justice merit with GOD: Of all
intemperancie; because we allow not their laws of superstitious fasting: Of
incontinencie and irreligion, because we like not their monstrous machorets,
their orders of religion, falsely so called, their imposed vows of chastity,
which become a snare to consciences, and an occasion of all filthy
uncleanness, there is no end of repeating all of this kind. Yea, natural men
amongst us, do they not condemn such as walk before them in ungodliness, as
proud and fingular? Men that think none like themselves, none holy to
themselves, enemies of Christian liberty, and of peace, and neighbourly
agreement.

Let us not then be over credulous to Judge all ungodly, Colossians are
condemned as not humble, why? they gave no worship to Angels to become
intercessours, as if the not doing of this did prejudice humility: He is a
proud man, says one, why? he is not promiscuously sociable, he is still
reproving some thing or other, he will not be content to walk as his
neighbors do, etc. Alas, as if humility lay in these things.

And in worship of Angels] First in the coherence may be marked: Under what
pretense the adoration of Angels and so of Saints marketh, even under the
vizard of holiness. This was the old philosophical reason taken our of
politic observation: Do men go forth-right to the King? Do they not get
some Noblemen about him to break their matters, and procure their favorable
access? And shall men presume to go upon the great GOD, and not take the
help of Angels and Saints, to the intent they may speed the better and
testify their submisnesse? To which Saint Augustine was wont to answer, My
thoughts (says GOD) are not yours, etc. by the same pretense and under show of
glorifying GOD in His Saints, the Papists persuade it at this day; yea, under
this show of humility they bring in their doctrine of doubting of our salvation.

Let us therefore be wise, Verse.

Observe secondly, That all religious worship of angels or Saints is
unchristian; Pass not you who does give sentence against you in the religious
worship of Angels, that is, as not yielding to the service of Angels. To
understand this, we must know, that the religious invocating of Angels was
obtruded upon the Colossians: from whence it is doubtful. Theodoret relating
the Council of Lacdicea on this place, he says, That such as defended that
Law, did likewise put upon them the invocation of Angels, as a matter full of
humility; the rather because the Law was given through Angels, by their
ministry. Another guess is, that this came out of the Philosophy School; for
the Platonists we know did worship Angels; yea, and souls departed of such as
had been Worthies amongst them, they worshipped at the monuments of them. To
which, as Eusebius testifies, the worship done to Martyrs at their (...), was
correspondent: Now this I take to be the truth, because though the Nazarites
and such after heretics might join this point (though it is not read of them)
and enforce this reason for adoration of Angels; yet these in the Apostles time
that stood for the Law, did no such thing: For beside that the second
Commandment of worshipping GOD alone, was held with them; so that Moses
himself was not invocated; yea, the being of them, by some addicted to the Law
(as the Sadduces) was called into question. Besides these things, it is like in
other Epistles, if they that contended for the Ceremonies had brought in this
doctrine with them, it is likely that the Apostle would have confuted it, and
encountered it as well as the other: I doubt not therefore, but it is to be
reduced to the Philosophy above named: Now this being in practice with them,
they condemned the Christians in it, as not using it in their going to GOD. The
Christians (as is probable) listened to it (such was the learning of the
Patrons it had) more than was meet, and were somewhat damped: the Apostle
therefore does stir up their Christian fortitude, exhorting them not to care
what any judge against them in that matter, for they are in the right that
yield not unto it; the LORD only is to be worshipped religiously, and we have
no mediator to Him but JESUS CHRIST. Epiphan. Contr. Collyrid. Her. 79. does
condemn all adoration of creatures.

Which serves to confute the Papists, highest worship, but with an inferior,
though a religious service: But (alas) did these heretical spirits, with the
Colossians, worship Angels with the highest worship? No, but with an inferior,
using them only as intercessours unto him whom they counted the supremum
numen. Yet the Council of Laodicea condemned it in them; and what did the King
in Daniel require? to be esteemed the highest GOD? No, but to have a divine
worship more than humane, which yet Daniel would rather dye than yield unto.
Religious worship is not capable of subdivisions; as but one GOD, so but one
religious worship, all other worship is Charitatis (as Saint Augustine says)
not Servitutis; such as we worship one another with, not religious. Saint
Augustine does not distinguish religious worship into (...) and (...), as two
kinds of it, but worship in general into religious, every degree whereof is
Latria, and into humane, which he calls Dulia, Servitus corporis non animae,
such as subjects give their Prince, servants their masters, who are over them;
but according to the flesh, therefore can have but an external worship done to
them.

In the second place, Revel. 19.10.
the most excellent are but our fellow servants. If any subjects do look at
some noble personage about the King with honor and acclamation a little more
than usual, though far less than that the King receives, is it not
derogatory to the highest Majesty? Even so we cannot enter the least degree of
honor above that which is civil, due to fellow Citizens with us, but so much
as is above proves detracted from the LORD's glory, to whom all religious
worship entirely belongs.

Intruding into these things he has not seene] This has the force of an
argument: He that voucheth matters he has no knowledge in, you are not to
pass for such a ones sentence: But these do so. Obs. then: What is the
property of a false deceiver, to speak that he has not certainly known: The
Apostles of Christ, they often interlace this as a circumstance winning credit,
and testifying their fidelity, The things we have seen, do we show unto
you: Thus Saint John in his first Epistle Chap. 1.1. So Saint Peter, ^ Pet.
1.20. Yea, our SAVIOR tells them, that he spoke nothing, but what he had
seen and heard from the Father: So all the servants of GOD testify nothing
which they do not by faith discern in the Word of GOD. But false teachers
will broach the speculation of their own brains, tell things (as CHRIST
speaks) in their own name, which they have not received and learned from
GOD: But as thus it is generally erred of false teachers: So they then run
into this fault principally, when through curiosity, and metaphysicall
speculation, they will run into descants of their own imagination, in nice
points, not contenting themselves to be wise within those bounds which God has
revealed in His Word: To which vice the Popish school is exceedingly addicted:
for what hidden point of the divine Trinity have they not determined? What
things about offices, gifts, order of Angels, have they expressed, as if they
had been amongst them, as they are called Scraphicall, and Angelical. What is
in Heaven or Hell, that they have not particularized, I, so far as to set
down the smells, the dinnes, the nature of the fire; as if they had come
thence locally.

But you will say,

When he voucheth any thing in GOD's truth or worship, of GOD: for then he is,
and needs must be in the darkness of his own natural reason, which
discerns not things spiritually perceived. As these vouched a point of
worship which GOD's Word had not taught: As no man knows what is in another
Country, unless he go to it, or have true information from it: So no man
can tell what is in Heaven, till GOD take him thither, or send word hither to
inform us, for here is no third.

Not to let ungrounded subtilties dazzle our eyes,

Let us be wise,

Let us take heed of this arrogancy in God's matters, God; for Saint John
preached of CHRIST, when he knew Him not so fully as afterward he did.

Passed up by his fleshly minde] Obs. What is the cause of vouching, yea, of
diving into hid things, viz. Pride: Let none be high minded, let none be wise
above that which is written. But one may ask, in what stands this Pride?
Answ. In leaving the direction of GOD's Word, and following the dictamen or
suggestion of our own reason: How does he condemn himself that takes upon
him, being a novice to make conclusions of an art he never entered? And what a
Pride is it, for some ignorant scholar to put by the direction of his Tutor or
Schoolmasters? So for us in these things which are only taught of God; not to
respect the Lectures read to us in His Word, or by His Vshers in whom He
teaches; for us who are borne altogether rude and ignorant of the Kingdom of
heaven, that is, as ignorant of saving knowledge in heavenly matters, as any
beast is in civil affairs, for us to set down determinations beyond our
element.

VERSE 19. And not holding the head from which all the body by joints and
bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the
increase of GOD.
NOw he comes to the third Argument.

Such as hold not CHRIST the Head, you are not to stand upon their condemning
of you:

These that teach you worship of Angels, hold not Him who is sufficient for all
the body of His Church:

Ergo.

The verse contains two things: 1 The state of these Sect-masters, in as much
as they did not hold CHRIST. 2 The description of CHRIST our Head from His
efficacy in all His members: In which three things are set down. 1 What
grows in CHRIST the Head, viz. the whole body. 2 How it comes to grow, viz.
being furnished and coupled by joints and ligaments unto the Head. 3 The growth
it self, grows with the increase of GOD.



Before we enter the verse, observe thus much: That looking to the Creatures
for help and grace, does make us fall from CHRIST: Such as are worshippers of
Angels hold not CHRIST; if (says Saint Paul) ye will be justified by your
own working, CHRIST will profit you nothing, He is dead in vain: And this is
most true in the Roman Church, where amongst Saints and Angels, CHRIST can
have little room, little respect in comparison: It is with faith, and
religious service so, that they cannot be lent unto any other, but they are
made one with it, and are withdrawn from CHRIST: So that as a Wife yielding
her love, and conjugall benevolence to another cleaves no longer to her
husband, is one flesh no more with him: So a soul bestowing the religious
adoration of it here or there, does join it self with the thing so
worshipped, and leaves God.

This is to be marked against them that are reconcilers,

2 We must keep only to God in Christ.

Thus much from this, that these religiously worshipping Angels, held not
Christ.

For understanding the verse: We must open some conclusions concerning the head
and Natural body.

1 The head is the supreme part in a humane body, from which comes outward
direction and inward influence of sense and motion into every member: So Christ
has both the sovereignty of outward directing, and by his powerful influence
he quickens and mooveth all that are his. 2 No member has any thing from the
head, which is not by joints and sinews coupled to the head, and by the same
bands and joints furnished from the head: So we have nothing from CHRIST, till
by faith and love, we are knit with Him and His body and by the same (...)
furnished from Him with spiritual grace, and heavenly nutriment. 3 We must
know that the soul from the head does (...) forth a nutritive faculty, a
vital faculty which nourishes, and augmenteth every member, as the nature of
it requires: The first continues as long as life, augmentation till we come
to that perfection of growth which nature affords: Being come to this,
augmentation cease about thirty six years: So the quickening spirit from
Christ our head, does by all holy means nourish every believer, and make him
grow as his condition requires and that till he come to be a perfect member of
one perfect man in Jesus Christ. 4 The last thing to be marked is, that a
Natural body grows up in every part proportionably, the hand for a hand, the
leg with the growth of a leg, the toe with the growth of a toe: So here all
the body thus coupled, furnished, and wrought upon with the quickening spirit,
grows to that perfection in every member which Christ has appointed.
The sum is. They keep not to Christ, who is an all sufficient head, by
whose efficacy all that believe on Him, being coupled to Him receive all grace
needful, and take increase growing up till they come to perfection with such a
growth which God Himself causes in them.

That we have not many but one head, Peter: the Scripture knows but one
head, neither was any of His Apostles a head of the Churches, for all had
alike, and the chief authority. Now if any were a head above others, He must
have the chief alone, no other having it with Him: thus the Pastor that
succeeded Peter at Rome should have been head over Saint John the Evangelist,
who lived long after Peter. But we need no better argument then this in the
Text. If CHRIST be one head, (and it is monstrous for a body to have two) then
the Church has no other: But CHRIST is the head: and for one body to have two,
is monstrous: therefore the Church has no other then Christ.

The Papists say, that a ministerial and secondary head may be with a
principal, and it is not monstrous: As there may be a Viceroy under a King;
yea they say, it makes with the union of the Church to have a visible head,
and does no more derogate from Christ's glory, in being our head, then when men
are called lights, GODS, Apostles, foundations from Christ, who is called the
light, GOD, the foundation, the Apostle of our profession.

For answer: First this distinction of a secondary ministerial head, it is
contradictory, for it is such an essential property of a head to be principal
and have rule, that what is not thus, is not a head.

2 Who ever heard of any secondary head in a natural body without deformity?
now it is a natural body with which CHRIST does compare Himself in this
respect.

3 That which is a ministerial head must do the work of a head, but that
none can do: The work is double, internal or external influence: regiment,
or direction. Of the first, it is granted: for the other of regiment, the
Scripture denies it to any but CHRIST, the Prince of Pastors, leaving to all
other a power ministerial only to serve the Churches, as superior unto them.

Again the truth is, no direction which is dependent is the direction of a
head; as the hand leading and drawing up the foot directs it, but is not a
head to it, because the direction of the hand comes from the principality of
the head reported unto it. As for those instances: First a Viceroy is in a body
politic; but CHRIST in calling Himself a head of his body, does draw the
comparison from a body Natural. Again the proportion is not kept; for to have
a Viceroy under a King in some Province is one thing, but to have a head under
a head is another: For a head is to the body as a King to the kingdom: Now to
have another King in a kingdom under the Chief, is a thing unheard of. The
union of the Church the Scripture teaches to depend on CHRIST and His spirit,
not on a visible head. Yea the Grecians continue to this day their rent from
the Church, and all for the pride of this head. Men have many names properly
attributed to them, and these above repeated, but improperly: but the names of
head and husband the Scripture and all sound antiquity appropriate unto Christ:
Kings may suffer men to be called Noble, Wise, Rich, but to be called Kings
within His Kingdom, is not permitted: for there is nothing more derogatory
from the glory of his Crown: so here etc.

Let us then cleave to this head CHRIST JESUS, thrust in betwixt the head and
it, so that they meet not to close each to the other: So it is with the
Papists, for betwixt Christ and them, the Pope has thrust in, so that their
immediate conjunction with Christ is hindered, and his beneficial influence
intercepted. Oh how absurd is it that any but Christ should be thought head of
the Church! It is as if the King should put his Queen under the power of a
Subject, or a man's wife should be made an underling to a servant, which never
was: the Apostles themselves though in their message from Christ, they might
command the Church in His Name; yet in regard of their persons, they were under
the Churches: as a servant who delivers to his masters son Commandes from
his master; he bringing his message, does command her, and yet his condition is
inferior to her.

The whole body] For opening the true meaning: First we must know what is
meant by the [Whole body] Secondly, in what regard the Church is said [the
body.]

To the first, a whole body sometime is put absolutely, containing the head
under it as well as other members.

Secondly, a whole body, is put respectively, for that whole frame of the body
which consists of all members beside the head: and thus always it is used in
the Scripture; for the body is spoken of, as distinguished by opposite
relation, from the head: now when the body is spoken of as a distinct thing
from the head, the head cannot then be comprehended under it: thus here the
whole body increases. Christ our head has all fulness, Christ therefore is
not meant in the whole body. Again, Christ is not head of the whole body
consisting of Himself and His members, for Christ is not His own head, but
God. GOD is the head of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.3
This is to be marked against some Papists, that say they make not the Pope
head of the whole body, but of the mystical body which stands of men, Christ
excepted, and this they think not absurd. But Christ Himself is not the head
of the whole body in that former acception, but only of His body mystical,
beside Himself.

Some again thus reason:

He that is head of a whole body, he is head of a body having a head beside
him: for else (say they) it were not a whole body: But Christ is head of a
whole body beside Himself. The first part is false, or the second, if not
rightly understood according to the distinction above named. Christ is head of
a whole body not absolutely called (whole) as comprehending a head within it;
but respectively so called, because it is whole, for a body distinguished apart
from the head. For the second thing, a body may be said the body of one two
ways.

1 In respect of the whole Person in whom it had or has being: thus we say of
one buried, here lies such an ones body, meaning the whole body that had the
personal being of it in such a man.

2 The body is said to be the body of one in regard of reference it has to the
head, as a distinct eminent part distinguished from it: thus we say, such a man
is dangerously wounded in his body, but his head is not touched: Now though we
have our mystical being from Christ, yet the Scripture calls us his body for
the respect we have to Him as our head; as being another more eminent part; who
with us makes up that whole mystical man Christ Jesus: And therefore Christ
is as properly said to be our head as we His body. Now though this or that body
may be said such a persons body; yet the person cannot properly be said the
head of such a body. These things being premised, to exclude Popish errors, and
to help us in the true conceaving of this matter, we will come to the
doctrine.

First then we see: That in Christ mystical there is nothing but the head
giving growth, and the body receiving growth from him: This is to be marked:
for where is the Pope found the head, giving growth? he is not his own: men
grant that he cannot infuse any grace, he has no influence of this nature;
then he is not the head in which the Church grows: for the body of the Church
growing, he will not be of the body: for he that will be the head of a body, is
not of the body: To say a head is properly a head of a body, and properly a
part of the same body, is a contradicton; as no subject can be truly made a
King, and yet remain a subject; he must then be found in that body whereof
the Devil is head, for here is no room for him.

2 Mark hence: That even for the whole multitude of believers there is
sufficiency in Jesus Christ: the whole body, those who lived in all times
before us, have found him every thing unto them: Abraham saw his day afar
off, and rejoiced; what place soever they live in, his virtue reaches them.

Alas then, Christ? Shall not he who has brought all the Saints from the
beginning of the world to that growth they have attained, that does quicken
every believer through the face of the earth, shall not he be sufficient for
thee? It is as absurd, as if the little finger (for by fiction we will lend it
reason) should think that soul not enough to quicken it, which not
withstanding did give to the whole frame of the body besides it. The not
beholding this with the eye of faith does make so many rest unsatisfied in
Christ.

3 By joints and bands furnished and knit together] Obser. That before we can
take spiritual growth from Christ, we must be knit unto Him, and furnished
from Him. Even as the natural members of the body can receive no growth if
they be not coupled to the head, and if it have not supply of nutriment, and
that faculty of nourishing and increasing sent forth into it: So if we be not
so knit to Christ, and have not his Word outwardly, and His virtue inwardly to
make us grow by it, we can never take increase in Him. Life is in Christ, says
Saint John: 1 Ioh. ^.12.
but when we come to have Christ, we have this life. We must first have
CHRIST, get into him by faith: true it is, that there are branches in Christ
which are dead and fruitless, but as I said before, they are not ingrafted
into Christ by true faith, but tied on him by the string of an outward
profession.

Wherefore we must hence be exhorted to get into Christ, as ever we look for
benefit by Him.

4 Mark hence: That every true believer grows up in Christ; He does not
stand at a stay, or go back, 1 Pet. ^.^.
but grows from faith to faith. 2 Pet. ^.18.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. We must grow in grace. Let him that is righteous, be more righteous
still; and he that is holy, let him be more holy still. Having such promises,
let us grow up to perfect holiness. 2 Cor. 7.1. Even as in Nature, she grows
from that which is less perfect to that which is more perfect: So in grace,
the LORD does lead us by degrees on to perfection. What a deformity is it in
Nature, when one is a dwarf, and grows in years, but not in stature? So
here before GOD, an old Christian in years, but a babe in knowledge and grace.

Wherefore such as fall from their first love may suspect themselves,

2 Hence we must exhort men to forget what is past, and strive to perfection,
he is the best Christian that is ever finding some want in himself, and
hungering and thirsting. What man would willingly have his stock kept at one
stay, not caring to grow in wealth? No, men will cast up their books, and see
how they come on worldward: So must we never be weary of seeking more grace,
and examining our selves what we profit; which might be made a third use.

Lastly, that he says with the increase of GOD] The Hebrews call the most
excellent and choice things, the things of GOD; as Nineveh, a City of GOD;
Trees of GOD; but here it notes the Author of this increase; for as he faith
after Chapter 3.3. Our life is bid with CHRIST in God; and it is GOD in Christ
that brings us on.

Observe hence: Who does make us as begin, so grow in grace, it is GOD. 1
Thessalo. 5.23. The very God of peace sanctify you throughout, that is, in
every part perfectly for the degree of grace: all the strength of man cannot
add one cubit to the stature of his body; how much more does GODS power alone
give the growth of the soul? He that knew what sicknesses, and enmities the
soul has to keep it down, will the easilier grant it.

To teach us whither we must go, 2 Cor. 9.8.
who is able to make all grace to abound toward you; praying Him to purge us
and make us more fruitful, and happily to leads us out of our infancy.

2 It lets us see, to whom we must ascribe our coming on, viz. Wholly to
GOD, who is the Author and Finisher of our faith: For as the same Sun which
first brings the light of the day, does after increase it, and bring it to
full strength: So the same God that begins the light of grace, does,
continuing his gracious presence, bring it to full strength and perfection: It
is not in man's power that which he has, much less to augment it.

3 The Papists hence are confuted, that put perseverance, and growing up, in
the power of our will: for some of them think, that look as in fire, a man
cannot make fire where there is none; but give him some few sparks he can
keep them in and increase them; So here: the first working of grace is from
God after a more special manner, but the continuance is otherwise.

VERSE. 20. Wherefore if ye be dead with CHRIST from the rudiments of the
world; why, as though living in the world; are ye subject to ordinances?
HAving in two exhortations armed them against the condemning sentences of
arrogant false Teachers, he now does turn himself, and by way of
communication or expostulation vehemently dehort from yielding to be burdened
with the customary observation of these elements.

And two things are to be marked to the end of the Chapter.

1 The dehortation. 2 The reasons.
In the dehortation which is in the end of this verse, We must mark the
Manner. We must mark the Matter.


For the manner, it is laid down by way of interrogation, which denies most
strongly. Why, as if ye lived in the World, are ye subject to ordinances?
that is, you are at no hand to live, that is, customarily to observe any
carnal or Jewish rites.

The matter is set down indefinitely, why are ye enjoined rites] More
distinctly, (...).
the kind of them is opened in the 21 verse: Touch not, taste not, handle not,]
and this for the dehortation.

The reasons are two fold.

Such as are dead to worldly elements, such must not live in them.

But ye are dead to these things verse 20. in the beginning.

The second kind of reason is taken from the nature of the things themselves.

1 Things that perish and come to nothing are not to be observed. 2 Such things
as are after men's commandments and doctrines, are not to be followed of you.
These two reasons are expressed in the two and twentieth verse.

Such things finally as have only an empty show of godliness, but not the
substance of it, they are not to be used: Such are these, verse twenty three.

This is the Apostles discourse, in the last verses of this Chapter.

For our being dead with Christ, you heard above, verse twelve, buried with Him
in baptisme] but mark from what we are dead in CHRIST, from the rudiments of
the world.] Observe: That Christ by His death has freed us from the ceremonies
of the Law of Moses. Gods worship is for the substance of it spiritual, and
was always: but for the manner of it, it was carnal, that is, standing of
sensible and fleshly observations which GOD did prescribe, not as simply
delighted in them, but as accommodating himself to the childish condition of
the Church in those times, wherein the more plentiful presence of spiritual
gifts was not obtained, Christ not being as yet manifested, and glorified. We
must so conceive, that our whole old man, with his sinful life, his vain life
in traditions of men, which were superstitious, and his natural life in
Mosaicall rites ordained of GOD, and enjoined him, not simply, but so far
forth, as he was carnal, living more in his senses, then in spiritual
contemplation, this whole life is so crucified, that after CHRIST, it is to
take no place de jure, in those that are His: the Apostle does not say without
cause, 2 Cor. 5.17.
old things are gone, in Christ all things are new.

This is to be marked; verse were not remooved. All the rites of the Jews did
not signify CHRIST to come, but were, by stirring up a motion in the mind, to
admonish them of their spiritual duties, yet these are abolished. Such
therefore are to be condemned, that would still bring the Church to be in the
A. B. C. and to use the Festkue, from which Christ by his death has delivered
it.

As if you lived in them, do ye receive rites?] Observe secondly: That true
Christians must not live in that which CHRIST dyed to take away. If ye be dead
in Christ from these, why as if ye lived in the world: No, they cannot live in
that which their head is dead to. How can we that are dead to sin live yet
therein? and therefore he says, as if you lived in the world; for he knew it
was impossible for true believers to live unto the fashions of the world,
either in regard of civil duties, or religious ordinances: the children of God
being set into Christ, have presently wrought in them a death of their sinful,
and sensual life: It is mortally wounded at the first, though it lives in us
long after; yea, though the Lords children do not often perceave it: for many
a man goes awhile with his death, and yet discerns not till sometime after
that he is deeply wounded: Even as we our selves feel nothing less when we
come into the world, then that we are dead in our Father Adam, and yet with our
nativity enters mortality, which never rests till we are utterly extinct by
death.

The use is to reproove us who live in sin after the fashion of the world;
Christ.

As if ye lived in the world] Observe hence: That Gods children live out of
the world, while they are in it: this makes CHRIST say, they are not of the
world; for though they are in it for place, yet their affection and
conversation is in heaven: and hence it is, Phil 3.2^.
that the Church is called by the name of heaven, in some prophetical
Scriptures, and this is here taught, while he says, as if ye lived in the
world] insinuating that it could not be that they lived in the world, for they
are called out of the world to a heavenly hope, and to be of another body;
even of that Corporation whereof CHRIST is the head: So that as a Townsman in
the University, if he be taken to be a Scholars servant, though he live in the
town, he is no longer of it, as who is gone from them, and belongs to
another body: So it is here.

Wherefore Conform not your selves to the fashions of the world; you are
pilgrims, forreyners, whose conversation does not so much as smell of Heaven,
may hence be convinced to them.

VERSE 21. Touch not, taste not, handle not.
Now he comes to lay down more distinctly these rites enjoined them from
Pharisaicall seducers, and he does unfold it by a mimeticall expressing the
charge that these false teachers gave; Touch not, taste not, handle not] O take
heed, you know all the old people were tied from the eating, and touching of
many things, as upon the touch whereof they were unclean; God out of His most
wise pleasure annexing a legal uncleanness unto them, as the touching of a
dead body, of a garment spotted with leprosy, of one troubled with a bloody
issue, etc. Now the Devil that sows tares did by some pharisaicall spirits,
which so received Christ that they would still hold the Law, he did set on foot
by these amongst the Gentiles, that unless they kept the Law they could not be
saved; this occasioned the first Council about some eighteen years after
CHRIST'S death, and within some years after this occasioned the Apostle to
write that Epistle to the Galathians, the same kind of men began to vent the
same wares amongst the Colossians, and gave them these caveats, Touch not,
taste not, handle not.

1 Observe from this practice of theirs: How exact and precise men are in their
outward observancies, who know not the power of godliness. It is the Property
of all pharisaicall spirits, that care not for the great things of the Law, and
the true spiritual obedience of it, they will tithe mint and cummine
precisely, wash hands and cups, their hearts being all foul and full of lusts.
For look as idle bodies which will not follow due labor, they will go with
their tales, as a Peddler with his pack, from one to another; yea, their
fingers shall go, and their feet shall speak, they will occupy themselves
busily in that which is superfluous: So here, when men will not exercise
themselves in the power of godliness, it is strange how they will abound in
etc. This may be seen in the Church of Rome, who not knowing the powerful
ordinances of God, have turned all into such dumb shows, as are the Mass,
their Precessions, etc. as full of superfluous observations, as empty of
substance.

To teach us how to know these spirits;

We must take occasion by them to be precise in the least points of spiritual
obedience, and not to stand so nicely on external rites and empty shadows:
those that do diligently look to themselves this way, have no leisure and
less affection to follow such bawbles; Even as a man seriously occupied, has
no fancy to dally and sport as others will, who have little to do; So here:
Who more in heavenly labor than Saint Paul? He labored through the grace of
GOD in Him more abundantly than they all; who more despised those kind of
Jewish legal rites, who cries them down as beggarly things which profit
nothing?

2 Mark in this their enforcing these things, What a hard thing it is to
forgo such old rites to which we are accustomed; these had been brought up in
them, and had seen no other, and lo they will not part with them, no not when
GOD will have them cease, and CHRIST nails them to the cross: Nay, they are
more fond on them than before: for such is the malice of our wills, that when
GOD will not, then commonly we will: like those Israelites, when they should
have gone up to bid battle to the Canaanites, discouraged with the Spies, they
murmured and refused; when GOD would have them go back into the wilderness,
and not go on against them, then they would have no nay, to battle they
would, to die for it. Besides, as in other things man takes on like a god; so
in affecting a kind of immutability, which makes him he will not be beaten
off that whereunto he has been accustomed: thus it is in opinion likewise
that one is bred up in, is often maintained too too stiffely: the first things
make the deepest impressions. Let a false tale get the start, and come the
first to us, truth spoken in the second place is less believed.

Wherefore let us take heed,

VERSE 22. (Which all are to perish with the using) after the commandments and
doctrines of men:
THe first reason from the nature of the things: Such things as vanish and come
to nothing, being of no use unto godliness: such you are not to use:

But these elementary ones are thus:

Ergo.

That which CHRIST said of meats, they defile not a man, for they go into the
stomach, and so are carried into the draught, so passing away: Correspondently
to that Saint Paul seems to say; These things perish in the using of them.

Observe then first; That these bodily observations profit nothing. Which must
not be so taken, as if due fasting, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and sober use of the creatures, were of no use to godliness; but to do those
things, not as using them in holy wisdom to some end, but as resting in the
things themselves once performed, as which for themselves please GOD, or to use
outward rites to such ends which GOD has not sanctified them unto, all such
customs have no profit to godliness; either to use means unto godliness, as
if they were a part of godliness themselves, or to use such means which are
not sanctified of God to any such person, is bodily exercise, utterly
unprofitable.

Let us then learn to see the Popish religion what it is, Mass, Pilgrimages,
Incense, etc. all these are bodily things of no profit.

Let us learn hence,

And doctrines of men] Observe, That we are not to give credence to any thing
which is taught without warrant of Gods Word: This is gathered out of the
Context; Why are you enjoined such things as are after men's doctrines? though
the manner of our teaching be humane, that is such as is subject to error; yet
the matter we teach must be out of God's Word, or it is not to be received: yet
this is to be understood so, that we must not exclude whatsoever is not in the
Word of God from finding any manner of belief: for though no humane doctrines
must come into our Creed, that is our divine faith which respects God's
revelation only; yet we may have an humane persuasion, and opinion of many
things which we find not in the Word expressed: this Saint Paul teaches, when
he teaches us to anathematize or accurse what is taught besides the Gospel.

This serves to confute the Papists, whose doctrine has a whole Creed, as it
were, of unwritten verities, by some of themselves no less is confessed; as
Peter a Soto, acknowledging all for Apostolical traditions, whose authors
cannot be found, reckons these for examples, the Mass, Chrysme, calling on
Saints, Prayer for the dead, the Bishop of Romes Primacie, the consecrating of
the water in Baptism, Confirmation, the Sacraments of Orders, Matrimony,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Merits, Satisfactions; Auricular Confession; set
Fasts, worshipping Images; besides some above named, the Churches Precepts,
with the Communion in one kind, Consecration of oil in Baptism, adoration of
Bread, or Host, Private Mass, Purgatory, Indulgences: Perasius adds, Par.
3. Priests single life: but these mint-masters of doctrines shall one day bear
their judgment.

It must teach us to be wise Bereans, Jerome vain garrulity, which is taught
as matter of faith without the Scriptures authority.

VERSE 23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in will worship, and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.
NOw follows the third Argument:

Such things as have but an empty show, wanting substance; you must not stand
upon:

But these are such: this is laid down Verse 23. wherein is expressed: 1 The
appearance and semblance of Virtue. 2 The Censure of the HOLY GHOST, in the
first part of the Verse.


We must mark: 1 The show it self, Which have a show of wisdom.] 2 The
things which make this show: Will worship or religious devotion. 2. Humility:
fained lowliness of mind. 3. Neglect of the body; which the most led by
sensuality, have only in admiration.


The Censure of the HOLY GHOST likewise has two things: 1 The sentence passed
of them, they are of no worth. 2 The reason; because they are occupied about
such things wherewith the flesh is filled.


Though this may be read otherwise as tending to describe the last thing named
in not sparing the body; thus: Which things have a show of wisdome] in not
sparing the body, as not having in any account things belonging to the filling
of the flesh, that is, meats and drinks wherewith the body is replenished, as
if [(...)] were borrowed from the beginning of the Verse, and thus understood.

The Verse is not a compound sentence standing of parts, one opposite to the
other, but a simple sentence, thus to be resolved, as containing: 1 The show of
wisdom: 2 The things which make this show which are three, as is abovesaid:
the latter of not sparing the body; first being propounded, then expounded by
the cause of it, viz. a pround contempt of those things wherewith it is
cherished: And thus the Verse lays down both a third reason, and an answer
to an objection: the reason is above expressed; the prevention may be thus
conceived: I, but how comes it to pass, that these things are every where
almost received with applause? Answ. They have indeed a show of wisdom, so it
is no wonder if many be beguiled and bewitched with them: And this as it
agrees with the translation, so it seems to me the most warrantable sense;
for the things which are said to have a show of wisdom, are not only precepts
of difference in meats, but of worshipping Angels; for Verse 18. this was it
which pretended humility, refraining meats was a point of perfection, in which
they gloried above others as profane; not grounded in confession of their
unworthiness, but in the profane pollution of the creature refrained. Now the
end of the Verse cannot be a censure of these things by the HOLY GHOST, because
this is a spiritual will worship, yielding no repletion to the body. Again,
this reason seems to be intimated in the Verse before, they perish with their
use: for what is this? They go into the mouth, thence to the stomach, and so
are cast into the draught. To come unto the Doctrines:


1 We see, that vice and error may have a show of truth and virtue: Even as an
harlot can wipe her mouth, and look as demurely as a grave matrone, with a
face more sober than many an honester woman: So falsehood and vice will put on
an appearance, as if they were true and virtuous; yea, will seem more true
than truth it self: take this example of Jewish rites, was it not (to have
examined it by flesh and blood) more likely that they should stand still in
force, than be abrogated, seeing God Himself had given them, Moses the Man of
GOD delivered them, seeing God did so miraculously testify to them by His
answering by Vrim and Thummim, seeing all ages had observed them: So to carnal
reason does it not seem more probable, that to honor with sumptuous and
stately Temples, more glorious than Kings have in that kind, to beautify the
worship of God with pompous solemnities (as all is in the Church of Rome) is
more pleasing to Nature, than to perform all in naked simplicity, without any
thing to the eye glorious? For even as men give poison in wine, that it drunk
down in such liquor may kill more forcibly: So the Devil does in shows of
virtue and probabilities of truth, conveigh his errors, that they may be taken
more easily and affect us more deeply.

To admonish us that we be wary that no false vizards beguile us:

In will worship] Observe hence: That will worship has a plausible show of
wisdom. In civil things to be able, when a thing is begun, to add to it, and
perfect it more and more, argues a wise man: So here in the matter of GOD, to
take up these Jewish solemnities, which may further adorn and set it forth as
glorious to the eye, seems an invention of great understanding: Thus the
Pharisees washed pots, hands, would pray at corners of streets, etc. and who
were thought wise, learned, holy, in comparison of them? But this seems so
only, for it is the hightest folly: what greater folly, than to charge GOD with
folly? But he will presume to add to His ordinances, does say that God was not
wise enough to frame the thing so perfectly as at the first it might, and by
his fact speaks as much as if he were able to mend GOD's institutions: So
though it seem devotion; yet it is nothing but toying superstition to put upon
GOD worship he requires not. GOD infinite in wisdom is able to prescribe all
things which are pleasing to Him, and He loves obedience better than
sacrifice; that whosoever goes before Him doing things commanded, that so he
may please Him, does hereby most heavily provoke Him: Thus the Pharisees
washing hands with a religious reference, In vain (says CHRIST) you worship
me; who has required these things at your hands? He that stayed the Arc
ready to fall, being a person not of that Tribe which was by God's institution
to serve in such things, how did God's anger break out against him? the bare
and empty show of wisdom and devotion are shrewd bates to beguile.

In humility of minde] Obs. That lowliness of mind argues wisdom; It is
thus gathered, these by a counterfeit humility made a show of wisdom: now the
shadow of it could not make a show of wisdom, if the substance of it were not
a token of wisdom; yea, wisdom it self: This property Saint James ascribes
to wisdom, it has lowliness accompanying her inseparably; she is gentle,
easy to be entreated. For the wiser every man is, the more he knows his
wants and miseries, which begets a lowly mind; and when we will set a
phraze on Pride, we say, there goes a proud fool, noting thus much, that
Pride is a certain proof of folly: by law of contraries then this is proved
which we gather.

The Use of it is to confute such as do think it folly and baseness of mind,
not to put themselves forth,

2 Mark hence, What is a thing false teachers will make a show of, even
humility: This is the sheeps fell in which they have wrapped themselves, to the
end they might seem to the sheep more lovely, and so make them a prey more
securely: thus the Pharisees did in show give such honor to their
forefathers, as if they had been made of submission, such praying, fasting,
etc. when they cared not for GOD's Commandments, when they despised poor
humble ones in comparison of themselves: Thus the Papists charge us with Pride,
as if we contemned Antiquity, themselves professing I know not what
dependencie upon their Consent, as Arrius, Eunomius, and Dioscorus did before
them. Ego dogma ab electis secundum fidem Sanctis rectigradis Dei discipulis
accepi. Ego (says Eunomius) non multorum incertas opiniones, sed sanctorum in
omnibus doctrinam tueor. Ego Dioscorus habeo testimonia sanctorum Patrum,
Athanasii, Gregorii, Cyrilli, in mult is locis. The Pope he pretended himself
Servus servorum; But as Aven. lib. 7. Ser^us servorum est dominus dominorum. So
what is more humble to show than a Monk and a Friar, the emblem of holiness
(to see to) in their habit, manner of life; but they are sinkes of spiritual
pride, for they think none holy to them, think they merit heaven it self by
their fond hypocrisy.

To teach us that we do not let our selves be ensnared with the hypocritical
show of this virtue.

And in not sparing the body] Obs. 1. That he says, there is a show of wisdom
in this: That to keep the body in subjection is a thing which argues wisdom.
This counterfeit mortification of theirs could not make show of wisdom, if it
were not a wise part to do it in truth; which indeed it is. To escape the
flattering of some enticing concubine or wife, so as not to be much swayed with
it, is great wisdom: So the body, which is since sin rather a concubine,
than a wife, not to listen to it, but keep it down, is a point of great
understanding; this was heavenly wisdom in Saint Paul, that he did make his
body a servant, and did buffet it down, to keep it in subjection; Not to be
overcome of foolish pity, but to chasten a child, and keep him under, argues
a wise man; how much more not to dote in love of our own flesh, but to use it
with wholesome severity?

Which may confute such Epicures as do even count it wisdom, to frank up
themselves with all delight,

Again,

Obs. Again, What often false teachers labor to make show of, viz. of
mortification of the flesh. We read of Baals Priests how they did lance and
cut themselves, showing great barbarousnesse toward their bodies: So we see
amongst superstitious Anachorets this practice of using themselves most
severely, and secluding themselves from all bodily comforts; yea, from the
society of men. The like is now amongst the Papists, there being at Antwerp
such an one who is kept caged up; such was that Alberick the Monk, of whom we
read, he would whippe himself till blood followed, are nothing but barley
bread, drank water, go in haire-cloth, barefooted; and there are some at this
day, who will not stick to serve themselves in this kind. But there is a
second branch of this inclemencie, which stands not in doing that which is
injurious, but in withholding that which is convenient for the body, and this
is chiefly here noted: when men by too much abstinence macerate themselves, and
while they spare the flesh of beasts, devour their own flesh most inhumanely:
As the woman said to Baldwin, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury with us: for
when it was reported that from what time he was made a Monk, he had never
eaten flesh, a woman asked him whether it was true? to whom he affirmed, it was
so: this woman replying, that it was not so; for he had eaten his own flesh
up, there scarce being left the bones of him, Rau. lib. 7. cap. 24. And many
do still place great religion in this letter, counting it mortification, and
an excellent point of perfection: the truth is; the body must be used with
mediocrity: we must not wound it, as it is a friend; because we must not pamper
it so as to make it an enemy: Stulti dum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt.

Let us not then be beguiled with such austerities, Manichees would go up to
the top of high mountains and cast themselves down headlong, and that they
counted the mortification of the body. The like mortification it is which
substracteth things behovefull from the body, or uses it barbarously.

Neither have they it in any estimation to satisfy the flesh] Observe from
this explication: That seducing spirits will make show of great abstinence;
will refrain meats and drinks which others use gladly, and nature after some
sort craveth, thus these did here; they would not touch many things, nor taste
them which others much affected. There have been some Papists so abstinent,
that being Bishops it is reported of them, Theod: hist lib. 7. cap. 13. in
vita. O^ho. nis Bambergensis, cap. 23.
that they did never ea^e bread to satiety in all their time of being Bishops.
For this they count mortification, wholly to refrain this or that kind of
meat: But we must distinguish true mortification from self affected
superstition. True mortification is either active or passive.

Passive is the obedient receiving of such things from Gods hand, which he
lays on us for the mortifying of us; humble your selves under the mighty hand
of God.

Active mortification is a spiritual endeavor of subduing the lusts dwelling
in us, that GOD may be glorified, and we more at liberty to serve Him: If by
the spirit ye mortify the flesh, you shall live. Romans 8.13


Now this endeavor has belonging to it many exercises: 1 Repentance, a
mournful spirit under the remnants of sin; for while the heart truly
grieveth, sin lies a bleeding; therefore it is said, the sacrifice of God is
a broken spirit. Psalm. 51. 2 In presenting our selves with the laws of lust we
feel dwelling in us, to CHRIST our High Priest, and praying Him to offer us a
burnt offering to GOD His Father. 3 In holding the persuasion of faith, that
Christ who is made of God our sanctifier, will kill in us, will dissolve this
life of Satan which is in us, for Christ bruiseth his head, that is, kills
that old serpent, when He kills this life of sin, which entered through
him, and is after a sort the Devil living in men: For as there is the life of
God in the Saints; So on the contrary there may be said the Devils life in the
unregenerate: these are principal means.


Now there are other assistant means: as 1 Not to serve our lustings when they
are inordinate: thus David did in that water which he had desired impotently;
thus Saint Paul did buffet, and keep his appetite as a slave in subjection, and
at the command of his sanctified reason. 2 We must sometime refrain lawful
things, that we may not be under the power of them, but have them under us; All
things are lawful to me, but I will not be brought under the power of any
thing; and these exercises are through the whole life, as occasion serves, and
the conscience warns us. 3 We must be diligent in some good calling; for
this is a great help of mortifying the flesh, the Lord having laid them upon
us for the humbling of us.


Let us then take heed of superstitious witcheries,

Hypocrites may abound in these outward pennances in which they place their
mortification; yea Philosophers: Plato, when he thirsted, would draw water at a
well, and power it down before his own eyes, not tasting. Socrates, Pomponius
and others: though the truth is, these non Curios simulant, sed Bacchanalia
vivunt, they (like the Manachees) dissemble: It is read of them, they would
drink no wine, but they doubted not to eat grapes. Aug. lib. 2. de Manich
aeorum moribus. cap. 16. Contra Faustum. cap. 31. their fasts are so pleasant
now, that they may say with the little boy, Mother when shall we fast again?
they absteyne from Eggs and Cheese, but eat dainty fruits, and quaffe in
wine liberally: yet if they should truly do their task, they go no further
then heathens may, who never received the spirit of God, and therefore never
knew true mortification.

But how may we discern a difference betwixt heathens and Christians, and
Papists; when the one fasteth,

There is great difference in the antecedents, God, as a point of merit with
God: But a good Christian he does refrain for the kingdom of heaven: how?
not to deserve it by such course, but that by this course done in faith, he may
subdue his lusts, and kill them, for it is their death not to be obeyed, and
that he may have more freedom in Gods service.

For the manner of doing it, the one does it out of Nature sometime; for as
Christ says of Eunuchs, some are by nature so; the same may be said of
abstinence: Some by Nature are averse from that liberty in diet which others
affect: But all besides true Christians do it out of their own strength:
whereas a true believer, he does it by the spirit of GOD, bewayling his
weakness, seeking to Christ for his strength to crucify these things to him,
and him to them.

2 A Christian does not absteyne for the thing simply profaning that, but from
lust simply, that he resists the thing so far forth as his lust takes
occasion by that which is in it self good. Now unbelievers look not to inward
lusts so much, nor cry not down them, as they vilify the things themselves
desired.

Hence is a third difference: the faithful do not make a set exercise, upon
stinted times only to refrain or totally at once renounce the touching them;
but daily as they feel themselves tempted, they resist, eating with
thankesgiving, when they feel themselves not endangered by them.

Lastly, they so refrain, that they know their refraining it self does not
commend them to GOD (for if not eating and drinking were in it self more holy
than eating and drinking; John Baptist should have been more holy than CHRIST)
but as through the working of GOD's Spirit, it is to them, being weak, a mean
of their more firm cleaving to GOD. Now all other extol the thing it self,
and rest in it as a matter of great perfection.

In the effect following they may be distinguished: for the one have by their
exercise greater confirmation of an external moral habit; the other true
sanctification, viz. death of sin, and life of grace promoted in them.

To teach us that we be not beguiled,

This must provoke us to fight in right order against sensual lusts: Plato
superstitious; Popish wretches will condemn many Christians, who feed their
hearts in whatsoever they desire. And so much for these words.

Now if you take the end of it, sounding to the first sense: Obs. 1. That
exercises much regarded with men, are of no esteem with GOD: Circumcision, nor
uncircumcision are nothing, much less meat, eating or not eating, commend not
to GOD, but a new creature: many things great and glorious in the eyes of man
are abominable before GOD: which if the Papists considered, they would not
extol the rules of their Monkish orders, the life of Anachorets, nor yet cry
down with such base terms those that use their liberty in CHRIST, as CHRIST
and Abraham, the Father of the faithful have given them example.

2 From the reason why they are in no price with GOD, because they are occupied
about the body; the filling of it; Bodily external things are not of worth
with GOD: He is a Spirit; worship in spirit and truth, is His delight: for a
Synecdoche must here be marked, one kind put for the general, seeing there is
the same disproportion in them to God, the same in one that is in another: even
as in Nature, like joyeth that which is like it: So here, GOD being a Spirit
does delight in that which is spiritual, like Himself: And as to a creature
which lives a pure sensible life, reasonable delights are as nothing to it,
tell a horse a story never so pleasant, it affects him not: So to a pure
spiritual nature, sensible matters give no contentment. In which the Papists
had need to consider, who follow GOD too too much with sensible things, and
think they take Him, because they affect us.

FINIS.
LECTVRES PREACHED UPON THESE TEXTS OF SCRIPTVRE.
By Mr. PAUL BAYNE.
Esaias Chap. 5. v. 12. Psalm. 50. v. 21, 22, 23. 1 Pet. Chap. 1. v. 17. Psalm.
119. v. 1. -- to v. 32. Luke Chap. 13. v. 24. 1 Pet. Chap. 4. v. 18. 2 Cor.
Chap. 7. v. 1. Luke Chap. 2. v. 14. Philip. Chap. 2. v. 12, 13. Hebr. Chap. 3.
v. 13. 1 Timothy Chap. 2. v. 2. 2 Timothy Chap. 1. v. 9. 2 Timothy Chap. 1. v. 12, 13,
15, 16.

