BRIEF DIRECTIONS UNTO A GODLY LIFE: Wherein every Christian is furnished with
most necessary helps for the furthering of him in a godly course here upon
Earth, that so he may attain Eternal Happiness in Heaven.

Written by Mr. Paul Bayne, Minister of Gods Word, to Mr. Nicholas Iordane his
Brother.

LONDON, Printed by A. G. for I. N. and are to be sold by Samuel Enderby at the
Star in Popes head Alley, 1637.

To the RIGHT Worshipful, Mr. NICHOLAS IORDANE Esquire, and one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace and Quorum, in the County of Sussex.
SIR,
IT has been an ancient custom to reserve some lively representation of
worthy friends deceased, thereby to continue the remembrance of their virtues,
persons, and love. This holy Treatise ensuing, has served you to that purpose,
and that very fitly; for herein you have a true representation and remembrance
of your most worthy and loving Brother, especially of the most noble and worthy
part of him, I mean of his excellent understanding in the mystery of
godliness: his most zealous and earnest will and desire of all men's practice
of godliness; And his sincere love unto you in particular, unto whom he
primarily directed these Directions unto a godly life; which as they do lively
express that he had put on the new man, created and renewed in knowledge,
righteousness and true holiness: so is it most worthy of our reservation,
both for the remembrance and imitation of him. Yea, I may confidently affirm,
that this faithful remembrancer is most worthy and fit always to be carried
about us, and daily to be looked on by us: for it will help us well to put on
that new man, and to be conformable to our Head Jesus Christ, and to walk
before the Lord in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. For
there is this difference between those former corporal Images of earthly
bodies and this, that men with too much love and use of them, easily fell into
superstitious wickedness; but this the more it is loved and used of men, the
more will all wickedness be rooted out of their hearts, and the more will they
glorify God by a holy life and conversation. Now having received this holy
Treatise at your worships hands to publish it unto the World, I am bold to
return it unto you for safeguard, both that the World may know unto whom it is
obliged for so excellent a monument, as also for the great benefit that shall
be reaped thereby. So (Sir) accounting it a wise part in him that cannot speak
well, to say but little; I commend you and this Treatise to Gods Grace which is
able to build us up further, even to do wondrously above all that we can ask
or think.

Your Worships humbly at command, N. N.

Brief Directions unto a godly Life: wherein every Christian is furnished with
most necessary Helps for the furthering of him in a godly course here upon
earth, that so he may attain eternal happiness in Heaven.
SUre it is, that it was not thus with mankind in the beginning as now it is.

God created man happy, yet mutable; but Satan by deceit did cast him from that
happy condition; whereby besides the loss of that felicity, he was plunged
into extreme misery, which consists in two things.

First, in sin.

Secondly, the curse following upon it.

First, our sin is not only that first transgression of Adam whereby we are
all guilty, but also that infection of soul and body arising from the former.
Hence it is that the understanding is fi^led with blindness; the conscience
wounded, seared, and defiled; the memory forgetting good things, or not
remembering any thing aright.

The will captive, of no strength to good, but only to evil; the affections
all together disordered.

The cogitations about heavenly matters, are error, falsehood, and lies.

The wishes and desires of the heart are earthly, and fleshly. The outward
behavior is nothing else but a giving up of the members of the body as
instruments of sin.

The curse makes him subject in this life for his use of the creatures to
dearths, famine, etc. For his body, to sickness and other pains.

In his sense for his friends to the like calamities; in his soul to vile
affections, to blindness, hardness of heart, desperation, madness, etc. In
both body and soul to endless, and easelesse torture in the world to come.
Yet some may object that,

All are not in this case or estate.

All are subject by nature to the same wrath of God;

The only sufficient remedy for the saving of man, is to satisfy Gods
justice, which by sin is violated. His justice is satisfied by suffering the
punishment due to sin, and by the present keeping of the Law. Therefore it is
not to be sought for in our selves, nor in any other creature. It being
appointed by the Father, was undertaken and wrought by Christ, and is sealed in
men's hearts by the holy Ghost: but it may be demanded:





This Divine Mystery is brought to light by the Gospel.

The use whereof is to manifest that righteousness in CHRIST, whereby the Law
is fully satisfied, and salvation attained.

The remedy and the tidings of it is received only by Faith, which Faith is so
to give credit to Gods Word, as he rest thereon, that he will save him; and is
wrought by the ministry of the Word, revealing this mercy and truth of God:
and by these the holy Ghost inlightening him to conceive, drawing him to
believe, and so uniting him to Christ.

The knowledge of the former things is not sufficient for him that will come to
happiness: but this knowledge works.

First, he is drawn by the secret work of the Spirit of God, to be persuaded
that the Doctrine taught does concern him: he has wisdom given him to apply
general things particularly to himself: Col. 1.9. as first, the Preaching of
the Law, and the threatened curses of it; whereby he sees himself guilty
before God of eternal punishment and wrath.

Secondly, the Lord directs him to enter into further consideration with
himself, of and about his present estate, and consulteth what to do in this
his ex remity; and that not lightly, but serio^sly, as a matter of life and
death, Ier. 8.6. Luke 7.15.

If he be not able to counsel himself, he asks counsel of others.

Thirdly, from the former consultation, he comes to this resolution, that he
will not return to his old ways, but in all humility and meekness and
brokennesse of heart, say with Paul; Lord what will thou that I do?

Fourthly, by this means he comes to an unfeigned desire of forgiveness,
which always proceeds from a sound hope that God will be entreated of him.

This hungring after mercy, and longing after CHRIST, is very earnest and
fervent, though in some with more timorousness than in other.

This makes the Gospel to be glad tidings, and the feet of them that bring
it to be beautiful to him.

Fifthly, with earnest, humble, and particular confession of his sins, he
pours out prayers to God for the pardon of them in Christ.

Sixthly, he having found out this pearl, prizeth it as it is worth: and
therefore sells all that he has, bids farewell to his sweetest delights
for the attaining of it; which affection is not for a moment, but is written,
as it were, with the point of a Diamond, never to be rased out again.

Seventhly, Then he comes to apply the Gospel to himself, as before he did
the Law, and seals up his salvation in his heart, reasoning from those
gracious promises which God has made to such as he is.

Thus by often and deep weighing the truth, unchangeablenesse and perpetuity of
the promises, he comes at length to be settled in Faith; this Faith uniteth
him to Christ, and brings him to happiness. And it is wrought inwardly by
the Spirit, while men obey Gods Ordinance in the hearing of the Word, the
outward means of salvation.

Now the marks of Faith to be seen in the believer by himself or others: are

1. If he strive against doubting, Judge. 6.17.

2. If not feeling Faith, he complain bitterly of the want of it.

3. If he seek fervently to be settled in believing.

4. If he desire to search out the sin which may possibly hinder him, and
endeavor to expel it.

The maine cause why so many do want Faith, is the Devils bewitching and
blinding of men, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Wherein man's fault is, that he opens his
ears, and gives credit to Satan's deceitful suggestions.

For the preventing therefore of this danger, the Lord has given watchmen to
warn the people of the peril.

The reason therefore why men do not avoid it, is either in the Minister, that
he does not warn them aright, or else in the people, that they do not
receive it.

In the Ministers:

1. If they teach not at all.

2. If they teach seldom.

3. If they teach, but not plainly to the capacity of the hearer.

4. If by Catechizing they do not teach the grounds of Faith in right and good
order.

5. If they be not ready by private conference to satisfy their doubts.

6. If they have not a Christian care of giving good example by a holy and
blameless life.

But the Ministers must consider their duty laid forth:

First, by Titles, as Watchmen, Laborers, Matthew. 9.37. Salt and Light, Mat.
5.13.14. Shepherds, Ioh. 21.15. Good Scribes, Matthew. 13. Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Nurses, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.

Secondly, in Commandments, Acts 20.28. 2 Timoth. 4.2. For their better
encouragements, they must consider:

First, the honor vouchsafed to them, to be God his Ambassadors.

Secondly, the comfort of this labor.

Thirdly, the good that they may do.

Fourthly, the great reward prepared for them, Dan. 12.3.

The lets that are in the People, are:

First, if they esteem lightly of the Gospel, preferring other things before
it, Luke 24.

Secondly, if they imagine it an impossible thing to get assurance of salvation
in this life.

Thirdly, if they think it, though not impossible, yet not any way necessary.

Fourthly, if they think it both possible and necessary, but too hard to come
by.

Fifthly, if they be careless and ignorant.

Sixthly, if for fear of losing other pleasures, they forbear to seek after
this.

Seventhly, if they presume of their Faith, living still in their sins.

Eighthly, if there were never through brokennesse of heart prepared to receive
the Gospel.

Ninthly, if for fear of not continuing, they will not begin.

Tenthly, if they do work it upon themselves, but do deal slightly with it.

Eleventhly, if they content themselves with sudden flashes that soon are out,
and do not seek to be settled.

A naked and bare desire of salvation, now and then stirred up in a man, is not
to believe.

First, true desire cannot be satisfied without it, and therefore gives not
over till it obtain it.

Secondly, it makes high account of it, as of a precious Faith; and valuing of
it according to the worthiness of it: He seeks willingly and readily: He
settleth his heart upon the promises of God.

He meditates on Gods Commandments, that he should believe: by these means
he comes to be settled. Which done, he must beware of all occasions that
may unsettle him. Again, espcially that he does not give too much place to
fleshly reasons and carnal doubtings, nor hearken to evil suggestions.

BEcause the children of God after they have believed, are often drawn from
their hold, and caused to suspected themselves, and so fall into much fear and
doubting that they are none of the Lords, they must therefore learn to
strengthen themselves thus:

1. They must know that in God there is no shadow of change, and therefore that
it is their weakness to entertain such thoughts, Psalm. 77.13. For he ought
not to cast away his confidence, Heb. 10.35.

2. He may persuade himself that he laboring after, and groaning to rest his
wearied heart on the promises of God, shall never be wholly forsaken, though
sometimes destitute of feeling. Now if any ask,

Why does God suffer his children to fall into such fears?

Lest by a sudden absolute change,

3. They must know that the root of our comfort, is not in the strength of our
Christian life, but in the free grace of God in Christ; and therefore the
weakness therein ought not to bring us into doubting of our salvation. It may
be weak, but it shall never be extinguished; for he that is newborn can
never die.

4. They must call to mind that they be yet but children, subject to many
diseases, and some of those, such as may take away sense of life; which must
move us not to despair, but to seek with al diligence for the cure of them:
whereas if any object,





2. They must learn to know from whom this delusion comes, even from Satan
who labors either to wring their hope from them, or else to weary their
lives with heaviness and discomfort. This he attempteth:

First, by spiritual suggestion, he being a spirit, and helped also with the
long experience which he has had of this trade, and therefore fit; he being
also full of malice, and of unsearchable subtilty, with exceeding strength, and
therefore ready thus to trouble us.

Thus he inticeth us to sins, not only which by nature we love, but even to
those which we have no inclination unto; and when he has thus fastened upon
many a man, then he labors to dim his knowledge and understanding, that
he may lay no hold on any truth that may comfort him, or make benefit of any
promise.

Secondly, by outward objects and occasions forcibly persuading to sin. Now
because these things proceed rather from Satan than from themselves, there is
no cause why they should be discouraged.

Thirdly, they must call to mind that God calls and encourages us to trust
and believe in him; and therefore it must needs displease him that they are
removed from their faith, to give place to the spirit of error.

2. The fruits of their faith are often evident to the eye of others, when
themselves cannot see them.

3. They must be acquainted with the ways of God, who often does hide himself
for a season, that they may with more earnest desire seek for his wonted
grace, and with more joyfulnesse of heart praise him when they have obtained it
again. And if this hinder them, because



little and little with daily watering and dressing: and that Patience and
constancy with a resolute mind to bear Gods trial, will bring a good end in
all temptations.

THat every Christian may see his estate to be good, it shall be profitable to
consider how far an unbeleever may go; and so whether he has gone further.

1. An unbeliever may be terrified with his sins, his conscience terrified
by the spirit of bondage, Matthew. 27.3.

2. He may be pensive after sin committed, 1 King. 21.7.

3. He may find joy and delight in the Gospel, and in the exercises of
Religion, Mat. 13.20.

4. He may have a taste of the life to come with Balaam.

5. He may reverence the Ministers, and obey them in many things as Herod did,
and yet never be sealed up to eternal life. Many that have made great and
glorious shows, and seemed to have been very forward, have after either in
prosperity waxed wanton, or in afflictions weary; nay, many which have shined
as lights for a season, have fallen away even before trouble came. Many have
had great grief of mind, and so seem unto themselves to have repented; but
yet have deceived themselves, because they never furnish themselves with true
faith, a pure heart, a good conscience, change of their life through the love
of God; their hearts are not upright, nor they will not deal plainly with the
Lord. But if we would not lose all our labor, we must go further than any
unrepentant person can go; we must never cease till we have more humility,
sincerity and truth of heart, and certain marks and testimonies of our
Salvation.

They will hear the Gospel diligently: but we must lay our estate with it,
and receive the print of it upon our hearts and lives, and be cast into the
molde of it, and so find it the power of Salvation.

They will refrain from, themselves, and drive out of their families many
sins.

But we must willingly be reformed in what part of our life soever we can be
justly challenged: and not blemish our profession in any thing.

ALthough the love of God and Christ, the work of the Spirit applying them,
and faith apprehending them, be the chief cause of our conversion, yet
because they are not so easily felt of us, as they are sure and infallible
grounds in themselves of Salvation; therefore it is necessary to add some
other effects or rather properties of true faith, that do accompany the love
of God, and of Christ Jesus in us; and are the works or fruits of the
Holy Ghost by the Gospel, which may more clearly be perceived and discerned
than faith it self; and will clearly testify, that where these be, there
shall that be found also.

The first inseparable companion of Faith, is joy and comfort, glorious and
unspeakeable, Act. 8.8.39. But it will be said, that



Math. 5.4. and their estate far to be preferred before the laughter of the
ungodly which is but madness.

1. The child of God being converted cannot but admire this change of estate,
and even be astonished at the love and mercy of God: What should move him to
bestow such happiness upon so unworthy a creature, Ioh. 14.22. Psalm.
116.8.139.34.

2. This holy and reverent admiration must not be only at our first
conversion, but ought every day to be renewed in the Lord, who does every day
pardon our sins, Psalm. 118.8. and does also uphold us in our confidence and
integrity.

3. The true believer feeling the love of God to be shed abroad in his heart,
has also within him unfeigned love kindled toward God, Psalm. 116.1. Luke
7.47. Which love of God must shadow the love of all other things whatsoever.

4 He cannot but have his heart enlarged unto thankfulness, and praise God
even in afflictions themselves, Psalm. 116.12.

5. There is begotten a holy and earnest desire to have more communion with
God; even to enjoy his blessed presence, and to see his glory, 2. Corinthians
5.1.

6. The former grace makes him to forsake this World, to become a stranger and
a pilgrim here, and so to have no more to do in this World than he needs
must; Not that he leave the necessary duties or forsake his calling, but that
he is not so tied to these things, but that he could willingly leave them, and
so being ready to die, is made fit to live.

7. He cannot but lament and be ashamed of his former unkindnesse to God, and
is ready to be revenged on himself for it.

8. It cannot be, but knowing out of what misery he has escaped, and unto
what happiness he has attained, he pity others that are as he was, and wish
and labor to make them as he is.

One means whereof is edifying conference. Pro. 10.21.

IF any man has tasted of that happiness which comes by a true faith, and
does therefore desire to keep the same, and fears the loosing of it, he must
for his confirmation:

1. Nourish within himself daily that high estimation and account making of
his grace, he must think it his chiefest happiness and most precious treasure;
which they that do, have their heart ever upon it; they fear the forgoing of
it, they regard it most of all other things.

2. He must both by prayer daily and often beg this of God, and also seriously
meditate on the gracious promises of God, their nature, truth, and perpetuity:
for want of this calling to mind of things, many do let slip out of their
minds those grounds of faith by which sometimes they have found comfort.

3. He must help himself by ordinary and reverent hearing the glad tidings
of Salvation preached unto him; as also by the holy use of the Sacraments.

4. He must carefully retain a viewing of his sins by right examination; the
sight of them will keep him from taking offense at the Cross of Christ, nay
the tartness and bitterness of his sins, will make Christ's death most sweet
and pleasant unto him.

5. He must labor to settle himself even by the experience which he himself
has found of God his goodness toward him, and his working in him.

6. He may confirm himself even by the examples of others, who of weak, have
become strong, and of such as he is, have become such as he desires to be:
by these means Gods children come to have a holy acquaintance with God, and to
know his will toward them; the Lord disposing even their weakness unto their
good, that they may by their falls be humbled, and God by their upholding may
be glorified.

One especial thing is, always to begin the day with deep consideration of
God his gracious favor toward us; which if we do not, little can be looked
for in the day, but either unfavory lightness, and so to be deceived; or
unprofitable care, and so to be disquieted.

By that which has bin said before, it is to be observed, that although true
faith be in substance one and the same; yet that there are three degrees of
it, it is plain.

1. The first is the weakest and least measure, when there is as yet no
assurance in the believer, and yet inseparable fruits, and infallible tokens of
it.

2. The second degree is when some assurance is wrought in the believer at some
time, but very weak; and is often to seek and wanting, and recovered again
by entering into due consideration of his estate, and of the truth of God who
has promised it.

3. The third is the highest degree of it, though more strong and better settled
in some than in other; and this has assurance accompanying it for the most
part usually, unless the believer do quench the Spirit in himself: Or the
Lord (to show him that he stands by grace) does leave him to himself for
his own glory, and the better establishing of him afterward.

It having bin showed hitherto who are true believers: it follows to show how
a believer is to behave himself throughout his whole conversation.

1. Wherein is to be laid down, first, the grounds of a godly life, viz. that
it is grounded on faith, and proceeding from a pure heart.

2. The parts of it, which is to fly evil, and do good.

Unfeigned faith, and a godly life, are inseparable companions.

1. First, godliness cannot be without true faith, Iam. 2.18. Heb. 11.6. Genesis
6.5. the fountain being evil, the rivers which run from it cannot be good;
so where says is not in the heart, there can no godliness be in the life; by
which we see how many do deceive themselves, thinking they fear, love, and
serve God; and yet have no faith, nor no constant desire of it.

2. Neither can faith be without godliness, for as no man lives godly which
believes not; so no man which believes, can live wickedly; but as he is newborn, so like a new creature follows newness of life and obedience;
although this does not appear neither at the first beginning of his
conversion, nor in the vehemence of temptation, Tit. 2 12. Neither does faith
work a bare wandering desire to please God, but it frames also the man unto it,
and teaches him in some true and acceptable measure to go about it; and when
it is overmatched wi^h fleshly corruption, yet it raises sighings and
strivings in the heart, till it be subdued.

So that as they are deceived, which pass from a little sorrow for sin, to
newness of life, as they imagine, without faith, the beginning and worker of
all new life: so they also are no less deluded that please themselves,
thinking they have faith, when their lives are not only filled with offensive
actions, but also with custom and co^monnesse in the same. For he that is
honored with the title of a believer, must be known by the livery of an
incorrupt life: and the true servants of God dare no otherwise believe their
sins to be forgiven them, than they walk humbly before God and man.

When faith is said to be necessary to a godly life, we must not only
understand by faith to be saved: but that the godly man must labor to believe,
that all the promises of this life and of the life to come, (whether the great
and principal, as of the graces of the spirit, or the smaller, as of bodily
safety and preservation from dangers so far as they shall be good for him)
do belong unto him: And besides he must believe, that both all the
commandments which teach obedience, and the threatenings (because they
restrain the contrary) are set down for him particularly to bind his
conscience thereunto, Romans 15.4. Thus he must depend upon the whole word of
God: many who have hope to be saved do not thus: some sins they make no
conscience of: some promises they look not at; by means whereof they are not
so well fenced as they might be; but hold the very promise of salvation it
self very weakly. This comes to pass partly because they are not taught
these things aright: partly because being taught, they do not digest and work
them upon their consciences. This brings doubting and unsetlednesse even to
good Christians: therefore he that believes to be saved, must believe also
that he shall be sanctified, 1 Cor. 1.30. that he shall receive grace from
God to bring forth fruits of amendment of life, and that he shall be enabled to
cast off his old conversation, and also have grace to go through troubles, and
deliverance from them: for assistance and blessing in God, he must depend on
God his Word; this is the obedience of faith, Romans 1.5. which if we have as a
foundato uphold and encourage us, it will greatly avail for the furthering of
us in a godly course; by this we shall sooner wade through doubts, and grow out
of fear; whereas otherwise we faint and fear ofttimes, and be without help.

Many examples we have in scripture of such as thus believed, especially set
down in the 11. to the Hebrews; Heb. 11.16.38. Gal. 2.19. When men do not
thus walk in the strength of God his word, it causes tedious troubles in
them, and indeed the offensive lives of many, and the starting aside of sundry,
come from this want. But it may be objected, Paul himself seemed to want this,
for he found no means to perform that which was good, as he complains,
Romans 7.18. I answer hereunto, that

He complains not that he had no promise of strength, Phil. 4, 13. but he
complains that for all the hope of help that he had, yet the rebellion of
his flesh did mightily strive and resist the spirit. And this must every
faithful man look for while he live.

NOw for the fountain from whence a godly life does proceed, it is from the
heart, which therefore must be purged and cleansed.

For this we are to know, that the heart of man, before it be emptied, is a
dungeon of iniquity; before it be enlightened, a den of darkness; before it
be cleansed, a puddle of filthiness: and that which Saint James speaks of
the tongue, may much more be said of the heart, that before it be tamed, it is
an unruly evil. Now if such an heart be the guide of our life, how monstrous
and loathsome must that life needs be? of necessity then the heart must be
purged and changed.

This purging of the heart is a renewing in holiness and righteousness by
little and little of all true believers, they being first delivered and freed
from the tyranny of sin and fear of damnation; for then does sin receive a
deadly wound, and the power thereof is abated and crucified, which is showed by
the hatred of sin, and a delighting in goodness.

Although this change be but weak at the first, yet if it be in truth, in
will and desire, it is an infallible mark of Gods election and love toward
him. This grace is often dimmed and even choked in many, because God does
strengthen and continue this gift of holiness and sanctification, as it is
nourished, esteemed, set by, and as men do stir it up in themselves, by
asking after it when they do miss it, and provoking themselves to pray for
such good affections and cannot be satisfied without them; as David did, Psalm.
43 5.103.1. Thus we ought to cherish and blow up the sparkles within us, which
will not ordinarily fail us, especially for any long time (except in time of
temptation) unless it be through our default and folly. As for the manner how
this is done, we are to know it is the proper and wonderful work of God by
the power of the holy Ghost, Acts 15.9. Isa. 11.2. He that has, with faith
unfeigned, an heart sanctified, and purified from his natural corruptions and
wicked disposition; as he is not to account it mean and little worth, it being
an evident work of the Spirit; so neither is he to stand at a stay in this,
it being but the beginning of that work which shall follow it: But,

Acts. 15.9. 1. Joh. 3.5.



But as soon as they are assured of Gods favor through faith, so soon are
their hearts changed, and their affections set another way; so that faith may
well be said to purify and cleanse the heart, 1 Pet. 1.4. but not as the
chief and highest cause, for that is the holy Ghost; but as the instrument.

Thus from faith and a pure heart, does arise a good conscience, a sweet peace,
and holy security; having received from God a mind to know him, an heart to
love him, a will to please him; and strength also in some measure acceptable to
obey him.

From hence does proceed that true repentance, which is a purpose of the heart,
Acts 11.23. an inclination in the will, Psalm. 119.44.57. and a continual
endeavoring in the life, Acts 24.16. to cast off all evil, and obey God both
inwardly and outwardly, according ^o the measure of knowledge in every one.

So that this sound purging of the ^eart, is that strong foundation upon which
only a good life comes ^o be builded. For God will have ^ur whole heart, not a
piece of (...), for that is neither beseeming his ^eatnesse, neither fit for
them to ^fer who receive so great good ^ings at his hands; many indeed (...)
hardly brought to this, and therefore all their fair shows and colors do
vanish away, and come to nothing, for rash and hasty purposes are no sufficient
foundations to bear up so great and weighty buildings, as the whole course of
their lives to be wholly passed.

But if men at their first embracing of the Gopsell, did give their hearts
wholly to the Lord, then should God have more honor, and themselves more
abiding comfort.

NOw having showed the ground and root of a godly life, viz. faith and a pure
heart: it remains to speak of the parts of it, which is a renouncing of all
sin, and a care to walk in a new life. And first of the former.

The party believing is brought to this power and grace, that he is out of love
with all ungodliness, and not with some part or kind only, but loatheth the
whole course of iniquity, which was his only delight and pleasure before:
neither does he this in some good mood only, or when some shame or danger
approach, then to show some misl^ke of it; but in good advisement he is
resolved to cast off such behavior, as a loathsome and and ragged garment, Hos
4.9. Ephesians. 4.24. Math, 16.24.

For want of this settled denying of our selves, diverse never attain true
godliness: some never conceiving the Doctrine, others forgetting, and some
scorning it, but the most receiving it coldly, and going about it
preposterously.

Whereas the servants of God leave not sin for a time, nor by constraint, for
or company, and fear, etc. but being at utter defiance with it, do abjure it
for ever; Nehem. 10.29.

But in all these they trust not to their own strength: but daily considering
what cause they have to do so; how infinitely they are bound to God to
discharge it, become firmly persuaded, that God who has made them willing,
will also make them able to do it, Phil. 4.13. Romans 9.31. and therefore,
although they see not that help present with their eyes, yet they hope for
that which they see not, and therefore wait patiently for it, till it can be
granted them. Thus both both faith and hope being nourished and strengthened in
them from day to day, they do find both will and desire, and strength (though
imperfect) to accomplish to the peace of their hearts, that which they set upon
and attempted. Indeed it is not obtained without striving, but it is no just
cause of discouragement to us, to take pain for so great a profit, when we are
sure of it before we go about it: and if,



does not cut off all comfort from them: for howsoever they do not account
light of any fall, yet those very falls turn to their gain afterward; for
thereby they come to know themselves better, their prime pride is much
assuaged, they have experience of God his grace toward them, and they cleave
more nearer unto him after, and are more circumspect in looking to their ways:
remembered always that this belongs only to the true believer, who having the
Lord for his teacher, is become both skillful and able to do this; which to
the natural man (in whom is no dram of goodness) is altogether impossible.

AS we have seen that sin is to be renounced, and in what manner; so we
must consider the diverse kinds of evils which are to be renounced: and they are
of two sorts, Jnward, or Outward.


First by inward evils, is not meant the native infection of the heart, but the
fruits and effects thereof, James 1.14. Col. 3.5. and that in such as profess
Religion.

Amongst these, the root of all the rest is infidelity, Hebrews 3.12. From
hence grows out three arms or boughs, of the which every one shoots forth
as branches, innumerable worldly lusts.

1. Impious against God.

2. Injurious to Men.

3. Most hurtful to our selves.

First, for those against God and his honor and worship in the fi st Table.

judgment day, Job 13. Acts 24.25.

And whereas he requires, that confidence should be put in him, for
continual defense, deliverance and succor in soul and body, they are carried
with distrust, as with a whirlwind. In adversity they are either overcome
with a servile and desperate fear, or boiling with impatience, or else
swelling against God in obstinacy and contempt.

In prosperity there is little or no thankfulness yielded to God by them,
their rejoicing is carnal, and oftentimes they are made drunk with pleasures,
so that they are lovers of them more then of God, and become insensible thereby
and past all feeling.

And as for the second Commandment; teaches them, Job. 21.14, 15 Matthew. 15.9.
Many are carried by superstition and blind devotion, into false worships; and
other which retain the truth, yet in the use of religious exercises, their
hearts take no delight.





Table 2.

After these we may consider those unbridled worldly lusts, which carry men
after the hurt of their neighbor.

What unreverent contempt and

How against the good of their Abraham, Genesis 13.8. pass from their right to
avoid dissension; how there is no meekness or mildness to forbear others, no
burying of offenses, no pacifying of wrath, no fellow-feeling of misery.





surmises do arise against our brethren; even as Saul against David and
Jonathan, 1 Sa. 22.8. Also what deriding there is both by word and writing,
what slanders, and reproaches, etc.

And lastly, how their desires

The evils also that concern themselves, are neither few nor small: in
abundance of outward things, setting their hearts on them and delighting
excessively even in the abuse of them, and ioying beyond measure in things
transitory, which is the very pride of life.

Contrarily, fretting, murmuring and vexing themselves when they fall into
extremity, or unto frowardness, or fullennesse, when they are crossed or
displeased, deceiving themselves with desires of things unprofitable, trobling
themselves with curious meddling in things impertinent, blind-folding themselves
with foolish love of themselves, etc.

The lusts wherewith the hearts of men do swarm, and are even burdened and
laden, may easily persuade us, that it is divine power and grace from above
that must purge these and such like unsavory draffes out of them.

And yet these and many other such like are renounced as they come to be
known of Gods servants, and resisted, according to the wisdom which God has
given them; although in others they rule and reign, and the obtaining of grace
to do this, is a special part of Christianity, Ephesians 4.22. so that he
that exercises himself in observing these his foul and shameful lusts, when
he has been led away, and deceived by them, which of them do most trouble
him, and oftest prevail with him, and so by the helps which God has given
him, does resist them, though but weakly and unperfectly, he need not doubt
but that he is occupied in the godly life.

Thus all Gods children do renounce and overcome their wicked lusts, though
not all in the like measure, yet of the weakest they are hated and striven
against, when they are once seen and perceived. All are not so meek as Moses,
Number. 12.13. so faithful as Abraham, so continent as Joseph, Genesis 39 10. so
zealous as David, nor so full of love as the woman in the Gospel: Luke 7.47.
yet those that be behind others (so it be in truth that they endeavor) are not
to be discouraged, for all believers have not their part in the same degree of
mortification, some receive thirty-fould, some sixty, some an hundred, and
indeed those who are most of all troubled for being behind others, do declare
plainly, that they love the grace that they mourn for, and hate deadly the
corruption which they complain and cry out of, they indeed that suffer
themselves to be ruled and led by their lusts, can no ways claim any part in
a godly life, for he that is so minded, cannot be but carnal, estranged from
God, and a bond, man of Hell.

But the weak Christians that do strive against those, and decline them in
their measure, may stay themselves for their comfort on these three special
graces.

1. That they have a clear knowledge of their salvation.

2. That they account it as their chief treasure.

3. That they be settled forward in some plain and good course of life, whereby
they may grow in faith, and the obtaining of God, though with some striving.
But if they walk destitute of any of these three, they shall be snar^d much
with fear and unqu^etnesse. These therefore must be earnest^y labored for,
b^ing of all things most necessary to be learned of such as have attained
already to the knowledge of true happiness by Jesus Christ: for as a man
knows nothing profitable unto salvation before he believes; so after he
believes, he knows nothing profitably to grow on with comfort in his
Christian course, without these three faithfully and carefully looked unto and
preserved.

As for the greater increase of faith, knowledge, strength against sin,
comfort and such like fruits of the spirit; sometime the Lord does withhold
them, either because he sees them in some respect not to be good for us for
the present, as 2 Cor. 10.9. or else to try us, whether we love them so well,
that we will seek after them still or no; but for the most part, if we grow
not, it is most justly to be imputed to our own fault as our own ignorance,
sloth, favoring of our selves in sin: or if these be not the causes, then it
is our own timorousness and unbelief, fearing that such grace as we desire
shall not be given unto us; whereas we ought to believe. Neither need we fear
lest by believing this we should be too bold or presumptuous, for God has
promised it, and commanded us to trust in him, Iam. 1.6. And if we fail not
in using the means, staying upon the Lord by faith; assuredly he will not
fail nor disappoint us; but we shall have grace to guide our feet, to rise
when we are fallen, to return when we are stepped out of the way, and to
walk in most sweet safe^y under Gods protection all the day long, Deuteronomy. 33.12.
And finally, our gains shall be such, as shall cause us to marvel at Gods
goodness, in giving us more than we would have asked.



their diverse growthes and ages, which are three.

1. The highest degree is old age, or the experienced estate, which yet is not
the perfect age in Christ, for that shall not befall us till the life to come,
but a fi^me, constant, and settled going on to that perfection.

2. The second is the middle age in Christianity, in which as young men in
wrestling, we have courage against our sinful lusts, but yet like unto them
who have many foiles, we are oftentimes cooled in our courage, though we
sometimes prevail, ever growing, though slowly.

3. The third is childhood or infancy, the lowest and the last, the which is
principally discerned by an earnest desire of the sincere milk of the Word,
and namely, of the promises of forgivenes of sins; which although some of these
dear children of God cannot with full assurance lay hold of; yet this their
hungring desire after it (which cannot be satisfied without it) with a sensible
fear to offend God, is a true sign thereof.

The first sort are such as through long experience, and much acquaintance,
with the practice of a godly life, have obtained grace to guide themselves more
constantly than others, and to keep within bounds: they are much freed from
this bondage, and seldom so grossly holden under of corrupt lusts as others:
which estate, though it be to be aimed at of all godly people, yet it is not
obtained but of such as have accustomed their minds to the heavenly course, and
to whom good meditations and thoughts to shun and avoid evil, are become a
pleasure; and are as well able to discern the same by their understanding and
judgment, as to have their will in good sort at commandment to follow the
good and shun the evil. Now these have their minds usually set upon some one
or other of the infinite heavenly instructions, which from time to time they
have treasured up in their hearts: whereby, although they be not quickened up as
they would, or desire to be, yet they are held from much evil; they are often
considering of Gods unutterable kindness, of man's mortallity, the momentary
estate of all things under the Sun, the blessed estate of the Elect, the
endless woe of the damned, and such like; they are often beholding, and
meditating of God, his Majesty, Power, Wisdom, Eternity, Justice, Patience,
and long suffering, and of his care over them; but a great part of their daily
thoughts is this, how they may have a good conscience in all things pleasing
God, and how they may be prepared for the cross; also how they may hol^ ^ut
constantly the profession of their hope unto the end with joy; how they may
resist all occasions of evil; what lets they shall find from without and
within. And lastly, how they may order well their particular actions in their
callings, that they may make a good account at the end of the day, and so at
the last end.

Thus the first sort are exercised, yet not wholly freed from evil thoughts,
and vain desires, for Paul was not, 2 Cor. 12.9. Romans 7.24. and God will make
them see their weakness from time to time, especially to subdue pride in them,
and to hold them under.

The second sort compared to young men, are neither so experienced in
Christianity as the father, nor yet utterly unacquainted therewith, as the
newborn babes.

These are especially occupied in fighting against temptations, and resisting
unruly lusts, Ioh. 2.4. For knowing by the light of the Scriptures, what
corruptions they have in them, they watch their hearts diligently, they pray
against them often and earnestly, they are always in fear lest they should be
overcome, and casting how they may avoid the occasions of sin, so that sin
becomes odious unto them, yet not ever overcome of them, but often unsettled
and distempered and as often renewing the covenant with the Lord to please him
better; sometime discouraged, but rise again, glad to use all good helps, both
public and private, and having prevailed against greater corruptions, are
earnestly set against the smaller, and such as seem less dangerous; as the
idle rovings of their brain which do not directly so much carry them after
evil, as hinder them from good, they are holden under some infirmities, that
they may be more humble and not forget what they were in times past, so that
this second age and growth in Christianity is a striving rather betwixt fear
and hope, sorrow and joy, than a superiority over unruly affections; an estate
standing in need of counsel and help, rather than fitted and experienced to
counsel, direct and settle others: but the more sure they be of their
salvation, the more expert they should be in the battle.

The third sort compared to little Children, who hang upon the breast and do
labor for knowledge of their Father in Christ, and desire the means of their
spiritual nourishment, 1 Pet. 2.2. their thoughts are taken up in these
things, and their keeping themselves that they may not offend or displease
their father; they are cheerful while their small faith is upholden, by
cleaving to the promise; and as uncheerfull when as faith fails, moaning, and
pining if it be long wanting: where they must take heed of two perils.

The first is, lest upon pretense of seeking continuance of comfort, they
neglect their lawful business; for Satan appears as an Angel of light.

The second, lest in want of comfort, they be driven to any distrustful or
desperate fear; for so the Devil appears as a roaring Lion.

These must grow daily out of their childishness, misl^king all such faults as
they spy in themselves and purge themselves from them. With these the Lord
deals most kindly, not showing them all their corruptions at once, which were
enough to dismay them; nor how many afflictions abide them, which were like to
confound them.

Thus we may see in these three degrees, how for the most part the purged
hearts of Gods children are taken up; the weakest of which do far differ
from the secret'st hypocrite, which of all unreformed, ours come nearest them.

THus having spoken of inward lusts and sins of the heart, and showed how
they are disliked and renounced of all the believers: The like is to be showed
of outward sins of the life, that they be abhorred and shunned also: which is
the rather to be considered, because many boast they have true hearts to God,
when their lives are wicked; but to rejoice either about their salvation, or
the goodness of their heart: if their behavior be stained with outward
wickedness, and their holy profession blemished with open and shameful sins,
is vain: for none can be truly godly, that does not endeavor to walk free
from offensive evils, if he do know them to be sins, which may be showed
abundantly in the Scriptures by Doctrine, 1 Samuel 7.4. Hos. 14.9. 2 Cor. 7.1.
2 Pet. 2.20. Iam. 1.25. Romans 6.2. By example, Joseph, Genesis 39.10. Moses, Heb.
11.24. Zacheus, Luke 19.2. of the sinful woman, Luke 7.37. These forsaking
those sins which by nature they loved, and by custom they had long lien in,
do plainly show that they believed in Christ, forsaking their old sins,
though they were never so pleasant unto them.

NOtwithstanding the former Doctrine be most plain for Scripture and reason,
yet there are many that hope for salvation, and yet renounce not open sins,
and outward offenses.

These are referred to four sorts.

The first are gross offenders, whom every vile person does scorn, because
he does see their hypocrisy by open and often committed evils, and has
Christian Religion it self in mean account for their cause; for profane men
when they see any walk sincerely indeed, and without just cause of rebuke, are
little moved at their example, neither greatly reverence them, or take any good
by the^, but reproach them rather; but that is because they see so many, who,
besides some outward appearance of zeal, were little better in their lives
than themselves, and therefore they are hardened to think so of all the rest;
which wilful blindness and hardness of heart, though it be a fearful sign
of God his vengeance to them, yet this in great part may be justly ascribed to
the lives of those who professing godliness, in their deeds deny the same, 2 Timothy 5, 6. for whom it had been better they had never made any profession at
all, such as Saul, 1 Samuel 22.18.

The second sort are such as being rude and ignorant, are altogether careless,
flattring themselves in that gross and brutish estate, who have many speeches
also suitable to their lives, which lay open their hearts to all.

A third sort are such, as because they keep within some civil course of
honesty, and are free from gross crimes, think themselves to be in very good
estate, though their open faults be many: some of these (as also of the former)
are sometimes pricked in conscience for sin, or rather for the punishment of
it, Exodus 9.27. and some kind of change, Mark. 6.19. Hos. 6.4. Mich. 6.6. they
will sometimes make vows and covenants to do well, Psalm. 78.36. they will
sharply reprove others, Ps. 50.16. they have some sudden flashes of grace, and
yet do want true godliness, and therefore have their sentence pronounced by
our Savior, Matthew. 21.31. and 5.20.

A fourth sort of professers are such, as for their seeming zeal do think so
well of themselves, that they cannot brook or abide any other that differ from
them in judgment, they are taunters, raylers and sl^nderers of their Brethren;
yea, most sharp and uncharitable and proud censurers of their brethren and
betters; who are so soon ripe in their own conceit, that none is meet enough
or sufficient to teach them, some also inordinate livers. Tit. 3. worse in
their dealings than men who profess no Religion, earthly, unquiet, and such
like.

The life thus led, is not the life which God requires, neither are those
works which faith affords, so that howsoever God gathers his Elect out of
all these kinds, yet are none of them to be accounted as his, while their
hearts abide stained with such corruptions, or their lives defiled with such
treachery.

AGainst this that has been said, some will be objecting and asking, why such
difference is made of men? have the godly no faults? are they without
infirmities? are they not like unto other men in sinning? if it be so, why
should they be shoaled from the others?

I answer, that as for differences of men, they are put by the Lord himself,
both in name, conversation, and reward, Psalm. 1.2. and 50.16. 1 These. 19. and
the end of the Ministry is, to shoale Gods Elect and beloved ones from the
World, and to bring them to his sheepefold. Where it is demanded, if they be
not partakers of the same sins that other men are? it cannot be denied, but
the godly are somewhat infected with common corruptions, living where Satan is;
and further, it is possible they may also lie still in the same loathsomenesse
for a season; but yet so, as it appears plainly, that they were not given
over like wicked men: for when they come to themselves again, we see how
strangely they are amazed at their offense, how they tremble to think what
they have done, and can have no peace within themselves till they return home
again after they are gone out of the way, and so are made more vigilant and
wary against the like another time, the which of the wicked cannot be said;
besides the falls of the godly are but when they are secure and take liberty
unto themselves, 2 Samuel 11.4. and give over to fence themselves as they are
charged, Heb. 4.1. and 3.12. As for reproachful and flagitious falls, we must
know, that it is possible for us to be preserved from them, 2 Pet. 1.5.10. so
was Enoch, Abraham, Caleb, and Joshua, with many others; but yet as many rare
and dear servants of God have fallen into shameful sins, so may we: for God
suffers his servants to fall so dangerously for these causes.

1. For the humbling of them.

2. That they see his exceeding bountifulness in pardoning so great sins,
and so love him the more, Luke 7.47. John 21.15. and

3. That others far weaker than they, yet faithful, may be encouraged to
believe that their sins shall be pardoned, and their weak service accepted
of him, as 1 Timothy 1.16. which otherwise might be discouraged. Out of these
cases, if we hold fast our faith, and stand upon our watch, we need not fear
falling, for God takes no pleasure to cast them down who desire to stand, but
to raise up them that are fallen, Psalm. 130.3. to help our weakness, to
supply our wants, and to deliver us from such dangers as we fear, so far as
it is expedient; or else make us able to bear them.

Now concerning infirmities, it must be granted, that because they have still a
body of sin within them, they must needs be subject to infirmities, and this
is properly a si^ne of infirmity, when partly of knowledge, and more through
frailety, an offense is wrought to the displeasing of God: and when of such a
one it is committed, as because he has his heart sanctified would not do it;
and yet because the power of corruption at that time is greater in him than the
strength of Grace, therefore he was forced to yield to it, so that in these
also the godly do much differ from all wicked: for it is their greatest care
that they may not fall, their greatest sorrow when they are overcome, and their
greatest joy, when they do prevail over their sins; none of which are to be
found in the wicked.

THe heart once purged, as has before been showed, does require great care
for the keeping of it so in good plight afterward, Prove. 4.23. which is done by
watching, trying, and purging; we must watch, lest we should for the want
thereof be deceived with the baits of sin; we must examine and try it,
because no man can watch so carefully, but that much evil will creep in; and
we must purge out that filthy dross of concupiscence which we find by
examining, that it set not our will on fire, to satisfy and perform the
desires thereof, Psalm. 119.9.

This indeed is no idle work; for he that goes about it must be content and
glad to weane his heart from many unprofitable and wandering thoughts and
desires: and so season them with holy and heavenly meditations. But we may see
by Scripture, Psalm. 32.4 5, 6. Heb. 10.38. and by experience, (notwithstanding
our affections be strong, unruly, and most hardly subdued) wi^h what ease we
may renounce and forsake them, and have power over our will and appetites, when
our heart be thus renewed and kept mastered: Whereas the little acquaintance and
ill governing of the heart, by letting it loose to folly, wandering and
needless fantasies, is that which causes it to be surfeited with all manner
of iniquity.

Again, if our hearts be not thus carefully looked unto, we shall not have
them ready to any duty. And from hence it is, that many men's hearts are
swarving usually with vain thoughts, even whiles they are in hearing and
praying, because they do not constantly throughout the day watch over them:
for the only way to curb our lusts, is to look to our hearts, by it we shall
not only have help and furtherance to worship God aright, but in our common
actions, affairs and business, we should so behave our selves as would be a
joy unto those that should behold us, and an ornament and beauty to the Gospel
which we do profess.

Thus therefore we ought to look to our hearts in all that we do, both
keeping out evil that would enter, and purging out that which by stealth shall
creep in, and not by fits only, when the good mood takes us (which as it is
too common, so it is most dangerous) but always, Psalm. 1.2. 1 Ephesians. 5.16. which
if we shall do, although our hearts being purified and cleansed but in part,
our desires therefore cannot be all good and pleasing to God, but unperfect,
that is to say, many of them evil, and many which are wholly mixed with evil
and corruption; yet to have our hearts thus changed but in weak measure, so as
it be in truth, is a benefit of greater value than the whole World: and he that
has it, is by infinite degrees happier than the most glosing professor that
wants it.

THus far of the eschewing of evil: Now for the doing of good.

Where first, certain rules must be learned and observed, which because they
are not followed, many that would gladly live well, attain to it in no good
sort to bring it in credit with others, but meet with many unsetlings,
discouragements, and cooling of their zeal, yea oftentimes dangerous
out-strayings, neither find the going about it so pleasant as toilesome and
tedious. Now the general rules are these.

First, knowledge of duty, with a delighting therein.

Secondly, practice of that which we know; which is that living by faith, or
laboring to keep a good conscience, so often commended unto us in Scripture.

For the first, we must understand by knowledge, such an inlightening of the
mind to understand the will of God about good evil, that we have with it
spiritual wisdom, to apply and and refer the same to the well ordering of
our particular actions; that we rest not in seeing the truth only, but approve
and allow of it, as that which is fit to counsel and guide us, but yet so as
he that has most of this, may grow, and he that has least, may not be
discouraged.

This knowledge must not be weighed and esteemed of us as a thing common and
of no value, but loved and liked, otherwise no fruit will follow.

For the second practice, is that seeking to walk worthy the Lord and please
him in all things, Colos. 1.10. which must be both inward and outward.

Inward, when as in resolution of our minds and desire and purpose of our
hearts, we are prepared and ready to be set on work, and be employed in any
good service to God or our brethren, Psalm. 119.10. Acts 11.12. this must be
often blown up in us; for if this be lost through forgetfulness, sloth, and
careless negligence, or overwhelmed with sorrow, fear, or such like
passions, or dulled and made blunt in us through lightness and vanity, then
are we unfit to honor God in any service.

Outward, when in our lives we express and declare the same, by endeavoring
at least to please God in one commandment as well as in another, Act. 9.3.

Thus much of the rules. The virtues which further us herein, follow.

First uprightness, when in a single, and true heart, we love, desire, and do
any thing, especially because God commands, and for that end, Deuteronomy. 18.13.
Ephesians. 6.14. Ioh. 1.47. Many actions otherwise fervent enough, for want of this
sincerity, are but froth (as were the hot enterprises of Iehu against
Idolaters) and cause them who have long pleased themselves therein, to cry out
of their doings (though admirable to the eyes of others) to say they were but
hypocrisy, for many are the starting holes in the den of our hearts, and many
ways we can deceive our selves and others also by false pretenses in good
actions: we must therefore labor that howsoever our best actions are mixed
with corruptions, yet we may have the same rejoicing with the Apostle, that in
singleness of heart we serve the Lord.

The second is diligence, whereby a man is ready to take all occasions and
opportunities to the doing of some good, and to shun idleness and
unprofitablenesse, 1 Pet. 1.5.

The third is constancy in nourishing all good desires, and holy endeauours,
until his latter years be better than the former, and so finish his course
with joy.

By these two, great matters are brought to pass: and for want of these two,
and through the contrary, sloth, and inconstant unsetlednesse; even the most of
the godly do not find the sweet fruit in their life which is to be found.

Fourthly in humility and meekness, all our duties must be practiced, if we
will follow Christ, Matthew. 11.29. These two are not particular virtues, which
sometimes only may have use, but such fruits of the spirit as necessarily are
required in all actions, so that at no time humbleness of mind and meekness
of spirit may be wanting. And therefore they are oft-times in the Scripture
set down together, as Ephesians. 4.2. Co. 3.2. and so urged, as does show, that
although there be many goodly gifts in a man, yet if he has not these, they
shall loose their credit and beauty amongst those which behold them, and
withhold their commodity from him who wants them.

By all this that has been said, it is evident that the life of the believer
is a continual proceeding in the departing from evil, and endeavoring after
duties, and a settled course in repentance, and a constant walking with God: not
an idle and uncertain stumbling upon some good actions, whiles a great part of
his life is neglected and not looked after. But some may say here, we have a
desire to do these things, but we want power and ability. whereunto I answer
that

The best desire is in vain, except we have with it an assurance of God his
favor, and help through faith; for it is faith that overcommeth all lets, 1
Jo. 5.4. this lets us see, that he which has saved us from the greatest
danger of hell, will much more save us from the lesser, of being overcome of
our corrupt lusts. And if any shall say, that

Saint Paul himself did not find power to overcome the body of sin? It is
evident

The holy Apostle did not overcome all rebellion of the old man, to the end he
might always have a mark of his unworthiness and sin remaining in him, and
thereby remember, that it was of only mercy that he was pardoned, and the
grace of God that kept him from falling away from him; and that for both these
causes he might be abased and kept humble under so great grace as he had
received: and last of all, that he might from time to time find sweetness
still in the forgiveness of his sins.

But although he was not perfect here as an Angel, yet was not he carried of
his lusts into gross iniquities, for God his grace was sufficient for him; and
so shall it be for us, if we do as often and as earnestly desire it; for every
christian in his measure may look for the like grace that Paul had, even
strength to perform in some good sort the duties which seem so difficult and
impossible unto him.

Which is not so to be understood, as if every godly christian does feel or
obtain this (for that might discourage many) but to show what God his children
may confidently look for, and how their estate may be bettered, and their
spiritual liberty increased. For many good people do not know what their
heavenly father has provided for them, but only receive so much light as
whereby they see the way to his kingdom; according to the knowledge that they
have of his will; thereafter they declare and show it forth in their lives; but
nothing as they might, or as some others do.

THus of the rules and virtues which help us to the practice of a godly life.
Now to show wherein it does consist.

The duties are these. First that pertain to God.

Commandment 1.

For we must desire to know him as his word does reveal him unto us, in his
nature, properties, and works, we must acknowledge it is allowed, and in
heart yield and consent unto the truth of those things which we know of him,
that then we may safely and boldly believe in him, and cleave unto him. Thus
knowing our selves to be safe under his wings, we must grow to put our
confidence in him: and from hence will arise another, even by hope to look for
that help which in confidence we assure our selves of from the Lord, and
through this confidence and hope, we must become patient in in aflictions, and
joyful in every condition of life. Further, because we know all good things
to flow unto us from God, therefore unto him we lift up our hearts for the
obtaining of those things which we want; unto him, we render thanks for all
blessings received, and are affected with all our hearts and strength to love
him more than all the world besides, and desire to enjoy the more full fruition
of his presence, in the mean time walking before him in all reverence and
uprightness with a holy and child-like fear as does become us.

Commandment 2.

Now besides these duties of holiness, which we owe directly to the person of
God merely or spiritual and inward: there are other whereby we worship him
outwardly.

Where is to be known that he will allow of no other means of worshipping
him outwardly, than he has appointed and prescribed himself in his word: As
the preaching of the Gospel, and administering of Sacraments by Ministers
lawfully called, public prayer, fasts, and thanksgivings, together with the
censures of the Church. These in public. In private, there are answerable to
these, as talking and conferring of the word of God, in mutual instructing,
admonishing exhorting, or any way else which is fit for edifying; in all which
duties, as in many other, that are good and godly, great care must be had that
they be not performed lightly, rashly, falsely, hypocritically, and
unprofitably, for that were abominable to God as a dead sacrifice; but
contrarily, we must use them with all high reverence, being prepared rightly
before; well affected in the using of them, and aiming at the most profitable
end which he has appointed, that so we may be approved and allowed of him.

Commandment 3.

There is also a further duty, that not only in time of his worship, but also
in our common and usual speech and actions, we declare what a worthy and
reverent estimation we have of the Lord. As by speaking all good of his name,
word, and works, and in our lawful callings, by ordering and behaving of our
selves wisely and graciously, that all which live with us may see that our
religion is joined with the power of godliness: and that this be done of us
in all estates and conditions of our life, both in prosperity and adversity:
laboring also to persuade others to the same. Now as in all things God must be
glorified, so more especially in an oath, which must be used as with high
reverence, so in truth, in righteousness, and in the beholding of Gods works.
viz. heaven and earth, with their furniture; taking sweet feeling of God his
Majesty and beauty which shines in them, rejoicing with reverence that he has
given us this clear glass to behold his face in (or rather his footstool)
which should move us therefore in all our Actions to beware of hypocrisy.

Commandment 4.

Unto all these is one more to be added, viz. that upon the seventh day all
our works be laid aside as much as is possible, and the whole day to be
bestowed in his worship and service, and in things directly tending to the same.

Here for the avoiding of that tediousness in well-doing, whereunto our nature
is prone, the Lord has left us variety of holy exercises, viz. all public and
private duties, more freely to be performed than at other times; which wise
and merciful regard of his over us, if it cannot move us to give our selves to
practice this part of holiness, (whatsoever our excuses be) we plainly
show, that our minds are carnal, and that we do but favor our selves in
worldliness or prophanenes, idleness, and ease when we reason against it, as
being too precise.

AFter the duties of holiness toward God, follow those of righeousnesse to
men, for these two are jointly commanded of the Lord, and ought not of any to
be dis-joyned in practice, as they are of many; some delighting in the first,
but neglecting the other; some following after the second, and destitute of the
former.

Now the ground root from which all these duties must spring, is love toward
all men, even our greatest enemies. Unto which must be joined brotherly
kindness to Christians, which is a holy and especial love of one faithful
brother toward another, 1 Pet. 2.7.

Command^ment 5.

The first of these are such as be due betwixt inferiors and superiors
mutually, viz. in general, that inferiors in their whole course honor their
superiors by voluntary subjection to them, as by Gods ordinance and
appointment, and reverence them, both inwardly and outwardly; and likewise that
superiors for their parts carry themselves toward them as brethren in all
courtesy, saving their authority; and further also, that they go before them
in all innocence and example of good life.

In particular, some as Superiors by civil authority as Princes, others as
Magistrates and Ministers, to whom inferiors both subjects and servants must
submit themselves in bearing their rebukes and receiving their corrections
willingly and without resistance, and in yielding obedience to all their
lawful commands.

And they, if they be in higher place, are to provide that the people under
them may live a godly, honest, and quiet life. If they be Ministers, they are
charged to be good and bountiful, just and equal unto their servants. Some are
Superiors by nature, as parents, to whom children do owe very much, as
forwardnes in embracing their wholesome instructions, reverence and obedience
unto the end, the disposing of their estate by marriage, or otherwise, that it
be not without their consent, and readi^esse to help their necessities etc.
They are also bound to teach them from their youth, to keep them from
idleness, to train them up in some honest and lawful trade, to govern them
wisely and kindly, to provide for their necessity of marriage, and to minister
things needful for this present life as they shall be able, and as they may
do it religiously and lawfully.

Some by gifts, as chiefly the Minister, to whom double honor, reverence, and
obedience is due, for his worke-sake, for he is not only a teacher, but a
father.

Secondly the strong Christian, whom God has endued with a liberal portion of
knowledge, wisdom, experience, and other heavenly graces, more than other of
their brethren: these the weaker must not judge rashly, they must bear with
their infirmities: so those that excel in any other gifts, are to be had in
honor and account for the same: Some by age of the gray head and ancient in
years, who of the younger sort are to be had in reverence and esteemed,
neither are we to neglect our equals, but their dignity and worthiness is to
be regarded above their own, Romans 12.10. These duties we owe unto the person
of our neighbor, to which must be added a care to maintain our own
reverence and credit among men, by a course beseeming our holy profession: now
follow some duties toward his life.

Commandment 6.

First for bodily life, it is required that our neighbor sustain no hurt by
us or any of ours, as far as we can hinder it, neither he nor his, so as his
life might be made unpleasant, yea though he should provoke us, yet we must
suffer far rather then be angry in our own cause, seem it never so weighty
to us, for that is no better than folly and madness: nay, further, we must be
wise and careful both in words and in deeds, to cut of all occasions, and to
avoid all discord; yea, though it be with departing from some of our right, as
Abraham did, Genesis 13.7. This innocence is accompanied with meekness, patience
and long suffering. Also, he that is harmless, is gentle, tractable, and
soon entreated, peaceable, communicable, and fit to be lived with: but yet
besides the not hurting of men, it is further required that we should do them
good; and indeed our whole course should be such, as that we might make easy
as many men's burdens as we can: to men that are in misery, we must be
pitiful and compassionate; as by showing mercy unto distressed servants and
such like, whom we might oppress, as being not able to resist us; by visiting
the sick, and relieving all that are in need; and finally, we must be
helpefull unto all, to procure and maintain their welfare, so far as
necessity shall require, and our ability can perform. This helpfulnesse has
adjoined unto it mercy and tender compassion, kindheartednesse and goodness,
and such like amiable and commendable virtues.

Secondly, for the spiritual life of our neighbor, we must give good example
of life, we must take all occasions of winning men to God, of confirming them
that are won, of peacemaking, of reconciling such as be at variance, of
observing one another, and provoking to love and good works: and finally, of
instructing, exhorting, admonishing and comforting, and such like duties.

Commandment 7.

After the life of our neighbor in the next place we have charge of his
honesty, or chastity, tha^ by no means it be hurt or attempted by us: for the
better obtaining whereof, it is required that both our minds be kept pure
from unclean lusts, desires, and though^s tending to unchastnesse, and our
bodies in honor, free from all executing of all such unclean desires by any
strange pleasure, which God condemns, and therefore that all the parts of our
body be kept continent as well as the face, eyes, ears, tongue, hands and
feet be carried from such occasions as may lead us thereunto: And this is
commanded both to unmarried and married.

Commandment 8.

Another part of righteous dealing with our neighbor is, that they be not
injured by us in their goods: so that where the case is plain, that any thing
is another man's, we cannot so much as lay claim to it; but God is despised of
us; but if there be a controversy, then in some cases we ought to forgo some
part of our right for peace sake; but if the doubt does arise by the subtilty
of either parthe damage ought to fall on them from whom it came, and if it be
otherwise so difficult, that it cannot betwixt themselves be determined, let
other men of wisdom take it in hand, or at the farthest, if suite of Law
cannot be avoided, let it be prosecuted in love. This must be observed in
general: but there are special duties according to the diverse states of men;
for some are merely poor men, and by God his appointment, do live by alms:
others can in some sort partly maintain themselves, but not without the help
of others, by borrowing of them. And the third sort is able to lend, or to
give, or to do both.

1, For the first sort, they knowing that their poor estate is allotted them
of God, they are to live in it with contentation; which contentedness, will
flow from the assurance of the favor of God in Christ Jesus; they must not
grudge in any sort at the abundance of other men, but acknowledge them as the
instruments and hand of God, whereby he ministers to their nec^ssities, for
the which also they must be thankful, and take encouragement from thence to
live godly and obediently, remembering also, that as much as they be able, and
their bodily infirmities of age, blindness, lamenesse, and such other will
suffer them, that they shun idleness, and all evil and unprofitable passing
the time.

2 For the second sort, they must not borrow without need, as to maintain
themselves in play, or idleness, or simply to make again of it either by
Usury, or by taking more dealing into their hands, than their ability will
serve unto; and when they have lawfully borrowed, they must carefully purpose,
and faithfully endeavor the restoring of that which they have borrowed at the
day appointed, and that with thanks; the contrary whereof, is both a sin
against God, being a kind of theft, and an injury to those that have need to
borrow; for a chief cause of little lending, is evil paying.

3. As touching the third sort, those that are more able, they must regard both
those duties which concern giving and lending, and also those rules of
righteous dealing, which they must follow in getting, increasing and using
their goods, They must give freely and cherefully for charity and conscience
sake, as the necessity of the poor requires, and their ability will give
leave.

They must lend also freely to such a borrower as is before described, not
only for the appointed time; but if necessity urgently requires for further
space, nay, sometimes to the forgiving either of all, or some part of it. That
men may be enabled to this duty, they must be moderate in wastefull expenses
upon themselves, or others, where they need not, neither does any charity bind
them.

In suretie-ship they must not be rash, neither may we be so hard, but to know
and approve Christians, so far as we are able to bear the burden, we may
with good advice be helpefull even in this kind.

Now as for our common dealings, we must first see that our calling be
lawful, then that we deal lawfully in every part of it, that righteousness
may be preserved by us, in buying and selling, hireing and letting, and in
partnership, etc. Care must be had, that one party alone be not regarded, but
indifferency used (as much as may be) for the mutual good of both: and
therefore Usury, wherein the common benefit of both is not regarded, is
altogether unlawful.

Concerning Annuities, they are of two sorts, the one is a yearly sum of money
for years, when the seller has no such Annuitie, but as he hops to make it
by his labor and commodities. The other is a certain revenew, rent, or part
of rent, which he injoyeth, and is willing to forgo it.

The first kind is full of danger, much like forehand bargains about Hoppes,
Corn, etc. which seldom ends without j^rs and controversies, neither ought to
be made, but of those who are both able to bear, and willing to stand to the
uttermost of the hurt which may, befall men; it is not therefore safe for those
that are wise and peaceable, to meddle with this first kind of Annuities.

The second kind is not unlawful, howsoever it may be often abused on the
sellers behalf, by fraudulent and crafty dealing on the behalf of the buyer,
when he takes advantage of the others necessity, and so grinding and griping
him worse than if he had took ten in the hundred; for the redressing whereof,
it is to be known, that the buyer of such an Annuitie, if it be of a rich man,
so as there be plain-dealing, may safely enjoy the benefit which the other
off^reth; but if it be of a poor man, or one that is in debt, he must give
the uttermost value without seeking advantage; a good token whereof he shall
show, if he be willing to release him afterward at his desi e.

Finally, that all may come by and enjoy their right, truth in words, equity in
deeds, and simple meaning in purposes and thoughts, must be firmly and
constantly retained; and where that has not been practiced, full restitution
is to be made.

Commandment 9.

As to the person and goods of our neighbor; so to his name also, there are
many duties belonging.

As that were joyce in our neighbors credit, and sorrow for their infirmities,
to hope with patience for better things, to cover their faults through love, of
whom we have hope, yet not by flattery or dissembling, but by Christian
admonition and rebuke, not to bewray a secret, when it may safely and without
displeasing of God be kept in; for every truth is not always to be uttered,
though all kind of lying and slaundering be at all times to be abhorred; their
faults we must not speak of after any manner, except first we have used all
means that we can to amend them, and then they are with a kind of
unwillingnesse, and loving faithfulness to be opened; only to such as are
likest and fittest to reform them, and not to please our selves therein;
neither to admit of all reports, but those only that have some certainety. We
are farther required to uphold and defend the good name of our neighbor, to
give testimony also unto him by word and writing. And finally, it is our duty
and uprightness of heart and kindness, to interpret all such sayings and
doings as may be well taken in the best part, rather censuring our selves
truly, than others rashly yet not to be foolishly credulous, as to judge well
of them which give open testimony of their badde and profane hearts.

Commandment 10.

The last part of duty toward our neighbor, is to acquaint our hears with
the thoughts and desires of his good; or whatsoever we are in the five former
commanded to perform to him, the same by virtue of this we ought to wish,
desire, and delight in; and the contrary lustings must be cast up and avoided
of us. This duty (though it be little regarded of the most) ought to find the
more care in us for the perfomance of it, because that the well regarding of
this will make us the better able to serve our neighbor in all the rest.

Hitherto of the duties of holiness and righteousness: to which if we add
those of sobriety, which concern our selves, viz. that we moderate our
affections in the use of lawful liberties, so that we serve not them, but they
us, that we may serve God the better, we shall have all things necessary to
a godly life: from hence we may fetch light to show us the way, and matter to
season our hearts and lives, when we wax empty, barren, and forgetful.

Here for avoiding of error, we are to know, that this godly life described,
the fruits of repentance, and the living by faith, are but so many sundry
manners of speech wherein the Scriptures do lay forth the life of the
righteous, or a Christian conversation: for the bringing forth of the fruits
of amendment, or of repentance, is nothing else but for the person who is
assured of Salvation through the forgiveness of his sins, to turn unto the
Lord, and to come under his government, from the power of Satan, and sin,
and in full purpose of heart to labor to be reformed from day to day more and
more.

A godly conversation is even the same, viz. an endeavoring to live after the
word of God, which teaches us to believe, that he will enable us thereunto,
and bless us therein. So also living by faith, is no other but relying upon
the word of God, with full purpose to be guided by it, either by resting upon
his promises, or obeying his commandments: which life of faith, is a most
glorious and rich prerogative: for by this we are confident, and rest quiet
about our Salvation from time to time: by this we walk in newness of life in
all the parts of it; by it we are assured in our prayers to be preserved, to
have the rage of our strong lusts weakened: by this we are delivered from many
sharp and bitter afflictions, and have grace to bear the rest with great
meekness and patience; by it we go through our callings more easily. And
finally, we attain to that quiet estate and sweet peace, which the carnal
wisdom of man shall never find nor enjoy: without this, any life is most
miserable.

HAving after a sort declared what the Christians or believers life is; it
follows to show some reasons, why the believer should lead his life thus.

First, there is great cause why this should be sought for; because by this God
is highly glorified: for if he be honored by the conversion of a sinner, then
much more by his life afterward. It was a great part of Salomons honor, that
he gave silver as stones, and goodly Cedars as the wild Fig Trees: this must
needs be a great honor to God, when he gives graces and possessions, which
neither silver nor gold can purchase, and an habitation that neither Cedar nor
Almond-tree can make resemblance of; this honor the Lord has in all ages from
the outward conversation of his servants; and yet their best things are within,
and cannot be seen of men, 1 Pet. 2.12.

2 Another reason why men should with full resolution, address them selves to
pass the time of their dwelling here with reverence and fear, is, the good
that comes unto themselves by it, and the danger which they are in without it,
Prove. 2.10. for he that has set himself to seek the Lord, and is willingly
weaned from unlawful liberties, and has made his pastime to be well occupied,
he is always safe; whereas for want of this, many fall where they little
feared; for it is not enough that we purpose no wickedness nor evil, but we
must be strongly armed always with full purpose against it, especially that
whereto we are most prone, and wherein we have had by woeful trialls,
experience of our weakness; for while we do commit none, yet we make a way
for it to enter into us afresh, while we become secure and improvident.

This is manifestly to be seen in the example of Peter, of the Prophet of
Bethel, of Judah, who did all purpose well in general, yet not fearing their
frailety, nor arming themselves against the same, they were soon overtaken.

3 This also may move us, that no exercise of Religion nor godly means of the
best sort can do them any good, who will not resolve themselves to come to this
faithful practice of a godly life? This is exemplified sufficiently in the
Jews practice, and proved in the Prophets complaints; experience also does
witness the same; for we see many frequent the exercises of Religion, who
because they propound not with themselves, to be cast into the mould of holy
Doctrine, and to be fashioned after it in their lives, do get rather harm
than good: whereas others at the same time, using the same means, do receive
much blessing from God thereby, such woe it is that profaneness of life
brings with it.

This is not spoken for the discouragement of any, that they should give over
the use of any good means, but to stir us up all for to seek the true fruit
of them; for Gods dear children when they grow careless, loose the fruit of
good exercise, when they wax weary of reverent attending upon God (as all good
things the flesh does soon turn to weariness) and begin after the manner of
men (with whom they live) to seek their unlawful liberty some way, not being
circumspect enough about the keeping of the best things in price and
estimation; the Lord seeing this, takes from them the privileges which they
enjoyed before, he dimmeth the light of their minds, that they see not so
clearly, shuts up their hearts that they delight not in the matters which
were wont to be of greatest account and reckoning with them. By all which it
may appear, that much more they that worship him with unclean hearts, never
washed and purged, cannot receive into them the sweet and wholesome liquour of
his grace, by what outward exercises soever they present themselves before him:
and if this be the state of many who draw near unto God outwardly; how
fearful then is their condition, who neither hear his word, nor are
acquainted with his ways at all?

NOw because this straight course is not easily yielded unto, therefore some
things are objected against it, which must be answered.

This life cannot be led,

It may seem so indeed, else being driven back, some complain of much
tediousness, and strong discouragements, fearful doubtings, and small
comfort in it; diverse others account it a mopish life. But for the Answer of
all this, we are to know, that this Christian life, consisting not in some
good actions, but in the keeping of our hearts sincere, and uprightly bent to
walk with the Lord in all his Commandments throughout our whole course,
according to our knowledge, is not only possible, but required, as the Prophet
shows, Ps. 1.2. and 119.9.97, 98. where he teaches, that he which is happy
and godly indeed, endevoreth to this, that his mind may delight in, and be
possessed of good matters, or rightly using lawful, or carefully resisting
those which are sinful, Phil. 3.20. The example also of Enoch, Abraham, Job,
Moses, David, with other godly men, who were not without their infirmities no
more than we, do show the possibility of this life; neither is it a state
unpleasant to the spiritual man, whom the holy Ghost directs, but easy,
sweet, and comfortable, though it be a yoke to the corrupt lusts not yet
subdued: for as every one excels another in the graces of the spirit,
thereafter is his measure greater in the privileges of a Christian than others,
and with more sound and continual comfort does he pass his days, and free
his life from reproachful evils; and the more that any godly man increases
in goodness, and goes beyond that estate wherein he has sometimes bin in
knowledge and high estimation of it, and the right use of the same, the more
shall his life be filled with matter of sound and pure rejoicing.

Howsoever there were some in the time of those forefathers,

Although the life of the most be indeed v^ry loathsome, yet their ^re so many
godly lights amongst us,) the Lord multiply the number of them, and the graces
which he^ has given them, a thousand fold, and be highly praised for them)
with whom to live, is next to heaven it self. They do not only not faint or
give over but grow from untowardnesse to Gods service, to a holy cheerfulness
and delight in the same, which growth is seen also in the duties to men as
well as to God. These howsoever they be but few, in respect of them who set
themselves to uphold the corrupt estate that the world has ever lien in; yet
some such, God has set amongst us, to far more great and singular purposes,
than many carnal eyes can see or discern: we must therefore be wise to
discern them, ready to love their persons, and to reverence those precious
things that are in them, and by frequenting their companies, learn to imitate
their virtues.

You that urge this strict kind of life, do go to far, David, Peter, etc.
It is good for all to profess no worse than others do, and so their falls
shall not be so much wondered at.

By the grace of God, us; his truth remains for ever: the true worsh^ppers of
God must depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. As for the fall of David, Peter,
etc. They arise from security, and the want of this watchful course which is
urged, and therefore should be motives unto us, the more carefully to look to
our selves, lest we also be overtaken.

Men cannot now live otherwise than they have done, especially after this
manner; so that neither husband nor wife, nor one neighbor with another can be
merry together.

As for change of estate, there is no cause why we should fear, or be
unwilling to change for the better: as for delights, there are none more sweet,
than those which have ground in Religion: but those that cannot stand with a
godly life, let them, in the name of God, be broken off, for they may as well
be spared as the paring of our nails, and therefore not sufficient to justle
out a godly life, from the practice of any true Christian and Believer.

THe Christians life being thus described; now because it is upholden by
means, it is fit to know what these means are, and how they may be used
aright.

These means are such religious exercises, whereby Christians may be made fit
to practice a godly life. They are partly ordinary, and partly extraordinary;
and both of these either public, or private. The public, are such as be used
in our open assemblies: ordinarily these are three.

First, the Ministry of the Word.

Secondly, the administration of the Sacraments.

Thirdly, the exercise of prayer, with thankesgiving and singing of Psalms.

Of private, some are to be used alone by our selves, as watchfulness,
meditation, and the Armor of a Christian, with experience. Some are to be used
with others, as society of conference, and Family-exercises; some are common to
both, as prayer and reading.

THe first and principal is the Word of God, read, Preached, and heard, as the
Lord prescribes. That this is a singular help, we may see, if we consider
the truth, authority, sufficiency, and plainness (through the Ministry and
translations) which is in the Scripture.

To speak therefore nothing of the benefit which it brings unto the
unregenerate, unto whom it is of might to convert them. The uses are many and
daily which the regenerate people of God have by it.

First, by it they are cleared from error and darkness, about Religion and
manners, and are made more sound in the knowledge of the truth, and see more
particularly into the way and whole course of Christianity.

2. They grow settled and established in their knowledge from day to day.

3. They are by this quickened in their drowsinesse, cheered in their
heaviness, called back from their wanderings, raised up when they are fallen,
and counseled in their doubtful cases of advice.

4. They are by it settled in a godly course, and taught to keep well when they
are well, rather than to be fickle and inconstant in good carriage of
themselves, as many are. For by it, as by a Sun that gives light in all
places, they espy their weakness, and how they are holden back when they are
fallen, and which is the right way of proceeding: By it, as by a rule, they are
taught to frame all their actions.

5. They are brought to bestow some time in pofitable reading.

6. They are framed so, as they become lights and examples to others: so that
we may boldly conclude, that the ordinary preaching of the Word, is a singular
means provided for the perfecting of Gods Elect, and for their growing in a
Christian life. And whosoever lives where there is a good order of teaching
with diligence, skill, love, and plainness; if he find not this fruit by it,
it is because he is not attenti^ and reverent in hearing, he is not prepared
before to hear, or else does not apply unto himself, nor willingly digest
that which he has heard; but is surfeited of some dangerous qualities in his
life, or corruptions in his heart; among which, this is a special one among
the people, that as they think of the person that teaches, so they do of his
Doctrine, and not otherwise.

AS for the Sacraments, they are helps necessarily adjoined unto the former;
for they do visibly confirm and ratify that which the Word does teach, and
the covenant betwixt God and the believer made, is most surely sealed up and
effectually on both parties by them.

First, the Lord for his part has granted to every faithful person, that he
will never call his sins to a reckoning, but will be his God, and love him to
the end through Christ; for the ratifying whereof, he has put to his seal:
so that the Sacraments must needs remain effectual to the faithful, both for
the strengthening of his faith in the promise, and also for removing of all
contrary doubts which through weakness might arise. So on the other part,
every believer for his own part has covenanted, to trust in God always, to
endeavor to walk before him conscionably, in righteousness of heart and
innocence of hands.

Now of the truth of his heart, the Sacrament is a sign; which he having
received, has openly professed thereby, that he has given and consecrated
himself unto the Lord, and is now no more his own to live as his carnal will
would desire; so that either the present receiving, or the fresh remembrance of
this, does spur him forwards to keep his covenant, and encourage him against
temptations, wearisomnesse, and all hindrances, especially believing, that
strength in measure shall be given him of God to perform that which he has
promised and sealed. By all which we may see, that howsoever the Sacraments be
unto the unbelievers, even as a mystery or hidden thing, yet the believer
having been soundly instructed therein, beholds much, both for the
strengthening of his faith, and his encouragement in a godly life.

First, this may be seen particularly in the two Sacraments: for the faithful
Christian which has been baptized, as he by his ingraffing into Christ, is
one with him; and therefore while Christ lives, must live also: so he having
thereby prepared union and fellowship with him, does draw strength and grace
from him, even as the branch from the Vine, viz. The power of his death for the
mortifying of sin, and the virtue of his resurrection in raising him up to
newness of life. So that Baptism throughout his life, must needs be a
forcible means to help him forward in a Christian course, as often as he does
duly consider it.

2. Likewise that the Lords Supper is an excellent help, we may see in three
specialties: viz.

1. In the preparation to it.

2. In the present use of it.

3. In the time which follows after.

1. The first consists in the trial, that every man ought to take of
himself, concerning his knowledge both general and particular, his faith in
Gods promises, his diligent endeavor for the removing and subduing of all
sin, and for readiness in any duty, his love toward all men: and lastly,
concerning his hungring after this Sacrament, and the benefit which God
offers by it.

These properties if he find to be in himself, he is a fit and welcome
guest to the Lords Table; but if through sloth, forgetfulness, darkness,
corruption and weakness, these graces be weakened, dimmed, and decayed, he may
not rashly put forth himself in that case, but speedily seek to recover
himself again, by searching the ground and serious renewing of his faith and
repentance. Which things being so; it cannot be but that this kind of
preparation must be a singular help to those that enjoy it.

So likewise at the Supper it self, where he may, and ought to meditate on
the dainties of the banquet, and the love of him that ordained it; on the
Communion he has with Christ, and his graces; and on the outward signs what
they assure him of; and on the Word preached, which shows him all this. When
as by the applying of these things he comes to be comforted and made glad, or
rather to be revived and quickened in his soul with the spiritual dainties
which by true faith he feeds upon; how can he but praise and bless the
author of this banquet? how can he but be much heartned and set forward in a
Christian course? It is also of the same force after the receiving of it,
(where right use is made of it according to Gods appointment) through the
remembrance and due consideration of the kindness of God therein offered and
reaped, easily to carry on the servant of God in a fervent desire of all well
doing, be heartened and strengthened thereunto, even as a man well refreshed
with meat is made strong to labor: so that he which is not made more able to
conquer his lusts, and weaken the strength of sin, and is not more heartened
to the life of godliness by these Sacraments, does abuse them, and sees not
Gods purpose in ordaining them.

THe public prayers solemnly offered to God in the Congregation, and praising
of him with Psalms, is another of these public helps: for when besides our
own private supplications and thankesgiving, we have by the Lord himself
appointed these also in public, and that in so solemn a manner, the whole
assembly consenting with us in the same, and God present among us to assist us,
as he will, because the very ordinance of God does promise a blessing thereto,
as often as we are partakers of them, so that if we come with reverence,
feeling our wants, earnestly desiring and trusting to obtain the things we
pray for, together with true repentance, we shall receive fruit of them
accordingly, even that good refreshing, whereby in private we shall be more
cheerfully bent to serve him.

So that neither any prejudicate opinion concerning the Ministers person
(though he be dumb, or otherwise offensive) nor yet any rash judgment of
reading a set form of prayer, or any thing of the like kind, ought to hinder
us from these public duties; neither ought the private helps to be neglected
of us upon any pretense, without the which the public are but cold.

THe first private help is watchfulness: which is a careful observing of our
hearts, Prove. 4.25. Diligent looking to our ways, Psalm. 39.1. that they may be
pleasing and acceptable to God. The necessity of this help may appear many
ways, for without this, sobriety is lost, 1 Pet. 5.7. and the force of our
prayers abated, Matthew. 26.1. and for want of this (as experience shows) many
Christians are not acquainted with a well ordered and settled course, but out
and in, off and on, never stayed; and because of the contrary carelessness and
security, many, not evil men are plunged into sundry noisome temptations,
find many wounds in their souls, and want many comforts in their lives; so
that some are as untrusty as Gehazi, some as hasty, furious, and unsociable as
Nabal was.

The manner of this watchfulness is set down by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.5. to
be in all things, and at all times, and by all occasions, in all places, with
all persons, and that constantly, so long as we be in danger of temptation,
Mark 13.33.

All of us therefore that desire ^o walk with God in peace, must go about this
duty to purpose, and set our minds and delight upon it; our evil lusts,
wherewith we be full fraught, do carry us headlong into sundry iniquities, in
so much that we can go about nothing but we may feel (if we can discern)
that some one or other of them is in our way to hurt us, and at hand to molest
and disquiet us: if we be occupied in spiritual duties, we have shame and
hypocrisy on the one side to hinder us; dullness, weariness, untowardnes,
etc. on the other side to break us off. In things lawful, we are secure and
careless what the manner or end be: in evil, we have eyes open to see the
seeming pleasure or profit they promise, and reason to extenuate the danger;
but we have no ears to receive the strongest disswasions that can be brought.
We therefore must be kilfull to know these disordered lusts diligent to espy,
prevent, and avoid them; we must abstain and weane our selves from that which
our hearts would naturally desire most, 1 Pet. 2.10. we must not dally with
the baits of sins, we must not be so bold as to venture upon all companies,
to fall into any talk, or to take liberty in any desires without respect. And
unto this care we must add prayer, as that which does quicken and put life to
it, so that it may be continued with much cheerfulness and little
tediousness.

It is further also to be marked, that because the servants of God have some
special infirmities wherewith they find themselves more troubled than with
any other, they must be most suspicious of, and vigilant against them: and
where they see Satan most likely to wind in himself, there they must carry a
more narrow and straight eye, avoiding the least occasion that tends that way,
and bestowing more time and labor in the rooting out of these corruptions,
from the which most danger may be feared. As in troubles we must watch against
impatience; in prosperity, against wantonness, because these are likest to
ensue; and when we have broke out of our constant course a little, and that
our conscience begins to check us, then we must tremble to think of it,
return speedily again, and we must fear after, lest we should offend.

This may seem unto many to be too strict, that our hearts may not range where
they list, nor our delights be fastened where we please, but that all powers
of our minds and members of our bodies must be holden within compass. But unto
those who are acquainted with it, and see what safe peace, and sweet joy it
brings to their life, it is no tedious bondage, but a spiritual and heavenly
liberty. On the other side, those that will not be persuaded to entertain it,
they must look to live destitute of a chief part of godliness; or if it be
but now and then in some especial actions and parts of our life regarded and
looked unto, it will make the godly life in great part to be bereaved of her
gain and beauty.

The second private help is Meditation; and that is when we do of purpose
separate our selves from all other things, and consider as we are able, and
think of some points of instruction necessary to lead us forward to the
kingdom of Heaven, and the better strengthening us against the Devil, and
this present evil World; and to the well-ordering of our lives. This heavenly
communion with God and our selves, is that which the Fathers called their
Soliloquies: which must be distinguished from the ordinary thinking of good
things, and pondring of words and actions, which yet in the Scripture is called
meditation, Josh. 1.8 Psalm 119.97. for that ought never to be wanting, being a
part of watchfulness, and is exercised together with prayer; but this is more
solemn, when a man of set purpose does separate himself from other business,
to solace himself in these holy and heavenly thoughts.

The matter of this our meditation may be on any part of Gods Word, of God
himself, on his works of mercy and judgment, of our own estate, of the
vanity and misery of this world, and of the manifold privileges which we with
the rest of Gods children enjoy: but especially of those things which we have
most especial need of.

The great and necessary use of this duty, may well appear even in the heart
of good Christians, in which there is much naughtiness; so many rebellions,
and loathsome filthiness, that it makes some despair of r^forming it, and
therefore they cease to endeav^ur it; yet if such noisome poisons be suffered
to lurk and remain in them, they will not only as sower weeds choke the
plants of grace within us, but also grow up themselves, and bring forth most
noisome and dangerous fruit, as by woeful experience men feel and try. Now for
the weeding of these out of the ground of our hearts, there is no means so
availeable, as the considering often, and deep meditating: viz. to find out
what swarms of them do lodge in our hearts; also to bring them into a vile
account, to be weary and ashamed of them, and so to entertain better in their
room: for although by the Word we know our corruption, by conference we
revive the remembrance of them, and by reading we do both; yet all this will
be but of small force, except they be joined and seasoned with meditation. For
our hearts are so deceitful, that if once we can but commend that which is
good, and speak against evil, we are ready to think that our estate is right
mavelous good; whereas yet, if there be not in the heart a hatred of the one,
and love of the other, we do but deceive our selves. Now, when we do often
gage these hearts of ours, and sift our thoughts, and deal truly (in accusing
or excusing) as we love our souls; though we find sin to sit near and
fast glued, yet by Gods assistance and blessing we shall break off and chase
away these cursed swarms of profane thoughts and desires; we shall become
better armed against them afterward, and our heart being thus mollified, and
relenting, we shall furnish them more graciously with holy thoughts, and
heavenly desires, and draw them into more near and heavenly communion with our
God; taking heed of the sugared baits of earthly delights, and transitory
pleasures of this world. In sum, the fruit and benefit which by our
meditation and private prayer we reap, is so great (the Spirit of God
changing our hearts thereby from their daily course and custom more and more,
and bringing the heavenly life into more liking with us, and making it more
easy and sweet which with the men of this world is so irksome and unsavory)
that none can express and conceive it, but he which has felt the same.
Therefore it is that the men of God, who are most commended for their piety,
both of old, as Moses, David, Paul, etc. and in our times also, are most taken
up of this exercise; and others that are strangers to it, though they be good
Christians, want much fruit which by it they may reap.

The lets which are enemies to this duty, they are of two sorts; for either
they are such which hinder men altogether from going about it, or else such as
keep them from taking any good thereby when they enter into it. Of the former
sort there are three.

1. The first is when a Christian knowing this duty to be required of him,
goes about it but he is so empty and barren that he has no matter to bestow
the time and his cogitations about. Now for the remedy of this, there shall be
rules and examples set down hereafter: but in general, it shall be expedient
for him to propound unto this his meditation these four things.

1. First, of his unworthiness, vileness, sins and corruptions

2. Secondly, the greatness of Gods bounty in his deliverance.

3. Thirdly, how he may be guided throughout that present day, according to the
rules of direction, especially in the hardest points.

4. Fourthly, of the several parts of the Christian armor which God has
appointed for his strengthening.

2. The second impediment of this sort, is an unfit mind unto spiritual and
heavenly duties, through some unsetlednesse, slothfulness, or other
corruptions.

Now the best remedy for such a one, is to meditate of his present unfitness,
looseness of heart, and earthly-mindednesse to count it an heavy burden to
accuse his heart, and so to bring it to relenting, by considering how far off
it is presently from that mildness, humbleness, heavenlinesse, and readinsse
unto duties which have been in him at some other times: but let no man give
any liberty in any sort to his evil heart, when it is turned away from
cheerfulness and willingness in any part of Gods service to go forward
therein, for that were to bring him to utter bondage.

3. The third let is, want of opportunity by reason of necessary business
taking up the time; or for want of convenient place, as it falls out to
seamen, and those that have small and poor houses: concerning which, it is
not to be denied but that there may sometime fall out such business as may
excuse us in the omission of this duty; and this must be remembered that the
ordinary duties of our callings must not put this duty out of place, for if
they do, it is through unskilfulnsse, or untowardnesse of them who commit this
fault: one of them is appointed of God to go with the other, and both of them
stand together in upholding of their inward peace. If any man be rich, he has
the less cause to be holden from it by worldly care; if they be poor, they
have the more need of it to moderate their care, that it exceed not, nor carry
them to unbelief: but if any intend, or pretend extraordinary business, they
must take heed that they seek not cloakes for their sloth: yet if any have
necessary lets indeed, hereby they shall appear to be fruitless if at any
time God be remembered some other way as shall be most convenient, and this duty
supplied when the hinderance is past.

Of the second sort of lets which may be called abuses, there be especially two.

1. The first is to use it slightly, and so to make a ceremony of it: the
remedy whereof is to hold our minds with taking delight in it; for this, and
all other good helps will be unsavory unto us, except we should fasten a
love and liking on them.

2. The second is when although we be desirous to use meditation, yet our heads
are so full of trifling and wandering fantasies, or worldly matters, that we
cannot mind heavenly things: the cause of this is the letting loose of our
hearts all the day disorderly, without watching over them, or keeping them
within an holy compass. For the remedying of it, we must therefore carefully
set our selves against the corruptions of our hearts, laboring to dry up those
swimming toies with the flame of heavenly and fervent affections; we must tie
up our loose hearts throughout the day from their deadly custom of ranging
after vain, fond, and deceitful thoughts, dreams and delights; this
whosoever does or not at all, or seldom, or coldly, they lose a great p^rt of
their sweet and blessed living here, not enjoying the tenth p^rt of those
privileges and liberties, which God has provided for them in their Pilgrim^g^.

The Rules of direction in meditating be these.

1. He who desires to have help by meditation, must weigh how slippery,
fickle, and wandering his heart is infinite ways to his exceeding hurt; and
that he must of necessity appoint some set time to check, reclaim, and weane
it from the same, Ierem. 17.9. Psalm. 55.17.

2. He must watch over his heart (having been so often deceived by it through
his whole life) and have it in suspicion, that so it may be more fit to be
drawn to such heavenly exercises, and attend unto the same.

3. This being observed, let him draw matter of meditation and prayer from his
own wants and infirmities, from Gods benefits, from the changes and mortality
of this life, etc. especially of that which is most availeable for this present.

4. If he cannot do that, let him read some part of the Scripture, or other
book fit to season and well affect his mind, that so his mind may be
quickened to the performance of this duty.

Particular meditation concerning duties to be practiced.

No man shall be fit to govern himself aright before men, if he do not
usually acquaint himself with, and frame himself after that Christian course,
first before God. Yet no man must rest in private exercises of Religion without
a wel-ordered life before men. Every part of our calling must be so carried, as
we may have peace thereby; if a man be fallen, he must not lie still, Ier.
8.6. but return unto God, though with difficulty, Exodus 33.8. the breach must
be made up in our consciences; which if we do, God is not far off, 1 Samuel
7.7.10.12.22.

If we rejoice only in prosperity, it is a sign that Gods benefits, not his
favor, makes us merry. It is a good thing to rejoice in the Sabbaths, and in
the communion of Saints; yet we may not rest there, but in this, that God is
our portion always, Psalm. 110.57. 2 Cor. 5.16.

In crosses we must use great sobriety, otherwise we shall be unsettled by
them; to this end we must prepare and look for trouble before it come, and in
it we must meditate of the best privilege that God has given unto us, 1 Samuel
30.6. Psalm. 77.

We seldom keep unlawful commodities, or rejoice too much in lawful, but
the Lord does cross us in them. The most vexations in our life become
annoyances unto us through our own default; in that, we either prevent them
not when we may, or bear them not as we ought, or make not use of them as we
might do. When matters of more importancee than our Salvation is come in
place, let us be occupied in them with more fervency than in that: but not
before. The practice of godliness is a rich and gainful trade, Prove. 3.14.
but if it be not well followed, it will bring no great profit. To have a
willing mind to be well occupied, and matter about which we may, and time to
bestow therein, and freedom from lets therefrom, is an estate much to be made
of; and yet for the most part, they which have almost all outward
encouragements, cannot tell what to do with them.

Whatsoever measure of graces we have gotten, yet it is certain, that God
has much more for us than we can think of, if those be the matters which we
have in greatest price; but being set light by, and the means neglected which
preserve them, they die. That is a good estate, when we have not only joy in
heavenly things at the first hearing of them, but increasing in joy, as our
knowledge and experience increases; and when we are not only delighted in
these present duties of Gods service, but also as joyful to think of them
which are to come, accounting that the more they be, the better they are. The
more sure thou art of God his favor by faith, the more humble thou art also,
Matthew. 15.27.

They are worthy of great punishment who set light by the plenty of that grace,
the crummes whereof Gods hungry servants do s^t great store by. When we are
affl^cted, and the wicked spared, our estate seems to them most vile; when we
are both in prosperity, they seem more happy; when they and we be both
afflict^d, then they account our estate happier than their own, but especially
when they are afflicted, and we spared, Evod. 14 25.

We may not assign the Lord, in what place, state, condition, or in what
company we would live, but as strangers wait on him, even as the handmaid on
her Mistress, for whatsoever he will allow us: we are ready most commonly to
be called away by death, before we be fit, or have learned how to live. Look
what care, conscience, zeal, love, and reverence, estimation of good things,
thou had when first thou embraced'st the Gospel; the same at least
retain, and be sure thou keep still afterward. The more knowledge that
thou have, take heed thou be not more secure; for thus it is with many at
this day, who therefore do smart for it.

We shall not enjoy the grace which we had at the first, except we be
careful now to keep it, as we were then to come by it.

Keep down carnal liberty, and the spiritual liberty shall be great, and
rest on God, and it shall make thee overcome the hardest things.

We must remember to serve and walk with God by days, not by weeks and
months only, Psalm. 90.12.

As Husbandmen wait for their fruits, so should we for that which we pray and
hope for; and that would make us joyful when we obtain it.

If we can rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, then are we Christ his
friends, Luke 15.6.

It is a folly, yea, a madness, to be heavy to the death for any earthly
thing, when yet a man desires nothing more than life

All our life ought to be a providing for a good end, and a keeping away of woe
which comes by sin.

The flesh would feign please it self in some unlawful liberties, when we
have pleased God in some duties; but a wise man will keep well when he is
well. The more grace we perceive in any man, and constancy, the more he is
like to God, the better we ought to love him, Ioh. 13.23. Psalm. 15.4.

Where there is wilfulness in sinning, there is great difficulty in relenting,
and also no power nor boldness in believing. Many beginning well in godliness
have fainted and quailed, or been justly reproached before their end, that
others may the more fear their own weakness: where new knowledge is not
sought, there is the less favor in the use of the old; and when men make not
good use of the old, the seeking of the new is but noveltie.

Men having experience of Satan's malice and continual dogging of them to do
evil, it should teach them to trust better in their armor, and less to
themselves.

Where we suspect that corruptions grow, if we go not about to pull them out,
and pluck them up, they will be too deeply fastened in a short time.

Though man pray and meditate, and keep a better course in his life than some
do, yet if he do it but slightly, that the flesh prevails much in
hindering the well-performing of it, all will soon come to naught; it may be
perceived in the sway it bears in other parts of the life, and then let it be
speedily amended.

It is good so to taste our selves with duties, one or other, at all times, and
in all places, that so doing, we may cut off occasions of much sin.

Let no sin be slightly passed over or omitted, for when it comes to
remembrance in trouble, it will be an heavy burden, and pinch us to the heart.

THe third private help is the armor of a Christian: concerning which four
points are fit to be known.

1. First, what it is, and which be the chief parts of it.

It is that spiritual furniture of the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, by
which God does deliver his from all adversary power, and bring them to the
obedience of his will, 2 Cor. 10.4. the parts are set down, Ephesians. 6.14.

1 Whereof the first is since^ity, which is the general grace, whereby a
Christian is made simple, and without fraud, or hypocrisy bearing sway in him,
both toward God and his neighbor, Psalm. 32 2. Matthew. 5.8. Pro. 30.6.

2 The second is righteousness; which is that gift of the Spirit, whereby our
hearts are bent to all manner of goodness, and righteous dealing, approving of
it as most excellent, desiring fervently, and delighting in it, and that
because it is good, and d^sliking, and hating of all naughtiness and evil,
Pro. 28.1. Psalm. 1.7.

3 The third is the shoes of peace, which is, that having received the
Gospel, and found the sweetness of it, we are now thereby as they who are
ready to take a journey shod and prepared, ready to deny our selves, and to
take up our cross and follow Christ, through this our pilgrimage, Romans 5.1.
Luke 22.33.57. Phil. 4 7. Ioh. 16.33.

4 The fourth is the shield of faith: which is to build our perwasion on God
his faithful promises, that Christ Jesus is ours: and that God has given him
to us, to obtain forgiveness of our sins, and salvation by him, yea, and all
other good things also meet for this present life, Colos. 1.33.

5 The fifth his hope, which is a joyful longing, and steadfast desire and
looking for the performing and accomplishing of all those mercies, temporal
and eternal, which God has promised, and we by faith are assured of, Luke
2.30. Pet. 1.13.

6 The sixth is the sword of the Spirit, which is to be well instructed in the
sound and living knowledge of the Scriptures, and to digest the same, and also
season our understanding within us: in such wise that we may know the will of
God, and have the same in remembrance in the things which most concern us, (as
we can:) that thereby we may at all times, and in all cases, be readily led by
it, Psalm. 119.105. Where it is to be remembered, that he which has most
knowledge, if he be not guided by that he understands, he knows nothing
as he ought, 1 Cor. 3.18. Prove. 3.6. Ioh. 13.17.

THe second general point is the necessity of this armor, viz. that we
should cloth and furnish our souls, with every part of it: which is so great,
that the right Christian life cannot stand without it: for to venture upon the
manifold tribulations of this life without the shoes of preparation, is as
much as to go barefoot among thorns, or to run naked upon the pikes.

To be destitute of this shield of faith, is the undoubted way either to
despair utterly, or else in deadly presumption and security, to drown our
selves in perdition.

To leave off the breast plate of righteousness, is to expose himself into the
danger of every temptation; for he that does not from time to time afresh
indent with his heart against all unrighteousness, he may look to be carried
into those unlawful actions which shall bring disgace to himself, and his
holy profession also, 1 Cor. 6.4.5.

He that has not the sword of Gods Spirit, so that he be able to say in
temptations, it is written to the contrary, shall never be able to cut in
sunder those bonds of sin, wherewith he shall be compassed.

He that has not all these girded to him, with sincerity and truth, shall but
deceive himself and others also.

He that has not true hope of salvation, to keep life in his soul, how can
he be void of fainting, irkesomnesse, heaviness, distraction, dumpishnesse,
and sundry such discouragements? Or how can he have any cheereful^esse in his
life, or contentedness, that has not this hope of passing his afflicting
days, under the wings of God his protection?

So that we may well affirm, without this complete armor of God, that the
Christian life cannot be continued.

THe third point is, how this Armor should be put on. For the answer whereof
we are to know, that it is not wholly wanting in any true Christian: for every
true believer at his first conversion, is made partaker (though in weak
measure) of all things appertaining to life and godliness, 1 Pet. 1.4.

What then means the Apostle when he bids us put on this armor? His
meaning is, that we should not have it as men in the time of peace have their
bodily armor hanging by them, unfit f^r use; but as soldiers have theirs in
battle, we must be sure, that in all places, and upon all occasions, we have
it with us so far as we are able, we must lie down, and rise up with it;
because our battle lasts all our life long, and our enemies be deadly, and
all our strength is by our armor.

Now to put on, and also to keep on, and to have the feeling of every part of
this armor, (faith against distrust, hope against fainting, uprightness
against hypocrisy; knowledge against the deceitfulness of sin;
righteousness, against all kind of iniquity, and the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, against crosses) to have, I say, this armor in a readiness,
we must use continual watching, hearty prayer, and frequent meditation about
them, Matthew. 26.4.

Here is to be observed, that the sword of the Spirit has two branches, viz.
that knowledge which we get out of the letter of the Scripture only, and so
have it but by rule: and the knowledge which we learn by proof and trial
for the bettering of us: for as in all trades and sciences there is great
difference betwixt the experimental knowledge of them, and bare or naked skill
of them; so is there great distance betwixt one that has only attained so
much knowledge as will enable him to give account of his faith, and him who
has had the proof of this knowledge, how it has been effectual in him. He
considers, observes, and applies the things which he hears, sees, and
does, to his own use: and by things past thus duly regarded, he learneth and
gets wisdom to advise and guide him for the present, and for the time to
come.

This is experience, which makes us wise in all things that are profitable to
godliness and eternal life.

The observation of the reward of evil will make us avoid it; and experience
of the fruit of a godly life, is the best mean to continue it: our own trial
how affl^ctions may be easeliest borne, and come to best end, is our best rule
for ever after. The example we have in David, Psalm. 120.1. 1 Samuel 17. 34.
Psalm. 77.10. Psalm. 37.37.

In sum, as in all Trades the beginning is hardest, and experience brings
facility; so it is in the practice of Christianity. Woeful therefore it is,
that in this, of all other, men will not labor for experience.

4. The fourth general fruit is, the benefit of this armor, which is not
small, for he that puts it on, and goes clothed with it through the day,
though the Devil, and his instruments, do assault by craft and deceit, or by
force and might, he shall mightily prevail against them, and preserve
himself; he shall be able to live with comfort in all estates that God shall
set him in, and in all places which he shall bring him to; and change by no
occasions, but hold out until an end be made of all difficulties and
uncertainties.



It is true indeed,

At least it is not expedient to impose so heavy a burden upon weak
Christians.

The child of God is no sooner borne,

NOw to come to those helps, either by our selves alone, or others also (for
the other kind shall have another place) these are prayer and reading. First
of Prayer.

Prayer is a cal^ing upon God accordling to his will; it has two parts,
Thankesgiving and Request, whereunto is added the Confession of sins.
Thankesgiving is that part of Prayer, in which we being comforted by some
benefit, which in favor God bestows upon us, are drawn to love and praise
him, and show forth the fruits thereof.

In this direction, there are to be observed three things, and three motives
unto them.

1. The first motive is knowledge and due consideration of some particular
benefit received or promised us, 1 Samuel 25.32. Genesis 24.27. Luke 17.15. Without
these three can be no true and hearty thankesgiving, howsoever in words there
be a protestation for fashion sake.

2. The second is joy and gladness of heart, for the benefit which we think
of, or call to mind, Psalm. 126.1.2. Except we find this sweetness in the
mercies, no duty of thanks c^n in good sort be performed by them.

3. The third, is a persuasion, that the benefit for which we give thanks,
comes to us from God his fatherly love.

This is a far greater cause of gladness than the benefit it self, Psalm.
116.5.

1. The first duty is a continu^nce of our love to God, Ps. 126.1.

2. The second is a desire to set ^orth his glory, and in words to ^rofesse and
confess his good^^sse; for if we love the Lord, we cannot but be carried with
this ^ervent desire, to advance and mag^ifie him, Psalm. 116.12. and 111.

3. The third is a further pro^eeding in obedience and walking worthy his
kindness: this one if it be wanting from the rest, makes them all lame, and
maimed, and as odious to God as the mortlings which were offered to him in
sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 6.10.11. Psalm. 50.16.

If in this manner we should frame our selves to thankfulness, it must
needs be a mighty and forcible means to mollify the hard heart, and to hold
under the strudy corruptions of it, so that they may be subject to God; yea,
even when strong provocations do draw to the contrary.

Thus much of Thankesgiving: Now for Confession. Conf^ssion is an
acknowledg^ment of our selves to be guilty, and worthily to have deserved Gods
wrath for our grievous offenses; together with a free and humble bewailing of
them before the Lord: such as are unknown to us in a general manner, but
those which we do know (according to the nature of them) particularly.

To the right practice of this, there are four things required.

1 The first, that we feel our sins odious and burdensome to us.

2 Secondly, that we accuse our selves of them to God.

3 Thirdly, that we stand at his mercy, having deserved condemnation.

4 Fourthly, that we abase our selves thereby, and so are weakened, and our
pride abated.

All these are in the confession of David. Psalm. 51. of Daniel 9. of the
Prodigal son, Luke 15.17.

Now this confession being from time to time often made unto God, will not
suffer us to go far, and lie long in any sin, but hunt it out before it be
warm and nestled in us; and therefore it must needs be of great force to
strengthen us in a godly life.

The last part of Prayer, is Request; it is that part of Prayer, wherein we
earnestly pour out our suits unto God, in contrition of heart, according to
his will, with comfortable hope, that through Christ we shall be heard, and
therefore forsaking the sin which might hinder our suit.

In this duty also there are four things to be observed.

1 First, that we show this contrition of heart, by being pressed with feeling
our wants, unworthiness, miserable estate, and manifold miseries, earnestly
desiring to be pardoned and eased, 1 Samuel 1.15. Luke 18.13.

I^ this be so (as will soon follow upon right confession) we shall neither
pray in lip-labor, which God abhors; nor think our selves too good to wait
Gods leisure, if at first he grant not our requests, but continue them as he
commands.

2 That we ask only those things as we have a word for, and in such sort as
he has promised them, 1 Ioh. 5.14.

3 That we quicken our selves to come in faith and confidence, and oft-times
to come chearefully to this duty, Jam. 6.1. Ioh. 16.24.

Now to the end we may come with cheerful delight unto this duty, let us
consider the fruits, which are especially three.

1 First, that by prayer we are made in a sort acquainted, and familiar with
God, and know his mind and will, and how he is affected to us, being admitted
to speak unto him, Iam. 4.8. Ioh. 16.26. Rev. 3.10.

2 Secondly, that it gives life to God his graces in us, which before lay
half dead; as we may see in the example of Ester.

3 Thirdly, it reaches out to us in our greatest need, the good things and
gifts of God which our selves desire, Matthew. 7.7.

4 The fourth and last property of prayer, is, that we bring not with us the
sins which will turn away the ears of God from hearing us; such are any
sins not repented of, but lain in, secretly at the least, and not renounced,
Prove. 28.19. Psalm. 7.4.

These are the parts of prayer, which if they be reverently and humbly adjoined
together (as they ought) accompanied with the forementioned properties; if we
be fallen, they will raise us up; if we be heavy, they will comfort us; if we
be dull, they will quicken us; they are a present remedy to the oppressed
heart, a preserver o^ the godly life, a giver of strength to the weak, an
especial meane^ to make a man live in every estate wherein God has set him:
therefore prayer must needs be a strong and mighty help to the godly life* for
if we pray well, and keep ou^ selves in case fit to perform thi^ duty, we
shall not need to fear i^ our life any great annoyance.

THe next help is reading; the general rules for it, are these

1 First, that the books of Go^ be, not laid aside and neglecte^ but read on
^s often of every one (...) may be: otherwise much unsavorinesse, unquietness,
unfruitfulnesse, and uncheerefulnesse, wi^ follow even in the best.

2 That all filthy, lewd, and wanton books, yea, needless and unprofitable be
avoided.

3 That in the Scriptures ther^ be a constant going on in order, and not here
and there a Chapter: and of other Authors, rather let one or two be read well
and often, than many slightly.

Now as concerning the manner of reading.

1 It must be with hearty good will to learn and profit by it, desiring God to
prepare us with reverence, etc.

2 We must settle our selves for the time to be attentive, and so to abandon
the wandering of the heart as much as may be.

3 We must be careful to apply that which we read wisely to our selves; as
persuading our selves that all duties are commanded us, all sins forbidden us,
and all promises to be believed of us: likewise we must look that all
exhortations, and admonitions quicken us; all reprehensions check us; and all
threats cause us to fear. If reading be thus used, it will many ways appease
the conscience; inlighten the judgment, enlarge the heart, relieve the memory,
move the affections, and in a word, draw the whole man unto God; and therefore
must needs with the rest be a singular help and furtherance to a godly and
Christian life.

HItherto of ordinary helps, extraordinary are especally two.

1 First, Solemn thanksgiving.

2 And secondly, fasting with prayer more than usual adjoined.

The first is, when in some rare and unlooked for deliverance out of desperate
danger, we do in most fervent manner yield praise to God for the same, and
rejoice heartily in the remembrance and confideration of it, tying our selves
in a renewing of our holy covenant more firmly to the Lord: and testifying
both these by signs and unfeigned good will to our brethren. All which are to
be seen most clearly and lively in that most famous example of Ester and
Mordecay, Ester. 9. It is to be used according to the occasion: when the
occasion of it belongs to a whole Church, and is publicly performed: it ought
to be accompanied with the preaching of the Word, for the quickening of the
assembly. If the occasion be private, it is to be used privately, with Psalms,
praising of his Name, and speaking of his works, and reading Scriptures
tending to that end.

The second extraordinary help is fasting: and this is a most earnest
profession of deep humiliation in abstinence, with confession of sins and
suppl^cations (for the greatest part of the day at the least) to God, to turn
away some sore calamity from us, or for the obtaining of some special blessing.

It must be used according to occasions, as the other; but neither must be
taken in hand, without true repentance.

Now if we weigh the force and use of these exercises, how the one raises up a
joyful recording of God his wonderful kindness; the other brings us low
for our own vileness, more especially remembered. Both of them do exceedingly
draw our hearts to more love and obedience to God; we must needs confess them
to be effectual means for the setting us forward in a godly life.

NOw that a believer is defined, the godly life described, and the helps
thereunto adjoined: It remains in the next place, to direct the weak
Christian in the right use and applying of the means. For those duties of
godliness are not left to men sometimes to be practiced, and at other times to
be neglected, nor generally only, but particularly in all their actions; and
every day, and thorowout the day, to be looked unto and regarded. The meaning
is not, that the selfsame particular actions and duties should be every day,
but yet that all evil be avoided every day, and such good done, as in our
calling and life shall be occasioned.

1 First therefore to declare that the believer must have direction for his
life every day out of Gods Word, it is manifestly proved out of these places of
Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.17.4.2. Heb. 3.14. Luke 1.75.

2 The Scripture does commend unto us a certain course to walk in with God,
and a particular direction of our lives as may be seen, Psalm. 119.9. Pro. 10.9.
Gal. 6.16.

And do further require the same to be daily kept and followed of us, Prove.
21.14. 1 Timothy 5.10. Psalm. 119.97. Psalm. 71.15. Act. 24.16. etc. 24.7. Psalm.
145.2. Therefore Christians must be guided by some daily directions in the
leading of their lives.

3 Furthermore, so many parts of a daily direction as will sufficiently direct
a man, be enjoined in the Word of God to be daily used, as in the parts of it,
and the helps unto it. In prosperity, Iam. 5.13. 1 These. 5.19. Iam. 2.23. In
afflictions, Iam. 1.5. 2 Chr. 20.34. Lam. 3.27. Psalm. 32.6. 2 Samuel 15.26. Luke
9.23. Deuteronomy. 33.12. Matthew. 26.41. Among the helps for Prayer, Psalm. 55.16. and
119.164, Pro. 6.22. For watchfulness, Psalm. 119.97. For reading, Josh. 1.8.
and as for public hearing, Prove. 8.33. Acts 2.46.

4 Besides, if we consider the danger that follows the neglecting of this
direction, by taking unlawful liberty, that will be a reason to stir us up
unto the embracing of this truth; for, first we are caught presently with the
deceitfulness of sin, some way or other, Mat. 26.41. Heb. 3.13. 2 Timothy 4.5.
Prove. 28.13.

2 Secondly, GOD himself, though he keep his children from many evils while
they desire it, yet if they be secure, he leaves them to themselves, and does
punish their sin as he does other men's, 2 Samuel 7.14. 2 Chro. 16.9. Prove. 10
9. Psalm, 89.3. and we all know that Satan watches all opportunities to hurt
us, Matthew. 13.25. Matthew. 12.44.

To these reasons may be added.

5 That this daily direction is the best means to keep us well, while we be
well, and to raise us up being fallen.

6 That the very ten Commandments, it joining duties toward himself
generally on six days in three commandments, and especially on the seventh
in the fourth, but toward men on all days, do lead us to this daily
direction.

7 That God has forbidden such differences to be made of days, as that in one
we should be careful, in others careless, Gal. 4 10. Col. 2.16.

8 And lastly, that our whole and daily conversation must be in heaven, Phil.
2.1.27. and 3.20.

Therefore as a man that has a long journey to travel, will not count this
sufficient direction to go on Estward, or Westward, or such general rules,
but will take a particular note of Towns and passages: so ought we to learn
wisdom, that having a great pilgrimage to pass, we content not our selves
with generals, but follow those certain particulars, which may help us
forward in the kingdom of heaven.

NOw it follows to show what this daily direction is. It is a gathering
together of certain rules out of Gods Word, by which we may be enabled every
day to live according to the Will of God with sound peace.

And therefore the following of such direction, is a faithful and constant
endeavor to please God in all things, every day as long as we live here, to
the peace of our own conscience, and to the glorifying of God. In the
description is to be observed:

1. That it is called an endeavor only, because perfection is neither required
of God, nor to be looked for of the best Christians. Thus such places, as Psalm.
119.1. Luke 11.28. which seem to require perfection, are to be expounded by
those that speak of endeavor, as, Chro. 28.7. Hos. 6.3. Act. 24.16. But this
endeavor is an inseparable fruit of the fear of God, and must be in our hearts
continually.

2. That this endeavor must be hearty, not constrained, or hollow, but
constant, that we faint not, but hold out therein.

3. Whereto it tends, viz. to please God in all things, Luke 16.13. Col.
1.10. Heb. 13 18.

4. Lastly, that this must be daily, and continue to the end, Act. 24.16. Pro.
4.26. Act. 26.7. 2 Cor. 1.13.

The necessary parts of the daily direction are these eight.
FIrst, every day we should be humbled for our sins, as through due
examination of our lives by the Law of God we shall see them, Psalm. 5.3.
Ephesians. 4 26. Job 1.5. 2 Every day we ought to be raised up in assured hope of
forgiveness^ of them by the promises of God in Christ; this is never separa^ed
from the former, Act. 2.38. Hos. 14.2.3. that word in the petition this day
does teach us so much. 3. Every day we ought to prepare our hearts to seek the
Lord still, and keep them fit and willing thereto, Heb. 3.12. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Mat.
22.37. Pro 4.18. 4 Every day we must strongly and resolutely arm our se^ves
against all evil and sin, fearing most of all to offend God. 5 Every day we
must nourish our fear and love of God, and joy in him more than in any thing,
and endeavor to please him in all duties as occasion shall be offered, 2 These.
3 5. 6 Every day our thanks be continued for benefits received, and still
certainly hoped for, Lam. 3.23. Psalm. 118.7. and 103.3 1 These. 5.18. 7 Eevery
day we ought to watch and pray for steadfastnesse, and constancy in all these,
Ephesians. 1.5.17. 8 Every day hold and keep our peace with God, and so lie down
with it, 2 Cor. 1.12. Phil. 4 4. 1 These. 5.16.


These are all necessary, as without which we can never be safe, we can never
taste of true joy. But here two extremities are to be avoided in conceiving of
them. One, that we think it not sufficient to regard these duties, some one
time in the day; for we must have this present with us, and our hearts
seasoned with them thorowout the day. The other is, that we do not take
occasion from hence to shake off our callings, or neglect any part of them; for
in our ordinary and meanest works, we may and must serve God, by doing them in
faith, not for carnal respects only: and avoiding the common sins that
profane ones join with them.

COncerning outward actions, no certain rules can be given in particular,
because they are variable and infinite; yet some outward duties there are,
although not necessary to be done daily, yet commonly to be observed, very
profitable and helpful to live well and happily, by settling us in the
practice of a daily direction; such are these that follow.

1 That we walk with God, that is, that as soon as we have broken off our
sleep, we set God before our eyes, and our hearts upon him, resolving to
walk with him that day, Prove. 6 22.

This accustoming our selves to good thoughts, at our first awaking, by setting
our hearts upon some holy and heavenly things, would be a good entrance to the
well spending of the day, and a preventing of sundry evils.

2 That in solemn manner (if it may be) before we enter upon other affairs,
we offer up our morning prayer to God, confessing our especial sins,
remembering his particular favors; requesting both pardon for things passed,
and assisting us with blessings for time to come, especially for that day, Dan.
6.10. For the helping forward of this duty, it is fit that some holy meditation
be joined with it: this being joined with a hearty renew^ng of our covenant will
so season us in the morning, that we shall retain the savor, and hold the
strength of such a gracious beginning, all the day after.

3 That then (if it shall be most expedient) we with our minds still kept well
ordered, betake our selves to our calling and vocation; wherein we must not so
much mind our profit, that we cool any grace thereby, or quench holy
affections in us. That we must have a calling, see Genesis 3.19. Ephesians. 4.18. 2
These. 3.6. That we must labor diligently therein, see 1 Cor. 7 20. 1 These
3.6.10. Pro. 13.4.11. and 18.9. and 24.30.

But that the walking in our calling diligently may ple^se God, we must so use
earthly dealings, that we neglect not spiritual duties; we must avoid
worldly mindedness on the one part, as idleness on the other: both of which we
shall be encouraged unto, if we consider that it is the Lord who sets us in
our callings, and has promised to be with us, and to give us good success in
them, and to help us to bear all tediousness therein, and further, that he
wills us to do all such duties for his sake, in such manner, as if we did
them to him; and from him to look for a reward, Josh. 1.8.

4 That in all companies we behave our selves as we are taught of God, and as
it becomes us, especially so as we leave no ill savor behind us. We must
not therefore rush unadvisedly into it, as most men do, but determine before to
do good unto others, as we be able, or to take good of others as occasion is
offered, Col. 4.6. Josh. 1 8. 1 Timothy 4.12. we must take heed of danges to come
by the fruitless and hurtful talking and behavior, which in most companies
we shall meet withal.

Occasions of good speeches must not only be taken, but sought and waited for,
Act. 26.28.

If the company be so desperate, that there is no place for God, yet we must
keep our selves from their unfruitful works of darkness, by giving of
apparent tokens of our dislike, leaving them also as soon as we can, and
shunning them afterward as much as we may conveniently.

Amongst others, we must be ready seasonably to give, or Christianly to
receive reproof, exhortation, comfort, etc.

1 In particular for our recreations, we must first look to the time, when it
is needful.

2 The kind, that it be honest, and of good report.

3 That we forget not God, in the use thereof.

4 The manner, that it be with moderation of affection every way

5 Our associates, that they be such as we may have comfort of.

6 Our end, that we may be fitter to the duties of our calling.

In bargaining and other covenants, they ought to be without hollownesse,
deceit, undermining, and such other unconscionable dealing; that so we may be
simple, and our meaning good, our words plain, our agreements reasonable, our
promises kept, our covenants performed, advantages not rigorously taken, etc.

Finally, we must observe and reverence the graces of God in others where we
see them, and by that means labor to chase away from us frivolous and
hurtful fantasies, faintness, discouragements, and weariness of well-doing:
That we may hold the profession of our faith with joy unto the end.

That when we be alone, we have the like care of our selves, that our
behavior be unblameable, and that our thoughts be either about things lawful
with moderation to dispose them, or spiritual with delight to enjoy them, or
else evil, with hatred and detestation to overcome thm.

1 As first in things indifferent, we must take heed that we do not busy our
selves in other men's matters needlessly, 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 10.24.

2 Secondly, that in our own we be not drowned, that our love and delight be
drawn away from better things, 1 Timothy 6.9.

1 In things holy, we must beware, first, lest by the common using of good
duties, we come to have them in less reverence, Matthew. 6.6. and 15.8. Matthew.
24.12.

2 S^condly, that we think not overwell of our selves, for that we do
somewhat more in the service of God than others, Phil. 3.14.

3 In things unlawful, we must carefully beware, that while we think of our
sins, or other men's, with intent to grow in hatred of them, we be not even by
that occasion tickled with some desire, or drawn into some s^cret liking of
them, as many are.

4 We must never in solitariness be unoccupied, because of that danger which
ensues, as examples do teach, 2 Samuel 11.2. Genesis 3. Matthew. 4. and our own
experience confirms; who are no sooner alone and idle, but swarms of vain,
foolish, noisome and perilous thoughts and desir^s are soliciting and offering
themselves unto us.

5 That we use our prosperity, and all the liberties which are lawful, of this
life, soberly, and so as we labor to be better by them. How hard this is, it
appears by experience, wherein it is so found, thas the more a man has of
these earthly commodities, the less he is enriched with spiritual graces; and
as they are increased and multiplied, so this decays and is diminished. Few
by earthly things are drawn on and encouraged to the love of the heavenly;
which yet is the end that the Lord has in giving them; few do as they did,
which are mentioned, Act. 9.31. Most make riches their strong towers, Pro.
18.11. whereby they are imboldened to do many things wilfully, which otherwise
they durst not.

Now that we may effect this, notwithstanding all difficulties, we must
consider that inordinate love which is in us, to the liberties and blessings of
this life; and this we must by all means possible weaken and abate; to which
end, First we must often and earnestly weigh how momentraty and fleeting all
things under the Sun are, and how uncertain hold we have of them, Eccles.
1.2. 1 Cor. 7.29. Luke 12.15. Prove. 23.4.

2 Secondly, we must consider seriously of the danger that comes to us by
them: in which regard they are termed in Scripture snares, thorns, choakes,
because they entangle us, prick, holding and smothering the maine graces of
God in us, that they bud not out and fructify, Matthew. 13.21. 1 Timothy 6.10.

3 We must often record, that these earthly things are not our own, but
borrowed, and so as they may every day be required again of us, Luke 16.12.

4 We must remember what hurt they have done, as by causing distractions,
unsettlings, etc.

5 We must often meditate upon examples of such as have enjoyed the like, or
greater commodities, and what have been their end.

6. It will be good to visit as others, so those also in their sickness,
which have had these outward things, that so we may both see how little they
can help at such times, and also be put in mind of our latter ends, which
cannot but something weane us from this world.

7 That we be ready to receive our afflictions meekely and patiently, Lam.
3.33. 1 Cor. 11.31. Jam. 1.2. 1 Pet. 1.6. Romans 5.5. Afflictions we must expect,
1 Pet. 4.12. Romans 8.29. 2 Timothy 3.12.

Howsoever therefore we be of our selves ready to shrink back at the hearing
of them, Job. 11.8. Heb. 12.11. yet we must prepare our selves to bear them
meekely, and cheerfully, and that in our youth, Lam. 2.27. knowing that Satan
will be ready to seek our mischief even by crosses, Job 1.6.

For preventing whereof, we must every day arm our selves against the fear
of such troubles as may come, and against impatiency, by such as already are
come upon us, Luke 9.23. Jam. 5.10.11. and that not only in great troubles, but
even in those which are common.

This, if we do with observation, we shall get experience, and by experience
hope, that will not cause shame, Romans 5.5. Psalm. 102.1. Otherwise, if we
neglect this, every affl^ction will unsettle and bring us out of frame, in
which estate we shall be both utterly unfit for any service of God, and also
unmeet for any Christian society with men; and so both add new troubles unto
the former, and make them which God sends upon us far more grievous than
otherwise they should have been.

8 That we constantly keep the exercise of prayer and thanksgiving in our
families, and such other helps (as Reading, Catechizing, Conference at times
convenient) to maintain the knowledge and true worship of God, and of true
happiness amongst us; to have prayer twice in the day is little enough, Psalm.
55. Dan. 6.10.

1 First, our necessities do require this daily serving of God, though we be
of the best sort.

2 Secondly, thy family being a little Church, there should be a trimming up
and a fitting for the public worship, especially seeing that experience
teaches that all is little enough.

3 Thirdly, by this means we have communion with the Lord, and therefore we
should often and cheerfully perform this duty.

4 Fourthly, we should cause our conversation to savor of the Lord and his
graces, whereas otherwise earthly dealing; will cause earthly minds.

5 Lastly, we have many examples, Genesis 18.16. Josh. 24.15. Act. 10.2.

9 The ninth and last duty, is, that we do at, or before our lying down,
look back and view the day passed: that where we have had blessings, we may
be thankful, and proceed in the like course after: where we have faulted and
failed, we may reconcile our selve^ to God, and so lie down in peace, Ephesians.
4.26.27.

The use of all these duties is, that every day we weane and withdraw our
hearts from any noisome bai^s or provocations, as suffer us not to arise in the
morning, to walk through the day, and to lie down at night in peace and
safety under Gods protection, of which we must be careful always, but
especially when unusual occasion^ fall out which may unsettle us.

THe Rules formerly described, if they be well followed, will be sufficient to
bring a Christian (though not to perfection in this life) yet to such an estate
as he shall find rest to his soul daily, which others shall want. Yet because
many dangers will be in the way that may hinder the weak, therefore it will be
profitable to know the letts and hindrances which may hold us back from peace
with God; that so we may learn how to prevent them before they come and hurt
us; or else how to rise when by them we are fallen; or how to turn into the
way when by occasion we are gone ou^.

Now the maine and chief letts ^re the Devil, with all his force, subtilty,
and malice, and our evil hearts, so far as they are unreformed; and by
means of both, all things in the world, though not in their own nature, but
by them made occasions to us of falling, and offending God.

FIrst, for the properties of Satan, and his attempts against us in general,
he is a mighty enemy, and cruel; for which cause he is called a great red
Dragon, and the accuser of the brethren, and also subtle, and vigilant, and
malicious: as he is strong, so he besetteth all people (though he be little
observed) and most of all Christians, whom he is openly and resolvedly set
against. He does not only kindle the concupiscence that is within us, and our
own lusts, setting them o^ fire to do the evil which we are inclined unto;
but also baiteth the outward things with poison, which we deal about, that he
may dazell our eyes, and cast us from our hold; that is, that we may not keep
still in the Christian course. Our hearts cannot so soon be ranging (though it
be never so little) but he is ready to meet with them, and set them forward in
some evil, fastening our affections upon it before we be aware: we cannot be
about any outward thing, but he is ready to serve us with it, knowing how to
use all outward objects to our hearts. Yet for all this we ought not to be
dismayed; for howsoever these things vex us, yet by Gods grace they shall turn
to our good, to make us set more store by Gods protection, and more carefully
to keep under his wings. He has not left us unarmed, for his own strength
is for our defense and preservation, Colos. 1.11. So that howsoever we may not
presump^uously abuse, yet we may with boldness sue unto him for help;
neither ought we to fear that for our infirmities we shall be shaken off,
when as God has made known his Will to the contrary, Luke 15.6. Rather they
must remember that they are the children of God, and therefore shall not be
unnaturally forsaken, or left to themselves in their need, and necessity, but
may persuade themselves, that waiting on God, these combats shall rather turn
to their further exercise, than to their deadly overthrow. Thus depe^ding on
God in all evils, they must by experience get wisdom.

In particular, the assaults of Satan are either against our faith, or else
against godliness in our life; first of the former.

HOw many having discouragements, he presses down the weak faith of newborn
Christians, appears by that which our Savior says to Peter, Luke 22.31.

Sometimes he terrifieth them with their own wants, ignorances, infirmities,
and unworthinesses: some with shame of fearful falls, which it seems to
them they are unlike to avoid: to which end he brings to their remembrance
such good servants of God as have fallen in like manner before them, and
fears them, that for all their care they shall never hold out in their faith
and holy course of life unto the end; but either by afflictions, or other
provocations, they shall be turned back. By all these means he labors
instantly to deprive them of all hope and confidence, that they may conclude
resolvedly, that they have no faith.

For the resisting of these assaults, they must grow better acquainted with the
nature and property of God his promises, viz. how true, unchangeable, and
perpetual they be, even as God himself is; they must prize them above all
other things, and send up earnest prayers to God daily, and often, for this faith
to be rooted in them: they must give daily attendance upon the Ministry of the
Word, ready also to receive help privately from those which are experienced,
meditate on Gods promises, such as are Matthew. 7.7. and 9.20. Luke 22.31.

Now, when by Gods blessing upon their diligence they have gotten some stay or
rest unto their souls, they must beware that they are not carried on the other
side to presumption, or too bold trusting in God, without a certain ground of
his promises: for by this subtlety, Satan does prevail with many, and by that
means brings them to desperate and dangerous falls.

But if he cannot prevail so far by his suggestions, and temptations, as to
bring us to utter unbelief, nor yet to presumption: yet he will labor to
hinder us, that we shall never be rooted nor established in faith; we shall
not feel the sweetness of it by possessing it daily: in which kind he does
so far prevail with most, even of the faithful themselves, that they are
oftentimes so discouraged, as they have scarcely any great use of faith in
respect of that which they might have. Which deceit of our adversary we must
wisely espy, and labor to arm ourselves against it, as, Psalm. 22.4 5. and
27.1. Job 13.15. We must take heed that our hearts be not stolen away with
worldly things: we must preserve and ch^rrish an high estimation of the
Gospel: we must deny all worldly wisdom, that we may be wise to the Lord,
and keep our faith as we would our life.

THe like malice does Satan show in hindering believers from godliness of
life. For as he labors to keep the unregenerate altogether, from pract^sing
godliness, viz. by keeping in them a heart so accustomed to evil, that it
cannot submit it self to the will of God in one thing, as well as another, by
holding them in presumption, by keeping them from serious consideration of
their estate and actions, by dissuading them from counting the godly life best:
and finally, by snaring them in dangerous opinions, sottish ignorance, or else
in hollow, loose, and wilful minds; so does he prevail so far even with
Gods people, as to hinder them from proceeding in godliness, and that chiefly
by these means.

1. By keeping them in want of some good things, without which they cannot
constant^y proceed in a godly life;

2 By pressing them with some evil.

3 By unsettling them through occasion of things lawful.

Of the first kind are three maine letts.

1 First when Christians are holden from a constant course of godliness.

2 When they fall from their first estate, or fi st love.

3 When they want a sufficient ministry. Of the first sort, there are many
which think it not meet to tie themselves to any direction of leading their
life; but are content with some general care and good meaning; than whom these
are not better, which for a season keep some good order; but by little and
little they fall to do it sl^ightly: even for fashion in a great part; and
rather through custom, than with delight and comfort; and all because their
hearts go not with their actions constantly, neither do they regard or look
to their consciences in one thing as in another, that they might be kept in
peace.

The Remedy against this, is faithfully to endeavor every day to be well
settled, according to the rules formerly mentioned. We must especially labor
by faith, even to feed upon the promises, which God has made for the
preservation and protection of his children; hearty prayer must often be used,
and watchfulness against our especial infirmities; it must be continual,
together with often and due consideration what a precious treasure this kind of
life is. And if through negligence we do fall, we must not lie still in
hardness of heart, but return to him as to our Father, and he will heal us:
and though we cannot presently have that confidence which sometimes we have
had, yet let us return, though with some shamefastness, even standing afar
off, with the Israelites, Exodus 33.8.10.

THe second special Let arising from want, is, the leaving of our first love:
for at our first conversion, when the exceeding love of God in Christ is shed
abroad in our hearts, so as it makes our selves admire; this constrains us
to love him again most fervently and dearly; his Word and Ministers, with all
our brethren, most sensibly and heartily: and this in Scripture is called our
first love, Rev. 2.4.

Now, when this shall wax cold through dullness, slothfulness, and
forgetfulness, and. it must need be a heinous thing in the sight of God, who
looks that our works should be more at the last than at the first, as our
knowledge is more, and experience greater, Rev 2.21. Yet this comes often to
pass both in Ministers and people, to their great shame, though otherwise they
keep some course in serving God, Rev. 2.2. which they show by weariness, or
at least wise, little pleasure taking in the public M^nistery, neglect of
private prayer, conference, Mutual exhortation, etc. untowardnesse in good
works, abating of their love to the brethren, embracing the world,
entertaining of ill-companiship, with heart-burning against the Ministers that
tell them the truth. By these and such like signs, many do show how much they
have lost their first love, whereby they give great occasion of discouragement
to the weak, and of lamenting to the best.

This was foretold by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 24.12. where also he showed
how hard it is to keep, and harder to recover our first love. Thirdly,
admonishing all sound hearted Christians to look heedfully, and carefully to
nourish and preserve that holy, pure, and first spark of grace kindled in them,
against all that may come in the way, to quench and p^t out the same. And
although the work be hard, yet we have the Commandment of God for our
warrant, and his promise for our encouragement; therefore ought we not to faint
or sl^cke for any impediment, but set our hearts daily to count it our greatest
work, to keep our first love.

THe third let of this kind, is, the want of an ordinary and sound Ministry
of the Word of God, whereby the way to salvation and godliness is plainly an^
in good order, with love and diligence taught so often in the week, as the
people can conveniently attend upon the same. This is the light of the world,
and the Sun which warmeth all the creatures of the earth with his influence;
so that those which enjoy it not, must needs be as the shadowed places, which
either bring forth nothing, or that which is sour and unsavory. How the Devil
has labored in all ages and Nations, to hinder the passage of this Gospel,
may easily be perceived, if we peruse well the Acts of the Apostles, and other
Histories of the Church: how he does prevail, our own eyes and ears can
witness: The remedy therefore is for such as want, to relieve themselves with
it, where they may with most convenience enjoy it, and to sue earnestly, that
they may live under it, (which should be more generally granted of God, if by
fervent prayers and other Christian endeavors it were sought for.) When they
do enjoy it, then must they prize it above all that they have, or ever can
enjoy in this world; for those which esteem lightly of it, must hear what the
Scripture speaks of them, Matthew. 8.11.12. Amos 8.11.12.

These are the chief letts that men have by wants; whereunto may be added
those troubles which some good Christians have through fear of their own
wants, though without cause. For remedy whereof (that they be not swallowed up
through deadly heaviness) they must take unto them godly boldness, to
consider that there is great cause of rejoicing, even in that for which they
are heavy, viz. in their fear, care, hungring and thi^sting, Pro. 28.14.
Matthew. 5.3. and therefore they ought rather to be thankful for that they
have, than utterly to be discouraged for that they want. Of small beginnings
come great proceedings; of one little spark, a mighty flame; and the tall Oaks
were sometimes but small Akorns: he has well begun, that has in truth
begun; and he has much, who feels that he wants much.

THe second kind of general Lets are, the unmortified affections wherewith
believers are oppressed. Concerning which in general, it will be profitable
for every one to mark with what he is most encumbered, and most easily
overcome of, and by what occasions he is readiliest drawn to them; that he
may the more diligently and wisely labor to prevail against them.

In particular, one kind is fear and doubt of persevering by means of
afflictions, etc. This does easily take hold of weak ones; therefore the
Scripture fore-warneth of it, Matthew. 10 28. Phil. 1.28. Ioh. 16.33.

This, if it do prevail, cannot but feeble utterly the powers of their minds;
and so withold the instruments of the body from practicing well any kind of
duty.

The way to remedy it, must be sought for in the Scripture, Psalm. 30.5. 2 Cor.
4.17. Heb. 12.11. 2 Cor. 9.10. Iam. 1.3.

Another unmortified affection, is, pride, and overweening of themselves:
examples whereof we have, Romans 3.17. 1 Cor. 4.8.

This makes men wax weary of learning, remiss of their diligence and care
for good, to account meanly of those which are loose and irreligious; or else
fall into sects, schisms, and heresies, or at least bring themselves in an
accursed melancholy and solitary life.

The remedy is laid down, Rev. 3.17. 1 Cor. 3.18. and 4.1. Psalm 119 12. We
must diligently examine and consider our ways, till we have found out our
sins unto true humiliation; we must compare our selves not with the worst,
but with the forwardest Christians, and holiest examples.

Another unmortified affection is sloth; the remedy to find out the root and
fountain of this mischief, and so remove it, Prove. 1.32. and 14.12.
Encouragements we have from God, Josh. 1.9. Ephesians. 3.19.

AMongst other unstaid affections which are inward lets of godliness, tuchie
or peevish frowardness is not the least; when men are fretting against persons
or things that do cross us, though it be but trifles. Thus many are caught
upon the sudden, which at other times could easily withstand greater
provocations, as we may see of David, if we compare 1 Samuel 24.7. with 25.13.

This is a high offense to God, a needless trouble to our selves, a bereaving
us of godly wisdom, yea, and of common reason also.

Therefore we must make diligent search, and inquire whether we be prone to
these servile passions, or no, and so if we do labor to prevent it; but if
we be at any time overtaken with it, then we must (as soon as may be) set our
selves apart, seriously to consider of the unseemelinesse of the thing, etc.
until we can shake it off, and after take more care that it return not
again upon us.

Another troublesome affection is, that men through ignorance or unbelief,
grow weary of proceeding in a Christian life, or at least in special duties
thereof: the danger of this may appear by the contrary forewarnings, Gal. 6.9.
1 Cor. 16.13.

This Satan labors to effect by reproach, etc.

We must therefore get assurance, that God his grace shall be suffic^ent for
us, Matthew. 11.31.

Many other affections there are of the like nature, and alike to be shunned;
as unjust anger, heart-burnings, looseness and lightness of heart, rashness,
hastiness, lumpishnesse, and melancholy, with diverse such like; the beginning
and first rising whereof, although our own hearts do breed, yet the strength
of them is of Satan.

BEsides the forenamed evil affections, there are other worldly lusts, whereby
many Christians are much disguised, as namely carnal pleasure, and inordinate
desire of riches.

For the first, many are drowned in sensuality, and the sottish pleasure of the
body, so that they become even blind and impotent: for when a man gives his
heart liberty to desire stolen waters, and to count them sweet, not casting
them up, and arming himself against them as he ought; and gives his eye leave
to feed it self with vanity, by little and little his prayers become weak,
and unable to drive out such sottishness, but it lodges in him, and so is
made a slave unto it. An example we have of Sampson, Judge. 15. Nay, some go so
far, that they are senseless at the sight of it, when as they should tremble
to behold in what state they are: for their prayers are dead, their burden of
Conscience importable, their loss of grace unspeakeable, the griefs of the
godly unutterable, and themselves become as fools in Israel, and spectacles to
the profane world to move pastime.

1 First, for the avoiding of these mischiefs; we must make it our greatest
care to abide in the favor of God, and hold fast the assurance of it from day
to day.

2 We must be willing to submit our selves to the yoke of Christ.

3 We must hold in our lusts and imaginations, as it were, with bitt and
bridle, that they range not after hurtful and poisoned baits.

4 We must shun and avoid all the occasions and objects of such mischief. And
especially, we must be suspicious and fearful of those sins to which we know
our selves to be most prone and inclined.

THe other worldly lust is noisome care about the things of this life, which is
a common evil under the Sun; for it creeps upon men so secretly and
subtly, that hardly shall one perceive the danger of it until we have taken
hurt by it: yet the danger is deadly, for where worldliness fastneth upon a
man, it devoureth godliness, as if there had been none before; it suffers no
good thing to grow by it, but choaketh it, and overshadoweth any gift of God
whatsoever, and so changes even good men, that they are not aware of it, that
they become most unlike themselves, 1 Timothy 6.10.

By this, men in worldly dealings become greedy of profit, rash in making, and
careless in performing of covenants; too much looseness, earthly rejoicing,
and fretting when we thrive not; overlaying our selves with worldly dealings,
so that no time is fit for better uses.

For the redressing of this, four things are required:

1 Let every man look carefully that no man be hurt, or sustain any loss or
danger by him, 1 These. 4.6. by this he shall be freed from all the sins against
our neighbor, commanded in the eighth Commandment.

2 His care must be not only to do no hurt, but also to do good to those whom
we have to do with, Romans 13.8. as to the Minister in maintenance, to our
family in provision, to the poor in relief, etc.

3 Heed must be taken, that riches hurt us not, that they be not means to
draw us unto sin, Eccles. 5.12.

4 We must provide that we be bettered by our wealth toward God his service.
Deuteronomy. 28 47.

As for the poor, they shall best testify that they are not tainted with this
sin, if they hold fast innocence, contentation, and thanksgiving. Reasons to
move us to the avoiding of covetousness, are,

1. First, because we cannot enjoy them long, but either they shall be taken
from us, or we from them; and yet this short time is also uncertain, Luke 16.2.

2. Because they are not our own but borrowed, Luke 16.12.

3 If we be not faithful in the smaller, it is an argument, that we will be
much less in the greater.

4 Because we shall give an account, as of all other things, so especially of
our getting, using, and forgoing of our goods and commodities, Matthew. 25.14.
Luke 6.2.

THere is a third kind of lets, whereby many believers are hindered from going
on in a godly course, viz. All kinds of outward things which of themselves are
not evil, but are made by Satan, occasions to hurt and wound our souls.

1 Afflictions though sent of God for our great good, as is to be seen, Heb.
12.7.11. Psalm. 119.71. and 1 Cor. 11.13. Iam. 1.2. Yet are by Satan and our
own corruptions, made occasions of impatience, fretting, pensiveness, and
many other evils; against which we must arm our selves before they come, that
then our unruly passions may not break out so impatiently, John 16.33.

2 So in prosperity he subtly makes drunken our hearts with love of our
good, puffes them up with pride and high mindedness, etc

To these dangerous evils shall the godly themselves be drawn, except they
carefully prevent them.

It is therefore a special point of wisdom, in time of peace that we beware
that we lean not upon outward things, for then we shall easily be cast
down with every blast of adversity.

3 Another occasion of unsetling our hearts are household affairs, and things
that concern our maintenance, by the unwarie use whereof, men become unquiet,
wayward, distracted, and unlike Christians.

A wise man therefore will unburden himself of these multitude of worldly
dealings, which will not suffer the mind to be freed, and will so subdue his
affections, that he may have them in order as well in one thing as in another.

4 By change of company, dwelling, and acquaintance, men receive much hurt,
Genesis 19.30.

5 The sight of godliness to be contemned, and licentious courses to be
maintained, is a great scandal Psalm. 73.

6 Familiarity with the wicked is of great force.

Many other occasions there are by our senses conveied unto us, against which
we must daily strive by keeping on our Armor, standing on our watch,
following that direction which God has given, and depending on that grace
which he has promis^d; ever remembering that we do not cast off fear of
danger, for occasions of sin shall never be wanting, no, not in things
lawful and good; nor Satan waiting upon them, with secret extenuations of
sin, and hiding the punishment.

NOW because there being so many lets in the ways of godliness, and those so
hardly passed, and difficult enterprises are always commended by the good that
follows them; it is necessary that the great privileges which belong to a
godly life should be explained; that so the godly may know their own
happiness^, and strive to enjoy it; the wicked may see what great good things
they deprive themselves of; and to all men the Christian life may be in better
account, which now of all sorts is too much underprised, and so neglected, and
of some contemned and scorned.

To omit therefore all those benefits which are common to them with the wicked
(although these also are far more sweet and savory to the godly than to
others) and those also which are proper to some of the faithful in respect of
their callings, those only shall be named in which the wicked have no part
nor portion, and yet all the faithful may possess, one as well (though not so
much) as another.

These are either such as are given us in this life to be enjoyed for our
encouragement, or else those which God has in store for us in the life to come.

THe first and chiefest of them which are given us in this life, is, that all
true Christians may know themselves to be beloved of God, and that they shall
be saved. 1 Ioh. 3.1. and 5.13. Ioh. 1.12. and that by better evidence than
any man can have of the things he holds in this life. This is not so well
known at the first, but after experience gathered of the unchangeable love of
God toward us, our confidence is increased; yea the longer we enjoy this
privilege, the better we know it; neither can it be lost wholly or finally.

Ob. Some of Gods Children after they have been thus persuaded, have fallen to
doubting again.

Answ. True Christians are renewed but in part, and therefore some are by the
subtilty and malice of Satan brought to the neglect or careless using of the
means whereby faith is confirmed, and so to doubting; and many not so
offending, do too too easily give place unto distrust, thereby depriving
themselves of this great privilege.

This privilege is the greater because of the unspeakeable glory and
everlasting joy which it brings with it, whereas other delights are but
fleeting and momentarie.

Which greatness will easily appear if we well consider the unspeakeable woe
and horror of such desperate persons as feel the want of this happiness
either here, or in hell.

AFter God has vouchsafed the faithful this honor, that they may know
themselves to be beloved of him here, and that they shall be saved hereafter;
he does not then leave them, but is always with them, and ha^h a special
care of them above others, nay, when he is angry with others. Romans 5.5. Psa.
30.6, 7. Luke 13.34. Deu. 32.10 1 Timothy 4.10. Matthew. 10.30. Psalm. 1.3. and 23.1.
Romans 8.31. and 23. 1 Sa. 2.3. Psalm. 1.1.

He esteems them not only as his household servants, but as his friends, Ioh.
15.15. his Sons and heirs. Romans 8.17. his precious treasure, Exodus 19.5.
yea, he hon^reth them so far, as he calls them and makes them kings, Exo.
19.5. All which is both certain and constant unto the faithful, but it is not
so with the wicked; so that by this it appears, that the estate of the
poorest child of God, is far better than the best of the ungodly, yea, better
than themselves sometimes would have asked, or thought of.

THose who are thus cared for of God, receive grace from him to live according
to his Will, that at death they may enter into his glory; for he teaches them
to be fruitful in good life, and also to avoid the foul offenses.

As for the first, viz. a holy life whereunto God enableth his by his own
power, it is a great prerogative, in that they need not account the Christian
life combersome, unsavory, heavy, and tedious, as many do; but an easy yoke
light burden, and pleasant race: this is in the Scripture called blessedness,
as Psalm. 1.2. and 84.2. Luke 11.14.

Many indeed there are, even good people, which in great part go without this
privilege; but the cause is, that they draw not by faith daily strength from
Jesus Christ to subdue their lusts, but trust either to their own strength or
in other means, until being frustrated of their desire, they either fall into
great vexation, or else plain s^curity and looseness. For the remedy whereof
they must labor to be steadfast in faith, not yielding unto distrust, but
learn to know that God who has taken care of his, will not leave them in
their infirmities, but according to his all-sufficien^ power will succor and
deliver them, which if they once believe (as God requires we should) then
shall they see themselves mightily staid and upholden until they be set at
great liberty, and that it was the devil who before held them in fear and
bondage.

Ob. We dare not believe that God will give us such grace, except first we
could overcome our special corruptions.

A^sw. We have no strength of our own to any such work, but we must obtain
it by faith which is also commanded us. Ioh. 3.23. and till we do so, we shall
be holden from our right by the craft of Satan.

AS for the second, viz. that the faithful are taught and enabled of God to
^void great falls and reproachful evils; that is plain Pro. 19.23. Ps. 119.10
11. And the ex^m^les of Enoch, Abra^am, Moses, Joshua, Samuel and Daniel, Job,
with others who for the time of their near acquaintance with God, committed not
any such heinous trespasses, as were common stains and blots in the lives of
others.

By this so excellent and invaluable a privilege, the doing of good becomes
meat and drink unto the faithful, so that they can serve God even in a good
and joyful heart in all things, Deuteronomy. 12.18. and 28.47. mind heavenly things
without that tediousness which is seen in others; perform earthly businesses
with heavenly minds, and always rejoice before the Lord.

Not that they have no rebellion in them; for they fi^d a strife always and are
in part led captive o^ it, that they might not triumph before the victory;
partly that feeling their own weakness, they may more wholly depend on God;
and p^rtly that their future victory may appear more glorious: but all this
while, though many wounds be received, the Christian is never so vanquished,
but that recovering again by the power of God, he goes on with steadfast j^y.

A Further Liberty is, that if the godly do by any occasion fall from their
settled course into any offense, whereby their consciences are wounded and
accuse themselves; they may return again unto God, with certain assurance of
being received of him, John 2.2. Without this privilege, there were but small
encouragements for any Christian, because of our often falls.

Therefore the Lord does not only permit us to do thus, but calls and
waits for it, yea, he is highly off^nded, if we do not, Ier. 8.4. and for
the effecting of it has given charge to the Pastors, as Eze. 34.3. and to
others, Gal. 6.1. how great a privilege this is, ^hey know full well who have
experience of an afflicted conscience, to whom no tidings can be more gladsome
than this, if it be rightly applied. It draws from such many thanks and
praises, and so brings much honor to God.

But this must be warily and wisely received, that we neither take occasion
hence to imbolden our selves to sin, or content our selves with slight
repentance: for Gods mercies must be instantly sought for, and then his favor
may not be doubted of, as appears by that example, Eze. 10.1.

So that here two extremes are to be avoided, viz. that neither we presume upon
slight and hollow repentance, nor languish in desperate and unfruitful
sorrow, but in sound humiliatio^ hope steadfastly for pardon, and say to our
souls, as David does, Psalm. 43.5.

The same that is spoken of actual sins, must also be understood of
dullness, idleness, unprofitable barrenness of the heart; and such other
corruptions which are wont to quench the work of God his Spirit, and to be the
seed of many cursed evils. The Lords will is, that from hence we should expect
in faith as well strength to weaken them, as mercy to forgive them.

THe very helps themselves which God has given to us, to further our
salvation, are great privileges, and so to be accounted.

As that by Prayer we may have access unto God to break our mind, lay open
our grief, and that with confidence: and that by watchfulness, we may escape
those dangerous snares of S^tan, wherein so many are entangled, and that we
may in the end of every day make up our accounts with joy, and keep all
straight. For unto these, and such like h^lpes, God has promised a blessi^g,
and we must by faith look constantly for the same; for there is no fruit of
the best help^s if we use them not in faith, Iam 1.6.

These are great privileges, and howsoever of many through earthlinesse,
sloth, and way-wardnesse of their hearts they be not so esteemed; and therefore
either not used, or else formally or slightly, yet we should account the more
of them; as being so glorious, that the dim eyes of profane persons cannot
behold them: and praise God the more, who makes them so sweet and gainful
unto us, which unto so many are very gall and wormwood.

ANother great privilege is, that the Lord teaches his, how to carry
themselves, and keep their integrity in all estates of life.

As first, in peace and prosperity, when a man has riches, Hono^r, health,
friends, delights, and pleasures, etc. This is a slippery estate in which no
man of himself can stand, and therefore is an occasion of falling to most men,
but God teaches his to stand in this slippery way.

For, first, when he causes the Doctrine of co^tentation, sobriety, and the
contempt of this world to be taught unto them, then he draws their hearts
inwardly to attend unto it, believe it, love and practice it. Besides this, God
causes them often to set before their eyes the daily changes of all things under
the Sun; and by the often and deep consideration of these things as they
observe them, their lusts are appalled, and the pride of life is greatly abated
in them, Psalm. 102.22.

So that by these means the Lord so frames his, that they desire no more, nor
no longer than their heavenly Father sees expedient; to use these outward
things, as if they used them not, and yet so to use them as that they may be
helps to themselves and others in the way of godliness.

All which is not so to be understood, as if every believer had this grace, but
that God has bequeathed, and does offer this to all, though only they have
it, which do esteem of it and seek for it, in faith at Gods hands.

SO likewise in regard of affl^ctions, the prerogative of God his children is
great; first, he holds many tribulation^ from them, which otherwise by their
sins they do pluck upon themselves, Psalm. 32.10, 11. which must needs be
so, because afflictions spring from sin, and therefore where sin is greater
or lesser, the afflictions will be proportionable.

The truth of it, viz. that they may be freed from many troubles, is plain,
because so many do fill themselves with inward troubles of mind and
conscience, by giving place to their unbridled affections, which breed many
perturbations, and by taking license to themselves in things which are not
seemly. They bring also many outward troubles upon themselves by their sins,
as shame, poverty, diseases, evil children, etc. All which may often be
avoided by the grace of God, if sin were taken heed of and resisted, and if
by labor and watchfulness the unruly heart were subdued.

Whereby the way, we may observe how unwisely they do, who shun the sincere
practice of religion, that they may be freed from troubles, when as Religion
does free a man from so many.

AS the faithful are freed wholly from troubles; so when they are in, God
delivers them out of many, when as the wicked remain in theirs, Pro. 11.8.
Examples both of the Church in general, and of the faithful in particular,
are sufficiently known to all that know any thing in the Scriptures: all which
are recorded, not to show only that the faithful have been delivered out of
trouble (for that were no singular thing, but common for the wicked) but that
they are delivered in the fatherly love of God, as appears by the means
which they used; as prayer, fasting, etc. This the wicked have never, nor
always the godly.

Ob. The Fathers had particular promise for their deliverance, but so h^ve not
we.

An. In the maine and chiefest things, God has spoken as plainly and fully to
us, as to them: we may always assure our selves, that God has a most tender
and fatherly care over us, and that he will show the same in the time of our
need, either by delivering us if he see it good and expedient, or else by
giving us that grace which shall be sufficient for us. The not teaching or not
believing of this doctrine, causes much uncheerfulnesse and discontent in our
troubles, as grudging against God, unlawful shifting, carnal fears, etc.
whereas, if it were otherwise, much heavenly comfort might be reaped in our
lives, which now is wanting.

When it pleases the Lord to lay any afflictions upon his, they may assure
themselves it is for their exceeding good; which persuasion if it be settled,
and the contrary power of carnal reason, checked and suppressed, we shall have
wisdom to look for afflictions daily, and be ready to receive them from God
thankfully, and meekely, this wisdom must be sought for of God, Iam. 1.5, 6.

Now, if we would take good by afflictions, we must first receive that word
with full assent, which is, Romans 8.28. All things work for the best to those
which love God: and then consider seriously how great reason there is, that we
should yield up our selves, our wills, and all that we have unto God his will,
and think that good for us which God thinks good; for God sends
afflictions to his Children,

1 First, That they may have experience of his love in delivering them.

2 Secondly, that they may have proof of their faith and patience.

3 Thirdly, that they may not be condemned with the world.

4 Fourthly, that they may be purged from their sinful dross.

5 Fifthly, to weane them from this world. If these things be known and
believed of us, we shall find them so to our exceeding comsort; and though
sometimes in trial we may seem to be neglected or forgotten, yet we shall
see at length that it is nothing so.

Ob. If afflictions shall turn to our good, then we need take no further
thought about them.

Answ. That promise does not warrant us to be c^reless^; for if we behave our
selves wilfully, blockishly or foolishly in afflictions, they will turn to our
great hurt and vexation: but if we mingle that Scripture with faith, it will
cause us to receive all crosses from God as sent in love; not to murmur at
them, but thankefully and patiently, and also with examination of our selves,
if so be that any sin has brought evil upon us; and then we shall have
proof of Gods grace in us, experience of his favor toward us, preservation
from many sins, increase of humiliation and thankfulness, preparation for the
bearing of greater, with some comfort at least in the end, and hope in the
midst, which shall not make us ashamed. When we find not this doctrine savorie
and sweet to us, nor the use of it in our afflictions, let us not charge or
challenge the Lord for it, but consider what we have lost by unbeleefe.

NOw besides all the former privileges severally, there is one that respects
them all of great price, and that is, increase and growing of all those graces:
for God gives to his greater every way, than they would have sometimes either
expected or asked, Col 1.9.

An example whereof we may see in Moses, if we compare his later times with his
former, and in the Apostles. This privilege, if it be duly considered, adds
great courage, and yields much comfort to Gods children: when they shall know
that this grace is offered them of God, even that like plants they should grow
and increase in Gods House, and as the Sun they should shine more and more
until Midday.

And howsoever the Devil rayseth many occasions of fainting, sl^th, deadness
of spirit, and earthly mindedness, neglecting of means, etc. yet may we not
be discouraged, but press forward, depending on Gods promise, and following
his direction.

AS he that makes a good beginning, shall increase and grow in goodness, so
he that increases daily, shall make a good end at length: for all true
believers shall continue to the end in a good and godly course, Psa. 37.37.
Phil. 1.6, Ioh 6.39. and 10.28. which as in it self it is a great privilege,
so is it the greater in that God makes it known to his children, and draws
their hearts to believe the same, even when the sea no ground for it in
themselves, 1 Pet. 4.5. 1 Ioh. 5.13. 1 These. 5 9.

This is a treasure invaluable, mightily reviving and gladding the hearts of
Gods children, and encouraging them with cheerfulness to follow the godly
life, and all means of proceeding in it. For they which take occasion from
this doctrine to wax slothful, worldly, idle, vain, etc. they know not what
it means, but pervert that which they know not, to their own destruction.

The truth and certainty of this privilege is not to be doubted of, though we
see good men at their death to show small tokens of grace and of a happy
departure: for there may be many impediments, and howsoever it may seem, yet
this is certain, of a good life comes a good death, Psalm. 37.37. Sometime
indeed for correction of some sin, or for example, the Lord may send such a
death as is less comfortable, as in Iosia, 1 King. 13.24. and in the Prophet
that was sent to Jeroboam: yea, sometimes a good Christian may offer violence
to himself, not knowing what he does; yet being formerly of a holy and
unrebukeable conversation, he is not to be judged according to that one action,
how unwarrantable and dangerous soever in it self.

Much less ought persecution to seem so grievous, as that it could not stand
with a good estate, and final perseverance, especially seeing we have much
encouragement to the suffering of it, by examples, promises, and predictions in
holy Scripture.

This perseverance then being so precious, and yet so certain, let us then
nourish the hope of it in our selves daily by keeping in us a willingness to
die.

2. By frequenting meditation of the vanity of this world, and all that therein
is, Col. 3.1.

Thirdly, by holding fast our rejoicing in Christ, 1 Cor. 5.31. by mortifying
of sin, and keeping our hearts from the love of it, Col. 3.5.

Lastly, by inuring our selves, to bear small afflictions, and so to deny our
selves, that we may the better undergo greater when they shall be sent.

NOw that whereon all the former do depend, and whereat they aim, is the
unspeakeable glory which was prepared for us before the begi^ning of the world,
begun in this life, and to be fully and perfectly enj^yned, in the life to
come. This for our capacity is shadowed out by many earthly comparisons and
resemblances of those things which do most delight us, as honor, treasure,
riches, beauty, friends, pleasure, joy, inheritance, etc.

Our company there shall be Christ, with his holy Angels, blessed Apostles,
Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, etc.

The habitation it self is permanent and everlasting, and so are all the
treasures that are enjoyed therein.

The estate of Princes is not to be compared with that happiness. All the
glory which was in this world, even before the fall, was but a shadow in
respect of this; the glorious and unspeakeable joy which Gods children h^ve
here is great, 1 Cor. 2.9. and making a day of their life, better than a
thousand of other men's, Psalm. 84.10. yet this is but a taste of that which is
to come. For then all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; for sin and death
shall be no more.

This privilege added unto all the former does sufficient commend the happy
condition of Gods children, especially to those that know these things to
belong to themselves, and find the comfort of them. But this effectual
Knowledge of Gods will, to apprehend them by faith in particular, is a
particular gift of God to his Elect; not enjoyed of any other, no not of the
greatest and most judicial Clerks and Divines, Matthew. 13.11. which does
indeed make this gift more precious, in that Gods children have grace to draw
down all good from God in his promise; which natural men cannot do; for flesh
and blood gives not this to any. But God draws his children to the knowing
and believing of it: First by his Word, and secondly by their own experience,
which brings most near and familiar communion with God by his Spirit, from
whence springs most unspeakeable joy.

THese being the great Privileges which our God has appointed for his, and
called them to partake of; most lamentable it is that many should be so
ignorant as not to desire to know them, so careless as to reject them, so
obstinate as to tread them under foot, and so to lead a life full of misery
for want of them.

The Christian life is termed in Scripture, a pilgrimage,

Therefore we had need of,

We see no such glorious things in Christians.

These are spiritual things, men will not acknowledge that glory which they
see; because it reproves them.

Again, these privileges are more inward feeling than outward appearance.
Moreover there are many infirmities in the lives of professors, which the
world do more gaze upon, than upon their Christian conversation otherwise. But
yet their lives be glorious before God, and shining lights to them that can see
and discern, whilst they that carpe at them shall be most loathsome and
abominable.

AGainst the former Directions many things may be objected both by carnal
cavellers, and also by weak Christians.

Of the first sort is, that there needs no other directions to be prescribed
besides Gods word. To which there needs no other answer, but that by the same
reason all preaching were needless; which if it be as it should, is out of
the Scriptures: but besides there is great need of such a Direction as this to
be penned, by reason of the great weaknesses which are in Christians, some
being slow of capacity, others short of memory, others very soon unsettled
for want of good direction, are ashamed or unwilling to open their griefs, or
else have no fit man to show them unto: so that besides other great harm which
follows the want of direction, they are deprived of much communion with the
Lord, and comfort that arises from it.

IT is further objected; that no such direction can be observed daily.

But if it were impossible, why does the Prophet call them blessed that follow
such a course? Psa. 1.2. and affirm so much of himself, Psalm. 119.97. many
such examples also we have amongst us, even in this age, who do not make
themselves strangers unto God, to hear from him, or to send unto him now and
then; but to walk with him daily, as all are commanded to do. Nay, many there
are, who of experience have found this way not only possible, but easy to
them, and full of comfort; who should indeed be patterns unto others; for the
best practisers are the best teachers: neither can any idle professor look
for such ease and comfort as the painful Christian that has been taught by
long experience. IT will be said, that howsoever it be possible, yet it is very
toylesome and inconvenient, depriving men of pleasure, and hindering labor.

But the truth is, there is no pleasure or comfort in the world, like unto it:
that is the sentence of the holy Ghost, Psalm. 119.99, 100. Prove. 8.11. Neither
is this meant of serving God at times, but continually, even all the day long,
Psalm. 119, 10.23.97.

And whosoever has any knowledge and experience by practice, what reward there
is in serving God, does justify this to be true: for why also should so many
Christians part with all sinful pleasures which they might enjoy with others,
and spend so much time and pains in Gods service, if it were so irksome?

It is not indeed a pleasure to all; but to the upright in heart, it is the
only delight, though in this life there be some resistance, nay, it seasoneth
and sweatneth all earthly liberties, also making them truly pleasant to the
godly, which to others are mixed either with burdensome tediousness, or
hidden poison.

Neither would this hinder labor and thrift; for all godly thrift, Christian
gaining; and lawful prospering in the world, does arise from hence; even when
a man goes to the works of his calling with a mind at peace with God,
commending his affairs to Gods providence, aims at his glory, looks at his
promise, and so waits for a blessing: and for want of this, many in great toil
and pains find no success nor blessing of God; and others that seem to
prosper have their wealth but as Judas had his sop, and the Israelites their
quails, to become their bane and poison.

AS causeless also is their fear, who say, that the following of this
direction would break off all society and fellowship amongst men. For this
would break off none but evil fellowship, such as it were to be wished were
abandoned all societies of Christians; which if it seem strange, it will be
only to such as the Apostle Peter speaks of in his first Epistle, 4.4.

BUt it is fit to satisfy the doubts which weak Christians are like to
propound.

As first, how they may attain and keep this Course?

For the answer whereof, thus much:

1 There must be an earnest desire wrought by the consideration of the
necessity of it.

2 There must be a strife against untowardnesse and sloth.

3 All earthly affections must be moderated, and not clog us.

4 There must in faith be expectation of fruit farer above the labor.

5 It will be good at the first that doubts which arise be imparted to others
of experience; and that the proceeding be marked, that wants may be supplied,
and good things continued.

This if we do, the matter will not seem so difficult and tedious unto us;
neither are lawful callings any lets unto this Christian course. For holy
exercises and lawful business, a heavenly mind and earthly dealing, may very
well stand together.

SOme are also moved, with the crosses that they shall meet withal in the
world.

But they need not be troubled so as to go back, but rather to set forward
thereby, Deuteronomy. 82. Ioh. 16.33.

The end of all this is, that such as have received the Gospel, and that have
not been careful thus daily and perpetually to walk with God; if it was of
ignorance, they must not be discouraged, but only show that ignorance was the
cause, by amending now upon knowledge. If it was of evil conscience against
their knowledge, their sin is the greater, especially if they have fallen from
the first love: Therefore time it is, that they should return and seek peace
with God, maintaining the same by careful watching over themselves throughout
the day, that they offend in nothing.

FINIS.

