THE CHRISTIANS GARMENT.

A Sermon Preached in London, by the late faithful Minister of Gods Word,
Master Paul Bayne.

GAL. 3.27. All that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

COL. 3.4. When Christ which is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in Glory.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwaite, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Flower-de-luce and Crown. 1618.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I do the rather commend this following Sermon unto thee:
First, because I do observe, that all the other works of this holy man of
GOD, which have been committed to the Press, since his death, are generally
approved, and embraced of all the Godly; And secondly, because I having had
other copies of his works in my hands, (as his first largest Letter of all,
exciting to Repentance, and New obedience; and another Sermon of his, which
entreats soundly, and in brief manner, concerning the Apostasy from true
grace, which may be in Gods children, and from those seeming temporary graces
which may be in the wicked) both which are now printed; I thought good not to
bury this other Sermon of his, which follows, in darkness and oblivion.
Thirdly and lastly, I was the rather willing to commit the same to the public
view of all, in regard of the Author thereof, who was, and is still reverenced,
and beloved of all the children of God, which ever knew him: especially of all
those, which had any familiar acquaintance and communion with him; who while he
lived, was a bright Star in the right hand of Christ; Reu. 1.20.
who, as a clear candle, shined so long unto others, upon the candlestick
where Christ had placed him, until by giving light unto others, he had almost
consumed and spent himself; 1. These. 2.11.
who lived as a gentle Father, and a tender Nurse among those of the children
of God which he had committed unto his teaching; who was of the same mind
with that holy Apostle, that he would very gladly have spent, 2. Cor. 12.15.
and been spent himself for their souls, over which he was appointed to
watch; though the more abundantly he had loved them, the less he should have
been beloved of them: so affectionately desirous was he of them, that he was
willing to have imparted unto them, not the Gospel of God only, but also his
own soul, because they were dear unto him, 1. These. 2.8. Act. 20.24.
who counted not his own life dear unto himself, so that he might have
finished his course with joy, and the ministry which he had received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God: which he labored to
perform in a good and acceptable manner unto him: For as he was allowed of
God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so he spoke, not as pleasing men,
but GOD, which tried his heart; 1. These. 2.4. and 6.
neither at any time sought he the praise and glory of men, but of God alone.
He was like unto John the Baptist, for he was both a burning and shining
light, Ioh. 5.35.
burning in himself, with the fire both of an holy and ardent zeal for Gods
glory, and of a pure and fervent love of the salvation of his brethren; and
shining forth unto others, by the light, both of his vncorrupt and sound
doctrine, and also of his unblameable, and good conversation. But behold, this
bright Star, this burning Lamp, this shining Light, was at length eclipsed,
darkened, and by death quite extinguished; but his memorial shall continue
still amongst us, and shall be blessed; his good name, Prou. 22 1.
which is to be chosen above great riches, and to be valued above all precious
treasures, shall never die, but shall freshly shine forth for evermore. Seeing
he was so good a man, his loss is the more to be lamented of Gods Church, and
children: being taken away, as for the unthankfulness of this wretched and
wicked world, Esaias 5^.1.
which was not worthy of him; so also from the evil to come.

Read this, and all other of his works with reverence; remember the things
contained in them with diligence; and practice all the good duties therein
urged upon thy soul with constancy: and if thou receive any benefit, and
comfort thereby, forget not to give God the praise and glory which is due unto
him for the same.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, G. W.

Master Bayne his Prayer before his Sermons.
OUR gracious God and merciful Father in Christ: We confess, that as we are
unworthy to appear in thy sight, so we are of our selves insufficient to
every good work; and much more to those of speaking and hearing thy Word: for
which, who are sufficient? We beseech thee therefore, in the entrance of these
our duties, to help us with thy good Spirit, that the thoughts of our hearts,
and words of our mouths may be acceptable before thee. We confess to thy
glory and our shame, that we are miserable sinners: if we look to our selves,
as lying in the loins of our first parents, we are a tainted seed, justly
disinherited of glory: if we consider our selves, as coming into this light,
we are all conceived and brought forth in sin, which like a Leprosy has
spread it self into all the powers of us; that what we have done of our own
strength, is abomination, and whatsoever is truly good, we have altogether
neglected it, there being not one that does good, no not one. More particularly
we acknowledge, even we, to whom thou have been merciful, to make us taste
how good thou art in Christ; that since the effectual working of grace in us,
we have not ceased, through the relickes of our corruption, to multiply
trespasses against all thy commandments, especially we have provoked the eyes
of thy glory by taking thy Name in vain, by coming to hear and speak thy
Word without renewing our faith, and repentance; and so have deserved, that
thou should turn thy Ordinances to become a savor of death unto us: Yea,
if in none of these kinds we had offended heretofore, yet since we have bowed
our knees, making these our confessions, we discern such blindness of
mind, and hardness of heart with us in the same, for which thou might
justly condemn us, would thou deal in Justice, and deny us Mercy:
Nevertheless, seeing it pleased thee by faith in Christ to make us thy sons
and daughters, we do in this regard enter thy presence with boldness, as it
becomes thy children, beseeching thee to make us able always to challenge
our righteousness before thee, that we may say with good conscience, making
requests in the death and resurrection of Christ: It is Christ, that is dead,
yea who is risen from the dead, who is at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us. Who shall condemn us, or lay any thing to the charge of
us thy chosen? To this end, send the holy Spirit of thy Son into our hearts,
which may renew us more and more to that heavenly Image from whence we are
fallen, which stands in saving knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness.
And because thou have appointed thy Word preached, for a means of begetting
and strengthening this faith, and perfecting thine own Image in us, we beseech
thee, bless thy Ordinance at this time unto us; Thou, who have made the
Ministry of it, a Ministry of the Spirit, in which thy Spirit works our
saluations: And because we know, that when we should receive the greatest
benefit from thee, that then Satan is most malicious against us; we beseech
thee to save us from the power of all spiritual wickedness, and from the
darkness, deadness, wandering and weariness of our own hearts. O thou who
have promised, that if we resist Satan, he shall fly from us; grant, that we
flying to thee in prayer of faith, may begin, proceed in, and conclude these,
and all such duties to the glory of thy name, and the furtherance of our true
happiness. Bless our dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty, bless his Person
and his Throne, sanctify his heart, enlarge it every day more and more for thy
glory, his own comfort, and the good of his people. Bless the Queen, the
Prince, with the Nobility and Clergy of this Land: give them all, O Lord, from
the highest to the lowest, such a measure of thy grace, that they may
faithfully and conscionably, according to their several Callings, discharge
such duties both in Church and Commonwealth, as thou in thy sacred Word have
commanded. We beseech thee to hear us in these, and all things thou know
needful for us: yea make us to see that thou hear us (for such is our
persuasion toward thee in CHRIST) that whatsoever we ask agreeable to thy will
in his Name, it is given unto us, but make us find it by good experience, that
our faith may be strengthened, and that we may teach all flesh to resort unto
thee, who art a God hearing prayer: To whom with thy Christ, and the Spirit, be
given from our hearts all Honor, for ever. Amen.

The Christians Garment.
ROMANS 13.14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.


THE Apostle having exhorted to the works of love, does in the 11. Verse
enforce this exhortation from a double reason. 1. The one taken from the
neerenesse of their reward, which made their diligence now more seasonable. 2.
The other from their present condition, who lived not in the night of
ignorance, and lust of ignorance, but lived in the daylight of knowledge and
grace, which the Sun of righteousness arising in their hearts had brought
forth: Such, who are now nearer the fruit, and end of their faith and love,
such must be more diligent in the works of them: for the end of every thing is
of such force, that the nearer we come to it, we do with more courage and
diligence ply the means which do bring unto it.

Again, though men in the night take rest, and sleep vnapparelled, not passing
for uncomeliness; yet in the day they go out to labor, and have care of
civil decency: from which the Apostle does proportionably argue, that such
Christians, whose night is past, who live in the peep and break of the day,
must settle themselves, as is beseeming for the day: this is mentioned in the
12. Verse, and this that follows: And it is first more generally propounded in
the 12. Verse; 2. Repeated and further expounded in the 13. and 14. Verses. The
first has two branches: 1. viz. Of casting away that which was unbeseeming:
Let us cast away the works of darkness. The second, of putting on such an
habit, as suited with the day, to which part there is a just correspondency in
the amplification: for Verse the 13 particularly unfolds the works of
darkness which we must avoid, and the 14. opens the habit, which will
well agree with us, whose day is at hand: Put on Christ, and take, etc. In
which verse is contained a double duty: The one principal: The other
secondary, following upon the former inseparable: the first, Put on Christ: the
second, Take no care for the flesh, as concerning lusts.

For the opening of which words we must consider, that the first member is
laid down by Phrase of speech borrowed from apparel, and putting on of it: so
that not we, but He is every where seen to live in us: this is resembled by
the action of putting on, which does so cover the body, that not the body, but
the raiment only is discernable. Secondly, Christ, who does determine this
action, is brought in, bearing the semblance of a garment, because as that does
cover nakedness, defend from the injury of the air, procure comeliness to
the body before men: the like does Christ to the whole man in the sight of God.
The latter duty may be conceived. first, as set down indefinitely, Take no
care for the flesh. Secondly, as construed by limitation, viz. so far forth,
as the flesh lusts against the Spirit in you.

To open which words three things must be unfolded: first, what is meant by
Taking care: secondly, by Flesh: thirdly, what Lusts are here excluded.

The first is a word which does signify providence and forethought, how to
bring about this, or that.

2. The flesh does here note forth the outward man: 2. Cor. 7.1. For were it
put for corruption of our nature opposite to the Spirit, the limitation
following, viz. as concerning Lusts, would seem impertinent: for corruption
absolutely, both root and fruit is to be abhorred.

3. The third thing is thus cleared, there are lusts natural, and sinful;
these are here debarred.

The sum is: grow up so into Christ our Savior and Lord, that he may cover
you so, that every where not you, but he may be seen to live in you; and
though you cannot in this body live without sin, yet be not harbingers and
purueyors, making provision to fulfill sin: and though you cannot be without
some care of this outward man, give no respect to the inordinate and sinful
desires of it.

We see then first, what must be the daily endeavor of us, to attire our selves
every where with Christ: I will not seek to prove this, which the Text holds
forth so manifestly, but will lead you into a fuller understanding of this
duty by unfolding these two points: First, how we may consider Christ, as he
is to be put on by us. Secondly, how we come to put him on.

Christ, as he is to be put on by us, or of us, must be conceived: first, as a
iustifier of us from sin: secondly, as a sanctifier, who does free us from
the power of sin, rinsing away, by the water of his Spirit, that stain of
corruption defiling our natures. Thirdly, as an example of life set forth for
our imitation, Learn of me: for I am lowly. And so be you followers of me, so
far forth as I follow Christ: for so far forth as Christ has reference to
this effect of not caring for sinful lusts, so far this consideration may be
fitly extended: yea so far, as he does make us and our ways beseem the Light,
into which we are translated: but Christ both as an Author and pattern
concurreth to this secondary duty of not taking thought for fulfilling the
lusts of the flesh: 1. As an Author in justifying us, and sanctifying us: For
sin entered before guit: but guilt must be taken away before sin can be
abolished, therefore he justifies us from guilt, then purges out our
corruption. 2. As an Example, in that he has left us a President this way.

This putting on of Christ is properly so called, or by a borrowed speech, the
proper putting on of Christ is, when we do by an affianced knowledge, and by
consequent affections come more and more to be united with Christ. As men are
estranged from Christ by ignorance, Ephesians. 4. so by knowledge (such as is in
truth and affectiue) they come to have conjunction with him: by faith he
dwells in our hearts, and we in him. This affiance and trust to him is such,
that knowledge by benefit hereof does unite us; otherwise he being in heaven,
and seeing the glory of God evidently, would not make us one with him, no more
then a sore eye is accorded with light being brought into it: yea affections
increase this union; by love our hearts cleave to him, by hope, joy, high
estimation of him; whom though we have not seen, yet we love, and believing,
rejoice in him with joy unspeakable, and glorious: I count all things dross in
comparison of the knowledge of Christ: Christ is said to be our hope, 1. Tim.
1.11.

Ob. But some will say happily, Does any thing but faith put on, and unite us
with Christ?

Ans. The first and radical union, on which all following have dependency, is
made by faith only: this lays hold on God in Christ, as now become our
merciful God, whose anger before threatened us for sin; nothing begins,
nothing continues this Union, but faith: There is a secondary Union, whereby
the soul cleaves more and more unto God, now reconciled unto it; and this is
done by means of the affections abouenamed, and the like, etc.

Now this presupposes the former: for were it not for this precedent union of
faith, we should fly from God as a consuming fire, yea though we knew him, and
that he is a gracious God in himself, yet with those unbelieving spirits we
should tremble.

Now we are said to put on Christ improperly, by imitation, as a man is said to
put on the person of such an one, whom in his gesture and otherwise he
represents. And thus when we do by knowledge, and faith, and holy affections,
and godly imitation, so grow up into Christ, that he covers us; His Spirit
from him works al our works in us, and for us: Not we live, but he in us,
Gal. 1. that our inward and outward man are in some good measure conformed to
that perfect pattern, which he has left us in himself to follow. Then we
practice this duty here enjoined, when this I say is truly endeavored, which
doctrine thus opened rebukes many.

There are not a few, which live in gross ignorance of Christ his Person,
Offices, and Conversation: How few are they, that labor for that confidence in
his promises, which might settle their hearts quietly through his grace! But
who almost of believers do tie Christ more nearly to them, by working their
affections toward him, laboring to feel him their love, hope, joy? the want
whereof makes Christians faith so weak, that when the wind and storm of
temptation overtake them, they think Christ is taken from them. For though
these affections come from faith, yet they are daughters, which strengthen
their mother when she is assailed.

The woeful practice of Papists is hence discovered: for they fail in the
thing to put on, and in putting it on: Christ alone they put not on: their
faith is on my Lady, S. Peter, S. Paul, on their own righteousness, works,
penal satisfactions, Popes Pardons, etc.

Object. I, but they hold Christ.

Ans. As one having his hand full of this, or that, cannot catch hold of a
third thing, but he loses that hold he had of the former: So here seeking
salvation in Saints, and themselves, and the Churches Treasury, they fall from
Christ. Now, for their Faith, it is a bare knowledge, without confidence that
he loved them, and gave himself for them. Faith is presumption, say they.
Their faith makes them like to such, who carry garments under their arms, but
leave them to others to put on: so they content themselves to know, that the
Son of God took our nature, died to redeem his Church, but that he is their
Savior, and they his people, that he loved them, and gave himself for them:
this, which applies him, they disclaim as presumption.

In the second place, let us provoke our selves to seek this wel-beseeming and
sweet smelling garment, to be clothed with this glorious Sun of
righteousness. It is the folly and madness of men, that this raiment is no
more in request. Why are not Infants ashamed of their naked parts? They have
not use of reason so far. Why are not mad men? Their reason is so depraved
and perverted, they think there is no shame in it: So here our spiritual
childishness, or madness makes us not respect our spiritual nakedness, so
far as to renew our care of putting on Christ daily.

Many in adorning the body are excessive, it is a year before they can have
done in dressing themselves, and half the care of men is about the back, but
they have not wisdom once to think of getting their souls araied with
Christ, and his image.

But let us not deceive our selves; glory is but an upper garment: if we be
found naked of this clothing, we shall never be ouer-shadowed with that glory:
Nay, Christ shall say, Taeke that guest without a wedding garment, cast him
into unquenchable fire. In putting on our apparel, we should raise our selves
to such like meditation.

And take not care. From the sequel and connection of these, one with the
other: we see, that the entertaining of Christ, and retaining of our lusts to
serve them, stand not together: the putting on of Christ, and putting off the
willing service of these sinful lusts are inseparable companions: you, that
are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the lusts of it: Gal. 5.24.
Whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.20. If you have learned
Christ, as the truth is in him, you have so learned him, as to put off the old
man: Ephesians. 4. for the putting on of Christ does transform us into his image,
1. Cor. 2. As the Air dark in it self, ouerspred with the light of the
Sun, becomes enlightened.

Again, we see, that further then old apparel is put off, new cannot be put
on. Besides that, other things can no longer occupy the heart, whose affections
are possessed, and filled with Christ: For look as a woman, the more she
puts on, and grows up into the love of her husband, the more she grows
out of lusting after any other: (the heart can truly love but one at once:) So
we, our affections being once taken up with the love of our heavenly Husband,
do grow out of love with adulterous desires and delights in the things of this
world.

If we well mark our selves, we may trace all our sins to this beginning:
viz. our not being clothed with Christ. Were our hearts so true to him, as
they should be, we should go safe, undefiled by all the allurements of this
world; as a woman loving her husband loyally, is safe, though she meet with
sollicitors to unchastity.

Which serves to deiect the vain presumptions of many, who think that Christ
is quickly learned sufficiently, if they can the Creed, the Lords Prayer, have
Christendom, be orderly Churchmen, receive at Easter; they think this is
Christianity enough: as for putting off of lusts, to which naturally their
hearts incline, they think it needless, and that God, who has made, and
knows our natures, does not expect we should be freed from that, which is by
nature in us: But this is to get our lesson by rote. He that crucifieth not
his natural sinful inclinations, has no union nor communion with Christ:
Yea, seeing these go together, such must fear, who favor themselves in their
lusts, when the devil shall wind this dart against them: Such as are Christ's,
they crucify their lusts, but thou have spared, and loved to have thine
untouched. Well, it will make us shake the head, they will be more bitter in
their aftersorrow, then ever they were pleasant, while they were tasted.

But if any weak soul should think, because they feel sin raging in them,
and themselves captive to it, that therefore sin is not mortified in them, they
must know, that it is one thing not have their sins mortified, and another
thing not to feel any stirring and moving of it in them. It is said truly
then to be killed, when that is done upon it, which will make it die in time,
though it take on awhile: as a wound will ache and tingle after it is dressed
with a healing plaster. He that feels it a burden, wherewith he is
unwilling to be laden: He that desires to be set free from it: He that
renews his faith toward Christ, who is made of God his sanctifier, and
rests on him to see these works of the devil utterly dissolved, he has
mortified his sin, though the devil and sin should never so usurp, and
tyrannize in him.

Paul was crucified to the world, and yet he felt sin usurping over him, and
leading him captive, Gal. 6. compared with Romans 7. The voluntary subjection to
it, mortification presently causes to cease: the inuoluntary suffering of it,
is successively diminished, but never till death totally removed: wherefore in
the second place let us resist all lusts, as ever we will assure our selves, we
are truly in Christ. What a shame is it for Christians, not to have power over
their inordinate lusting in meats and drinks, when a dog will be trained to
stand upon a Table, and touch nothing, which is not given him? How shall we
think they persuade themselves truly that Christ has shed his blood for
them, who cannot forbear a superfluous cup for his sake, when their stomakes
are before charged with more then enough? If a companion come in, though it
were at their mouth, they would thence pull it and yield to him.

Again, Lust is not satisfied, when served. What was Amnon the better when he
had got his will of his sister by violence? Nay, the very lusting for a thing
makes a good man, that he dare not touch it, when now it is present. When
David had a months mind to the water of Bethlehem, he would not touch it,
when now it was bronght unto him. What joy could a good man take, who should
get Manna and Quails with murmuring, and inordinate lusting? And thus in
general.

More particularly, we must note, what is the property of one in Christ: not to
be a harbinger and purueyor, making provision to fulfill his sinful lusts: sin
has not willing obeisance performed to it; You that are under grace, sin
reigns not in you, Romans 6. But to conceive of this the more fruitfully, we
must open the difference betwixt the sinning of one in Christ, and one that
has no true fellowship with him; which we may consider: first, in their
dispositions before sin: secondly, while they are in sinning: thirdly, after
sin accomplished.

First, before sin, a true Christian does not plot and set down with himself
advisedly in a sinful course; but he intends to walk uprightly before his
God; sin closes with him besides his purpose. The wicked ones in their beds
devise their mischiefs. Micah 2.1. The godly are taken at unawares, Gal. 6.1.
Look as one travailing in slippery ways, cannot but slide and fall sometimes,
yet he does not purposely set himself about it; so do the godly in their ways
of sinning. The wicked, who do it with full will, have greater resolution and
delight, while they are a working it, then the godly can have. The Scripture
says, that the wicked hardneth his face, he will not be abashed in his course,
but will go through: A Phrase taken from a trauailer, who sets his face against
the storm, and will on his way what weather soever comes. Thus Pharaoh: thus
that Ichoram of Israel, who would, when two fifties were consumed, send a
third. Again, sin is sweet to them, as a loosing under their tongues; for it
is their meat and drink to have their wills; as it is a godly man's to do the
will of his Father in heaven. Now those, who have a contrary spirit, cannot be
so resolute, and entire in following it, nor tasting any such delight in it. I
speak comparatively: For as they cannot so resoluedly do the good they would,
because sin lusts against grace: so they are but half of them in sin,
because the Spirit of grace lusts against sin in them. David in his haste
would kill and slay; Abigails speech charmeth him: when he had now committed
sins of infirmity, Nathans speech does reclaim him. And doubtless, the
experience of all Gods children will confirm, that sin is but a bitter
sweet, while the Law of grace vp-braides them in doing it.

Secondly, after that sin is attempted, if it be not executed, the wicked
grieve, sleep not, Pro. 4. For as a man fasting, for want of comfortable
vapors, such as nourishment sends up to the brain, cannot sleep: so these
wanting that, which is as bread and meat to them, are kept waking through the
vexation of it. But the godly defeated do at length, when the fit is a little
off, at least bless God with David: Blessed be God, thy self, and thy
counsel, that has kept me from shedding of blood. If it be accomplished, the
wicked, they make a sport of it, are glad they have their wills, pass from it
impenitently. Esau contemned his birthright, when he had profanely sold it.
When Cain had done his murder, he said, Am I my brothers keeper? Whereas the
godly, their hearts smite them, they go forth and weep with Peter. For as meat
unwholesome taken into a stomach, which has strength of nature, causes either
sickness or vomit: so where there is the life of grace, this poison of sin
once taken down, cannot but make a sick soul.

The use of which is to let us see their fearful estates, whose course is to
plot reuenges, covetous reaches, to set meetings of good-fellowship, not
letting men follow their Callings quietly; but provoking them to join in
company: Such, who are wilfully bent: Such, as can brag, when they have met
with one in way of revenge; can tell, with delight, oh, how merry they were!
and repeat their vain delights gladly; sometimes their sinful villainies: That
they have laid up such a one. Such, as when they have made a Conny of one in
bargaining, can drink a pint upon it: Such, as when they have dishonored those
they should obey, can brag, how they stood to them, and held them up. These
wretches have not, as it seems, any spark of grace, who can so well concoct
their sins.

Secondly, this may comfort us, who find these signs in us, that we have
fellowship with Christ: though sin dwell in us, yet we do not purposely hold
a course in it, wilfully and delightfully converse in it, and go away with it
remorcelesse.

Object. But one may here object, that wicked ones do not continue, and
fore-designe all the sins they commit: Secondly, that they sin with
reluctation, and as Judas had, have their after-griefe: Thirdly, again: Godly
ones sometimes have deep fetches for bringing sin about; as David, in
compassing, or covering his fault with Bathsheba. And the sons of Jacob, What
a strange winde-lase did they take to bring about their savage murder? It
seems they may add wilfulness to their sinning. Good Asa, though God
followed him with sore sickness, yet would not seek to him, but to the
Physicians. Yea, they may be unrepentant after sin: For the sons of Jacob
did stoutly carry out their barbarous fact: Shall our sister be made a whore?
etc.

Ans. First: for wicked ones, though they purpose not this, or that particular
sin: yet to follow their own unrenewed mind and will, they always purpose.

Secondly, They sin with reluctation in grosser crimes, such as the world do
note; but the righteous man in lesser, such as no man can challenge him for.
The natural man has a reluctation betwixt the remnants of natural light, and
moral inclination of the will on the one side, and the enormous aberration of
his sensual wilfulness on the other: But the godlies resistance is between a
new divine quality in judgment, will, and affections wrought by the Spirit of
Christ, on the one side; and the remainders of our native corruption on the
other: He has after-griefe, but it is in such crimes, as nature her self,
less corrupted, judges reproachful: Whereas the godly man's grief is even in
good duties, that sin will not let him do them, as he would. Again, the
natural man's grief is, because of miseries in Name, Body, or otherwise,
which his offense has bred to him: The godly man grieueth at the evil it
self of sin, and at the offense of his God displeased with it.

Thirdly, to the exceptions of Gods children, I answer: First, we speak not of
what Gods children do, when now they slide through infirmity, or are fallen
into a spiritual sickness; but how it is with them, when they are themselves
through grace, according as they are regenerated and new creatures. Secondly, I
say there is a great difference: The godly man does thus, but not totally as
the wicked. As it is with a sick man, so it is with him, who is out of his
natural Constitution, so far as the disease, or sick cause hinders and
peruerteth the order of nature: So the godly man having received the Divine
nature, does not do thus according to his new being in Christ, but according as
his state is troubled by the sick relickes of sin, which still dwell in him.
Again, we must distinguish betwixt the general course, and particular action,
out of which ground the aboue-named particulars may be satisfied: For they were
done of them, now sliding through weakness, or declining into sickness, as
in Asa: secondly, they were done not of their whole man, but of that sick
matter which did trouble their Constitution, and Divine Nature they had
received. Thirdly, these were particular acts, in comparison of their general
course. David now fallen into adultery, and down under the fit of sin, did
design that murder; but he was taken by a wandering eye, without any
premeditate intention to offend; so the other in anger, though while the sharp
fit still continued, they could not but devise a way of revenge.

Asa's and Salomons were long sicknesses, into which they fell, prevented by
frailty, besides their purpose (I mean) their course in sin they held in,
which so far forth as the fit, or working of lurking corruption did actually
get the better of Grace, they added wilfulness to their course: but this was,
when now they were by infirmity overtaken, and fallen into sickness, and so
far forth, as the moving of sick matter, that is, of remaining corruption, got
the upper hand. The sons of Jacob were impenitent, when they made that answer:
for their choler was not yet cooled; wrath was still up, and godly wisdom
down: But they were not so in ordinary course, nor when they were themselves
not transported with so violent passion: neither is it to be thought, but when
their blood was now cold, before the renewing of the Covenant, which presently
follows, they did repent. As for David's fact, besides that all above may be
applied to it, he was abused by flattery; the right was doubtful, one
affirming, another denying: He did, no doubt, though not directly in reuoking
wholly that former grant, make Mephibosheth amends, so far forth as he grew
secured of his innocence.

The last thing to be marked is, that he, who puts on Christ, is not
forbidden simply to care for the flesh, but so far forth as it lusts
inordinately.

Concerning lusts; observe, that not care of the outward man, but only then,
when it sinfully lusts, is forbidden a Christian man. No man hates his own
flesh; That God, who commands us not to kill, does bid us not to be wanting
to our lives, in procuring such things as serve for the just comfort of them:
Yea, a Christian Charter is large this way; All things are pure unto the pure:
God has created wine, as well as water; things of delight, as well as
necessity; and the man of God, who should be exemplary for sobriety, is allowed
a cup of wine for the benefit of his stomach, 1. Tim. 5.23. But when desires
grow beyond the bounds of Nature and Grace, they are not to be served.

Object. Here it will be asked, how we know lawful desires from sinful
lustings?

Ans. By considering, 1. the object, 2. quality, and 3. quantity of them: If
they be carried after things unlawful, simply; as private revenge forbidden,
uncleanness, injustice, etc. These are wicked, naught for substance, as we may
say after a sort. Thus when a woman's mind stands to ashes, lie, pitch, raw
flesh (as such who do long, are subject to these) we know them to be
unnatural, because they are after that, which is unwholesome, and agrees not
with nature, when she is in her right frame and temper. Secondly, the quality
of them, when they are vehement, though about a thing that is good: Vehement, I
say, so that they work a perturbation in us, and put us so off the hooks,
that we are not our selves for the instant, these are sinful: Rachel might
lawfully have desired children: but when it comes to Give me children, or I
die: To this, that she will die of the sullens, if she have them not, this
lawful desire is depraved and become sinful. Thus we know, natural heat
from unnatural: the natural heat is so temperately dispersed, that it
disturbeth not the sweet content of natures Constitution; But these unnatural
heats, they make the part glow to which they shoot, and breed a tedious
distemper. So an ordinate desire does not interrupt the sweet harmony of
natures Constitution: but while it is kept in due order, a man walks, not
feeling disturbance by it. Thirdly, the quantity: For if they be excessive, and
insatiable, they are sinful: To have care of business is lawful; but when
there is no end of it, one draws on another; this is sinful: So, to take
delight, is lawful: but when men dwell upon it, and unsatiably after one, must
have a second, after a second, a third; this is gross sensuality: So to take a
cup of wine is lawful; but when one draught calls on another, one meeting
another; this is inordinate.

Quest. How do we know natural thirst from unnatural?

Ans. The one is satisfied with a draught or two: The other is so kindled by
drinking, that it still desires drink: as it fares in Thirsts caused by
Agues, Heates, and in Dropsy-like appetite by salt rhewmes provoked.

This then serves first, to take away the slander of a Christians estate,
which hears, as if it were barred of all liberty; when indeed licentiousness
only, and sinful lusts are prohibited: stolen waters, sinful and intemperate
abuse, not the use of any creatures is restrained. True it is, wicked men
think, there is no pleasure, if they may not have things after their own
mind: And as Daniel loved Pulse better then the Kings diet, while he had it in
holy order; so they contrarily think, that only pleasant, which is had in
sinful fashion: Nevertheless it is not pleasant, but only seems so to
their palates, distasted with sensuality. Fennes are not the delightfullest
places, because Frogs like them; nor Thistles the best meat, because an
Asses lips desire no better Lettice.

Secondly, let us be ashamed to run into our lusts, because God does use us
so liberally, as to withhold nothing from us, that is good. If we allow out
servants plentifully that which is fit for them, we take it the more
heynously, if they pass their bounds, and take by stealth in hugger mugger: so
may the Lord be highly offended with us, seeing his hand is not straight over
us. Let us therefore shake off the service of sinful lusts, as ever we will
have assurance that we are Christ's. A Lust is an unmerciful Tyrant, which will
never be satisfied, but task thee more and more, the more thou obeyest it: And
though men may think they shall lose by this means, and part with pleasure;
the truth is, no man ever had loss by losing a Courtezan: It shall be thy
gain to break off with these spiritual harlots. Amen.

FINIS.

