A COMMENTARY UPON THE FIRST Chapter of the Epistle of Saint PAVL, written to
the EPHESIANS.

WHEREIN, BESIDES the Text fruitfully explained: some principal Controversies
about Predestination are handled, and diverse Arguments of Arminius are examined.

By Mr PAVL BAYNE, sometime Preacher of Gods Word at Saint ANDREWS in
CAMBRIDGE.

PHIL. 2.13.14. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

For it is God which works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure.

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM, for ROBERT MILBOVRNE, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Bear. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir HENRY YELVERTON Knight, His Majesty's Attorney
General, all happiness of this life, and the next.
MOst respected Sir, I need not certify you bow singular is commendation of
greatness it is, to have goodness linked with it; whether it be that goodness
which is conversant in doing kind offices to the living, or to the dead: Nay
surely, that good which is stretched forth to the living, in some regards is
the inferior of the two, as which may either in heart or deed be recompensed;
but that which is performed toward the deceased, can not at all by him that is
not, be known; much less can it be any way requited: Only it remains as an
high commendation to the living, that they still exercise acts of Love and
goodness toward such as are departed this present life. This I speak, Right
worshipful Sir, to provoke you at this time to vouchsafe the gracious aspect
of your countenance, and your worthy Patronage to this ensuing Commentary of a
godly learned man, now at rest in the Lord. He was once of the same College
where your Worship began to lay the foundation of your own studies; and was
not unknown to your self: In which regards I have made the bolder with you, in
becoming an humble and earnest suitor, that you would be pleased of your
goodness to suffer this Orphane-Treatise to repose it self under your wings;
whereof, if it shall please you, Worthy Sir, (as your many and great affairs
will permit,) to read some passage or place, I doubt not but you shall meet
with matters, which at once may both profit and delight you. The Author whilst
he lived, had an indisposition and antipathy to the Press; but since his
death, diverse learned men have pressed me, not to conceal some writings of
his, which came to my hands; yea, they have challenged me, as indebted to the
Church and common good, touching the publication of this part especially:
Accept therefore, I pray you, Right Worshipful Sir, my tendered duty of
Dedicating this work to your name; which, if it shall please you to do, I
shall rest exceedingly bounden to pray for the continuance and increase of all
prosperity to you, from the God who is never wanting to honor those who honor
him.

Your Worships ready bounden to all good services, E. C.

To the Reader.
NOtwithstanding the worlds complaint, of the surfeit of Books (hasty wits
being ouer-forward to vent their unripe and misshapen conceits;) yet in all ages
there has been and will be necessary uses of holy Treatises, applyable to the
variety of occasions of the time; because men of weaker conceits, cannot so
easily of themselves discern how one truth is inferred from another, and
proved by another, especially when truth is controuerted by men of more subtle
and stronger wits. Whereupon, as Gods truth has in all ages been opposed in
some branches of it; so the divine providence that watches over the Church,
raised up some to sense the Truth, and make up the breach: Men gifted
proportionably to the time, and as well furnished to fight Gods battles, as
Satan's champions have been to stand for him: neither have any points of
Scripture been more exactly discussed, then those that have been most
sharply oppugned, opposition whetting both men's wits, and industry, and in
several ages, men have been severally exercised. The ancientest of the
fathers had to deal with them without (the Pagans,) and especially with proud
Heretics, that made their own conceits the measure of holy truth, believing
no more then they could comprehend in the articts of the Trinity, and natures
of Christ; whence they bent their forces that way, and for other matter wrote
more securely. Not long after, the enemies of grace, and flatterers of nature,
stirred up Saint Augustine to challenge the doctrine of Gods predestination and
grace, out of their hands, which he did with great success as fitted with
grace, learning, and wit, for such a conflict, and no Scriptures are more
faithfully handled by him, then those that were wrested by his opposites, and
such as made for the strengthening of his own cause. In other writings he
took more liberty. His Scholars prosper. Fulgentius and others interessed
themselves in the same quarrel.

In process of time, men desirous of quiet, and tired with controversies,
began to lay aside the study of Scriptures, and hearken after an easier way of
ending strife, by the determination of one man, (the Bishop of Rome) whom
virtually they made the whole Church; so the people were shut up under
ignorance and implicit faith, which pleased them well, as easing them of
labor of search, as upon the same irkesomenesse of trouble, in the Eastern
parts, they yielded to the confusion and abomination of Mahometisme.

And least Scholars should have nothing to do, they were set to tie, and
untie Schoole-knots, and spinne questions out of their own brain, in which
brabbles they were so taken up, that they slightly looked to other matters; as
for questions of weight, they were schooled to resolve all into the decisiue
sentence of the sea Apostolic; the authority of which they bent their wits
to advance; yet then Wisdom found children to justify her: for Scriptures
that made for authority of Princes, and against usurpation of Popes, were well
cleared by Occam, Marsilius, Patauinus, and others, as those of predestination
and grace by Ariminensis, Bradwardine, and their followers, against
Pelagianisme then much prevailing.

At length the Apostasy of Popery spread so far, that God in pity to his
poor Church, raised up men of invincible courage, unwearied pains, and great
skill in Tongues and Arts, to free Religion, so deeply inthralled; from whence
it is that we have so many judicious Tractates and Commentaries in this latter
age. And yet will there be necessary use of further search into the Scriptures,
as new heresies arise, or old are revived, and further strengthened. The
conviction of which, is then best, when their crookedness is brought to the
straight rule of Scriptures to be discovered. Besides, new expositions of
Scriptures will be useful, in respect of new temptations, corruptions in life,
and cases of conscience, in which the mind will not receive any satisfying
resolution, but from explication and application of Scriptures.

Moreover, it is not unprofitable that there should be diverse Treatises of the
same portion of Scriptures, because the same truth may be better conveyed to
the conceits of some men by some men's handling then others, one man relishing
one man's gifts more then another. And it is not meet that the glory of Gods
goodness and wisdom should be obscured, which shines in the variety of men's
gifts, especially seeing the depth of Scripture is such, that though men had
large hearts, as the sand of the sea shore, yet could they not empty out all
things contained; for though the maine principles be not many, yet deductions,
and conclusions are infinite, and until Christ's second coming to judgment,
there will never want new occasion of further search, and wading into these
deepes.

In all which respects, this Exposition of this holy man, deserves acceptance
of the Church, as fitted to the times, (as the wise Reader will discern.) He
went through the whole Epistle, but left large notes of no Chapter but this,
which in some few places are not so full as could be wished for clearing some
few obscurities; yet those that took the care of setting them out, thought it
better to let them pass as they are, then be over bold with another man's
work, in making him speak what he did not, and take them as they be, the
greatest shall find matter to exercise themselves in, the meaner matter of
sweet comfort and holy instruction, and all confess that he has brought some
light to this excellent portion of Scripture.

He was a man fit for this task, a man of much communion with God, and
acquaintance with his own heart, observing the daily passages of his life, and
exercised much with spiritual conflicts: As Saint Paul in this Epistle never
seems to satisfy himself in advancing the glory of grace, and the vileness
of man in himself; So this our Paul, had large conceits of these things, a
deep insight into the mystery of Gods grace, and man's corruption; he could
therefore enter further into Paul's meaning, having received a large measure of
Paul's spirit. He was one that sought no great matters in the world, being taken
up with comforts and griefs, unto which the world is a stranger; one that had
not all his learning out of Books; of a sharp wit, and clear judgment:
though his meditations were of a higher strain then ordinary, yet he had a
good dexterity, furthered by his love to do good, in explaining dark points
with lightsome similitudes. His manner of handling questions in this Chapter is
press, and Schoole-like, by Arguments on both sides, Conclusions, and
Answers, a course more suitable to this purpose then loose discourses.

In setting down the object of Gods Predestination, he succeedes him in
opinion, whom he succeeded in place; in which point Divines accord not, who in
all other points do jointly agree against the troublers of the Churches peace,
in our neighbor Countries; for some would have man lie before God in
predestinating him, as in lapsed and miserable estate; others would have God in
that first decree to consider man abstracted from such respects, and to be
considered of, as a creature alterable, and capable either of happiness or
misery, and fit to be disposed of by God, who is Lord of his own, to any
supernatural end; yet both agree in this. First, that there was an eternal
separation of men in Gods purpose. Secondly, that this first decree of seuering
man to his ends, is an act of sovereignty over his creature, and altogether
independent of any thing in the creature, as a cause of it, especially in
comparatiue reprobation, as why he rejected Judas, and not Peter; sin
foreseen cannot be the cause, because that was common to both, and therefore
could be no cause of seuering. Thirdly, all agree in this, that damnation is an
act of divine justice, which supposes demerit; and therefore the execution of
Gods decree is founded on sin, either of nature, or life, or both. My meaning
is not to make the cause mine, by unnecessary intermedling; The worthiness of
the men on both sides is such, that it should move men to moderation in their
censures either way; Neither is this question of like consequence with others
in this business, but there is a wide difference between this difference and
other differences. And one cause of it, is the difficulty of understanding, how
God conceiues things, which differs in the whole kind from ours, he conceiving
of things, altogether and at once without discourse, we one thing after
another, and by another. Our comfort is, that what we cannot see in the light
of nature, and grace, we shall see in the light of glory, in the University of
heaven; before which time, that men should in all matters have the same
conceit of things of this nature, is rather to be wished for, then to be
hoped. That learned Bishop, (now with God,) that undertook the defense of Mr
Perkins, has left to the Church, together with the benefit of his labors, the
sorrow for his death, the fame of his worth; an example likewise of moderation,
who though he differed from Mr Perkins in this point, yet showed that he could
both assent in lesser things, and with due respect maintain in greater
matters. If we would discern of differences, the Church would be troubled with
fewer distempers; I speak not as if way were to be given to V^rstian, lawless,
licentious liberty of prophecy; that every one, so soon as he is big of
some new conceit, should bring forth his abortiue monster: for thus the
pillars of Christian faith would soon be shaken, and the Church of God, which
is a house of order, would become a Babell, a house of confusion. The doleful
issues of which pretended liberty, we see in Polonia, Transiluania, and in
countries nearer hand. We are much to bless God for the Kings Majesty's
firmness this way, unto whose open appearing in these matters, and to the
vigilancie of some in place, we owe our freedom from that schism, that
troubles our neighbors.

But for diversity of apprehensions of matters far remote from the
foundation; these may stand with public and personal peace. I will keep the
Reader no longer from the Treatise; the blessing of heaven go with it, that
through the good done by it, much thanksgiving may be to God, in the Church,
Amen.

R. SIBBS.
Grays Jnne.
The Doctrines gathered out of this Commentary, upon the first Chapter of the
Ephesians.
Verse 1.
1 MInisters must inculcate to themselves, and to those with whom they have to
deal, that their calling is from God. 2 The quality of the person that brings
the matter of this Epistle to us, is that he is an Ambassador of Christ. 3 We
must account it our greatest dignity that we belong to Christ. 4 It is the
will of God that does assign to us our several callings. 5 All the members of
the visible Church are to be Saints. 6 In the most wicked places, God gathers
and maintains his people. 7 It is faith in Christ alone with makes men
Saints.
Verse 2.
1 It is the duty of Christ's Ministers to bless the faithful children of the
Church, as in the name of God. 2 The most holy and justified persons have need
of grace. 3 The most excellent thing to be sought for above all other, is the
favor of God, that his Grace may be with us. 4 True peace is a most singular
blessing. 5 All true peace is that which is bred in us from the knowledge of
Gods love toward us. 6 God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, are the
authors of true peace.
Verse 3.
1 A good heart must be ready on consideration of Gods benefits to break forth
into praises. 2 Every Christian heart is to magnify God, in that he has
been the God of Christ our Lord. 3 The sense and knowledge of Gods blessing
us, is it which makes God bless us again. 4 Our heavenly Father blesses all
his children. 5 The faithful ones, and sanctified, are they who are blessed of
the Father. 6 Spiritual benefits make the regenerate man thankful. 7 All our
blessings are given us in the heavens. 8 God deals liberally with his
children, giving them all kind of spiritual blessings. 9 We come to be
blessed in and through Christ our Lord.
Verse 4.
1 Our Election is a blessing worthy all thankfulness. 2 The Elect are such
who have true faith and holiness. 3 The grace of Election begins with
Christ, and discendeth to us in him. 4 Gods love borne us in Christ, is not of
yesterday, but before all worlds. 5 God has of Grace chosen us to the
supernatural life. 6 God has not only chosen us to this life, but to the
perfection of it. 7 God has of grace taken us to this life, that we shall
live in his glorious presence.
Verse 5.
1 God does first love us to life, before the means bringing us to life are
decreed. 2 God has not only chosen some, but ordained effectual means,
which shall most infallibly bring them to the end which they are chosen. 3 Such
we may say are predestined, who have believed, and are sanctified. 4 God has
determined before all worlds to bring us to this, that we should be his adopted
children. 5 The life which God has ordained by means prepared to bring us
unto, is a life coming immediately from his grace. 6 God out of his mere good
will does determine both the end and all the means by which he will bring us
to the end.
Verse 6.
1 All the Lord did from eternity intend about man, has no end but his own
glory. 2 God does generally intend the praise of his grace, in all such who are
predestined by him. 3 The attributes of God are his essential glory. 4 That
grace which in time does work all good things for us, is the same which before
all time did purpose them to us. 5 The grace of God does bring us to receive
favor and grace, in and through his beloved.
Verse 7.
1 In Christ is to be found deliverance from all spiritual thraldom. 2 All of
us are by nature no better then in a spiritual captivity. 3 We have
deliverance from our spiritual thraldom by Christ. 4 That by which we are
ransomed and redeemed, is the blood of Christ. 5 To have our sin forgiven, is
to be redeemed and set free from all evil. 6 Every belieuer in Christ
receives forgiveness of his sins. 7 God from his rich grace gives us
pardon of sin.
Verse 8.
1 God gives pardon of sin to none, to whom he first has not given
wisdom and understanding. 2 True wisdom and understanding are gifts of Gods
grace in Christ Jesus. 3 God does give wisdom and understanding plentifully
to us, whose sins he forgiueth.
Verse 9.
1 God works saving wisdom in none in whom he opens not the doctrine of
wisdom, the Gospel of salvation. 2 The doctrine of our salvation through
Christ is a hidden secrecy. 3 The reason why God reuealeth or opens the
Gospel to any, is his mere gracious pleasure within himself.
Verse 10.
1 God has set seasons wherein he will accomplish all his purposed will. 2
God by opening us the Gospel does bring us his Christ. 3 Whosoever have him,
or shall be gathered to Christ, they are brought to him by opening the Gospel.
4 We are gathered together as fellow members each with other in Christ.
Verse 11.
1 Being in Christ we find not only righteousness in him, but life
everlasting. 2 The way to find our selves predestinate before all worlds, is
to find that we are called, justified, sanctified. 3 Every thing which comes
about, is Gods effectual working. 4 What God works or wills, he does it
with counsel. 5 What God wills once, that he effectually works.
Verse 12.
1 To be brought to faith before others, is a prerogative which persons so
called have above others. 2 The end of all our benefits we attain in Christ is
this, that we may set out his glorious grace and mercy toward us.
Verse 13.
1 God by our hearing his Word, does bring us to be partakers in his spirit. 2
The word of the Gospel is that which being heard, brings us the quickening
spirit. 3 All Gods promises made in Christ, are true and faithful. 4 It is not
enough to hear, but we must believe before we can be partakers of the good
spirit of Christ. 5 The faithful are as it were by seal confirmed touching
their salvation and full redemption. 6 The holy spirit, and the graces of the
spirit are the seal assuring our redemption.
Verse 14.
1 The spirit does not only as a seal, but as an earnest penny given us from
God, confirm unto us our heavenly inheritance. 2 The spirit abides with us as
a pledge confirming us, till our full redemption. 3 Here below the faithful
feel not themselves fully delivered.
Verse 15.
1 Ministers must labor to know how grace goes forward in those with whom
they have to deal. 2 The Ephesians faith is occupied abo^^ the Lord Jesus
Christ. 3 Faith and love are never disioyned, but go ^^ch in hand one with
another. 4 The love of true believers is set on the Saints, yea on all the
Saints.
Verse 16.
1 The grace of God in others must move Christians especially Ministers to be
thankful to God. 2 Christians are to help each other with prayer, especially
Ministers their converted people. 3 We must with perseverance follow God in
those things we pray for.
Verse 17.
1 We must so consider God, when we come to him in prayer, as that we may see
him in the things we desire. 2 Even true believers have great want of heavenly
wisdom. 3 We have need not only of wisdom whereby to understand, but of
light manifesting the spiritual things which are to be understood of us. 4 It
is even God by the spirit of Christ, who works in us all true wisdom. 5 To
grow up in the acknowledging of Christ, is the way to attain the more full
measure of the spirit in every kind.
Verse 18.
1 They whose spiritual light is restored, have need still to depend on God,
that their eyes may be further and further enlightened by him. 2 Even true
belieuers know not at first, in any measure, those hopes which are kept in
heaven for them. 3 There is no grounded hope, but only of such things as God
has called us to obtain. 4 The inheritance kept for us is abundantly
glorious. 5 The Saints are they to whom belongs the heavenly inheritance.
Verse 19.
1 Gods believing Children know not at first any thing clearly the great power
of God which works in them. 2 They in whom the power of God works, are true
belieuers. 3 It is the effectual working of Gods almighty power, which
brings us to believe.
Verse 20.
1 The selfsame power put forth in raising Christ our head, is that singular
power which raises us. 2 God does lead his dearest children to the depth of
miseries, before he send relief. 3 God never so leaves his, but that he
sends salvation in due time. 4 God does make the abasement of his children be
the forerunners of their greatest glory.
Verse 21.
1 Our Savior Christ as man, is taken to have prerogative before every other
creature. 2 Christ not only as God, but as man also, has power over every
creature. 3 Christ is crowned with glory at Gods right hand before and above
all things. 4 There is a world to come, in which Christ and those who are
Christ's, shall reign for ever.
Verse 22.
1 Christ is made as a head, having a more near and communicatiue sovereignty
over believers, then over any other. 2 God of his grace has not only given us
a head, but such a head to whom all things are subject.
Verse 23.
1 As Christ is the head of believers, so they are his body, and every
believing soul a member of this body, whereof he is the head. 2 Christ does
not count himself full and complete, without all his faithful members. 3
Whatsoever thing is in us as Christians, all of it is from Christ.
FINIS.
A COMMENTARY UPON THE FIRST Chapter of the Epistle of St. PAVL to the
Ephesians.
CHAP. 1. VER. 1. PAVL, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to the
Saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus.


BEFORE the words be entered, it is fit to praemise some few words concerning,
1. the Occasion, 2. the Scope, and 3. the Method of this Epistle. First, the
Occasion was the state of the Church, foreseen by Paul, Acts 20. it being the
care of a faithful Teacher to provide that the things he has planted may
stand, and take increase after his departure, 2 Pet. 1.15. 2. The Scope is to
teach them the Doctrine of Gods most rich grace, and to stir them up to every
good duty, in way of thankfulness. The parts of the Epistle are three. 1. The
Preface, in the two first verses. 2. The Matter or substance of the Epistle,
which reaches from the 3. verse, to the 21. of the sixth Chapter. 3. The
Conclusion, thence to the end. In the Preface 3. things are contained. 1. The
Authors name, who is described by his office, an Apostle, which is further
amplified; first, from the person to whom he appertained, or for whom he was
employed: secondly, from the efficient cause by which he was made an Apostle,
the will of God: This answers to our subscriptions, for we write our own
names under our letters. 2. The names of the persons to whom he writes, who
are first propounded more briefly, with the place they were at, Saints at
Ephesus; Secondly, it is expounded more clearly whom he means by Saints,
not such as are written in the Popes Calendar, having Divine honor done them,
but such as are faithful in Christ. Again, these words may seem to lay down
persons, first, more specially, as the Saints at this place; secondly, more
indefinitely and generally, as true believers on Christ every where; but the
note of quantity wants to make this sense: for Paul would have spoken in this
manner, To the Saints at Ephesus, and to all that believe on Christ, if this
had been his meaning, as 1 Corin. 1. This part of the Preface answers to our
superscriptions wherewith we endorse our letters; for on the back of our
letters we use to express the name of our friend to whom they are directed.
The third thing in this Preface is his salutation. The words of this verse
needing no further explication, Doctrines of the 1. verse.
we will note out the chief instructions, which offer themselves to our
observation, and so pass on to the second Verse.

Paul does use to set forth his calling, before he enters his matter with
them, it does teach that Ministers must inculcate to themselves, and such as
they have to deal with, their callings from God. S. Paul does not text this
forth in the forefront of every Epistle; Paul, a servant of Christ: Paul, an
Apostle of Christ, but that he found it a fit thing to be proposed, both for
his own sake, and theirs with whom he had to do: Even as Civil Magistrates
do give out their Writs in the Kings name, with mention of the Office they
bear under him, to the end that due respect might be given him of the subject:
So this great Church Officer does mention what place he held under Christ the
King of his Church, that the things delivered by him might be accordingly
received: In a word, this is good for the Minister himself, and for the
people: how could they look to be shielded against all, but by holding their
eyes on him who has called them? For people this is behoofefull, for it makes
them sanctify God in hearing, while they look not so much at man, as at God
teaching by man, Acts 10.33. 1 These. 2.13. 2. It makes them obey those that
are over them, when they have conscience of this, that God has sent them: as a
servant, when he thinks his Lord or Lady has sent any to him, does readily
do that he is commanded.

Paul himself might have been misconstrued: What nothing but Paul an Apostle;
cannot Paul have the office of Apostle, but all the town must be of Counsel?
But as S. Paul feared not to prefixe this, howsoever his custom might be
depraved; so must we immitate the same, in prudent proposing the Ministry we
have received from God, though evil minded men misinterpret the fact, to their
own destruction.

Paul an Apostle. Observe more particularly, first the quality and degree of
him, who brings the Doctrine of this Epistle to us; He is an Apostle, one of
the highest degree, an Ambassador of State, sent from Christ, for so the word
signifies. Look as Kings have their superior and inferior Magistrates, from
the Chancellor, to the Constable; so Christ, the glorious King of his Church,
has diverse orders of Ministers; the order of Apostles being supreme, and most
excellent above any other, Ephesians. 4. And look as Kings dispatch Lords
Ambassadors into other Countries, concerning important business; so the Lord
Jesus, now about to ascend, did send forth his twelve Apostles, to publish the
Charter of the world, even forgiveness of sins, and free acceptance to life
eternal, to all such as would take their pardon forth, by a lively belief.
Many were the privileges of these Apostles. 1. Privileges of an Apostles, 5.
They were immediately, no person coming between, designed by Christ. 2. They
were infallibly assisted, so that in their office of teaching, whether by word
of mouth, or writing, they could not err. 3. Their commission was universal,
throughout all Nations, though the usual exercise thereof, Gal. 2.
was limited and determined by Christ, doubtless for the greater edification
of the Church. 4. They could give by imposition of hands, the gifts of the holy
Ghost, which Simon Magus would have redeemed. 5. They were eye witnesses of
Christ, and saw him ordinarily, and miraculously in the flesh, as Paul. my Lord
Chancellor, or some great statesman should in person publish his pleasure, we
would attend it more reverently. The Atheism of these times is much to be
lamented: Our superstitious ancestors, if the Popes Nuncio or Legate came
amongst them, bringing the Popes blessing, indulgences, relics, such wares as
were the mock of the world; Oh how were they received, how were their
commodities (if I may so call them) entertained? But our Atheism is such, that
we let these things lie by; many of us not asking after, nor vouchsafing to
read with devotion these things which the true Legates of Jesus Christ have
brought unto us, and left published for our sakes.

Secondly. We see hence the firmness of all those things delivered in this
Epistle; for, it was not so much the Apostle, as God in him, who indicted these
things: As when a lesson is sounded forth upon an instrument, it is not so much
the instrument, as his who plays upon it: So here, I Preach not my self, but
Christ the Lord; an Apostle of Christ, that is, an Apostle, whom Christ does
take and own as his Apostle; who is employed about him, 2 Cor. 4. And indeed,
this phrase does import his being made by Christ, rather then include it; and
therefore, 1 Timothy 1. ve. 1. he is said an Apostle of Christ, by the
commandment of Christ; where an Apostle of Christ is an Apostle pertaining to
Christ, now possessed of him, and employed about him, having been advanced to
this place by the ordination of God and Christ.

Paul's fact holding out this as his glory, that he was Christ's Apostle, does
teach us; that we are to account it our greatest dignity, that we belong to
Christ. We see in earthly seruiters, their glory is so much the greater, by how
much their Lords and masters are in greater praeeminencie: Hence it is that we
sue for the cloth of Noble persons, espeally, who are great favorites with
the King: Moses, Abraham, David, then that Gods name was called on them;
Abraham the friend of God, Moses my servant, David, Oh how thy servant loves
thy statutes? Psalm. 119.

largess is, even above all heart can think, to his true hearted servants.



According to Gods will.] Observe hence, that it is the will of God which does
assign to us our several callings; for the Apostle does acknowledge in this
phrase, two things: First, The Providence. Secondly, The free grace of God.
Civil men will set forth the wisdom and bountifulnes of their benefactors;
those that rise by the Kings favor from one place to another, oh how they will
extol his Prince-like clemency: So this heavenly mind of the Apostle, every
where is affected with the free grace of God, who did assign to him such a
high calling as this was: the truth is, it is Gods providence, and goodness,
which do design us to every calling, Galla. 1.15. Even from his mothers
womb, did God set him a part, Ier. 1.5. Before he was borne, did God decree
him a Prophet; yea, the Smith that blows in the coals, the Lord creates
him, Esaias 54.16. No wise man does make a thing, but he knows the ends to
which he will use it; much less does the Lord make any of us, but he knows
to what ends he will employ us; and look as a wise governor in the family,
sets one to this work, in this place, a second to another, in a diverse
place; so does the Lord in this world, which is a piece of his household.

Cor. 7.21.

Saints at Ephesus.] Paul was not ignorant, that there were bad fish, as well
as good, Chafe, as well as Wheat, in this visible Church; nevertheless, he
does well call them Saints: man does not like to have in his house uncivil
rake shames so the most holy God will not allow any in his family, openly
unholy: Like master, like man, at least in outward conformity; and look as no
man can think well to have Swine in his house, or Dogs and Swine come to bourd
with the rest of his family; So here, open sinners, who after their names given
to Christ, return to their vomit, they have no allowance from God to be in his
household: When we see it otherwise, it is through sinful neglect of due
censures, and such as have the power of them shall answer it. But here the
Brownists must be answered, who reason thus; Every true visible Church stands
of visible Saints; Our Churches stands not of visible Saints; Ergo, They are
not true, and by consequent to be separated from. The proposition has a double
sense: First, every true Church has in it some visible Saints, thus it is
true; but then the second part of the reason is false; ours have in them no
visible Saints. The second sense is, every true visible Church stands, or
has in it only visible Saints, stands entirely of these, no others any way
intermingled: Now it one understand this de iure, viz. of what kind of persons
the Church should stand, it is true; but if it be understood of that which
through iniquity of some men, falls out in the Church, then it is false; For,
the Church of Corinth was a true visible Church, while the incestuous person
remained vncast forth, though he was of right to have been excommunicate: And
how absurd is it that one sinner, by the negligence of some vncast forth,
should degrade a thousand from the dignity of a Church?

young Saints, prove old devils: It is a wonder that such hellith ow^e^ dare
fly in the sunshine of so Christian a profession as is made amongst us.

our selves Saints, married to God; for us to live in the lusts of our own
hearts, does exceed all Turkish and heathenish impiety; They are loose and
free (as I may so say) they have not entered any covenant with the true God, in
Christ.



In Ephesus.] This was a mother City, famous for Idolatry, Coniuring, as the
Acts of the Apostles testify; so given to all riot, that it banished Hermodor,
in no other consideration, but that he was an honest sober man. This people
were so wicked, that heathens themselves did deem them from their mouth,
worthy to be strangled; yet here God had his Church.

Noah in it; thus he had a Melchisedeck in Canaan, a Lot in Sodom, a Job in
Vz, a Church in Pergamus, where the Devil had his throne: where God has his
Church, we say, the Devil has his Chapel: so on the contrary, where the
Devil has his Cathedral, there God has his people. Look as in nature, we
see a pleasant rose grow from amidst the thorns, and a most beautiful Lilly
spring out of slimy waterish places. Look as God in the darkness of the night
makes beautiful lights arise; so here in the darkest places he will have some
men who shall shine as lights, in the midst of a perverse generation. This God
does first in regard of himself, that he may display his mighty power and
wisdom so much more clearly: Thus in the creation to bring the creature out
of nothing, lights out of darkness, did display the riches of his almighty
power, goodness, and wisdom. In regard of the Saints, that they may more
clearly discern his great grace to them, who has so separated and altered
them from such, with whom they formerly conuersed. In regard of the wicked,
that by the example of these, the world may be condemned in their unbelief and
unrighteousness, and all other darkness, which they chose rather then light;
as Noe is said to have condemned the old world, while he builded the Arc, of
the impenitency and careless unbelief in which they lay, without respect to
Gods threatening, Hebr. 11.7.

he who has kept his in the wickedest places, will keep us also. Secondly,
we must think of our happiness, if we did use it above these, they did
dwell pell-mell, heathen and Christian under one roof, whereas we live with
none but such, for the most part, as profess the Christian name, Ergo, in many
regards our condition is far easier.

Now he comes to explain whom he means by Saints, describing them from
their Faith in Christ: To the faithful in Christ:] For, these words are added,
first, to point at the root of sanctification, which is Belief; Secondly, to
distinguish Gods Church from the Synagogues of the Jews, who professed faith
toward God, but not in Christ Jesus; Identice, formaliter.
and he does fitly note out the Saints by their faith in Christ Jesus; for,
whosoever is faithful is a Saint, and whosoever is a Saint, is faithful;
though to be a Saint, and to be faithful, are not properly and formally both
one.

Terminum non obiectum.
for (in) Christ, notes rather the effect of their faith, then the object.
Observe then who are the true Saints, viz. all who by faith are in Christ
Jesus. Fides non formaliter sed effectiue sanctificat, Christum siquidem
apprehendit per quem formaliter iustificamur sanctificamur effectiue.
Saints, and faithful ones, are carried as indifferent with the Apostle, Col.
1.2. and elsewhere. For though the formal effect of faith be not to sanctify,
whence we are denominated Saints; but to justify, whence we are called
righteous, through forgiveness of sin and adoption unto life, yet faith
effectually produces our sanctification, whereupon we have the name of
Saints. Three things go to this: 1. The purifying of the heart: 2. The
profession outward of holiness: 3. Holy conversation: Now Acts 15.9. by faith
our hearts are purified; for, as a counter-poyson coming in the poison that is
weaker, is expelled: and as the Sun rising, the darkness of the night is
expelled and vanishes; so Christ, the sun of righteousness, by faith
arising in our hearts, the ignorance and lusts of ignorance are despersed and
fly before him.

Secondly, faith begets profession of holiness; Having the same spirit of
faith, we cannot but speak, says the Apostle; and believing with the heart,
and confessing with the mouth go together. Thirdly, holy conversation
springs from faith; If you have learned Christ as the truth is in him, you
have so learned him as to put off the old man, and to put on the new. Faith
works by love, even as a tree has both his leaf and fruit. And as if a tree
should be changed from one kind to another, the leaves and fruit should
likewise be changed, as if a Pear tree should be made an Apple tree, it would
have leaves and fruits agreeing to the change made in it; so man by faith
having his heart purified, made a tree of righteousness, he has his leaves
and fruit; leaves of profession, fruit of action. So again man as a new tree,
set into, and growing out of Christ, bears a new fruit; he conuerseth in
holiness and newness of life. Thus you see how those that are faithful, are
also Saints, because by faith their heart is purified, their profession and
conversation are sanctified: wherefore such believers, who are mockers of
Saints, who will not be accounted Saint-holy, and such who are not changed into
new creatures, walking in newness of life, they may well fear that their
belief is not true, such as does unite them with Christ; for whosoever is a
true believer, is a Saint; whosoever is by faith in Christ, is a new creature.
We would be loath to take a slip, or be deceived with false commodities in a
twelve pound matter: Let us be here no less diligent, that we take not an
ungrounded fruitless presumption, for a true faith, which rests on Gods
word, made known, and is effectual to the sanctifying of the believer.

Paul's time: A man may be in hell who has all such things performed about him.
Saints are Triumphant or Militant; Triumphant, such who now walk by sight,
enjoying the presence of God; Angels, Spirits of the righteous departed, who
have now rested from all the labors of their militant condition. Militant, who
walk by faith in holy profession and conversation, holding Christ their head,
by whose power, apprehended by faith, they are kept to salvation.

hold us as Saints; he that by faith has put on the Sun of righteousness,
is more clear and bright then if he were arrayed with the beams of the
Sun. Again, though we have sins too many, yet the better part gives the
name. Corn fields we see have many weeds, yet we call them Cornefields, not
fields of weeds: so here, yea Grace, though it seem little over that sin
shows to be, yet it will in time overcome it; as Carloe is much higher then
the Barley, yet the Barley gets up and kills it: The spirit that is in us
from Christ; is stronger then the spirit of the world.

God the Father, and the Son.

Numb. 6. Aaron and his sons shall bless the people in my name. As God has
given a power to the natural parent to conueigh good things to their children;
Honor thy Father that thy days may be long, or that they may prolong thy days
by their blessing, deservedly coming upon thee; so God has given spiritual
fathers a power of blessing, yea, and of anathematizing or cursing the children
of the Church, who so deserve, and that effectually: So that Paul makes good
what they do in this kind. This good Annah found, 1 Samuel 1.17. when she had
meekely answered, so harsh and false a suspicion, The God of Israel grant thy
request, says Elie, and she glad of the favor she had found in his sight,
went away, and it was presently granted. For more distinct conceiving of the
matter, I will briefly show, 1. what this blessing is: 2. on what it is
grounded. It is a ministerial act, which does apply Gods blessing to the well
deserving children of the Church, and enters them into the assured possession,
through faith, of Gods blessing toward them: which does apply I say; for it
differs thus from a Prayer; a Prayer seeks to obtain the things for us,
this does in Gods name apply and assure our faith that the blessing of God is
upon us, and shall graciously follow us: When the Minister entreats
forgiveness of sin, it is one thing; when again he does assure a repentant
heart that God has done away his sin, this is another thing: in the one he
seeks to obtain this benefit for the party, in the other he does assure
the party that it is now applied in him.

The grounds are two. 1. The spirit of discerning, I mean ordinary, not
miraculous, which makes them by fruits see who are such members of the Church,
whom God does promise to bless: The second is the authority which God has put
upon them, Ordinary, Public, Private.

who will have them to be his mouth and instrument, whereby he will both
assertaine his children of their blessedness from him, Private is but a wish or
prayer.
as likewise execute it in them. Now from these two, that I discern a child
of the Church, to whom blessing pertains, and know my self to be his mouth
to signify it, and instrument with whom he will concur to produce it, from
these two, it is that this act of blessing springs, be it a blessing in
general given, or singularly applied. And hence you may see a difference
betwixt our blessing, and the Patriarchs prophetical blessing; for their
blessings were grounded upon a Revelation, in them made, of things which should
befall their posterity.



superstition, every hedge-Priests blessing was highly esteemed, if he had
given his benediction in Nomine Patris, Filij and Spiritu sancti, how well they
thought themselves? but as every where else, that which they superstitiously
and idolatrously often magnified, that the Atheism of our time utterly
neglects. Thus in General: now in particular.

Romans 5.2. in which Grace also we stand: At the day of judgment, that we have
to deal with mercy, not with justice, it is manifest, 2 Timothy 1.18. where the
Apostle prays that the Lord would show Onesyphorus (a most godly man) mercy,
in the day of judgment, and life it self, the very thing we come to. Now the
gifts of Gods spirit whereby we come to it, is called grace, Romans 6. the end,
life eternal; not a stipend, but (...), a gift of grace; thus it is one way
cleared. Again, in what should grace manifest it self, but in these three
things. First, in forgiving sin; Secondly, in attaining life; Thirdly, in
continuing in the present grace. Now when we are converted, we have need of
forgiveness of sin, otherwise what need we to pray, Lord forgive us our
trespasses? Beside, every Saint finds himself sold under sin, and that as
an evil within the will of him, which cannot therefore increase his merit, but
makes him more guilty; for heaven we have no need of grace, for according to
the Law, continue in all perfectly to do them, and live; none conscious of
sin can hope to live this way. Now for perseuering in state of grace, we have
need of grace, for this we cannot deserve; but as Gods gracious pleasure made
him to come unto us, so it makes him abide with us, to accomplish his good
work, which should he not, all would come to nothing in us: For as the soul
entering into the body, gives it life, sense and motion, which presently cease
in the body, if the soul be departed: So here God, the soul of our souls,
returning to them, does produce by his spirit, a life of grace, which would
presently be extinct, if he should forsake them.

God would enable me, rather then another to come effectually to life, Gratia
cadit in actum voluntatis diuina, non in obiectum.
but no grace that I come to life; as when I might sell a Horse to many, it is
my favor that I will sell him to one, and not to another; but it is not my
favor that he has the Horse which buyeth, and ergo, by force of
communicatiue justice is to have him. Thus they say it is Gods grace, that he
will have some to have life, and give them wherewithal to buy it, but that
they have life, is justice, not his grace. Poor souls, thus they forsake
their mercies, besides that, they make mercy to have nothing to do at the day
of judgment, and life it self not to be grace, contrary to that which is
above named.



viz. the favor of God, that his grace may be with us. To open it before we
discourse of it: Grace joined with pity, does signify Gods love only, so
far as it is a fountain, from whence springs his pity to us in misery;
out of which mercy he does, when now we are miserable, save us; thus grace
sounds nothing but love, and the object of it is more general; for grace is
toward us, and every creature, in innocence, and misery; but mercy is only
toward us, as we are considered in misery; unless the preserving the mutable
creature subject to fall, may also be an object of mercy: but when grace is put
indefinitely, then grace includes mercy in it; for mercy is but grace
restrained and limited to man, as in misery; the difference is rather in our
manner of containing them, then in the things themselves. Now wishing them
grace, out of which came true peace; he wishes three things. 1. That God
himself should be still mercifully and graciously inclined to them, for God is
love, 1 John 4.16. 2. He does assure them of all effects of Gods grace and love
toward them, partly in procuring them all things that were good; the grace of
the father of lights, being as a sun; Psalm. 84.2. partly in protecting them
from all evil; this favor being as a shield, wherewith the Saints are
compassed about, Psalm. 5.13. 3. In grace, is included the signification, the
report of his grace, in such sort, as that they might have the sense of it,
that is, the displaying it on their heads as a banner; the shedding of it into
their hearts, the lifting of the light of his countenance upon them, Lam. 2.4.
Romans 5. Psalm. 4. Thus when we wish one favor with any, we wish him that he
may be in their love, inwardly affected, helped with the fruits of their love,
and courteously and kindly entreated, in regard of loving vsages, which is the
signification of their love; for if God should love us, if he should do us
good, and shield us from evil, yet should he hide this from our sense and
experience, we could not have this peace, which is next mentioned. Now then,
we may better see that this love of God, is above all things to be desired;
there is no lack in this love, no good thing shall be wanting unto us, nay, if
evils in our taste be good for us, we shall not want them; as the love of a
Parent makes him when need is, provide bitter physic for his child, as
well as other contentments: No evil shall have access; no, if things good in
themselves be harmefull for us, they shall not have access to us; as the love
of a Parent lays away a Knife, which is a good thing in it self, out of the
reach of his child, for whom it were hurtful: All things which to our sense,
and in themselves are evil, this love makes them work to our good: If the
skillful Art of a Physician may make of a poysonfull Viper a wholesome Treacle;
no wonder if Gods gracious love, turn even the devil himself to become a
helpefull instrument, setting forward our perfection, 2 Cor. 12.9. In a word,
it makes a little estate great riches, every estate contentfull: A little
thing given as a token of the Kings good will, do we not prize it more then
thrice the vallew of that, which is no pledge of his favor? And when the love
of a sinful man is of such force, that many a woman while she may enjoy it,
feels not beggary it self not grievous: What a force is there in the grace
of God, while it is perceived, to make us find no grieuance in greatest
extremity? Whereas without this, were a man in a paradise of the earth, with
all the good of it, all were nothing. There are Noble men in the Tower, who may
ride their great Horses, have their Ladies, fare deliciously, want not for
wealth, yet because they are out of the Kings favor, no wise man would be in
their coats, none esteems their state happy: How much more then are all
things of no value; if they be possessed without this favor, of which we
entreat? Psalm. 17.15. Psalm 4. Psalm. 63.
This grace is our life, it is better then life: As the Marigold opens when
the Sun shines over it, and shuts when it is with-drawne; so our life
follows this favor; we are enlarged, if we feel it, if it be hidden, we are
troubled. Finally, that which the Kings favorable aspect does in his Subject,
that which the Sun and Dew do in the creatures of the earth, which they
make to smile in their manner; the like does this grace, through all the world
of spirits, who feel the influence of it.

husband, with God, from whom we are most disloyally estranged.

Means to grow up in favor with God.
Now, if you ask by what means we may grow up in favor with God. I answer:
First, we must every day show unto God, that well beloved of his, in whom he is
well pleased, from whom favor flows upon all his as the ointment trickled
down from the head, Psalm. 105.4.
on the garments of Aaron. Secondly; We must provoke our hearts earnestly to
petition for this; Seek my face; Psalm. 27 8.
Lord, I will seek thy face. Thirdly; We must grow up in conscience of our
vileness to be humble; Isay 57. Luke 1.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble; that is, shows
favor: As the lowest valleys are blessed with the happiest influence of the
heavens; so here, the contrite humble spirit, is the place God delights to
let his grace dwell in. Mat. 5. Heb. 12.
Fourthly; We must labor daily, more and more to depart from evil, and purge
our hearts from all the corruptions which remain in them; The pure in heart
shall see God, even the light of his countenance, in grace and glory. Look as
a clear transparent thing, as Crystal, has the light coming through it,
which cannot pierce through grosser bodies: So in those hearts which are the
purest, shall this light of Gods countenance diffuse it self most abundanly.

And peace.] Peace; that true peace is a most singular blessing. The Apostle
cannot speak of it, Phil. 4.7. but he sets it forth with this commendation,
that it passes all understanding; this is that golden bequeath which Christ
did leave us, now ready to dye; My peace I give unto you, not as the world
gives you, Ioh. 14.22. Peace described.
That it may be the better conceived, I will open three things. 1. What it is.
2. In what kinds it may be considered. 3. Whence the one and other peace
flows. It may thus be described; Peace is a tranquillity or rest in the mind,
springing out of Christ's death, wrought in us by the spirit, through the word
of God: it is a quiet, I say, or heavenly tranquillity, for peace, in these
salutations, is opposed to fear, grief, to any kind of perturbation, which
breaks the sweet consent and harmony of the mind; My peace I leave with
you, fear not, be not troubled: It is a sweet concord, making joy in the
mind, as the concord of well compounded discords begets a most delightful
harmony, in which the ear ioyeth and triumphs. Secondly, It comes from
Christ's death; his chastisement was the chastisement of our peace, his stripes
our healing: For as an imprisoned debtors peace, springs from some sureties
satisfaction, so here, etc. Thirdly, I say it is wrought through the spirit,
Gal. 5.22. any body may put an instrument out of tune, but none can reduce it
to true consent, but he that has the skill of it; And as it is in any man's
power to distemper himself, and breed troublesome sicknesses, but a skillful
Physician only, can restore a temperate constitution: so we of our selves were
able to disorder our souls, putting all out of frame, but it is God only by
his spirit, who can heal all iarres, and bring forth sweet peace in us.
Lastly, I say by the Gospel, which is therefore called the Gospel of peace.
Now as man leads us by his outward words, to see his good meaning toward us;
so God by this outward word, as well as inward, does reveal to us his rich
grace. Now we may consider this true Peace, as for the substance of it begun in
us, or as more full, for the circumstanciall degree of it; for as Christ
insinuates a joy in part and respectively, a joy full; so we may conceive of
Peace: For, as there is a light more cloudy, and more bright and clear; so
there is a peace, with which more or less disturbance is intermedled. Now
Peace considered in the first kind, comes first from this, that Gods amity
is restored; whereas his wrath was toward us, now he is attoned and reconciled
through Christ; the working therefore of our peace, is chiefly ascribed to
this, that Christ did abolish the enmity twixt God and man, Ephesians. 2. Col. 1.
The Angels singing on Christ's nativity, Peace on earth; in the next words
opening the fountain, viz. Good will to men. For look as there can be no
peace to a Traitor, till the King turn favorable to him; in like sort it is
with us, who from the womb are rebels, if we knew our condition.

Further, hence it comes that the whole creature is accorded with us, even
the beasts, yea, the stones of the field are at league with us, Hos. 2.18. Job
7. For as servants follow their master, soldiers their chiefetaine, so do all
the creatures obediently follow him who is the Lord of Hosts. Secondly, this
peace comes from the doing away of all disturbance which was within man
against himself; as the accusation of his thoughts for guiltiness of sin,
the rebellion and fight of lust against his reason, or rather the spirit of his
mind renewed; we being justified by faith, have peace toward God, Romans 5.1.
The God of Peace sanctify you throughout; by which we may gather, that while
God sanctifies us, he does show himself a God that makes Peace; and so many
as walk by this rule, viz. rejoicing in Christ crucified, who has crucified
the world to us, and us to the world, Peace shall be upon them, Gal. 6. For
look as the body, sick with distemper, cannot be healed with the Physicians
good affection, unless his action also be afforded; so it is here; it is not
sufficient that God should be graciously inclined, unless he should by his
will and power cure those disturbant aberrations which deprived us of all
peace. Thirdly, from a securing us for time to come, in regard of enemies both
inward and outward, from breaking the power of them, of hell, death; that they
are not able to hurt us, much less to prevail against us: For it is not the
molesting power of enemies, but the hurting power which stands not with
Peace. You see how gainful troubles, and worldly peace, stand well together:
so the trouble of our militant condition accrewing to us from these outward
spiritual enemies, does not let our Peace, while we know that all things
shall work to our good; that we shall be more then conquerers; that God will
not leave us nor forsake us. Fourthly and lastly, our Peace considered as
abouesaid, does flow from the gift of the spirit, which teaches us in some
manner, to know these things which are next above named; we have not received
the spirit of the world, but the spirit of God, which teaches us to know the
things bestowed upon us; Nihil no^ precognitum afficit voluntatem.
for nothing can work upon the affections, as to make us fear, joy, further
then it is known: and we see that a condemned prisoner, though that his
pardon be sealed, yet is no less subject to fear, then before, till the
matter comes to his ear, and he be infallibly certified of it.

Thus much for the grounds, which are in some measure wheresoever true Peace is
in any degree. The more full Peace, comes from a further work of Gods grace
in us, which represseth or vanquisheth for a time all perturbations, which
spiritual wickednesses, unbelief, unholiness in general, want of godly
contentation, defects in our conditions, might occasion. For look as unto
bright clear light more is required, then that the Sun should be present,
inlightening the air, to wit, that it should be in that strength present, as
to waste and disperse all darkesome clouds: so here to this full peace, it is
necessary that all perturbations should be more fully removed. Thus much for
the opening this benefit.



thank God for this temporal peace of our Kingdom, that we hear not the
drum, the trumpet, the clattering of armor, but that thou have part in this
peace, which makes thee free from fear of death, hell, the world, all
wickednesses; which makes thee sleep secure wheresoever the wind lie, for
none can blow, but to bring thee in profit; if thou know this peace, how
much more art thou bound to break forth into the praise of thy most merciful
God?

God saves man and beast; he opens his hand and fills them; his mercy is
over all his works; this more common or universal mercy, as I may call it.
But here arises a necessary question, viz. How I may discern Gods special
grace, from this more common? Ans. First, this special grace springs from
another fountain: common Grace comes hence; God is a faithful Creator,
patient and kind toward the vnkindest vessels of wrath: Hence it is that he
does them good, that his goodness may not want a witness in their own
conscience, Acts 14.17. but this special Grace comes from hence, that he is
reconciled to us in his Son, Grace and truth through Christ Jesus; he has
made us beloved in his well-beloued, John. 1. Ephesians. 1.7. Secondly, hence
comes a difference in the benefits, for that common favor gives benefits to
the preservation of this natural life, but this love in Christ, gives
supernatural benefits of repentance, faith, hope, inward change of heart and
affections. Hence follows a third difference: for common Grace is
acknowledged sometimes while the benefits of this life are afforded men, but
they neither feel nor confess Grace, when these are bereaved; but this
spiritual Grace which comes from Christ, and stands chiefly in
supernatural gifts, this is felt often most abundantly in afflictions, Romans 5.
Afflictions breed patience, patience experience, experience hope, the love of
God being shed into the heart; for as the darkness of the night hinders not
the bright-shine of the star, no more does the darkness of afflictions
obscure the bright-shine of this Grace toward us. Yea, we shall find this in
experience, if before our troubles we do not ouertly skin our soars,
sparing our selves in our sins, partly by not provoking our selves to due
repentance, partly by not seeking to get the roots of rebellion thoroughly
mortified, partly by not endeavoring to weane our selves from all inordinate
earthly delight in the creature: for our superficial sleighting in matter of
repentance, our boisterous proud impatience not well subdued, our vnweanednes
to some thing or other; these 3. do make an Eclipse of the light of Gods
countenance, when now we are afflicted: This by the way. A fourth difference in
these graces, may be taken from the effect of them in the heart; for the grace a
carnal natural man feels, never makes his heart fly up from all earthly
things, and rejoice in God, whom he sees favorable, but even as a harlot, her
love is more to rings, bracelets, or gold sent her, then it is to the senders:
so the world, an adulteress, her affections are altogether on the creatures
and good benefits given them, nothing in comparison, upon God himself: But the
true special Grace makes us love him, who has loved us above all things,
delight our selves in him, say, What have I in heaven but him, in earth in
comparison of him? Thus then we see that true Peace comes from sight and
experience of Gods special grace to us, and how we may distinguish this
special favor. But before we pass to the Use, a question may be asked, viz.
Whether a man may not be in favor with God, and yet without this Peace? To
which I answer briefly: First, that he may be in favor, and want this outward
sensible Peace in himself: The reason is, because this follows not my being
in favor, but my knowing and my being persuaded that I am in favor: Now it is
not impossible for a man to lose his sense and persuasion, which yer-while he
has had of being in favor with God, his faith may be for a time in a swoon,
and ouercast with unbelief, Secondly, I say, though a man may be without this
operation of Peace, yet the grace of the spirit, which as a root does bear
this fruit, cannot fail in any who is in Gods favor: the fruit may be pulled,
when the tree it self stands still, thus in joy; Faith we may likewise
distinguish, the seed of God abiding in us, though these outward secondary
effects are not always conspicuous.

There is a Peace in the Tents of the wicked ones; Look Job 21.9. There is an
ease which does slay the foolish; which is the ease that men do live in, it
comes not from feeling this special grace toward them, but from the
sleepiness of the conscience, which makes them without feeling; from
ignorance, which makes them without knowledge of the evil imminent over them.
If a man has twenty diseases never so painful, while he is fast asleep, he
is at ease, because his senses are bound, not because his diseases are healed.
So again, say a man were in a house ready to fall on his head, let him know
nothing of the danger, he is as quiet as if all were safe. Thus men's souls
are asleep, and ignorant of their peril: Take heed of this sick sleep,
lest it pain you at waking: take heed lest while you say Peace, Peace, that
destruction be not at the doors. Yea, let the Lords children take heed, who
have full peace, but not from the grounds above rehearsed; their peace comes
not from seeking Physic wherewith to purge their sick souls, from not
exercising their feeble strengths in works of repentance, faith,
thankfulness, forgetting themselves in humane occasions and contentments,
from Laodicean-like conceits. A body of ill habit, while you stir it not with
some courses which fight with such humors, it is quiet; a lame leg while it
is rested, is at ease; while the senses are pleased or stounded with some kind
of an odynes, those pains are not felt which are present. Finally, a man in a
golden dream, thinks things far better with him then they are, and is
highly contented for the time; These are ways (my brethren) whereby we walk
in a full peace, when yet our unbelief has not been out-wrastled, when our
unholy lusts have not been crucified by us.

some black clouds, which did ouer-spread thy condition; Happy art thou whose
repose issues from these considerations.

From God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.] the God of peace, Christ
is called, the Prince of peace: God making peace, none can trouble, as, when he
hides his face, who can bear it? Job 34.29. Look as Kings are authors and
maintainers of the civil peace within their Countries, they keep their
subjects from disturbance by foreign and domestical enemies; so God, the
King immortal, and Christ who has received the kingdom, are fitly brought in
as the authors of this spiritual Peace: And it is to be noted, that he fitly
names God the Father, and the Son our Lord; for, the principal and
subordinate power which do work any thing, are fitly combined: Now the Father
has all power, and he has subjected all things unto the Son, himself and
Spirit excepted. But why is not the spirit named? It may be said, because the
Apostle here is directed to express only these persons, who have a kind of
principal authority and agency: Now the Spirit has the place of executing
these things, as sent by the Father and Son: But in unfolding these things,
as it is good to use diligence, so it is requisite to use sobriety. For
conclusion; Let these be remembered, that though both the Father and Son, be
fitly named, for the reason above; and the Father first, both for his
principal authority, as likewise, because he works both by himself, and
from himself; the Son by himself, (as who has the selfsame divine nature)
but not from himself, as who is not from himself, but from his Father, and
therefore in his working keeps the same order; Nevertheless, in wishing the
effecting of things, it is not necessary to name any persons, ne yet God
indefinitely. 2. It is necessary to conceive in mind the true God, in Christ,
though not distinctly to consider the three persons: The reason is, because
every act of religion does require that we some way apprehend the object of
it; and as there can be no sight without some matter visible propounded, so no
act of religious worship, without this object, in some wise conceived. 3.
Mark, that it is lawful when we name persons, to name one only, two, or all
the three, provided that we name not one, as excluding the other two, nor yet
two, as excluding the third: for thus calling on one, we invoke all, and as
naming no person distinctly, we do not dishonor the persons, so naming one
and not others, does not breed any inequality of honor in our worship. And
lastly note, that we may name the Spirit before the Son, and so by
proportion, the Son before the Father; see, Reu. 1. For as that precedencie
seems derived from priority of order and inequality of office, which is found
amongst the persons by voluntary agreement; so this latter naming of them,
seems to be grounded in the equality of their natures.

Cains city building, and S^uls music, with company, good-cheare, music,
employments, tables, cards, etc. quieted the melancholic spirit, then they
think their peace is well restored. God sets these things upon us, to arest
us, as it were; we seek to still them, never looking to God, that he would,
through his Christ, be reconciled to us: Now what is this but extreme folly?
If a Creditor should set a Sergeant upon our backs, were it wisdom in the
debtor, to compound with him, and corrupt him, and to think all safe, while
the Sergeant winketh at him? Every body would account this folly; for he is
never a whit the more out of danger, till the Creditor be agreed with. Thus it
is likewise in seeking our Peace, by stilling our evils, not by quieting Gods
anger, which is justly kindled against us.

Thus much of the Praeface.
Verse of the sixth Chapter. In the Doctrinall part two things chiefly are to
be marked. First, he propounds Doctrine concerning the benefits wherewith we
are blessed in Christ, which is done more indefinitely in the first Chapter,
applied from comparison of their former estates in the second. Secondly; the
scandal which his Cross might cause, and the impediment which it might put to
the fruitful receiving of these things, is prevented, Chap. 3. In the more
absolute handling of these benefits, we must mark, that first in this third
verse, they are summarily propounded, then more particularly from their several
kinds expounded. Now in this 3. verse, the Apostle does not barely propound
them, but breaks out into thanksgiving, before he makes mention of them.
Three things being to be observed in this Verse. 1. His praise, Blessed. 2. The
person praised, that God and Father of our Lord. 3. The arguments, which are
two; First, which God is to Christ our Lord; for this is usual with the
Apostle, that when he describes God in petition or thanksgiving, that the
description contains matter of strengthening faith, and whetting desire in the
one, and motives of praise in the other; The God of peace sanctify you
throughout, 1 These. 5. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus, the God of
all mercies and consolations, 2 Cor. 1.3. The second Argument, is from that God
has done by us in Christ, in those words, Who has blessed us, with all
spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in Christ. Now before we come to the
more particular consideration of these words; some things are to be opened for
the clearing of them: First, What is meant by our blessing God? Answ. Blessing,
is sometime operative, working and effecting the happiness of him that is
blessed; Thus God blesses us: Sometime it is declaratiue, confessing and
extolling the blessed estate of those whom we bless; Thus we bless God, we
acknowledge him blessed, praise, and extol him, Psalm. 145. ve. 1.2.21. where
blessing and praising are made aequiualent. Secondly; it is to be marked, that
these words; God, even the father; contain a description of God, from two
relations unto Christ; one from this, that he is the God by covenant of Christ:
The other from this, that he is the father; according to that, Ioh. 20.17. I
go to my father, and your father, to my God, and your God: for this, the words
bear better then that first God indefinitely, then limited to the person of
the father, should be conceived in this sense, blessed be God, to wit, God the
father of our Lord; for the article should rather be prefixed to (...), and the
particle (...) does redound. The last thing to be marked, is that the word,
heavenly, which may signify things, or places, is fitliest taken to note the
place where our spiritual blessings were given us, for spiritual blessing
notes not the action of God blessing, but the effects proceeding from it; to
this sense, who has blessed with spiritual things? for the Apostle construeth
all spiritual blessings by predestination, vocation: Now to say, Who has
blessed us with spiritual things, in heavenly things, is absurdly superfluous.
Again, this word is in two other places of this Epistle used, to note the
circumstance of place, and therefore is here in that sense to be construed,
without more urgent reason to the contrary. The sum is, Praised be the God of
our Savior; praised be the God of our Lord Christ Jesus, who has blessed us,
that is, by his blessing made us partakers of all spiritual benefits, such as
take their beginning from heaven, are kept in heaven, shall all have their
accomplishment in heaven; and all this in Christ, who is the root, and second
Adam, whence every benefit supernatural springs, and is derived into us.

Paul's Epistles, may give sufficient argument of this truth. Nay, we see how
David, a man after Gods heart, was so affected, that he did not only stir up
himself, his soul, spirit, all within him, but all the creatures, every thing
that had breath, from the highest Angel, to the lowest creature: This grace
being like fire, which once kindled, catches hold of all that is near it. For
our better understanding this duty, I will open two things. the instrument be
first tuned; no more is any voice of praise acceptable, unless the heart be
first ordered. 2. There must be a declaring before men of that kindness and
love the Lord has showed us: Come, I will tell you what God has done for my
soul, Psalm. 66.16. I will daily tell of thy righteousness. We count it
ingratitude in men, when they will smother benefits, and never be known to
other of whom they have received them. 3. There must be an endeavoring of
requiting Gods love, by answering his benefits with thankful duty, by walking
worthy of them; What shall I repay the Lord, for all his benefits upon me? Thus
we count him unthankful, who does not bend himself to requite love with the
like, so far as ability reaches. Psalm. 103. My soul praise the Lord, forget
not all his benefits.

but taken away some distance, does brightly discern it: So we, when good
things are taken away know them well, which we see not to be such benefits,
while we enjoy them; Again, the plentiful use of the best things, breeds a
satietie, and makes them no dainties; And hence it comes, that good things
which are commonly and constantly with us, are not regarded: Let us therefore,
the rather practice this second rule, for the neglect of it makes us want our
comfort while we possess things, (for who can take joy in that he esteems
not?) and it makes us have double grief, when now they are removed; for then
the conscience of our carelessness does bite and sting us.

Jacob said. Hunger is sauce which makes every thing well tasted; So this
poverty of spirit, makes the least blessing seem great toward us. The humbled
poor, take the least scraps thankfully.

such measure as we do: But this exceeds all the rest, that because God does
constantly continue to us benefits, that therefore we should slacken our
thankful duty. If one give us 20. pound one time only, we thank him; but to
give it us yearly for twenty years together, this is far more thanksworthy;
to give it us as an inheritance for ever, this is most of all obliging us; Thus
it is with Gods benefits, which he constantly leaseth out to us, and makes
them as it were a freehold with us. We for these, even in this consideration,
should most extol him.

Call on me in the day of thy trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. We would not forfeit any thing worth the holding for non-payment
of rent: Let us take heed lest for want of thankfulness we give God occasion
to re-enter, and dispossess us of all good things we enjoy.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Blessed be God the Father for
blessing of us, but first, Blessed be the God of our Lord Jesus Christ: Before
he comes to consider what God was to himself, with the rest of believers,
he does extol him, for that he was to Christ the head. Which doctrine before
we can prosecute profitably, it is fit to unfold what this does comprehend, to
be the God of any; for this opened, we shall conceive more clearly, the equity
of this, that we are to be thankful in this regard. This is a fundamental
favor, whence all other do spring, and it conteyneth the eternal love of
God, loving us, and predestinating us to supernatural happiness, as likewise
every subordinate grace, by which it is executed. First therefore, the
foreknowledge and predestinating Christ as man, to the grace of personal
union, and glorious office of a Mediator, of which we have, 1 Pet. 1.20. this
comes here to be conceived. I have sheep that are mine, which are not of
this sheepe-fold, says Christ: where we see that we are Gods, Ioh. 10.18. Heb.
2.10. Heb. 7.26. Heb. 4.89.
and God ours, before we are called, even by predestination. Secondly, Christ's
calling, of which is spoken, Hebr. 5.1. and the confederation entered with our
mediator, wherein God required on his part, the fulfilling of righteousness, so
far as served to qualify his person, that he might be a fit high Priest, Isa.
53.10.11.
and especially the offering his body, that is, his soul and body by the
cursed death of the cross, wherein God promised on his part, that he would be
with him to strengthen him, and deliver him from all evil, and to crown him
with glory; yea, that all his seed should be blessed with righteousness and
life, through him. The Scripture is plentiful to prove that it is all kind
of blessedness, to have God for our God. Now then if we be members with Christ
our head, have we not cause to be thankful to God even in this respect, that
he has been, and is his God? The ancient Church did magnify God, that he had
made himself the God of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob their forefathers: how much
more reason is there for us to glorify him in this regard, that he is the head
of Christ our Lord? Again, if any man should help and deliver from great
evils some of our friends, should do them many favors, would we not return
them in this consideration thanks, and much commend them? If Christ be dear
unto us, we must needs bless and praise the Lord, inasmuch as he has been a
God assisting, preserving, and is a God glorifying our Lord and Savior. In the
head of Christ lay all our happiness, had not God been a God to him, and
covered it in the day of battle, we had all of us perished; all our
supernatural happiness stood and fell in him.

at the head, the hand will ward the blow though it be quite cut off: Thus if
we were such members to our Christ, as we should be, we would more rejoice and
magnify God, for that he has been, and is, to his Christ, then for that
which he works for our selves. If we love not and extol not the God of
Christ in this respect, that he is a God to him, it is a sign we bear not
that love to Christ which we should.

And Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:] Observe secondly: that we are to
magnify God in this regard, that he is the Father of our Lord: This respect
is here placed in order of nature, duly, for it flows from the other; God
is not first the Father of Christ, in regard of his humane nature, and then his
God; but because he was of his own accord the God predestinating the humane
nature in Christ to the personal union, therefore he comes to be the Father
of his Son, so far as he subsisteth in flesh: As we are not first the
children of God, and then come to have him for our God; but because God has
freely set his love upon us, and been our God so far as to predestinate our
adoption, Ergo, he comes to be our Father, and we his children: That Christ
therefore, as man, or in regard of this extrinsick nature is the Son of God, it
comes from the grace of predestination; Yet we must not think that this does
make in God the Father, a double generation; for, as the respect of fatherhood
is not multiplied from hence, that his Son is now single, now married; so
Gods generation is not multiplied, in regard that his Son sometime only was
in the nature of God, but now is married, by an indissoluble personal union,
unto our nature. To come unto the Doctrine.

Sheba, accounted the servants of Solomon, happy men: Nay there is nothing so
mean, which does any way enjoy this or that excellent thing, but we esteem it
blessed. David, admiring the beauty of Gods Tabernacle, did almost emulate the
happiness of the Swallows, who might yet make their nest near the Altar; He
counts all that have access to it, and that doore-keeper who dwells in it,
exceeding happy. Again, we see that if any be more markeable for wisdom,
valor, favor, with their Prince, if any be a deliverer of his Country
oppressed, will not civil men pronounce the Parents of such children thrice
happy? of him in this respect. Who does not glorify God in that he is the
Creator of this aspectable world, which we behold? but in being the Father of
our Lord and Savior, his honor is much more displayed: the rather let us
strive to magnify God in this respect, because we shall then assure our
hearts that we love and honor our Lord and Savior Jesus, and that we have
Union and Communion with him, as head and members; for where fellowship is,
there is conjunction. Then shall our praises be distinguished from Jewish and
Heathenish doxologies, which sound not in them a syllable of Christ Jesus. If
we look at God the Father, we have reason to laud him in this regard; for it
is the greatest manifested glory: If we consider Christ, we are bound to it;
for who can think honorably of him that is begotten, but will honor the
begetter in regard of him? If at our selves, we may gather from that has been
spoken, arguments enough, obliging us to this duty. I speak the more to this
point; for the love of Christ Jesus is cooled, yea almost extinct, even amongst
Christians.

Now follows the second argument, from that which God has done by us in
Christ; Where first we are to consider the action; of Gods blessing. Secondly,
the Persons blessed; Thirdly, the blessings themselves, set down by enallogie
of the number, and metonymie of the cause, blessing for blessed benefits, which
are described from the quantity and kind of them, with all spiritual
blessings. Fourthly, the place whence those blessings come, and where they are
reserved, heavenly places. Fifthly and lastly, the fountain; in Christ.

First, it is to be marked that he had in his heart an apprehension of Gods
blessing him, with these faithful ones he wrote unto, before he breaks
forth to bless God. David and others, you shall find that the conscience of
some benefits received from God, did move unto them; I will praise thee,
because thou have exalted me: Praise the Lord my soul, who has forgiven all
thy sins, etc. Psalm. 36.70.3. that receipt of benefits, is the foundation of
thankfulness. When the Leper saw himself cured, he returned and gave
thanks: As S. John says in Love; We love him, because he has loved us
first, 1 John. 4. So in blessing; We bless him, because we find that he
has blessed us first. As a wall cannot reflect light and heat from it, till
the Sun has first shined on it; and as an Echo cannot resound any thing to
us, till we have first spoken unto it: so till our God has spoken his
blessings to us, we cannot resound blessing to him.

our best blessings, and our hearts will not be unthankful. In particular.

Authoritatiue.
father of all fatherhoods in heaven and earth; he gives his blessing to those
that are his. Again, as we see earthly Parents, bless their children, both in
word and work, wishing them blessed, and giving them many benefits; for
Parents treasure up for their children: Thus our heavenly father, does both in
word pronounce us blessed, who are his by faith; Blessed are you that believe
on me; that hunger and thirst for righteousness; that are pure in heart; and
he does also bestow on them many benefits, which do make them blessed; For,
to bless, signifies both as well to give a gift, as pronounce blessed.

Jacob did wrestle for it with prayers and tears, Genesis 32.26. Come to God and
confess, that we are accursed children of his wrath, but entreating that for
Christ's sake, who was made a curse for us, that for this his Sons sake, he
would bless us. The blessing on Mount Sinai was gotten by doing; but seeing
the Law is impossible, to our sinful weakness, we must seek the blessing
only in believing. Would we not count that Child a miscreant, which would
not come to the Parents, and ask their blessing? It is a token we are
bastards, and not children, if we come not to God in secret, and entreat him to
bless us, through his Christ: What may they think of themselves, who have
never heartily, and humbly sought this way? That reprobate Esau shall condemn
them; for he sought his earthly Parents blessing importunately, and with
tears, when now it was too late, which these never did toward their heavenly.

Come ye blessed of my father, inherit, etc. ergo, is not lightly to be
esteemed.

A third Use, may be for Imitation.

Who has blessed us, my self with you, who are faithful Saints. Observe,
what kind of children have their fathers blessing; the faithful ones, who are
sanctified, these are blessed of God; for Saint Paul's saying, who has blessed
us, does not speak rhetorically, like great men, who speak in the plural
number, for the singular; We will you, this or that was done to us; but he has
reference to these Ephesians, whom he described in the first Verse; of whom,
joined with himself, he affirms that they were blessed; The truth is, first
we are really and actually blessed, blessedness being received into
themselves, but such as are believers, and now sanctified, though others are
predestined to blessedness, yet this does only make them blessed, so far,
as that their blessedness is intended in time future, it does not for the
present work any alteration in them, tending this way. Praedestinate and
reprobate, before faith come, are in themselves all one: Know you not that
drunkards, railers, shall not enter into Gods kingdom; such were you, but now
you are washed; these ergo, who now were blessed, ergo, predestined before
their callings, were the same with them, who shall not enter into Gods kingdom.

Secondly; I say, as none are actually blessed, so none can be known and
affirmed to be blessed in Gods purpose, which are not believers and Saints. The
reason is, because that which is in Gods mind cannot be known further then
the word or work of God does reveal it. Now Gods word does tell us only thus
far, that such as are and shall be called to faith, and sanctified, they are
predestinate. Now then, further then we can see faith, we cannot descerne any
to be predestinate: But the faith of such who are already believers, is only
such as we may perceive (for there is no word revealing whom God will give
faith to hereafter, I say, so revealing it that their persons thereby are made
evident to us,) ergo; we can see none to be predestinate to salvation, unless
we can by fruits, behold him to be in present a believer. Again, our faith and
grace, is the work beginning our salvation; till therefore faith is wrought,
there is no work of God apparent, which does let us see he has a purpose to
save: This then is a truth, that the believing and holy person, is only such,
of whom we may say, that he is blessed of God; yet this caution is to be taken,
that as we cannot say any is blessed; so we cannot say any man in particular,
wanting faith and grace, shall not be blessed, or that he is not predestined.
If a man up a fore day should reason thus; here is no sun up, ergo, none will
rise to day, his sequel were frivolous; so here, etc.

Ephesians. 5.15.
the world accounts them, as they did before of Saint Paul, Christians, and
Christ himself, as if they were off-scourings, 1 Cor. 4. base, cursed people,
Ioh. 7. Cursed and plagued of God, rather then blessed, Isa. 53.4. But this is
our comfort, God thinks, and pronounces otherwise of us.

Mat. 3.14. To ride on a fine Palfrey, to have a cap and knee given them, to
fat their hearts with laughter, and all earthly contentments; these things our
Epicure-like Christians count felicity; But if thou have not faith and grace,
clensing thy heart and life, though thy excellency does touch the clouds, and
thou do seem to make thy neast in the stars, yet shall thou perish like
the dung; the higher thou have been lifted up, so much the more deadly
downfall shall thou take into those hellish torments, that fearful
destruction. Thus much for the persons blessed.

Now for the blessings. 1. The quality; With spiritual. 2. The quantity; With
[all] spiritual blessings. First; for Paul, mark what kind of benefits
provoke him to bless God; even those which are spiritual. Romans 1.8. 1 Cor.
1.4. Romans 6.17.

of sin, the gift of faith, sanctification, and such like; so as to be
thankful for them, joyful of them: yea, if we have any fellow-feeling, as
members knit together in the same body, we shall not be able to see these
benefits in any, but they will move us to be thankful.

Observe thirdly; In regard of God, what kind of benefits he does give his
children; to wit, such as are spiritual; every thing in nature does
communicate with that which is begotten of it, such a like nature as it self
retains: Thus it is also with civil men, for they leave their children, Gold
and Silver, House and Land, and such like other good civil benefits: Thus our
heavenly father, he is a spirit, he, ergo, makes us partakers of a divine
nature, who are his children, and blesses us with spiritual blessings.

Now a blessing is spiritual in two regards. 1. In respect of the nature, when
it is a thing wrought, not by any power of nature, or means natural; but by
the virtue of Gods spirit, and means supernatural, such as is Gods word. 2.
Things are then in some sort spiritual, when though for their Essence and
being, they exceed not nature, yet they are directed by a supernatural
providence, to work unto an end above nature, even to bring us unto happiness
with God, such as is spiritual and supernatural. Now God does thus give his
children many blessings spiritual, for nature; and does so guide all things,
health, wealth, sickness, poverty, that they work together unto the
spiritual and supernatural salvation of those who are his. If then one should
object, and say, why the godly have the benefits of this life, natural and
civil, as well as those belonging to another, ergo, are not blessed only with
spiritual blessings. I answer. That even these benefits are in some sort
spiritual, while by Gods providence they are elevated and guided to a higher
end then is the service of this life only. Hence we may make a rule, whereby
we may know whether we be Gods true children, whether we have the childrens
blessing. Let us enter into our selves, and look if we find these spiritual
blessings, then we may secure our selves, that we are the Lords: These are all
of them appurtenances to the matter of inheritances. Now we know, though
Parents give Legacies to many uses, to many persons, who are no kin to them,
yet they conueigh the matter of inheritance only to children; So does our God
give many blessings to men deuoide of grace, to cast-awaies; but these
spiritual blessings of sound faith, repentance, etc. which serve to enter us
into the inheritance of that everlasting kingdom, he bestows these on none
but children. Let not men deceive themselves, because they have these outward
things: Esau got the blessing, which the deaw of heaven, and the fatness of
the earth might yield him: Abraham, gave gifts to the children of his
Concubines, though not Isaaks blessing. Thou can not know thy self blessed
of God, by outward things, unless thou find them to provoke thee to love
and fear, and be thankful to the Lord, and so set forward thy spiritual
salvation.

1 Cor. 2.
but spiritually; the godly man has a white stone, in which is written a name,
that none read, but himself; he is absolved from sin, Revel. 2.17.
and accepted to be a Son of God, through Christ, and heir of heaven: And
yet because he is thus made a son of God, through Christ, 1 John 3 3.
the world does not know him; even as we know not the sons of Princes, (were
they amongst us,) who dwell in Nations far from us. But this must not dismay
us: Some men that carry a low sail, being of great wealth, living at an under
rate, in regard of that their state might bear, when some of greatest show,
but mean wealth, scorn them as poor; they smile at the the matter, knowing
themselves in matter of estate, not inferior to the other, and they please
themselves thus, that they are unknown: While we have hidden treasures the
world knows not of, we are not to be dejected.

In heavenly places.] Cor. 13. but the things we hope for are in heaven, our
incorruptible inheritance, is heaven, reserved for us, where Christ our head
was; there Saint Paul, there all things may well be said to be, which are given
us in him. Now when the Apostle did write, Christ the common treasury of all
his Churches good, was in heaven. Earthly Parents give and leave their children
blessings, there where themselves have their abode; they give not commonly
inheritances to them in Countries they never did dwell in: Our heavenly fathers
dwelling is in the heavens, and there he gives us our blessing. Again, we see
that is the place, where every thing rests, that I say, in which it is first
bred, from which it first comes: Fish bred in water, there they abide, they
cannot live being out of it; so the creatures in the earth: and thus these
spiritual benefits, the place of them is heaven, there is kept the fullness of
them, thence they come, thence they shall have their consummation: In this
regard, earthly things are called things below, heavenly, things above, where
Christ sits; this is our advantage. What man in a strange Country, as a
Soiourner a while, would not wish, were he to receive great sums, that they
were paid in his own Country, for his use, rather then tendered to him there,
where he was a stranger? So it is with us, under sail toward our Country,
where our father dwells, it is our commodity that our treasures are there
reserved.





Heb. 10. They endured with joy, the spoiling of their goods, knowing that in
heaven they had a more enduring substance.

Again, that he says, [All spiritual blessings.] Dona spiritualia:
Essentialia, accidentalia. Essent. in quorum perfectione sanctitatis perfectio
consistit: Accide^t. quae possunt abesse sanctificatione nostra sibi constante,
illuminationes pleniores suauitatis, etc.
for we have justly forfeited them all; To give us spiritual blessings is
more; but thus to give us all kind of spiritual blessings; yea, as you heard
in the last Doctrine, to make every blessing, after a sort spiritual, this is
his exceeding bountifulness: He has given us all things that pertain to
life eternal, in the world to come, and to live godlily in this present world,
1 Pet. 2.1. We see great men on earth, do not only give their Heirs earthly
blessings, but all kind of earthly blessings, dignity, offices, they take them
wives, bestow on them house, land, money, every thing abundantly; thus does
our heavenly Father in things spiritual. To understand it more fully; know
these spiritual benefits are eternal, I mean given us for eternity, or, in
time performed to us. The first are our Election, Predestination, of which
hereafter.

Now these given us in time are double, such as we have for the present, such
as are kept to be revealed hereafter, 1. Pet. 1.3. These which we have for the
present, are Positive, such as do confer some good thing upon us; or
Privative, such as keep evil from us. Gods positive spiritual benefits are
inward or outward: Inward, all illuminations, inspirations, gifts of the
spirit, all moving and confirming of Grace once received: Outward blessings,
Word, Sacraments, occasions outwardly moving us to good, all the gifts of grace
in others, by which we are edified, they are our spiritual blessings whom they
profit, not theirs only in whom they are received: In a word, every thing
which is made to further our salvation, is made in this regard a spiritual
outward blessing to us.

Now the Privative blessings, in not letting temptations come, not come in such
strength, in putting them by, in defeating the effect which otherwise they
would have, they are above all can be spoken or comprehended.

The blessings to be revealed in the last time, which respect both the soul
and body, for that shall be made spiritual, they are such as never eye saw,
nor ear heard: And though we have them not in possession, yet they are ours;
we are blessed with them, though we are not yet possessed of them; as an heir
has right to his lands, during his Wardship. Let these then suffice to give
you some taste of this bountifulness of God toward us.

Esaues prefer their pottage before this blessing. If men being capable of
great hopes from their earthly Parents should choose a wandering life, not
setting by all their Fathers could leave them, would not every one cry out of
them as forlorn miscreants? Thus it is with us, we are capable of all kinds
of spiritual blessings from our heavenly Father, things so great as never
entered into the heart of any fully: If we live like Prodigals, stray from his
house, not setting by these things, how woeful is our case?



all is Amen: Such who seek justification, perseverance, pardon of sins
after Baptism in themselves, their own satisfactions in the Churches treasury.

In Christ:] 2 Pet. 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.31.
even in and through Christ our Lord; We are blessed through the acknowledging
of Christ, with all things that belong to life eternal, and godliness. Christ
is made of God, our sanctifier, iustifier, rather, Redeemer. In Christ was the
fullness of Grace, that we might receive from him, the Sun of righteousness,
and Head of us. We have life begun in us, I mean the life of Grace: Where
was it before our callings? Where was the life of us before we were born? was
it not in our Parents? Thus this life we have, before it come to be conveyed to
us, was in Christ the second Adam, and common Parent of us all. We look for
life in the heavens: Where is it? Where is the life of a tree in Winter? Is it
not in the root? at the Spring it will be manifested by leaves, blossoms,
Colos. 3.3.
fruits: so, our life we look for, is hid in Christ our root, as it were;
When he the Sun of life and righteousness shall approach to us in judgment,
then shall we have that life, now hidden, manifested in us.



whether should we have recourse but to him? the more we could approach to the
Sun, the more should we be enlightened with the light of it. Want of Union and
Communion with this fountain, makes the Grace in temporizers come to nothing,
as waters do which have no running spring to feed them.

Who has elected us:] in whom we have redemption, through his blood. The
former are two. 1. Election in this verse. 2. Predestination in the 5. and 6.
verses. In this verse we are to mark these things. 1. The spiritual
blessing, as he has elected. 2. The persons here said to be elected (us,) 3.
The person in whom, (in him.) 4. The time. 5. The end.

First, to open the meaning of them, and then to come to the instruction to be
deduced. First, for Election, it is put sometime for that election which is
made in temporary execution of Gods purpose, whether it be a separating of men
to the state of Grace, which makes them as the chosen first fruits of the
creature, thus it is taken, John 15.19 The world hates you because I have
chosen you out of the world, and thus, 1 Pet. 1. ver. 2 to the elect of the
dispersion, seems to be understood: or a separating of them to any office or
dignity, as Saul; yea, Judas might in this sense be said (chosen). But here
he speaks of that choice which God made with himself from all eternity, as
is manifest.

Secondly, By the persons (us,) he means himself, with those Ephesians which
he had called Saints and believers, ver. 1.

In him.] Is diversely construed; first, in him, that is in God the Son, not
considered as God-man, Head and Mediator of the Church, but as second Person,
God with the Father. Thus all things are said created, in, or by Christ; not
that he is considered as Man-God in this work, but because Christ God-Man as
the Son of God, God with the Father and Spirit, as that person by whom all
things are created But ver. 3. it is plain, he does consider Christ as we are
blessed in him, in regard of both natures, even as he has God for his God by
covenant; In him who has God for his God and Father, we are blessed.

Some make this (in Christ) not to be referred to that action of election, but
to the end, in this sense; He has chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy,
that is, he has chosen us that we should be holy in Christ; but besides the
harshnes, it is impertinent, though a truth; for, his scope is to prove, not
that in Christ we are made holy, but that we have this blessing of election in
Christ.

Some take (in Christ,) as if it belonged to the persons elected, in this
sense, as he has chosen us now by faith in Christ, to that foresight of his
which beholds all things as present, which are to come; but this is beside
the scope of this Scripture, which intends not to lay down our union with
Christ by faith, but Gods electing Christ, Ergo, in him, must needs belong to
the action of Electing, not that object about which it is exercised.

In him.] Therefore notes, Christ God-man, as the head and first Elect, after
whom, and in whom all of us his body (for order of Nature) are elected: so that
this phrase notes the order in which we come to be elected, not the cause of
election.

For the time, there are 3. 2 Thessalonians. 1.13. 2 Timothy 1.
phrases which seem to note the same thing: 1. From the beginning: 2. Before
worlds: 3. Before the foundation of the world. These all may note that eternal
love of God toward us; there understand nothing but eternity; but because
within eternity God does foresee the things which are done in time, and
therefore though he chose from eternity, nothing hinders (as some think)
but that he might foresee some thing whereupon to choose; therefore this
phrase may be extended, not only to respect the actual creation, but the
Decree it self of the worlds being: to this sense, that he chose his in order
of nature, before by his Decree he laid the foundation of the world.

The end is all one with salvation elsewhere named; for, love made perfect is
the formal blessedness we look for in heaven: it is nothing else but the
supernatural being and life of a Christian, which is begun in Grace, perfected
in glory. The sum of these words more amply is this: Blessed be he who has
blessed us in Christ, with every spiritual blessing: As for example; First he
has with himself set his liking on us, chosen us before others; us, I say, who
now believe on Christ, and are sanctified by his spirit; this his Election,
beginning first at Christ our Head, and so descending downward on us his
members, in him: and this his Grace was toward us before there was any word;
yea, for order of nature before his decree did ^ay the foundation of the world,
that to which he has elected being no less then salvation, that glorious life
of love, which begun here shall one day be made spotles and perfect before
him.

Now to come to the Doctrine hence to be deduced.

I praise God always, who has elected you from the beginning: This is the
root, out of which all these blessings grow, which in time we partake; even as
the body and bows and branches of the tree issue from the root, and are corn
up by the same, Ergo, this is in nature, and in S. Paul's reckoning, before
predestination it self. For as first I agree upon this end, I will help a
sick man to recover his health, before I determine to send for any Physician:
so here, God does first by election choose to the end, and agree on that in
order of nature, before he predestinate means, by which he will most
certainly bring to this end. For the better understanding of this benefit, two
things shall be briefly opened. 1. What it is. 2. Why God the Father is here
said only to elect. For the first, the common matter which does concur to the
being of this benefit, is love; a love which God has to us to bring us to that
life, which is above nature; therefore sometime Gods choosing, is expressed by
loving; I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau, that is not, yielded Esau that
measure of love, which the Hebrews called hating. But there is a further thing
in Election, which does difference it from love, and that is a respect which is
in this love, whereby it is carried to some, Actio collatiua vt intrinserae
formalitatis reiectionem cennotans.
before other some; it so loves some, that it rejects other some from having
part in it. Deuteronomy. 7.7. I have loved thee, and chosen thee. Should God have
loved every reasonable creature to life, there had been love to all, but
election of none; he who takes all, makes no choice of any; therefore God
makes it a different thing; I have loved thee, and chosen thee: Some make this
all one with that foreknowledge mentioned, Romans 8.29. and it cannot be denied,
Romans 8.29. Expounded.
but knowledge is often put for love and approbation, and that God knows his
Church and chosen, far otherwise then other things; even as a man knows all
his goods and substance, but his wife and children after a special manner:
Nevertheless, it may well note, that knowledge which is in order to this
action of Gods choosing, whether going before it, or coming after it. If we
have chosen any to any thing, we know whom we have chosen, and if we are about
to choose any, we know whom we are about to choose: So God does not only know
whom he has chosen, which knowledge (to our manner of conceiving) does follow
the act of his will, now being put forth, but he does know whom he is in
choosing, or about to choose, and this does go before to our understanding:
And this I think the meaning of foreknowledge in that place: Such whom he did
foreknow to be the persons whom he would choose, such he did predestinate;
and thus that place, 1 Pet. 1. ver. 1. may be more fitly resolved; where he
says, the faithful of the dispersion were chosen, according to fore-knowlege.



David leaped, rejoicing in spirit before the Arc, what was before him? That
God who had chosen him, had rejected the house of Saul, from ruling over his
people. How should we rejoice in spirit, to think that God has elected us to
an eternal kingdom? from which many, no way our inferiors, are rejected? If
any show us common countenance, we do not so much respect it; but if they
admit us into such peculiar favor as they will not communicate with any who
are not their best beloved, then we do highly esteem it: To be taken unto
this riches of grace, this so restrained favor, in which the greatest part of
man-ktnde have no part, how should it affect us?

who have true faith and holiness: As we may know Faith, so we may know
Election. If we see in judgment of charity, that any has a faith unfeigned,
and true endeavor of holiness; we may in judgment of charity, say that such
are elected. Thus Saint Peter and John, may give the name of Elect, to the
members of the visible Churches, to whom they write: If we know by
experimental certainty, or by faith, that any have true belief and holiness,
we do in the same manner, certainly know, that we, or they are elected. Thus
we may by Faith, know that in every true visible Church, there are some elect
of God; because the word teaches, that where God gives his word, there are
some Saints, whom he will gather and edify; some ground good where he sends
his seedes-men: Thus we may know certainly our selves elect, because we may by
certain experience know our selves to have Faith. If I see one put into the
office of the court of Wards or into the Treasurors Place, or so; I know that
such a man was the man, whom the king had chosen with himself to have the
place: So when God now has by faith and sanctification, taken one out of this
world; we may know that he was chosen forth of the world, unto life: things may
be said to be, when now their being is made manifest; While a babe is in the
womb, we know not what is there conceived, but when we see a man-child borne,
then we know that such an one was conceived: So when the babe is borne, when
the being of faith and holiness are apparent; we may say that such a person,
before all worlds was conceived in the womb of Gods secret Election. We may
know a will secret three ways.

1. If a man will himself tell us. 2. If he will write to us. 3. If he do
this or that, we know then by event, he had a will to such matters, which now
we see him execute: So here God may speak by extraordinary revelation, which
has been the privilege of some few. 2. God may make his will known by the
ordinary enlightening of his spirit, which is that unto the mind, as a word is
unto the ear: We have received the spirit, to teach us to know these deepes of
Gods gracious purpose toward us, 1 Cor. 2.12. by the letter of his word, that
golden chain, Romans 8.29. If I be sanctified with the divine nature, in which
glory is begun, I am justified; if justified, I have been called according
to purpose; if called, I was predestinate, if predestinate to means, I was
foreknowne, as one whom God would choose to the end, even to glory.

3 When I see my self set a part by God, from the world; the event does tell
me, God chose me from amongst others: When I love God, come out of the world,
choosing him as my portion; then I may know he has loved me first, and chosen
me, even as I know a seal has been set there, where I behold the print of
it. One may object, that God only knows who are his? Ans. God only knows
by himself who they are whom he approves for his own, but with this, may
stand the knowledge of such to whom God reuealeth it; as none but the Son
knows the Father, and such to whom the Son reuealeth it. 2. God only knows
his celectiuely taken, that is, the whole university of his chosen; no mere
man nor creature, does in this sense know who are Gods. Obie. Could we know
that we have true faith and holiness, we might know our Election, but we
cannot; for many who have them not, think they have them; many who have them
in some sort, fall from them; many who have them, so as they shall not fail,
yet may miss in judging of their estates, as Peter; If all should forsake
thee, etc. To this I answer; First, though a man dream he eat, or be in this
or that condition, and be deceived; yet a man who is that or that waking, does
know it, and is not deluded: So here, though the dreaming man, who is a sleep
in sin, may mock himself; the man who is awake and walks with God, is not
mistaken. To the second, I answer. Many who have temporary graces, fall from
them; but this lets not, but a man who has that grace which makes the
heart honest, may know that his grace shall abide, and is such as shall be
accompanied with perseverance: Because some think counterfeit money good
silver, it follows not, but that we may know that which is good, from that
which is otherwise. Finally, though a true sanctified man may be deceived in
judging of his measure of love or strength, it follows not, that therefore
he cannot judge at all truly of his estate. I may be deceived in judging how
wise I am, how strong, but not in judging that I live, have sense, move; so it
was with Peter. But this is by the way.

Wherefore let us strive to make our election sure. We will diue into the
affections of men, we cannot be at rest, till we know how they are minded
toward us. What beseems a child more then to labor, that he may know his
fathers goodness to him? We should seek to God to witness to us by his
spirit this grace, to make us understand it, through the word; we should try
our faith and sanctification; this is the counterpane written out by the
original copy, that will of God within himself, choosing us to holiness.
The want of this pains makes some that they come to call in question Gods
love, election, yea, whether ever they had grace, yea or no. Should any
corporation choose us to any place of dignity and profit, we would quickly
learn it, and if we had but an inckling, we would not rest till we had found
the whole matter. I would faithful souls were as wise in this matter.

Paul does, for that we do not know? besides, are we bid to believe the
Gospel, a part whereof this is? we must not be proudly arrogant, to think we
can search these things to the full; for to see things unvisible, and search
things unsearchable, are a like impossible: We must not therefore be arrogant
above that is written, nor yet unthankfully negligent, so far as to neglect
that which is written for our instruction.

In him.] fore-knowne before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1. The wise
providence of God does dispose every thing, so much more principally and
timely, by how much it is more excellent: Hence it is, that it does not think
of electing and predestinating us, who are as a body, and come by occasion to
think on him, who is the head afterward. 2. We are predestined to be made
like unto him: Now that master picture and first pattern is before that which
is drawn by it, and done after: Christ was the chief pattern of the election
of grace; And look as it were an unnatural thing for the feet to come forth
of the womb, before the head; So for us to come forth of this womb before our
head, to me seems very preposterous; yet I say, though he is first chosen to
that glory which became him as a head, he is not the cause why we are chosen;
Even as the first Adam is not the cause why God did love one, so that I should
be a man, and have this natural life and being, though in and through him I
come to have this being: So Christ is not the cause why God would have me,
rather then others, have this being and life above nature, though I attain to,
and receive this being in him, for his sake, and through him. The love of God
as immediately comes from himself to me, as to Christ; this love whereby he
would have me to receive supernatural life and blessedness with himself. But
here two weighty Objections are to be answered; for hence two erroneous
conclusions are inferred, in this wise; Those who are chosen in him, whose
promise and exhibition comes in after sin, they are considered as now in
sin, before they are chosen: But we are chosen in him, etc.

that things are in Gods intention in the same order in which we see them in
execution: Things in their material existing have one order, in their
intending another. I want a house to dwell in, I must hire or build one, I
cannot get any let to me, say I; well then; I intend to build me a dwelling
house, I cannot without workmen; I intend in the third place, to hire
Carpenters and Masons, but because my workmen can do nothing without matter,
hence I decree to prepare stone and wood: Now in executing, I first set stone
and wood the matter, then I hire workmen, then I raise the frame, then I enter
and dwell in it. In order of material existing, Christ is revealed, promised,
exhibited after sin, but he was intended before sin; the Apostle reckoned
the order in which things exist, 1 Cor. 3.22.23. the world, you the Elect,
Christ, God: but he gives us to understand the order of intention: first God
intends his own glory, then Christ, then the Church, then the World: He who
is elected and fore-knowne to be a Lamb taking away sin, a mediator
redeeming from sin and death, he is elected himself after sin foreseen,
and by consequent all in him; But Christ is so foreknowne and elected, Ergo.

I should deny the first part of this reason; for I see not why God should not
choose and predestinate him who should save his chosen from sin, before he
decreed or ordered that they should fall into sin: It is no ill providence to
prepare my salve before I will let my child out himself.

But some may say; If God do first appoint Christ to redeem from sin, then
he must procure the being of sin, and so be the author of sin: Beside
that, this were nothing but to break ones head, that I may after heal it. To
this I say, that it is good that sin should be (as Austin says,) and that
which is good, so far as it is good, God may effectually procure it.
Praecipiendo and mouendo, non quiescendo consentiendo.
He is said to be the author of those things which he commands, and works,
moving the heart by habits which himself infuseth, Ergo, cannot be said to be
the author of sin. If a man make a gash to prove the excellency of some
healing balm, I see not why God may not prepare and give way to the sinful
fall of his creature, especially seeing he knows how to mend better then his
first making.

To the second part of the reason might be answered: that Christ was not
primarily, and immediately chosen and predestined a Lamb, a Mediator of
redemption, but a Head and Prince of salvation, who should save all, to the
glory of Grace. Now being chosen to this end, he is by force of this, he is
chosen upon sin falling forth, to be a sacrifice, a Lamb taking away sin;
for he who is chosen to the end, is chosen to the Means.

The second thing hence inferred, is that foresight of Faith, and perseverance
in it, as a necessary condition, before we can be elected.

Such who are chosen in Christ, such are now foreseen believers when they are
chosen, for none are in Christ but such as believe: But we are chosen in him,
etc. The first part of this reason is denied, with the proof of it. There is a
double being in any thing, Virtuali continentia. Actuali in existentia.
the one in virtue, the other in actual existing: In the root of corn there
is blade, ear in virtue; but in harvest time the ear and blade are as it were
actually, having their existence in and with the root: So we are two ways in
Christ; First, in virtue, inasmuch as by force of Gods Election we shall in
time have life and being from him. Secondly, when now by faith we come actually
to exist in and with him, who is the root of us. Now the first being in Christ
requires not faith, but the second: the first being here to be understood.

To the second part we deny, that this or any text says, we are chosen being
now by faith in Christ; for this sense makes (in Christ) to belong to the
object of relation, whereas the scope of this place does necessarily make it
belong to the act of electing, in this manner: as for example, He has chosen
us in him, viz. Jesus Christ, my self, with you. Thus we might here take
occasion to discuss these two great questions.

1. Whether man as now fallen, be the subject of election, 2. Whether Election
is of such who are in Gods foresight faithful.
But I will handle the first in the next Doctrine; the latter in the last
conclusion or doctrine of this verse. From this then, that we are beloved in
Christ as our head, we may gather our happiness. O how firm is that
conjunction which is begun in such a head, who is God with God, blessed for
ever! If Kings bear good will to some family, if his love begin in some chief
one who is with him at Court, as his special favorite, it is so much the
firmer to all the rest of them. Thus here how firm and sure is his love to us,
whom he has loved to life in Christ our Head, and eldest brother, who is his
natural Son, from whom it is impossible that his love should ever start? and
when it is sure to the head, can the body be forsaken?

Before the foundation of the world:] Observe what ancient love the Lord has
born us in Christ: it is not of yesterday, but before all worlds, that his love
rested on us, electing us to salvation, such as should stand with the praise of
his glory, 2 Timothy 1.9. There is mention of Grace given us before all worlds,
Ioh. 17.24. Make it manifest that thou love them, as thou louedst me before
the foundation of the world. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, says
the Prophet. Earthly men will purchase to themselves and heirs, when it is but
a possibility whether they shall have heir of their body, yea or no. Again,
they will show their care of posterity while yet they are unborn, by making
sure intayles: But our Father of all the Fatherhood in heaven and earth, does
when we were but possible creatures before him, love us to this end of
supernatural blessedness: for, by this phrase I take not only eternity, but
the degree of order in eternity, is noted, that for order, before the being of
the world was willed by him, he did show us this grace of choosing us to life.
Here therefore is fit place to consider of that question; Whether God
foreseeth man as fallen, before he elect him. The question I should answer
negatiuely, but in determining of it, we will consider; 1. The arguments which
affirm it. 2. The reasons which deny. 3. We will show what we take to be the
truth in this matter, answering the arguments which are here propounded to the
contrary.

1 First then the execution is urged, to prove our Election after sin.

Those whom God (now fallen into sin) justifies, saves, and condemns,
those now being in sin, he chose to save, and decreed to condemn.

But God saves and condemns men now fallen into sin, Ergo.

2 Those who are chosen out of mercy, and reprobated out of Justice, they are
now foreseen in misery by sin.

But our Election is out of mercy, and reprobation is out of Justice. Ergo.

3 Those which are not, or have not any way being, they cannot be elected or
rejected: But before Decree of Creation, men are not. Ergo. The first part is
plain, that which has no being, can have no affections, that cannot be thus,
or thus, which is not at all.

4 That which makes God first decree man's reiection, to the glory of his
Justice, before his being or corruption is considered, that is absurd.

But this Doctrine of choosing and reprobating before man's fall does so, Ergo.

5 That which makes God to create mankind out of necessity, not out of
liberty, that is absurd: But choosing some, and reprobating others to ends
forenamed, makes him create out of necessity.

6 He who cannot do worse then annihilate his creature, cannot reject it to
the glory of Justice. God cannot do worse; for he gives it but being, Ergo
can do no worse, then take away that he gives it, Ergo.

7 Such who are chosen to salvation through faith and sanctification, such are
in sin: But we are chosen Ergo.

8 Such who were all alike loved in Creation, amongst such was no election nor
reiection: but we are all alike loved, received like favors, had all life
alike offered us.

9 That which makes the fall of man necessary, so as man was not free to fall,
is not to be granted: Gods decree to have mercy glorified in some, and justice
in other some, does impose necessity of falling, Ergo.

These be the chief reasons which I have observed for the vouching our
election to be both after the decree of creating us, and permitting us to fall
into sin: Now then let us set in equal pareill the arguments which show that
Gods electing of us cannot be after the consideration of our creation and fall.

1 That which is a mean by which God brings some to salvation, unto the
glory of Grace, and others to glorify his justice in deserved punishments,
that is after these ends decreed. But the permission of the fall is used by God
as a mean. etc.

The first part is plain, for the ends must be in nature, before the means to
the end; The second part may be thus cleared: We see some by occasion of the
fall saved, to the glory of mercy, which without the fall they could not have
been: Had Adam stood, it is manifest that justice should immediately and
properly had the glory in all our saluations: for we should have lived
according to Covenant; Do these things and live in them.

Again, that sin, in whose punishment justice does glorify her self, the
permitting it could not but be a mean; but the punishment of Adams sin lies
unremoved on all unpenitent and unbelieving persons; for we are by nature the
children of wrath, and Gods wrath abides on him who believes not; abides, I
say, intimating that the wrath is not first inflicted upon unbelief, but
further continued; whereas, could we by faith come to God, he would be
reconciled. That which some object that the sin of Adam, not as it was
contracted by him, condemns any, but as it is continued by our unbelief;
this is nothing to the matter. For first it is false that many remain not in
the death of sin and trespass, in which by nature they are conceived. Now
these who have the punishment of that sin never removed from them, must
needs be under that sin once contracted by him: And though the latter part of
that exception is true in this sense, that by reason of unbelief that sin
hurts them, which otherwise would not; yet in this sense it is not true, viz.
unbelievers are only condemned for that sin of unbelief, not for that sin
they sinned in Adam also, and other actual transgressions. But whither as
first contracted, or after continued, it condemns; This is sure, that unless
it may be verified that the sin does not by any means stand on any man's
score, so as to be condemned for it, that it must needs be yielded a mean
whereby justice is glorified in the just revenge of some.

Argument. 2.
No word teaches that God had any other event; for do this and live, does not
prove that God propounded to attain this as his end, that we might all live,
no more then in what day thou eatest, thou shall die the death, does argue that
God had this end, viz. that all mankind breaking his Law, should die eternally.
Either God had no end in making his creature, or this end, which now he
compasses, or some other which he has not attained.

But he could not be without his end in making him, nor have any other end,
which he has not attained.

The first proposition is undoubted: the second is as clear: for to have no
end in working agrees not to God, a wise and understanding agent; to have an
end and not attain it, stands not with his blessedness; for to have a
primary principal end, which one affects, is more blessed then not to have
it. Again he whose providence is so perfect that no inferior cause can
default beside his intention and permission, his end cannot be disappointed:
Now it is plain that no instrument can default further then he intends, it
shall and chooses to permit it; for if any defect befall an instrument which
the Artificer chooses not, his work is troubled, and it argues ignorance or
impotency in him that so works.

Argument. 3.
Either God did by his antecedent providence propound this end, or he comes
to it by occasion of some event.

But he does not come to this end of saving in Christ by occasion.

First this after-prouidence is imperfect, not beseeming God; when one, after a
thing is fallen out, makes the best of it, and is rather post videntia then
prouidentia.

Secondly, this makes God use a more imperfect providence about his most
excellent works, and come to that, besides his primary intention, which is far
more glorious then the first end could have been intended.

Thirdly, This makes God, like men, to do as he may, when he is hindered
from that he would.

Argument. 4.
That which does take away the unsearchable mystery of Election and
reprobation, is not to be admitted.

But to choose, reject, after the fall, does euacuate this mystery.

For though God deal diversely with men now in equal condemnation, yet the
justice of this fact is apparent; for God may punish with death, or make that
treason, trespass, which is committed against him; Who will challenge this
fact of iniustce?

Argument. 5.
That which makes God will some of his creatures conditionally, that is not to
be granted.

But to make God choose after the fall, makes him to have willed ineffectually
some other end.

Gods will were not omnipotent, should it not effect what ever it wills; Gods
velle, is posse; neither can he have a conditional will; I will give my
creature life, if he keep this commandment: For, either he must suppose that
his creature must do some thing which he will not make him, and then he were
not omnipotent; or think that he will make him do that thing, and on doing it
give him life, and this in effect a will most absolute; or he must know that
he neither will, nor can do it, and yet will this on a condition which he
does see impossible; and this were frivolous.

Argument. 6.
That which makes God look out of himself, for determining his will: But to
elect and reject after the fall suspendeth that determination of his will on
qualification foreseen in the creature, Ergo.

The first part is manifest; For it makes him not having all sufficiency in
himself, and as it were imperfection in his understanding, to go forth of
himself, seeking knowledge from things without him, as we do; so is it for
his will to look at things without himself, that thereupon he may determine
his will.

Argument. 7.
That Election and reprobation which are shadowed in the persons of Jacob and
Esau, that is the true election and reprobation.

But election and reprobation of persons, yet not actual existing, but in some
kind possible, of persons without merit, or demerit, are shadowed forth, Ergo.

Argument. 8.
That election and reprobation, which make God a Potter framing his clay from
his mere pleasure, to contrary ends, of honor and shame, that election and
reprobation are of man before his fall?

These latter reasons do more sway with me, and seem to me far more
unanswerable. For I cannot see, how God can be thought to have had other ends
without many absurdities, as for example; 1. Without holding he may suffer
defeasance in the intentions he purposes, and by his providence endeavors.

2. That God is mutable, going from one intention to another; and that his will
is not effectual in every thing it wills; that his will does on foresight
of some thing, in the creature determine it self to that, to which of it self
it is not determined.

Secondly; I hold that the surest way tracing truly the order of things in
Gods intention, is to mark well the existing of them in execution. Now we see
first the world was made. Secondly, man, and so Gods chosen were brought forth
in their natural being, holy, blessed, capable of life, if their wilful
defection hindered not. Thirdly; They were permitted to fall into sin and
misery. Fourthly; They are by Christ delivered from this misery, being called,
justified, glorified. Fifthly; Christ glorious, as a mediator and Savior of
Gods chosen, to the glory of grace or mercy. Sixthly; God his mercy glorious,
who chose and predestined Christ, that he should be made every thing to us.
In intention, then this order is to be kept. 1. Himself, or his glory, in the
manifestation of his mercy. 2. The glorifying his Christ with supernatural
glory. 3. The bringing us to supernatural being and glory with himself,
through Christ. Now because he may bring us to supernatural glory, to the
praise of his grace and mercy, either by keeping us from misery, or permitting
us to fall into sin and misery, and restoring us out of it to more blessed
estate then ever, it is plain, that he purposed so to work by his permission,
that we should wilfully, through our own default, run our selves into sin
and misery. Now because such whom he will bring to supernatural life and
being, must first have natural life and being, 1 Cor. 15.46.
and for that, man must first be natural, then spiritual; and because that
which he purposes to permit to fall into sin and misery, must be holy and
happy, Ergo, he purposes to make man, to make him holy, not knowing any
misery. Lastly; because he that will have man thus made, must have some fit
place, fitly furnished, in which such a creature might be placed, ergo, he
decrees to make this world which we behold. Wherefore approving the latter
arguments; I will come to answer the former, and so pass from this question.

To the first Objection.

If this proposition be understood in this sense: Such men are foreseen, when
now God chooses them to salvation, it is false; for it makes Gods election
find such as it does take, fitted to salvation, and not make them such as are
fit, by means predestinate. For this reason proves a man not only foreseen
in sin, but foreseen as perseuering in faith, before Gods decree to elect
him to salvation; for in time, such only are saved who persevere: It makes
Gods decree choosing some persons to this or that end, presuppose every thing
which after comes in, before the end be attained: But in this sense, such
whom God saves in executing salvation, such be elected to salvation; In this
sense I say, he elected those, who should become such and such, by his
predestination, not those who were foreseen such before his election; in this
sense it is true, and infers nothing against our assertion. The reason why
this latter is true, being this; because God choosing any to the end, does
choose him to the means also.

But they Object, either he must choose to save such as now in time he
saves, or this execution differs from his decree; but it does not.

ergo, his Execution differs from his Decree: Whereas they should reason;
Those whom God neither foresaw such when elected them, nor predestined to
make such as now they are when they are saved; those are saved otherwise then
God decreed, for the decree of God is as well of the means, as of the end.

viz. that mercy and justice can do nothing where it sees not sin and
misery; for mercy may work where there is possibility of misery, either by
preventing the entrance, or by decreeing to save and deliver from that misery,
which by permission shall befall the creature; and though revenging justice
cannot by way of execution; yet I see not, why God may not out of love, to the
glory of his justice, pass by some, intending to glorify himself in their
just punishment; for what show of injustice is in this act of God most just, I
intend to be glorious in the just punishment of such and such? It is one thing
to make a just intendement, another thing to make an unjust execution. It is
answered to the second part; that Election is out of grace, 2 Timothy 1. Paul
says by Onesiphorus, the Lord show him mercy in that day. In diverse respects
the same thing called by different names. And whereas it is said, that
reiection or reprobation, is an act of justice; it is denied, seeing it is an
act of Gods dominion, liberty, or holy self-love, whereby he loves the glory
of his justice in the manifestation of it, rather then a formal act of justice
her self; as likewise, the permitting the fall, was not one act formally from
mercy or justice, but by wisdom and providence, making way, that both mercy
and justice might exercise their proper works about the creature.







viz. That he who cannot execute worse on the creature then annihilation,
cannot so dispose of it, that worse will at length befall the creature then
annihilation; For Gods making the creature does give him right, not only to
annihilate it, but to use it to the utmost, that lawfully may be to his glory.
Now to pass by a creature in regard of grace no ways due to it, and to decree
the glory of his justice, in the just deserved punishment of it, has no
appearance of injustice.

if by Gods decree of permitting sin, they may become sinful, which is the
truth; For God did by his decree of permission shut up all in sin, that he
might have mercy upon all.





this circumstance of antiquity, does make it more respected of us. How should
we account of this love, which before all worlds, the Lord did bear us,
accordingly as he has manifested the same in us who believe.



ergo, Saint Paul, Romans 9. says, God chose Jacob before he was, or had done
any thing, that the election might be according to free purpose; and Saint Paul
2 Timothy 1. says, that we are saved, not by works, but according to grace given
us before all worlds; whereas merit of works, and grace given us before all
worlds, are opposed. If any say that Paul excludes works then present, when
God electeth, it nothing hinders but that he might from eternity foresee
works whereon, before all worlds, he came to elect. This is but an old
Pelagian evasion; for Paul speaks against all works which stand not with
free grace in electing. Now works meritorious, foreseen, are as opposite to
grace, as works meritorious really existing. If I do any thing for reward,
which I see will befall me, it is as ^arre from being done freely, as if it
were done on reward beforehand received.

Again, he cannot choose on works foreseen, because he cannot see any to
come, which he does not first predestinate that they should be; Now then, for
him to choose on foreseen works, is to say that God first predestinateth,
and causes such whom he will choose to have such and such works, that after he
may choose them; which is to turn the Cart before the Horse. This francke love
of his can never be enough extolled. If a man of eminency choose to him for
wife, some woman, who has neither dowry nor friends, ne yet has beauty or
breeding extraordinary, the part is maruailous in our eyes: But well may we
wonder at this fact of God, who when we were not, ne yet had any thing which
might commend us, did freely set his liking on us and love us to life. But of
this more in the next Doctrine.

Now we come to the last point, to be observed in this Verse; to what God has
chosen us: That we should be holy, and spotless before him in love.] This end
is al one with that otherwhere named, viz. Salvation. Who has chosen you from
the beginning, to Salvation, through faith and sanctification; that is, to be
entered by belief, and the first beginning of it, the sanctification of the
spirit. And here three things are to be marked. 1. The state of perfection
which agrees to the life whereto we are chosen, that we may be holy and
without spot. 2. The circumstance of person in whose presence we shall live this
life, before him. 3. The life it self, which is as it were the subject of this
perfection in Love. A little to insist in the explication of this clause,
because it contains more then is commonly marked.

Holiness is put sometime for all, or any sanctifying graces of Gods spirit
which make us holy, 1 These 4.7. 2 Cor. 7.1. Sometime it is put more
particularly, either to note a virtue which inclines us to do in such manner
as beseems both the presence of God and our selves, who are Saints by
profession; or a state of purity and perfection, to which we come in virtue,
and this life of love which here is begun in us; thus when Christ says,
Blessed are the poor in heart, he does not so much note any singular virtue,
as a state to which some here come above othersome in virtue: and thus I
think it is taken here; both because these words do signify a state of
Christian perfection, and because here is Love expressed as the subject: the
life in which we shall attain this perfection. For that second circumstance,
those words (before him) do note sometime this presence of God, which we have
here in state of Grace by sight, Luke 1. But here it does directly signify
that presence which we shall have of God, when now we are brought to state of
perfection, when we shall walk by sight, and see him as he is. Lastly, when he
says (in Love,) he notes that supernatural life, in which we shall be
brought to this perfection; as if he should have spoken more largely.

Who has chosen us, as who should have that supernatural being and life of
Love, yea, that we should grow to such a state in it, that we should be pure
or holy, without the least spot, and that in his glorious presence, whom we
shall then see as he is.

Three things then here offer themselves to observation.

1. First for the former, S. Peter says, the faithful was chosen of God, to
the sanctification of the spirit, that is in effect, to be made partakers of a
Divine nature; and when we are said chosen to salvation or glory: This is
chiefly perfection of Love, which does make the soul glorious, even as
whiteness makes the wall white: thus God has loved us, that we should not
only have such a life of God given us in the first Adam, as was due to our
nature, and created together with it, but such a life as is both for kind and
degree above all that nature created did know, the root whereof is that second
Adam, Christ Jesus. Look as all of us who have this natural life and being,
which now as men and women all of us have, we were loved of God, so far, as
to receive it in Adam, and be brought to it through him, and look as all that
shall be borne to the end of the world, and be in time, men and women, were
loved of God, and chosen as it were, that they should in their times have the
nature of man: so here we who now have this life of God live, and all that
ever shall have the holy life which the spirit of God works in the hearts of
believers; we and they were from eternity chosen, that in time we should have
it derived and propagated through Christ. Now this is to be marked, that being
chosen to have this holy love, the Divine nature, we are chosen to faith also;
for look as all who are loved to the receiving of this natural and bodily
being and life, are together chosen to this, that they shall be borne of Adam,
and have a natural nativity from him: so all who are chosen to have the being
of holiness and love, are together taken to this, that they shall have a
supernatural nativity from Christ; that is, they shall be brought to believe:
He that believes is borne of God, 1 John. 5.1.

state in which men shall come to worse pass then if they had never been.

Because God does not raise all who are dead, nor give all sight who are
blind, therefore we think them to have found great favor whom God did
choose to this, that he would restore their sight, though they were borne
blind, and raise them to life, though they were dead: But what love has he
showed us, in choosing us whom he would make light, when now we were darkness;
make to live when now we had been dead in sins and trespasses? for this we
have to thank his gracious pleasure; For as his will is the chief cause why
one is poor, another rich, one in excellent state, another in vile condition,
so here; why one is left in that miserable estate into which sin has
brought us, others delivered from it.

Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you. Nay there is no more
effectual argument persuading Christians to sanctification, then this of our
election; Now as the Elect of God put on meekness, Colos. 3. If we hear
that we are chosen to any place or condition on earth, which is beneficial,
this, that we are chosen to it, makes us ready, and stirs us up to get
possessed of it.



Now here is fit place to consider of that question; Whether God in foresight
of belief and perseverance in faith and holiness, do choose us to salvation?
I will discuss the question after the former manner, in which I will propose
diverse Articles.

First, then the Arguments affirming, which I have observed are these.

1. They who are chosen in Christ, are chosen on Faith foreseen: But all the
Elect are chosen in Christ, Ergo. 2. Such whom God does adopt and save, such he
decreed to adopt and save: He adopteth and saves believers, etc. 3. On what
condition God offers life, upon that condition foreseen, he chooses to
life. But he offers life upon believing. 4. If God choose not all on
condition they will believe; then some are bound to believe a lie; for they are
bound to believe that God will save them: But we are not bound to believe a
lie, etc. 5. If God chose some to salvation before faith and perseverance
foreseen, then he loves some to salvation, whom his wrath follows to death
at the same present: But Gods anger to death, and love to salvation, cannot
take place at once, Ergo. 6. If God cannot choose any in particular, before
some general conception, that such and such who believe, shall be chosen, then
he chooses not but on faith foreseen: But God cannot, etc. For, we prove in
our understandings, that we do things in particular, according to general
conceptions within our mind. 7. That which makes God choose persons to life
which are not eligible, is not to be admitted: But an absolute election without
any foresight of Faith does so. 8. The Scriptures say we are predestined and
elected according to foreknowledge. Fly lusts of youth, etc.
The reasons for the denying part are many: To leave such named before, which
are common to this question also.

I will upon foresight of my condition absolutely choose him.

2. That election of persons, which has annexed to it a decree, preparing
faith and justification for the persons that are elected, that is of men
unbelieving: Those who being elected are predestined to have faith wrought in
them; those are considered without faith, as now they are elected, Romans 8.39.
These four and five Verses of this Chapter.

3. If God decree to elect none till he does see them believing with
perseverance, then he does decree to give faith and perseverance, before he
does decree to take, or ordain to life. But this is absurd, for God should
decree to that, by which as a mean he comes to elect, before he should
decree to elect. Let the Arminians tell us what is Gods end in decreeing to
give this man faith and perseverance, if not that he may choose him to life. If
he have this end in decreeing to give faith, he must needs intend the
election of this person, before he decree to work in him effectually faith,
with perseverance: Beside, the Scripture says, so many as were ordained to
life believed.

4. That which makes God choose us, when we have chosen him, and love us, when
have loved him first, is contrary to Scripture: But if God choose us, when now
we have held the faith and love of him to the last moment, he does choose us
after we have chosen him.

5. Christ says, we hear or believe, because we are sheep; This says, we
are sheep or elect, and ordained to life because we believe.

6. From this verse: That to which any action tends, as an effect, that is
after the action it self: But this eternal election tends to this, that we
should be pure in love.

7. That which stands not with the freedom of Gods will, yea, of his mere
will within himself, that is not to be endured in election: But a condition
qualifying the person, makes Gods election not merely from his will.

8. Had faith, sanctification, works, been the condition on which we were
elected, it is like Saint Paul would have thought on them, Romans 9.11. But he
finds no such consideration, in which reason might stay it self, but
exclaimeth, O the depth! etc.

Deuteronomy. 7.7.
9. That which Isreal's election does typifie, is not an election on foresight,
or any worthiness. But ours is typified by it, ergo.

10. That which Austin retracted, as coming near Pelagianisme, is not like to
be orthodoxe; This he did so.

First; The latter arguments persuade me fully that God does not elect upon any
thing foreseen in us, He decrees on this condition, though he sees that
neither they can do it of themselves, neither is he minded to work it in
them: if the first, then God were not omnipotent; if the latter, he should
decree foolishly upon that he saw impossible; if the second, it is all one with
an absolute will.
which should move him to this action of electing of us; God cannot have such a
conditional decree: I will elect all, if they will believe: For he must either
think, they can do this without him, and then he were not an omnipotent, or
that he would give them effectually to believe, and then it is all one with an
absolute will; as for example: I will elect to life such as shall believe, I
will give these belief with perseverance, and will choose them to life, having
thus believed; this is all one with this decree we maintain: I choose these to
life, and decree to give them faith and perseverance, by which they shall be
brought to life; they are alike upon the matter absolute; Only the former
makes God to decree the giving of faith, that he may decree election: This
latter makes God decree the giving faith only, for obtaining salvation, to
which we are elected.

Secondly; I say, he that can make us fit to any end he chooses us, may choose
us to that end before he order his means to bring us thereunto. Arminius will
first have him make us fit, and then decree to choose us to life; which is to
set the Cart before the Horse; to predestinate means before the end be agreed
on; to set predestination before foreknowledge and election.

Thirdly; This proposition; God has chosen us to life, believing and
perseuering: This is true in this sense, we are chosen to life, to which he will
bring us, through believing; But if it be referred to the action of choosing;
in this sense, God does choose us, when now he does see us believing, that we
should have life; it is not true, nor agreeing to those Scriptures: God has
chosen us to salvation, through sanctification and belief; God has ordained
us to obtain life, through Jesus Christ.

These three Conclusions praemised: We will answer those Arguments propounded
for the contrary, and so proceed. For the first; see that which is before
answered on these words, in Christ: viz. That God chose us being in Christ
vertually, not actually.



Those persons whom God saves and adopteth, thus and thus qualified in time,
those he did decree, when they were made such by force of his predestination,
to adopt and save. This conclusion is true. God did decree to save certain
persons, by working in them effectually faith and perseverance. But Arminius by
decree, understands the decree of election to life, as it is distinguished
against predestination, which is the decree of means, whereby the chosen of
God shall infallably be brought to life. Now the first part of the reason thus
limited, is false: Such whom God saves, such he does foresee them in his
Decree of electing them to salvation; for this takes away all predestination
of means, serving to bring the Elect to life, and presupposes falsely, that
God cannot choose any to life, whom he does not find or foresee as actually
fitted then when he does choose them; whereas he may choose, though never so
unfit for the end, if having chosen us he can make us fit; for our unfitness
for the present, to the end, does not make us unfit for Gods election: as for
example, I may choose a pen to write, which never so faulty for the present,
and unfit to write with, while I know I can mend it, and make it fit for this
purpose.

I answer thirdly. Even of the decree of Election, this is true, if rightly
taken, viz. Such whom God saves in time, such he elected to salvation, such
now when he was in electing them; this is false: Such he elected, to wit,
becoming such through his election, this is true: The first presupposes in
Gods foreknowledge an antecedency of faith, before the act of electing: The
latter, a concomitancie of faith, in the person chosen to salvation, and that
by force of Gods electing: For election does choose men as well to means, as
to the end; and these decrees, though diversely named, and in our conceits
different, yet they are one thing in God.

the terminus to life, to which we are chosen. Would they prove that God does
choose to life on faith, they should reason thus.

Upon what condition God offers life, upon that he chooses.

But on condition of our faith, he offers to choose us with this eternal
election, Ergo.

But we see the second part of this reason would be evidently false; for in
what Gospel is it written, believe, and thou shall be elected? Lastly, I
answer, that we cannot gather the decree of God within himself, by promise or
threatening; for then we might truly gather, that God had decreed the eternal
death of all mankind, but on sinning, in the forbidden tree he did threaten,
ergo, he did decree. Arminius distinction of peremptory decree, and not
peremptory, would not help any thing; indeed this presupposes, that the
signifying will of God may not any whit differ from his secret will, which he
keeps within himself, which is a most palpable false-hood.

Abraham did verily believe that he was to offer up his Son without any
exception; for he did sustain his faith in thinking that God could raise him
from the dead, not thinking God would repeal his command; yet Abraham believed
not a lie, because he believed according to that which was revealed unto him.
But then you will say, God may bid us believe this, or that, as if it were his
will, when he knows it not to be his will within himself? Doubtless, he
may to prove us, as he did Abraham, whether we will address our selves
conscionably to obey him, or carelessly out of wilfulness disobey his
commandments. As the goodness of the creature is not in doing what God within
his secret will has appointed; so the truth of the creature stands not
always in believing what he within himself has determined.

To the second part I answer, that God does not bind any directly and
immediately to believe salvation, but in a certain order, in which they cannot
but believe them truly: for he binds men first to believe on Christ unto
salvation; and then being now in Christ, to believe that he loved them, gave
himself for them, did elect them, will save them, and none can truly believe
on Christ to salvation, but infallibly believes all these other.

so as to choose some persons to be brought to life, through certain means,
this stands well with wrath to death for the present; and God would never
have given nor called Christ to suffer death for us now in sin and death, had
he not thus loved us. Look as God may bodily inflict death on him whom he so
far loves, that he means to give him life by raising him from the dead, by
his almighty power; so is it here: He may yield him dead to his justice, whom
he so loves to life, that he will by means predestined bring them from
death to life.

I will choose these, if they believe: it is enough that we conceive some such
general as this, I will choose whom I will choose. We deny the assumption,
with the reason of it. Let them tell we when God raised Lazarus, or chose
Lazarus, whom he would raise from the dead; such a blind man whom he would
restore to light; such a piece of earth which he would make into the body of
Adam; what general rules he did these by; rules which presuppose that things
or persons thus and thus qualified, should be thus and thus used? The reason is
denied. For to measure God by our scantling, is foolish, and to imagine as it
were created general verities in his understanding, like as it is in our
selves, is fitter for doting anthropomorphits, then grave Divines. Beside, that
man does many things to some particular persons, for which he has no general
rule, but that he may do as he will, Ratio obligans. Ratio prepondarans. Ratio
concommitans.
where there is no reason which does obliege him and sway him to the contrary.



Paul and Peter speak of, cannot be the foreknowing of Faith and
sanctification in certain perso^^; for then what need is there, that those who
are foreknowne should be predestined to be called, justified, and sanctified?
and if Peter's foreknowledge were a foresight of faith and holiness, what need
we to be chosen to holiness? For that place in Timothy, If ye fly the lusts
of youth, ye shall be vessels of gold and silver. Besides, there is no
necessity to conster that whole passage of election, though it be so usually
taken; the faith of some has been subverted but the groundwork, or
foundation of saving faith and Grace abides sure; and God does know them in
whom it is, and they may know themselves by their care to depart from iniquity.
But why does not God work this well-grounded grace in all? It is fit there
should some, not all, be precious and golden vessels, having that precious
faith, to wit, which cannot be subverted, and those precious graces of the
sanctifying spirit. How may one know that he is one of these, and not a vessel
of Alchimie, or baser matter? Whosoever does purge himself, he shall be a
vessel of gold; he shall have in him that foundation of God, that is, that
sure grounded faith and grace which shall not be subverted: But this by the
way. Now to proceed.

viz. That God has chosen us who believe, not only to have this life of
grace, I mean, of love and holiness, but to have them in perfection: Thus the
text says, he has chosen us, that we should come to such a state in this life
of love, wherein we shall be perfect and pure without any spot in it. Here we
have life, but all is in part; We know in part, we love in part, we are holy
in part, this state is a state of childhood or imperfection: But in the other
life, that which is in part shall be done away: We shall know as we are
known, we shall love with all our hearts and strength, we shall be perfectly
holy, without defect or spot, because God has chosen us, not only to life,
but to a state of perfection in this life spiritual. Look as God has loved
plants, birds, beasts, men, not only thus far that they should have a
being, but that they should grow up, and attain to a perfect state in this
life and being, to which he has chosen us.

lamenesse with it; but to choose us to come unto such a state, wherein we
shall be pure without any spot or defect, not only to ordain us to find
life, but life in abundance in Christ, this is the riches of his mercy.

some in youth, some in the aged progress of sanctification, yet shall not
this hinder; for he who is no sooner begotten to God, then he is hence
removed, even he shall in that day, wherein all of us shall grow to a perfect
man in Christ, attain this state of perfection, as that natural creature
which is carried out from birth to burial, shall at last day be raised up, not
in fancy (which enters as a present penalty of sin) but in the full stature,
which beseems such a nature.

viz. that God has taken us of grace to this, that we shall live in his
glorious presence: had he given us a perfect life without showing us himself
as it were face to face, it had been much favor, but to choose us to this
most near communion with him, is the height of his grace, and our happiness;
There is a being before God in state of grace, such as now we have: Thus Noah,
thus Abraham, Hezekiah, Zachary, Elizabeth, are said, to have walked before the
Lord; and it is no small privilege that we may converse in his presence after
any manner: but all we see of him here, is but as it were the reflection of
him in a glass: there is another being before him, when we shall be now with
him in the place of his glorious presence, when we shall walk by sight, when
we shall see him as he is, when we shall follow the Lamb, and see God, with
that blessed vision, even face to face as it were; and this is it which is our
chief blessedness, even to be with him, and see him, Glorious (...).
in whose presence is the saciety of everlasting delights. That perfection of
quality and action which we shall attain, is a great blessedness, as great as
can be inherent in our persons; for what can be greater then to know God as we
are known, to love him with the whole heart, to praise him most constantly and
joyfully? but all this is nothing so good to us, as to have our God before us,
and taste the joy of his presence: All our walking in light tends to this,
that we may have communion with him. Look as a wife who found sometime much
difficulty in pleasing her husband, and doing things to his mind, she takes
great pleasure when she can now with ease fit every thing to his mind,
Obiectiua beatitudo.
but nothing so much pleasure in this, as in her husband himself: And look as
there is no loving wife which takes half the pleasure in her bridal
apparel, that she does in her husband himself; so it is here, I dare say,
all that glory in which we shall be in that day clothed upon, shall be as
nothing to us in comparison of that blessed object of God, whom then we shall
see as he is. If in this life God is so good to his children, that they can
wish themselves a curse for his sake, what will he then be when we see him in
glory?

Paul to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: We are chosen to this manner of
presence, and for that presence which then we shall have, when we come to state
of perfection in love, is no other: we are chosen to it, ergo, let us aspire
after it. If a loving wives husband be absent in some far country, though
she have by messengers, and by letters, some communion with him, yet this will
not satisfy, there is a great desire to see him, to be each in the embrace of
other: so it should be with us, this letter of his word, this recourse of his
messengers, should rather excite desires fully to enjoy our God, then occasion
us to rest contented in this present condition. I remember Absolon, when he
was now recalled from exile, but not admitted to see his fathers face at Court,
he was so impatient, that his exile seemed almost as easy as such a
condition: Thus it is with us, from what time God has brought us to belief,
we are called back again from our exile spiritual, to the Church or City of
our God: But alas, we are not yet admitted into the Court, into the glorious
presence of our great God. Let us (ergo) if we be risen with Christ, groan
after this prerogative, to which God has chosen us, and take no delight to
dwell here, further then the serving God in his Saints does sweeten our abode.

This shows us the Lords exceeding grace: If the King should pardon a
Traitor, and give him competency of living in the remotest parts of his
Kingdom, with, prohibition once to pass the bounds of them it were
Prince-like favor; but to enrich him with possessions, and take him to Court,
yea to reckon him in midst of his dearest favorites, what clemency and
bounty were in such a fact? Such is this dealing of God toward us.

Who has predestined.] In describing which, these things are to be observed
as they lie in the Text.

1. The benefit it self, Who has predestined. 2. The persons who are
predestined. 3. The thing to which he has predestined us, to adoption,
amplified from the cause of it, through Christ. 4. The manner which is
propounded in this word, within himself, expounded, i.e. according to the good
pleasure of his will. 5. The end, to the praise of his glorious grace, which
grace is described from the effect of it in us, which is amplified from the
manner of working, q. d. out of which his grace, he has made us accepted, or
done us favor, in and through his beloved.
Three things for better understanding are to be insisted on, because they are
not of so vulgar explication.

1. With what this word is to be continued. 2. What it is to predestinate. 3.
What is meant by Adoption.
To the first, Rep.
some refer it to (in Love) in the fourth verse, in this manner, who has
predestined us in love; but that he should absurdly repeat the cause of
predestination, which he expresses after to have been his gracious pleasure;
it is fitlier set as in equal pareill to that in the third verse, Who has
blessed us, who has predestined us, (...). Some imagine it joined within
him, after this manner, who has chosen us to adoption, having predestined us
in him before worlds, that we should be holy before him. But I have showed
above, that (in him) must needs be referred to the benefit of election, or the
Apostle should not conclude pertinently, that God in Christ has blessed us
with every blessing: Beside that, this sense confounds the sentence, to
decline the force of the argument above mentioned

To the second I answer, that God does condescend so far to our capacity, as
to teach us his one only action, by which he loves us effectually to life, by
two, which in us are diverse because one infinite action of God does eminently
note that those two are in us, though they are distinct and diverse; as the
first act of election laid down Gods choosing us, or loving us to an end; so
this does signify the ordaining of us to the same end, by such a course of
means as shall effectually work thereunto: Thus it is with us, when we will
do any thing, we do appoint by what means we will do that we are agreed on.
When one is agreed to bring up his Son at a Trade, then afterward he
determines to choose some Trade forth, to seek him a Master, to bind him
Apprentise, and let him serve his time, and get his Freedom in it: Thus when
God has set his love upon us, to bring us to life, he does next determine, by
such an order of means as counsel suggesteth or presents within him, to
bring us to this end, which is to predestinate; for to predestinate is to
decree the attaining of some end, by such like means as counsel shall prompe
us with. Predestination may be defined to be an act of counsel, showing means
effectually bringing about some end: as now it is accepted of the will, it
differs therefore from election. First, election is in the will, this is in the
understanding; Acts 4.28.
Those things which thy counsel has predestined. Secondly; Election is
only of the end, this is of means also. Thirdly; that is seated in the will
only, this primarily in the understanding, in the will by participation, in so
much as the will does accept; for should Gods wisdom show means which would
effectually work any thing; if his will should not accept of them, he could
not be said to predestinate any thing by them.

This predestination is twofold, according to his ends: The first is an act of
counsel, showing or preparing means whereby his grace in some shall be
glorious; and of this only here he speaks, as is plain in the Text: He
speaks of it as a benefit in Christ, as it respects persons elect, verse 4.
as it has his terminus adoption. The second is, an act of counsel, accepted
of his will, which does show and decree the being of all such means, by which
his justice shall in some persons be glorious: Thus Fulgentius does make
predestination, not only a preparation in his eternal disposition of things
which he did foreknow himself about to work, whether in mercy or justice;
and the Scripture doubts not to say, that God did predestinate all those
things done to the person of our Savior, then which the Sun never saw viler.
The Fathers do define Gods predestination in evil things by foreknowledge,
only to show a difference between the working of his providence in good and
evil, viz. that he does not work these by himself, or by command, or by
concurring effectually to them, as he does to good actions. Now that which is
spoken respectively, must not be absolutely taken, neither need men to fear
the use of such phrase, which God himself has not declined: But enough of
this for this place.

Touching the third point, Adoption; it notes the same matter for substance,
which was the end of Election, even glorious life with God; but it includes
further, a dignity or sonne-ship which does interesse us in some sort to life
of glory; and look as the royalty of a Lordship, may be distinguished from the
Lordship it self, though they go together; so may this dignity or title of
sonne-ship from the inheritance it self, which does go with it. By Adoption
then, he means here the dignity and glory of the sons of God, under what
maine benefit, whether under justification or glorification, it is to be
conceived, I will show after in unfolding the Doctrines. The sum of these two
Verses, is in larger term of speech, as follows: Blessed be God, who has
blessed us in Christ with all spiritual blessing; as for example: Who has
elected us, and not only chosen us to the end, but has so ordered all things,
by an eternal disposition for us, who believe, that they shall bring us to
that dignity and full glory of the sons of God, which is both begun in us
here believing, and is also to be accomplished hereafter through Christ; and
this he does, not looking out of himself to any thing foreseen in us, but
within himself; my meaning is, out of his mere gracious pleasure, that thus
his glorious eternal grace might be magnified, out of which this grace
flows, that he has now in his time done us favor, and made us accepted in
his beloved. First it is to be marked in the order that God does to our
conceiving; first love us to life, before the means bringing us to life are
decreed; This is the order, in which we are to conceive that one simple action
of God which works our salvation: Here election is the first in this
enumeration Paul makes, and, Romans 8.39. Paul sets foreknowledge before
predestination; and when the Scripture says, we are elected to life, through
faith and holiness, as the way of life; needs must the end be first in order
of nature, before those things which serve to the end. As it is with us, we
first are at a point concerning the end, before we seek means which lead
unto it; as I am first at a point to Write before I take in hand Pen, Ink, or
Paper. Resp.
It is one thing to love any so, as that I will bring them to life by just
means; another thing to love any so, as immediately to communicate life with
them; In the first sort, God may love those who are sinners before him; the
latter cannot consist with his wrath inflicting death: And thus he did love
them before the giving of Christ; So God loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son; that he spared him not, but gave him all to death for us.
This is to be marked, against them who make God first decree the giving of
Christ to death; of faith and perseverance to some, before he make either
inward or outward election of them.

more facility and fruitfulness. Some complexions and constitutions are far
more accommodable instruments to grace now received, then others. The good we
see in others, we glorify God in it, in the day of our visitation, though we
scorn it for the present, the good given us in others, is often ordained as an
antecedent to our conuersions, as when God does give us love in the eyes of
some good man, stir him up to pray for us; Thus Austen thinks that Steuens
prayer was ordained of God, as a mean to work Saul's conversion. The evils we
know before our conuersions, work to this end likewise: The Iailors
affrightment God had ordained as a means to make him seek out of himself: So
the sicknesses which were upon many in the Gospel, made them seek out to
Christ: So the deformity which befalls some, the infirmities, the fears and
griefs of mind which follow them, though they know not why, (as we say) nor
wherefore, are often disposed as occasions of their greatest good, of
preserving them from many sins: Nay, the sins they lived in before their
calling, God makes them occasionally work to this end; For, after our
conversion, they make us more to love, as Mary; more humble and merciful, as
Paul's persecuting, more diligent in well doing, when we were in the flesh, Romans
6. Even as the art of the Apothecarie makes Vipers into Treacles; so does our
God. Now when God has visited us, we prove then by experience, that our good
which he gives us in our selves and others, whether it be spiritual or
temporal: yea, the evil we suffer, whether of sin or of punishment, whether
the punishment come immediately from God, or mediately from the hands of men;
that all I say, are ordained to carry us home to the end, unto which he has
chosen us. In the good things we find to help us, it is more apparent, then
that we need to speak of it; in good gifts which wicked men have, they are
often predestined for our good; Even as Carriers have money often, not for
themselves, but for those to whom they are sent; So men unsanctified have
golden gifts, sometime for the sake of others, to whom they are sent. Our
sins and evils we sustain, God does even use them as Physic to our
souls, and he prepares wicked men often to do that by his children, which
those of the skullerie do by a vessel when it is foul, even to scour them
from their rust: Even as he predestined his Sons sufferings; so ours also,
whom he has predestinate, that we should be like to his Son, as well in
sufferings, as in glory. Saint Paul proves, that to the called, according to
Gods purpose of life, all things did work together unto good; and he proves
it hence, because God had predestined them. Now if Gods predestination did
not contriue every thing befalls us to this end, his proof were insufficient.

Paul the life of all in the ship, Acts 27.31.
yet when the ship-men would have left them, Paul tells them; If these men
hide not in the ship, ye cannot be saved; Gods decree does stablish means, not
remove them; Thus we might refuse meat in health, medicine in sickness, and
say, so long as God has appointed us to live, we shall live: The devil
teaches men in outward things wholly to distrust God, and rely altogether on
means; in these spiritual things, he makes them lay all on Gods mercy and
purpose, never taking heed to means.



Now I was ordained to it, I think it was my destiny: But happy is he, who
can by event learn to see how God has destinated beforehand every thing for
his good.

are predestined, even of such as have believed and are sanctified; the
persons which are ordained to life and predestined, they are called, that is
brought to have a true faith, and justified, and they shall be glorified. This
chain of four linkes is, such, two whereof are kept with God in heaven, two
are let down into earth, as it were; This chain is so coupled, that whosoever
are within these midlinkes, are within the two utmost also. While a man
carries a frame or plot of this or that in his mind, we cannot say what is
his meaning, but when he now does execute it, then we know what he had
predestined, and aforehand designed within himself. When God does lay the
foundation of faith and holiness, such as shall never be subverted; then we
may know that he did predestinate in his time, to work a glorious work in
such a person; How precious then is this faith which purifieth the heart, which
does let us be able, even to read our names written in this predestination of
God, as a book or register of life; which makes us discern our selves in
that state, that all things shall work for our good? every wind, even the
crossest, shall help us to the haven of true happiness. I know faithful
souls cannot always find this comfort, because they find themselves worse,
rather then better, for many things which betide them; but we must not be
dismayed, things work together, when thou see the last with the first, then
thou shall see that harmony which is in all, for thy best good. A Physician
does with one thing or two, make that man more sick then ever, whom yet at
length he most comfortably heals: Verse, may hither also be reduced. Only
let us endeavor to know our selves predestined by him, for this is our
strength. which cannot be shaken, when we know that God has determined and
contrived such means as shall infallibly bring us to glory; this known, we
may say, If God be with us, who shall be against us?

That we should be adopted through Christ.] Rom 8. like even in glory, as well
as suffering, like in being Sons, as he i^ a Son; like in having a state of
glory fitting them, as he has glory, such as is fit for him the Head or
firstborn of us. For this cause, Heb. 12. ver. 21. the predestinate are
called the Church of the first begotten, who are written in heaven, because all
Gods chosen are by this predestination appointed to this, that they shall be
Sons of God: Even as great men appoint with themselves some that think nothing
of it, that they shall be their heirs, and do adopt them by this means
children to them: So God did within himself ordain of us that we should be
brought to this estate of being his adopted children. For our better
understanding this matter, three things shall be opened. 1. What this Adoption
contains in it. 2. Through whom we come to be adopted. 3. In what order we
do receive in time this so great benefit, or to what benefit this is to be
reduced, whether to Calling, justification, or glorification.

John 1.22. 1 John 3.1. He gives us this dignity, shows us this love, that
we should be called his children; not that we are children as Adam was, who
because he was produced in the similitude of God, might be called a Son of
God, but sons through a mystical conjunction with Jesus Christ that natural
Son of God.

Secondly, we have the inheritance of light, or a divine nature, which stands
not in such a life of God, as Adam had, which was a knowledge of God only as a
Creator of all things, and a righteousness and holiness which were in order
to God known only as a creator, not such a life as may fall away, but a life
which stands in knowing, as an Author in Christ, of supernatural grace; such
righteousness and holiness as are in order to God, as now made manifest in
Christ Jesus; such a life as shall never have end, according to that, those who
are borne of God cannot sin, for the seed of God abides in them.

Thirdly, all that glory we look for in Heaven, is comprehended in this
adoption, Romans 8. We expect our adoption, even the redemption of our bodies.

so many as believed, to them it is given to be his children, sons and
daughters: upon our marriage with the natural Son, we come in the place of
sons and daughters also: But for the order, in which we receive this dignity,
it is somewhat doubtful, whether when we are justified, or when we are
glorified. To which I answer briefly, that it belongs to our glorification,
and is to be recalled unto that head; for, Redemption which is put for
Forgiveness of sin and justification, when it does not note out our final
deliverance, this redemption is made to go before it, Gal. 4.5. That he might
redeem us who were under the Law, and that we might receive Adoption. Beside
justification does nothing but sentence this of me, that I am just before God,
so as to receive life from his grace. Now to be just is one thing, to be
reckoned a son another. Again, this adoption is called by the name of a
dignity, or eminency, (...).
yea glory it self is called by the name of Adoption, Romans 8. Waiting for our
adoption, even the redemption of our bodies: To omit that, Romans 9.4. those two
words, Adoption and Glory may be put for one thing, viz. Glorious adoption:
For, the Arc is well comprehended in that head of service; as a principal
type belonging to the Law ceremonial; and look as not only actually to
possess the kingdom, but to be heir apparent of it, is a great point of
g^ory, so the dignity of adoption, adopting us as sons, and heirs apparent
of the kingdom of heaven, is a great part of glory, as well as the inheritance
it self. There are but two things of moment which I know to be objected.

John 1.12.

Resp.
The second part of this reason is not true, and the proof is insufficient; for
though we be adopted, believing on Christ, which the testimony voydeth, yet it
follows not that we are immediately adopted, nothing coming between our
faith and adoption. We are said to be saved by faith, to have eternal life
believing, yet between faith and life, justification must be conceived, so
here also.

Resp.
being it self no circumstance, nor part of life, now executed in us: But so
adoption does not, which is the giving of life, in regard it makes life now
ours, as an Orphans lands are his; ours, as who have the right to it, but are
not yet actually possessed in it. Should not the proposition be limited as I
have said, it would prove, that the giving of the spirit belongs to
justification, for that does give me right to life, as an earnest penny, or
part of payment, does give a man right to challenge the whole sum: This
benefit then is fitly couched under that last of our glorification, Romans 8.
Whom he predestined he called, whom he called he justified, whom he justified
he glorified; in this manner executing their glory: First he gives them of
grace, the dignity of sonne-ship, and so a right to glory, and after he does
actually possess them of it; thus glorifying those whom out of grace he had
justified, to the receiving of life from him, as a gift of his mere grace.

Abba Father, the spirit of this Adoption, what is this now wrought in time,
but that which God did preordaine before all time, even thy Adoption through
Christ? See then what love the Father did bear thee, that thou should be
made a Son, admire it. When David was told of matching with Saul's daughter,
what? said he, seems it a small thing to be son in Law to a King? And shall
it seem a small matter to us that we are now, according as we were
predestined, that we are sons in Law, adopted heirs, ioynt-heyres with
Christ of the kingdom of glory?

If I be a Lord, where is my fear? if a Father, where is my honor? Earthly
Parents, the greater things they mean to leave their children, the more they
expect all obsequious and dutiful behavior from them; so does God from us;
the greater and more excellent condition he has appointed us unto, the more he
does challenge from us all such care and duty as may declare us not unworthy
so great favor.

Behold what love the Father has showed us, that we should be called his
children, 1 John 3.1. Ergo, life is called a gift of Gods grace, Romans 6. vlt.
And that which God will do about his children in the day of judgment, is called
mercy. 2 Timothy 1. The Lord show Onesiphorus mercy in that day. This is to be
marked against the Papists, the first force of their error in the matter of
merit beginning here. For they grant this proposition true, They make grace
belonging ad actionem dei predestinantis eligentis, non ad terminum electionis.
that God does out of his grace predestinate us to life; but this they will not
admit, that God does predestinate us to life, which shall come immediately from
this grace. Now to conceive thus of predestination, is to take away all the
grace of predestination. For to choose one out of grace to have this or that
he shall well pay for, is grace not worth God have mercy? As they say this is
grace, when he might have chosen others, and left us, he did take us, as who
should have life purchased from his Justice. I answer, here is an action of
liberty, to take one before another; but while this is it to which I am taken,
viz. to have a pennyworth for my penny, there is no grace at all showed me.
For when actions are defined according to the object about which they are
conversant, if the object of life have not grace in it, there can be no grace
in electing to it.

Secondly, predestination should be an intermedled action; partly a preparation
of things God would do out of his grace, as of calling, the first
justification according to the Papists; partly a preparation of things God
would do out of Justice, as of our glorification.

Thirdly, this makes all that God does out of grace, tend to this end, that
his justice may be glorious in giving life: We read the contrary, that justice
shuts all under sin, that grace may be glorious in all; this we read
not, and it were absurd to think it, when all his justice does in reprobation
tend to this end, that the riches of his grace may be more displayed.

Fourthly, the life to which we are predestined is here included in this
word Adoption; it is called a gift, an inheritance; it is here said to be
attained through Christ, Romans 5. v. vlt. As sin reigns to death, so does
not the righteousness of Christ to life; But grace by Christ's righteousness
reigns unto life, the immediate cause ergo of life, is Gods grace; for the
immediate cause of death is sin; The Papists make life from grace remote,
quoad radicem, not prexime and immediate.
and God is said to have made Christ every thing to us, that our whole
rejoicing might be in God, showing us grace through him: not that we might be
able to rejoice in our selves, as now reinabled to deserve from justice through
him: this then is to be held as a principle of great moment, that the life to
which we are chosen and predestined, is a life immediately flowing from the
grace of God: For this does show that the justifying righteousness which God
does prepare for us, must be such that God may upon it reckon us just from his
mere grace, to the receiving of life from his grace. But here is no place to
enter the doctrine of justification and merit, the which we shall have fit
occasion to unfold hereafter.

Now follows the manner, [within himself;] that is, according to the good
pleasure of his will: The first phrase I rather read thus, because in that we
are said to be ordained to adoption through Christ, it does intimate that we
are ordained to be children to him, and because he would rather have said, Who
has predestined us to be Sons through Christ, to himself, then to
adoption through Christ to himself: but it skilleth not how we take it, seeing
the latter words does sufficiently ground the instruction to be gathered.

life, so far they move to intend and execute the means which must bring to
life. But the Papists themselves in this are sound, who hold, that therefore
God does freely ordain us to the end, and that he does therefore freely call
and justify us; hitherto they grant grace, even in the execution of Gods
predestination, and it may be proved by Scriptures: For in calling, two things
may be marked. 1. The sending his word. 2. The working with it by his spirit:
now he does both these out of his free pleasure; For the word he does send it
to those whom he does see will less profit by it then others; If the things
done in thee, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they would at least have
humbled themselves in Niniuie- like repentance; and Ezech. 3. I send thee not
to a people of a strange tongue, they would hear thee, but these will not
hear thee. Now he teaches inwardly no less freely. Luke 10.2. Father, I
confess thou reuealest these things to babes, and hidest them from wise ones,
even according to thy good pleasure. Therefore Paul says, 2 Timothy 2.9. He has
called us with a holy calling, according to his purpose and grace: Now if God
do call us to salvation without any thing foreseen in us, it cannot be but
that he did ordain us to salvation without foreseeing any thing which might
move him unto it; this is taught, Romans 9. that the purpose of God, is according
to election, that is, free, depending on him only who calls us to glory, not
on any thing in us called. The reason why God shows mercy, or hardens, that
is, denies mercy, is his mere will; That as the Potter has nothing but his
pleasure moving him to appoint or make of the same lump vessels to so diverse
ends; no more has God: And here it shall not be amiss to clear that
Scripture from some misconstructions which have been made, obscuring the true
meaning of it to some understandings.

Romans 9. Verse. 11. cleared from false constructions.
Some make (the purpose of God) verse 11. to note out such a purpose by which
God determines to choose out to life, such whom he does foresee, will seek
it by constant faith in his promises, rejecting others from life, who seek
salvation by their own righteousness in the works of the Law: This
construction flows from a former error, viz. that the Apostle in this
passage of Scripture, from the sixth verse downward, does speak of the Jews
taken and rejected, not as persons, by carnal generation descended from
Abraham, but as persons who seek salvation by cleaving to the promise, or
otherwise by works, according to the tenor of the Law. This likewise does
presuppose that those Jews, whose objection Paul preuenteth, verse 6. do by
the word of God conceive the word of the covenant legal, in this manner; What
then? if we be rejected from salvation, who seek it by works of the Law, then
the word of Gods covenant is come to naught: Which Objection, they should seem
to make by occasion of the former Doctrine of justification; but in all of
these, and in all inferred on them, Arminius is deceived; For it is not the
doctrine of justification so much, as the doctrine of Predestination, which in
the eight Chapter went before, which makes the Apostle enter this discourse:
For he having taught in the former part of the Epistle, Romans 4. that those who
traced the steps of Abraham's faith, were his children; and in the Chapter next
before, that such whom God did foreknow and acknowledge for his people, they
were predestined and called to faith in Christ, every one might be ready to
gather that the Jews; for the body of them were not acknowledged of him as his
people, because they did set themselves stiffely against the faith of Christ,
and therefore they were not the Israel of God, the chosen seed of Abraham, the
people whom God did know before; and this is that which he leaves to be
gathered in that lamentable preface, Romans 9. from the first to the sixth verse,
viz. that a great part of the Jews, carnally descended of Abraham, are
rejected now from being the people and Israel of God, the seed with which God
had promised his presence and blessing: Compare Romans 8.29. with Rom 9.6.7. Romans
11.8. he speaks not of a reiection from righteousness and life, befalling
such as followed salvation by works, for thus were the greatest part always
rejected, when yet they could not be said rejected ever before, in this manner
which did befall them, and is here lamented: This reiection intimated, he
preuenteth an objection, which some might make against it, in this manner: That
which would make Gods word to Israel, and that seed of Abraham frustrate, that
is not to be granted: But the reiection of the Jews from being Gods Israel,
and the seed whom he will bless, makes his word in vain, Ergo, The reason
which confirms this assumption is to be gathered from the Apostles answer;
such as the Israel, whom God has loved, and chosen, and promised to bless for
ever, such cannot be rejected, but the word of God will be made frustrate; but
said they, we are Gods Israel, we are Abraham's seed, which are plainly to be
gathered from verse 6. and 7. From these circumstances, well marked, we may see
that the word here meant, is that word which opened Gods gracious election of
this people, to be his people and children, and which promised his perpetual
presence with them, and blessing toward them: The word here meant, is such a
word as takes effect in that part of the Jews whom God did know before, and
is still made good in them; but the word of the legal covenant is abrogated to
all the chosen of the Jews. Secondly; Jeremy declared the word of the legal
covenant to be made in vain, yet did not this give place to such an objection,
that Gods word to his people was made of none effect. Again, the Apostle his
answer was direct, the word is made by man's sin in vain; and to have
informed them in the true end of the word of the Law, and not to answer them,
that the word of the Gospels covenant is not frustrate, when they object, that
the word of the covenant of the Law is come to nothing; this were but being
asked of Chalk, to answer of Cheese. Again, we see that Paul does not
intimate the reiection of the Jews, as from righteousness and life, as they
were followers of the law, which is a point he comes to in the beginning of
the next Chapter; but he considers them, as part of Israel, and the seed of
Abraham only: for had this been the thing in which they grounded themselves,
if those who follow the Law be rejected, Gods word is come to nothing, then
should not Paul have answered, all who are from Israel, are not Israel; all who
are Abraham's seed, are not children; but all who follow the Law are not the
true Israel to which God did tie himself by promise. Secondly; It is plain,
he intimates their reiection, as they were the people of the Jews, as they
were denominated the Israel of God, which may be gathered from the first Verse
of the eleauenth Chapter. Has God cast away his people? God forbid. I am an
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. Thirdly, No godly
faithful ones could think the word of God falsified, if such as did seek
justification in the Law by the works of it, were rejected; but the Apostles
and godliest a while were exercised with this doubt, they could not see how it
could stand with Gods word, that Israel should be forsaken, and the Gentiles
called: It is certain therefore, that he does intimate the reiection of the
Jews, as those who had been the Israel of God, and seed of Abraham. The
Apostle denies the reason on which they thought their reiection a thing which
could not stand with the immobility of Gods word. He answers the assumption
of the latter syllogism, by distinguishing of Israel and children; denying
that all Israelites are that Israel to which Gods word belongs; or that all
Abraham's seed are those children whom God adopted to himself, verse 7. but
such only who were like Isaac; First, begotten by a word of promise, and
partakers of the heavenly calling: The reason is to be conceived in this
manner; The rejecting of such, who are not the true Israel, nor belong not to
the number of Gods adopted children, cannot shake Gods word, spoken to Israel
and Abraham's seed: But many of the Israelites and Abraham's seed, are such to
whom the word belonged not, Ergo, The word of God is firm, though they be
rejected. This assumption is propounded in the end of the fifth and sixth verses.
Secondly; It is proved to the foureteenth verse. Here Arminius having
presupposed this word the word of the legal covenant, and this reiection of
such as sought righteousness in the Law; he thus takes up the argument.

If the word respect the children of promise, then it is firm, though the
children of the flesh are rejected: But it concerns children of the promise,
that is, believers; Ergo, it is safe, though iusticiaries, children of the
flesh be rejected. But this assumption is no word of it in Arminius his sense,
here expressed: For though children of the flesh in some other Scripture, does
note out iusticiaries, seeking salvation in the Law, yet here the literal
meaning is to be taken; a child of the flesh being such a one who descends
from Abraham according to the flesh; for it is most plain, that these did make
them think themselves within the compass of the word, because they were
Israelites and the seed of Abraham, in regard of bodily generation propagated
from him; and Arminius does decline that, in obiecting and answering which this
discourse consists? Beside that, though the sons of the flesh may signify
such, who carnally, not spiritually conceive of the Law, yet the seed of
Abraham without any adjoined, is never so taken. The assumption which is to be
proved, is this; That many of Abraham's seed, are such to whom the word
belongs not: The word which belonged not to Ismael and Esau but to Isaac and
Jacob only, and such as were like to them, that word belonged not to many of
those who are the seed of Abraham, and Israelites: But the word showing Gods
love, choice, adoption, blessing of Israel, and Abraham's seed, belonged not to
Esau, Ismael, and such as they were, but to Isaac and Jacob. Here Arminius
having those legal iusticiaries, thus gathers his sillogisme.

Ismael and Esau were types of such as sought justice in the Law: Ismael and
Esau were rejected; Isaac was reckoned in the seed; Isaac was a type of the
children of the promise; Ergo, the children of the promise are the seed.
Ismael was not in the seed, but Ismael was a type of all who sought
righteousness in the Law of all the children of the flesh; Ergo, the children
of the flesh were not in the seed. The conclusions are true, but not pertinent
to this sense; for the children of the flesh here are those only who in
course of nature came from Abraham: the children of the promise those who were
so borne of Abraham, that they were in Isaac called to the heavenly
benediction. But in laying down this reiection of Esau from benefit of this
word, belonging to the seed and taking of Jacob, he shows plainly, that it
is not a rejecting of those in Abraham's seed, who were iusticiaries as
iusticiaries, because that Esau was rejected before he was borne, or had done
good or evil, from part in that word made to Israel and Isaac, taken to the
heavenly benedicton before any thing which might move thereunto: mark, Ergo,
in the 10.11.12.13. ver. three things. First, the equity of Esau and Isaac in
Parents conception, merits, demerits, only in birth Esau had pre-eminence.
Secondly, mark the word Came, signifying the election of the one, and calling
him to the heavenly inheritance, with the reiection of the other, which is laid
down, verse 12.13. Thirdly, Mark the end, why God did choose and refuse,
before merits or demerits in the end of the 11. verse, by a Parenthesis, viz.
that Gods purpose according to his free election might abide for ever, while it
depended not on works in men, which are changeable, but on himself, who
freely calls whom he will to this heavenly glory. The scope of this example is
the same with the other, viz. to prove that all of Israel, and all the seed of
Abraham were not such to whom the word declaring Gods free Election and
Adoption to the heavenly inheritance belonged.

That word which belonged not to Esau, but to Jacob, that belonged not to many
of Abraham's seed, and by consequence that may stand firm, though a multitude
of Abraham's seed be rejected: but the word declaring Gods election, etc. But
the Apostle does lay down the manner after which the word choosing and
adopting Israel, refusing Esau, was given forth, viz. that it came without
respect of good or evil, which might move unto it, that he may prevent a
second objection which the Jews might make from their own righteousness, in
respect of the Gentiles, sinners; for they might think it impossible that Gods
word could stand with rejecting them, who were righteous in comparison of the
Gentiles received; for he conceived this included in that quaerulous
objection: First is Gods induration a cause why he is angry with us? Secondly,
can he be angry with us who are hardened by his irresistable will? Thirdly, can
he be angry with us justly? The Apostle in this 21. ver. tells us, that that
induration is not the cause of Gods anger, but anger of induration; for none
are hardened but vessels now of wrath, by their own deserving. 2. Says he, God
bears them with much patience, and does not harden them by will irresistible.
3. God does it for most just ends, and thus a reddition might be framed, says
he, a maiori ad minus: Shall the Potter have such absolute power in his clay,
and shall not God have power to decree the hardening of those who justly deserve
it? and that with such a will as does expect with much patience their
conversion, and all for the obtaining of most just things: But for this latter
it is plain the argument of the Potter is a pari or minori, if it be compared
to God: Shall we think that God has less power over his creatures then the
Potter? God I say, Besides that Gods actual induration begins where his
patience ends.
who creates and makes the clay, he disposes? And to use this similitude to
Arminius, his order is to illustrate a thing by that which has nothing like;
for Gods work (by that Arminius conceiueth) has no resemblance to that the
Potter does, as is already showed. For the matter answered.

First, he conceiueth not the question right: They ask not whether Gods
induration be cause of his anger, but whether God may be angry at them who come
to this state of being hardened? Now this is certain, that men hardened and
forsaken, are the object about which Gods anger is exercised, as a malefactor
punished is the object about which the Magistrates anger is exercised, though
punishment is not the cause why he is angry, but the effect of it; neither is
there one word in this verse, which testifies God to harden such, with whom he
is angry for sin, unless to bear with patience, signify to harden, and
vessels made or prepared to destruction, men now having by sin provoked God:
the first absurd, that an act of patience should be induration opposed to
mercy; the other equivocal, as a vessel prepared to glory is not a vessel now
believing and sanctified, and actually fitted for glory; so on the contrary.

For the second it is false that here is any thing to testify Gods will
irresistable, which the Apostle did never except against, but rather justify,
and yet maintain it equal by a comparison fore-construed. And this is no
argument why his decreeing will should not be irresistible; this I say, that
he uses patience toward those whom he has decreed to reject, he conceiueth
the will of God to have come to election, and otherwise to include an appetite
as it were, of having some thing which he will not work by his omnipotency,
but he whose omnipotency is not in every thing, he is not a God omnipotent; for
there are some things in which he is not omnipotent; not to name the same
things he would have of us, he has couenanted to work them in us, I will put
my spirit in your hearts, and make you, etc. and that there is no power in God
which is not infinite and omnipotent; true it is that the verse sets down
just ends, and that therefore God has power to purpose and work most justly
that which is decreed and done to so just purpose. These are collections which
his head has deduced, but not once imagined by the Apostle: and mark now how
the Apostle has foiled the cause of God, by struggling so laboriously and
mystically against that which might so easily be answered: They seem to
murmr against God; if he be angry at them who are hardened by his will, or a
decree of his will irresistible: The plain answer is, God is not unjust
though he be angry, because the decree of his will did determine the hardening
of none, but such who should first by their ungrateful and horrible unbelief
provoke his just anger and induration, (whereas you think that he did decree
to bring you to this with a will irresistable,) the truth is, he did decree
nothing about you, but conditionally, putting also the condition so in your
power, that you might have kept your self from coming into the number of
those, who are in his anger hardened, if you would, but you would not. The
manner, ergo, laid down, preuenteth such a thought, in as much as this might
be deduced from it; That word which does signify such an election and
adoption, as do not depend, nor once respect any merit in the creature, that
word is sin, though the Jew, righteous in comparison of the Gentiles, be
rejected, and the sinful Gentiles received: The end showing why God would not
look at any thing in such whom he elected and called, viz. that his decree
and word about some whom he had elected, might abide surely, taking effect,
while the stability and efficacy of it depended on him freely calling, not on
us; for did Gods decree, or word, touching salvation, depend on men, it would
prove more unstable then a decree in Chancery; as we see in Arminius his
decrees, I will save them all, if they will obey me; I see they will not, but
they will sin: Well, I must let them, but I will condemn them all; I but my
mercy here must moderate Justice, this decree must not be peremptory: I will
send Christ to redeem all, that I may save all again: I decree to save all,
if they will believe, but I see they will not; I will save such as I see now
believe with perseverance, and reject others: that order was fit in electing,
which does make Gods decree most firm, and of most effect to his elected; but
to choose them without any respect to their works, was fit to this end; Ergo,
he did choose in this order, not looking at any thing in them, but at his
gracious pleasure; and in these examples, as in types, are laid down, all the
high points of election, viz. that God does choose us before we are, that God
does not look at any thing in us, for which to choose us; for though it is
true they were in their causes, yea, in some degree out of them, yet they are
brought in as now chosen, when they were not manifestly in the nature of
things, but creatures to be borne afterward; and though they both had in Adam
offended, yet this is excluded in their typical consideration, and they are
here brought in as having done nothing. Like as Melchisedeck had Father,
Mother, length of days, but as he is a type, none of these things come to be
considered in him. What says Arminius here? He makes the 10.11.12.13. verses
to contain these two things, the Type, and the explication of the Type; the
Type, set forth with sundry circumstances, which are not so much to be heeded
as the things typified, expressly set down in these words; That the purpose of
God, according to his choice of some, or in which he chooses some to life,
rejecting others, might be firm, while it depends not on works of the Law,
but on faith, obeying him that calls. From which explication he gathers two
syllogismes, proouing things to his thought, which go before.

1. That purpose which is according to election of some, with reiection of
other some, that purpose may stand sure, though many be rejected.

But Gods word and purpose is according to election, or is such as discerns
and choseth some from other some to salvation, ergo, the word of God is not
made of no effect, though many of the Jews be rejected.

2. That purpose which depends not on works, but on faith obeying him, that
calling, that purpose, comprehends not such as seek by the works of the Law
salvation.

But this is such, Ergo.

Esau the first borne is hated of God.

Esau is a type of such as seek righteousness in the Law: Ergo, such as seek
righteousness in the Law are hated of God.

Jacob the younger, was loved.

Jacob was a type of all who follow life by grace of calling: Ergo, all who
thus follow life, are beloved of God.

To answer which things briefly, the persons named, are here to be considered
personally, and typically. Personally, because else he does not prove that
Israelites the seed of Abraham may be rejected. Typically, because they are
heads of all the chosen and rejected, both in the seed of Abraham, and in the
Gentiles also. But that they are types here of persons qualified with zeal of
the Law, or faith on Christ, this is a dream without proof, merely presumed,
which before has been sufficiently refuted, and shall be further touched, in
this which follows. First then, to the circumstances, why are we not to stand
upon them, seeing between types and things typified, there is such analogy,
as that thereby one does lead us to the other? But he does see well that these
things here set down in the types cannot stand with that he would have
typified. How can Esau now considered without works, good or evil, when he is
rejected, be a type of those who are rejected as sinners for righteousness by
works of the Law? Or how can Jacob, as he is considered without faith, or any
other work, when now he is chosen and called, be a type of such who are now
chosen, when God does see belief with perseverance in them? Again, this
decree electing Jacob, did offer him grace above Esau; but the decree of saving
Jacob, if he would believe and obey the heavenly calling, does offer no less
to Esau, or any other. Now his conceiving the Apostle to explane his type in
that parenthesis, is most absurd; does the note of a final cause or event,
that, or to the end, that his purpose does thus begin the accommodation of a
type propounded? it is an example not to be seconded; nothing is more plain
then that it is added to note the end or event of that manner electing and
rejecting, which are here expressed: and for the two conclusions he does
argue from these words; The first is true, but not a thing here to be proved;
for the Apostle had said that, ergo, the word was true, notwithstanding the
multitude of Israelites were rejected; because that all Israelites were not
that Israel, and all the seed of Abraham were not those children to whom the
word belonged: This is then that which here is to be concluded, that those who
are the seed of Abraham, and Israelites in course of nature, were not that
Israel, and that seed, to whom the word signifying Gods election and adoption
belonged: the force of the argument therefore is in this, not that the decree is
after election, but that Jacob only was in decree of election, and Esau borne
alike of Isaac was not.

The second syllogism concludes a thing that never came into the Apostles
mind, and cannot be accommodated to these types, unless types in that wherein
they are types may be contrary to the thing testified by them; as I have showed
above. Beside, who will yield him that Gods calling, is here put for faith
obeying God calling, when the sight of faith and every thing else was before
excluded in this election of Jacob; and therefore the decree electing him
excludes and opposes it self in works to this faith, as well as any other
thing. Now then we see that this decree electing and adopting, is so from Gods
will, that nothing in man is considered in it, as a mean or cause, but only
his mere pleasure: for clearing which, I entered the explication of this place:
to this only the context following will agree, which seeing I am thus far
entered, I will show so shortly as I can.

What shall we say then (says the Apostle) is there injustice with God? God
forbid. For he says to Moses. This is plain, that the doctrine next before
delivered, gives occasion to this objection. Let any judge then whether
Arminius his sense is made probably a ground of this imagination; we see this
does naturally arise from our construction; for if God from his mere pleasure
does choose one, and call him to adoption and the heavenly inheritance,
rejecting another every way equal to him; Then God seems unjust, for upon his
mere pleasure, to deal so unequally with equals, upon mere pleasure seems
very hard; do but lay that of Arminius by it, and there need no other
confutation. If God decree to reject such as reject his grace offered in
Christ, stiffely cleaving to their own righteousness; and if out of his mere
pleasure, none deserving it, he decree to save such as shall by faith lay hold
on his mercy offered in Christ, then he seems unjust. I answer; Here is no
show of injustice to the reason of man; for that which he supposes to be the
ground of their suspecting injustice; namely, that God should of his mere
pleasure decree that believers on Christ, not followers of the Law, should be
saved, contrary to his former decree in the covenant with Adam; for had this
been the ground of their imputation, the Apostle should have answered, that
God did not of mere pleasure decree otherwise about attaining life, then at
first he had; but he came to this covenant of the Gospel, by reason that we
had broken the former, and through weak flesh, made it impossible to us: But
he maintains the will of God from mere pleasure, showing mercy to Jacob to
have been just in him; it follows.

He who has power to show saving mercy where himself pleases, he is not
unjust in showing to some, without any consideration on their parts, and
denying to other some.

But God has power to show mercy, electing, adopting, calling to the heavenly
inheritance, to whom he will.

This is the express testimony of Moses, which tends to prove God free from
injustice in his grace to Jacob, and in denying it to Esau: For if he may show
it to such as he please, he may refuse it others by the same liberty; He does
amplify this by a consectory deduced.

That which is wholly in the free pleasure of God, that comes not from any
thing in the power of man: But this mercy, electing, adopting, calling, is
merely in Gods free pleasure; it is not therefore in man to procure it, but in
Gods liberty to show this mercy. This answer does plainly show, that the
point which distasted was this; That God should at his mere pleasure show
mercy to Jacob, which he refused Esau; which would make our election, calling,
adoption, quite out of our power, merely depending on Gods free pleasure: For,
both these are here avouched to stand with justice in God, what ever might be
surmised: And mark here, that the Apostle does maintain it without injustice,
to show and refuse mercy, when he considers not any thing in the persons
which might make this equal: For were the equity of Gods mercy showed to
Jacob, and denied Esau in this, that now all were become children of wrath,
whom God might pardon and restore, or leave and execute at his pleasure; then
the Apostle should in the honor he owed to the name of God, have here
expressed this consideration, that God might justly show mercy to some, and
deny it to othersome, who were no^ such, that they had by sin brought
themselves under sentence of condemnation. For if he had not showed it to any,
he had not been unjust; but Saint Paul did know that he had affirmed, that
God looking neither at merit in the one, nor demerit in the other, had chosen
and loved the one, refused and less loved the other. Here mark Arminius.

If that purpose, God rejecting such as seek righteousness by their own
works, electing believers, depend only on his mercy, then it is not unjust.

But that purpose is neither from him that runs, etc. but depends on Gods
mere mercy, Ergo, it is not to be accused of injustice.

First; Mark how he makes the Apostle not answer the difficulty of the
Objection, which was this; How could God go from one Covenant, decreeing
salvation on works, and decree contrary, that not workers, but believers
should be saved? for Gods mercy cannot be the cause, nothing else coming
between, why God should change his order, and go from one unto a contrary.
Secondly; Let him show how mercy can be the only cause, why a iusticiarie,
cleaving to his own righteousness, is rejected from salvation. Thirdly; The
Apostle does not prove this decree, that believers shall be saved, to be just in
God, but Gods showing mercy in destination and execution to one before another.
Now this decree, I will save all that shall believe; does not show any mercy to
one before another, but offers mercy to all alike. Lastly; Who would ever
accuse the mercy of God, for decreeing in a just course to bring men to
salvation, when now they had made themselves guilty of wrath: Mark how he
depraueth that consectorie, which shows that it is not in our power now under
wrath to deserve that God should decree the salvation of us, in case we would
believe. But why Gods decree of election falls on my person to life, this he
makes in our power, which is the chief thing here excluded; for from that God
had purposed and performed to Jacob, and from that privilege that God will at
his pleasure both intend and manifest his saving mercy and compassions, this is
deduced, that this mercy, electing, calling, and adopting one before another,
is not in the will or endeavor of man, but in God freely showing compassion:
Not to say, he should tell us a great matter, in concluding with a solemn
Epiphonema; such a point as this, that man under sin and death, could not
deserve, or any way cause why God should strike that covenant of the Gospel,
and promise salvation upon believing.

For the Scripture says to Pharaoh.] The 17. Verse follows: The connection
may be diuersely conceived, either to prove that God shows mercy at his
pleasure to some, so as he denies it to othersome; or that which went before,
that it is not any thing in us which makes us elected like Jacob, or rejected
as Esau; and then the proof err thus; the Scripture does testify, that
hardening and denying mercy depends on Gods mere pleasure, no less then
showing mercy; Or we may conceive it as in reference to the unrighteousness
formerly objected; for that objection had a double fact giving occasion; God
electing Jacob, rejecting Esau, without any thing that deserved it, whence God
might seem subject to injustice in two regards; First, for showing his grace
to the one before the other, when they both were alike. Secondly; In refusing
the one out of his mere will, and excluding him from the grace showed the
other, when he had done nothing to deserve it.

Hitherto he has answered the first part of the objection, that God in
showing mercy to equals, unequally is not unjust. Now he answers the other
part.

That which God has done, that is in the freedom of his will justly to do:
But God has for ends of his glory, without any thing done on their parts to
move him, denied grace to some, and hardened them, which is plain in this
example; he did raise up Pharaoh, not yet being, purposing to harden and punish
him; Ergo, as he shows mercy where he will, so he hardens, that is,
denies mercy, and so hardens and punishes whom he will. The Assumption is the
example, the Conclusion follows it. Arminius is here still like himself, he
frames a double Sylogisme, taking away show of unrighteousness in his decree,
made with election of some, reiection of other some.

That which God justly does, that he may decree to do.

But he stirs up, hardneth some justly. Ergo, he may decree it without
injustice.

The second Syllogism, from the 18. Verse.

He who shows mercy and hardens, may decree according to election, to show
mercy to some believing, and to reject such as seek righteousness in the
works of the Law. But God shows mercy on whom he will, etc. For the first,
it is true that is gathered, but not pertinent; for this example is brought to
show that God may reject a person without injustice, when he has done nothing
for which Gods will should be moved to reject him; and it is to be well noted,
that the mind of God cannot be too prone, that he may make a decree to reject
a person that follows righteousness in the Law; for Pharaoh cannot be
considered, as in the number of those Jews who were zealous for the Law.
Beside that, it could never seem in appearance unrighteousness, to decree
when a man is now a child of death, that if he will not accept of Gods mercy
in Christ his Son, but cleave to his own righteousness, then he shall be
rejected. And for the latter Syllogism, it is no new Argument, as Arminius
would have it; but the conclusion affirming from all gone before, that it is in
Gods liberty to show mercy to some, as to Jacob, and to deny it to othersome,
and that, Ergo, he cannot be unjust in doing that which he has liberty to do.
Again, the first part of the Proposition does fight with it self; for he who
may show mercy on whom he will, he may not make the creature the cause why he
should show mercy, for he cannot show mercy on any out of his mere pleasure,
and yet show mercy on some consideration in the creature moving him to it.

Now from this that here it is said; God may show mercy on whom he will; he
gathers, that God may make a decree to show mercy to such as believe, repent,
and persevere, etc, in sanctification.

He who may show mercy to whom he will, he is not restrained to some persons,
who shall be of this or that condition, but is as free to one as another. Now
the grounds of this new learning, or old error, I know not which to call it,
say, that God cannot choose any, but such whom he sees eligible, as being
qualified with such condition as the justice of God admits, which is the
moderatrix of his mercy.

He who can show mercy where he will, can do more then that which may possibly
be done, and yet not any receive mercy.

But such a decree as this might be made, and it still possible that not one in
all mankind should be partaker of mercy.

He who shows mercy where he will, is the cause why mercy lights on these
particular men, rather then others.

But he who can but make a decree, that such as will believe shall have mercy,
he is not the cause in particular why this man has mercy showed to him, rather
then another.

His Conclusion misconstring that word and decree, is above refuted, and has
no concord with this Objection following, which is most evident, after this
manner.

If it be by his mere irresistible will that men be in the state of such as
are rejected and hardened, then he has no reason to blame them being so.

But he out of his pleasure, without any thing in the creature causing it,
does reject some from mercy, and harden them: Ergo.

Now Saint Paul does answer this, either by denying that the will of God is
irresistable, or by denying that the efficacy of Gods will does reach thus
far, that some men are in the number of those who are rejected and hardened;
but first by rebuking the insolency of this fact, that a creature should
expostulate with his Creator; secondly, by showing the right of the thing, viz.
that God may at his pleasure reject and harden some: The first in the 20. Verse.

That which the Pot may not do with the Potter, that may not thou do to
God thy Creator.

But the Pot may not find fault with the Potter, for framing it thus or thus,
the end of the 20. verse. Thou may not find fault with God, as if he were in
fault, by whose irresistible will thou art in this case wherein thou stand,
rather then thy self, who do suffer his unavoidable pleasure.

Having thus chidden the insolency of this muttering imputation, he proves
that it is equal God should out of his mere pleasure show mercy to some of
his creatures, and reject other some, to induration and punishment.

The right which the Potter has over his clay, that and much more has God in
his: for the Potter must have his clay made to his hand; but God must create
and make the clay which he will work with.

But the Potter has the power that he may sever certain distinct parcels of
his clay, out of his mere pleasure to contrary uses. v. 21.

The Potter does not sever his clay in this manner, if it shall all be fit to
receive some noble form: I will make it to such end, if not, I will turn it
otherwise; for then it must from the clay, not the Potter; why this parcel
were a vessel to honorable use, and that otherwise.

The Conclusion follows, ver. 22.23.

Ergo. shall not God have the same right to appoint some of his creatures to be
vessels of dishonor, howbeit he uses much patience toward them, that he may
the better declare his wrath, and power in them, and his most gloririous mercy
toward his chosen?

The words have a rhetorical reticency in them, and are thus laid down. What
if God, willing to show his wrath and power, have borne with much patience?
etc. and that he may show his glorious mercy toward the vessels of mercy. Now
something must be understood: Shall his power for this be the lesser? or any
plead against this freedom of God in denying his mercy, and rejecting some,
from the great patience he uses toward them: or we may conceive it, if not
preventing this objection, yet laying down the conclusion with a double
reason, after this sort: If God have most just ends of his glory, and the good
of others who are vessels of mercy, and if he execute his decree with much
patience, and long sufferance, toward the vessels of wrath; shall he not have
power to ordain them to this end, whom in so just manner, and upon so good
considerations he brings unto? etc. In answering these, Arminius seems
very accurate, but it is a wily diligence; such as those poor creatures use,
which being hard be set will run round often, and fetch running-iumps, that by
this means they may bring to a loss all that pursue. To leave him therefore
in impertinent discourse, what I can gather out of him, touching these words,
respects one of these three things: 1. The occasion which went before, God
hardneth whom he will, as he shows mercy to whom he will. 2. The objection.
3. The answer.

Let us begin with the first, for if you mark the antecedent in the sense
Arminius takes it, it will not bear the objection following. Secondly, If the
objection could be made, yet Saint Paul's answer would prove impertinent; the
antecedent occasion, Arminius must understand of Gods decreeing to harden, or
actually hardening, according to his decree: His decree is, I will deny thee
mercy, harden thee, punish thee, if through unbelief and impenitency thou
shall make thy self worthy: His actual hardening is a powerful executing this
punishment of induration, and rejecting, on him who has by final impenitency
deserved it: neither of these will bear his objection, with show of reason.
And because Arminius seems rather to respect the decree, we will take up
that, and join this murmuring objection with it. If I am hardened by Gods
decree, which does set down the hardening and rejecting of all such who shall
by final unbelief and impenitency provoke him to it, then has God no reason
to be angry with me, on whom this sentence is executed by his irresistable
will: But I am hardened according to that decree. Take the antecedent in the
other sense; If God now in his wrath execute induration on me, having deserved
it by my final impenitency, and that with such power that I cannot resist him,
then has he no cause to be angry with me, who am thus hardened by his almighty
power. I do appeal to any conscience, what show of reason there is, inferring
such a consequence on such antecedents. No, had Gods will been, not absolute
within himself, but respecting conditions meritorious in the creature, or had
his induration been a mere inferring of punishment now deserved, and not a
denial of mercy which should have removed the entrance of the other (which
the opposition teaches to be meant by induration) then there had been no show
of reason thus to grant against God. But come to the objection: He conceived in
it thus much, as if it should say, Can Gods induration cause him to be angry
against us who are hardened? Can that which is the effect of his irresistable
will, cause him to be angry with us justly? First, the Apostle chideth this
insolency, suggesting the state of the person murmuring, and the person of God
against whom it is murmured. Secondly, from comparison, well having thus
repelled it, he defends the equity of God, and answers to the matter. First
in the 2. verse.

He who has power to decree the life and death of his creature on some
conditions, and so to harden some, and show mercy to others; If he harden or
show mercy, we must not reason against it. But God has this power set down in
the comparison of the Potter: but the comparison of a Potter pleads a far
higher thing in God, then making a decree of saving such as should become fit
through use of their own liberty, and condemning such, who should most justly
deserve it. For this legal kind of induration, as some of his scholars call
it, gives no occasion of imputing, with show of reason, any fault to God,
seeing Gods decree does not any thing to me, unless further then I make my
self a vessel of dishonor. Secondly, this sense has no affinity with the
Potters fact, this decree does not make definitely any persons vessels of
honor, but such of them as should believe; all if they will believe: this does
not make the persons become vessels of honor, but the performance of the
condition in the decree, this makes God to frame persons diversely qualified,
to diverse ends; whereas the Potter frames a mass all alike to diverse
purposes. Thus having repelled this murmuring, he does make answer to the
matter of their objection three ways, which likewise may make, to his
judgment, a limited reddition of the former comparison.

Thus by the way I have run over part of the ninth to the Romans, in which
were not all error a thing connaturall, I should marvel how any could ever
imagine things so directly against the meaning and discourse of it: The plot of
his election was as strong in his brain, as numbers in theirs who thought they
saw them in every thing. Let us ever hold that the choice and purpose of
calling to the heavenly inheritance, is merely from his will, because he
will, without any respect to the works or condition of his creature; framing
mankind to diverse ends, with as much freedom, as the Potter does his clay,
though it seem to fasten unrighteousness on God, and to excuse the creature,
to flesh and blood. It is one thing to do things with will, another thing to
do them from free pleasure of will, or because we will only.

Again, the decree is therefore made to depend on God calling, that it may be
firm; but did it depend on perseverance in faith, left altogether in our
liberty, it could not be firm, seeing it depends on such a condition as to
the last breath is uncertain, by his own principles otherwhere delivered.

Now follows the end. For the praise of the glory of his Grace.] First, to
open some words in this verse, that so we may see the meaning, and consider of
it more fruitfully; it may be asked what Praise is: There are words which sound
this way, the difference whereof I think good to unfold. Praise, when it is
taken restrainedly, does signify the setting forth by speech of this or that,
in any which is praise worthy: Honor is larger, for it is done by word, work,
gesture, and serves to report our reverent respect to Gods excellency:
Thankfulness is a praising of God, as having bestowed some benefits on us:
Glory is the account which we have of God, when now he is made known to us.
Now here praise is put in a larger acception, and may contain all of them,
both the admiration and high esteem of it, when it is once manifested, the
praising it in word, and honoring it, the thanksgiving which is most worthily
yielded to it.

Glory of God is sometime used in a singular manner, to note a glorious
instrument, coming immediately from God, and made immediately for God; man is
the image and glory of God: Sometime it is used in an acception more frequent,
for the glory of God which is in us who glorify him, or the glory of God in
himself, who is glorified of us; even the glorious being or essence of God;
Thus it is used here, and Romans 9. that he might show his glory to the vessels
of mercy, that is, glorious nature so merciful and gracious: So 2 These. 1. from
the glory of his power, that is, his glorious essence, which is most powerful.
Thirdly, for his grace, here we must know that S. Paul uses diverse words,
Romans 5. 2 Timothy 3.5. Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3. John 3. A^ beneficientia it amicitia
afficient ad benefaciendum.
which signify one thing, but clothed or putting on diverse respects, (...).
Romans 5. Love, Bountifulnes, Mercy, Philanthropie, Grace. Now all these are the
same thing, even Love; What love is, I need not show; Bountifulness is Love,
as now it is in work beneficial; Mercy is love, as now it helps the
miserable; Philanthropie is love, as it respects mankind; Grace is love, as
it gives good things freely, without desert, to make accepted; The word
signifies to do a favor, to follow one with some real favor now executed.
The sum then is this.

All this spiritual blessing wherewith God has blessed us, is to this end,
that he might manifest his most glorious essence, which is grace it self, and
that to the intent we might admire it, esteem it highly, honor it, set it
forth in words, yield thanks to it; which grace of his, before all worlds, is
it which now in the appointed time has made us who are children of wrath,
accepted and followed with many favors in his beloved Son our Savior.

The verse contains two things.

1. The end in these, words; For the Praise of the glory of his grace. 2 A
description of Grace, from the effect, which is set forth both by the principal
cause, God by his eternal grace; and ministerial, or secondary, God out of
his eternal grace, in and through his Christ has made us accepted.
He made all things for himself, Prou. 16.4. All things are from him, through
him, for him. Bring my sons and daughters every one, whom I have created for
my glory, Isa. 43.6.7. The reason is plain, God who is wisdom it self
cannot work without an end: A wise man will do nothing but to some purpose:
That which must be Gods end, why he makes all things, must be better then all
those things which serve unto his end; for the end is better then that which
serves for it, as the body is better then food, raiment, and all things which
serve for the body. In the third place it is plain that nothing is better then
all the works of God, beside God, nothing better then every creature, but the
Creator: If then he must needs have an end why he makes things, and this end
must needs be better then the things made for it, and nothing is better then
all the creatures, but only God the Creator: Hence it follows that God must
needs have himself as his end in every thing which he works: now God being
so perfect, that he needs not our good, that nothing can hurt him, or make
him better in himself: hence it follows that his end must needs be some
external matter, as the making himself known, that he may be accordingly
honored of us, and that to the benefit of us who yield him this honor. The
Scripture intimates 3. ends in that God works toward his chosen. 1. The
glory of us; The wisdom of the Gospel is said to be predestinate to our glory;
all things are ours. The 2. is the glory of our mediator, all are yours, you
are Christ's, 2 These. 1. Christ shall be glorious in his Saints, yea, admirable
in them that believe. The 3. is God himself; all are yours, you Christ's,
Christ Gods; that is, for God and his glory: Now those two former are ends to
which, not for which God works. He that builds a house, that he may lay a
sure foundation, that he may raise the frame, give it the due filling which
belongs to it, but these are not his proper ends, but that he may have a
house for his habitation: So God works many things to our glory, and that in
us his Christ may be glorious, but the proper end which he has in all, is his
own glory.



grace, must needs be to the glory of his grace; But he does elect and
predestinate us out of his grace. We see that if one does this or that in
wisdom, he is praised for his wisdom, which in this or that he has showed:
So in any other virtue, thus it is, those things which God does out of his
grace, he must needs intend to have his grace notified in them, and to have
it, being known, admired, honored, and praised accordingly. Again, those
things which God does out of justice, though, diversely justice, from which they
come, shall be glorious in them, yet all that justice does is reduced to this,
as the just supreme end, even to lend a voice to the riches of Gods glorious
mercy, which he shows the vessels of mercy: For look as in us the actions of
inferior virtues, which commend the virtues they come from, they are
serviceable in some sort, to actions of superior virtues, Ergo, what my
temperance does upon the Sabbath, it does it for religion sake, that my
devotion may more fully and fruitfully occupy himself; so would God have us
conceive in his dispensation, that what his justice does, it is such, that in
some sort it has a respect to, and is serviceable to this most supreme end,
this praise of his grace; this is it, in which he most delights: Even as
virtuous Kings after the matters of God, affect above all things to be had in
honor for clemency and bounty; so it is with our God, King of Kings, all he
does is to this end, that his grace may be made manifest, unto his greater
glory. Men indeed may look at praise as a spur, but not drive at it, as
their highest end, nay, they may not seek it, but for a further end, Gods
glory, the good of others, their own due encouragement: But God may seek his
glory as his utmost end, because he is not in danger of Pride, as man is, and
there is none higher then himself, to whom he should have respect; this makes
him when he shows himself to Moses, proclaim this in himself without
comparison above others. See the place.

Paul; I thank God in Christ, Romans 7. Praise be to God in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.
Blessed be God, even the Father, 1 Pet. 1. If the light of Gods graces shining
in men, must make us glorify God in them; how should this most high grace of
God before all worlds thinking on us for good; how I say, should it be extolled
of us? When the love in a good man must be glorious in our eyes, yea, seeing
his predestination has so wrought, that all things shall work for our good;
let us in evil, as well as in good praise him; he loves in every thing love
it self. Even as waters come from the sea, and return again to it: So from
this Ocean comes every blessing, and every benefit should by praising this
grace, be resolved to it.

Aeque proxime and immediat^o.
If they say God does give it as an act of grace and justice; I answer, then
God has not done all in election and predestination to life, unto the glory of
his grace, but to the joint glory of his grace and justice. Again, it is
impossible that God should alike immediately give life jointly from grace and
justice: For if grace give it freely, justice cannot together give it, as a
matter due by meritorious purchase. God may as possibly condemn the same man,
both out of revenging justice and mercy at once, as he can give a man life at
once, both from free grace, and distributive justice; for mercy and revenging
justice are not more opposite, then grace is to distributive justice.

Again, we see them confuted, who think that God propounded an indefinite end
about his creatures, destinating his creature to his glory, in a manner
indefinite, whereas we see in the highest acts of Gods counsel the Scripture
mentions, God is testified to have his end, not in general, but specified as
it is here, the praise of his glorious grace. Beside that, God cannot propound
ends indefinitely; for this supposes that God may provide for some particular
end, and be frustrated in it; that he depends on the will of man in his
decrees touching his glory, in this or that particular manner; that he does not
see in that instant moment, or sign of his eternal act, whereby he did decree
to make: When he does decree to make his creature, to what particular end he
shall bring him, only he is sure in some kind or other to have his glory.

Of the glory of his grace.] And so the other attributes of God are his
essential glory, a most glorious Essence; In earthly things, that is a
glorious body, which is light some and radiant, and has a kind of luster,
Ergo, Saint Paul says, there is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon and
Stars, making these lightsome bodies subjects of glory: Thus it is a property
of a body glorious, to shine as the Sun; needs then must God be essentially
glorious, who dwells in light, who is light it self, such as that to it
there is no access; such as that the Seraphims conscious of their infirmity,
do veyle themselves before it. The light natural, which this bodily eye
sees; the light of reason, of grace it self, all are as nothing before this
light. When Moses said, Lord show me thy glory, Exodus 33. the Lord said, I will
show thee my excellency; And what was it? Even his grace, mercy, bounty,
long-suffering, etc. Exodus 34.

Sheba; There is no spirit remaining in them, they are overcome with it: But
how would this delight us, did we in any measure discern it? What shall be our
glory in heaven, our blessedness, but to enjoy the continual view of this
glory, this most blessed vision? By meditation and contemplation, to fix the
eye of our souls on this glory, will transform us into the likeness of it.
All the glory of this world is but like the shine of rotten wood, which seems
bright for the night season, but is nothing, as we see by day but rottenness
it self. Wherefore let it not bewitch us, but let us all seek to God, to take
away the veil off our hearts, to the end that we may yet, as in a mirror or
glass, get some sight of this most rich glory. Romans 9. This grace of his which
has been always toward us.

Observe fourthly. Wherewith he has made us accepted.] That is, with which
grace electing and predestinating us, that it might be glorified of us, he has
now in his time done us favor, or made us accepted in his Christ. he did so
love us, that he gave his Son all to death for us, Ioh. 3. Romans 5. And when
he calls us in time, he does it out of that grace which was given to us in
Christ our head, before all worlds: For this cause the Scripture does not say,
that God begins to love us to life when we believe, but that he gives us
life eternal, executing that to which he had loved us; neither does the
Scripture say, that in Christ now sent to work our redemption, love in God is
first conceived; but that it is manifested, when that saving grace appeared,
Tit. 3. when the philanthropie, or love of mankind appeared, Tit. 3.5. So God
does call us according to grace given us before worlds, but now made manifest,
2 Timothy 1. 1 Timothy 1. yea, life and immortality are said to be brought to light,
as things which had been ouershadowed by the Gospel. Now look as if the
Sun having her light long eclypsed, should after break out, it were no new
light, but an (...), or new getting up of the old light, which for a time was
eclypsed: So it is with this sun of Gods eternal grace, the interposition of
sin, through the virtue of justice, did for a time keep from us all the
gracious influence of it, till at length in Christ, removing that which
hindered, it breaks out, piercing our hearts with the beams of it, and
working in us many real effects, which it could not put forth till justice
were satisfied: Even as God knew how to love Christ his Son to that glorious
life, to which he had chosen, and yet execute the cursed death on him, as our
surety: so he could love us with his eternal love, unto that life, to which he
had chosen us, and yet execute on us the cursed death, when we had offended.





The Law came by Moses, but grace and truth through Jesus Christ. The Angels
did sing at his birth, glory to God, peace on earth, good will to men; In him
God was reconciling the world, and God did give this testimony of him, This is
my beloved, in whom I am well pleased. For Christ has performed such an
obedience at the commandment of grace, as does yield such satisfaction to
Justice, that grace may justly give us every good thing; yea such an obedience,
as does procure from grace every good thing for us; for Grace and Justice kiss
each other in Christ; Grace freely bestowing all her gifts unto her glory, and
that without any wrong, nay with full contentment of revenging justice. See the
first to the Coloss. what is written on those words, Who has translated us
into the kingdom of his beloved Son.

In whom we have redemption through his blood, even. etc.] Paul with the rest
believing. Secondly, in regard of the Gentiles; and in particular, these
Ephesians. The grace toward Paul, with the rest of those who were first called
to faith, has two maine branches: First, the grace of redemption, or
justification. Secondly, the grace of glorification, beginning verse 11.
reaching to the 13. Now in handling this first benefit: first in this verse, he
does propound in the former part of the verse, expound it in the latter.
Secondly, he does set down the benefit of vocation effectual, which did go
before it, and make way to it, verse 8. Thirdly, the means of their vocation,
verse. 9.10.

In his propounding the benefit, first we must mark in whom we come to have
it, in Christ. Secondly, what this redemption is, that is the bringing us out
of bondage. Thirdly, the ransom in which we are redeemed, through his blood.
The exposition, viz. that he means nothing by redemption, but remission of
sins, the fountain whence it springs being annexed, viz. the riches of
Gods grace. The sum is, out of his eternal grace he has made us accepted in
his Christ; for in his Christ (whereas by nature we are in thraldom and
bondage) he has delivered and redeemed us, through no other ransom then the
blood of his Son; He has, I say, set us free both from guilt and punishments
of our sins, through his most rich and abundant grace toward us.



Because God has made Christ an Adam, head, root, common receptacle and
storehouse, in whom are treasured al those good things which from him are
communicated to us: There are three phrases in speaking of Christ: Sometime we
are said to have things in him, sometime for him, as Phil. 2. To you it is
given for Christ his sake, not only to believe, but to suffer: sometime we are
said to have things through him, as 1 Corin. 5. Romans 7. Blessed be God, who
has given us victory, through Christ. Now the reason of the first is, because
that in Christ as a common storehouse, every thing is first placed, which
afterward is to be imparted to any of us: As in Adam our being natural, our
hopes of life and death, and in event our condemnation, was received, before
ever they came to be applied and received actually into us. The second is said
that Christ does by his obedience, obtain every good thing, which in time is
communicated to us: for as Adam has procured all the guilt, condemnation,
misery, which in time we know; so Christ the second Adam in regard of the
contrary. The third phrase is spoken in respect that Christ is a mediator, not
only of impetration, but of execution; that is, not only obtaining and
receiving from grace all good for us, but executing, and by efficacy applying
the same in us: as the first Adam does effectually propagate his being, sin,
guilt, condemnation.

men seek to be made one person in Law, to be most nearly joined to such as
may bring them in wealth, Allies beneficial, but who does seek by a
spiritual marriage to become one with him in whom is every good blessing? See
above the end of the third verse.

We have redemption in Christ; what all of us are by nature, viz. no better
then in a spiritual captivity or bondage. Were we no way taken or held
captive, there could be no place for ransoming or redeeming of us. Now
captivity or bondage is a state opposite to liberty, wherein men live under the
power of hard Lords, deprived of liberty, and grievously entreated many ways.
The bondage of captives is in this; first, that they are in hands of such as
rule severely over them: secondly, they have not freedom to do any thing
which formerlie they might, when they were at liberty: third^y, they are forced
to endure many things most grievous: Thus it is in the spiritual
consideration, which I will briefly unfold. What Lords as it were reign over a
man, they are of two sorts, the Principal, or Ministerial: The principal is
the most just God, whose justice we have wronged by sin, ergo, we are said
to be redeemed from under the Law, that is, from under the revenging justice of
the Law: Look as subjects taken in murder, robbery, and committed, are the
Kings prisoners principally, not his who keeps them; so it is with us.
Ministerial, the Devil and his Angels, the conscience accusing and condemning
for sin. Act. 2. Men are said before their conversion to be under the power of
the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. to be taken as beasts alive of the Devil, to his will;
not that he is the principal Lord that has right in the prisoner, but he is
the Iayler and executioner, and so the prisoners are his, to keep them in the
dungeon of darkness, and in the chains of lusts of darkness: Yea God has
put a man under the power of his Conscience, which is as a keeper, continually
going with him, and halling him to condemnation, while he is out of Christ; and
therefore that effect which the spirit works through the Law, in the
Conscience fearing, is called a spirit of bondage: As amongst the Romans,
prisoners had vnder-keepers, who were chayned arm to arm unto the prisoner
whether soever he went; Thus does God, to guilty man his prisoner, he does
join to him his conscience, as a continual keeper, which though it may be
brought asleep, yet it shall ever be found when God shall call, bringing him
forth, and witnessing against him.

For the second: Natural man has no spiritual liberty to do any thing
spiritually good, as he did before sin entered, but is led as a slave by
lusts, by passions, by objects which please him, so that he is in a brutish
bondage: for, even as the bruit beast has no liberty, but is carried by the
appetite to every thing that does agree; so natural men, as Peter speaks,
are led with sensuality, covetousness; that look as one would lead a sheep
with holding out hay or yuie, an ox with fodder carried before it; so does the
devil natural men, with such objects as he knows does fit their corruption,
2 Pet. 2.19. Every one is servant to him of whom he is overcome; Now sin has
overcome all men, and this Paul did confess of himself before his conversion,
Tit. 3.3.

Natural man's bondage is, that he is exposed to suffer a thousand evils, to
wearisome vanity in every thing, yea through fear of death the vpshot of
evils, he is subject to bondage all his days, while in that state he abides,
Hebr. 2.15. Pharaoh did never put Israel to such hard services, as the Devil
puts those to, whom he keeps under his power; You may amplify these
considerations: Having showed what it is, and in what it stands. I will
conclude this point with showing how it entered.

Our first Parents by the Devil tempted, wilfully breaking Gods commandment,
brought themselves into bondage: Now our Parents once in bondage, we that are
borne of them cannot be in better condition, till God by his Christ, out of his
mere grace, set us free: The children you know of persons in bondage, are all
bondmen likewise; Portus sequitur ventrem.

he is to be slaughtered. Again, they know, nor think nothing of bondage:
When Christ told them If the Son set you free, you are free indeed; What
replye they? We are the sons of Abraham, we were never in bondage; Spiritual
thraldom could not enter their thoughts. Look as it was with those men Elisha
did lead to Samaria, those bands of the Syrians, so fares it with these;
while the Devil leads them to hell, where they will dye without repentance,
see themselves in the midst of murdering spirits, they follow him as if they
went to heaven it self, as those followed, being led with a mist deprauing
their sight, they followed to the city of their enemies, thinking they had gone
to Damascus, their own strength: Many such souls there are led in this
fashion, who yet will have the Devil in their mouths, and defy him in words,
as having nothing to do with him; but as many profess in words that they deny
in deed, so many defy in word that they do in work. Take a young gallant,
who now in his ruff does swagger it, and run the next way to the hospital;
tell him of being poor, he will defy that ever it should come near him; but
yet while he does play the prodigal, he does go apace in the way to beggary:
so thou do defy to be in bondage to the Devil, and follow him; but while
thy ignorant mind, thy lusts, thy passions, customs, corrupt example, while
these guide thee in thy course of life, the Devil leads thee, as in a
string, to all he pleases. If thou did never feel any spiritual bondage,
this is sign enough thou art still in bondage; even a (...) sicknesses are
felt when now nature somewhat recouereth: so bondage is felt when now God
restores in the beginnings, by work of his grace, some true liberty, then a
man finds his unregenerate part yoke him, the things of this world too much
prevailing over him, that he thinks himself even sold under sin and
captive to it.

they may serve the Lord without fear. Those whom God did raise up to redeem
his people, as Moses, the Judges, etc. yea those who redeemed, as kinsmen, this
or that, were shadows of this our great Redeemer, who was in time to be
revealed. Now redemption notes sometime the action of God working our
deliverance, sometime for the effect of this action in us, who are redeemed and
enlarged; thus it is here taken for a state of freedom, which believers
attain through Christ his redemption: and this state is twofold; either
begun only in this life, or consummate, in which sense we have the
redemption of the body, Romans 8. and Christ is said to be made our redemption
after our sanctification; where redemption notes out that consummate
deliverance from the bondage of mortality it self, 1 Cor. 1.30. v. the word
Redemption expounded.
which these vile bodies of ours shall be brought unto in heaven: Here he
speaks of the former, which faithful ones are brought unto now believing:
This may be amplified by branches correspondent to the contrary bondage; for
from what time we are in Christ, we are freed from being under the Law, and
revenging justice of God, there being no condemnation to those that are in
Christ, Romans 8.1. Again, this strong man is cast forth, from what time Christ
the stronger enters; The conscience is made a sweet companion and comforter,
rather then a rigorous keeper: Being justified by faith we are at peace. Where
the King has released a prisoner, the Iaylor can have no further power over
him; for he is but to keep him during the Kings pleasure. Again, by grace,
God does set our wills at liberty; so that sin cannot reign in us as
heretofore, Romans 6. Grace which fights against the lusts of the flesh, and
will not let us come under the power of any thing; yea, the world is crucified
to us, and we to the world: For as when health comes, a man begins to
walk abroad, and do such things as he could not stir to, while his
sickness did keep him under; so it is here. Finally, we are so set free, that
we can suffer nothing which our wills have cause to be unwilling with, all
things being such, as shall work together for our good. Count it all joy when
ye fall into temptation, which is the height of freedom, that so far forth
as we are regenerate, we cannot suffer any thing, though all the creatures
should conspire, but what our own wills like well of; yea, ask by prayer, in
some sort at Gods hand. But it may be objected, that the devil does still
prevail against us, that sin leads us captive, Ergo, we are not delivered.
I answer, redemption is double either as I said; begun, or perfected: These
things stand not with full and perfect redemption, but they may stand with it
while it is in the beginnings. We must distinguish the power of the devil, to
hold us under condemnation, from his power of molestation; and we must
distinguish the power of sin reigning over men, with willing subjection, and
usurping over him, as now set free, and making resistance.

In the former respects, we are redeemed and delivered, from what time we
believe; the latter, we are so subject to, that they shall be more and more
diminished.

Mary our Magnificat to God; What cause have we to praise him, who has visited
and redeemed us with such a redemption? We should every one sing the song of
Moses, to see our selves thus delivered. Let us remember how this lust, and
that passion, were wont to tyrannize in us; Let us remember when it was death
to us to be held to duties of godliness, in which is the exercise of true
freedom; Let us think of those times wherein sin did hold us so fast, that
though we saw the mischief of it, and purposed sometime a new course, yet we
could not but return to it, as before; Let us remember when fears of
conscience and death, have held us in thraldom, that these may set an edge
upon our thanksgiving. Least we should forget this duty to God, God has left
some trouble, some remainders; like the weather in ache of a wrested joint,
when now it is restored: How thankefully would we take it to be set free from
the drakenesse, deadness, sensuality, earthly mindedness, which we still
find, as a clog and chain to the spirits of us? If this would be so grateful
to be set free from circumstances, which molest us only; how much more is that
our substanciall deliverance from the revenging justice of God, from the power
of the devil, holding us under the curse; from the power of our conscience
justly condemning us, from the power of sin, commanding as King, how much
more is this to be extolled? This mercy was not showed to the Angels, creatures
more excellent then our selves. Should one set us free from the state of
Villenage, or ransom us from the Galleys, we could not think our selves
thankful enough to them; much less can we ever be thankful enough for this
benefit.

Isa. 44.23. where the insensible creatures are called upon to rejoice, for the
redemption of Gods people, when they were redeemed from Babell; the joy did put
them into an ecstasy, they knew not whither they were a sleep or a wake. Let
us pray to God to move the scales from our eyes, and take the veil from our
hearts, which will not let us rejoice in so excellent mercy.

It follows. Through his blood.] Observe, what it is by which we are
ransomed and redeemed, even the blood of Christ; This was it, which in the
blood of all the Sacrifices was prefigured: We are redeemed, says Peter, not
with silver or gold, but with the blood of Christ, a lamb undefiled. When any
are captive here and there, we have but two ways usually, by which we redeem
them; The first is by force of arms, when we powerfully rescue them, the other
is by course of justice, when we send some ransom, and by way of change set
them free. For withdraw that voluntary covenant, who doubts but that had the
creature kept his innocence a thousand years, God was free to have annihilated
him?
Now it is in vain to dispute what God might have done by absolute power; for
God may out of his absolute sovereignty, not have punished Adams sin, both
because it was against himself, not others, to whom he is tied to do justice;
and especially, for that the demonstration of his revenging justice springs
not from the necessity of his nature, but from his voluntary disposition, as
well as the giving life perpetual, to obedience for a certain space
performed; And finally, because God is able, were he pleased to show this
power, to turn it to his glory; which men's impotency not attaining, makes
them that they cannot always with justice forgive, even that in which
themselves are trespassed: Yet seeing God has determined that his justice
shall take her revenge, if by breach of covenant she be wronged, he cannot but
execute punishment, neither may he set us free from the same, but so as wronged
justice may receive satisfaction. Again, we know which makes the Scripture
say, it was meet and necessary that Christ should be consecrated, through
suffering, that he should suffer, and so enter his glory; See, Luke 24.26. Heb.
2.17.

Death corporal and spiritual, such as is a punishment of sin, but not
sinful. Desertion, not in regard of union and sustentation, but of
consolation. Impression of wrath, death being made as serviceable for our good,
and the fear of it being taken away by him who has tasted it for us, and
swallowed it up into victory.

We know that he has by way of ransom redeemed us, as being the fittest way,
both to deliver us, out of his grace, freely, and yet to show himself just, in
so justifying or redeeming of us; See, Romans 3.25. For further opening this
point. Mark two things. 1. What is understood by Christ his blood. 2. How it
has set us free from bondage. By his bloody death upon the cross, or his
bloody and cursed death, the Scripture makes us redeemed: By his death, Heb.
9.12. and by yielding himself to be made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. the
commandment given to Christ, being this, That he should lay down his life for
our redemption; For look as a surety must pay in such death as the Law
inflicteth on sinners, such death as is joined with the curse: As he was our
surety, and undertook to answer our sins, the Godhead did but sustain him,
that he should not be swallowed up of it; as the brazen covering of the Alter,
did make it fit to endure that material fire. 3. The assault of those impure
spirits for the hour or time, for all those powers of darkness was then
come, when this his redemptory suffering approached.

Christ our surety, was to take upon him our debt of death, both corporal and
spiritual, so far as he might, neither the union of his person, nor yet the
holiness of his nature any whit diminished: The Scripture does mention his
blood so frequently, both because this circumstance is most sensible, and was
the body in which all the typical blood of sacrifices in the Law had his
accomplishment.

And Ergo, as when we read that Christ was flesh, we must not think as
Apollinarius, that he took no soul; so when we read his blood shed, or
bodily death, we must not think that he dyed not a spiritual death in soul
also: The fathers, who denied that he dyed in soul, deny it not absolutely,
but after a sort, viz. that he dyed not such a death in soul, as did destroy
the essential life of it, like as death bodily does the life of the body; nor
yet any such death as did either separate his soul from union with God, or did
imply any sinful corruption, as it did in us, whose souls are dead in sins
and trespasses.

the Law, we are said to be redeemed from the Law or curse, as by an
all-sufficient ransom accepted of justice.

Col. 2. By his cross he triumphed over, and spoiled principalities, etc. By
death he destroyed him that had the power of executing death.





Romans 5.

it cries for better things then the blood of Abell; This does appease
revenge, not provoke it, this does call for all kind of blessings: Wherefore
let us get our consciences sprinkled with this, and fly to it by faith, as
they were wont to the sanctuary, to the horns of the alter; for this is our
true refuge in every necessity.

This does show us how we should esteem of all those benefits, as remission of
sin, etc. which are purchased by it: Things bought at high price, we do
esteem of them accordingly. Many will not come out of their vanity, but leave
the thing as not worth the taking, which Christ has purchased with his dearest
blood: Knowing that you are redeemed from your vain conversation, not with
silver and gold, but with the blood of Christ, a Lamb undefiled.

Remission of sins out of his rich grace.] Whence observe; First, that to
have our sin forgiven, is to be redeemed, Reconciliation, Redemption,
Remission, Justification, One thing, in regard of diverse respects, diversely
named.
or set free from all evil; That which before he called Redemption, is here
called Remission of sin. Our natural estate, if it be considered as a
spiritual bondage, Christ his deliverance is redemption; but if it be
considered as a state, in which we stand guilty, and under punishment of the
Law, then Christ his deliverance is the procuring of remission of sin; and
they cannot but be one in substance, though in reason and consideration they
differ: For what is forgiveness of sin, but an act of grace, acquitting us
from all the guilt and the whole punishment of all our sin? And as we did
speak of redemption, so we may speak of remission: For though the sentence of
pardon be wholly and at once passed to us, yet the execution of the sentence is
here begun only, and shall then be consummate, when every tear shall be wiped
from our eyes, in which regard we may grant, without any danger of Popery, that
in the life to come, even at the time of Christ's appearing to refresh us, or to
reanimate our bodies by the return of the soul to them, that even then sins
shall be blotted forth, that is, the sentence which had absolved us from all
the punishment and consequences of sin, shall then be fully executed. Again,
the force of this remission is such, that it sets men free from the
condemnation of Gods justice in the Law, from that power of the Devil, and my
conscience condemning of me, from the life and power of sin, which is the
death of the soul, from all miseries and death, which come in as a wages of
sin.

David says, Blessed is the man whose sin is forgiven, to whom God imputes
not sin. Look as Malefactors will turn every stone, make all their friends
they have, to get a pardon for their lives; so would we bestirre us to get
this pardon, which once gotten, we shall be sure to have in Gods time all
tears wiped from our eyes, we shall see our selves delivered from all evil.

Observe secondly, that every belieuer in Christ receives forgiveness of his
sins: though by nature we are in our sins, lie in evil of guilt and
punishment, yet once getting faith on Christ's blood, we are justified, we have
forgiveness of sin, and are accepted as righteous to life, through Christ his
obedience; though the one is named, yet the other is by a Synecdoche to be
conceived: Even as Kings to show their clemency in entering their reigns, they
give out free pardons to many kind of trespasses: so God to glorify his
mercy, it pleases him to give to us in Christ, the forgiveness of all our
sins. My meaning here is to speak precisely of remission of sin, as it is
distinguished from imputing righteousness, which I conceive as a distinct
part, concurring in our justification.

About this then we will inquire three points.

1. In what order we have it. 2. What is the extent or latitude of it, in
respect of sin and punishment. 3. How we who have it, can be said to believe
the remission of our sins.
Ergo, Paul, 1 Cor. 15. says, That if Christ were not risen, we were still in
our sins; where he makes the clearing of us all from sin, and Christ his
resurrection, to be accompanied one with the other: Again, God did reconcile
the world, not imputing sins in Christ, which could not be without remitting
all their sins for whom his Christ did undertake. Besides, were not our
sins forgiven in him, we could not be raised up, set in heavenly places with
him; for before we can have quickening given us in Christ, we must have pardon
of sin given us.

Further, what did Christ shed his blood for, but that he might actually get
the pardon of our sins? Finally he does distribute nothing to us, which by
virtue of his obedience he receives not for us.

In the third place this remission is communicated from Christ to us in manner
following.

1. Christ sends his Ministers, as Legates, with the word of reconciliation
or pardon, inuiting them to believe on him, that they may receive forgiveness
of sin.

2. He does work together by his spirit, making those who are his children
believe on him, that they may find forgiveness in him.

3. He does communicate with them the forgiveness which himself had procured
and obtained for them: Thus even as condemnation was first within the pleasure
of God; secondly, Come forth against Adam and us all in him; thirdly, is
communicated actually from Adam to us, what time we come to be borne of Adam:
So on the contrary, our justification or remission of sin is first with God;
secondly, in Christ, who has by his obedience obtained for us the remission of
al our sins; thirdly, it is communicated to us when soever we are
supernaturally begotten of him, that is, brought to believe: He that believes
is borne of God; for though we have not justification actually applied before
we are called to faith, yet we do receive it virtually in Christ, when he was
quit from all our sins, as it is in Adam who was his type; for though
condemnation is not actually applied till we are borne of him, yet in virtue
his condemnation was the condemnation of us all. And by the way, we may see
here how God forgiueth sins, how Christ the Mediator, how the Ministers. God
by the principal and prime authority; God, in dependenter ex authoritate
primaria: the Mediator, ex commissione: Man, ex ministerio.
the Mediator by a secondary derived authority; Man, by a ministerial
publication of the word of pardon; for Christ does not ministerially declare
pardon, even as he is man; for though he be a servant and subject as Mediator,
yet he is such a servant as has an under power of judgment: The Father
gives all judgment to the Son, he judges none himself: Such a servant as
my Lord Chancellor is to his Majesty, not such a servant as an ordinary or
special messenger in forgiving sins. Then conceive it thus, as in citing one
to appear, the original authority is the Kings, the under authority is with
the Judge of this or that Court, the Ministerial authority in the messenger
which does carry and serve the Writ; and the messenger may be said to fetch
such a man up, not because any authority in him does it, but the Writ he
carries, as a sign, has authority to do it; so here God first pardons,
as having the prime and original authority; then Christ as chief Judge under
God, in the Court of Chancery, that Throne of Grace; the Ministers as
messengers pardon, because they dispense the word of God, and Christ, which
gives pardon, and has authority to give it. But this by the way.

Col. 2. God has freely pardoned unto us all our sins; He does see no
iniquity in his Jacob, he to whom things to come, John 5.24. Hebr. 10.
offenders once purged shall have no more conscience of sin.
and things past are alike present; The remission which leaves no place for
condemnation, must needs be of all sins: But we being in Christ, are so
remitted, that now there is no condemnation to us, though we daily sin,
through the flesh which dwells with us.

That justification between which and the giving of eternal life or
glorification nothing comes, that is from all sins: But who so belieueth,
has such a forgiveness, that he receives eternal life; or is so justified,
that he is presently glorified with the beginning of glory. Again, we
believing, receive that forgiveness of sin, which Christ has obtained by his
blood for us: but this was a full remission of all our sins, from the first
to the last of them: Beside that, the redemption and righteousness Christ does
bring are everlasting, Hebr. 9. which they could not be if our remission were
but of sins past; for then should every consequent sin make us again
unrighteous, till we were restored. If the sin present at our conuersions be
such as cannot be done away without the forgiving those that follow, then we
have forgiveness of both; but our sin dwelling in us is such that it cannot be
forgiven, but all the rest must be forgiven likewise, for all the other are in
it, as an effect in the cause, the cause as the fruit is in a tree, and the
guilt of the corruption present reaches to the last sin, which is to spring
from it, and ergo it is sure, that when God forgiueth us this, be does forgive
us all other likewise, which he does see are in it, and will in time issue
from it. Did not God covenant with us, believing, to forgive all our sins,
and seal this Grace by Baptism, all I say past, present, to come, then we
could not help our selves in our after fall, by looking to that grace sealed
in Baptism, for that was helpful for the sins committed before it only,
which is contrary to all good experience and doctrine? Again, were a man
pardoned for sins past only, then must we grant that either he may quite
fall from his union with Christ, or be in Christ, and yet be subject to
condemnation: And if we had not pardon of sins after committed, as well as
before, whence comes it that daily many sins of infirmity escape us, the
peace which follows our justification, not once disturbed by them? If any say
we have pardon of those sins for after, without which none lives, but not of
crimes more grievous; this is to yield what they please, and to desist where
they please, without any motive from reason. Neither does that parable teach
that God forgiueth us our sins before our conversion, but not sins after,
which he does charge upon us at his pleasure; for the letter of the parable
does, if it be followed, seem to sound as if God might require our sins
after those sins which before he had forgiven us, and so did forgive us now
absolutely, which the Popish school will not abide by. The Parable therefore
must be constred by the end which it is brought for, viz. to teach that such as
will not forgive, shall not find forgiveness with God; Neither is that Romans 3.
where God is said to be just in forgiving the sins passed before time,
through his patience, it makes not any thing to this purpose; for sins are
said to be before committed, which were committed under the former testament,
as Heb. 9. it is made plain, and so not the time of a man before and after
conversion, but the time before and after, or under the new Testament is there
compared: and howbeit we are still to seek forgiveness, it is not that we
are not in state of being justified and forgiven, but because it is needful
that God should as well preserve and continue this, as at first give it; and
that this his mercy should be more and more manifested in us, and that the
execution of this sentence should be further and further performed. Finally,
that the Fatherly chastisements our sins daily incur might be prevented; for
these causes we make this petition, though we know all our sins are in regard
of Gods gracious sentence remitted to us: Neither does the Churches censure
excommunicating any argue that he is one who before the tribunal of God is in
state of condemnation, or does not continue united to Christ, but that he has
no manifest external communion with her in the duties of godliness, and
secondary operations of the Spirit; yea, that as the Leaper was ciuilly dead in
regard of civil communion, so is he to her in regard of spiritual; but she
does take him to have inward union and life, which flows from it; for even as
we seek the health of none by way of medicine, whom we cannot take to have
life in them; no more can the Church the restoring of these by this so sharp
censure, might she not think there were some life in them, though it is
oppressed, as the life natural by a fit of the Apoplexy. If we have not all
our sins forgiven, past, present, to come, it is because Christ has not the
pardon of them all to give us; or because the Word and Sacraments cannot apply
to us at once the pardon of them all; or because our faith cannot receive this
plenary remission; or else it is not fit for some consequence which would
ensue: But the former three none will doubt of, and the latter is fondly
surmised, when this grace which forgiueth, is the parent and nurse of holy
fear in us, Psalm. 130. Wherefore for this first part, let us assure our
selves, God does give us full pardon of all our sins, and that this his gift
is, as his effectual calling without repentance, and we believing, do receive
this whole mercy: So that though we are subject to grievous falls after it, and
unbelief, yet not to any such unbelief as shall ever make the faith of God
and his gracious gift in vain; which, concerning Gods forgiveness, so far as
they conceive it to extend, the best of the Papists School maintains.

Now to show that the whole guilt and punishment is released.

Such who are set free from all condemnation, are as well set free from
temporal as eternal. Now all in Christ are thus set free, etc.

Such who are set free from the curse of the Law, are set free from temporal
punishments of sin; such I mean, as come from revenging justice, that she
may be satisfied in them, as well as from eternal; for all these are the
curses of the Law; see, Isay 43. Acts 3. Mica. 9. Dan 9. Psalm. 103.
Deuteronomy. 17. He who covers them, blotteth them out, throws them into the
bottom of the sea, seals them up, remoueth them as far as the East from
the West; he does not pardon them by halues. The Papists do yield this full
pardon in Baptism; but in sins which we fall into after Baptism, I mean
mortal sins, they say, that we recei^e forgiveness only of the eternal,
not of the temporal punishment, which remains to be suffered by us, to the
satisfaction of Gods justice: This is a wicked Doctrine, derogating from
Christ, that the reuenew of purgatory might not be diminished: and not to
speak that all this Doctrine of sacramental penance leans on false
grounds, as namely on this for one, that sins only before Baptism are
forgiven when we are Baptized; that there are some venial sins, not
deserving eternal punishment; it is to be detested, because it makes Christ
not solely, and perfectly to save us from sin; it makes Christ not the
purger of us by himself from sin, which is affirmed, Heb. 1.3. while it does
make us to satisfy for our selves, in regard of the guilt in part, and
temporary punishment. Here are arguments in the Text against it.

1. That remission which is given upon a price, more then sufficient to answer
all the punishment of sin, that is not a half remission.

2. That sin which is remitted or pardoned, that is not to be satisfied for:
to pardon, is without satisfaction, or any revenge taken, to forgive that which
is committed against me.

Should the King, when he might execute a Traitor, not take his life, but
keep him in prison, he should not forgive the fault, but change a greater
punishment into a less.

3. Again; that which is given from the riches of grace, is no scant half
pardon.

But the remission which God gives, is from his rich grace.

True it is that God does after he has forgiven a sin, take temporary
correction still, as in David; but to offer himself as a father for our good,
is one thing; to revenge himself as a judge, for the satisfying of his justice
is another; the sting of revenging justice is pulled forth, from what time we
have forgiveness, this done; the evil is no curse of the Law, and Ergo, it
may stand with full and free forgiveness. Should some Turk have sentence
pass on him to die for some murder which amongst Christians he is found to
have committed; should Christians between the sentence and time of execution,
labor with him, and convert him to the faith of Christ, should he now, when
the hour of execution were at hand, Paenitentiae est sanatie in regeneratis in
nonam vitam.
being duly prepared to it take Baptism, I hope he should be fully forgiven,
and yet he should have no release from this death, which by his murder he had
deserved. In a word, there is no ground for this opinion, Which some see and,
Ergo, yield that Baptism does not take away all punishment in this life, but
in the life to come it shall: It takes all away which were to be suffered in
purgatory, and all penalties the Church may inioyne.
but it is only defended that the flame of purgatory might not be
extinguished. Ask the question, why does this man, having after Baptism
fallen to some mortal sin, and then repenting, why does he on his faith and
repentance, receive only forgiveness of the eternal punishment? Is it that
Christ his death is not as sufficient as before? are there not sufficient
means? will not the same qualification in faith and repentance serve, that did
before? They say, the first is all-sufficient in it self; They say, the
Sacrament of their penance is perfect; they say, if a man have such
confession, satisfaction, contrition, as do not put any impediment to the
Sacrament, then it suffices: Then say I, every man who receives pardon of the
eternal punishment, by the Sacrament, must receive pardon of the temporal
also; for the Sacrament suffices to give both, if he come with such contrition
and qualification as does not put impediment, he receives the whole benefit;
if he come not with such, he receives no grace by means of it, no remission
of the eternal.





second time in conspiracy, how unthankful, how intolerable? So with us,
etc.



men should limit it, to sins before Baptism, of sins in regard of their
eternal punishment? In humane matters, we hold that clauses which are in
favor to us, are to be censured in the amplest manner which they may bear
with probability.

verse, from whence it is that God gives us pardon of sin, even from his
rich grace: This made the Saints in the old Testament fly to Gods manifold and
tender mercies, and feel in them remission of sin. See, Exo. 34. Jehovah,
gracious, merciful, rich in kindness, forgiving sin and iniquities: As if
the riches of his grace were in this act above all others manifest. Isa. 43.
For my own sake do I put away thy sin; not for your sake, but for my own
name sake, will I purge you, and wash you from your sins, O you house of
Israel, Ezech. 36. We see that giving benefits, though it comes from
kindness, yet it does not any thing so much testify the clemency and
kindness of our natures, as the bearing and passing injuries which do highly
provoke us; this then is the fruit of Gods most rich grace: Indeed nothing but
grace can forgive, forgiveness being a free pardoning of some offense, without
taking any revenge or satisfaction. I cannot forgive that fault, for which I
take my revenge, or something which does counteruaile the injury offered;
Justice may cease revenge, but cannot forgive. that is from justice due to us,
not from free grace given us.

Many limit this sentence thus; Resp.
That we receive on a ransom which our selves tender, that is due, not on a
ransom which is given us out of grace; but this seems not to answer the
difficulty: for what I purchase with money never so mercifully bestowed on me,
is mine in justice, though the money were not mine till mercy did furnish me
with it: A price of redemption, Ergo, must be considered two ways. 1. As a
thing demanded of justice, that she may inliew do something upon it; thus
Christ's blood was no ransom; For justice did not call him to this
mediatour-like, and priestly office, nor bid him lay down his life. 2. It must
be considered as a thing provided and enjoined by mercy, that by it, as by a
mean, mercy may do something justly, which otherwise she might not; and such
a ransom is Christ his blood, and Ergo, does excellently accord with free
grace, and the work of grace in every thing. Obi. But when Christ his
obedience is such as cease justice, It is Gods money, but not given to buy
with from justice.
how can God out of grace release to this obedience that punishment of sin,
from which now justice in regard of it has ceased? Answ. Because the obedience
of the Son is due to the Father, and may be required from the Son of duty,
to be rewarded at his pleasure: If my Son do that at my command, upon which
I can demand ten shillings, I who have the right of my Son and his work, may
take the whole, and yet give him of grace what I please.

Obi. But (say they) punishment abides to those whom God forgiueth out of his
mercy; as David, and those for whom Moses prayed that God would forgive them,
according to his rich mercy. Answ. It does so; but it so abides, that all
guilt of sin to God ward is taken out of it; as it is in the hanging due to a
murderer, who heard before time of execution, is converted and Baptized; in
which case, if the abiding of the punishment do not let but forgiveness may
be full and free, why should the remaining of punishment argue in the other a
partial remission only?

David did at Shemeis sometimes, how would we tell of their love; and set it
forth? But what indignities have we offered our God? what debt stand we in to
him? the greatest debt of a thousand talents: O then we should love much, be
much thankful; The want of this makes God sometime hide the sense of
forgiveness from us; even as when plenty makes ^s blessings no dainties, he
does take them from us, that we may seek after them, and learn to enjoy them
with greater thankfulness.

Thirdly, let us like children imitate him, forgiueing each the other, as he
for Christ his sake has forgiven us. But of this hereafter.

Now he comes to the second benefit; which seems here annexed, not so much
to begin a second branch of his enumeration, as to make us conceive aright of
the order in which we come to receive remission from grace, viz. to prevent us
that we may not think that in the first place forgiveness is bestowed, because
that was first named, but that we receive pardon from grace, when now that rich
grace of God abounded toward us in giving us wisdom and understanding; Thus I
conceive the coherence. Now the points which are to be marked in this matter
are these: First, the abundant Grace of God, the principal cause of it.
Secondly the Persons, to (us) who have found in him remission of sin.
Thirdly, the benefits in which this rich grace had formerly abounded, in
Wisdom and understanding; and these are in the 8. verse. Fourthly, the manner
of working these benefits, viz. the revelation of the mystery of his will,
which is amplified partly from the efficient cause thereof, Gods free pleasure,
and this is ver. 9. partly from the ends, verse. 10.

by which grace he abounded toward us, in wisdom; As if this were the sense;
by which Grace he did abundantly give us all wisdom, but this is not the
meaning: For abundance is not to be adjoined to the grace bestowed, but to
Gods Grace bestowing: The Scripture places Wisdom, not in knowing only, but
in doing, Let him who is wise, show it in conversation: him that hears my
words and does them, I liken him to a wise builder.
the abundant measure of the gifts is sufficiently showed by the note of
quantity, all wisdom; and the phrase does not signify by which, but in, or
with which; for here is no particle to intimate any such thing. The second
case noting the matter, subject, wherein God is here said to have abounded,
the truth is, as when we say such an one is abundant to me in his love, our
meaning is, the love of such a one was abundant toward me; so when he says,
God has abounded toward us in Grace, or with Grace, his meaning is the Grace
of God had been abundant toward us; toward us who have in him remission of
sins.

In wisdom and understanding.] These must further be opened: Wisdom is put
sometime generally; thus S. James, chap. 3. uses it for a gift of the mind,
given us from above; which teaches us to know, and inclines us to do that
which is good, and serving to some good purpose. It is taken more strictly, and
then sometime it signifies the doctrine of wisdom, the doctrine of Christ
crucified; sometime the Grace by which we know and believe on Christ to
salvation, even as faith is put sometime for the Doctrine of faith; sometime
for the grace and exercise of it, as now it actually belieueth, 1 Cor. 2. The
Doctrine of Christ crucified, it is called the wisdom of God; predestined
to our glory, so in the first it is called the wisdom of God; now if the
doctrine of knowing and believing on Christ be wisdom, needs must the Grace by
which we know and rest on him be wisdom, making wise to salvation: this I take
to be principally intended, if not soly. Understanding is light supernatural of
the mind, whereby it conceiueth the meaning of God, in his word and works,
and pierces into the nature of the things of God, of things spiritual. As
wisdom is opposed to foolishnes, so understanding to dulnes, and to the
superficial ouerture or childish shallownes of knowledge: Be not children in
understanding, but in maliciousness. The old, which boasted themselves of
knowledge in the Law, because they did abide in the Letter, and not go to the
inward meaning of it, the Apostle says they did not understand the things they
did speak of. Israel knew what God had done, yet not perceiving the end to
which his great works tended, so as to follow and to cleave to it, they are
said not to have an understanding heart. Knowledge is a gift of the mind,
which perceives the truth and falsehood which is in things; it is opposed to
ignorance: These two former words answer to Chockmah and Binah, or Tebunah,
which in the Hebrew are of like importance; for that note of quantity (all)
wisdom, it does signify a rich mesure in these things, not absolute
perfection: Who enriched you with all speech, all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. The
sum briefly.

We have found redemption in Christ, through his rich grace, which he had
abundantly showed us, in as much as he has given us wisdom, whereby we
know and rest on Christ's salvation; and understanding, which makes us see into
the things of God, yea both of them in plentiful measure. Cor. 1.31. God does
make Christ an author of righteousness to none, to whom he is not first
wisdom, that is, who do not first receive the gift of wisdom from Christ.
Acts 26. Paul is sent to bring men from darkness to light, that so being
brought to be light, that is, to have wisdom and understanding, they may
receive remission of sins, and inheritance with Saints. We must learn from
the Father, that is, we must be made to understand before we can come to
Christ; My servant by his knowledge shall bring many to remission of sin,
shall justify many. Look as it was in the Type of Christ, none were healed by
that brazen serpent, who did not first behold it; so here, if we be not taught
of God to see that Christ crucified, made a curse on the Cross for us, we
cannot be healed of sin, wherewith that old Serpent has stung us. Which is
to be marked of them who presume forgiveness of sin in Christ, and yet have
no wisdom, no understanding in the things of God: Whereas Christ will be
avenged on all, who know not God; Whereas God says, he has no delight in a
people of no understanding; nay, that he is angry with them to destroy them.
There is no sign so fearful as to live, especially where means of the word
are, without this understanding; for it is a token that the God of the world
has power over such, to keep them blindfolded, to their endless perdition;
even as in the body, the eye which is still blind after the most sovereign
eye-salue applied, it is a shrewd presumption it is irrecouerably blind, and
altogether helpless.

Adam, who is the Lord from heaven: Even as reasonable understanding is beyond
the compass of that knowledge which the beasts have by kind, so is this
understanding far beyond the reach of all that wisdom left in corrupted
Nature. To clear this point, observe these two things. First, that it is
freely bestowed on us. Secondly, that it is a benefit, then which we receive
none of greater use. Were it never so good a thing, yet if I did purchase it
meritoriously, it were no grace to me; were it never so freely given me, were
it of no use no ways to me, it could not be a favor; much less a thing given
me in riches of Grace; for that which is a gift of rich Grace, must come freely
from the donour, and be greatly to the good of the donatory or receiver: Now
how freely we have this wisdom, we all know; it is bestowed on us when all
we are at enmity against it, yea counts it foolishness: How behoofull it is
for us, we may easily know, when the sight of the body is so precious a sense,
when the reason which we have as civil men, is so beneficial, that a man were
no man did he want it; for this does lift him above the order of those
inferior creatures, how can it be but this wisdom and light must needs be
precious, by which we see God, Christ, those things within the veil, kept in
the heavens for us, by which we are above our selves, and all this world, to
have communion with God, Christ, Angels, spirits perfected, which makes us
far higher above the state of natural man, then natural man is above the
beast? Now then it being freely given, and a thing of all others most
behoofefull, it must needs be a gift of the rich grace of God.



men empty of true understanding. Did wisdom come from nature, and grow out
of the earth, it were not a gift of Grace in Christ Jesus; No, the Princes of
this worlds wisdom, such who have seemed to ransacke all the creatures, from
the highest star to the lowest mineral within the bowels of the earth, even
these are as deuoyd of true wisdom, as the Asse-colts of the wilderness Men
are out of their right minds till they come by faith and repentance to God in
Christ Jesus: What can the foolishness of folly work, which is in men while
they are converted? Folly makes a man know nothing of these civil things; a
fool cannot tell how many twice two are; and what does a natural man know of
his estate by nature, of Gods Grace in Christ? He knows not, nay he cannot
know the things of God; for he counts them foolishness. Secondly, a fool
is unteachable, not more unlearned, then unteachable, Prou. 25.9. Persuade him,
smile on him, chafe at him, nothing will enter: so natural men; let God from
heaven, and Christ by his ambassadors beseech them to be reconciled to God; let
God threaten them with the eternal curse of his heavy wrath, nothing will
sincke into them. Thirdly, a fool judges not aright of that civil end to
which his life should serve. Wise civil men know that they live for the good
of their Country, and their own private; but a fool wants this wisdom. And
what do all natural men? They see not what is the last end, at which all
their life should aim, as at a mark viz. that through faith and obedience
they may come to live blessed everlastingly with God. As a fool judges not of
the end to which he lives, so he makes no provision of means which tend to
the good of other, or himself; and yet seeks after a commonwealth of
bables, such as are his dagger, choler, cap, etc. for these are as good to him
as the Tower of London; So it is with natural men, they gather a heap of
transitory things, but lay up no treasure in heaven, which might stand them in
stead for afterward. Again, though fools are thus poor and miserable, yet
they think themselves to have all the wit, and have no sense of all their
misery; for the eye of reason is out, with which it should be discerned: Thus
it is with natural men, they think they know what they have to do, they feel
no want of Grace, they see not their misery which is come on them through
sin. To reckon up particulars in this kind, would be too tedious: Wherefore
let us labor to see our selves fools, that we may be made wise. It is a
signe-some beam of heavenly wisdom has shined into the soul, which now
finds it self empty of true saving Wisdom.

all knowledge, Romans 15.14. 1 Cor. 1.3. Col. 1. So James counts it all joy;
and it seems to note a kind of fullness and rich measure in the things to
which it is adjoined, see Colos. 1.9. and 1 Cor. 1. and so God does give us
plentifully these things, Wisdom, Life, Regeneration; he sheddeth and gives
them abundantly, Iam. 1. Tit. 3. This God did foretell, that after his Christ
manifested, the earth should be filled with his knowledge; that he would pour
out his spirit, not give it by drops, but plentifully: Even as gracious Kings
and Princes on earth, will not only give things which are good, but will
bestow them in such measure as may set out their prince-like bounty; so it is
with our God.

Now for the further understanding of this point, we who believe, may be said
to have all wisdom; 1. In regard of the excellency. 2. In regard of the
quantity. For the first, when a man has one thing so good, that it serves him
instead of all, as if a man has Gold, Silver enough, we say he has every
thing, because he has that which serves him for every purpose: So though this
wisdom is not for kind, all wisdom, yet being so excellent that it serves
us to all purposes, it may be called (all) wisdom. But here is a further thing
to be conceived, even in regard of the quantity of it: Now it cannot be said
(all) in regard that it is absolutely full and perfect for degree; for we know
in part only, it must be said so then comparatively only: Now it may be said
(all) wisdom, thus in a double respect; First, in comparison of that measure
which was given the believing Jew; and thus every faithful Christian may be
said to have all wisdom given him: It is a great speech that the least in the
kingdom of God shall be greater then John Baptist: for look as we who now
are up after the dawning of the day, and rising of the Sun, have far more
light, then such who are in the night; thus it was with the Jew, he had the
Star of Prophecy, as in a dark night; we have the Sun of righteousness
now risen over us, and Ergo, our light is far greater then theirs. (all)
knowledge, in regard of those who are more imperfect; as there are some
Christians more carnal, weak, then others, so more ignorant also. For as this
earthly understanding is not in that degree in a child or young man, as it is
in an aged: So when there are babes, young men, old men in Christ, there is a
measure in wisdom answerable to these ages, as it were in Christ; but Saint
Paul here seems to set this down, so as it may admit a common application,
rather then otherwise.

they are not book learned: ask them a reason of that they do, they have
nothing but a childish imitation, they see others do so; they put off
understanding more fully, as if it were a thing appropriated to our coat.
Suspect your selves. While the darkness of night abides, who will think the
Sun is risen? and how can the Sun of righteousness be risen in thy heart,
who still do remain in so great darkness? Some cry out against much
knowledge, they say, men lived better when less was known; as if they would
set that on foot again, that ignorance is the mother^ of devotion; or were of
the mind, that men might have too much of their heavenly fathers blessing.
Finally, such as vpbraid Christians, counting it pride in them to take upon
them knowledge in the Scriptures, or judgment in the particularities of
divinity.

God will hear us graciously. He who answered Solomon, seeking politic
wisdom, and granted him above all he did think and ask; what would he do
to us, were our hearts set to beg heavenly understanding?

Shiloh, which because it gives not the loud report, like these humane
wisdoms, it is not in request with men of carnal judgment. Let this
weakness be far from us. This wisdom makes the face to shine, is able to
satisfy the soul, I care to know nothing, but Christ, and him crucified; yea,
to save the soul eternally, bringing it to endless glory. Such who have the
wisdom to get honors and treasure here on earth, they laugh at all learning
besides, in comparison of this, counting that skill folly, which a man may have
and yet go bare-foote. But how truly may we deem all that wisdom folly,
which a man may have, and yet loose his own soul?

verse, we come now unto the fourth in this Verse; namely, the manner of
working this wisdom in us, in these words; Having opened unto us the mystery
of his will.] Which is amplified. 1. By the cause, Gods good pleasure, the
freedom whereof is argued in the words following; which he purposed in
himself, not considering any thing in us which might move him unto it. Here is
nothing needs explication, unless those words; the mystery of his will.
Which phrase does note out the hidden wisdom, which the pleasure of his will
ordained to our glory, and is for matter all one with the word of truth, the
Gospel of salvation, verse 13. The sum is.

Which so rich benefits of wisdom and understanding he did work in us, when
now he had opened unto us that secret wisdom which his will had ordained, to
our glory; that Gospel of salvation, which he did out of his gracious
pleasure, which within himself, not looking at any thing in us, he purposed
toward us. cause Ministers are called such as teach others in wisdom, Col. 2.
the end. Such as feed with wisdom and understanding, Ier. Such as make wise,
as it is, Dan. 12.3. For though it be read, wise, the word has an active
signification, and imports to make wise, or bring to wisdom, as the next
word does not signify just men, but such as turn others to righteousness.
Even as in great Schools, there are inferior Vshers, as well as the
principal Master; so it is here: It pleases God by man's outward ministry, to
open the eyes of the mind, and bring from darkness to light; but man's
teaching, which goes but to the ear, cannot do this matter. We must
therefore consider God speaking within the mind, by holding out some such
light, and causing such an inward illumination, as does speak things no less
to the mind, then a word audible does report them to the ear. This is it
which we are said to hear and learn from the father: should not the father
speak and teach, we could not hear; neither is it an outward voice, for all
that hear this voice come to Christ, which is not verified in the other: And
this is that light, which diffusing it self through the word we hear, does
make the things of God visible to the soul: Even as not the air alone, but
the air now enlightened, is the mean by which things are made discerneable to
the bodily eye.

In the third place, we must consider that God does together with this
illumination, which speaks and propounds things within the mind; he does I
say, together with it, open the eye of the understanding, the ear of the deaf
heart, to see and attend unto it: This is called sometime renewing the
understanding, giving light, opening the heart to attend, removing the veil:
For if I will show to a blind man any thing, it is not enough to propound the
object, and to procure an external light by which it may be discerned, but I
must restore the sight of the blind eye before I can show it the thing
proposed: So it is with us, who are spiritually blind, before we can have
opened to us the things of God.

A B C. but thou must have a Schoolmaster, why will thou imagine thy self
able without help of teaching, to learn this high point of wisdom, which
teaches to live happy with God, world without end?

Blessed are they who wait at her gates, at the posts of her door: A speech
borrowed from Clyents or Patients, who wait to have access to their learned
Counsel, and to the Physicians, whose advise they seek for: Yea, let us seek
for that inward teaching of God, in whose light only we come to see light.

1 Cor. 2.
a hidden wisdom; which the chief for wisdom in this world knew not, 1 Timothy 3. Without doubt says the Apostle, great is the mystery of godline sse:
naming after points of doctrine concerning Christ Jesus: And needs it must be
so, for the great volume of the whole creature, has not one letter or syllable
in it of this wisdom: They reveal a wisdom, for in wisdom God made the
heavens, and founded the Earth in understanding; but those who knew this
wisdom best, Pro. 3.
learned nothing of this saving wisdom in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. Again, there is
no spark of light in man by nature, able to conceive this secret: The wisdom
of the Law, the light of nature reaches not, for the light of reason
discerns that God is to be loved and honored; that I am to do, as I would
be done to, and not after that measure I would not receive; But of saving man
kind lost, by faith on Christ, and repentance, there is no light left which
can trace any step of this doctrine. Thirdly; the knowledge it self is of that
height, that from what time we have the spirit which does teach it; we cannot
in this mortality know it any thing as we should, we see but in a glass, know
but in part, like Children, which know not fully the things they know: Now that
which is hid in so great measure from us, who are now light in the Lord; how
great a secret is that in it self?

Mystery in three regards, 1. absolutely, because it is a thing of it self
within the will of God, which no creature by it self is able to know: If a
thing within my mind be such, that no creature can know it, further then I
make it known; none does know the things in Man, but the spirit of Man, how
great a deep and secret is that which is within God himself? Mystery still in
regard of the spare revelation, and small number of those to whom it was
manifested. For a thing is not only hid while I keep it in my self, but
while I show it only to some few persons more near me, it is a secret matter
still. If the King acquaint some two or three of his most near favorites with
a secret, it remains hid still, and a secret, in comparison of things
commonly known: Thus was the Gospel a Mystery, when it was made known to the
people of the Jews only; but continued no longer a Mystery in this sense,
when now it was notoriously published to all nations. Mystery, when it is now
diuulged, in regard of those whose eyes are not opened to see it, and their
ears boared to attend to it: as news so common every where, that they are no
news, are still secret to such, who being deaf, have never heard of them;
thus it is at this day, a hidden riddle to many Christians by outward
profession.





John 15.15. I call you friends, for I have showed you what I heard from my
Father. When God revealed the secret of Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel, and Pharaoh
his secret to Joseph, was it not a mercy, for which they were thankful? see
Dan. 2. and do not we account them to have found much favor? But this is above
all, to make known his hidden wisdom, which shows us what things await us
to everlasting life and death.

Psalm. 147.19, so it is his mere Grace that they are bestowed on any, rather
then others: This is showed in giving them to Israel, who were worse then Tire
and Sydon, then Nineveh, then the Nations. I do not send thee to a Nation of a
strange tongue; Ezec. 3.3.
they would hear thee: Had these things been done in Tire and Sydon, they
would have repented: Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonah, Lo, a greater
then Jonah is here. Yea, God is forced every where to vpbraid them with
stiffe-neckednesse, a neck of steel; with hard hearts, hearts like Adamant;
with brazen foreheads; yea, to call them a gaine-saying and rebellious people.
Even as his pleasure carries rain to one place, and not to another; so he
makes his Ministers drop the word of Wisdom amongst some, and not amongst
other-some. Matthew. 10.6. Go not to the way of the Samaritans. So Act. 16.7.
Go not whether thou intendest, but into Macedonia. Now if man's outward
teaching be afforded out of mere Grace, how much more Gods inward teaching,
yea his opening the eye of our minds? In truth as no reason can be given why
one man's eyes were opened, one dead man raised, rather then all the rest; so no
man can give a reason, why these who now see and believe, should be made to see
rather then others.

Adam, as a thing appropriated to him, Romans 5. Yea, some think that the inward
teaching which does so teach that it changes the mind, that this teaching I
say is given to such whom God does see as fit to work with it, and use to this
purpose; as a Captain sets a man on a horse whom he does see will manage
him well: But this does presuppose a connaturall correspondencie in corrupt
nature, to the supernatural grace of God, and a power in nature to use Grace
aright, which has long since been condemned as a Pelagian error, from these
grounds, that we cannot do any thing which profits to salvation out of
Christ, that we are not fit to think a good thought.

Woe be to thee; thou were lifted to heaven, but I will throw thee down to
hell.

ergo, we must dwell a little on the explanation of it. First, we will
consider of the connection it has with the former, then of the meaning and
parts of it, and so come to the instructions which it affords: For the
dependence of it on that which goes before, it may seem brought in either as
an explication of those words in the verse before, the mystery of his Will, or
as an effect intended by some thing which is in the former verse reported. The
first sense is to be taken up after this sort; God has opened to us the
mystery of his will, out of his gracious pleasure; Where I mean nothing by the
mystery of his will, but that he meant in fullness of time to gather to head in
Christ, with those things already in heaven, all things in earth, even a
universal Church, through the face of the earth: this cannot, as I think, be
an exposition of those former words; For to say nothing that the Gloss is
harder then the Text; words which are adjoined by way of construction, are not
commonly so far removed from them they conster, as you may see in the 7. and
13. verses of this Chapter, and all abroad. Again, the Apostle by other
equivalent terms in the 13. verse does open what he means by the mystery of
Gods will, viz. no other thing then the word of truth, and Gospel of
salvation. Thirdly, that mystery made known; did work in them all wisdom
and understanding, made them wise in good full measure to salvation, but the
knowledge of this, that God would call and gather to his Christ, an Universal
Church in earth, is such a point, in which men made wise to salvation, were
long ignorant, as Peter himself. Now then if it be no explanation, then must
it depend on the former, as an effect intended, and flowing from something
before mentioned. Now the matters in the verse precedent, are but two: First
the revealing of the Gospel to Paul, with some others. Secondly, the gracious
good will which God did purpose within himself, concerning this benefit of
opening his hidden saving wisdom to the sons of men: Some join it with the
former, God did open to us Jews and Gentiles the Gospel, that thus he might
in that full time which he had appointed, gather to all things now in heaven
when he wrote, all the things in earth also, even a Church universal: But
neither would I subscribe to this exposition. For first it takes the persons
to whom God is said to have opened the mystery, to be both Jews and Gentiles,
yea Gentiles principally; whereas Paul verse 12. seems to appropriate this
passage of his Epistle, from the 7. verse, to the 13 verse unto the Jews only.
Secondly, this takes that fullness of times, to note the fullness of that
particular season, wherein God had purposed to publish his saving wisdom to
the Gentiles; but the Text has it not the fulness of any certain time, as in
Gal. 4.3. but the fullness of times indefinitely and universally. Thirdly, the
publishing of the Gospel to all Nations, did not gather those just spirits
before in heaven, but here they are as properly said to be gathered into Christ
their head, as the things on earth; as when God is said to reconcile all things
in the blood of Christ, as well the things in heaven, as the things in earth,
reconciliation does as properly agree to the heavenly things, as earthly, so
here by proportion; for otherwise he would have said, that he might gather to
all things which were now joined to their head in heaven, all the things in
earth also. Lastly, all in earth, through all times and places were not
gathered by that first publishing the Gospel to Jew and Gentile, but all who
then were ordained to life through the whole world: Now these are not al
absolutely, but respectively in comparison of that few and small remnant which
out of our Nation, God sometime gleaned.

It remains then that these words come in, as showing the intended effect
which God did aim at, in his gracious purpose of opening the hidden saving
wisdom to the sons of men, viz. that thus he might in the fullness of those
seasons, which himself in wisdom fore-appointed, have gathered to a head in
his Christ, all things; both those who now were, by having this revelation,
gathered in heaven, and all the things which are in earth, through all places
and times, to the end of the world. This I take to be the truest coherence,
both because gathering to a head in Christ, is the effect to which God does
destinate this gracious purpose of opening the Gospel, and also for that this
purpose of opening the Gospel, outwardly and inwardly, or at least inwardly,
is extended to every one, through all ages of the world, who is to be united,
as a member, to Christ the head: so that no more, nor fewer have been, are, or
shall be gathered, then those whom God did purpose to teach in every
generation. Lastly, the words fit no sense but this, which to show we must
search a little the meaning of them.

(dispensation;) secondly, by fullness of times. Dispensation, is a word taken
from Stewards, and such as have the keeping of things in common, and are to
dis^ribute them as they see fit, for singular persons and occasions: To
dispense then, is to distribute that I have in common, as is fitting in
wisdom, to persons and occasions in particular.

Now the dispensation of times, is put by a Meton. of the adiunct, for fulness
of times wisely dispensed.

The fullness of times indefinitely, vnuiuersally, noting the consummation of
all those seasons succesciuely, which God had appointed for the gathering of
his children.

God might gather to a head in Christ; that is the force of the word. Secondly,
mark the Object of this action, all things; that is, all persons, who in Gods
counsel belonged, as members making that body whereof Christ is head. Thirdly;
Note the point as it were in which all are to be gathered into one, or united
in Christ, in him: Having propounded the object, he does explain them by a
distribution taken from the place; all things which now are in heaven with
Christ, gloriously conjoined to him; and all who are in earth, that is, who are
in all places, and all times, to be gathered to Christ in the earth. The sum
of them is thus much.

God I told you did open to us the Gospel of salvation, which thing he did
according to that his gracious pleasure, whereby it pleased him to open it to
all his chosen, which he purposed freely within himself, that thus by opening
his will he might in the consummation of all those seasons, which his wisdom
has dispensed, that he might (I say) have gathered as it were to a head, all
things in Christ, both those members who had in their times this Mystery
revealed to them, and are now gloriously united to him in the heavens: and all
those who by means of this revelation, shall in all places and through all
times, to the end of the world be gathered upon earth, as it were to our head
in him. Eccles. 3. He brings out every thing beautiful in the season of it.
As he brings things natural, the Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, every
thing in season, so in all the works he will do about his children, whether
it be the punishing of wickedness for their sake, the delivering his children
from evils, the giving them benefits, he will bring them all forth in the fit
appointed seasons: The Cananite, when his iniquity is full and ripe, shall be
visited; Israel, when 430. years expired shall be delivered, Exodus 12.41.
When the 70. years are expired, Dan. 9. Christ in the fullness of time, shall
be exhibited: It cannot be, but that God should both appoint times for every
purpose, and execute in them the thing that he has purposed; To design times
is his prerogative. As a Master of a family has this power, to set all times
which he will have this or that business taken in hand, so Acts 1.7. Secondly;
Such is his wisdom, that he only knows how to appoint the fittest seasons
for all his works: as the husbandman, it is his wisdom or skill in
husbandry, which makes him know the fittest seasons for Earing, Sowing,
Setting, Grafting, and such like businesses. Now look as man's fidelity does
bind him, if he has said he will do this or that, at such a time, to make
his word good, and do it accordingly: So Gods fidelity does so bind him, that
he will not but most faithfully execute all that good he has purposed to us,
in the seasons which with himself he has dispensed thereunto.



weather, for it would not be kindly. Thus in the winter-seasons of any
trial, we should not wish the sunshine of this or that blessing, before our
God does see it may be seasonably bestowed, remembering that the man who
believes, must not make any preposterous have.

Cha. 4. He gives a Pastor and Teacher, who may outwardly reveal these
things; that he may gather his Saints, knitting them to their head, and one
with another: So he gave the Priest, Leuite, and Prophet to this end. How
often, says Christ, would I have gathered thee, as a hen does her chickens
under her wing? and you would not. Look as the news of a gracious Prince
calls together subjects who were fled under tyranny hither and thither: So
the opening to us of this our King and Savior, who must save us from sin;
this does make us fly home to him, as Pigeons use to their own lockers. For
the better understanding of this point. First, we must know that by nature we
are many ways dispersed and severed. Secondly, the order in which we come to
be gathered.

the Wolf, and leaving the Shepherd of our souls. Thirdly, we are divided
one from another; a man being by nature a Wolf to a man, his feet being swift
to shed blood, further then God restrains.

the Angels becoming ministering spirits for our good, and we most strictly
knit with all both in heaven and earth, already in Christ; not only that we
are under one head with them, but we are quickened with one spirit, and
contained together, as the members of a natural body, are both contained and
quickened by one soul. Nay, we are gathered to all, who in Gods predestination
belong to Christ: As one borne of this or that man, is not only lincked with
those brethren he has in present, but has a respect of consanguinitie, to all
that may be begotten of him; so it is with us; from what time Christ has
brought us, by a supernatural nativity to be borne of him, we have a respect
of mere conjunction to all, who are in time to be brought to faith by him, who
can unfold the society which the Gospel revealed causes?

Pro. 9. Mat. 22.
refuse not wisdom sending forth her maids; refuse not God, sending out his
servants, and inuiting you to come and partake in his Son Christ, and all his
benefits, to forgiveness of sins, and salvation of your souls; least you by
despising his grace, most highly provoke his indignation.

that is good indeed; It brings us to have fellowship with Christ the
mediator, with God, with Angels, with spirits of just men departed, with the
predestinate ones, whose names are written in heaven, with all in earth, who
are believing members in Christ: It breaks company, by reason of men's
corruption, which makes them, they had rather live thrals of Satan, in their
ignorance and lusts, and customs of ignorance, then suffer themselves,
yielding obedience, to be gathered to Christ.

Paul did write these words in hand. There is but one eternal Gospel; Gal. 1.
never was there other name made known, in which men might be saved, then the
name of Jesus, Christ yester day, to day, and for ever, the only way of
salvation. Abraham saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced; yea, from Abell
downward, it was by faith on that promised seed, that they were accepted.
What is the whole redeemed Church? a number called forth by God out of the
world, to partake in forgiveness of sin, and life eternal through Christ.
When the whole Church is a multitude of such as are called; and Gods call is
nothing but the inward and outward, or at least the inward opening of the
Gospel, to such whom he has predestined to salvation: It cannot be but that
every one who is of, or belongs to the Church, must have this wisdom of God
opened to him.

if the blind lead the blind, both will come into the ditch; his conscience
and he will both perish, if he learn not this way of faith and obedience to
the Gospel of Christ.



In Christ, even in him.] Observe, who it is in whom we are gathered together,
as fellow members each with other. We are fitly said to be gathered in Christ
together, both because he has abolished the enmity twixt God and us, and so
removed that which did disperse us. 2. He does call us, and effectually draw
us home in his time; even as Shepherds do their flocks, which are now
scattered: When I am lifted up, I will draw all; How often would I have
gathered you? 3. In him; as in the same point we are all of us one: Even as all
the families of the earth, in regard of Adam their first parent, the common
root and stock of all mankind, they are all but one; Or as the Subjects of
England, Scotland, Ireland, are in our King united, and all made one body
politic, so it is with the members of Christ in heaven and earth; now being
gathered under Christ their head, they must needs be gathered one to another,
as fellow members in one and the self same body, Romans 12. There being not
only a bond from Christ to us, even the bond of his spirit, and from us to
Christ, even our faith, but a bond of love, the bond of perfection, which does
hold us one with another.



sees, the hand handles, all for the good of the whole, they will not revenge
themselves: if going hastily one foot strike the other leg or foot, it will
not strike again; they so bear the burden one of another, that their
affection each to other is not diminished; as if the head ache, the body will
not carry it, and knock it here or there, but bears the infirmity, doing it
the ease it may; yea, being well affected to it, no less then before; Now that
God, who is love it self, teaches us these things.

All the things which are in heaven, or in earth.] Observe, That there is no
place, in which are any members belonging to Christ, but either in heaven or in
earth. Thus, Colos. 1. the Apostle did not know any belonging to
reconciliation, wrought by the blood of Christ, but they were either in heaven
or earth: The Scripture does not know but two kinds of men; some believing,
passed from death to life, some unbelieving, over whom wrath abides; though
some have greater faith and sanctification, it mattereth not, degree changes
not the kind; a child is a man, no less then a man for the kind of him: It
acknowledges not but two states; some as Pilgrims here, Wrastlers, Soldiers,
runners of the race; some as at home, having received the crown, the garland
of victory: So it acknowledges but two Times, the one in this life of labor,
which ends in death, Eccles. the other of rest, after this life ended;
Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, they rest from their labor: In like
manner two Places, belonging to all faithful Soldiers; The one is earth, in
which they are for time of their warfare: The other is heaven, where they rest,
receiving the crown, which belongs to them: Even as those material stones
were either hewing and polishing in the mountain, or transported and laid in
the Temple; so it is with us; either we are squaring and fitting here, or else
we are by glorious conjunction, laid on Christ the corner Stone in the heavens.
But some who will grant, that when Paul did write these words, which was many
years after Christ's Ascension, that then all were in heaven; but they will not
yield that souls were there from the beginning, but only sithence Christ his
entering thither. For answer, I say, that the contrary does seem clear to me;
for they were taken to glory and saved as we; now such as are taken to glory,
are taken to heaven, for the Scripture knows no place in which God does
ordinarily display his glory, but in heaven. Again, they were received into
everlasting tabernacles, Luke 16. Now if the godly at the instant departed,
were bestowed in any place but heaven, they then did go to mansions, which
they were to leave within a year or two, even then when Christ was to ascend;
they whose Pilgrimage and soiourning ceased with this life, they could not but
be in their Country at home, after this life. Heaven is the Country of
Saints; O our Father which art in heaven: Vbi Pater ibi Patria. Those who
walked as strangers here in earth, because they looked for a heavenly
Jerusalem, a City whose maker was God, they leaving this earth were translated
thither, neither was there any thing to hinder it: Not their sins; for they
which could not hinder them from sanctification, fitting them for heaven, could
not hinder them from heaven: Not want of faith, who now has that faith which
Abraham and many of them had: No want of efficacy in Christ, he was yesterday,
to day, and for ever; his death was effectual to cause them to find pardon of
sin, and the spirit of sanctification; Not any privilege of Christ, for not
simply to ascend into heaven in soul, was Christ's prerogative, but to ascend
soul and body, as heir of all things, and the author of salvation to all that
obey him. Finally, the translating of Enoch, Moses, and Elias, seem to figure
out no other thing; wherefore though David be said not to have ascended into
heaven, Act. 2. it is spoken in respect only that he was not raised in body,
and gone into heaven body and soul, as the heir of all things, and person who
was to sit at Gods right hand; and though Heb. 9. the way into heaven be said
not to have been opened, and then to be new; the meaning is not, that none
went this way, but only to show that the way was not really entered by the true
high Priest after the order of Melchisedech, as the repealing of Sacrifices did
show that yet remission of sins was not obtained, that is really received of
our surety, upon performance of that satisfaction undertaken, not that
believers found not pardon of their sins, under the former testament. Again,
it is one thing for a way not to have been traced at all, another not to have
been fully manifested; the latter was not under the old Testament. To
conclude, though it be said, they received not the promises, say in their real
exhibition, and that they were not perfected without us, the meaning of which
is not, that they were not taken to heaven, no more then to deny that they had
not forgiveness, or the same spirit we have; but to teach that they had not
before Christ that perfect state in heaven, which now we and they are presently
possessed of; For they did expect in heaven their redeemer, on whom they had
believed for forgiveness of sin and life: Even as souls now expect the
resurrection of the body, the second appearance of Christ to judgment; in
regard of which things they are not perfected. Now hence followed a want of
much light and joy, which on the sight of Christ, God man, entering the heavens,
did redound unto them: as we in heaven now have not the fullness of joy which
then we shall have, when we see the accomplishment of the things we expect.
While the Fathers do set out this imperfection of their estate; the Papists
have fancied their Lymbus, which never entered into their hearts.

The use of this doctrine is, first to confute such Academicall doubting
spirits, who will not say where they were, I mean the souls of the fathers
before Christ's ascension: Certainly, unless we will be as fruitful in
multiplying Heavens, as the Papist is in his Hells; we must grant them
received into one only receptacle of blessed perfected spirits.

Marcionites in this point, who did hold that the fathers had refreshing and
ease from pain, but not salvation; and the reward of them was not in heaven.

Ask, says God to Christ, I will give thee the Nations for thine inheritance.
What did Christ ask? Ioh. 17. Father, where I am, there let these be, that
they may see the glory thou have given me: The Thief went from the cross to
heaven, to Christ's Kingdom, which was a short one if it were in Lymbus, which
was to be broken up within a few hours space. This should make us desire to be
dissolved, seeing we shall presently be with Christ in heaven: Should we have
waited for admittance into heaven, as long as for the resurrection of our
bodies, there were not that comfort; but to fly forthwith to those blessed
mansions, how willing should it make us to depart? Who is it does not willingly
bid farewell to his smoakie Inn, when he knows that he shall come to his
own house, every way contentfull?

Thirdly, seeing heaven must find us when we leave this earth, let us send our
treasure before us. This earth is but Gods Nurcery, in which God does set his
tender plants, not that they should grow here still, but that he may transplant
them in his time, and set them in heavenly Paradise; where they shall abide for
ever. Why then seeing our eternal mansion is there, what should we treasure
here below? Men care not for furnishing things they must leave quickly, they
send all before to the places wherein they mean for their times to make abode.

In whom also we have been chosen to, or obtained, an inheritance. Now he
comes to the third blessing, even our Glorification. Having laid down our
Justification, verse 7. and our Vocation, verse 8.9.10. he does set down this
third before mentioned, in this 11. and 12. verses. We are to mark 1. The
benefit. 2. The foundation of it. 3. The end. The benefit has reference to the
7. verse, In whom we have redemption, in whom also we have obtained an
inheritance; The old books read it, We are chosen, the latter, we have
obtained an inheritance: The word signifies, we have been chosen, as it were
by lot, to an inheritance. The ground shows us, first our predestination.
Secondly, the author of it, by him who is described from the effect; in which
we are to mark, 1. The Action, who does work effectually. 2. The Object, all
things. 3. The Manner, according to the counsel of his will: the end of this
and all the other benefits following. The words being easy, we will come to
the instructions.

death, so his grace through Christ reigns to life eternal. Now the order in
which we receive this inheritance, you may see, Acts 26.18. Romans 8. God
enlightens their eyes, brings them to know and believe on Christ, that so they
may receive in him, First remission of sins; Secondly, Inheritance with the
Saints: those whom he has called, he has justified; so those whom he has
justified, he has glorified. Sin is a wall of partition, which must be
beaten down, before the light of grace and glory can shine unto us: Now sin
being removed from us, who are with the natural son, what should hinder but
that we should be heirs, even ioynt-heyres with him? Being one with him, we
are the seed to whom was promised under Canaan, the inheritance of the world
to come. The better to understand this matter of our inheritance, you must know
what it is in general. 2. In what order we come to receive it. That is an
inheritance which I hold as the Son, or Allie; or as out of favor I am
written the heir of this or that man; so what ever we obtain by our
principal birth from Christ, that is our inheritance. That which we obtain is
twofold: First, in this life we receive the first fruits, the earnest of the
spirit, and all our blessings are given to us as part of a child's part. Wards
while they are in their minority have some allowance from their inheritance;
and Parents will prove their children with some lesser stocks, to see how they
will husband them, before they give them the full estate they mean to leave
them; so does God.

come, which stands partly in Prerogatives. Secondly, in the glory that shall
be put upon our persons. Thirdly, in the things which shall be given us to
possess. Some inheritances, have prerogatives annexed, as to be Lord high
Steward, Lord high Chamberlain: so our inheritance has this royalty annexed;
We shall be Kings and Priests to God; we shall be Judges of the world, and
Angels with Christ, standing by Christ, as Benchers and Assistants in place of
judgment. Our glory respects soul or body; the soul shall be filled with
the light of knowledge, even as the air upon the coming of the Sun to it, is
rather light to appearance, then enlightened. 2. Our love shall as a flame rise
up to God. When the water which runs in many channels is brought into one,
it makes a little Sea: When all our self-love, love of wife, children,
earthly things, yea of sinful lusts, is turned all into the love of God, then
doubtless great and glorious shall be our love. 3. Our joy breaking forth in
praise, who is able to utter, when here it is unspeakable sometime and
glorious? The glory of the body shall be such, that it shall shine as the Sun
in the firmament, both from the glory about it; and the glorious spirit within
it, as a Lantern shines from the Candle within it: For the things we shall
possess, they are in a word all things, the world to come, the new heavens,
and the new earth; and the creature being a little thing, we shall possess God
himself, in Christ, as our husband and all-sufficient portion.

to us freely, did we deserve it, and in effect, pay for it, it were purchase,
not inheritance; but it is not said simply an inheritance, but such an one as
is assigned us by lot; for this word seems to respect that division of Canaan
to the twelve Tribes, whose several seats were by lot designed: Now if our
inheritance comes by lot, then it is not our own industry, but the Divine
disposition, which works all in all in it.

amort while these things are piped? Ah alas there are too many who taste their
pottage, like Esau, better then their birthright. O let us be ashamed, that in
these outward toys, which are but like the shaking of a childs rattle, that
in these our hearts should be tickled, and with the matter of their freehold
in heaven, should not be moved. This should make us rejoice when we are made
heavy with diverse temptations, 1 Pet. 1. so they did in those Apostolic
times; but the hidden light of this star, is not so discerned by us who live
in this day of outward prosperity.

are so affected to their earthly inheritances, that they sometime practice
against their own parents, affecting ouer-timely possession. Great purchasers,
if they make a purchase in the remotest parts, are not well till they have
seen it; so should we be affected toward our inheritance: Why has God given
us the first fruits? even as the Spies did bring to the Israelites some of the
fruits of Canaan to make them long after it, and desire to be possessed of so
good a land, so does the Lord give us, to the like end, the first fruits of the
spirit, to make us desire and long after the fullness thereof.

Hebr. 12. The greater things we expect from any, the more must be our
obseruancy toward them, and endeavor in all things to please them.

Now follows the ground of all these benefits in time; having been
predestinate: Which is described from the purpose going before, having been
predestinate, according to his purpose: Which purpose is argued from the author
of it, who is not named, but described: In the description three things are to
be noted; First, his action or working; who works: Secondly, the object; all
things: Thirdly, the manner; after the counsel of his will.

To speak a word of Predestination according to purpose, which is here made
the ground of all the former, and so to come to this description, in which we
must dwell with more diligent consideration for the unfolding of it.

For Predestination see above. But it may be asked what is this purpose,
according to which we are said here to be predestinate. (...).
We read of some purposed and ordained to the obtaining of life, Acts 13.1. 1
These. 5. Now Gods purpose and ordinance touching the end, does seem to follow
upon Gods election: for when we have a will to do any thing, there follows
upon this, in the mind, a settled purpose to effect it; so when God has loved
some to life, there comes to be as it were in God a settled purpose of
bringing some to life, which once settled, all things come to be predestined,
for performance of it: and Romans 9. this may be grounded, when he says, that
the purpose of God, which is according to election, might be sure: Wherefore I
deem foreknowledge by which God now about to choose, knows whom he will
choose; election by which he sets his love to life on some before othersome;
purpose settled of bringing some to life before othersome; these belong all to
the same benefit, viz. Election: Foreknowledge as that which goes before; for
God does not blindly choose he knows not whom: purpose following it, as a
shadow does the body, and therefore where the one is named, the other by
discourse are to be understood: He has purposed us to attain life through
Christ, he has chosen us to attain life, as Romans 8. Those whom he did
foreknow himself to choose and purpose unto life, those he predestined: And
thus you see why it is said predestinate, according to purpose. But note here
by what method the Apostle does gather themselves to have been predestined,
even a posteriori, from this that they were now called, justified, that they
had received an inheritance by faith, he gathers that they had been
predestinate. Observe then.



To come to the description of the author of this purpose, according to which
we were predestinate: the parts to be marked in it have bin mentioned; Let us
first then consider of the meaning of the words. Secondly of the scope, for
which they are brought in. Thirdly, of the doctrines to be marked in them.

First, this word [worketh,] does signify such a working, which has efficacy
to the bringing forth the being of that which it works.

All things.] Notes out whatsoever things are, whether good or evil.

Counsel.] Notes sometime the faculty of wisdom, which gives advise
touching things to be done, and means of doing them: And thus, according as
the nature of the thing has it self to him who gives advise, is sometime
present and ready, sometime needing deliberation, but deliberation so far as
it is grounded in imperfection of knowledge, and argues doubtfulnesse, cannot
be ascribed, but only so far as it signifies the maturity and ripeness of
counsel. Secondly, counsel signifies not the faculty, but the effect, wise
advise given in any case from that faculty of wisdom which gives counsel.
Thus we understand when we say; What counsel did such a one give you? Now thus
it is here taken for that wise order of things, and means, which Gods wisdom
suggested. Lastly, it is to be considered, why it is called counsel of his
will. First, because it is propounded to his will; secondly, it is accepted of
by his will: The meaning is, we obtain all these blessings before named,
having been predestined according to that gracious purpose of God toward
us, whose working brings about all things, according to that wise order which
his counsel did propound, and his will for the liberty of it did freely accept.

Now the scope of this description tends hither, to prove that we attain the
benefits before named, having been predestined by Gods counsel (for
predestination is an act of Gods counsel, as I have said before) thereunto; he
proves this particular, by this general; He who works all things after the
counsel of his will, he does work these benefits in us, his counsel having
predestined us to them; But God works all things, etc. These are frivolous
exceptions, that God speaks only of the things before, which he does out of
his gracious pleasure: for this were an impertinent superfluity, to say that
God had wrought us these benefits, when his counsel had predestined us, who
does work these benefits according to his counsel; He has wrought them in us
according to his counsel, who does work them according to his counsel.

Secondly, what so ever things are according to Gods counsel, those he is said
to work; for these last words may as well determine the subject, as show the
manner of his working.

Thirdly, what reason is it to say, he works these things after counsel? as
if all the works of God were not alike after counsel.

Lastly, to say he speaks of things he does out of gracious pleasure, is in
their sense, who except frivolous: for he says not, the counsel of his (...),
but of his (...). Beside that, the Scripture does attribute those things, which
as judgments God does execute in reprobates, to Gods (...), mere free
pleasure, Mat. 11.25. and 13.11. Thou have hidden these things from the wise,
even so, because it pleases thee. Now to come to the Doctrines.

Of him, by him, and for him, are all things, Rom 11. vlt. 1 Cor. 8.6. Things
are of two sorts, good, or evil; good things are natural, or supernatural,
such as are wrought in Christ: Now all these the Lords efficacy is in making
them, yea of nothing: Though man must have some matter to work on, God can
give being, and call the things that are not, making them stand out as if they
were. Secondly, his work is in sustaining them; He does not leave these
things, as a Carpenter his building, or Ship-wright his Ship, but still is with
them sustaining them in the being, received from him. That which has not heat
of it self, but is made hot (as water) with fire, it depends on fire to be
kept in heat, and no longer then fire is under it, it will not keep hot: So
these things, not having being of themselves, depend on him for their
continual sustentation, who did first give them their being. Thirdly, Gods
action is in them, governing them to that end for which he did make them;
Things depending on another, are governed by that on which they depend. Beside,
our servants depend on us, to be governed by us; what are all the creatures,
but so many things ministering to him who is the Lord of hosts? Not to speak
that the same wisdom which teaches us to get any thing, for this or that
purpose, does teach us likewise when now we have it, to govern and apply it to
that purpose: So Gods wisdom, which made all things to an end, must needs
govern and use them to that end: There is no question in these things. For
that any thing should beget a thing like in kind to it self, it is not
strange; and that any workman should work any thing like himself, is no
wonder; The diffecultie is in evil things: Evil is either of punishment, or
sin; Now God is by himself an author of the first; See, Amos 3.6. Is there
evil in the city, which I work not? Out of the mouth of the Lord comes
evil and good, Lam. 3.38. For, punishment though it be evil to his sense who
suffers under it, yet it is good in it self, when now it is deserved; as to
execute a man is evil to him who suffers, good in the Judge who cutteth off
a hurtful member for the good of the public. Evil of sin, is either of
the first sin, or the sins ensuing. Now these, to speak in general, neither
of them are without Gods effectual permission: They who so are in Gods power,
that they cannot sin without his sufferance, his permission is effectual to
the being of sin from them, that is, necessary to this, that they should
actually commit that they are inclined to commit. Now thus it is with God, for
he does effectually work somethings by himself without others; is the
creation of all these things; some things in and with others, working as
instruments under him and with him; thus he works all the works of grace;
some things by permitting others, and that when he could hinder them; thus his
efficacy reaches to the being of sin, and this is most just in God; for
though evil is not good, yet it is good that there should be evil: God who
brings light out of darkness, being able to do good of evil; and it is
just in him to permit, where he is not bound to hinder.

Acts 4.21. That look as it is in those double two faced pictures, look at
them on one side you see monsters, on the other beautiful persons; So it is in
these wicked works, They work idem, but not ad idem.
the same that man works sinfully, God works most holily.



or wills, he does it with counsel; though his will be most just, yet we
must not conceive of it, as moving merely from it self, without any thing to
direct. With him is counsel, with him is understanding, Job 12.13. and Esaias
46.10. My counsel, says the Lord, shall stand. Even as the foot of the body
has an eye bodily to direct the moving of it; and as the reaso^able will of
man has a light of wisdom to go before it; so would God have us conceive in
himself, that the light of advised wisdom is with him, in whatsoever he
wills or works. This is to be marked; first, that we may see how all things
befalling us are good; for the Lord bringing them about according to his
counsel, they seem good to his wisdom: Now wisdom judges nothing good,
but as it is fit to some good end; now that which is fit for some good end,
that cannot but be good.



strong willed, Prou. 12.14. He that hears counsel is wise. It is good to
look before we leap, and to remember that two eyes see more then one.
Solomon, the wisest for politic wisdom, has his sage Counselors, whose
advise while Rehoboam followed not, he did lose ten parts of his kingdom: It
is in our little personal common wealths, as in those wide ones; Where
Counsel fails all goes to ruin, Prou. 11.24.

Counsel of his will.] That is which his will propounded to it, did freely
accept. Observe hence that what God wills once, that he effectually works,
see Psalm. 115. Our God is in Heaven, and does whatsoever he wills: Who has
refused his will? so Isa. 46 10. We see in beasts that they have an appetite to
that they move after; in men that which they will, that they put out their
power to effect, so it is in God, if he will any thing; he does work it
effectually. That is a frivolous distinction of an effectual, and an
ineffectuall will in God, which stands neither with truth of Scripture, as in
this place; nor with the blessedness of God; nor with the nature of things:
all that showed him which his will accepts, he does effectually work it.
Against blessedness of God; for might God will a thing and not have it, he were
not fully blessed, when to have every good will, is more blessed then to want
it. Against nature of things, for every thing which will and ability works;
if God almighty have will to any thing, the thing must needs follow. Where
there is full power to work any thing, applied to the working of it, the thing
wrought must needs follow.

Here some distinguish and say, that in things which God will do, his power
does work them effectually; but the things which God would have on condition
from us, those his power does not work: An old Pelagian conceit. Would not God
have us walk in his commandments, and has he not said, that he will put his
spirit in us, and make us walk in them? S. Austin learned that God did promise
to work mightily those things he requires from us. If to have the
conditional will be more happy then to want it, then God who has power to
work the condition in us, will not want it: Not to say that this conditional
will is absurdly imagined in God, he must will the having a thing on condition
which he will not work, and then it is impossible, unless the creature can
do something good, which he will not do in him; or on condition which he will
work, and then he works all he wills; or on such a condition which he
sees the creature cannot perform, nor himself will not make him perform;
and this were idle and frivolous.

on me good, depend not entirely for principal efficacy on God, farewell all
religion.

if God will, says James. God can have nothing with man, no faith, no
conversion, but if man will, and that not as coming to him in obedience, but
as able to cross him, and resist his pleasure. Ob. He does still work after
the counsel of his will, seeing it pleased him to yield so to the liberty of
his creature. Resp. Where learn they that God has suspended his omnipotency,
and put the staff out of his hand? The Scripture tells us, that God has the
hearts of Kings, to carry them as he will, that the power that raised Christ,
works faith in us. Secondly, I say, that did God look to the will of
another, as the rule of that he will work, he could not be said to work after
the counsel of his will, though he might be said to work willingly: as it is
with servants and subjects, who look to the wills of others for their
direction, of others to whom they are in power inferior.



Having thus admonished what I deem fit to be spoken more generally, as
fitting to popular instruction; before I pass this place, I think it good to
deliver my judgment touching that question.

Quest. Whether Adams voluntary fall, was preordained, and in some sort willed
by God, yea or no? Or whether God did only foresee it, and decree to suffer
it, not willing, or intending, that it should fall out, though he saw how he
could work good out of it. I will first set down the arguments on both sides.
Secondly, lay down conclusions opening the truth. Thirdly, answer the
arguments propounded to the contrary. Those who defend the latter, reason thus.

1. That which makes God cruel, and more cruel then Tygres themselves, and
unjust, is not to be granted: But to make him will the undeserved fall and
ruin of his creatures does make him so.

2. That which makes God will an occasion of showing his own wrath, is
foolishly ascribed to God, no wise man will make work for himself to be angry
at.

3. That which fights with the end of God in creating man, that is not to be
ascribed to God. But to will the fall of his creatures, fights with his end
he propounded, namely, that by serving him, they might live happy everlastingly.

4. That which stands not with Gods truth in his word is not to be granted.
But that to say he did will and determine the fall, stands not with his
truth. His word says, I would have thee come to life, and persevere in obeying
me: this says, I will not have thee come to life, nor continue in obeying;
Ergo, it makes God to have deceived man.

5. That which makes God will the taking away of some guilt, by which Adam
should have been enabled to have obeyed, or to withdraw some Grace, and so
forsaken him, before he had sinned, that is not to be granted. But to make God
will and decree that his creature shall fall, does infer the substraction of
some Grace and sufficient abilities to keep the Law, and that while Adam yet
had not offended: Ergo it is not to be granted.

6. That which God wills, that he works, and is author of: But the fall
you say he wills: Ergo.

7. He who gave strength enough to have avoided sin, did forbid it in pain
of death, he is not willing that sin should be: But God did so.

8. That which makes God will that which has disagreement with his nature, is
not to be yielded: But to will sin, is to will a deprauation of his image,
disagreeing with his nature: Ergo.

9. That which takes away man's liberty in sinning, makes his sin no sin,
and is not to be granted: Gods ordeyning that man should fall does so: Ergo.

10. He that punishes sin, is not the author of sin: God does punish it:
Ergo.

11. He who does give his son all to death for the abolishing of sin, he does
not will that it should be: But God does so: Ergo.

12. If God willed the being of sins to some ends, then he has need of
sin: But he has not need of sin.

13. That which makes God will the being of sin, that he may show mercy in
Christ, and show mercy in Christ for the taking away of sin; that makes God
run a fond circle. But this does so.

14. He who cannot tempt to sin, cannot will sin: God cannot. Ergo.

Now to prove that God did will, that through his permission sin should
enter, or that he did will sin so far forth as that it should be, or the
being of sin, (for these are one,) the Arguments following are used.

1. He who does make his creature such who may fall, and sets him in such
circumstances in which he does see he will fall, and then permits him to
himself, he does will and ordain that his creature, through his mutability
and freedom, shall fall: But God makes him such who may fall, and sets him
in such circumstances, in which he does foresee he will fall, and then
leaves him to fall; Ergo.

If any except God, does make him such as may fall, and set him in
circumstances in which he will fall, not that he intends his fall, but for
his trial, I would, ask why God knowing such circumstances, in which his
creature might possibly have fallen, not actually falling, and so have proved
him without falling, why he did choose to set him in such, in which he did
foresee that he would fall certainly?

2. That about which an act of Gods will is occupied, that thing is willed:
Gods permission is an act of his will, and is occupied about sin, the entering
or being of it: Ergo, this is willed.

The first part is plain; as love, hatred, fear, cannot be about any thing,
but the thing must be loved, feared, hated; so here, neither does man permit
any thing, having power to withstand it, but he is willing with it. Now
permission is so an object of will, that it is likewise an act of will,
conversant about that which it permits.

3. He who prohibiting any thing, nilleth it or wills it shall not be, he
permitting any thing wills it shall be. But God does ever nill that which he
hinders.

4. That which God so permits that he has his end in permitting it, that
he wills; for what ever has an end, that so far forth is good: What ever
in any degree is good, that so far forth is a fit object of the divine will:
But God permitting sin has his end, why he will permit it, as all grant.

5. He who wills the antecedent, on which an other thing does infallibly
ensue, he does will that which follows also: As God cannot will the being of
the Sun, but he must will the illumination following it.

But God wills to permit, on which infallibly follows the sin permitted;
otherwise God might permit, and the thing permitted not happen, which is absurd
to think; for then he might deliver a person up to sin, and he not fall
into the sin into which he is delivered: For though the action of free will
come between Gods permission, delivering up, and the sin to which we are
delivered and permitted, yet God does never permit, but that the creature will
fall most infallibly to that which is permitted.

6. He who cannot but either will that sin should be, or will that it should
not be, he has willed that it should be: But God must either will it, or nill
it; Ergo. He whose omnipotency is in the being of all things, he must will
the being of all things: Gods omnipotency is in the being of every thing: for
look as if his knowledge be not in every thing, he were not omniscient; and
look as if his presence were not in every thing, he were not omnipresent; so
if his powerful will work not in every thing, he is not omnipotent.

7. No defect of an inferior instrument, can trouble the work of an
all-knowing and almighty Artificer; For the instrument cannot do any thing,
nor yet fail in any thing, without his sufferance and knowledge: But a defect
in an Instrument, not intended and chosen by the Artificer, does disturb his
work; Therefore Adams defection from Gods order, was not without the will and
intention of God.

8. That which makes Gods providence more imperfect toward man is not to be
granted: But to say, God lets man fall into sin without his will
ordaining it before, does so: For God does not only foreknow the evils which
befall the basest creatures, but he does ordain the falling of them forth.

9. What ever Gods providence works to his will, is to have that be to which
his providence works; for providence is joined with will, and of things
willed: But Gods providence does set the creature such circumstances in which
it will sin; does keep back all effectual hindrances which might hinder
the creature from sinning, does intend the use of sin fallen out, Ergo, Gods
will was that his creature should sin.

10. That which takes away the true ground of fearing God, solid trusting in
him, patience in evil, is not to be admitted: But the opinion that says, that
evil may befall us, which God neither wills nor intends, makes us we can
neither soundly fear, nor stay on God: for how can we fully fear and rest on
him, in whose hand it is not entirely to keep us from all evil, or to bring
about all that evil which may overtake us? Now to say that man had power to
fall into sin without Gods will or intention, does affirm both these, viz.
that it is out of Gods hand to preserve us: For though he will, and intend our
preservation, yet we may fall into evil: And that evil may befall us, which
God does not will, nor effectually bring about. I need not show what a ground
of patience is taken away, when we cannot think that God had any will or
intention in that which is befallen us.

11. He who may holily will and ordain to good ends and uses after-sinnes,
he may ordain the first also, and will it as a mean which he can use to his
glory: this is thus showed: After-sinne as sin, has no less disproportion
with Gods nature, nor can be no more approved by him, then the first: It must
then only be respects for which God may will an after sin, rather then the
first; but if respects make sin a fit object of his will, the first puts
on as good respects as any other: For it was fit the first sin should be to
teach the liberty, and withal infirmity, of the creature, that he might take
occasion of unfolding his mercy and justice, that his admirable wisdom,
goodness, and power might be manifested, while he did bring good out of such
evil. The assumption: But God most holily wills and ordains after-sinnes;
As for example; the unjust crucifying of Christ, Acts 4.28. Acts 2.23. None are
blind like such as will not see: For to say that God would not that his Son
should be killed by the Jews procurement, and the hands of sinners, but only
that God would have him delivered into their hands, to suffer what God would
have him to endure, is but an escape of a turne-sicke brain, blinded with
wilfulness; for what is it but to say, God would not that his Son should be
killed by them, but given into their hands that he should be killed by them?
for it was death, even the death of his cross, yea, and that under the hands
of sinners, that God did lay upon him to suffer: Neither does it help, to say,
they were now refractory sinners; for if sin in one, now a wilful sinner,
does by respects it has and uses, become a fit object for Gods will to will
and ordain; then the sin of a creature defectible may be ordained also.

12. That in which is Gods counsel, in that is his will and work; But Gods
counsel reaches to the being of sin, otherwise sin should fall out God
unadvised. The proposition is in the Text; His counsel is accepted by his
will, and he does work effectually after some manner, that which his will
allows, and counsel advises.

13. That which is a truth, must needs have some former truth, a cause why it
is true; and so there is no stay till we come to the first truth, cause of all
truth: But that sin is a truth, Ergo.

14. If there were but one fountain of water, there could not be any water
which were not thence derived: So there where is but one fountain of being,
what ever is found to be, must needs thence take the original, so far forth
as it is existent.

Having heard what chiefly is brought in one judgment and other, we will lay
down these conclusions for way of answer, to those Arguments which were first
laid down, opposing the truth in this Question, as I take it.

Conclusion 1.
God cannot possibly sin: He may work beside his rule who may sin, Gods
rule is his most just and wise will, which he cannot but work after, no more
then he can deny his own nature; Ergo, he cannot sin.

2. God cannot be author of sin, in and with his creature, as he is of every
good word and work; for that which the creature does, God being the author and
principal worker of it, God must inform the manner of it by his commandment,
and work it in him by his spirit: But it is impossible for the creature to
sin in working after that which is commanded him of God, Ergo.

3. God cannot so far will sin, as to approve it for good in it self; it
has no proportion to his nature, such as he cannot be author of in the
creature, nor yet the creature work while it keeps communion with him.
Wherefore God cannot allow it as good in it self, though he has liberty
whether he will punish it thus or thus; according as he does with freedom
reward such things which he cannot but approve as good, such obedience to his
Law had his creature obeyed.

4. Though God cannot will it as good in it self, nor approve it as good, yet
he may will it so far forth that it shall be, as being able to work good out
of it; God might have willed that none of these things should have been, which
had agreement with his nature, and Ergo, by proportion may will that such
things shall be, which disagree in some sort from his nature: For though these
things are not good, the being of them is good to him who can use it to his
glory. Gods efficacy, Ergo, reaches not to the Essence, but to the being and
beginning of sin: For though the will of man does make sin exist
immediately, yet the will of man could not do it, did not the will of God give
way by his permission. I see Thieves coming to rob, and ready to enter at
such a door, I have power to shoot the boult and lock it, so that they could
not enter; notwithstanding having company about me to take them at pleasure, I
leave all, that they may freely enter and take some booty, that so I may come
on them, apprehend them, and bring them to their deserved end; in such an
example, though the unjust will of these men did immediately make this robbery
exist, yet I do make it exist more principally then they, in as much as they
could not have done it, had not I given way to them; yet how beit I am a cause
why this robbery is committed in this place, and at this time, in which I could
have withstood, yet am I no cause to them of committing it.

5. Sin, though it has an outward disagreement, such as may be in a creature
from the Creator; yet it has no inward positive repugnancie or contrariancie
to Gods nature, such as is twixt fire and water: Even as the good created,
though it has an outward agreement with, and resemblance to the creator, yet
it has no inward agreement, such as is twixt nourishment, and a thing
nourished, for then should the divine nature inwardly in it self be better for
the one, and worse for the being of the other, and so should necessarily will
the one, and nill the other. Again sin, though as sin, it has an outward
disagreement, and be evil in the nature of it, yet is it not absolutely evil
to God as it is sin, but to the instrument sinning, in as much as God can make
sin, as it is sin, serve to diverse good uses. No wonder then wicked men can use
Gods best things to evil.

Sin, as sin, God can turn to an occasion of his glory; for not
permission, but the thing permitted, is it which God does take occasion by, to
give the promise of the Mediator; He can use sin, as sin, for a punishment,
Romans 1.14. Because they did provoke him by adolatry, he did punish them with
giving them up to buggery: These latter sins were not punishments, in regard
they deserved further punishment and condemnation then the former, yea, a
further desertion of God; but in regard of committing these acts themselves:
Had God by conversion prevented further desertion and condemnation in one of
these idolaters, now come to masculine filthiness, his idolatry even in this
act once exercised, should have been punished. The sinful respect in this
fact is more penal then desertion or punishment following after. God may use
sin as sin, for exercising his children; The cup of suffering God reaches
us, is to be sinfully and injuriously handled; God would have Christ not only
dye, but suffer being innocent, an unjust condemnation, yea, the sinful manner
of afflicting is heavier to Gods children, then the affliction it self. Beside
that, in many of their exercises, it is not the act which does or could afflict
them, but the sin of the act; not speech from Shemei, but sinful reuiling
speech was David's exercise. Wherefore being not absolutely evil, but good to
God in regard of the use of it, he may ordain and will it as good, or rather
the good use of it.

6. Though Gods will and work may be in sin, yet it is not alike in the
sin which his creature in innocence may fall into, as it is in regard of that
sin which he may fall into when now he is for state sinful.

7. God may furnish forth his creature, so that he may per se, and yet may per
accidens, make defection, and he may will that his creature shall sin, being
suffered to it self, by accident of it own liberty and vertibilitie.

8. Or having made his creature, so that when he may obey, he will in such and
such circumstances take occasion and willingly and wittingly sin; God may
decree to set him in such conditions in which he will sin, and leave him
without putting any impediment, which in effect is to will that sin shall be
by his permission.

9. God may do that which may directly bring a sinner to commit sin, as he
may smite him with blindness in understanding, with prauity; for as death bodily
is a good fern in the nature sinful of things, though not good to a living
person, so is this blindness, prauitie, hardness of heart, good in
themselves, though not good to man, who should be conformable to the Law, and
free from them; good as inflicted, not as contracted and received. Secondly;
God may suspend all actions which in any degree tend to hinder. Thirdly; God
may provoke by occasions of finning not only set things, which he may take
occasion to pervert. The reason of all is, it were just with God to consummate
spiritual death upon his creature now sinful, and Ergo, much more lawful to
execute such a degree as is inferior.

These Conclusions premised, the Arguments used for defense of the negative
part, may be more easily answered, then many of those for the affirmative.

Argument 1.
To the first, it is denied that it is either cruelty or injustice in God to
ordain that the creature shall fall through it own wilful defection, and so
glorify his justice in deserved punishment: to constrain the creature and make
it sin unwillingly, and yet to determine to punish it, were to punish it
without cause, as delighted with cruelty. Secondly, I answer, as much may be
objected against their permission: That which is cruelty and injustice, not
befalling savage men, that is far from God; But to set his child, never
having offended him, in such a taking, in which he does see he will
certainly make away himself, and not to hinder him when he might every way as
well do it, and that with speaking a word, is cruelty and injustice, far
from savage men: Now all this, different Divines confess of God. First, that
he did set him, being every way yet innocent, in such circumstances. Secondly,
that he could have hindered him by suggesting some thought effectual to that
end. Thirdly, that if God had thus hindered him, man's will should have been no
less free, and Gods primary purpose should have bin more promoted. Fourthly,
that God determined, notwithstanding all this, he would permit him fall:
Revenging justice cannot be glorious but in just punishment; just punishment
cannot be, where there is no just merit on the creatures parts; just merit
there can be none, if the creature do not wittingly and wilfully sin against
God from the voluntary counsel of it, ergo, as God will have the end, so he
cannot will the creature shall sin, otherwise then from the wilful
defectibility of it.

Argument 2.
To the second I answer, denying the proposition: God may will an occasion of
manifesting his just wrath, or else he cannot will the demonstration of his
own perfections: but to say God cannot effect the show of this or that
perfection in himself, is ouer-harsh and unbeseeming the power and wisdom of
the almighty: He who has the creature so in his power that he cannot make
defection further then he wills, he must needs will the being of that which
his justice shall punish before it can come to be: yea it is so with men, that
sometime they do draw this or that fact from another, with which they are
justly angry so far as to punish it in the offenders. Thus a master draws
forth the unfaithfulness of a servant: Of which somewhat more in the last
argument. This may be retorted. That which makes God unable of himself to
show his perfections, is not true: But that which says he cannot ordain or
will the being of sin, makes him unable of himself to show his revenging
justice; ergo, it is absurd.

Argument 3.
The second part of that third Argument is denied: It is one thing to make
mankind in some part capable of life; another thing to will and intend it
should all attain life: This latter was never in God; But God said, do this
and live. Ans. This does show what God would have the creature take as his
will, not what was his secret will within himself; or it showed what way the
creature might attain life, both for himself and his seed, but it does not
show that God had this will within himself, that his creature should with
effect perform this, for then he would have wrought it in his creature; even
as the threatening does not show that it was Gods final pleasure within
himself that we should all lie in death, if that we sinned.

Argument 4.
The second part is again denied: To give a commandment to my creature, to do
this or that, which I am minded within my self he shall not do, is no untruth,
when it is not for to deceive, but for trial or otherwise: As in Abraham,
Offer thy son Isaak, yet Gods will was not to have him offered; the command,
ergo, does not lay down what was Gods will within himself; for these were
contradictory in the Divine will, if he should be said to will in himself at
the same time, and not to will within himself the offering of Isaak: Thus here
it is no untruth for God to signify this as his will to Adam, that he should
do unto life that in charge, when yet it was not his will to have him with
effect perform it; and look as God in his threatening did signify as his
final will, that which was not his final pleasure touching mankind, without
any untruth; so here.

Argument 5.
The second part is denied, we do not affirm the substraction of any grace
he had, neither does this follow on decreeing his fall, but only the not
superadding of that grace whereby he would infallibly not have fallen. Gods
decreeing that he should sin out of his own voluntary, does not diminish
any power he had, whereby he might have stood if he would, but does only
hold back that grace which would have made him with effect to will that thing
which he was otherwise able: the not putting to grace no way due, which should
make him infallibly stand is one thing, the substracting of Grace inabling him
to stand if he would, is another.

Argument 6.
That which he wills, that he is author of and works. We distinguish, that
which he wills so as to command it, that he is the author of to his
creature, and that he works in him: But to will the being of sin, is to
will that his creature shall of his own accord without his warrant do this or
that.

Argument 7.
He who gave strength enough to avoid sin, and forbad it on pain of death,
would not have sin. Ans. It follows not, but thus only, that he would not
have his creature sin, so as the blame of it should redound on him: had he
willed that he should not have sinned, he would have given that grace with
which he saw he would not have fallen.

Argument. 8.
That is not to be yielded which makes God will a thing disagreeing with his
nature, as allowing it for good, not that which makes him will it so far
only that it should exist, and have being, for it is good that the evil
should be which God disalloweth: or thus, that which has naturally and
intrinsically a positive contrariety with Gods nature, that he cannot will,
such a thing sin is not; for such contrariety cannot stand with the
impossibility of the divine nature.

Argument 9.
Gods decree takes not away man's liberty; God does not by any outward force
determine the will, but as being more intimate to it then it is unto it self.
If man can determine his will, and no way diminish his power to the contrary;
how much more shall God be able? Not to say that though man for exercise be
determined to one, yet while he does this out of free judgment, counting it
such as he may do, or not do, he cannot but work most freely.

Argument 10.
He that is author of sin, does not punish it, so far forth, or in that
respect, in which he works it. Again, God is not said Author, but of such
things which he does both morally by command, and physically by inward
operation work in us: They should say, He that punishes sin, wills not
that sin should be, which is false.

Argument 11.
He who gives his son to abolish sin, he does not allow sin as good;
this follows, or he would not that it should still dwell in those for whom
his Son effectually suffers: But it will not follow, that who so gives his
son to abolish it, never willed the existing or being of it; these may be
subordeyned one to the other.

Argument 12.
That which God wills for ends, that he has need of. Ans. God is
all-sufficient, not needing any thing out of himself, nevertheless upon
supposition that God freely will have some ends, those things are in some kind
necessary, which his will guided with wisdom chooses, and his counsel
advises as behoofefull to such purpose; thus the being of sin may be said
needful, so far as it signifies a matter advised by counsel, and chosen by
Gods free pleasure, as sitting to such ends which he propounded: The denial of
the wise man is respective to this, that sinners think there is such need of
their sin, as may excuse them in sinning; as Peter says, God was not slack,
as men count slacknes, so he says, God needs not sinners as sinful men
think him to need them.

Argument 13.
It is a circle which Saint Paul is not ashamed of, God shut up all under
sin, that he might show mercy on all; we see every day he wounds that he
may heal again; he brings to the grave, that he may raise up.

Argument. 14.
To that in James, it is true, first, that God does not tempt any man, so as
man can excuse himself; Secondly, he tempts not the creature to that which
is sin unto him, or merely aiming at the seduction of the creature; for this
darkness of sin goes into light, this evil is good, so far as it is an
object, about which his will may be occupied; Nevertheless God may lead the
creature into temptation, suffering the Devil to tempt, and God may prefer
such objects to his creature, on which he does see that he will sin, and
intend that he shall sin accordingly as he does see him inclined: This is
not to be an author of sinning to his creature, but to detect unto good
purpose, the defectibility which he does see to be in his creature. It is then
denied that he who ordains that his creature shall fall, or wills it,
becomes a tempter of his creature to fall, or sin against him: As God
willed that sin should be, so he willed that it should be by the will of man
freely obeying the seducing suggestion of the Devil, and perverting by
accident such things as should have contained him in due obedience.

Thus have I endeavored to unloose this Gordian knot, which has exercised the
wits of the learned Divines that ever were. In a point of so great
difficulty, I presume not peremptorily to define, but submit all that I have
conceived for the opening of it, to the judgment of the Church of God.

their hope; which is amplified from the circumstance of time, and the object
about which it was occupied, Who hoped in Christ first of all; that is, then
when as yet the Gentiles were not called to believe and hope on him; which here
is mentioned to their honor: The end is, that we might be to the praise of
his glory, that is, to the setting forth both by words and works of his
glorious mercy; so glory is taken, Romans 9. as is above noted more at large.

to seek the lost sheep of Israel; Accordingly, a Church was gathered
amongst them, though for their number they were but few in Christ's time, in
comparison of the multitude which would not receive him, yet the kingdom did
suffer violence, the poor did receive the Gospel: yea after his Ascension,
the Church in Jerusalem did grow numbersome before the Gospel was carried to
the Gentiles: Now this is here set down as an honorable circumstance that
they did believe, when yet the Gentiles were strangers from the Covenant. When
Subjects have made a revolt from their lawful Prince, those who shall first
return and receive again their lawful King, it is unto their commendations:
Thus 2 Samuel 19.15. it was Judah his praise, to be first in fetching home David
their King; so for us who have made defection from God and Christ, it is our
glory to be with the first in receiving him our true David and King: Again,
the first borne has a privilege, and so here it was a privilege of the Jew,
that he was the first begotten to the faith.

Romans 16.6. Paul mentioning Andronicus and Iunius, does not omit this
circumstance of honor, that they were before him in Christ; and so he does
repute it the honor of another, that he was the first fruits of Achaia, 1 Cor.
16.

viz. experience, wisdom, weanednesse, all kind of mortification: Should one
of 50. have no more wisdom nor stayednes, then another at 15. year old, it
were able to make their age despised: Let us look to this, many that were
first prove last, even as it is with these Jews, then before all, now behind
all.

These. 1. The end why we receive this inheritance of light is, That we might
set forth his virtues, who has called us into admirable light, and that it
might so shine forth before others, that they might glorify God and Christ.

Who is thy beloved? Those who find bounteous Lords on earth, how will they
tell of their affability, liberality, of every circumstance wherein they do
them any grace and favor? How will they protest themselves devoted to their
service, drinking healths upon their knees to them? how impatient of any thing
which does so much as in show tend to their disparagement? What a shame is it
that we should walk, neither feeling our hearts affected, nor yet opening our
mouths to praise him who has redeemed us, and brought us to the hope of an
immortal, incorruptible inheritance?

Gentiles. Now this matter is first handled simply, to the end of this first
Chapter; Secondly, is set down comparatively, illustrated from their former
estate in misery. Now in setting down the benefit, we must first mark the
benefit it self, which they are said to have received; Secondly, the effect
which this mercy showed them had in Paul, whom it moved to pray for them. In
the benefit, these particulars are obserueable. 1. In whom they received it, in
Christ. 2. Who receive it, even ye; for this circumstance (ye) is set out as
it were in text letters; (Ye) who were before without God in the world, who
walked in the vanity of your minds. 3. The order in which this benefit did
befall them, which is to be gathered from the precedencie of two other. 1. Of
hearing. 2. Of believing. The hearing is amplified from the object, which is
propounded more indefinitely; the word of truth; expounded more distinctly, the
Gospel of salvation. The second thing going before it, is faith; in whom also
having believed. 4. The last thing, is their benefit, which was their sealing,
in which we consider. 1. Their sealing. 2. The seal and sealer, viz. the
Spirit; set down more generally from his holiness, inherent to his person,
from this external circumstance, that he was the spirit fore-promised. In the
fourteenth verse he is described more particularly, from that respect in which
he is to the Saints, viz. an earnest, etc.

The sum. As we in Christ have been thus blessed, so in him even ye
Gentiles, sinners; when ye had heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your
salvation, in him I say, even ye, when ye had not heard only, but also
believed, were sealed with the holy spirit, which had been before promised
unto life eternal. To omit the first circumstance, which has met us before,
and the second also, which does give occasion to consider what impure persons
the Lord does choose to sanctify; we will come to the third and fourth points
propounded; first handling the general circumstances of them; secondly,
touching those things which may by the way be pointed at in them.

You when you had heard, were sealed with the spirit.] Obs. How God, by hearing
his word, does bring us to be partakers in his spirit. Hearing is every where
made the beginning of our coming to God; He that hears, and learneth from
the father, Ioh. 6. If ye have heard and learned Christ, as the truth is in
Christ, Ephesians. 4.21. The word has been fruitful in you, from what time you
heard, etc. Col. 1. This was the sense by which first death entered; Eve hearing
the Serpent, was seduced: and this is the sense by which we are restored.
Look as the ground cannot be quickened with fruits, till it receive seed, and
the dewes from heaven; no more can our soil be quickened with the spirit and
fruits of the spirit, till by hearing it has taken in this seed immortal,
drunk in this heavenly shower of Gods word. Now it is not every hearing which
is accompanied with the spirit, but hearing with the heart, so as the heart is
affected to do that it hears. There is a hearing with the ear bodily; thus
many may hear, who do not understand, and Ergo, hear, and do not hear. If
outlandish men were here, such as did only know their own foreign
language; we might talk loud enough in English, not fearing their hearing of
us. There is a hearing joined with understanding, when yet the heart is not
affected to do after it; and this hearing is no hearing also: If one hear us
asking him to do this or that, if he have no mind to perform it, we say, he
cannot hear on that side: It must Ergo, be such hearing as Lydea heard with,
whose heart God opened to attend to Paul's preaching.

Judas, who was, when now he had heard Christ, and taken the sop, he was
filled, but with Satan; they are viler after hearing then before: and the most
like children, when Schooling-time is ended. Nay it is to be feared, that some
with hearing, are grown past hearing; as those who dwell, near the continual
roaring of mighty waters, they wax deaf, through continual hearing such
vehement noise, so that they cannot hear any thing at all; so many, the sound
of Gods word has so long beaten their ears, that they cannot discern any
thing in it, what ever is spoken.

carry the water hither and thither so does the word conueigh the graces of the
spirit into our hearts; It is a peale to bed; when men can be without, hearing,
not feeling need of it, as some times they have done.

Received you the Spirit by hearing the Law, or by the Doctrine of faith
preached? Gal. 3.3. And for this cause the ministry of the Gospel, is called
the ministry of the Spirit, not of the Letter; because this doctrine does
only bring us to receive the quickening spirit, which does work in us a life
eternal. The Law may bring us to feel our selves dead, Romans 7. but it cannot
quicken any: Though when the Gospel has now quickened us, it may instruct us,
reform us, yea, delight us in the inner man, Romans 7. many things may help us,
when now we live, which could not be means of restoring us from death to
life. But it may be objected, the Gospel is said a sauer of death, as well as
the Law is said a a killing letter. I answer. The Gospel is said so, not that
directly the nature of it is to kill, but by accident of men's corruption who
reject and will not obey it, it turns to their further condemnation: As the
Kings pardon cannot kill any by it self, yet despised by a malefactor, it may
double his guilt, and bring him to more hasty and fearful execution: So the
gracious pardon of God, offered in the Gospel, kills not any by it self,
saves many who receive it, yet despised, it may by occasion work heavier
death and destruction. But the Law does of it own nature hold a man now in
state of sin, under death and condemnation, and cannot of it self bring any
to life, who now has offended; The words I speak to you (says Christ) they
are spirit, they are life: Even as the body of the sun, diffuseth as an
instrument, the beams of this material light; so it is the Gospel, that
instrument of God, by which he sends out the light of his gracious spirit
into our hearts.

Acts 8. and how while Cornelius and his friends heard Peter opening the good
word of salvation, the holy Ghost did fall on them, to the wonder of the
believing Jews, who accompanied Peter.

They are Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. They are true, and worthy all
entertainment, 1 Timothy 15. The whole word is true: For like as the witness is,
like is the testimony or deposition which comes from him: Now God is
faithful and cannot lie; but this is attributed to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
as agreeing to it, with a certain excellency before other parcels of the word:
For the Gospel is sometime called by general names, as a doctrine of
godliness, a Law, a Testimony; Sometime it is described by the author, the
Gospel of God; sometime from the object, the Gospel of Christ, of the
kingdom; sometime from the property, as an eternal Gospel, a good word, a
true word, as here; sometime from effects, as in the next words, a Gospel of
salvation. Now it is testified to be a word of truth, after an eminent manner,
for three causes. First, it is occupied about Christ, who is the truth and
substance of all the shadows legal, which now are vanished. Secondly, the
truth of this word is further confirmed to us then the truth of any other, by
word, by oath, by the testimony of the great Apostle Christ Jesus, by a iewry
of solemn witnesses, chosen for this purpose, by a multitude of miracles.
Thirdly; this property is the rather annexed to this Doctrine of the Gospel
that thus our unbelief might be helped; for our mind is corrupted with
error, prone to any unbelief, but hard to believe these points so high above
the natural reach and apprehension of it. Now as a Physician does say of his
medicine, that it is excellent, not that it needs commendations, but that he
may induce his Patient the better to take it; So God and his Ambassadors do
testify of these things, that they are true, that we might thus be brought to
yield them belief.

But it may be objected, that word which bids many reprobates believe the
forgiveness of their sins, and life everlasting, that is not a word of
truth; but the Gospel does so. The reason of the former proposition is,
because that which bids me believe a lie, cannot be true; but to bid a
reprobate believe his sins are forgiven, is to bid him believe a lie. The sum
put together, comes to this; That word which bids a man persuade himself
of that which is untrue, that is a lying word. To believe that my sins are
now pardoned me, and that I am saved; this is not the first act of faith, but
follows them when now a man does see himself to be justified in Christ.
First I say, this may be denied, unless I bid him persuade himself so, with
a mind of deceiving him. Abraham by Gods command was bound to persuade
himself that Isaac was to dye under his own hand, yet was not that a lying
word, by which God spoke to him, because the intent of it was butto prove him:
Some say he was bound to think so, unless God should countermand and reuerse
his former command. Ans. Abraham did absolutely believe it; and Ergo, did not
comfort himself, by thinking God might call back his former precept, but by
considering that God could raise him from the dead: Much more may God bid the
reprobate believe this or that, while he does it but to euince their
contumacy, and does see well how far they are from believing any such matter.

Secondly I answer, that the second part of the first reason is not true; God
does bid them believe on Christ to forgiveness of fin, he does not bid any
reprobate directly believe that his sin is forgiven.

He that believes not, makes God a liar, 1 Ioh. 5.10. Should one promise me
an hundred pound, doing this or that, though I should not tell him he did but
gull me with words, yet should I go my way, never heeding what had been
promised, never endeavoring performance of the condition on which I might
claim the benefit offered, by doing this, I should show plainly that I did not
take for truth that I heard spoken; so it is between God promising to us on
believing and repenting, and our turning our backs on him without endeavoring
after these things.



Secondly, it might be noted here, that the Gospel is such a doctrine, as
works salvation; Gods power to salvation, it may well be called a good spell,
or word, for it brings us the tidings of all our good. First, it brings
immortality and life to light. Secondly, it offers us the grace of
forgiveness, and life everlasting. Thirdly, It is Gods instrument, whereby he
works faith, receiving these things. Fourthly, it is the word of Grace which
must build us up, and bring us to that blessed inheritance, Acts 20.32. But I
hasten to the things remaining in this verse.

Gal. 3 14. By faith we receive the spirit of promise: The Gentiles having
heard and believed, God did give them his spirit, Acts 15.7.8. He that
belieueth, rivers of water shall flow from him, which is spoken of that spirit
which they receive, who believe on Christ, John 7.28 This fore-promised spirit,
is first in the fulness of it received by Christ our head, Acts 2.33. and from
Christ it comes to us; for from his fullness we receive Grace for Grace. Now
look as a member cannot receive those spirits from the head which cause sense
and motion in the body, but they must be united with the head, so it is here,
we cannot have this spirit from Christ our head, but we must by this sinew or
nerve of faith be united to him.

But how can we receive the spirit by faith, when we cannot believe before we
have the spirit? Some think that we have first actual grace, that is, that
the spirit as an aid without us, does make us actually believe, that so the
spirit afterward by habit of faith, and all other sanctifying graces, may come
to dwell in us. Now they would answer, that though we cannot believe without
the outward aid of the spirit, yet we might believe without the spirit, by any
supernatural habit dwelling in us; but this is the error of the school: for
we are said to have a spirit of faith, before we can bring forth the act of
faith, 2 Cor. 4. having the sefe-same spirit of Faith we speak. Again, no
externe help can make us bring forth good fruit, till it make us first good
trees; and a blind man may be ^ifted up to see, without a faculty of seeing,
as well as an unbelieving man lifted up to an act of Faith, without a faculty,
a supernatural habit of believing: We, ergo, are said believing to receive
the spirit, because then we receive it more fully and manifestly, dwelling in
us to our sanctification and assurance, touching our redemption.





Thus having considered the benefit in general, we will sift it more
particularly; for he does not barely say, in whom when ye also had believed,
ye received the spirit, but ye were sealed with the holy spirit fore-promised.
Two things are to be marked; 1. The sealing, which does figuratively signify a
singular confirmation given to faithful ones touching their redemption: The
seal, the holy spirit, that is both the person of the spirit dwelling with us,
and the graces of the spirit inherent in us, which is here said a spirit of
promise, because God had fore-promised to put his spirit into our hearts, that
his word and spirit should never leave the faithful seed; that he would pour
out the spirit on all flesh; which solemn promises make me think that this
phrase is in this sense rather to be constred, as Gal. 3.4. We are said by
faith to receive the promise of the spirit; that is, the spirit of promise, or
that had been promised, as here it is uttered.

Chap. 30. ver. Who confirms us, who has anointed us, yea, who has sealed
us, 2 Cor. 1. As God did seal his Christ, as the person in whom he would be
glorious by working our redemption; so he does seal us who are belieuers, for
persons who shall have redemption by him. Even as persons contracting do
mutually seal and deliver each of them their deeds in several: so between
God and the belieuer; the belieuer does by faith set to his seal as it were,
that God is true in that which he promises, John 3.33. and God he does seal
unto the believer, that he shall be infallibly brought to the salvation he
has believed; for to seal up belieuers to redemption, or to seal redemption
to belieuers, are here equivalent. Look what a seal set on any thing does,
it agrees well to belieuers: For first a seal makes sometimes things sealed
secret; Thus the graces of the spirit make belieuers unknown to the world, who
have not received the same spirit with them, yea such as none can ordinarily
know their happiness beside themselves: My love is like a fountain sealed;
for this cause the World knows you not, because it knows not the Father, 1
John 3.2. Secondly, a seal does distinguish; thus the belieuers are a peculiar
to God, are set apart; as the first fruits of the creature, are taken out of
the world. Thirdly, A seal does make things authentical: Thus measures,
clothes, deeds, any thing by the seal coming, is confirmed and warranted in
the kind of it: Thus belieuers they have that given them which does fully
assure their salvation always, yea, which does not only make it sure in it
self, but sometime put it out of all doubt with them, that they can say, they
know whom they have believed, and that he is able to keep their salvation
they have trusted him with to that day. Look as Kings when they take any to
great offices, or to have and hold lands, matter of inheritance here or there,
they give their seal, that they may the more secure it unto them; so does God
to us, when now he takes us believing to that heavenly inheritance. But it
may be objected by many believing hearts, we find no assurance, but much
doubting ever and anon, though we hope we have and do truly believe. Answ.
It is one thing to have this or that surely by deed and seal confirmed,
another thing to know that we have a thing so sealed: As men in earthly things
may have sure evidence for this or that, and yet not always know the certainty
of their hold, and so doubt causlesly, thus it is in belieuers, they have their
redemption ever surely sealed, but not knowing the certainty hereof in
themselves, they are yer-while subject to doubtings.

Ergo, labor to be fully persuaded touching this his grace toward us. Though
true believers are not always sure of their salvation in their sense and
judgment, yet they should ever strive to this; For as men would be trusted
confidently, in that they promise and seal; so God much more would have us be
secure, touching that which he has promised, written, sworn, outwardly and
inwardly sealed.

Ezechiel, and Revelation 7. those were kept from the judgment spiritual in
the one place, corporal in another, whom God had sealed and marked thereto, so
is it here, etc.

viz. That the holy spirit, and the graces of the spirit, are the seal
assuring our redemption, the seal sealing us to redemption. For assurance of
outward things we have only the seal sealed on wax, or otherwise, we need
not the Signet sealing; but we are confirmed touching salvation, both by the
spirit of God, who is as it were the seal sealing, and by the graces of the
spirit, which is as it were the seal sealed and printed upon us; yea, these
two, both of them are together as a seal, while it stands upon the matter
which it now seals. Look as the Kings of England grave on their broad Seal
their own image, and so print as it were their own picture in this or that
which they seal: So our God by his holy spirit, essentially like himself, he
does print upon our souls, his own image; upon us I say, whom he seals to
redemption.

Now, that both Gods spirit and this image of God in us, do as it were seal
us up to salvation, is plain. For first of the person of the spirit, it is
spoken, Romans 8. that it bears witness to our spirits, that we are Gods
children, and heirs with Christ. The spirit of God does by his own testimony
in special manner confirm us and assure us this way. Now for the other, We
know by this, says Saint John, that we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren. Now seeing it is the holy spirit dwelling in us,
and Gods holy image in our souls, which seal up our salvation: How should we
labor for the spirit and for holiness, without which none shall ever see God?
Had we great matters to be conveyed to us, though all were concluded, and the
instruments ready drawn, yet we could not rest till we had got all sure
sealed; so it is with us, we should not rest, but seek this holy spirit, that
we might see our heavenly inheritance safe and sure, even sealed within us.

Secondly; We see by this, that the seal is Gods holy spirit, that God does
not intend by sealing, to make our salvation certain in it self, but to us
also: For he who seals us with such a seal which we may know, he would have
us assured in our selves, touching that to which we are sealed: But the spirit
may be known of us; for that which is a sign manifesting other things to us,
must need^s it self be manifest. Now Saint John says, By this we know God
dwells in us, and we in him; because he has given us of his spirit:
Unreasonable Sheep cannot know the marks wherewith they are marked; but
reasonable sheep may know the seal wherewith they are sealed.

Thirdly, we may gather how fearful the state of such is, who will scoff at
the spirit, at Purity, Holiness: Surely as God has his seal, so the Devil
has his: when he fills men with darkness in midst of teaching, hardens
their hearts till they know not how to be ashamed and penitent, fills them
with hatred and scorn of such as are more conscionable then themselves, it is
a presumption God has given them up to the power of Satan, that he might
seal them to eternal damnation.

Who is the earnest of our Inheritance, until that redemption, purchased to
the praise of his glory.] He comes to describe the spirit more particularly
from that which he is unto us. First, for the words: It is to be marked that he
speaks not of the spirit as a thing in the Neuter gender, but uses the
article Masculine, to point out the person of the spirit; and our English
relative (who) does more distinctly answer to the Greek, then (which). This
word (Earnest) is in the original tongues more large then our English, and may
signify pledges, pawnes, hostages, as well as earnest, which is in contract of
buying and selling only exercised, and is a giving some small part of a sum,
to assure that the whole shall be tendered accordingly in due season.
Inheritance is put for that consummate inheritance of glory kept for us in
heaven, 1 Pet. 1.

Until the redemption,] not for the redemption; it is the same proposition
which we read chap. 4.30. The redemption is here to be understood, not of that
which we are said to have, ver. 7. but of the redemption of the body, or of the
full liberty of the sons of God, which is kept till that great day.

The sum is: Ye are sealed with the spirit who is in you with his gifts, and
is unto you as an earnest in hand, assuring you that you shall have that
perfect inheritance bestowed on you, yea, it dwells with you, as an earnest
confirming you in this behalf, till that redemption of glory befall you, which
is purchased to the praise of Gods glorious mercy.

The parts are two: First, that the spirit is said to be an earnest of our
inheritance; Secondly, the durance of time, in those words, to, or until the
redemption: which is described from the property adjoined, a redemption
purchased; secondly, from the end, to the praise of his glory.



Cor. 1.22. Who has given us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts: Even as
men do assure others that they will pay them the whole sum due for this or
that, by giving an earnest; so God does make us, as it were, part of payment,
does execute in part his gracious promise, that we may be the better
ascertained touching his gracious purpose of bringing us to that our heavenly
inheritance: He knows our unbelieving molde, and ergo, omitteth no mean
which may help us forward to assured persuasion.

There is twixt an earnest and the spirit with the grace wrought in us, great
resemblance. First, an earnest is part of the whole sum, which is in regard
of this or that, to be paid in times appointed; so the spirit we have, and
grace, is the beginning of that glorious being we shall receive, the same for
substance, differing in degree.

2. An earnest does stay with him that receives the complete sum (...)
pledge is given back when the sum undertaken is fully performed.
An earnest is but little in comparison of the whole; twenty shillings is
earnest sufficient to make sure a sum of an hundred pound: Thus all we have
is but a small thing in comparison of the fullness we look for, even as the
first fruits were in comparison of the full harvest.

3. An earnest does assure him that receives, of the honest meaning of him
with whom he contracteth; so the spirit and grace which we receive from God,
do assure us of his settled purpose of bringing us to eternal glory.

viz.

Whether we may in ordinary course be infallibly persuaded touching our
salvation.

The truth is, Christians may come to it: That which is sufficient y confirmed
on Gods part to Christians, and that whose confirmation may be sufficiently
received on Christians part, concerning that they may infallibly be assured;
but God has sufficiently confirmed it, as is plain by his Word, seals, oath,
pledge, etc. and what God offers or confirms so, we by faith may receive
it; for faith does enable us suffi iently to believe that God reuealeth to us:
Now his will to save us, by all the former is particularly revealed, as we
shall show further hereafter. That which makes us unable to have sound joy,
hearty thankfulness, courage to proceed in a godly course, that is contrary
to the truth: But to take away this certain persuasion of our inheritance does
this: How can I joy in a thing which I know not whether I shall have it or no?
I mean with sound and full rejoicing? How can I be thankful for that which I
know not whether ever I shall get it or no? How can a man have heart to
proceed, while he cannot know whether he is in a course right or wrong, and
cannot tell whether all he does will come to any thing yea or no? To explane
the truth more fully, I will open these four points. 1. What this certainety
is. 2. On what grounds it rises. 3. In what state the faithful attain it. 4.
That the sense of it may alter even in those who have attained it.

1. This certainty is no other thing then the testimony of a renewed
conscience, which does witness through the spirit, that we are in state of
grace, and that we shall be brought by God to life everlasting. I call it a
testimony of the conscience, for the conscience does not only show us what we
are to do, what state we should seek to get into, but it does witness and give
judgment about that we have done, and the state we stand in, be it good or
evil. The conscience accuses of sin, and witnesses to a man that he is in
the state of damnation; it does witness to a man that he is in state subject
to Gods temporary displeasure, and so likewise that a man is in such state as
that God will show him favor for the present, and bring him to see his
promised salvation: That it is a testimony of our spirit, that is, our
conscience renewed, it is plain, Romans 8.16. That our spirit does witness it,
through the spirit witnessing our state unto it, is plain in that place: also,
The spirit of God does witness with our spirit; and Rom 9.2. My conscience
bears me record through the spirit; for the conscience does but speak it as
an echo; that it testifies to us both our present estate of Grace, and our
inheritance with Christ, it is evident there also; Nay, when the conscience,
through the ministry of the Law, does testify to a man his state in sin, and
under the curse, it is through the spirit of bondage that it does so testify,
this being the office of Gods spirit, to teach us to know the things bestowed
on us, 1 Cor. 2.12. to work in us not faith only, but spiritual discerning
of those things which are wrought in us, and look toward us believing.

The conscience does testify this, partly through faith believing it, partly
through discerning the faith, love, obedience, which are by Gods spirit brought
forth in us, 1 John 4.^6. We have known and believed the love the Father
bears us. I know whom I have trusted, and that he is able to keep my
salvation committed to him unto that day, 2. Tim. 1.9. Faith may receive what
the Word does testify, but there is a word testifying thus much, that my
particular person beholding the Son, and believing on him, shall have
eternal life, and be raised up at the last day; Ioh 6.^0.
that there is no condemnation to me being in Christ; that he who has begun
his good work, is faithful, is constant, and will finish it also; that Christ
is made of God, not only an author, but a finisher of my faith, not only a
iustifier of me, but a perfect redeemer; that I being justified and called,
shall also be glorified: Neither could John with the faithful believe Gods
love toward them in particular, if some word did not show it: Neither will the
Papists say that all of them were privileged with singular revelation: For
though no word expressly say thou Thomas believing shall be saved, yet that word
which says, every one believing shall be raised up, that word says, I
believing shall be raised up; Otherwise we might ask what word says, thou
Thomas shall not kill, steal, etc. if the general did not sufficiently
contain every particular person?

Paul did know on whom he had believed; How could we say every one we believe,
if we might not know it? Can we speak that truly whereof we can have no
certainty? Thirdly, when I see one, or trust to any, promising me this or that,
I know I see him and trust to him, rest on him for that he has promised: Shall
I by faith see Christ the Son, and rest on him, and yet know no such thing?
We may know we have some kind of faith, but not that we have the true
lively faith. Ans. S. Paul bids us, to try and prove our selves whether we
have not that faith, by which Christ dwells in our hearts, which is the faith
of such as are accepted with God, 2 Cor. 13.5.6. Now to bid me make search and
examination for that which cannot be found out, were ridiculous. Our love to
God and our brethren, by which we know our selves translated from death to
life, we may know also. St. John makes it a sign of our being translated;
Ergo, it may be known. Signs manifesting other things, must themselves be
more manifest. Secondly, he that may know he has true, faith, may know a
priori, that he has love also: for love is in true faith as the fruit in the
root, from which it springs: We love God when now we have found that he
loves us first. Now by faith we perceive God to bear us love, and be
reconciled, for God does offer his love to me believing. Again, if I love
men, I know my love to them, yea, and in what degree I bear them love: Shall I
love God to the denying of my earthly profit, yea my life often, and not be
able to know that I love him? Were this true, when Christ asked Peter, Love
thou me, he should have answered, Lord, thou know we cannot tell truly
whether we love thee. Again, St. John says, By this we know that we love
him, if we keep his commandments: If any say we know that we have a natural
love, but we are not sure that we have this Christian love. Again, many
Christians think they have true love, yea Peter himself was deceived in his
love. Ans. The love of a mere natural man to God, is as like Christian love,
as an apple is like an oyster; and therefore we pass by it. Christians are
either enlightened only, and not sanctified, or sanctified also with their
enlightening: The former may think themselves to have love, not having it; but
because a man dreaming, or running upon some mistake, may be deceived, shall
this prejudice, but that a man waking may judge truly of this or that which is
before him? A man that has no charity, thinks himself to have it; therefore
one that has it, may not judge infallibly that he has it? Now for those that
have it as Peter, they may be deceived, not in judging simply of the thing, but
of the measure of that which is circumstantiall in their spiritual life, not
in that which is substantial. Peter was not deceived in thinking that he had
faith and love, but in presuming above his measure. Thirdly, we may know our
works, which are fruits growing from the tree of grace in our hearts. S. John
makes them signs which do evidently declare love, ergo, they are manifest.
He who knows when he does sin and swerue from obeying God, he may know
how far he obeys God; they who do spiritually obey God, either they know
it, or their consciences are not privy to that they do, cannot bear witness
and judge of that they do; but this is false. Paul's conscience did testify to
him, that he did walk in simplicity, according to the Grace of God. True it
is, that for the outside, the works of unsanctified men are like to the works
of the sanctified, but they are without the life and spirit which is in the
work of a true believer, to which he is no less privy, then to the external
work which comes from him. To conclude; they who have the testimony of a
good conscience, may know that they obey God sincerely: But Christians may have
the testimony of good consciences. Beside that, the spirit does teach our
consciences to bear witness of the grief and joy we have, and so by
consequent of all we do according to good. Now the conscience as through
faith so discerning these things, does testify to us from these our salvation,
which he has promised, and God will not forget to finish what he begins.
Should a King promise to erect some College, and give liberal maintenance to
Students in it, we are certain by a humane faith, that he will do such a
thing, though it be not begun; but when now the foundations were in laying,
then we should not only believe his purpose, but in part know it by that we
saw executed, and by that we saw in execution, we would assure our selves the
thing should be finished. But here it will be objected that though knowing
these things we might come to see our selves in present state of grace, yet we
cannot be sure of our salvation, unless we could know that our faith, love,
and obedience, should persevere to the end. To this I answer, that the
Scripture could not say that he that belieueth has an everlasting life, that
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, did it not take our faith
and the fruits of it to be such, from which we should never fall, through the
power of God; and this the conscience comes to know by faith in God,
conceived through such promises as these; I will make you walk in my
commandments; I will put my fear in you that you shall not depart; I have
begun my work, and I will perfect it in you; I am author and finisher of thy
faith; it is my will thou should have eternal life, and be raised up at the
last day. Now though the conscience does testify this our present being in
favor, and our future salvation; yet it does not this in every state of a
belieuer. For first there is a state in which faith is a smoking week,
desiring that it could believe, rather then getting up to feel it self
believe. Again, though faith be not troubled, but does quietly stay on Christ,
and taste God good in letting them find peace with him, yet such is the
infancy of spiritual understanding in Christians now first converted, that
they do not return into themselves, and judge of that they do, and of the
great consequence which follows from that which they do. Hence it is that
they will tell you they find God good to them, and go on cheerfully in
duties for the present, but they come not to behold the stability of their
salvation for time to come. There is a state in which faith is exercised with
temptation, from unbelief or otherwise, by which opposition the soul is kept
from attaining this certainty, being encountered with doubtful appearances,
which it cannot well answer and clear for the present. There is a state wherein
faith is now grown up, and either has out-wrestled, or otherwise is exempted
from knowing such temptation; and the faithful in this state do persuade
themselves, that Gods mercy, and truth, and power shall carry them through unto
salvation. Look in 1 Pet. 5. v. 11. The God of Grace, who has through Christ
called you unto eternal glory, when you have a little suffered, he perfect
you, stablish you, strengthen you, ground you sure.

Lastly, when now our consciences are come to testify through faith and
experience, this happy estate, we are subject by neglecting means, by falling
into some more grievous sin, by secret desertions ere-while to lose for a
time this comfortable persuasion, the spirit not speaking in us by his light as
heretofore, and our consciences and faith so hurt and wounded, that the actions
of them are troubled, depraved, as we see the like befall the natural reason
and senses. We see through melancholy what reason comes to imagine, how the
eye thinks it sees things yellow and read, when they are nothing so; the
taste things bitter, when they are sweet; so the sight of faith and conscience,
when nothing but sin, guilt, wrath, angry desertion ouer-lay it, it seems
to see every thing, for the time, of like color to those things wherewith it
is possessed. These things I thought good to set down, that we might conceive
the nature of this point more fully. One thing is to be answered which seems
to me of greatest moment, namely, that this doctrine does leave no place for
fear, but breeds presumption; but this is utterly denied: for the grace and
mercy of God believed, breeds love of God, and consequently true fear, which
is opposed to senseless stupidity and carnal presumption, though it casts
out fear, which proceeds from unbelief.

Secondly, such who may be certain of salvation by faith, they may be secure,
if they did not as well stand in this grace by faith, as first enter into it;
but this we teach with the Scripture, and ergo our doctrine does show that
those who see this Grace, have still need to look to Christ the author and
finisher of it, that they may so stand in it unto the end.

Thirdly, it is false that such as are sure of salvation have no cause to
fear, unless no other evils but final damnation need to be feared; but while
the soul is subject to bring upon it Gods temporary wrath, sicknesses
spiritual, hellish anguish to the sense of it, there is still left cause
enough to fear.



even hence we are not to be discouraged, seeing it may be little, and yet a
true earnest of that fullness to be given us.



Until the redemption purchased, etc.] Whence first observe, that the spirit
abides with us as a pledge confirming us til our redemption, our full
redemption. First, that it abides. Secondly, as an earnest or pledge. Isa. 59.
v. 50. God promised that his word and spirit should never depart from that
blessed seed, and all those who should be borne after a sort of him: and Romans
8. the spirit of Christ is said to dwell in us who are Christ's: Yea, so that it
shall at length quicken our mortal bodies: the seed of God is said to abide in
those who are borne of God that they cannot sin; but I will not prosecute
this here, which I have done elsewhere. It abides a pledge, confirming that
full redemption: for eu^n souls now perfected have the sanctifying gra^^^ for
substance, which here they had, though their faith and hope be changed into
sight and quiet expectation, and by that executed in their spirits, they do
expect the consummation of glory, both in body and soul. But it may be said;
Does the spirit leave us at the time of our full redemption? No, but though it
dwells with us, yet it cease to be a pledge of further matter; even as the
money given a man in earnest bideth with him when he has the whole sum
paid, but it is no longer an earnest of further money to be received.

Saul, whom it never sanctified, yet it shall never depart quite from them whom
it has in truth sanctified, but they shall like David then have it praying in
them, that is, teaching them to pray, when they think themselves most deuoid
of it.

We are the Sons of God, but it appears not what we shall be; we believe
life everlasting, we do not see it, yet we by nature lie in darkness of
sin and misery, God will have our light return successively, even as the
light of the Sun, which shines from one degree to another, till it come to
full strength, Prou. 4. There is a double redemption, the one which we have by
faith, verse. 7. the other which we shall have in that great day; This
redemption belongs immediately and directly to man, to the creature
mediately; for in that great day the creature shall be changed from the vanity
and bondage of corruption to which it is subject. As the first Adams
treasonable defection, deserved to be punished both in his person, and in all
the things which appertained to him; so it was meet that the second Adams
obedience should not only restore man, but the creature also which might any
way be a fit appurtinance to him in his state of glory. But one may ask what
use there shall be of these visible heavens, of the earth, when man's mansion is
prepared in those third heavens? In these things we are not to be curious: What
if God will have them stand as a monument of his former power, wisdom,
goodness, toward us in our pilgrimage? Again, we see it is a state belonging
to earthly Princes, to have houses here or there, which sometime through all
their reigns they do not once visit. What respects man, ye may find in
that I have written on the 13. verse.

holy spirit of Christ, thou have received thy consolation, nothing does abide
thee but weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, an eternal night, a
reckoning which will be more bitter, then the pleasures of sin have seemed
sweet.

verse. 2. The fact; which has two parts. 1. His thanksgiving. 2. His prayer.
Concerning the latter; first we have set down that he prayed. 2. What he
prayed, in the end of the 16. verse, and so downward. In setting down the
occasion: 1. We are to consider the Apostle his hearing of them. 2. What he
heard of them, which was, first their Faith, et down with the object of it, in
the Lord Jesus: secondly, their Love, which is amplified from the object, to
Saints, from the quantity and extention of it, to all Saints. The verse has
nothing difficult to be explaned.

Paul gets heeresay say how the matter of grace went amongst them; that
Ministers must labor to know how grace goes forward in those with whom they
are to deal. This was the news that Paul asked after; his desire was to be
certified of this before all other things. Thus Epaphras told him of the
Colossians estate; thus he learned out the famous faith of the Romans; thus
he learned by some of the house of Cloe, the state of the Corinthians:
Natural men will inquire and hearken after the health of their friends, how
they are in body and estate: Thus this spiritual man, he was still learning how
the souls of the Churches prospered; It behooves shepherds to know their
flock. Natural parents if they have children at the university, they will
inquire how they go on in learning and virtue: Thus this Father of souls
absent from them, could do no other but be delighted to learn how they did
grow toward God.

Acts 17. news fitter for men that follow the Exchange, then for those who are
Fathers in Churches. Again, this does show how wide they are, who think it
curiosity in Ministers, if they look into the manners more nearly of their
people: What need they busy themselves, and thrust their oar into other men's
boats? For a private person without any calling to be inquisitiue, and to pry
into others, that I may know how to come over them, cast something in their
teeth, if they a little displease me, is great wickedness; but for a Minister,
to the end he may discharge his duty more fruitfully, it is no other thing
then God requires for the good of people. Some who would hear nothing but
omnia been, would have Ministers quiet men, stop their ears with wax, and
never wear their eyes about them, but when they have a book in their hand;
but alas, they consider not that Ministers are shepherds, watchmen,
ouer-seers, etc. and that this is the key which opens them the way into all
the parts of their duty, viz. the knowledge of their states to whom they are
to speak.

Ephesians was occupied, even about the Lord Jesus Christ. We read sometime
the faith of Christ, sometime the faith on Christ, sometime faith in Christ, as
here; they note much the same thing, but that the first may be conceived, as
propounding Christ the simple object of faith: The second phrase notes Christ
the object, together with our adhering to him: The third, notes Christ the
object, our innering in him, together with the word prounded, as the way and
mean by which we come beleeuingly to inhere in him; for that distinction which
some make, following some of the ancient, is not by Scripture warrantable,
which does indifferently appropriate these two phrases to the Saints, to
believe in the Lord Jesus, and to believe on him. Christ is every where made
the thing which faith imbraceth to salvation; So God loved the world, that he
gave his Son, whom he has set forth a propitiatory sacrifice, through faith
on his blood: Through faith on him we hope to be saved as others; not that
Christ is the only object, about which faith is exercised; but it is the
principal of all others, and the sole object about which it is occupied, that
it may obtain righteousness and life everlasting; otherwise, as faith is
called justifying faith, not that to justify is the sole adaequate or full act
of it; but because to justify to life, is the most eminent act of all others
(...) i^ is said to apprehend Christ, not that Christ is the adaequate, the
full object of faith, as color is of sight; but because it is the most eminent
of all other. In like sort, Love is called the love of God, not that the same
love wherewith we love God, does not love men also; the contrary whereof, see,
1 John 4.12. but because God is the most excellent object, about which it is
conversant. Further to open this point. 2. Things must be showed; first what
faith in Christ, or on Christ is; secondly, why faith as it justifies and
saves, is carried to Christ only: Faith on Christ, is not only to know, and
with the eye of the mind to see that God sent his Son, that he was borne and
suffered for mankind; but to rest or stay on Christ, that we may find mercy
in him, to the forgiveness of our sins; to stay on him; for faith is not only
a knowledge in the mind, but a godly affection in the will, which does go to,
embrace, rest upon Christ, or the grace offered in Christ, Ergo, receiving is
made an effect of faith, John 1.12. and going to Christ, he that believes,
he that comes to me, John 6. and the nature of faith is described by words
which signify to roll our selves on God, to lean on him, as one would stay
himself upon a staff; for the word of promise, not only containing truth but
offering some good thing unto us, we cannot fully receive it with
understanding, but the will also must move toward it.

Again, let me be distressed for a hundred pound, or so, if one promise me I
shall have it of him, I do not only know and think, and persuade my self he
says true; but I trust to him, rest on him, and write as we say, on that he
has spoken. Besides, if there were no particular confidence in a Christians
faith, the reprobate might have all that is in his belief. Now though our
faith believe many other things, yet it justifies and reconcileth us to God,
as it does see and rest upon Christ: As a malefactor, though his hand will
receive innumerable matters, yet as it receives the Kings pardon only, it
does acquit him and restore him to liberty; so it is with us condemned ones, as
our faith receives Gods pardon in Christ, it does obtain remission of sin,
and set us free from fear of damnation. The matter objected, may easily be
answered, if these two things be remembered. First, that when the words of
knowledge do together by connotation imply affection, much more do the words
of belief, and Ergo, where I find to believe that Christ is the Son of God,
I must conceive this belief, to contain confidence in the Son. Secondly, to
remember that when faith of any temporary promise is said to be accounted for
righteousness, it is because it does in believing the thing temporal,
apprehend him in whom all the promises are yea, and Amen; who is at least the
removed object of a justifying faith in every thing it apprehends. Thus
Abraham believing the promise of seed of Isaac, did apprehend that blessed
seed which had from the beginning been promised, and saw his day, which the
Apostle does testify, Gal. 3. Neither did he look at the power of God, but to
sustain his belief of a seed before promised, against the temptations
wherewith God did exercise him; that we have a particular word, and in effect
to believe on Christ unto forgiveness of our sins, I have showed above.



Paul, 1 Timothy makes love to flow from faith unfeigned; and Gal. 5. he says,
that faith works by love, not as fire makes hot by heat, which is a formal
property inherent in it; but as the soul does this or that by the hand, which
is an externe instrument conjoined unto it: for love is not any essential
cause which does give being to faith, but it is a grace without the being of
faith, though joined unto, by which, as an instrument, faith works.





faith; but this is but a consequent of Lombards error, who did hold love to
be no other thing then the holy Ghost himself.

viz. the Saints, yea, all Saints. True Christian love, next to God and our
own souls, makes us affect those who are sanctified, who express the
virtues in their life of our heavenly Father, by whom we are called from
darkness to light. Hence it is that the Saints, the household of faith, the
brethren, are commended as persons whom we must affect and do good to, before
all other: Thus our God loves, Psalm 147.10 not the strength of horse nor
legs of man, but those that fear him, are his delight: Thus Christ loved, Who
is my father and mother? etc. he that hears and obeys: Thus Paul and David
loved; We love none according to the flesh; all my delight is in the Saints, in
them who excel in virtue. Every creature loves and likes to be with those
who are united with it in communication of the same nature; So sanctified
Christians cannot but love and like to be most with them who have received the
like divine nature, in which themselves are partaker; yea, it loves all
Saints; not such who have other parts pleasing and contentfull, but it loves
every one in whom it can see the image of God shining: for it cannot be but
that love which truly loves one person as he is holy, shou d love every one,
so far forth as he is holy; yea, though we are to esteem and inwardly affect
men, as we see them holy, we are not bound to show them the outward effects of
our love answerably. The nearer persons are tied to us in natural and civil
bonds, the more must our providence be for them, and love showed them in
outward things, unless their foolish lewdness dispriuiledge them this way;
for then the proverb takes place, A wise servant may be preferred before a
foolish child.



thou take pleasure to converse by her; and can thou having the life of God,
delight thy self in such who are dead in their sins and trespasses?

I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers.

Now he comes unto the fact, which stands of thanksgiving and prayer; his
prayer being first generally mentioned, then more particularly declared to the
end.

verse, mark three things. 1. That on hearsay of their faith and love, he is
thankful to God. 2. That he does pray for them. 3. The manner that he does
it, without ceasing. Observe from the first, the graces of God in others must
move Christians, especially Ministers, to be thankful to God; Paul does it
every where, look the beginnings of his Epistles; yea Christians did no less
for Paul, Gal. 1. vlt. they did glorify God in him. The nature of envy makes
a man like those who have sore eyes, they are grieved at the spiritual good of
others, as the soar eye is to see this corporal light: An example we have of
it in Cain to Abel: but love does congratulate, rejoices with thankfulness to
see truth of knowledge, of grace, of holy practice, 1 Cor. 13. Besides, the
third commandment does bind us to give honor to God, by praising him for
these his works of grace in others. If a Schoolmasters bring a rude untoward
Boy to behavior and forwardness in learning, we much commend him, that he
has wrought so far on so undisposed a subject: But how much more is he to
be magnified who does work such alterations in sinners, dead in their sins
and trespasses?

Secondly, the nature of joy is to enlarge the the heart to thankfulness: Now
true Christians, especially Ministers, can see nothing which does more glad
them then men walking as the truth is, in Christ. 3. John, verse 4. I have no
joy like to this, when I see my children walk in the truth.





If you stand steadfast, says Paul, 1 These. 3.8. whereas if they lie in grievous
state, it does so grieve their Ministers, that nothing can refresh them, but
their amendment, by whom they are grieved, 2 Cor. 2. Natural parents are so
affected, that while their children stand well with them, they think there is
no cross; but if a cross befall them here, they can find no content for the
time in any thing beside.

ergo make promises, that our prayers shall be available, as well for others,
as for our selves, Iam. 5. But Ministers by office are Gods remembrancers, and
must offer incense as well as teach, Deuteronomy. 33. which our Savior likewise did
before his offering up himself, John. 17. The bounty of God does encourage us
unto it, who has said, that they who have any thing in truth, shall have more;
it is but as a pledge of his further grace to be bestowed.

Again, the Devil is busy, seeking to bring them back who now are taken
from under his power: we see by woeful experience, how many are turned back
from good beginnings; we have need therefore to support them, and when
Ministers should have parent-like affections, how can they but seek their
good? How many wishes will natural Parents have about their natural children?

Wherefore let us all seek to God each for other: What will we do for him
whom we will not lend a word to for his good? Especially, let us Ministers say
as Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. God forbid I should cease to pray for you, and so sin
against God.

Luke 11. of him that went to borrow three loaves, and Luke 10. of the widow
following the unrighteous Judge. There are many conditions in prayer, in regard
of the persons to whom we pray; persons and things for which we pray; persons
who pray; finally in regard of the prayer it self; as that it should be
humble, fervent, and continual. God does prevent us with some things, he does
give us speedily othersome, but there are others again, for which he will have
us follow him with continuance, before he be^o^^ them; for should we still no
sooner ask then receive, Prayer were rather a matter of experience, then of
faith: he does, ergo see it fit thus to exercise our sanctity, faith, patience;
thus to try whether our request come from unsettled humor, or from poverty of
spirit, and thirsting desire. Thus he does prepare us to receive the things we
ask in greater measure; for the wider the soul is enlarged in desire, the
more abundantly God means to fill it in his time. Again, by this mean he
does make us possess his blessings with more delight, and carfulness, then
otherwise we would: not to mention that we in our first seeking things are
unfit often to receive them.

But hear two questions shall be briefly answered. First; whether it be sin,
always to cease from asking this or that. Secondly; whether all ceasing to go
on in Prayer, does make our former Prayer fruitless.

Paul was taught to see the use of that buffeting remaining with him: Thus when
Jeremy learned that God had not to give, nor would not be entreated for the
prosperity of the people, he did desist, though he did well before in asking
of it: for that revealed will, and not the secret is that to which our actions
must be conformed: Though here is something extraordinary in these examples, yet
God does often let his children see that they did affect things not good for
them, by leading them into fuller knowledge of their own hearts, and by
letting them find the fruit of some outward disturbances, the remoouall
whereof they sought earnestly, so that they correct themselves, and no more
seek to be free from that which they find so necessary by good experience:
this desisting is holy and good. Thirdly, there is a desisting ouertaking Gods
children, when God does lock up their hearts that they have not power to seek
the good of some persons or Churches as heretofore they have done, which when
it is not contracted or caused by some sinful indisposition in the party, but
from a secret of God not moving the spirit in this kind, that so way may be
made for his judgments, it is such a ceasing as cannot be condemned for sin,
though it may always be bewailed, as a secret desertion, which does foretell
heavy things ensuing. Fourthly, We cease to pray as before for things,
without sin, when now God has, as it were, spoken within our spirits, that
we shall have the thing we have asked, and bid our souls after a sort return
to rest: For from whence we find God thus good unto us, we follow not with our
accustomed feruency, though execution delayed, may cause us sometime seek the
seasonable performance of it, the soul is more in joyful expectance, less
then before in careful petition. The ceasing therefore forbidden is, when
before we receive things, we do through unbelief and impatience, give over
either for a time, which befalls Gods children, or altogether.

David his saying, that Saul would at length catch him, and flying out of
unbelief to Gath, did not make his former faith in vain; so intermission for
a brunt, while the fit of unbelief, deiection of mind, or impatiencie
lasts, does not hinder, but that we shall receive the things we have
unfeignedly desired.

The Use is to stir us up that we faint not in following God: We love not
to be troubled, and even molested with instancy, but no thing is more
acceptable to God then this violence, which will not let him go till he has
blessed us. I, but I seek and see nothing of my prayers: the harvest comes
not so soon as the seed is sown; though thou feel not the things thou
ask, nor remoueall of those evils whereof thou complainest, yet thou do
not know what evil this course of following God does keep from thee, nor what
good in other kinds he does thee for it. Again, thou shall reap in time if
thou utterly faint not, for that which is denied us in life, is often by Gods
most wise disposition granted in the end of it. But to come to the prayer it
self.

to Christ; Secondly, from the attribute of his glory, God of Christ, the
Father of glory. 2. The benefits for which he prays; touching which, three
things are to be observed. First, the benefits to be bestowed, which are
propounded in this verse, and further declared in the beginning of the verse
following. Secondly, the way by which they should be given them, in the end of
this verse; Wisdom and revelation through the knowledge, or acknowledging of
Christ. Thirdly, the end, that thus they might know both the things kept from
them in the heaven, and that which had been bestowed upon them.

To open the words of this verse; the Father of glory, does note out God as
glorious by nature in himself, and the fountain of that glorious life which
is communicated with any of his creatures. The spirit of Wisdom, is put for
the gift of wisdom, which is bestowed on us; and it is called the spirit of
wisdom, both because the spirit does beget it in us, as also because the same
spirit is with it to sustain it, and perfect it. Thirdly, because the wisdom
it self is of a spiritual nature, moving them in whom it is, to work after
the direction of it.

The spirit of Revelation.] Revelation is extraordinary, or ordinary, and it is
nothing but the gift of illumination, or that light which the spirit causes to
shine about our minds, by which as a mean, things spiritual are made manifest
to the eye of our understanding, as by the light of the Sun things bodily are
made manifest to the eye of our body; and the spirit causes this, and
continues it, even as the Sun does cause and continue this natural light
which we have with us all the day long.

Knowledge of Christ, is put for that affectionate knowing and acknowledging of
him. The sum is. Since I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, I go to him,
who is the God of this Christ, on whom you have believed, who is the Father
glorious himself by nature, and the author of all that glory which is
communicated with his children, entreating him to give unto you that spiritual
gift of wisdom, whereby you may be able to understand, and that light of his
spirit, which does make manifest the things spiritual, which are to be
understood of you; and this I wish you, through the further knowing and
acknowledging of that Christ, in whom you have believed: More plainly, I
desire for you, that God would give you eyes of your understanding so
enlightened, that you may know him.

Paul still set God before him, as having that in him for which he prays; The
God of peace sanctify you throughout, 1 These. 5. Subdue those lusts which
fight against your souls. So seeking the consummation, or perfecting of the
believing Hebrews, he does set God before him, as who had from the lowest
humiliation, brought the head of them to glory, Heb. 13. Thus the Church, Act.
4. seeking courage, and that wonders might be wrought, they set God before
them, as the God of power, who had made heaven, earth, sea, etc.



Luke 2. fine. What does the want of wisdom in children, which we may not
observe in our selves? They see not things, together with the end they work
unto; and hence it is, they count such things good, as to their senses seem so
for the present; They think those love them, who cocker them, and that those
do not love them who reprove them, or hold them in, more then they are
willing: Thus we think it happiness to have that contenteth us, to be free
from that which is grievous to flesh or spirit. We think God loves while he
smiles on us, and that he does not love us, when he does frown on us, and make
us drink a wormwood draught day by day. Again, children through want of
wisdom, are unwilling to suffer that should do them good, backward to that
would do them good another day, for a matter of present pleasure, will part
with things of no small profit: Are not the best of us unwilling to come under
Gods yoke, though there is no other way to find rest to our souls? are we
not most backward to renew our faith, repentance, to endeavor further the
work of mortification? Do we not for a little pleasure of sinful lusts,
part with our peace; yea, the health of our spirits too often? Thirdly,
children for want of wisdom, forget the beatings past, when now the smart is
over, and fall to the same faults which have made them smart heretofore; and is
it not so with us? How soon is the grief of sin escaped us forgotten? how
soon do we stumble at the same stone, returning to sin in the same kind
wherein we have formerly offended? Finally, as children and youth, through want
of wisdom, speak and do many things full of folly, so we let fall in word
and deed, alas how many things, in which the work and direction of true
wisdom is wanting?

selves, and see our folly, that we may be made wise. The more we grow in
years, the more we see what lack of civil wisdom we had in youth; So it
should be here, the auncienter we grow in Christianity, the more we should
discern the folly in us, and want of wisdom, which is from above.

Let us not be dismayed, who are conscious of lack this way: things are not
begun and perfected at once; wisdom must get up from one degree to another in
us.

ergo, compared with fire, which has not only heat reso^uing numbnesse, and
making stark joints active; but it has light grateful to the eye of the
body: So the spirit has both love which warmeth our frozen hearts and
affections, and also this light of revelation which delights the eye of the
understanding, and manifests to the view of it, things that are heavenly.



Son does work it in us: It is not pregnancie of natural wit, can make us
wise to salvation, nor ripeness of years, not many wise; and grace we see is
not common to gray hayres; It is a spirit, and the inspiration of the almighty,
that gives understanding, Job 32.8. Nevertheless, we do attain ripeness of
wisdom by means, even as we see in natural men, they come to a more full
measure of civil wisdom, not without means making way to it: How does a
foolish youth grow a wise man? First one day teaches another; he as his days
increase gets knowledge of many things; Secondly, He tastes as we say,
many waters; and finds by experience the good in some things, the evil in
other-some; Thirdly, he grows by some means weaned from his youthful lusts,
which like a back-bias did draw after themselves the understanding: thus when
his knowledge is increased, when he has gathered experience and sowed his
wild oats, as we say, he grows a wise staide person: In the same manner,
when God has brought us on to know, to prove things by our own experience,
and to be weaned from the lusts of sin, which are the true folly bound in our
hearts, then he causes wisdom in far greater measure to enter into us. We
see then to whom we must give all thanks for what wisdom soever we have
received, and to whom we must fly for the increasing of it, even to God, who
gives it plentifully and vpbraideth us not. See what is written verse 8.

through the knowledge, or acknowledging of Christ. Observe, to grow up in the
acknowledging of Christ, is the way to attain the more full measure of the
spirit in every kind. 2 Pet. 1. Every thing is said to be given us, which
respects life or godliness, through the knowledge or acknowledging of
Christ. When we first come to know him as the truth is in him, we partake
according to our measure in his spirit; when we grow to behold him as in a
mirror or glass, more clearly, we are turned into the same glorious Image by
the spirit of the Lord more and more; when we shall see him and know him
evidently and fully, we shall be as he is, 1 John 3. The more we know him, the
more fully he dwells in us, the more we enjoy the influence of his spirit;
even as this bodily Sun, the nearer it approaches to us, the more we have
the light and heat of it.



given, in the former verse, and are Ergo, put in the same case with the
former, viz. the spirit of wisdom and revelation, and that without any
particle which should couple them, because they are brought in by way of
explanation, in which case the copulative is often omitted, as, verse 7. 1 Pet.
1. verse 3.4. For, to have eyes of understanding enlightened, differs not from
that former, to have given the spirit of wisdom and revelation, but that it
does more roundly and fully note the same benefit, and that without any
insinuation of the cause, viz. that spirit from which it comes; this then
thus comes. When I ask for you a spirit of wisdom and revelation, my
meaning is, to speak more roundly and nakedly, I ask, that he would give you
eyes of understanding enlightened: The end follows; First propounded, then
more clearly expounded: Propounded in those words; That you may know the hope
of his calling. For clearing whereof, you must know, that hope is put for
things hoped for, not for the grace of hope, which springs from faith: Thus
we say, he is a man of fair hopes, we mean goodly Lands, which in likelihood
will befall him. Now this hope is described from an antecedent benefit the
ground of it, viz. Gods calling them by the Gospel: and whereas there is an
outward significatiue effectual calling, wherewith many are called, who are
not separated from others; this is meant of that inward operative and
effectual calling, which the Scripture does describe with additions, viz. that
it is a calling according to purpose, a high and heavenly calling, a holy
calling. The end of the verse expounds this hope, by this, that it is an
inheritance, described from the glory, yea, the riches or abundance of glory
adjoined unto it, and from the persons who are the subject of it, the Saints.

The sum of the verse. When I ask for you a spirit of wisdom and
revelation, my meaning is, I ask at God that he would give you the eyes of
your understanding enlightened, that ye may be able to know those good things
which you have in hope, having been called of God to the obtaining of them,
through the ministry of the Gospel; even to know what is the abundant glory
of that his inheritance, which he will of grace distribute amongst the Saints:
for the particle we read (in) the Saints, does signify in or amongst, and is
so read, Acts 26.18.

Mark 8.24. we see, but confusedly and indistinctly. Now this inlightning
comprehends these four things, which we have still need to seek to God for.

into it, yea, some filme or skin growing over it: So an eye of the soul,
which now sees, may have mists of ignorance, clouds of lusts, veyles of
hardness of heart, all hindering this faculty of seeing, in the action of it:
We must therefore look to God for the eye salve, and the help of his hand in
these regards.





Prou. 20.12. God is said to make the eye seeing, and the ear hearing, that
is, not only to create them, but govern and apply them to that they do;
otherwise we might be like to Hagar, not seeing that which was before our eyes.
Even as it is not the eye so much that sees, as the soul in and by the eye,
whence it is, that if the mind be abstracted in some serious thought, men see
not that which is before them; So it is not so much the eye of our
understanding, as the spirit of Christ, which is the soul of all the body
mysticke, which does cause sight in us. We do every thing but secondarily and
instrumentally, it being God who gives principally both to will and to do;
and all these are here to be conceived, because the end which the Apostle does
aim at, cannot be attained without them.





Observe secondly from hence, that he does pray that they might know their
hope, the matter of their inheritance; that even true believers know not at
first, in any measure, those hopes which are kept in heaven for them: Naturally
we know nothing of the hope to come; When God does now regenerate to these
hopes, we do know them in some measure, but nothing as we ought, and may come
to know them, if we be not wanting to our selves: Even as earthly heirs in
their minority, through want of earthly wisdom, they know in general that
they have inheritances, and where they lie, but they do not particularly and
exactly know the several Lordships which belong to them, the worth of them,
etc. yet the nearer they come to age, the more they wind out such particulars;
so it is with us: We do at first know things very confusedly, and the nearer
we grow to our salvation, the more we come into the understanding of these
things.

Now the reason why these hopes are not so known, is partly in the excellency
of them, and the glorious light which is in them; if the Law has his wonders
in it, Psalm. 119.18. what a wonderful thing is this, which is the vpshot of
all, the Gospel? Again, the weak sight we see of yonglings in christianity,
is not proportioned and fitted as yet, to so high an object as this is. Bring
the light of a candle near to the natural babe, and it cannot endure to look
up against it. Thirdly, even as children are so taken up with their childish
commonwealth, that they cannot bend themselves to the more serious
consideration of more important matters; so believers are a great while so
carnally affected, that they cannot set themselves to purpose about this
contemplation. Fourthly and lastly, as Heirs in earth want not crafty
companions about them, who will keep them from knowing the worth of things
which belong to them, so the Devil does labor nothing more then to keep us
hood-winked this way.



Absolons and Adoniahs hopes: sometime they are gotten, but prove no blessing,
it being with them as it was with the Quails which were given Israel; 2 These.
2. Tit. 2. 1 Pet. 1.
But what if they be gotten and possessed? in death they perish, for death
diuorceth a man from all these earthly things he enjoys. But these hopes will
not let us be ashamed, these are good and blessed hopes, yea, life it self, a
living hope; till we know this hope we have in heaven, we cannot be heavenly
minded; for where a man has hope, thither his soul will look out, and be
more there then where he is bodily present: This is it which makes us purge
our selves. Men that hope to stand before Princes, will refine their
behauiours, and furnish themselves with all kind of complement: This knowledge
of our hope is the spur of action; men work cheerfully when they know an
ample reward abides them: It is a ground of all patience, sweet in hope,
makes that which is sower for the present, go down more sweetly.

Hope of his calling,] That there is no grounded hope, but only of such things
as God has called us to obtain: We could not have hope of salvation, Gods
kingdom, life eternal, had not God called us hereunto, 1 These. 1.12. He has
called us to his kingdom and glory. 2 These. 2.14. He has called us to obtain
life, ergo, Col. 1. it is said, that the Colossians now had a hope laid up in
heaven, when they had heard the word of truth, even the Gospel of salvation.
As no man can hope to stand before a mortal Prince in place of dignity and
office, till the King do call him thereunto; so none can groundedly look to
be in glorious condition in Gods kingdom, till he have called him hereunto.
Here briefly it shall not be amiss to consider what this calling is. 2. How
we may know that we are effectually called.

For the first, this calling is such a revealing of his grace within our hearts
or minds, as does make us come to him and follow him for the obtaining of life
through Christ: As a man has both a foul and a body, so this call stands
not only in the outward word, which sounds in the ear, but that inward
revelation which God makes within the heart; I will speak to their hearts.
The heart of Lydea was opened. Secondly, I say it makes us come and follow God
for obtaining life and glory, to which he has called us: for God speaks
inwardly and outwardly to many, who are not effectually called, because God
does not intend to convert them and make them follow; but this calling,
according to his purpose, is never without effect: It is with us in this call,
as it was with those Christ called to follow him, Mat. 4.20. he did so reveal
his will within them, that they presently obeyed.

Paul, Acts 9. Lord what will thou I should do? Acts 26. I was not disobedient
to the heavenly vision. When God speaks within us, his grace or calls us to
this or that, according to his effectual purpose; our hearts eccho-wise
resound, Thou art our God. Hosea 2. vlt. Speak Lord, thy servant hears.

Secondly, it is seen by this, that it makes us separate and stand out from
the world, If a governor call out a servant to do this or that, he is
separated from all his fellow servants, and set a part for a business wherein
they intermeddle not; so it is here; From what time God does call us unto
salvation, he does set us a part from all others, to be as it were the first
fruits of his creatures, Iam. 1.18. even from profane persons, civil men,
without religion, religious men in show, without power, Heretics,
Schismatickes, his calling does make us come out from these, so that we cannot
be of one heart with them, nor they with us.

Thirdly, by the spirit received; When God called Saul, he did put into him
another spirit, agreeing to the condition whereto he was called: and men called
to places of dignity, presently there is a spring of spirits in them,
answering that estate; so God also, when he calls to his kingdom and glory,
he does give them a spirit which does aspire and make them endeavor to that
prise of this their high calling in Christ.

Lastly, by thankfulness to God, in regard of this favor, that he has
called us out of our natural estate of misery, to such hope in Christ.



the Lord will certainly set us in possession of that to which he has called
us in Christ; as Gods call and anointing David to the kingdom, did sustain
him against all incounters; So must it do with us, who are called and
anointed in spiritual manner, to that heavenly kingdom; He who has called
you to his eternal kingdom, after ye have suffered a while, strengthen you,
stablish you, 1 Pet. 5.

(riches,) set before any thing, does signify the abundant measure of that to
which it is annexed: Oh the riches of the wisdom of God! Romans 11. The state
we are in, is much different from that which is reserved for us, Esaias 64. The
things are wonderful which God will work for his, 2 Cor. 4. We are passing
through this veil of misery, to an excellent eternal weight of glory. An
Heir apparent in his mothers womb, or childe-hood, has nothing, to the glory
which he comes to have when now he swayeth the scepter, and sits in the
throne of his majesty; so it is with us; that we have now, is nothing to the
glory of that which shall in the last time be manifested. The inheritance of a
kingdom has annexed to it great glory; as for example; Salomons kingdom,
when the Queen of Sheba did observe it, her spirit failed through
astonishment; What was his kingdom, in comparison of this eternal one, to
which we are called? He had royal apparel wherewith he was clothed; and to
see a King in his richest roabes, as say in his Parliament roabes, is a sight
somewhat glorious; nevertheless, the Lilly (as our Savior speaks) does
exceed all that Art can set them out with: but the Saints shall shine as the
Sun, and be clothed as it were with light it self, as was shown in Christ
his transfiguration. He had a sumptuous palace, but not to be compared with
those eternal mansions in the third heavens, prepared for us: He was
accompanied with the Peers of his kingdom; but we shall have the presence of
God himself, Christ, the spirit, Angels. Finally, he had a most magnificent
provision for his table, but not like the Manna, not like that true tree of
life, which we shall feed of in the Paradise of our God.



The poor children of God must hence comfort themselves, that God has thus
exalted them, and not envy worldly men their full estates in this present
world: Heirs are glad to borrow trifles with Servants sometime, while they are
under government: so God does hold his Children low for a while, in this
present life. Again, why should we envy them, seeing they have but a state of
life granted them in this most remote and utmost part of our inheritance? Will
a Child think much a Parent should give a pension for life out of this or
that, while he has greater things far left him, yea, the inheritance of that
also, out of which an anuity as it were for a time is granted to some other?
Thus it is our Father deals with us, while he does both reserve for us
greater things, and also bequeath the everlasting inheritance of heaven and
earth to us, in which wicked ones have but a state of life, till we shall come
to our full age in Christ: See more of this, verse 11.

viz. the Saints; such as are not only cleansed from the guilt of dead works,
but by the spirit of Christ renewed to true holiness, and brought to walk in
all holy Conversation, 2 Pet. 3.11. 1 These. 4.7. For we are called in Christ,
both to outward and inward sanctification. See Acts 26.18. So likewise, Coloss.
1. To receive inheritance with the Saints: Made us fit to have inheritance with
the Saints in light. If you ask this question, why we shall have the
inheritance of life? it is answered, the grace of God in Christ is the cause
why we obtain it. If you ask who shall have it, see Psalm. 24.3.4. He whose
hands are innocent, whose heart is pure, who looks not to vanity. This
inheritance as the glory of it decays not, no, does not so much as wither; so
it is for state and undefiled inheritance, no unclean thing may enter, Revel.
21. Again, to whom do men leave inheritances, is it not to Children or
Allies, who have the same flesh and blood as it were with them! So God will not
give his inheritance but to those who have the divine nature, and are made holy
in some likeness as he is holy, though not in like perfection.



complexion, age, company, most incline us unto, to seek to God to make us
grow up in holiness and his fear; he that does these things is happy; he that
does not these things is but a painted sheath, and whited sepulcher, he has
nothing but a powerless show, which the Lord abhors.

And what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power.

The second thing to be known, is the power of God; not that absolute power by
which he can do what ever is possible, but that power joined with his will,
which was put forth for finishing the work of faith in them who now believed:
This power is described by the quantity, in those words, the exceeding
greatness of his power; from the persons whom it respects, toward us who
now believe; the principal cause of their believing being next adjoined, viz.
the efficacy of his mighty power, which was put forth in raising Christ from
the dead. The sum. That you may not only know the hope of glory laid up for
you, but also more fully see the excellent great power which has wrought, does
work, and will work out for us who believe, all that salvation and glory we
hope for in the heavens, for us I say, who are brought to believe by the
selfsame effectual working of Gods almighty power, which he wrought or
showed, while he raised Christ from the dead.

work wonderfully, passing by us and we see him not, changing his place and we
observe him not, Job. 9.11. It is as nothing which we know of his ways, Job
26. vlt. And as he reuealeth his wisdom in afflicting us once, twice, and we
hear him not; so he does again and again manifest his power, but we are not
able to conceive it: This is part of that light to which is no access, the eye
of our minds especially, at first weak, not able to look against it.

power while it works in midst of manifold weaknesses, is not to outward
appearance so powerful as it is in it self.

Abraham believed Gods power, as a supporter of him against such temptation as
said that the thing formerly promised in Isaac could not take effect; and so
Paul, 2 Timothy 1. I know whom I have believed, who is able to keep that I have
trusted him with, to that day. How could we ever believe that hope touching the
resurrection and glorification of our bodies, did we not believe this; as a
revealed property in God promising, viz. that he is of such power as can
subdue all things to it self. Again, the want of the knowledge of this power
of God makes many who otherwise use all good means think, O such a thing
will never be helped with them.

But it may be asked, by what means we may come to know this power better.
Ans. First, by seeking to God, who has promised we shall know him to the least
of us, praying him to open our eyes, that we may somewhat more see this his
glory. Secondly, by looking into that double mirror of his word and of his
works, through which the light of this his glorious power reflecteth to our
sight. Thirdly, by observing the experience we have our selves of this power,
both working in us, and for us.

regard whereof it is ready to work further: What a power is that which does
so change them, and make them Lambs of Lions, chaste and sober of silthy and
intemperate, humble of proud, a thing more hard then for a Cammell to pass by
the eye of a needle? Secondly, to continue and promote the work of
sanctification in us, who are carnal, sold under sin; a thing no less
strange, then to keep in fire, and make it burn higher and higher on the
water. Thirdly, the quickening of us with heavenly desires and holy affections,
is no small power; neither is it less wonderful, then to see Iron and Lead
flying upward, were it no less frequently wrought then the other. Again, what
a power is it, that inwardly confirms and strengthens us, that we are not
overcome; yea, that does chain up these spirits of darkness, that they are
not able disturbantly to assail us? these things are daily done in us. Now
this power is ready to work in times to come, our deliverance from all evils,
the further supply of graces which we yet find our selves to want, the further
healing of our sinful natures, the full redemption of our souls and bodies.

all; Dumb spirits, deaf spirits, crooked spirits, who do so hold the joints
of our hearts downwards, that they cannot look up; Leprosies, Lunacies, etc.
that is done in us, which answers them all: but that his power should be
still toward us, to work further things in our behalf, this is matter of much
rejoicing. Fear not thou whose heart believes; in fire and water he is with
thee, to deliver thee: if thou do see no footesteps or prints of some graces
in thy self, which thou much desire; that power is with thee which calls
and makes the things which are not, stand forth as if they were: If thou have
sinful inclinations of never such strength and continuance, that power is with
thee which can dry up these issues, and heal infirmities of longest
continuance.

Paul was full of of this: we are not able to think a thought, when we were of
no strength: As one must have conscience of his folly, before he can be made
wise; so before we can have the power of God work in us, and strengthen us, we
must be conscious of our own vtterinability to every good word and work.
Thirdly, we must submit our selves to all kind of weak estates and
conditions, into which God shall lead us; for God does commonly manifest his
power in infirmities, as Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 12. Lastly, we must glorify
this power, in that it does or has wrought for us; this is Paul's practice
every where: I can do every thing, Christ strengthening me; I strive, through
the power that works in me mightily, Coloss. 1. vlt.

Col. 2.12. Faith is said to be of Gods effectual working, and, 2 Cor. 4.6.
God who brought light out of darkness, is said to have shined into our
hearts, and to have enlightened us with the knowledge of Gods glory, in the face
of Christ: For the creating of us anew in Christ, is a greater work, then
giving us our natural being in Adam, and ergo, may not be ascribed to any
power which is not almighty: Which will yet be more apparent, if we consider
what state we are in of our selves, when he brings us to believe; We are
dead, Ephesians 2. Now to raise from natural death, is an effect proper to
that power almighty. Secondly, if we consider what powers do hold us captive,
even those strong ones, whom none but the strongest can ouer-master. Thirdly,
if we consider to what estate God does lift us up by believing, even to such an
estate, as is without comparison, more excellent then that we received: Now to
bring us from death, under which so mighty ones hold us captive, to such a life
so vnutterably glorious, must needs be the working of a power almighty. But
here three things are for further understanding of this point, to be
considered. First, in what stands that effectual help, See for the
finishing of this Doctrine, that which follows hereafter, at this mark in the
Margent,
by which we come unto God. Secondly, in what order it does make us come to
God, whether immediately, or by some preparation going before. Thirdly, whether
it leave the will at liberty, actually to resist it, yea or no.

ergo, he does stretch out the arm of his power, to effect this in them.
Nevertheless, to speak more fully; though this be the principal, it is not
the sole cause in conversion: We may then consider three causes. First, the
principal, viz. this power. Secondly, the isntrumental, both of the word
sounding in our ears, and that inward illumination and inspiration wrought
within us, by which as an internal word, God speaks in the mind. Thirdly, a
formal cause, a free gracious disposition or habit of faith, by which the will
is inclined agreeably to the disposition of it, to come unto God: so that the
more full answer to this question, viz. what is all that effectual help
whereby I come to God, is this: It is a mixed thing standing partly of that
almighty power of his, put forth for my good, partly of that word outward and
inward, by and with which his power is put forth; partly in that spirit of
faith, and supernatural life, which his almighty power through his word
brings forth in my soul. What was that help whereby Christ made Lazarus
able to come to him, out of the grave of natural death? The principal was
Christ's power almighty; the isntrumental, his voice; the formal cause
immediately helping to it, or working it, was the spirit of natural life,
which the power of Christ by his word, restored to this dead corpse, which now
was fallen. And thus you have the effectual help or grace, by which we come
actually to convert; for that Gods power put forth to work good for us, is a
help given from his free grace, or his free favor toward us cannot be
doubted, when the Scripture every where makes him our helper, from his mere
grace. If we lend our arm or hand to help one, being no way tied to it, it is
a help given from our free favor. That his call, inward or outward, and habit
of grace, wrought in us, may be fitly called grace effectually helpful to the
acts brought forth by them none denies, though all will not have habit
needful to our first couersion. And this first thing is well to be noted; for
from hence we may gather in what stands the efficacy of Grace, effectual
to conversion, viz. In Gods effectual power, put forth to execute his
intention which he has of converting some actually before othersome; it does
not stand in any congruity or temperature of Grace, correspondent to our
Nature; for this does argue that there is inwardly an incorrupted, a
connaturall disposition to receive grace. This makes the effect of conversion
to depend as much on the active capacity of the will, as on the Grace of God;
nay more: for it makes the Grace of God work it morally and externally, and
the will of man from a power within it self, which does more inwardly enter
the effect of conversion then the other, as he who persuades me to give an
alms, is not the cause of it so essentially as I am, who out of my pleasure
give it upon his first motion.

Manasses was humbled in great misery, he sought the Lord; Thus by conviction
of sin they were pricked in heart, and said, what shall we do to be saved?
and then speedily received the Gospel believing: sometime by extraordinary
terrors, rising from external accidents, yea, hidden natural causes; thus the
Iaylor was prepared, and Paul himself by an extraordinary vision was brought
to great astonishment: sometime by restraining, giving common gifts which make
men for degree nearer, that is, in their kind and state not so much removed, as
others in the same state and kind with them: Thus Christ said to the young
man, who was rich and unconverted, that he was near the kingdom: Nay, God
may by giving a man up to height of some sin, or sins, prepare one to
Conversion, as Paul and Manasses, the one left to persecuting, the other to
those horrible outrages; that look as Physicians by ripening diseases make way
to heal them; for sick matter is never more easily brought away, then when it
in ripenes and quantity exceeds. Concerning this matter, for our better
understanding, let these conclusions be remembered.

First, that these preparations are not absolutely necessary, for we see that
God does give to infants sanctifying grace, in whom none of these preparatiue
operations can take place.

Secondly, we do not find that they have been always used, and therefore this
matter is to be understood as a thing most commonly falling forth, not
otherwise: How was Matthew called? even at his custom, he followed presently,
not as Judas, but as a true convert to Christ; so in Lydia: for life and death
being such contraries as have no third thing between them, which does partake
in them both, the one may be changed into the other, without any thing
preparatory.

All things which God does prepare to the receiving of Grace, and coming to
him, they make not of themselves any thing to the introducing of Grace further
then God intends this effect by them: Fear of hell, conscience of sin,
never such afflictions, moral parts, and all gifts which may be without
sanctifying Grace and true belief, many have all these, who yet never turn
unfeignedly to God. When the sickness is now grown greater in quantity, this
absolutely taken, makes the patient further of health. But the Physician may
intend this, because he does see his medicine will the better work on it, and
educe it, when it is grown to such ripeness. If a man fall out of a dead
Palsy into a light Frenzy, frenzy of it self is no paration to health,
but to the physician who can work on him more fitly in this taking then in the
other, it may be a preparatiue to health: Thus to be like an aguish man on his
good days, or like to some mad men in the time of their intermissions, is in
it self as far from state of health, as otherwise; but yet the Physician may
use such a state, as a way to health, choosing rather to deal with him in this
taking, then in the fit. Thus it is not the height of sin; it is not fear
of hell, though contrary to the Apoplexy of deep security; it is not a moral
course, which comes not from true sanctification, that of themselves can make
nearer the state of grace, but only in regard of God, who does intend to turn
them hereunto. Thus if God stir up a man to live according to the light of
nature virtuously, it may be in regard of Gods intention, a preparing him to
receive further Grace of effectual vocation; but all a man can do from
natural strength, of it self profits nothing.

Fourthly, that where effectual raising up the heart to faith begins, there
Gods preparatiue works take an end: for as that which prepares the ground for
seed, now cease when the seed is to be sown; so all these things, which as
they are preparations do nothing but fit the soil of the heart for Gods
effectual calling to be given, they have their end when this immortal seed
comes to be sown in us: beside that, a man is no sooner called, then he
receives a spirit of faith, by which he is, as by a new heavenly form, in
some manner quickened.

Fifthly, The Papists doctrine is here very defective, and false in part;
Defective, for they speak nothing of preparatory courses, by which God does
bring us to come unto him by faith, but of such like operations by which God
prepares us, and we prepare our selves to be justified: Now we prepare our
selves to justification, when the spirit does without any habit of Grace, lift
us up to supernatural acts of belief, hope in God, love, sorrow for sin,
and fear of hell; in which many things are erroneous; as first, that they make
us lifted up to acts of this nature without habits, which is to make a blind
man see without giving his eye new sight; to make us bring good fruits while
yet we are not made good trees; to make us be justified by our faith, come into
grace by our faith, stand in grace by another. The school not understanding
the doctrine of preparation, consider of it philosophically, as a thing
between Nature and Grace. Now between the things we work out of natural
strength, and those we do meritoriously from Grace now infused into us, and
inherent in us, they devise a third kind of works, which neither come from
any power of ours merely, nor yet from any supernatural Grace inherent in us;
and these are works done by eternal aid of the spirit; whereas all the
Scripture make that faith which is required to justification, to be the same
with that which works by love; to be a faith fully formed, coming from a
spirit of faith, that is, an habitual guilt wrought by the spirit; to be a
faith believing on God, which the best pillars of popish learning confess to
be an act of formed faith. Beside, they err when they make fear of hell a
thing immediately disposing to justification, when the work of this is to move
us to seek out of our selves after some word of faith, and this is cast forth
proportionably as faith and love enters: It may prepare to our conversion, not
to our justification immediately. Again, when they make love actual to go
before justification, whereas love does follow; For we love because we have
found love first; now no love is felt from God till remission of sin and
acceptance to life in some measure are felt and perceived: should God lift us
up to love him before his justification, he should by making us love him,
prepare us to be loved of him; She loves much, because much is forgiven her.
In a word, setting aside the act of a true faith, coming from an inward gift
of the spirit, inclining the heart to believe, there is no other thing
preparing to justification immediately; where this is, there together in time,
justification is received; there the spirit of love and hope are not wanting;
He who belieueth, is passed from death to life: Nevertheless, we do long
after, not feel our selves justified, nor perceive Grace to dwell in us so
fully and manifestly as we desire. Hence it is that sometimes we are in
fear, sometime believe, hope, sometime we are in repentant sorrow, and by
these we are led both to the manifest perceiving of that which is wrought in
us, and to the more full measure of Peace and Grace, which we much desire.



set down, viz. That God does bring us to belief by the effectual working of
no less power, then that which raised Christ from the dead.

That which makes Gods aid and Grace put under the power of man, and not man's
will to be under it, that is a Pelagian heresy: But to say that
notwithstanding Gods helping Grace, man may resist, is to put Grace in man's
power, not to put man's will under the power of Grace. For the first part of the
reason we may see it; Aug. de haeresibus. 88.
for Pelagius taken up, because he yielded nothing to Grace as he ought,
granted that he did not prefer it before the will, but put it under the
power of it. That which makes man able to frustrate Gods counsel touching his
conversion is not to be granted: But power to resist all God can work, makes
him have power to frustrate Gods counsel: Indeed it would be thus in power of
the creature to make God perjured in the things he has sworn. To the second
part of this reason some may happily answer, that this power makes not man
able to resist God because he does in his counsel decree nothing, but so that
he does see this power is ready infallibly to perform it: But this is nothing
that God does so will and decree that he knows the creature will not resist
him; for this does infer no more, but that God shall not miss of any thing he
wills: it does not prove he may not, but it abhors from Christian ears
to say there is any power which may possibly make God a liar, as well as to
say, God shall not be found true in that he has spoken.

That which is wrought in the will, not from any natural power of suffering,
but from the obedience in which it is to Gods almighty power, that the will
has no power to decline:

But the work of conversion to God is wrought in it, from the obedience in
which it stands to Gods almighty power.

To understand it, things have a power of suffering, from their natures,
inclining them to suffer this or that, as wax is naturally inclined to melt
with heat; or a power which cannot but obey some agent working on them from
without; thus a piece of wood may be made into an image. Now in regard of God,
all things are in such a state of obedience, that they will come to any thing
he will bring them: A stone by this power may be made into a man, even a Son
of Abraham. Now that which things suffer from this power, whereby they obey
agents working on them from without, that they cannot avoid: for every thing so
far as it is come in obedience to another, so far it cannot resist. Now, that
conversion is wrought in the will, as it stands only in obedience to Gods
power, is plain; for it has no natural inclination to suffer any thing, both
for the being and manner of it, above nature: For there is no natural power in
an eye now blind, to receive sight, which is not in it self, but only in
regard of the manner in which it is to be restored, a thing supernatural: How
much less in the eye of the mind, now become darkness, to receive the light
of saving knowledge, which is every way a thing both for matter and manner
supernatural unto it? Beside, if there were a power natural to receive
conversion, then there must be some agent in nature able to work conversion;
for there is not found a power natural of suffering in any thing, but that we
see also in nature a correspondent power working upon it: Wherefore the will,
not from any natural inclination it has, suffering this work of conversion,
must needs suffer it as it is in obedience to Gods almighty power. Now to say
it may resist, as it is in obedience, is to speak things contradictory: The
Scripture doubts not to say in effect, that Gods will of predestinating,
calling, and showing mercy to salvation, is irresistable; Who has resisted his
will? Romans 9. and if it were needful, it might be showed, especially out of
Tertullian and Austin, that Gods grace has the free will under the power of it.
Out of Austin, That God by his omnipotent power inclines wills whether he
wills, having them more in his power then we our selves; that his grace does
help us indeclinabiliter and inseparabiliter; which is all one, as if he should
say, it does help our infirmity, not only infallibly, but irresistably; That
it is not rejected of any hard heart, because it is given to take away that
hardness of heart which might resist. The will of the creature is the
necessity of things on Gods decree, necessity follows, this labor is
superfluous to my intent. But it may be objected, that this does take away the
liberty of the will in converting, if the will he not able to do otherwise;
for that which the will does, not having power to do otherwise, in that it is
not free. I answer with limitation, that which does not having power to do
otherwise from change in second causes compelling it so to do, in that it is
not free: Otherwise, when this necessity comes from Gods almighty will by
himself determining of it; for this does so sweetly determine the creature,
that the power of it is no way changed or diminished; as the omnipotent will of
God does so in the falling out a contingent thing, as the not breaking Christ's
bones, as that the nature of contigencie in regard of all secondary causes, is
no whit impaired. I answer secondly, that this opinion does ground the
freedom of will falsely; for the freedom of will, as it is a faculty voluntary
or elective, does not require this indifferency of exercising the act of it
diverse ways, for the constituting of it. To clear this the more, consider
that liberty may seem to spring from three roots.

First, from this indetermined indifferency, whereby the will is free, nothing
determining it otherwise, as well to move it self to a diverse thing, as to
that whereto it moves. Secondly, In regard of the flexibility which is in the
habitual inclination, which might bend as easily to another diverse thing, or
to suspend, as to move whereto it moves.

Secondly, in regard of flexibility, which is in the habitual inclination,
which might bend as easily to another diverse thing, as to that whereto it
goes. Thirdly, In regard of the judgment, which does go before the act of
it, judging freely of it, as a thing which it is able to do, or not to do, or
if it come into comparison with other, judging of it as a thing to be done
before other, and so moving to it. Now this I take to be the true root of
liberty, whence actions are said free, because we out of a free judgment move
about them for to do a thing or speak thing, thus or thus, out of judgment
thinking it free, or determining one, when it considers a diverse thing which
it might do also, this makes the action free; yea so free, that it is done
with election: For though the thing I work be necessary in regard of Gods will
which has determined it, yet I work it freely, while I do it out of such a
practical judgment going before. As a man, though he speak things for the
matter of them never so true, yet while he speaks out of a judgment that the
thing is false, he speaks falsely, though the thing spoken be otherwise
true; neither does God maintain a false judgment in man, because his judgment
of other things free to him, is with this limitation in him for ought he
knows, and to do any thing from my will with judgment, that it is possible
for me in some sort if I would to do otherwise, is enough to free working. To
place the freedom of the judgment in judging, the mean we use indifferent,
such as may be used and not used, and yet the end attained, which I like not,
because Christians cannot esteem and account of faith, repentance, as means
indifferent, when nevertheless they believe and repeat freely.

Now though the will was in creation, and is in Christians inclinable to
contraries, yet I do not think liberty to stand in this native flexibility,
which is inclinable hither or thither, much less in liberty of exercising
power to or fro, as being herein by no power predetermined. For first, the will
seems to be said free in regard of something no way bound but the
indifferency of the inclination in exercise are bound by Gods decree, so that
nothing can be done; but what he has determined.

Secondly, in men distracted in reason, the inherent flexibility of will is not
altered, the exercise is no more physically predetermined then before, and yet
they work not with liberty. Thirdly, were liberty in the flexibility, then the
more our wills were flexible to things opposite, the more perfect were our
liberty. Whereas we see Christians, the more they grow in grace, the more
their inclinablenesse to sin is diminished; and when they have attained
perfection this flexiblenesse to evil shall be totally removed.

The first opinion must be more nearly scanned. Many will have liberty nothing
but such a freedom, whereby God has made his creature every way undetermined,
so that when he does any thing, he has full power to do the contrary, or to
suspend. Now though this freedom might be defended against whatsoever is in
any second cause, viz. in this sense, that he is free to exercise his power as
well another way as this he moves, for any thing that any creature can do in
heaven or earth, nay, for ought he can see in himself also; But to hold this
absolute in regard of God himself is a most prodigious conceit. Liberty in
this sense, accidentality, contingency, necessity, these are modalities
agreeing to effects, as effects are in order to their second causes, not to God
who most certainly, necessarily, and wisely has willed them. Fire burns not
necessarily to Gods power, who can at pleasure change it, or restrain the
second act of it; nothing falls out accidentally, as referred to him whose
wise intention reaches to every thing: So for contigency also, and liberty in
the sense before named. But it shall not be amiss to show some reasons why
this is to be rejected.

1. That which exempteth a creature from being as an instrument under the power
of God, is absurd; but this does so. It is proved thus, that which gives the
creature a power to do as he will, when God has done all he may unto him,
that does make him no instrument subject to Gods power: But this opinion does
say, when God has done all he may, the creature is free to do as he will. Some
are not ashamed to say that God does not work out of his omnipotency in the
free will of the creature; othersome are not ashamed to say, that even in
works of grace, the will is not properly termed an isntrumental cause under
God: some deny the assumption and proof of it, because this power came from
God, and is sustained by him, and he can do what he will in man. But to this I
say, a thing communicated and maintained to me by another, is that it is: So
this power though given and maintained by God, yet is a power exempt so far,
that he may not by any power overrule it; and though God can do what he
will, yet it is one thing to be able to do a thing by persuasion, which I may
refuse, another thing to do it by power which I cannot refuse: This latter by
this opinion is denied.

That which takes away Gods infallible prescience, is not to be granted, but
to say the will of man is free no way determined does so: for knowledge is
measured by the thing to be known, and therefore when the thing to be known is
every way uncertain, every where indetermined, knowledge cannot be certain. The
second part of the reason is denied; for they say, that God by a kind of
knowledge does see what a free creature now made will do, if he be set in such
and such circumstances. I Answer, he does indeed, because he does see how his
power would determine him in such and such occasions; but to make him see
determination, when neither himself has any way determined him, when the
circumstances do it not, when nothing in the free Creature does determine him,
is to make him see that which neither is in the Creature, nor in himself to be
seen. But let us ask this question; How does God see his Creature would work
thus or thus, set in such and such circumstances, because it is the nature of
it to do so? whence does be see it is the nature of it so to be carried? Here
nothing can be answered, but because his wisdom and power the one has
advised, the other has effectually wrought that he should do so, or that to
which he concurreth. 2. In a word, God cannot know this or that man's conversion
certainly from eternity, but he must see it certain in himself, willing it,
or in the causes of it, or he must see it from all eternity, as being present
to himself out of the causes, the former ways, this opinion denies; the
latter is true, for God cannot see these things as existing forth of the causes
from eternity to eternity, but they must have coeternall existence with him:
he has in eternity all things thus present, because Gods indivisible
eternity ^s before, in, and after all measure of time; but that he has them
present from eternity to eternity, is an vnconceiueab^e absurdity.

James says, We may not say, I will go to such a place, unless God will.
This doctrine makes God say, I will work Conversion, Faith, Repentance, in
such a Person, if he will.

thing, should it have failed in any circumstance of due obedience, God
himself should have been guilty: Now Christ had liberty and such as is the
ground not only of working that which is good and praiseworthy, but that
which was in some sort meritorious. But we will not prosecute these points,
which we shall have occasion in other places to unfold; The truth is, that
whether we look at the preparation God makes in some, or at the faith it
self, both are wonderful. What a power is that which shakes the hearts of
the most secure sinners? It is a strong wind which shakes an Oak, but to
bring a heart like the Iaylors to tremble, is a matter arguing a mighty power.
Again, to give a hand or eye to one blind and maimed were much; but the hand
and eye of faith, great is the powerby which they are restored.





Lastly, we may see hence how many persons deceive themselves, who think Faith
but a matter of opinion, or an imagination of things absent; who though they
never felt the power of God working in them, yet persuade themselves they have
faith as well as another; as if it were so slight a thing, which no less
power must work in us, then that which raised Christ from the dead: But having
thus dispatched the point for common edification, I will for the benefit of
such who are more ripe in understanding set down my judgment in these three
points following. ( See Page 353.) at this mark

viz. 1. His resurrection, which is set down from the state in which he was
raised; raising him from the dead. 2. The exaltation of Christ, which his power
wrought; in which we are to mark; first, the kingly power he has received,
and set him at his right hand; secondly, the place where he has it, in the
heavens above; these visible heavens, for so the word signifies: Thirdly, the
persons; which are of two sorts; first, those who are subject to this power, as
it is more generally taken, verse 21. and part of the 22; Secondly, those who
are subject to his power, as it is in special manner tempered with grace, in
the words following; A head to his Church: the more particular consideration
whereof shall not here be unfolded. First, to clear this 20.21. verses, and
part of the 22. ver. First, we must mark, that this which is a word, having
reference to the efficacy or effectual working of mighty power, which was
wrought in Christ when he was now raised from the dead: As if it were not his
mind to express a power like it for kind, so much as the selfsame singular
working which was wrought in our head. Secondly, to understand the raising him
from the dead; we must know what death here is meant, and in what it stands:
Secondly, what this resurrection includes. Christ suffered a supernatural
death, so far as might stand with the unity of his manhood, to the person of
God the Son, and with the holiness of his nature; but here is only meant
that natural death, which did a time hold his humane nature in the state of
it. This death stood, first, in separation of natural soul and body.
Secondly, in the loss of all that sensitive life which the soul caused, and
continued in the body. Thirdly, in the ceasing of all actions, wrought by the
body as an instrument. Fourthly, in a desire to be again conjoined unto the
body. Now then the resurrection is such a work of Gods power, which brought
again the soul of Christ to that body from which it had been a little
divorced, which caused it bring forth life in that body, work by it as an
instrument joined with it; finally, joy in the conjunction of it.

For better clearing Christ's exaltation; we must first know what it is, to be
set at Gods right hand. Secondly, what heavens are here to be understood.
Thirdly, what persons are meant by principalities, powers. Fourthly, what is
meant by putting all things under his feet.

For the first, Saint Paul and Peter, do conster it by reigning immediately
over every creature, till the mystery of our redemption shall be finished, 1
Cor. 15.25. compared with, Psalm. 110.1. So to the Hebrews, he does conster it,
the setting Christ in the throne of majesty, Heb. 1.3.8.1. Heb. 12.2. At the
right hand of the throne of God. Saint Peter makes it all one, with making him
Christ and Lord; See, Acts 2.35.36 Chapter 5.31. But for the further opening, we
must know. 1. What it is that is given. 2. To whom, and in what respect. 3. How
long it is to continue. To the first, I answer, that it is not the might of
divine sovereignty over the creature; for this does so follow the nature of
God, that it is necessary with every person that has this nature: This the
Son could not relinqu^sh, this he cannot be taken unto, as which does
necessarily agree to him, as God blessed for ever. What is it then? A right of
executing immediately and in a manner appropriate to this person, the
sovereign dominion of God, over every creature: So that though the Father and
Spirit have a right and sovereignty over the creature, yet they do not
immediately execute this in such sort as the Son does; which makes Christ
say, John 5.22 The Father judges none, but has given all judgment unto the
Son. The Son by voluntary dispensation sent by the Father, did empty
himself and lay aside not only the right of having dominion over every
creature, but of exercising and showing it forth in that nature he had assumed:
The Father by voluntary dispensation does resign to the Son the immediate
execution of all power over every creature, till the time that all things be
subdued under him; This right, the one relinquished in the time of his
humiliation, the other does answerably leave a time for the exaltation of his
Son.

The Lord said to my Lord, that is, to David's seed, as he was David's Lord,
according as Christ expounds it by his question; now David's seed was not
David's Lord, as man, but as God. That it is given him as man, is plain,
because it is given him now ascended into heaven with his humane nature.
Again, that power is given to Christ as man, which is to be executed by him as
man; but this kingdom is executed by Christ, so that his manhood does concur
as an instrument working with his Godhead in the administration of it, John
5.27. He has given him power to execute judgment, in as much as he is Son
of man.

Psalm. 110. and Paul construing it, 1 Cor. 15.24.25. namely, that Christ shall
give up this kingdom, and cease to sit at the right hand of God in this manner
in which now he does; for then he shall no longer by his manhood execute
government, neither shall he in manner appropriate his person, but together
with the Father and Spirit like as they, so shall he jointly with them rule,
and be all in all for ever.

The second point for clearing the Text is, what heavens are here understood;
those which Paul calls the third heaven, above the air, clouds, and starrie
firmament. Faith does believe a place above these, though Philosophy know it
not.

To the third I answer, the persons over whom Christ is advanced, are first
described more particularly, but yet obscurely. Secondly, more generally and
plainly. The particular enumeration in these words; Principalities, powers,
mights, dominations: The more full and plain opening of them in the words
following; Every name, that is, every creature howsoever named, whether in this
world, or whether belonging to the world to come.

But it is a question, who are meant by the former words. Ans. They are
commonly understood of Angels; but I take the first two to be names of
excellency, found in this present world. First, Principalities and powers, when
they are put for Angelical natures, they are not termed so simply, but with an
addition of the place; as, Ephesians. 3.10. Ephesians. 6.12. but these words put for
humane excellencies, we read them simply, without any thing added. Tit. 3.1.
Be subject to principalities and powers. Again, I think this distribution of
power, named in this world and in that to come, respects something in this
enumeration forenamed: the former, these two first named; the latter, the
couple following: Thus I think also, Col. 1.16. that enumeration of Thrones,
Diminions, Principalities, Powers; the first two respect things invisible, or
things in heaven; the latter two, things on earth; for he seems to illustrate
each part of the distribution, by the particulars there inferred: Wherefore we
may thus conceive of them.

Principalities, signify those in principal authority.

Powers, all secondarie powers sent from them, as Peter speaks.

By mights, I understand Angels, putting forth might in some miraculous effects
of mercy, or judgment; such as the Angel, who did smite so many hundred
thousands in a night; the Angel which did the miraculous cure at the Poole,
John 5.

By Dominations I understand such Angels, whose ministry God uses in the
government of kingdoms and provinces; for that God does use their ministry,
this may be gathered both out of Daniel and Ecclesiastes.

The putting all things under his feet, notes nothing but that subjection in
which every thing is to Christ, God only excepted; read, Heb. 2.8. These
things for opening the difficulties incident. The sum is. I wish your eyes
opened, that you may know the power of God toward you who believe, through the
working of the power which was wrought in Christ, when God did raise him from
the lowest degree of his humiliation, even the state of the dead, and did
crown him with dignity, and kingly glory in the heavens, not only giving him
prerogative before both Principalities and powers, such as we see in earth;
yea, before Mights and Dominations, such as belong to the world to come; but
giving him power over these and all creatures, so as he has them under his
foot.

verse. Which he wrought in Christ. That the self same power put forth, in
raising Christ our head, is that singular power which raises us: For look as
the almighty power put forth to make Adam a living spirit, was it which does
quicken us in our order, and bring us to have life and being from him: Thus the
selfsame power which raised Christ to be a second Adam and quickening spirit to
all who belong to him, that is the power which does cause us in our time
receive this supernatural life and being from him: For Christ his
resurrection, is both the resurrection of our souls and bodies, in as much as
he is raised up, that he may be a fountain and root of all supernatural
life; his humane nature concurring with the divine, as an instrument with that
which is more principal in the producing of it.

Adam a fountain of generation unto us all? And shall we be able to resist the
almighty power of God, raising Christ as a fountain and root of spiritual
regeneration to all who are his?

flesh; but this is far more worthy of praise, that even in raising, he
should think on us, and appoint us to receive a resurrection of soul and body
from him, in due time and order.





In that Christ is raised; Observe, that God never so leaves his, but he
sends salvation in due time: He left his people in Egypt, in Babylon, till
their civil state was dead and desperate; yet he delivered them. If he let
them be swallowed, like Jonas, yet he will bring them forth again, and show
them his salvation, for God is a helper at time of need; such is his
faithfulness, in the Mountain he will provide, as Abraham said. Thus though
he let his own Son dye, yet he saves him in due season, and delivers him:
There is a double salvation, one protecting and keeping evil that it shall not
come near us, nor once ceaze on us; the other is a keeping of us so as it
shall not hold us, much less prevail over us: Thus God saved his Christ,
accordingly as he asked, when he prayed with strong cries to him that was able
to save him from death, Heb. 5.9.

Job is to be looked at, how much more this standard of examples? What though
thou seem never so forsaken? what though many evils have seized on thee?
fear not, stand still, salvation will shine forth in due season. God is not
like the devil and wicked ones, when they have brought one into the briars,
there they leave him, on plain field: I have sinned in betraying innocent
blood: What is that to us, say they? but God will be with us in the evils, yea
in seven, to save and deliver us.

forerunners of their greatest glory; as the pride of wicked ones does lacky as
it were, and run by their ensuing ruin: so on the contrary, the sufferings
and humiliations of Gods children have ensuing answerable glory: He was made
less then a worm, and here is taken to the right hand above Angels. It
pleases God not only to exalt his humbled children, but in the degree also,
in which he had abased them, according to that prayer of Moses. Psalm. 90.
Comfort us, according to the years wherein we have suffered affliction: as on
the contrary, we see him bringing judgment on the wicked, in the same measure
in which they have taken in the delights of sin, Revel 18.7. True it is, that
this does not hold universally in this present life, but when the definitive
sentence is now to be given them according to works, shall every soul receive
proportioned recompense.

Iam. 1.10. Rejoice in afflictions, for when you are tried, you shall receive
the crown of victory; The wickeds woe is sown in their rejoicing, but in our
darkness light is sown for the righteous. Let us think God does but prove
us, that he may in his due time do us good: Blood and sweat go before
victory, and before the earthly harvest is gotten in: We must not then think
it strange, if God cause us to know sufferings, before he show us those
glorious mercies which he has prepared for us.

more particularly: First, when it is said, he is set at Gods right hand,
above principalities; Observe, that our Savior Christ as man, is taken to have
prerogative before every other creature: For first, this phrase notes the
preeminence of him, as next to God himself; that look as one made a King,
has a dignity above all persons named in his kingdom, Dukes, Earls, Lords:
So our Savior, taken up as man to this kingly dignity, must needs be in
preeminence before them. It is no wonder, for this nature essentially
appertains to that person which made all these things; see, Revel. 4. vlt.
The Lamb is worthy to receive glory, for by him all things were made, for him
they were created.

Secondly, every person, the nearer he is in conjunction of blood to an earthly
King, the more he has prerogative before others, more disioyned: so this
created nature, seeing it is made one personally with God, by how much it is
more nearly united, by so much it is fit that it should have prerogative
before others. Not to speak that being heir of all things, it is meet that
he should be before all, who are but parts of his inheritance; and having more
excellent endowments, I mean created gifts then any other, it is meet he
should have the first place before all other.





To me is given all power in heaven and earth, that is power, whereunto every
creature is subject: He speaks of it as done, because it was immediately to
be performed; in which manner he spoke before of his body and blood; This
person as God, receiving by voluntary dispensation this honor from the father,
that he should in an immediate and appropriate manner, execute government over
all the creatures in heaven and earth; the same person as man, participating in
this kingly divine authority, so far that he should instrumentally concur
in executing all that judgment which Christ according to his divine nature did
principally effect. This the Scripture does lay down, as in regard of earthly
powers they are subject; For he is ruler of the kings of the earth, Revel.
1.5. He has this royal state written on his thigh, as it were, King of
Kings, Lord of Lords, Reu. 19.16. That he has power over Angels, is plain,
both by the reverence they do him, and their obedience toward him, Heb. 1.
When he brought his Son into the world, he bad all the Angels should adore
him, every knee boweth to him, the evil Angels yielding sign of subjection,
either deceitfully to wrong end, or by force compelled, though their state is
such, that they cannot do it religiously as the other: That all the Angels are
in obedience to him is plain; the good are sent forth by him to be ministering
spirits for our good: Now he that has power to dispose of and employ them,
has power to take account how that he sets them about is discharged; the
evil Angels are likewise at his disposition, for they could not enter the
Swine without his leave, they are subject to his judgment; When the Saints
shall judge the Angels, what power has Christ himself this way?

sittig at Gods right, hand we see that the meaning of this phrase is not to
be admitted to equality with the divine nature, for this Christ ever had as
God; neither to be admitted into the divine blessedness setledly to enjoy it,
for Christ as God ever had and could not but have, that essential beatitude
and that blessedness which he receives as man is not to have end, which this
sitting at Gods right hand is to have; neither is that filling Christ's humane
nature with supernatural gifts of knowledge, power, etc. the proper thing this
article lays down; for these gifts shall dwell with him for ever; he shall
sit in this manner on the throne of majesty but for a time. Much is the
Lutherans sense to be approved, who make Christ's placing at Gods right hand to
import thus much, that the humane nature of Christ is elevated to this honor,
that it may freely use the divine attributes, omniscience, omnipresence,
omnipotency; so as to become by them omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent no
less properly then the divine, though after a manner far otherwise; the
divine nature being thus of it self by natural necessity; the humane being
thus by union with the divine, by gracious Communication of these unto it, with
liberty to use them for the perfecting of it self: that look as we conceive a
sinner justified or made righteous with Christ's righteousness, not as inherent
subiectiuely in him, but in Christ, yet really communicated with him, so as he
is made righteous with it; thus do they say the humane nature of Christ is
made omnipresent with the omnipresence of the divine nature, not as a thing
subiectiuely inhering in it, but so really communicated with it that it is made
truly omnipresent by it, though the divine attribute never go forth of the
nature of God, in which as the proper subject they grant it immouably
inherent: It shall not be amiss for the instruction of some, a little to open
what I think to be their opinion.

person; that the properties of the divine nature abide immoueably in it, never
going out of it; and that the humane nature when now it has the free liberty
of perfecting it self by use of the divine properties, that the humane nature
then has and holds it finite and proper qualities abiding in it; such like
things as these they religiously affirm with us.

In what then will you say do they differ from us? So far as I can conceive
then, in these three things. 1. Upon the union of these natures they think
such a communication to follow of the divine properties, for example sake
Omnipotency, as that the humane nature is made truly omnipotent, not by any
confusion of properties, nor yet by any bare communion and concourse of it to
the same effect, each nature working that which belongs to it with communion
of the other, for this we grant, but by a real donation, by which the divine
omnipotency, does so become the omnipotency of the humane nature, that it may
work omnipotently with it, no less then the Divine Nature does it self.

2. They say that Christ's humiliation stood in this, that his humane nature did
suspend to usefully these Divine properties communicated with it.

3. That the exaltation or setting Christ at the right hand, is the eleuating
his humane nature to the full and free uses of the divine properties, so that
his humane nature by actual use hereof, is become omniscient, omnipresent: But
as this last is a misinterpreting of this article; so the ground of their error
is, that they suppose a false effect of personal union, namely, such a real
communication, for the union cannot cause the humane nature partake more in the
properties of the divine, then it causes the Divine partake in the properties
of the Humane. Again, if a true real communication did follow of Divine
attributes it must needs be of all, seeing these are the Divine Essence, which
can no way be divided. Beside, in the union of body and soul, which is
personal, the ^ife of the soul is not communicated with the body, but an
effect of it only. Beside, to what end should created gifts serve, when now
more noble properties do enter! Not to mention the infinite perfections cannot
perfect finite natures, no more then reasonable perfections can make perfect
unreasonable creatures.

Finally. This opinion makes the divine properties become instrumentary
faculties, as it were to a finite nature. This by the way.

bring them hither, who will not I should reign over them, that I may stay
them.

Hebr. 2.8. the Apostle himself acknowledges.

Acts 3. Look as Kings are crowned in the chief Cities of their Kingdoms,
and keep their residence in their Palaces near unto them; So it was decent
that our Savior should be crowned in this heavenly Jerusalem, and keep his
residence as it were in his heavenly mansion.

we would long to see them, and make a journey to them.

John 17,

He is ascended and sits in Heaven, Ergo, he is not here, according to the
Angels reasoning, Math. 28.6. He is not here, for he is risen: they did not
know this new Philosophy, that Christ might be risen from that place, and yet
be corporally present in it to.

worlds. Observe, There is a world to come, in which Christ, and those who are
Christ's, shall reign for ever: This world waxes old, the fashion of it
passes, it is called the present evil world; but there is a world to come, in
which all things shall be restored, which God has made subject to his Christ,
as the heir of it, Heb. 1.8. in which we shall be ioynt-heyres with him.
Abraham had a promise, not only of seed, but that he should be heir of this
world, a type whereof the land of Canaan was; even as the first Adam, and all
that came from him had a world, this in which we are, prepared for them: So
the second Adam, and all that are his, have a world also belonging unto them.

Matthew seems to have respect: He that blasphemeth against the spirit, shall
not be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Now follows the special Sovereignty; And has given him a head over all, to
his Church, which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all.

head is used sometime for one who in any kind is before and above other: and
in this large sense, Christ is the head of Angels and all men: Man is the head
of the Woman, Christ of Man, God of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. He is the head of all
principalities and powers; But here it signifies that Christ is so over his
Church, that he is in a more near and communicatiue sort conjoined with it,
as the head is with the body and members, which are annexed and subjected to it.

A head over all.] This may be referred to the Church, as making a comparison
twixt Christ's superiority over his Church, and Angels, in this sense; God gave
Christ that he should be a head principally and above all other things, beside
to his Church: Thus Chapter 6. Above all, put on the shield of Faith; or it may be
referred to him who is given our head in this sense; God gave him to be a head
to us, who is over all things, because the special sovereignty is noted in his
being a head: This word being taken in the strictest acceptance, and because
it affords matter of further consideration, we will take the latter sense; to
his Church. This word Church, sometime notes one congregation of men called
forth of the world, as the Church at Corinth, Cenchraea; sometime it is taken
to signify the multitude of them, who are foreknown of God and appointed to
salvation, for all who are gathethered by Gods effectual calling in heaven and
earth, and who are in their time to be made partakers of his holy and
effectual calling: Thus Heb. 12.28. we find it taken thus here; for, all the
body which does make full and perfect Christ mystically considered, is here to
be understood.

Which is his body.] Not his natural, but mystical body.

The fullness.] That is, which makes him full and complete as he is a head:
for a head without a body is maimed; though otherwise such is his perfection
and fullness, that he fills all in all. The sum is. Though God has set
Christ over every creature, yet he has given him that he should be over his
Church as a head, in a more near and communicatiue power; him I say has he
given to be a head to the whole multitude of belieuers, who is in dignity and
power above every creature. Now as he is a head to the ^niuersity of true
belieuers, so the united mu titude of them are as a body mystical to him,
ma^ing him full and complete so far forth as he is a head; him I say, in
whom dwells all fullness, so that he fills all in all. In the end of the
22. verse, we are to mark first, that Christ is given to be a head to his
Church: secondly, the quality of him given to be our head, or of our head that
is over all. The Church is described from the mutual respect which it stands
in to Christ, as a head, which is his ^ody. Secondly from the effect of it, to
be gathered from those last words, which is the fullness, that is, which makes
full him who fills all in all.

government over any other: This will appear by considering how much nearer
and communicatiue he is to us then to Angels, creatures otherw se most
excellent. First, look as the natural head and members are of the selfsame
special kind for nature, the head stands of skin, flesh, bones, and so
do the members also: thus it is that Christ is one with us, in regard he has
taken the selfsame nature with us, standing as well of that which is outward
and sensitive, as of that which is inward and intellectual: In this he comes
nearer us then Angels; he took not the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham. Hebr. 2.

Secondly, Christ does by his sufferings procure for us all blessings
spiritual and temporal, makes a purchase of them with his blood: Now he in
his death respected not Angels in like kind; that look as Kings provide many
things for their Queens, which they do not for other subjects, so does Christ
for us.

Thirdly, he does unite us to himself more nearly then Angels; they are
united to him by knowledge and love, such as do come from the power of that
understanding and love which they have of their own, from the first creation:
but we are united here by knowledge of faith and love; hereafter by glorious
light and love, such as Christ himself by his spirit begets in us; as the
members of the body are united with nerves and sinnewes, such bands as take
their beginning from the head.

Fourthly, he does communicate with us that whole life of grace and glory
which we have, and shall receive, as the natural members have no sense or
motion which flows not into them from the head: But the Angels have a blessed
life; for the substance not coming to them by Christ, considered as a
mediator, even that blessed life in which first they were created, that which
comes to them is only an augmentation of happiness: their illumination and
their joy being in many regards much increased; they who learn by that they
observe in the Church falling out, what do they hear think we by inioying
the presence of Godman, now ascended and glorified? and they who joy in heaven
at the conversion of one sinner, how many ways by Christ is their joy enlarged?

Fifthly, he does not direct them as he does us; he does govern and direct
them as a King does voluntary ready subjects, by an external signification of
his will only; but he does direct and move us, outwardly by signifying his
will, inwardly by sending his spirit, which might move us with efficacy to
that he shows, as a natural head does the members of it.

Sixthly and lastly, he does not confirm them as he confirms us; for he has
neither gotten by his death for them this grace of perseverance to the end,
neither does he shadow them and follow them with ayds outward and inward, as
he does us, left our faith should be prevailed against; they have been no
doubt confirmed from the beginning, both by force of their election, and
preventing them with actual grace, which made them with effect execute what
ever thing it was in which it pleased God to prove their obedience, if they
have any confirmation from Christ their King, it is such an one as does make
them strong to subdue evil Angels, or any opposing them in businesses, in
which their ministry by Christ is employed, such an one may be gathered, Dan.
10.13.

Ans. There needs not a ministerial head to supply Christ's bodily absence;
For as Kings are in body present at Court only, and yet well enough govern
their bodies politic; So Christ in regard of his bodily presence in heaven,
can well enough rule that part of his body in earth, without the supply of a
visible head. Were the Pope a ministerial head, he might do that which the
principal, whose room he supplieth as Viceroyes do, that in the kingdoms
over which they are set, which the Kings might do in their own persons, whose
rooms they supply; But the Pope cannot do any inward thing which the head of
the Church is to perform. 3. Were there a ministerial head, there should be a
Lord-like power over part of the Church out of Christ's person in some other
creature; then should there be more Lords then one, contrary to that in 1 Cor.
12.5. There are divisions of ministeries, but one Lord. Look as great Lords in
earth have in their houses ministeries of more and less honor, from the
steward to the skullerie, but no Lord-like or Master-like power in any beside
themselves; so is in Christ and his Church, which is the house of God, wherein
he is the Lord, Apostles, others, having more or less honorable services, but
no master-like power over the meanest of their fellow-seruants.



We see hence, that we may assure our selves we shall lack nothing, who have
Christ become a head to us, in so near and communicatiue sort, as this is:
There are some official parts in the body, which have that they have, not for
themselves only, but for the whole body; Thus the Stomach has meats, the
Liver blood, such is the Head: Now it were an unnatural part for these, to
keep that they have to themselves, as for the Liver to keep in all, the blood
and not impart it by veins to the rest of the body; so Christ (who can do
nothing which does not beseem him) he having for all of us the fullness of
grace and glory, according to that, Psalm. 16.2. My good is for the Saints; he
cannot but be most ready to communicate with us every thing that is good: only
let us renew our faith and repentance, that so we stop not the passage of this
spirit from him our head: If the natural head of the natural body be never so
full of spirits, if the vessels which conueigh it, be once obstructed, as in
the Palsy, the body then is without sense and motion: We may apply it to our
selves, etc.

Observe secondly, that he says, this our head is over all: Whence note, that
God of his grace, has not only given us a head, but such a head, to whom all
things are subject; he who must be a saving head to us, there is great need he
should be over all: Could he not bind that strong one, and cause him redeliuer
his possession, how should we be ever set at liberty? Could he not dissolve
the work of Satan, swallow up death, create life and quicknance in us, our
case were lamentable? This is to be marked; for it is a spur to
thanksgiving: It is grace showed a Commonwealth when wanting a head it has a
tolerable one bestowed: But when God does, as he did by us, give us a King,
great before his entertainment amongst us, whose power might the better
procure our weal, and secure our peace, this is a double mercy: so it is to
give us a head, yea, a head over all, so mighty that we may sleep on each
ear, without fear of any enemy.

Secondly, this does show us a ground of confidence: What need we fear any
creature, who have him that is over every creature? if he be ours, who can be
against us? Look as Queens on earth, they fear not subjects displeasure,
because they are so nearly united to him who commands every subject: so it
may be with every true member of the Church, if our unbelieving hearts say not
nay.

Which is the body.] ergo, it is so said the body, that Christ who is the head
of this body is distinguished from it. Now the multitude of believers are fitly
so called; for as in a body are diverse members, having their several faculties
for the good use of the whole; so in the Church there are diverse kinds of
members, some taught, some teaching, some governing, some governed, some
distributing, yea, every member has as it were his distinct grace, whereby he
may serve to the good of the whole. But for further clearing of this, I will
show who are of already, and belonging to this body. Secondly, in what regard
every believer may be said a member of the body of Christ: and grow up to a
perfect man in him, Ephesians. 5. He is called the head of the Church, and the
savior of his body: As the Church and his body, so his headship and salvation
being of equal extent; to which purpose he says, Ioh. 6. That it is the will
of the Father, that he should not loose any of those who are given him, but
that he should both begin and perfect their salvation, even raise them up to
life eternal at the last day: Or, this body is the multitude of such as have
or shall, in spiritual manner proceed from Christ, and grow up in him: for as
all who have descended, and shall descend from the first Adam, are a complete
body natural, under Adam the head and root of them, (I take natural, as it
may be opposed to Adams personal body;) so the multitude of those children who
are given to this second, Adam, (Lo I and the children whom thou have given
me,) they make up the whole body, whereof Christ, the second Adam, is the head.
For though there be virtue in Christ, able to have procured the salvation of
others, and though there be a passive capacity in all mankind to be converted
by him, upon supposition God would so have determined; yet can he not be said a
head of any, but those only whom God has destinated to convert and bring to
salvation by him; as it is in the first Adam, who cannot be said a head of any,
but who are and shall in time actually, according to Gods determination, be
propagated from him, though there wants not in Adam and his, both a
generatiue force, and matter passive, of which many others might be engendered,
if God had been so pleased to ordain.

2. The same life of grace for kind which is in Christ, is in every faithful
soul; as the same sense and motion which is in the head, is for kind in the
body also: for look as that fire kindled, is of the same nature with the fire
kindling; so this fullness of grace in Christ, is of the same nature with that
which it does in some manner bring forth in us. Lastly, every faithful soul
is governed by Christ outwardly and inwardly, as a member of the body by the
head; the head does not only show the foot whether to go, but imparts
spirits which stir up the faculty of moving, and so cause it to go. Thus we
are outwardly by Christ's words directed, inwardly by his spirit; So many as are
Christ's, are lead by the spirit of Christ.



Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? He that touches you, touches the apple
of my eye; Can the finger ache, but the head feels?



This body is his fullness, that Christ does not count himself full and
complete, without all his faithful members; Hence it is, that while all
Christ's members are gathered, we are said not to be grown up to that age
wherein Christ is full, or to the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. For
as it has pleased Christ to make himself a head to us, we may say of him, as
Saint Paul says of the head, 1 Cor. 12. Can the head say to the foot, I have
no need of thee? For as the head is not in full perfection, till it have every
member, and that in the growth which appertains to it; so Christ our head is
not complete, till he have all his members, and that in their several
perfections belonging to them; even as it is between Kings, who are heads
politic, and their people, though for their persons they are never so
complete, yet the multitude of their subjects adds no small glory to them;
So it is twixt Christ our King, and us his people.

depart from me, were every true parts of Christ's body; for Christ is made the
fuller and complete by all his true members, and should be maimed if he lacked
one of them: These ergo, belonged to his body, as a wooden leg or glass,
does to the body of a man, or at the most, as a bunching wenne, which is more
inwardly continued, and has a kind of life, but it is not quickened as a
member of it, and therefore it remains the more complete when such are cut
off from it.

part with a member, were it in the power of it still to enjoy it? Wherefore
when Christ wants no power, we may assure our selves he wants no will to
preserve us in that union and communion which as members we have attained with
him.



Observe lastly from this description of Christ, Who fills all in all, that
whatsoever thing is in us as Christians, all of it is from Christ, Colos. 2.10.
In him we are complete, filled with all heavenly gifts, which serve to
remove evil, or set us in state of blessedness; So Colos. 3.11. Put on the
new man, in which Christ is all in all: For look as what ever things are in
natural men, are all from the old Adam, as for example; That they are of this
complexion, this stature, feature, sex, in regard of their body, that they
are of sharp minds, reaching wits, or otherwise, that they are in this
Country, in this civil condition, what ever they have according to the
fashion of this world which passes, all is from the first Adam: so look about
thee, what ever thing is to be seen in a Christian as a Christian, all is from
Christ this second Adam, who fills all in all. Should we have any thing
which we received not from him, we might so far boast in our selves, Ergo,
We have not any thing which is not given us by Christ, that all our rejoicing
might be in God through him. He does furnish us with the whole suite of Grace
and glory, that his magnificence might not in the least degree be obscured. For
the cleerer opening of this point, two things are here to be considered.

First, What the things are wherewith he fills us.

Secondly, how we come to be filled.

Adam fills his with sin and death; so the second Adam has treasured in
him righteousness and life for all that are his; therefore he is said, Daniel
9.24. to have taken away sin, and brought to us eternal righteousness; and
he is said, 2 Timothy 1.10. to have took away death, and brought to light life
and immortality; the life, is either the life of grace, or of glory; the life
of grace, is inward, or outward: The inward grace of Christ, being that which
does dwell in the soul, principally changing it, in the understanding, will
and affections of it: which does also secondarily show it self in the body,
both making the outward man more amiable and awful; Wisdom makes the face
to shine, and also subiecting the members of it to it self, so as they become
weapons of righteousness, Romans 6. Even as that cloud of Gods presence, first
filled the sanctuary, and thence spread it self into the whole house; So the
soul, being first filled with all knowledge and goodness, Romans 15.14. they
break out thence, and show themselves in the body, as the outward temple; Know
ye not, your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost? Now the external grace
which we receive from Christ, is that whereby we are in this or that state and
condition; some teachers, some governors, some taught and governed. Even as
the natural force of Adam does frame the matter of the natural body, one part
into an eye, another into a hand, etc. so this is from Christ that the
multitude of Gods chosen, who are the matter of his body mystical, some are
made members of one kind, some of another, the life of glory is that which we
look for from Christ in the heavens, both for substance and circumstance of
it. For look as we have, not only from our first parents, a natural life for
the substance, both of soul and body, but also all the circumstanciall joy,
which from times, places, creatures are incident to us: So we shall have in
Christ, and from him, not only that glorious light of understanding and love,
wherewith we shall love God, now seeing him as he is: not only those glorious
endowments of the body, whereby it shall become strong, immortal, glorious,
spiritual, but all the circumstanciall joy which shall in heaven be incident
to our estates now glorified, we shall be filled with it all through him.

We have it from him according to the measure of his gift, Ioh. 1. Ephesians. 4. As
the sun has fullness of light, in that perfection which does agree to light;
the Moon has light from the Sun in that measure wherein it is capable; so
Christ, the Sun of righteousness, he has fullness without measure; but the
Church, with all her members are filled from him, according to the capacity of
them, as members under him.

We must know by what means we receive our fullness from Christ: To which the
answer is by being partakers of Christ himself, we come to be filled with the
fullness of grace and glory in him, as by eating and taking the substance of
earthly nourishments, we come to have the virtue in them, even to be filled
with spirits and blood engendered from them; so in Christ is life, by getting
him we come to partake in this life which flows from him. More particularly,
the means by which we come to be made partakers of Christ and so to be
filled, they be such means as conueigh Christ to us, or make us receive him.
The first are the word and Sacraments, for as Persons by their words, and by a
ring do contract and give themselves fully the one to the other: So does
Christ by his word offering us himself, and by his Sacraments as pledges and
tokens conueigh himself and bestow himself on us. Now we receive him partly
by Humility, which does empty us of our selves, and make room for him, for
poverty and hunger are every where made the forerunners of being filled: partly
by Belief which does feed on him and apply him, partly by walking in Christ,
and exercising our selves spiritually; be filled with the spirit, speaking to
your selves in Psalms, etc. Our walking in Christ makes him settle and root
more and more in us: Now the further he dwells in us, the more he fills
us; Beside that, the nature of fire is to burn out further when it is blowed
and moved.

Secondly, we are filled with fullness after a sort for the present age of
Childhood, in which we now live: thus the Romans are said to be full of
goodness and all knowledge; full after a sort for this state of Childhood in
which we here live, full in comparison of more imperfect beginnings. Thirdly,
lastly. We are absolutely filled with all that fullness which does belong to us
as members of Christ, and that is to be done in heaven hereafter: Look as the
first Adam communicates and fills his Children with this natural life, so
as they are first infants, then ripe for children, then men: So Christ does
gradually impart unto us his members this fullness, which dwells in him.



Ho, whosoever thirsts, let him come and drink, yea drink freely the waters
of life, and John 7.37. Whosoever comes to me, I will not cast him forth?
Christ may complain as he did sometime with that people of the Jews, How often
would I have gathered you, but you would not? So he may say to us, How often
would I have had you, blind, naked, miserable by nature, come to me, that ye
might be filled with righteousness and life, but ye have refused? Well, did we
know what we are called to, and what we might find in him, then would we
come and be suitors to him, John. 4.10. But alas this is hid from our eyes.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 73. line 13. read collectiuely. Page 82. line 27. read parallel. page 90.
line last, r. an. page 92. l 23. r. then God may permit or deliver a sinner to
sin, and no sin follows. p. 112. l. 8. r. in infancy. p. 131. l. 25.
leave out nu. p. 136. l. 5. add, are. p. 140. l. 14. r. benediction p. 148. l.
15. r. typified. p. 150. l. 10. r. consectary. p. 163. l 7. add, has these
ends. p 178. l. 22. r. Partus. p. 183. line 1. r. darkness. p. 205. l. 9. r.
the Doctors. p 207. l. 31 r. count. p 224 l 3. r. to a head p. 226. l. 2 r.
one. p. 227 l. 9 r. successively p. 228. l 6. r. one. p. 228. l. ^2. add, in
p. 232. l. 7. r. near. l. 242 l. 32. in the margin, blot out Doct. 2. p. 168.
l. 24. blot out, with prauity, and l. 27. r. pronitie to sin. p. ^01. l. 5 and
6. r. may not one that has it. p 311. l 14. r. propounded. p. 338. l. 5. r.
for p. 340. l. 15. r. within us his grace. p. 345. l. 4. r. an 355. l. 26. r.
preparatiue. p 357. l. 19. preparation. p 359. l. 2. for the latter (our) r.
one. p. 355 l 25. r. preparatiue. p. 363. l. 26 r resist; That the will of the
creator is the necessity of things, on Gods decree necessity follows. But
this, etc. p 383 l 1. r. style. p 384 l: 4. r. much less. p. 402. l. 13. r.
ever. p. 3^^. l. 13. Grace once. r. great ones.


