ARMA PACIS FVLCRA


The Art of Embattailing AN ARMY. O R, THE SECOND PART OF AELIANS TACTICKS.

Containing the Practice of the best Generals of all Antiquity, concerning the
forms of Battles.

Wherein all Motions requisite to be used in a Battle both for offense and
defense are fully expressed.

Necessary and useful for all Martial Spirits, that desire to have knowledge
in the Art Military.

Englished and Illustrated with Figures and Observations upon every CHAPTER.

By Captain JOHN BINGHAM.

LONDON: Printed for RALPH MAB. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR HVGH HAMERSLY, Knight, one of the Aldermen and
Coronels of the Honorable City of LONDON, and President of the Martial
Company, Exercising Arms in the Artillery Garden in LONDON.
TO CAPTAIN HENRY WALLER, NOW CAPTAIN OF THE SAID COMPANY.
AND TO ALL THE REST OF THE Worthy Captains and Gentlemen of the said Company.
Captain I. B. wishes such valor and experience, as may make them victorious
against all sorts of Enemies.
Worthy Gentlemen:
THese my last endeavors upon Aelian, I purposed to have kept to mine own
private use, and not to have presented them to the view of the world. But now
being to depart from you, and toiourney into a far Country, and finding your
kindness and love toward me such, as I was not with any reason to expect, I
altered my mind, and having nothing else to offer unto you, I resolved to make
this a monument of my thankfulness to you, and a testimony of my desire to
do you the best service I am able. For my pains herein, I leave them to the
judgment of any learned Reader; for the profit of the Treatise, I say no more
but this, it contains the practice of the best Generals of all antiquity
concerning the forms of Battles. And whereas many hold opinion, that it
sorteth not with the use of our times, they must give me leave to be of another
mind: Indeed our actions in War are only now a days and sieges oppugnations
of Cities; Battles we hear not of, save only of a few in France, and that
of Newport in the Low Countries. But this manner will not last always, nor is
there any Conquest to be made without Battles. He that is Master of the
field, may dispose of his affairs as he lists; he may spoil the Enemies
Country at his pleasure, he may march where he thinks best, he may lay siege
to what Town he is disposed, he may raise any siege that the Enemy has laid
against him or his. Neither can any man be Master of the field without
Battle, in ordering whereof, that General that is most skillful, seldom
misseth of winning the day: experience of former times cleares this. I should
exceed the compass of an Epistle if I brought the examples, which serve to
this purpose. Now for the skill of ordering Battles, it is not to be learned
out of the practice of our days, wherein when we come into the field, we make
shows, and musters rather, then observe any forms of Battles for use:
Battles must not be always of one figure. The wise Generals of ancienter
times, fashioned their battles according to the range, which they saw the
Enemy had before taken up. The place often makes an alteration in that form,
which otherwise would serve to our purpose. He that is acquainted but with one
form, if he be forced to change that upon the sudden, disordereth his troops,
and brings all into a confusion. The knowledge of the forms of battles
being then so necessary for a General, this little Pamphlet must needs be
welcome to them that desire the mannaging of fields, and the command of Armies.
For here have you all forms expressed, together with their use; so that the
General that is acquainted with the practice of these precepts shall not be to
seek to make transmutation of his battle, into what form soever necessity
shall require, and that upon the sudden. As for them that hold, that great
Ordnance will not admit any of these ancient forms in our days, I hold that
for a dream, and not worthy the answering; since the invention of great
Ordnance, we never read of any form of battle disordered thereby; some
slaughter has been made by great Ordnance, and the Army that suffered by great
Ordnance, has been forced the sooner to join with the Enemy; when the Armies
are joined, great Ordnance has and must sit still, and look about as an idle
spectator, serving for no other use, then for a pray to him that gameth the
field. Now for small shot, it succeeds in the place of the lightarmed of
antiquity. By them a Battle may be broken, if they be not repressed, and
themselves cut off in time. But what is said of them that may not be said of
Bows and Arrows? The greatest fields that we gained against the French, were
gained only by our Archery. To say nothing of other Nations, that had the
skill of shooting: so that no reason can be alleged why the forms of
Battles used by antiquity for advantage, may not be as well used in our
days. Howsoever the matter stands, my desire is, that the Treatise may with
your favorable acceptance bear your names in the Front thereof. Not because I
think it worthy of your Patronage, but for that I would have it appear to the
world, how much I esteem of your kindness (as I said) and of your love, which
you expressed toward me in my taking leave of the City. The Lord of hosts have
you in his keeping.

Your servant, as heretofore, to do you service. JOHN BINGHAM.

Cap. 30.
Plagiophalanx or the Brode-Fronted Phalange Orthiophalanx or the Hearse
Loxe-Phalanx or the uneven fronted Phalange The Front



THE TACTICKS OF AELIAN, OR THE ART OF EMBATTAILING ARMIES.
The broad-fronted Phalange, the deep Phalange, or Hearse, and the
vneuen-fronted Phalange. CHAP. XXX.
(1) PLagiophalange, or the broad-fronted Phalange, is that, which has the (2)
length manifoldly exceeding the depth.

(3) Orthiophalange, or the deep Phalange (now commonly called the Horse) is
that, which proceeds by a (4) winge, having the depth much exceeding the
length. In general speech every thing is called (5) Paramekes, which has the
length more then the depth; and that which has the depth more then the length
(6) Orthion: and so likewise a Phalange.

The Phalange (7) Loxe, or vneuen-fronted, that is, which puts forth one of
the wings (which is thought fittest) toward the Enemy, and with it begins the
fight, holding off the other in a convenient distance, till opportunity be to
advance.

NOTES.
THis Chapter and the next, seem not to hold their right place: for being set
before the manner how to wheel, and likewise before closings, and inserted
betwixt the motions of the Battle.
Phalange (to which motions, or to one of them, the manner of wheeling and
closings appertain) they interrupt the method or orderly handling of the said
motions; which method Aelian curiously observes through his whole Book.
Besides, Aelian himself, after a manner points out the true place of them,
in that in the 24 Chapter, rehearsing shortly the appellations or words of
Military discipline; he places these forms after Induction and Deduction: I
take it therefore, that their proper place is after the 37 Chapter, the rather,
because all the forms of Marches from thenceforth handled, are either Squares
of the one kind or other, or else spring out of these Squares. I Cap. 1^.
noted before that there are three kinds of Squares; one, that has a longer
front then flank; another, that has a longer flank, then front; the third,
that has the front and flank equal. Of the third Aelian speaks in the 42
Chapter, of the first and second in this Chapter: of these two therefore I will
treat in order. And first I will handle the Names, then the Use, lastly the
Manner how to transform one into another.

The first is called

1. Plagiophalanx, or the broad-fronted Phalange.) The word (...) is often
interpreted for oblique; which signification it cannot have here; the oblique
Phalange being in this Chapter termed by the name of (...), and yet
distingnished from the Plagiophalanx. They that translate Plagiophalanx, the
transuerse or ouer-thwart fronted Phalange, agree better with Aelians meaning,
because it meets the enemy with a front trans-uerse, and drawn out in
length, and directly opposite against him. I have rendered it the broad fronted
Phalange, as more fitting the English tongue: It may also be called the
long-fronted Phalange. For breadth (I have remembered it before) and length of a
Phalange are all one: In this sense is the word (...) used by Arrian, being
applied to the manner of bearing of a Pike. He tells, that Alexander
transported his Army over the river Ister, to invade the territory Arr. l. ^.
4. C.
of the Getes; and has thus, The number of those that passed the river with
Alexander, were about 1500 horse, and 4000 foot. They passed in the night, and
landed where the Corn was high, which was the cause that their arrival was
not descried. As soon as the morning appeared, Alexander led them through the
Corn fields; Commanding the foot, that bearing down the Corn with their
Pikes held a thwart, (...), they should march into the Champeigne. The manner
of their bearing of Pikes (as I interpret it) was this; They took the Pikes in
the midst with both their hands, and so bore them out, not with the points
forward, but cross and parallel the front of the Phalange, that the file
leaders with one joint force might ledge and bear down the high-growne Corn,
and make easier passage for those that followed. If they had carried them out
slope, or oblique (which is the other signification of the word) it had been
no more, then the particular force of every man a part, that held his Pike
sloping; besides that, they would have been entangled in the Corn; whereas
the bearing of them cross parrallell with the front, was the joint force of so
many file-leaders, as did thrust forward against the Corn. Therefore as when
the Pike is borne in full length cross ^. 9. 72 (...) and 77. (...).
the front of the battle, the posture of the Pike is said to be (...), so is
a Phalange termed (...), that has a front stretched out in even length, and
opposed against the even front of the adverse battle of the enemy.

2. The length manifoldly exceeding the depth.] Aelian sets not down expressly
any proportion of the excess of the length above the depth, only he says, it
must manifoldly exceed the depth: We must take it then, that the excess of the
length must be at the least threefold; for thrice falls into the appellation of
manifold. A Macedonian fourefold Phalange may justly challenge 4. Phalange
Macedonian consisting of 1634. pike^en Phalangarch is the fourth part of a
Phalange.
this name, being 1024 men in length, only 16 in depth. And likewise a
Phalangarch led severally and by it self, as having 256 men in length, but 16
in depth. The rest of the bodies of the fourefold Phalange, till you come down
to a Pentecosiarchy, albeit ranged by themselves, are likewise Plagiophalanges,
or broad-fronted bastacles. A Pentecosiarchy has only twice so many in front,
as in flank (as 32 in front, 16 in flank) and therefore 4. Pentecosiarchy
has in it 512 men. The ordinary depth is 16.
comes not under the name of a broad-fronted Phalange. So that, let the
battle be as long as you list, having but the ordinary depth, it still is
accounted a Plagiophalange. When it is but twice so long in front as in flank,
it cannot deserve that name, but it is to be termed rather a Square of ground,
because the flank in a square of ground takes up as much ground as the front.
To the Battaile-broad-fronted, is next added the Phalange, called

3. Orthiophalange, or Herse] which albeit it have the length and depth
unequal, as has the Plagiophalange, or broad-fronted Phalange, yet must the
depth manifoldly exceed the length, which is contrary in the Plagiophalange.
This says Aelian proceeds in

4. A wing.) To proceed in a Aelian c. 36. (...) Leo c. 9. 77. Aelian c. 9.
Wing is to march on with a parcel or one body of the Army, namely with a
certain number of files (as with a A body of four files.
Tetrarchy, A body of ^ files.
Taxis, or A body of 16 files.
Syntagna) and to follow with the rest in like manner, so that the whole army
holds no proportion of length or breadth to the depth. That which is called
by Aelian Orthiophalanx, is called by Diodor. Sic. l. 20.
Diodorus Siculus, and by Arr. l. 1. 3. C.
Arrian, (...), a deep phalange, because the form of it arises out of the
depth of the embattailing, as I have noted upon the seventh Chapter. This kind
of march the Greek writers express by the words of leading Xenoph. hist.
Grac. l. 6. 558. A.
(...) and Arr. l. 1. 14. C.
(...), that is, in a wing; whereas the other kind with a large front (I mean
the broad-fronted Phalange) is said to be led Xenoph. hist. Grac. l. 6. 558. A.
(...), and Arr. l. 1. 14. F.
(...), and Arr. l. 1. 14. C.
in a Phalange, and Arr. l. 1. 14. B.
(...), Leo c 17.. 26.
(...), in front, Leo ibid.
(...), in extention of breadth. The words I recite to help them, who although
they be skillful in the Greek tongue, yet are not so well acquainted with the
Tactickes, and may easily mistake, or not understand the signification, if they
be not forewarned. But because I have before in my notes upon the seventh
Chapter touched this matter, I will here use an example, or two, only to
explain, and to give light to both forms. Arr. l. 1. 14.
Arrian reports, that when Alexander was to pass the river Granicus, on the
further side whereof the Persians had embattailed themselves in a (...).
broadfronted phalange to hinder his passage, Parmenio one of his eldest and
best Commanders came unto him, and gave him this counsel; Sir, said he,
Consider the Persians are ready to encounter you on the other side; my opinion
is, you cannot gain the passage without exceeding danger: both because your
phalange cannot be led (...)*
in front (that is, in a broad front) by reason of the many and sundry depths
that are to be seen in the River, and of the height and steepness of the
banks, as also for that the enemies horse ordered in a (...)
phalange, will be ready to charge us, whilst we disorderly and (...).
wingwise (which is the weakest kind of fight) endeavor to scamble up the
banks. Thus Arrian using the words before recited, and noting the difference
of both the forms. Leo c. 17.. 26.
Leo has the like passage, instructing his General how in the night to
surprise an Enemy in his lodging. His words are these in effect; When you
march, says he, to the intent that no tumult or confusion of noise be heard,
nor the stretching out of your battle into a great length breed error and
inequality in marching; and hereupon cries and loud commands arise, so that the
Enemy may easily perceive the access of your Army; It behooves you to march
not in (...).
front, that is, in a (...).
large extension of breadth, but (...).
wingwise, that is to say, in a (...).
deep form of Embattailing; as if one file should follow in the rear of
another, observing still to maintain the depth, or x ^n a Horse.
thickness of the battle. His meaning is: That in the night an Army ought
not to be led in a broad-fronted Phalange (because the places are ways through
which you are to march, are sometimes large, sometimes straight, sometimes
rough, sometimes plain, and so you cannot preserve an even front, but must
change the form and disorder it) but in a Hearse or deep Phalange, which will
fit all passages, and in the greatest inequality of way maintain the form of
the battle entire. And so much of the signification of the words marching in
a Wing, and marching in a Phalange.

5. Every thing is called Paramekes.] It is to be observed, that there is a
difference between Paramekes and Heteromekes: I thought good to note it,
because Aelian in diverse places mentions both. Paramekes is the figure,
according to Aelian, wherein the length many times exceeds the depth; it may be
Heteromekes, albeit it be but twice as long as deep. I am not ignorant that
Euclyd. l. 1. definit. 30.
Euclyde names all four sided figures, that have right angles, and unequal
sides, Heteromekes. But Aelian, though he apply Heteromekes sometimes to the
Aelia. c. 18. 38. 46.
front, sometimes to the flank, yet he gives no more then a double proportion
either of front to flank, or flank to front.

6. Orthion.] Albeit the word Orthium properly signify things rising in a
height, yet in military discourse it is applied to the dimension of the depth
Aelian has afterward (...).
of a battle, and not of the length. Here a Phalange is termed Orthia, and in
Leo in the place last by me cited, mention is made of (...), ^ deep
embattailing: and in Xenophon (...). l. a. 32. D. ^ ^ ^. ^.
(...), a Company stretched out in dep^^, (...) Polyen also, and Arrian, and
Appian. Polyen. l. ^. 549. ^. ^.
Polyen has besides, (...), and (...), for an army, that is cast into a great
depth, and into a narrow (...) Therefore, as Paramekes signifies the length of
the front; so Orthion signifies the depth of the flank of any battle ordered,
as is aforesaid. Thus much of the names of the two battles: It remains to show
the Use of them, and how one may be transformed into the other.

The Plagiophalange, or broad-fronted battle brings most hands to fight with
conueniency, and therefore is accounted the better form; and, as near T^^ use
of the broad-fronted Phalange, and of the Hearse.
as opportunity of ground would give leave, the ancient Generals principally
affected, and sought to put this form in ure: It has the commodity to
ouerfront the adverse battle, and is safe it self from ouerfronting, unless
the Enemy bring a greater multitude then you have to ouer-match your Army. The
Macedonian Phalange was for the most part of this form, as all the fields
Alexander fought evidently declare; So ordered he his troops at Granicus, so
at Issos, so at Gangamelos, so in other places, if the ground would serve. This
Caution notwithstanding was observed, that the depth held proportion with the
length; otherwise the length profits not so much, as the thinness of the
depth hurts, by giving means to the enemy to break through, and put the
adverse battle in a rout. I have noted it before out of Leo c. 14.. 10^.
Leo.

The Hearse, or deep Phalange, was thought the weakest kind to fight in. Arr
l. 1. 14.
Parmenio, one of the chiefest Commanders Alexander had, distrusted it (as I
have showed a little before.) Xenoph Cyrop. l. 6. 167. B.
Cyrus the elder, in the embattailing of the Egyptians, derided it; yet cannot
the form of the broad-fronted Phalange be so exactly taken up, but that
necessity will sometime force the other. In straight places it has been often
used: So Arr. l. 1. 36. C.
Darius in the battle of Issos, by reason of the straightness of ground, was
forced to this form: So Bo^il^ar the Carthaginian, was feign in a straight
place to make a narrow front of his phalange, and to extend it in depth. And
Liu. l. 46. 112. A.
Acilius Glabrio the Roman Consall, in the streights of Thermopyle against
Antiochus: and Liu. l. 38. 215. C.
P. Scipto in Spain against the Illergets. Therefore in large grounds the
first form is to be chosen, in narrow and rough places the other. The Hearse is
also fit for Marches, because in a March you are assured to meet with variety
of ground; sometimes with woods, sometimes with bushes, sometimes with straight
ways, with rivers, with hills, with pits, with bridges, with ditches, and such
like impediments, so that the front of your broad-fronted phalange must needs
be dissolved; whereas no difficulty of ways can hinder the passage of a Ael.
c. 45.
Hearse, the front whereof may be narrowed (according to the ground you march
in) as you list. Arr. l. 1. 2. B.
Alexander being to lead his Army against the Thracians, that had planted
themselves in the mount Aemus, was ^^ine to narrow the front of his phalange,
according to the way that led up to the Mount: The same did Xenoph hist. (...)
6 ^o^. D.
Agesilaus passing through the streights of Mantina; the History is by me
recited before in my notes upon the 26 Chapter Polyen. l. 5. ^^3.. 1.
Panimenes likewise leading his Army through Pho^is toward ^hebes, and finding
that the Enemy had taken and possessed a place called Philo^aeoton, that had
two streights leading toward it, one of which the Enemy held with a guard;
casting is troops into a Hearse (...), making the bulk of his Army slender,
and ^it to march, shaped himself to the right hand, as though he meant to hold
on to that passage. The Enemy therefore leaving the left hand straight, which
they had in guard, ran with all speed to the right hand to stop his passage; but
he taking the opportunity, speeded hastily to the left, and conveyed his Army
thorough without danger. Many like examples of Herses accommodated to straight
ways, where a broadfronted Phalange cannot march, are to be found in
Histories. The Orthiophalange or Hearse was also much^sed in an ascent against a
hill which the enemy possessed: and in this sense are (...) deep Companies
takes in the Greek writers, especially when a whole Company is put into a
file, and 3 or 4 or more files laid together to make an Orthiophalange, in
which form they used to mount up against hills. Many examples be in heir
Histories of beating off Enemies from hills in this form. Xenoph. Cyrop. l. ^.
71 D
Cyrus the elder used it against the Chaldaeans; Xenoph. d'exp. l. ^. 3^0 D.
Xenophon against the Carducans; Xenoph. d'exp. l. ^ 324. E.
Cherisophus in passing the river Centrites, which river divides the
mountains of the Carducans from Armenia: the Graecians against the Mosynecans,
that inhabited certain Mountains which the Graecians were to mount. Arr. l.
4. 95. ^.
Ptolomey against the d Xenoph. d'exp. l 5. 3^3. A.
Indians, that embattelled themselves upon a mountain to resist the invasion
of Alexander. And a notable example of an Army ascending against a Mountain,
is described by Xenoph. d'exp^d. l. 4. 340.
Xenophon, in the fourth book of the ascent of Cyrus; Herelateth that the
Cholcans had taken up a high Mountain, and there imbattelled their Army to the
intent to stop the passage of the Grecians in their return out of Parsia: The
Grecians at the first ordered themselves into a Phalange, (a broad fronted
battle) meaning in that form to make their way. But afterward the
Chief-taines calling a Court, advised upon their best course of fighting:
Xenophons opinion was, that laying aside the form of a Phalange, it would be
best to order themselves in Companies (...).
drawn out in file. For a Phalange, said he, will soon be broken, by reason
of the inequality of the way, which in some parts of the Mountain will be
found easy enough, in other hard to ascend. And the sohldiers will quickly be
discouraged to see the Phalange disordered, in which they march; Besides,
marching in a large front, the enemies, that exceed us in number, will
ouer-front us, and use their multitude to most advantage: In a narrow front it
will be no marvel to see our Phalange cut asunder with missiue weapons, and
with men ordered in battle to charge us; whereby the whole Phalange will be
distressed. Therefore, as I said, I hold it best to put the Army into
Companies stretched out in depth, giving to each Company such distance one from
another, that our wings may ouer*reach the uttermost points of theenemies
battle: and let every company make choice of their fittest way for ascent: As
for the spaces betwixt company and company, it shall not be easy for the enemy
to convey himself into them, all the companies on all sides (in case he enter)
wrapping him in betwixt them: and if it chance that any company be distressed,
the next company is to succor and aid it. Now say, that one company attain
to the top of the hill, you may be assured, that no enemy will keep his
ground. This Counsel was assented to by all; When therefore every man had
taken his place, and the (...) 8000 armed.
companies were laid out in their just depth, the armed amounted to about 80
companies, in every of which were reckoned almost 100 men: The Targeteers and
Archers were divided into three bodies, the first to march without the armed of
the left wing, the second without the armed of the right, the third in the
midst, every body consisting of well-nigh 600 1800 light-armed.
men. After prayers made to the gods, the soldiers advanced, singing the A
song or hymn to Apollo used by the Grecians when they joined with the Enemy.
Iul Pol. l. ^. c. 1.. 33. But the Scholiastes of Thucydides says, there were
two Paeans, one to Mars before victory, the other to Apollo after victory. ^. 1.
Paean; Then Cherisophus and Xenophon (leading the point of the Grecian
battle) and the Targatiers with them, who over reached the enemies wings,
hasted on a pace, and the enemy perceiving it, extended their wings to meet
them, and by that means were distracted some to the right, some to the left
hand, leaving an empty space in the midst of their Phalange* the Targatiers
armed after the Arcadian manner, led by Aeschines the Acharnan, seeing the
enemies battle disseuered, and imagining them to fly, ran forth with all
speed, and were the first that gained the hill: they were seconded by the
armed Arcadians, commanded by Cleanor the Orchomenian. When the Enemy saw them
come running on, they forsook their ground, and began to shift for them.
selves, one one way, another another: The Grecians having gained the Hill,
encamped there. Hitherto Xenophon, out of whose practice the best address
against an enemy, that possesses a Hill, over which our Army is to march, may
be learned* In a broad-fronted Phalange it is hard to proceed, both because of
the inequality of the ground, which will easily break the phalange, and
disioynt all the parts thereof, and also for that the enemies weapons thrown
from the higher ground will not lightly miss so great a body, and great
stones, and other mass, tumbled down, will bear down and make ruin of
whatsoever comes in the way, impossible to miss in such an extension of
length, and thronging of the Army: to lead in one and a continued Hearse is no
less dangerous. A few men, and those only in front, shall come to fight
against a multitude of enemies, who will ouer-front, and charge them on all
sides. Xenophons Counsel then is to make diverse bodies, and to order them so
severed in front and flank, that they may ouer-front the enemy, and not be
parted asunder with the unevenness of the ascent, nor yet prove too fair a
mark for the enemies weapons. The Bodies are declared to be Companies each of
100 men; these so divided one from another in distance filewise, that the
uttermost bodies on both sides might be able to ouer-reach the points of the
enemies wings, and to make choice of the best Ascent toward the height of the
hill. Further, the form of ordering the bodies is set down, They were
stretched out in depth ((...):) Orthios lochos is here taken for a Company
ordered in one file; and it fignifies as much as (...), a Company ordered one
man singly after another: which phrase is used by Xenoph. Cyrop. l. ^. 55. A.
and l. 5. 130. D.
Xenophon elsewhere: and in the same sense Thucyd. l. 2. 155. ^.
Thucydides uses the phrase of placing ships one in a direct line after
another (...), which his scoliastes interprets (...), having one after
another. And Polyb. l. 1. 27. ^. C. D.
Polybius likewise of Ships has the same phrase, (...), to be placed one after
another; and in the same place (...). Yet this passage out of Xenophon, where
he mencioneth (...), has a diverse signification from the common usage of (...)
amongst other Grecians. It agrees, in that, they led their Companies stretched
out in file; it differs, in that Zenophons files were placed in distance one
from another, and had all an equal front in the manner of a A broad-fronted
Battle.
Plagio-phalange, where in the other examples they were joined; to the end to
make an Orthiophalange, and in several bodies to follow one another. I deny
not that (...) are otherwise taken in the wars of the Romans described by the
Greciatis.

So Appian. in Ly^^cis 22.
Scipio ordering his battle against Hanniball in the fight of Africa, is
reported by Appian to have disposed his Army into Maniples, distributed into
three kind of bodies, the Maniples to stand (...), one directly after another.
How they stood Poly. l. 15. ^^^. ^.
Polybius shows, describing the same battle; He says, that Scipio ordered
the Hastati and their ensigns first of all the rest, and in front, and gave
interuals to their maniples; behind them the Principes, not against the
interuals of the Hastati, as the Roman manner was, but behind them in a right
line (because of the multitude of the Enemies Elephants:) and lastly, the
Triarij. On the wing of the left flank he ranged C. Lelius with the Italian
Horse under him: on the right Massanissa, and all the Numidian Horse, which he
commanded. The interuals of the first Ensigns (that is, of the Hastati) he
filled with the bodies of light armed, commanding them first to undertake the
fight; and in case they were not able to withstand the affront of the the
enemy, or of the Elephants, he willed them to retire; some, that could prevent
the rest with speed, through the direct interuals of the maniples to thereare
of the army; other, that were in a manner surprised, to the flanks, near the
Ensigns. This ordering of Maniples one directly after another, so termed and
described by Polybius, Appian calls (...); which notwithstanding, if truly
examined, cannot according to the Grecian practice come within the compass of
that name. For the Grecians, as I said, drew their Companies severally each
into a file; and laying four, or five, or six, or more of them together, made
a body, the depth whereof much exceeded the length, or breadth, the front being
of 4. 5. or 6. men in rank, the depth of 100, whereas the Romans, as appears
by Polybius, kept their ordinary manner of embattelling, saving that they
placed their principes not against the interuals of the Hastati, as their
custom was, but directly behind the Maniples of the Hastati, to the end the
Elephants of the Carthaginians might have an empty and void lane, as it were,
to pass through their whole Army: As for the Roman Maniples they consisted of
two parts joined together, which they called Or^^.
Ordines, and every Ordo contained 60 men, commanded by a Captain; so that the
Maniple had in it 120 men, and two Captains or Centurions. These 120 men being
digested into files, containing 10 men a piece (for that was the length of
file, and the depth of the Maniple) make 12 files, which stood one by another
ranged in front, not stretched one after another in depth. But because the
Maniples of the Hastati principes, and the Triarij, stood directly one after
another, therefore Appian called them (...), either out of the ignorance of the
manner of embattelling amongst the Romans, or else because the Grecians in
their writings reduced the order of the Roman embattelling unto their own
usage. So they called a Tribune of the Roman Army a Chiliarch, albeit a
Chiliarch amongst the Grecians and a Tribune amongst the Romans differ very
much, as I have noted upon the ninth Chapter of Aelian: the manner of
embattailing of the Army of Acilius Glabrio a Roman Consul in the streights of
Thermopyle, comes nearer unto the Greekish form: Appianin Syracis 97. C.
Appian describes it thus; Antiochus having fortified the streights of
Thermopyle with a double wall, and drawn forth his army ord^^ly for fight, to
make good the place against Acilius; Acilius divided his troops into three
parts, and giving one part to Cato, another to ^laccus, the one to make his
passage on the one side of the Hills, the other on the other, himself led the
ordinary way against Antiochus; and framing of his owne^ part (...) (which
manner of embattelling alone, says Appian, seruet^ for straight ways) ^e
pushed on and forced his Enemy to retire, gained his Camp. The (...) here
mentioned, are no other then the Hearse.
Orthie-phalange, which Aelian has set down in this Chapter, namely, having
one Maniple (or if the straight permitted not a Maniple of 12 files to march
entirely in front) one Ordo consisting of six files to advance, the rest
following in the same ^inde, as the fashion is of the right induction,
remembered by Aelian hereafter in his 36 Chapter. Now albeit that form come
nearer to the Grecian form, yet it is not the same, the one filling the way
with the Maniple or Ordo, as it fell our, in the same figure, that it stands in
the field, the other changing the order of the field, drawing the Company out
into one file, and joining other Companies with it in front, as many as the way
would receive: So that the Grecian had too in depth of the body, the Roman but
10. We are not to pretermit, that albeit Acilius used this form to dislodge
(...) from the H^ll, yet he trusted not to it alone, but dividing his (...)
into three parts, he caused two of them to march up the hills on both sides,
himself on the midst, to the end that one part might ^aine the height over
(...) head, and so make him forsake his ground. Thus far of the use of these
two (...) of Phalanges or battles: it remains to show, how one of them may
be transsormed into another.

The next proceeding Chapter teaches, that out of doublings of Ranks, the
Transformation of one into another.
length of the battle arises, as the depth out of doubling of files. I have
showed the manner of both in my notes upon the 8 and 29 Chapter. And this
manner is easy in a single Company, or in a small Army: In great Bodies it
has no Doubling of files.
great use, let the Example be of a Phalangarchy, which is the fourth part of a
fourefold Phalange, and contains 256 files. Double the files once you shall
128 files, and 32 men in depth, and but 3 foot distance in rank. The second
doubling brings forth 64 files, and as many men in depth, but the distance
betwixt rank and rank is but a foot and a half. Beyond this doubling you
cannot proceed; for beside the confusion of places of officers, which are in
number above See Aelian c 7.
250 in a Phalangarchy, the interuals betwixt man and man, will not
conveniently allow above two doublings: your open order betwixt man and man,
wherein they stand at first, gives but six foot: The first doubling takes away
three foot from every internal, the second leaves but a soot and half. And
considering that when the battle is closed for fight, the nearest distance
betwixt rank and rank ought to be no less then three foot, in regard of
handling of weapons (as I have showed before out of Polybius.) The second
doubling, albeit it yields room from the bodies of Soldiers to In my notes
upon the 11 chapt.
stand in, yet it takes away the half of this distance, but the third doubling
allowing but 3 quarters of a foot for each man to stand in, gives not so much
ground as his body will possess. So is it likewise of Ranks, which will not
suffer above two doublings fit for use. Aelians file is of ^6 men, double your
ranks once, your file will contain no more then eight men, and every man
shall have three foot distance from other in rank, double them twice, the file
has but four men, and every man's distance in rank is no more then a foot and
half, which as it is allowable in close order, so admits it no third
dou(...), wherein the space betwixt man and man cannot exceed three quarters of
a foot. As therefore the second doubling of ranks in a Phalangarchy, albeit it
extend the front of the battle, leaves yet too small a depth to the
Plagiophalange or broad-fronted battle, it containing no more then four men
in depth: so the doubling of files twice fitteth not the Orthiophalange or
Hearse, as having 64 in depth, and as many in length, which number neither
holds proportion of the depth manifold to the length of the Orthiophalange or
Hearse, nor yet by reason of the length has conueniency to apply it self to
straight ways; a thing that contains the principal use of that manner of
battle; which was the cause that antiquity used another course.

If the march were to be made out of a Plagiophalange or broad-fronted
battle, they framed a Hearse, by putting forth out of the right or left wing,
first one A body of four files.
Tetratchy, or other body, which might march whole according to the largeness
of the ways and after it followed from the same wing, the rest of the Army in
the same kind. If contrariwise a Plagiophalange or broad-fronted battle were
to be framed out of an Orthiophalange or a Hearse, they caused the body which
had the vaunt, to stand firm, and the rest following to sleeue up by it on the
right or left hand, till they all came to an even front: Xenoph. Cyrep. l. 2.
55. A.
Xenophon shows the manner in a Company, whose words are these in English;
Then he ( Cyrus the elder) beheld another (...).
Captain leading his Company from the river side to dinner, one soldier
following another in a (...).
single file, who when he thought ^it commanded the second, and third, and
fourth file to sleeue up, and make an even front with the first; the
file-leaders being new in front, he commanded the (...).
half files to double the front, so that new the Decadarches or leaders of
half files stood in front. Again, when it seemed good he commanded the (...).
(...) here signifies a file: in the ascent of Cyrus, and in the Greek History
it signifies a Company of 100 men. The File-leader commanded the whole file of
24. The Decadarch the half rearefile. The two Pempedarchs 5 men a piece; one
the 5 that followed after the first 6 in front; the other the 5 that were next
the rea^e.
quarter files to double the front: so the Pempedarches or leaders of the
quarter of files led up, and the files marched on, being divided into four
parts. When they were come unto the Tent door, he commanded the first file to
single out again, and to enter in, and the second to follow it single in the
rear, and so the third and fourth, till all were within the Tent. To clear
these words of Xenophon, It is to be understood, that the Company or (...) here
mentioned, consisted of 100 men, and was divided into four files or (...),
each file containing twenty four men. The file had five Officers, the file
leader, the Decadarch, two Pempedarchs, and the bringer up. At the head of the
file stood the file-leader, and behind him directly five men; next after them
stood the first Pempedarch and five men that followed him* in the midst of
the file (that is, after the Pempedarch and his five) was placed the Decadarch
(who ^ed the hinder most half file, and after him five men more? Lastly, the
second Pempedarch and five more after him, the last of which was the bringer
up. Now when Xenophon says, that the whole Company followed by one or file
wise, he means that the four files were cast into one file, and followed one
another in a right line, and by that means had 100 in depth, and but one in
front. To bring it therefore to convenient length from this depth, the Captain
commanded the first file leader to make Alte, or to stand, and the second file
The bringer up was the last of all.
leader with his file to advance, and to sleeue up on the left hand and to
front with the first file leader, and so both files to stand even fronted in
open order. The like he commanded the third and fourth file to do; so that the
four files being laid one to another, and fronting equally, the front or
length of the body had four men, the depth 24. Then, because he held this
depth disproporcionable to the length, in so small a body; he again enlarged
the front by doubling, commanding the half files to double their front. The
Decadarchs hereupon marched up to the front, and ranked with the file leaders,
and the half files following them, ranked with the front-halfe files man to
man. Now was the front eight in length, the flank or depth twelve. To enlarge
again the front, and to make the length exceed the depth, he commanded the
quarter-files to double the front: hereupon the Pempedarchs advanced marching
up with their quarter files after them, till they fronted with the file leaders
and Decadarchs, and each man of the quarter files ranked with the rest, so that
the front came to be of 16 men in length, the flank six men in depth, and each
man in rank had a foot and half distance, in file six foot. And thus the
Company from one file, as it were from an Orthiophalange or Hearse, was formed
into a long body somewhat resembling a Plagiophalange or broad-fronted
battle. To reduce it again to an Orthiophalange or Hearse, the Captain at
the entry into the Tent (where the whole Company was lodged together) first
directed the first file to march out, namely by the file leader with his five,
then the first Pempedarch with his five, after him the Decadarch with his five,
lastly, the second Pempedarch with his five; which drawing out of the Officers
one after another in depth, with the parts of the file Commanded by them,
immediately brought the file to the just* depth of 24. This being done, the
second file followed the first in like order, and the third the second, and
last of al came the fourth: and this was the manner of changing one form into
another: and albeit the example be but of a Company, yet is the reason all one
in a Phalange or battle; for as a company is compacted of many files, so is a
phalange of diverse companies; and as one file, in the example before, was led
after another filewise, so is, or may, one company or other body be led after
another, making thereby an Orthiophalange or Hearse: and as one file advanced to
front with another, to the intent to alter the form of the Orthiophalange, so
must the bodies or companies sleeue up one by another to make a plagiophalange
or broadfronted battle, yet want there not Examples in the Greek History of
turning the Orthiophalange or Hearse into a plagiophalange or broad fronted
battle, and by consequence the plagiophalange into an Orthiophalange.
Cherisophus in the return of the 10000 Grecians, that followed Cyrus the
younger into Persia, had the leading of the Vant-gard all the way. Xenoph. de
exp. l. 4. 334. A.
He in his march in Armenia perceiving the Chalybes, Taochians and Phasians had
taken certain mountains, over which the Grecians were to pass, made alte
some 30 furlongs before he came to the Enemy, lest encountering with the enemy,
he should fight with his army being led in a wing or Orthiophalange: He
commanded therefore the Captains that followed him with their companies, every
one after another to (...).
sleeue up their companies by his, to the intent to cast the army into a
plagiophalange or broad fronted battle. When thereare Commanders were come
up, he called a counsel to advise of the best course in proceeding. Here is
the order of the Grecians march expressed to be in a Hearse or Orthiophalange,
which consisted of many companies one following another; and likewise the
manner of transfiguring the Hearse into a broad fronted phalange, viz. the
Captains one after another sleeuing up their companies by Cherisophus his
company on the left hand, and making an equal front with him. And yet this
example contains no more, then the sleeuing up of the Companies upon one
flank. Cherisophus first made a Stand with his company, having the vant; the
following Captains sleeued up their companies on his left hand, as the files
did one after another in the other example. Arr. l. 2. 3^. C. D.
Alexander used another kind of sleeuing a little before he fought the battle
of Issos; For, caufing the vant-gard first to stand, he commanded the rest of
the foot to march up to the front of the vant-gard on either flank. The words
lie thus in Arrian. Alexander having by midnight gained the Streights of
Cilicia, setting out a straight watch upon the rocks, rested, and refreshed
his army till morning: b^ day-breake he descended from the streights in the
ordinary way, and as long as the passage was narrow, he led in a (...).
wing; afterward the mountains opening a greater distance, he enlarged his
wing into a phalange by little and little still sleeuing up the armed, one body
after another to the front; on the right hand toward the mountains, on the
left hand toward the Sea. The Horse all this while marched after the foot* but
coming to ground of larger capacity, they were ordered on the wings. This
manner of working to make a phalange out of Hearse, was by drawing the following
companies up on both flanks, on the right toward the mountains, on the left
toward the sea; so that it differs from the other form wherein the Companies
were sleeued but upon one hand. A third way of making a Plagiophalange of a
Hearse, I find in Polyb l. 1^. 632. B.
Polybius, Machanidas the Lacedemonian Tyrant (says he) being to fight with
Philopaemea the Achaean General, who had fashioned his army into a broad
fronted phalange, made semblance at first, as though he meant in a (...).
Hearse to charge the right wing of the Enemies battle; but approaching nearer
at a convenient distance, he brake off the hinder part of the Hearse, and facing
it to the right hand marched out, and led it out in length, and joined it in
equal front with his right wing, thereby equalling the left wing of the
Achaeans. In this manner of transforming the Hearse into broad fronted phalange,
the companies or bodies follow not one another, to sleeue up to the front, but
half the Plagiophalange is broken off at once (the rear half) and facing to
the right or left hand, is led up and joined in an even front with the other
half, not unlike to our vsagein exercise, when we command our middle men with
their half files to face to the right or left hand, and marching out to double
the front of our battle. Thus much may suffice for the names, use and
reduction of one of these two Phalanges to another: The third Phalange
mentioned in this Chapter follows.



7 The Phalange Loxe.] There are two kinds of Loxes, or uneven fronted
Phalanges: The front of the one is figured in a continued right line stretched
out bias-wise thus: The other has as it were two fronts, formed out of two
several parts of the Phalange; the one advancing against the Enemy to begin
the fight, the other staying behind, and keeping the first ground, being
ordered without the flank of the first, that upon occasion it may likewise
advance, and join, or else retire from the Enemy, and give back; the figure
shows the shape of it: the last has bin used by great Generals as a form of
advantage in fight. The first only to win a passage, as I take it, over a
river, or such like (where the broad-fronted Phalange could not pass) and to
bring the Army to a ground, where it might be ordered in better form for
fight. I will give one Example (for I read not many) of the first; Arr. ^. 1.
14. ^.
Alexander having conveyed his army over Hellespont, and entered into Phrygia,
came as far as the river Granicus. Three Lieutenants of Darius with 20000.
Horse, and well nigh as many foot, had embattelled themselves on the other side
of the river to hinder his passage: The river was full of depths and slallowes
somewhat dangerous to enter, and the banks on the further side high, rough,
and steepie; besides, the Enemy was ready with horse cast into a long or
broad-fronted phalange, and with seconds of foot to beat him back, that should
offer to clymbe the banks. Alexander being resolved to pass over, first
ordered his troops in a broad-fronted phalange* The right wing he commanded
himself, and gave the command of the left to Parmenio; then putting the
Scout-horse with the Paeonians into the river, and after them a Phalangarchy of
foot led by Amyntas the son of Arrabius, and then Ptolomy the son of
Phillip, who commanded the troop of Socrates, which troop had the Vaunt of all
the horse that day, himself with the right wing entered the river (the Trumpets
sounding, and the Army giving a shout) extending still his battle bias-wise
against the Stream ((...)) to the end the Persians might not fall upon him, as
he led in a wing, but himself, as much as was possible, might come to join
with them, having the front of his phalange extended in length. The Persians
cast (...).
Darts from the high ground against the troops of Amyntas and of Socrates, as
they approached to the further bank, and some of them, where the ground was
more even, descended to the brinke of the river; so there was thrusting and
sholdering of Horsemen, some to ascend out of the river, some to hinder the
ascent. The Persians let fly many a dart, the Macedonians fought with spears:
The first Macedonians that came to hands with the Persians, were cut a pieces
fighting valiantly, save only those that retired unto Alexander, who was now
near advanced with the right wing: He himself first of all charged the
Persians, where the principal strength of the whole body of their horse and the
Generals of the field stood; about him was a strong fight, and in the mean
time one troop after another passed easily over the river. This passage of the
History is long, and therefore I forbear to recite the rest, only I add,
that after a long fight the Persians were forced to fly, and the victory
remained with Alexander. And this, that I have recited, may serve to show the
use of this kind of Loxe-phalange, which was practiced by Alexander to no
other end, then to gain the passage of the river; for in this form he would
never have fought, nor is there any president for it out of his battles ranged
upon even ground, where he might have chosen the form he liked best; but here
he was to get over a river, the enemy held the banks on the other side with
20000. Horse ordered in a broad phalange; the river was full of shallowes and
depths, and thereby hardly passable; the banks on the other side steep and
broken, and hard to ascend: Parmenio dissuaded him to lead in a wing or hearse,
and himself had no great fancy to adventure in that form. In a broad-fronted
phalange he could not, which must needs have been broken by the unequal
footing in the bottom of the river? What did he then? he thought best to
choose a passable foord, and through it to put over the right wing of his Army
slope-wise toward the further bank, whither when they came, they should
proceed against the stream; that the front being still extended, and the rest
coming up and joining, he might front toward and charge the Enemy
phalange-wise. And that this was his meaning is plain by Polyen l. 16.
Polyen, who rehearsing the same Stratagem, says, that Alexander led his Army
in that form along the further bank to the end to ouer-front the Enemies
Horse-battaile: So that this kind of Loxe or vneuen-fronted Phalange is no
form to fight in, as I conceive, but has been sometimes taken up, as a
means to attain to a ground fit for a better form; as Alexander changed it
as soon as he came to the banks of the river on the other side.

The other (as I said) great Generals have used, and by it have gained great
victories. I will add an example or two, whereby the use of it may more
clearly appear: Epaminondas the Theban in a field against the Lacedaemonians,
gained a famous victory by this form: Diod. Sic. l. 1^. 486. C.
Diadorus Siculus writes thus, The Baeotians also being ready to fight, the
battles on both sides were fashioned in this order: Amongst the Lacedaemonians
the Chiefetaines of the race of Hercules had the wings (viz. Cleombrotus the
King, and Archidamus who was the The Lacedaemonians had by Lycurgus Law two
Kings at once.
son of Agesilaus, the other King:) On the Baeotian side Epaminondas using a
peculiar and choice kind of embattailing, obtained a renowned victory by his
martial skill: For, selecting the best men out of all his troops, he opposed
them against one of the Enemies wings, himself resolving in his own person to
try the fortune of the day with them. Against the other wing he set the
weakest, commanding them (...).
to fight retyring, and to give ground by little and little, when the Enemy
came on to charge; framing therefore an uneven fronted Phalange, he determined
to hazard the fight (...).
with that wing, which consisted of his chosen Soldiers: The Trumpets sounded,
and the Armies gave a shout, and the Lacedaemonians figuring a half Moon
thrust out both their wings of purpose to enuiron the Baeotians, who with one
of their wings retired, with the other ran forth to join with the Enemy: after
joining, the Victory hung a good while doubtful thorough the valor of both
parties, notwithstanding Epaminondas by the manhood of his people, and the The
Baeotian^ were 50 deep, the Lacedaemonians 1^. Xenoph. bist. gr^^. l. 6 596. ^
thickness of his battle having the better, many of the Lacedaemonians fell;
for they were not able to endure the weight of the resolution of those chosen
men, yet so long as Cleombrotus lived, and had many to (...).
join Targets for his defense, and ready to dye before him, the sway of
victory was uncertain: But after he had cast himself into all kind of
dangers, and yet could not force the Enemy to retire, fighting heroically he
was borne to ground with many wounds, and so ended his days: There arose a
flocking and concourse about his body, and multitudes of dead men were heaped
one upon another. That wing, being now without a Commander, was hardly laid to
by Epaminondas and first with plain force somewhat disordered. The
Lacedaemonians on the other side, bravely hazarding for their King; recovered
his dead body, but could not attain to the victory: as also the selected band,
albeit provoked by the virtue and exhortation of Epaminondas, it used
extraordinary valor, yet with much ado did it force the battle of the
Lacedaemonians, who first giving back, somewhat disordered themselves; at last
many falling, and no man being to command them, the whole army took it self
to flight. Epaminondas his soldiers followed the chase, slew many, made
themselves Masters of the field, and carried away a notable and famous victory.
Their honor was the more, because they fought with the most valiant men of all
the Grecians, and overcame them being many more in number then themselves,
contrary to all men's expectation; but of all other Epaminondas was the man that
merited most praise, who by his own valor and martial skill, won a battle
against those Generals of Greece, which to that day were held invincible. This
Testimony of the Loxephalange is somewhat long, but the worthiness of the
circumstances will, I hope, bear me out to recite it, wherein the form
agreeable to Aelian is first to be noted, as advancing one wing against the
Enemy, and holding off the other; albeit it go a little further then Aelian
prescribes, in that the wing kept off, stood not still, waiting time to come
forward, but when the Enemy came up, joined with him, giving ground, of purpose
to distract his phalange, and on that side to busy him with a slow fight, lest
happily he might give upon the adverse flank of Epaminondas and succor his
own party that already was in fight. It shows besides, the advantage of
Military skill; for the Lacedaemonians, Masters of Arms at that day in Greece,
having fashioned a half Moon, and imagining in that form to enclose the
small number of the Baeotians, and to charge them on every side, Epaminondas
with his Loxe Phalange so plied the front of their wings, that the rest of the
half Moon, being never able to strike stroke, became unprofitable: It shows
further what kind of battle is fittest to encounter the half moon: Lastly,
it has the reason and use of the Loxe phalange; that is, to charge one of the
Enemies wings with the best and strongest part of our forces, and at the same
instant to annoy him with the other wing, thereby to embarre him from giving
aid to his people that were in fight. Diod. l. 17 592 E
Alexander used this form at Gangamela, beginning the fight and victory with
his right wing, and after with his victorious troops succouring his left wing,
that was in danger to be routed by the Persians. The like form with the like
success was used by Diod. l. 19. 686.
Antigonus against Eumenes; it is a battle worth the rehearsing, but I have
been long in the Example of Epaminondas, and therefore refer the Reader to
the quotation. Diod Sic. l. 19. 716.
Demetrius framed the like battle against Ptolomy and Seleucus, albeit he
were frustrated of his hopes in the event by the foresight of Ptolomy, who
opposed his choicest troops against that wing of Demetrius, which was first to
undertake the charge. Hitherto of these three forms of Phalanges, see the
figures, in which albeit the two first be portraited without interuals, yet you
must in the broad-fronted Phalange understand the three interuals usual in the
Macedonian fourefold Phalange: and in the hearse the spaces betwixt the rear of
the bodies that lead, and of the front of those that follow.

Parembole, Protaxis, Epitaxis, Prostaxis, Entaxis, and Hypotaxis. CHAP. XXXI.
(1) PArembole, or insertion, is, when Soldiers being placed in a body, we
take some of the hindmost, and order them within the distances of the first,
drawing them up in an equal front. (2) Protaxis, or forefronting, is, when we
place the light-armed before the front of the Armed, and make them
forestanders, as the file-leaders are: (3) When we order the light armed
behind, it is called Epitaxis, as it were an after-placing. (4) Prostaxis, or
adjoining, is, when to both flanks of the battle, or to one flank, some of
the hindmost are added, the front of them which are added lying even with the
front of the battle. This addition is called Prostaxis. (5) Entaxis or
insition, is, when it seems good to set the light Armed within the spaces of
the Phalange, man to man. (6) Hypotaxis or double-winging, is, when a man
bestows the light armed on the wings of the phalange, so that the whole
figure resembles a threefold gate or door.

Cap. 31.
Hypotaxis, or double-winging Entaxis, or insertion Protaxis, or forefronting



NOTES.
THis Chapter shows the enlarging of a Phalange or battle, by diverse
placings partly of the armed, partly of the light-armed. It is not hard to be
understood; the rather because most of the alterations here mentioned are
spoken of heretofore either in Aelian, or in my notes: Six forms are here set
down, two by changing the place of some of the Armed, the other four by
changing the place of the light-armed, the armed are altered by Doubling the
front by middle men.
Parembole or Adjoining.
Prostaxis, the light armed by Forefronting.
Protaxis, Placing after.
Epitaxis, Placing between.
Entaxis, and Placing on the wings.
Hypotaxis; what the signification of each is shall be showed in the notes
following.

1. Parembole.] This must always be of armed, which are taken from the rear
of the Armed, and inserted betwixt the files of the front: of this kind is the
doubling of the front by middle men with their half files, whereof Aelian has
spoken in the 29 Chapter, see the figure there.

2. Protaxis or fore-fronting.] I have showed before in the notes upon the
seventh Chapter, that the light-armed were diversely placed in the front, in the
rear, on the wings, within the battle; when they are placed before, it is
called Protaxis, see the figure here: Diod. Sic. l. 19. 717. ^.
Ptolomie and Seleucus being to fight against Demetrius, who had many
Elephants, placed the light armed before, to the intent to wound the Elephants
and turn them away from their Phalange: so Alexander, so Darius, at the
battle of Issos, placed darters and slingers before the fronts of their
phalange: they serve greatly to annoy the Enemy being so placed, especially
being not charged with horse or pikes; if they be charged with either, they are
to retire into the interuals of their own battle of pikes: See Onosander
cited by me in my notes upon the 7 Chapter of this Book.

3. Epitaxis.] Ordering of the light-armed behind was the usual manner of the
Macedonian Embattelling, from whence they drew them at pleasure to any place of
service: see the 7 Chapter.

4. Prostaxis] it is, when armed are taken from behind and laid to one or both
flanks of the battle fronting even with the front thereof, which is a
doubling of ranks, as is before showed, done when the hinder half files
divide themselves, march out and front with the fileleaders, or else march out
entirely without division.

Entaxis] Incision is always of the light armed into the spaces of the armed.
It is all one with pareutaxis, another Greek word used in the same sense.

6. Hypotaxis.] Placing of the light armed on the wings was much used in
ancient time, as the manner is also at this day: but Aelian would have them so
placed, that the eminency of them should make a hollow front in the battle:
Patritius takes Hypotaxis to be the placing of the light armed in the rear,
which seems to be a mistaking, both because the placing of them in the rear
is in this Chapter called Epitaxis, and also because there being four manners
of ordering the light-armed, one in the front, another in the rear, the third
within the body of the Phalange man to man, the fourth in the wings: if this
ordering should be understood to be behind the Phalange, there would be two
kinds of placing of the light armed in the rear, and none of ordering them in
the flanks: Besides, when Aelian says, they are placed (...), under the wings
of the battle, he sufficiently expresses himself, the flanks of the
battle on both sides being the uttermost parts of the wings.

The Use, and advantage of these exercises of Arms. CHAP. XXXIV.
THese precepts of turning about of faces, of wheeling, and double wheeling of
the battle, and of reducing it to the first posture, are of great use in (1)
sudden approaches of the Enemy, whether he show himself on the right or left
hand, or in the rear of our march. The like may be said of Countermarches, of
which the Macedonians are held to be the inuenters of the Macedonian, the
Lacedaemonians of the Lacedemonian, from whom the Appellations are accordingly
drawn. The Histories witness, that Phillip (who much enlarged the Macedonian
Kingdom, and ouer-came the Grecians in a battle at Cheronea, and made
himself General of Grecia) and likewise his Son Alexander, who in short
time conquered all Asia, made small account of the Macedonian countermarch,
unless necessity forced it; and that by use of the Lacedemonian, they both
became victorious over their enemies. For the Macedonian countermarch, the
Enemy falling upon the rear, is cause of great disorder, in as much as the
hindermost marching up to the front, and making show of running away, it more
incourageth and emboldeneth the Enemy to fall on, for fear and pursuit of the
Enemy is ordinarily incident to this Countermarch: but the Lacedemo^ian
countermarch is of contrary effect; for when the Enemy shows himself in the
rear, the file-leaders with their followers bravely advancing, and opposing
themselves, it strikes no small fear and terror into their minds.

NOTES.
ALL the four motions of a battle; Facing, Countermarching, Doubling, and
Wheeling, are before handled: In this Chapter Aelian briefly rehearses the use
of them, especially in

1. Sudden approaches of the Enemy.] If the Enemy come suddenly upon us, he
must direct himself either against our front, or our rear, or our flanks. If
Against the front.
against our front, we need no other motion then that whereby we may
strengthen our front, which is usually done by doubling of ranks; we march for
the most part in a hearse, in which form there cannot come many hands to fight:
and that is the reason why it is accounted the weakest form to join with the
Enemy. Doubling of ranks.
Doubling of ranks helps that defect, and brings as many hands to fight,
as the proportion of forces will allow: If against the Against the rear.
rear, and time straight you not, and your battle be in open order, you have
the use of Countermarch.
countermarch, which brings the best hands to fight; for the File-leaders are
esteemed the flower of the Army: your battle being in order or close order,
you are to Wheeling.
wheel it about to your right or left

Cap. 32. The action of wheeling


Cap. 32. The manner of wheeling
The first posture Closing of files Closing of ranks forward The Front



Cap 33 Os Cloinges
Closing to the middes^ The front after closing y^ right action Closing to y^
left ^and Closing to y^ right ^and The Front before closing The Front of y^
battle before closing



hand, and so to oppose the front against the Enemy. But in both these motions
the caution of Aelian is, that the Enemy surprise you not whilst you are in
the a(...)ion of countermarch or wheeling, lest taking his advantage, he
charge you being in disorder. Therefore if he come so near, that you have no
liberty to countermarch or wheel, your only refuge is to Facing.
face about to the right or left hand, for so he shall not be able to give upon
your back: If the enemy appear upon any flank, countermarch of the Front
will not avail, much less doubling against the flank of ranks, or files, but
you must either wheel your Front to the flank, or if you have not time enough
so to do, you are to face your battle to that hand: The use of these motions
has been handled in their several Chapters more at large.

Of the Signs of Direction which are to be giuin to the Army, and of their
several kinds. CHAP. XXXV.
(1) WE are to acquaint our Forces both Foot and Horse, perfectly with the (2)
voice, and perfectly with (3) visible signs, that whatsoever is fitting, may
be executed and done, as occasion shall require. (4) Some things also are to be
denounced by the Trumpet: for so all directions will be fully accomplished, and
sort to a desired effect. (5) The signs therefore which are delivered by
voice, are most evident and clear, if they have no impediment. (6) But the
most certain and least tumultuous signs are such as are presented to the eye*
if they be not obscured. The voice sometime cannot be heard by reason of the
clashing of ^rmour, or trampling or neying of Horses, or tumult of carriage, or
noise and confused sound of the multitude. The visible signs also become many
ways uncertain, by thickness of air, by dust, by rain, or snow, or
sunshine, or else through ground that is uneven or full of trees, or of
turnings. And sometimes it will not be easy to find out signs for all uses,
occasions eftsoons presenting new matter, to which a man is not accustomed:
yet can it not so fall out, that either by voice, or by signal, we should not
give sure and certain direction.

NOTES.
1 THe ordinary motions in a Phalange are all represented by Aelian. Now
comes he to speak of Signs, which direct, and are means of effecting all
these motions, and without which the Army is no Army, but remains a body
vngouernable, and may aptly be resembled to a Ship that has no rudder: For
as a Ship in a tempest is driven by all winds, tossed by waves, thrown every
way upon rocks, upon sands, upon dangerous shoares, that is not guided by the
Master, who stands and moves at the helm; So an Army not directed by
signs, and forecast of the General, is carried away through ignorance and
violence of affection, sometimes of anger, sometimes offeare, sometimes of
revenge, and other unbridled desires, and breaks or else falls into
confusion through disorder, working little against the enemy, may rather giving
him means of a certain victory. The ship is like the Army* the General
like the Master, the words of Direction like the Rudder, guiding all and every
motion of the Army: For the Army being a body of many heads* whereof every one
has a several sense, hangs together not by the natural coherence and
knitting of one member to another, but by artificial joining of man to man,
file to file, body to body, whereby it is gathered together into one Mass, and
figured into many members and joints, and ruled not by the reason and judgment
of it self, but by the reason and understanding of the General. So that no
man is to demand why this or that is commanded, but is to execute it alone for
this Cause, because it is commanded: The General then being to Command, and
direct the actions of the whole Army, ought to find out means to speak and
discourse with them all at once, in such a language, as it were, that all may
understand at once. For the occurrence of war being oftentimes sudden, and
once slipped by, irrecouerable, require sudden means of speedy direction, that
nothing fall out so unlooked for, but the Army may have notice how to prevent
and avoid, or else to turn it to their most advantage; the rather because in
war, safety and life come in question, in loss of which, no pardon of
negligence can be admitted. And seeing there are two principal senses of
advertisement, the ear the one, the other the eye; the ear to hear all
manner of sounds, the eye to discern all manner of colors and shapes, it has
been the witty inventions so ancient Generals, to inform their Armies by the
one, and by the other; by the eye when there was no use of the ear; by the
ear when the eye could not be informed: The true observation and use of these
signs avail much in war. Veget. l. 3. c. 5.
Vegetius says, that nothing profits more to victory, then to obey the
admonition of signs. Former experience has taught, that the neglect or error
of signs, has brought in great inconveniences, and quite overthrown the
enterprises in hand. Polyb. l. 9. 555. ^.
Polybius remembers it in Aratus the elder, a General of the Achaeans,
Cratus, says he, the General of the Achaeans, seeking to get the Cy^ethian
City by a plot, agreed with those of his party within the City, upon a certain
time to come by night to the river that runs by Cynethe, there refreshing
and staying his Army a while, and that those within taking their time, should
send about midday out of the gate secretly one of their companions, to stand in
a cloak by a hill appointed, which was not far from the City, to give
advertisement to Aratus to march on* and that the rest about that time should
lay hands upon the Polemarches, ( that used to guard the gates) while they
reposed themselves and slept: And that this done, the Acheans should with all
speed hasten to the gates, out of their Ambush. These things concluded, and the
time approaching, Aratus came accordingly, and hiding himself by the river,
awaited the signal: About the fifth hour, one of the City an owner of
sheep, that bore extraordinary fine wool, and were usually feeding about the
City, came out of the City gate in a cloak, desirous to speak with the
shepherd about some private business of his own, and standing upon the same
hill, looked round about for the shepherd. Aratus and his folk imagining
this to be the expected signal, ran in all have toward the City; but because
nothing was ready within, the gates were quickly shut, and not only Aratus
missed of his purpose, but the Citizens also that conspired with him* fell into
great misfortunes, being taken with the manner, and presently brought forth and
put to death. This may be an example of error and misprision of the sign* Of
the neglect, and likewise of the like error and misprision, there is a notable
example in Caesar de bell. Gall. l. 7. 156.
Caesar's Comentaries in the siege of Alexia, Where Caesar having won the
Enemies camp, lying upon a hill near the Town, sounded a retreat to his army
that was in fight: the Ensigns of the tenth legion made a stand, but the
Soldiers of the other legions not hearing the sound of the trumpet, by reason
of a valley, beyond which they were; were yet held back by the Tribunes and
Legates, as Caesar had given direction. Notwithstanding, being puffed up with
the hope of a speedy victory, and with the fight of the Enemy, and their happy
battles of former times, thinking nothing so hard that it might not be
achieved by their valor, they made no end of their chase, till they came
near to the Wall, and Gates of the Town; and some of them entering at a gate,
othersome clymbing up the wall, imagined they had gotten possession of the
town. In the mean time the Enemies forces, who were busy in fortifying
without on the other side of the town, being acquainted herewith by message,
sent their horse before, and followed after themselves, and in great numbers
charged the Romans: The fight was hard, the enemy trusting to the advantage of
the place and to their number, the Romans to their valor, when on the sudden
were seen on the open side of the Romans the Heduan Horse who served in
Caesar's Army, and were by him sent on the right hand to get up the hill
another way: they by likeness of their armor put Caesar's soldiers in a great
fear. And although it might easily ^e discerned, that their left shoulder was
unarmed, which was the sign of such as were friends, yet the Romans conceived
them to be enemies, and to use that device only to ouer-reach and entrap them.
Being oppressed on all hands, and 46 Three were 60 Centurions in a Roman Legion.
Centurions slain, they were beaten from their ground with the loss of few
less then 700 men. Caesar's Soldiers here offended in both kinds in the
neglect of their Generals Command, which he gave by sign, and in mistaking the
sign, which was usual for the Heduans to be known by. Caesar's judgment of
these two faults appears in his speech, which he made to his Army presently
upon the loss; in which he reprehended their rashness, in that they would
needs take upon them to judge how far they were to proceed, and neither be
held in with the sign of retreat that was given, ^or yet be commanded by the
Tribunes and Legates. He showed of what force the disadvantage of ground was,
and what his opinion was before this time at Auaricum, where surprising the
Enemy without a General and Horse, he let an assured victory slip out of his
hand, because he would not hazard, no not a small loss in fight upon
inequality of ground. As much as he admired their brave minds and resolution,
whom neither the fortifications of the Enemies Camp, nor the height of the
Mountain, nor the wall of the Town could hold back; so much he reprehended
their presumption and arrogance, in that about the victory and issue of things,
they preferred their own conceits before the opinion of their General: For
his part he required as well modesty and continency in a Soldier, as valor
and magnanimity.

So Caesar insinuating that obedience and heedfulnesse were two principal
virtues in a Soldier; by the one to be ready at all commands, by the other to
execute with discretion what was commanded: by want of heedfulnesse they
perceived not the sign of retreat which was proposed unto them, and mistook
the mark of the Heduans, whom they esteemed for their foes; by want of
obedience to their Officers, they incurred the danger and loss which they
sustained: diligent care therefore is to be had of signs, by which the mind
of the General in all directions is declared, and as it were set before the
eyes of the whole Army.

The Inuentors of the Signs of War were many. The Ensign was invented by
the Egyptians, as I have showed in my notes upon the 9 chap. of this Book,
where also the reason of the invention is given. ^lin natural. ^ist. l. 7. c. ^
7.
The order of an Army, the giving of the sign, the watch, the watchword was
invented by Palamedes, the trumpet by Tirrhenus the Son of Hercules.

To give signs to an Army pertains, as I have showed, to him that is the
Governor thereof, that is, to the General. The manner how signs were by him
given, appears in Onosander ^. 25*
Onosander, I will recite his words: Let all signs, quoth he, (he meaning by
voice) and (...).
by-signes be delivered to the Officers of the Army; in as much as for a
General to go up and down and proclaim the sign to all, is the part of an
unwise and unexperienced Man, and both time is lost in denoun^ing it, and it is
often a cause of tumult, whilst every man asks what the sign is. Besides,
one adds something to the Generals words, another diminish^th them through
ignorance. Leo ^. 20.. ^ ^6.
Leo has almost the same words, at least the same sense, and as I take it,
he borrows them from Onosander. Onosand. c. 25.
Onosander adds, It behooves him to give the word to his highest Commanders,
who are to deliver it over to the next to themselves, and they to their next
inferior Officers, till it come to the last; for so shall every one speedily,
decently, and quietly know what is commanded. And this was the manner of the
Grecians, as may appear by Thucydides, who describing the usage of the
Lacedaemonians in giving the word and signs, of direction, has thus, And
presently the Lacedaemonians Polemarches. Lochagi. Penteco^^ers. Enomotarchs.
Xenoph. Cyrop. l. 8. 203. ^.
ordered themselves in battle, Agis the King commanding, as their law is; for
when the King leads, all things are under his command, and he gives
direction to the Polemarches, they to the Lochagij, who deliver it to the
Pentecosters, and they to the Enomotarches, from whom the Soldiers of the
Enomoties have it. This was then the manner of the Grecians. How the Romans did
deliver ou^ their word you may find in the sixth Book of Polyb. l. 6. 479* and
Lipsius ad ^olyb. ^. 5. dial* 9. Veget. l. 3. ^. 5.
Polybius. But because it pertains not to Aelian, who entreats of the
Grecian discipline alone, I remit the Reader to my marginall quotation. The
sign was then delivered from the superior Officers to the inferior, and from
them to the Soldier* the kinds of signs that were delivered are reckoned up
in this Chapter, being in number two; for they were presented either to the
ear or to the eye* to the ear, as all sounds, whether man's voice or trumpets,
or other instruments of war, which were presented for direction or motion of
the Army. To the eye, as all mute signs (so they are called which have no
sound) which were set up to the view of the Soldier for direction likewise:
Both of these kinds were either ordinary or extraordinary; ordinary, which had
daily use in the Army, as the Trumpet, Ensigns, and such like, as served for
ordinary direction. Extraordinary, which were brought in as occasion was
offered of Sig(...)
Vocalia. Semiv^calia Muta.

new command: besides, some were delivered openly, as the vocal, semiuocall
and mute signs, which by proclamation, sound of instruments, or representation
were set forth to the whole army at once; some privily, as the word, and such
like, which passed secretly from one to another, and were received privately in
the ear. This variety was invented, that in case one kind failed, or would
not serve, another might, as I have noted before out of Suidas upon the ninth
Chapter, and as Aelian teaches in this Chapter.

The ends of signs are two, one to order and direct our own forces, the other
to distinguish them from the Enemy.

Because I have before spoken of the diversity of vocal and mute signs, it
Sig^^ Vocalia.
shall not be amiss here to show the use of them both by examples.

And this is first to be noted, that the Graecians in governing their troops,
as much as they could, retained the use of the voice. In public directions
they used the voice of the Crier; I have before noted it upon the 9 Chapt. If
the command required secrecy, the General gave it to his chief Commanders
secretly by word: Of this kind was the sign delivered to discern enemy from
his own soldiers in a battle to be fought. Xenoph. d'exp. l. 1. 284. ^.
Xenophon writes, that at such time as Cyrus the younger and Artaxerxes were to
join battle, Cyrus sitting on horseback a pretty distance from the
Grecian troops, heard a murmuring noise running along through their whole
battle, and asking Xenophon ( who was then present with him) what noise it
might be, and what it meant, Xenophon told him, that the Word was now given the
second time: He wondering who had revealed the Word to the Enemy, desired to
know what the new word was; Xenophon answered, it was Jupiter the Savior and
victory; which Cyrus hearing, I accept it, says he, and let it be so. The
murmr here mentioned arose out of the delivering of the sign of the
battle, which being delivered to the inferior Officers by Clearchus, the
chief Commander of the Grecians, and the Officers communicating it to the
Soldiers, and the Soldiers one to another, went thorough the whole body of
the phalange with a soft and still noise of them, that whispered it in the ears
of their companions. Xenophon has here set down, that the word was Jupiter
the savior and victory; In Xenoph. d^ exp^^* l. ^. 386. ^.
another place he has, Jupiter the Savior and Hercules the guide, for the
sign. To know who was an enemy who a friend, the soldiers meeting one another
demanded the sign; if they delivered the word given by the General, they held
them for friends, if otherwise, for enemies: Polyen* l. ^*
Polyen tells of one Acues an Arcadian General, who commanded his Soldiers
to kill him, whosoever he were that should ask the word: so that he made the
voice of the enemy serve for the word to his own Soldiers. This sign was
changed in every battle, lest, if still the same signs were used, the Enemy
might happily come to the knowledge of them, and so be taken for friend, under
color whereof much treason might be wrought: not much unlike the sign given
in a battle to be fought, is the watchword by night, which was usually
delivered to the first Officers of the Army, and by them derived to the rest,
and so brought down to the Soldiers, and was no less observed in a City,
then in the Camp; in both which the same form of watching was held, save that
in a Camp there were Sentinels per due, as we term them at this day (the
Grecians called them (...)) who stood and watched without the trench of the
camp; whereas the Cities for the most part had Sentinels watching only upon
the walls or marketplace, or other pieces of strength giving to, and receiving
the word from the rounders. And as the signs of battle varied upon occasion,
as the last example spesified, so the watch-words were often changed, for fear
they might come to the notice of the enemy; for the Enemy having the
Watchword, might nourish spies in our Camp or City, and have certain
intelligence of all, that passes there, as being taken for friends, because
they carried the mark and tokens of friends; and they were changed not only
at the relief of the watch, which time is the usual moment of varying the
word, but oftentimes after the same night, for fear that a Sentinel might be
snatched up without the Camp by an enemy, or else because of treason within,
in revealing the word to the enemy; oftentimes also they gave a (...).
double word, one to the sentinel, another to the round; and ^ Polyb. l 9. 5^6.
sometimes added a (...) ^. 25. For the double sign and bysigne, ^ Aen^. ^.
24, 25. and Casaub. in notis ad Aene ^. 4. etc. 24, 25.
mute sign, to the word, which kind they called (...), as it were a by-signe,:
and these are all the secret signs by word, which I find in the Grecian
practice. For the other words, as the exhortation of the General to the Army,
and the words of training delivered by the Crier to the Soldiers, (for every
Company had a Crier, because his voice was stronger and louder then the
Captains,) they neither are secret, and seem rather to be in the nature of
Commands, then Signs. The single word of battle and watch, I find to be
called by no other name then (...), if it were a double word (...), if a mute
sign were joined to the word (...).

The voice then of a man was used for a sign either when secrecy was
required, or else where the Crier might be heard in discharging his duty by
proclamation, because it was weak and could not extend to the hearing of ths
whole Army, and many things required for public and quick direction,
Instruments of sound were brought in. Vegetius says very well, Because a
Semiuocalia.
multitude cannot be governed by voice alone in the tumults of fight, and
because many things are to be commanded and done, according to necessity, the
ancient use of all Nations found out, how the whole Army by signs might with
speed have notice of and follow that, which the General judged profitable for
it. To help therefore the weakness of the voice, Instruments of sound were
brought in, which were of three sorts amongst the Grecians, the Trumpet, the
Flute, and the Harp. The Sea my notes upon the 9. Chapter.
Flute was used by the Lacedaemonians the Harp by the Cretans. (even to the
joining of battle) all other Grecians used the Trumpet. Diod. Sic. l. 13. 3^3.
And yet in the battle during the time of fight, and in retreats, the
Lacedaemonians also used the trumpet. I have noted it before upon the 9 Chapter,
where I have also touched in what occasions and actions the trumpet was the
sign. Now will I give some Presidents of the particulars thece remembered.

And first the Trumpet gave the sign of removing the Camp: which appears by
this precpt of Leo. 11 27.
Leo; When you will remove your Camp without tumult, you are to given
commandment over night. And again, the same day in which you remove, you are
in the morning by day light to signify the remove by sound of the Trumpet
three times, and then remove, and the Leaders and the armed are to go out
first, then the wagons, if any be, and then other things which are carried for
the use of the Army. Thus Leo, for the remove by day. By night, the Army of the
Grecians that fought with Artaxerxes (as Xenophon de exp. l. a. 275.
Xenophon reports) removed after this sort. After the death of Cyrus, the
Grecians that followed Cyrus, being in distress, and pinched with want of al
things, not knowing what course to take, and having a message from Arieus (a
chief Persian Commander under Cyrus while he lived) to come and join with
him, that they might return together to Ionia, from whence they first began to
march, Clearchus the Principal Commander of Grecians being determined to do
as Arieus counseled, and yet loath the enemy should know of his departure, gave
these directions to the Army, This must de your course, says he, we must go
every man to his lodging, and sup with such provision as he has, and when the
Horn gives the sign to rest, trusse up your baggage, at the second sign lay
it upon the carriage beasts, at the third every man follow his Leader. The
Captains and Coronels hearing this, did as they were commanded. This practice
of Clearchus differs not much from Leos precept; for he used three sounds of
the trumpet, and so Leo does command: Clearchus yet further shows what was
be done at every sign, which Leo pretermitteth, perhaps as a thing commonly
known: Besides, Clearchus used all these signs for another end, then for
which they were first instituted. The Grecians at evening discharged their
workmen from their work by sound of trumpet, and that was called the sign of
rest: then they divided the night into four parts, which were called four
watches, because rheir Sentinels were four times relieved in a night, and at
every relief the Trumpet sounded. Now the sounds of the Trumpet by night,
Clearchus converted into signs for marching according to Leoes prescription,
and removed his Camp, the enemy not perceiving it. Hence it appears then
that the Camp was removed by the sound of the Trumpet: And yet I find that
Alexander brought in an alteration about this sign of remoouing: For Q.
Curtius l. 5. 107.
Curtius remembers that Alexander at the first used it, but perceiving
afterward, that this sign could hardly be discerned by the whole Army, by
reason of the noise and stirring of the multitude, thought it better to stick
down a Pole, and upon the top of it to hang a colored cloth, to give his Army
notice, that he meant to remove, and ever after held himself to that sign.

The Trumpet likewise was the Xenop. l. 3. 308.
sign of fight: And when all the Trumpets of the Army sounded, it was called
Diod Sic. 673. 760. 372.
(...), (in Latin Classium;) and the whole Army hearing this sign, began to
advance, and sung the Xenoph l. 1. d'exp. 265 Diod. Sic. l. 13. 372.
Paean, and gave a shout, and presently joined with the enemy. The Greek
histories every where give testimony hereof.

But we are to note that this sounding of trumpets all together, was before
the Army came to join with the enemy, and that the end of it was to strike a
terror into the enemy, and to encourage and stir up the minds of their own
people to fight; for in the time of fight, they used another manner according
to this precept of Leo ^. 12.. 6^. 107.
Leo, I would not advise you to sound with many Trumpets, during the time of
conflict, it being a thing both hurtful, and bringing with it tumult and
confusion: for thereby no Commander can be heard. But if the place be found
plain and even, the Trumpet of the middle battle will be sufficient for all
the other battles: if it be uneven, or the wind, as it often happens,
boisterous, or the noise of waters hinder the cleernesse of the sound, it will
not be inconvenient for a Trumpet to speak in every battle so that three may
be sounded in the whole Army. For the more that stillness is observed, the
less shall the youger sort of Soldiers be disturbed, or the beasts
affrighted, and more terrible shall the battle seem to the enemy, and
directions be better heard and put in execution.

The Trumpes were therefore the signs of fight, first all sounding together
when the Army went to charge, and afterward one or three at the most during the
time of fight.

And as the sign of fight was given by the Trumpet, so was the sign of
retreat.

This also is manifest by the stratagem of Pammenes. Polyen relates that he f
Polyen. in ^^^^ m^ne l. 5.. 4.
deceived his enemies by using a contrary course in sounding the Trumpet, then
the common manner was, commanding his Soldiers when he sounded the retreat,
they should go to charge; when he sounded a charge, they should retreat: in
doing whereof, he greatly annoyed his enemies. The example of Diod. ^ic. 15.
475.
Agesilaus cited by me in my notes upon the 9 Chapter shows, that the
trumpet was used for retreats: and the History of Callicratidas reported by
Diodor. Scic. in his 15 Book; Suidas names this kind of sound given by the
trumpet, (...), as it were h Suidas i^ (...).
a calling back, or a command to retire.

The Trumpet finally was used as a sign for the Army to stand, or to go
forward as the business required. Albeit I must confess, there were other
usual signs besides the trumpet in this case: Leo ^. 7.. 31.
Leo says, In exercise of Horse, when you are to move the Body, you are to
give sign either with the voice alone, or with the Trumpet, or else with the
bowing down of a Baneroll, and so to move them. And if you would have them to
make alte, you are to do it either with he voice, saying stand, or with the
Trumpet or with the noise of a Targetbeaten upon with a sword. The like he
speaks of the exercise of foot in the same Chap and after in the 9 Chapter he
says, you shall command the Soldiers to stand, by knowing exactly the sound
of the Trumpet, and again to move by the sound of the trumpet. So that although
other signs were given for marching and retreat, yet the most common sign was
by the Trumpet. Semiuocalia.
Now we are to understand, that all signs given by sound to the ear (except
by the voice) are called signa semiuocalia, because albeit their sound be
louder and stronger for the most part then the voice is, yet they are not
articulated, as is the sound of the voice. Hitherto of signs that were given
to the ear by the sound. Now are we to speak briefly of mute signs, or those
that were set up, as it were, a mark for the eye.

Mute sign swear of two kinds: for either they were simple, and used by
themselves, as an object of the eye alone, or else they were mixed, and joined
Mute signs.
to signs of sound, and so communicated both to the eye and to the ear. Of
the second for were those whereof I have spoken a little before, and they were
called (...), namely when a mute si ne is added to a vocal: as when to the
Word in the night is joined some special gesture of the body, as holding down
or nodding of the head, lifting up the hand, putting off the hat, heauing up
the skirt of the garment, etc. concerning which see Onosand. c. 26.
Onosander and Aeneas c. 24.
Of the first kind were signs presented to the eye alone, which extended very
largely, and served where neither voice not trumpet could be heard by reason of
the remorenesse of the place; these were called (...), signs properly, and
(...) likewise, because it was agreed by the parties, who gave and took them,
that they should have such and such signification. The words be different, but
the meaning and effect is all one; for as no sign can be, but there must be a
giver and a taker of the sign, so ^^ that respect the signs called (...) by
reason of the communication betwixt the giver and taker of the sign, may aptly
also be termed (...). And albeit I noted before that the sign of the battle
and the watchword was called by no other name but (...), yet it (...) taken
often for a mute sign also: Many occasions were of giving these signs, and
they were sometimes shown by day sometimes by night, and in the day time they
were sometime proposed in the battle, sometime in other places, where they
might be perceived. Arr. ^ 1. 6. D.
Arrian historieth of Alexander the Great, that at his being in the Country of
the Taulantians, his enemies Clytus and Glaucias, had with man^ horse, darters,
and slingers, and not a few armed men, taken the Mountains and high places, by
which he was to pass in returning. The place was straight and woody, shut up
on the one side with a river, on the other side with an exceeding high
mountain, the sides whereof were very steep, so that the Army could not
march with more then four armed in front. Alexander marshalled his troops to
120 in depth, and ordering 200 horse on each wing, he commanded silence, and
heed to be taken to his directions: And first he willed the armed to advance
their pikes, then upon a (...)
sign given to let them fall, and charge, then to turn them close knit to the
right hand, then to the left, and sometime he moved the battle quickly
forward, and sometime he moved it to the one wing, sometime to the other. And
so fashioning it into diverse shapes in short time, and at last casting it into
a wedge, as it were, he led it against the Enemy; who stood wondering at the
speediness and good order of the diverse motions; and now perceiving the Army
to be led against them, abode not the charge, but left the hill, which he held,
and fled. Here are mentioned seven several motions of the phalange, which we
have in practice at this day: 1 Advancing of Pikes, 2 charging of them, 3 first
to the right hand, 4 then to the left hand, 5 moving of the battle forward, 6
moving it to the right wing, and then 7 to the left. And all these motions were
directed by a sign; what this sign was, may be doubted, because it is not
expressed whether it was by voice, trumpet, or a mute sign. For my part I
would not take it to have been by voice; for how could the voice be heard in
so great an Army as Alexander had (which according to Diodor. Sec. l. 17. 566.
Diodorus Siculus consisted of 30000 foot and 3000 horse) and was stretched out
in depth, and had but four armed in front: nor yet would I imagine it to have
been given by trumpet; because, though perhaps the trumpet might be heard of
all the Army, by reason of the Echo rebounding from the Mountain and river,
yet could it not fitly and clearly distinguish the sound that should direct
these seven several motions: I have before declared in what case the trumpet
was employed. Let me with leave therefore think, that it was a mute sign
presented to the eye; as for the purpose a Coat, or other garment fastened to
the end of a long staff, the color whereof being eminent, and the staff
being lifted aloft might be perceived by the whole Army. The sign then
advanced to the full height, might signify advancing of Pikes, which was the
first motion. Being abased and held level before the front, charging to the
front, which was the second motion; held out level to the right flank
charging to the right hand, to the left flank, charging to the left hand;
which were the third and fourth motions of Alexander: moving forward in front,
it might be a sign for the battle to follow, which was the fifth. Moving to
the right hand, for the battle to march to the right, which was the sixth: to
the left, for the battle to move to the left, which was the seventh; which
motion might more easily be performed, in case the ensigns of the particular
Companies took their direction from the maine sign, and so framed themselves
to the same motions, and the Soldiers to the motions of their Ensigns: This I
say is my conjecture, wherein notwithstanding I prejudice no man's opinion, but
leave every man to his own conceit and sense. Xenoph. hist. great. l. 6. 587.
C.
Xenophon relates a notable example of Iphicrates the Athenian, who being
chosen Admiral by the City, as soon as he began to take the Sea with his
Navy, both at once sailed, and also prepared all things necessary for
Sea Fight: for he left at home the greater sails, as one that sailed forth to
fight, and seldom used the greater masts, were the wind never so fair, but
hasting forward with the oar, he both made the bodies of his men strong and
healthy, and the Navy gained a speedier way: and oftentimes where he meant to
dine, there would he draw his whole Navy from the shore in A single file.
a wing? and turning them about, and addressing their prowes to the land, give
a sign for the ships to hasten with all celerity to the land, every one as it
could. It was a great reward and victory for those that came first to land, to
water, and take all thing they needed, as also to dine, and a great punishment
to the sluggards to want those commodities, and besides to put to sea again,
when the sign was given: for the first did all things at ease, and as they
list, the last were streightn^d with haste, and must do as they could. When,
by chance he dined in the enemies Country, he set out Sentinels some upon land
as behooued, other upon ships rearing up the Masts, that from them they might
take a view of all things: for these being placed in a higher station, might
easily discern and see further, then the other standing upon even ground:
wheresoever he supped and slept, he suffered no fires to be made in the Camp
by night, but held light before the Camp, that no man might have access to it
without discovery. Oftentimes in fair weather, he no sooner supped, but put to
sea again, and in case there were a fresh gale, sailed forward* and the
sailers in the mean time gave themselves to rest: when have was needful he
relieved the sailors by turns, and in the day time upon (...). Xenoph. hist
grec. l. 6. 587. C.
signs led sometimes in a wing, some times in a phalange.

That these were mute signs from the Admiral ship (besides that, the word
(...) imports so much for the most part) no man I think acquainted with
Sea-seruice will make question, considering that both voice and Leo c. 19.. 40.
trumpet easily give place to the whistling of winds and roaring of tempests,
and raging of waves of the Sea. To say nothing of the distance of one ship from
another, nor of the tumult and cry of Mariners, or sound of oars (for in those
times sea fights were altogether in Galleys driven with oars) which make them
incapable of direction by any other kind of sign. And for these mute signs
to be given by sea, I mean, of what kind they should be, and to what end, and
in what manner delivered, I think good to cite the words of the Emperor Leo,
which sound thus: Leo c. 19.. 42.
Let there be, says he, in your Galley (...).
a sign standing in some eminent place, either an ensign, or some banerall,
or some such like, wherewith after you have signified what is to be done, your
direction may straight be understood and executed, whether you would have your
Navy to go to charge, or retire from the Enemy, or to countermarch to
encompasse the enemy, or to hasten to relieve some of your own party
distressed, or slack or quicken their advancing, or lay or avoid an ambush, or
such like: that they seeing the signs from your ship, may receive direction
what is to be done. And a little after he declares the manner and usage of
these signs, saying; Let the sign Le^ c. 19. 42.
be shown either standing upright, or enclining to the right or left hand, or
lifted aloft, or let fall low, or be taken clean away, or transported to
another place, or changing by making the head of it appear in diverse forms by
adding other shapes of colors unto it, as was used by the Ancients. For their
manner was in the day of battle to rear up a red colored sign, which they
called Diod. Sic. l. 13. 372.
(...), and it was nothing else but a piece of red cloth exalted upon a long
staff, and such like; but it may be more safely delivered by your own hand. I
thought good to cite these passages of Leo, the rather to give light to the
place last before recited out of Zenophon. For out of this precept of Leo the
practice of Iphicrates his motions may more perspicuously appear.

Now that these red colored signs, and signs of other colors also were used
in fights on land, Toly^. l. 2. 151 D
Polybius shows in the battle between Antigonus the Macedonian King, and
Cleomenes the King of Sparta. Antigonus Army consisted of diverse nations,
Macedonians, Agrians, Galatians, Achaeans, Baeotians, Epirotes, Acarnans,
Illyrians. Cleomenes his enemy had taken and fortified all the straight
passages which led into the territory of the Lacedaemonians (for thither did
Antigonus bend his invasion) and so disposed his forces that Antigonus could
not pass without fight: Hereupon Antigonus resolved to fight; and because his
fight was to be ordered in and against diverse places, and at diverse times, as
his advantage fell out, he gave diverse signs to his different people, when to
give on: (...).
The sign to the Illyrians was, then to charge up

Cap. 30.
The Coelembolos, or hollowfronted wedge The right Induction The front



Cap. 36.
The Coelembolos The left wing The Phalange set against ye left wing of ye
Coelembolos The front The forbearing Phglange The right wing The Phalange set
against ye right wing of ye Coelembolos



Cap* 36.
The File-leaders A Deduction to the left hand A right induction The Front A
Deduction to the right hand The File leaders



the hill, when they saw a white linen cloth held up from the place about
Olympas, to the Megalopolitans and horse, when they saw the King lift up a
purple garment. Caesar ^. ^. de be^. civil 323.
Caesar commanded his Soldiers not to ^ight without his direction, saying. he
would give a sign with an ensign, when he would have them begin. And albeit
the color of red was used for the most part in Signals, yet was not the party
that gave the sign precisely tied to any color: it was enough if the sign
might give notice of the Generals intent to them, whom it concerned: the first
Diod. Sic. ^. 20. 759.
Ptolowie gave a sign to his Navy to begin the fight by hoisting up a gui^^
Target in his Admiral galley, Vegec. l. 3. ^. ^.
other with holding up or shaking their garment, or their hand, or with wearing
some unusual mark upon a horse, upon Arms, upon vestures, or such like. This
is to be noted for a general rule, that when you find in history a sign was
given at a great distance, and it is not expressed what sign it was, you must
understand that it was a mute sign presented to the eye, because the sense of
hearing is feeble, and not able to discern far off. Hitherto of mute signs
given by day. In the night, when all was covered with darkness, and the use of
sight taken away, the usual manner was to give a sign by flame of fire, which
manner of signal might be descried in the night, being the darkness never so
great: Appian in Hispanicis 306. ^.
Scipio Africanus the younger, having enclosed Numintia round about with a
trench and rampire, commanded that if the Enemy fell out upon any part of his
fortification, a red piece of cloth should be held out by day upon a long
staff, a flaming fire by night, that himself or his chief officers might
come to succor. The like shall you find in Casars Commentaries and Q. Curtius
and in other Historiographers both See vegec. ^. 3. ^. ^^
Greek and Latin.

These were the signs used in the battle, and in the Camp: without the Camp
were set Sentinels both horse and foot to fore-warne and give aduerrisement to
the General of the Enemies approach. To Ae^^^^ ^. 6^^
these oftentimes the General gave a sign amongst themselves, and they by
signs signified what was done abroad* For the manner of placing these
Sentinels, see Aeneas. The signs themselves were such as might be discerned by
the eye, and of that kind and form whereof I have made mention already.

Of Marching, and of the diverse kind of battles fit for a march. And first of
the right induction, of the Caelembolos, and of the Triphalange to be opposed
against it. CHAP. XXXVI.
(1) BEing now to speak of marching, I will first give to understand that some
kind of march is a (2) right-induction, othersome a (3) deduction on the right
or left hand, and that in a single, or double, or treble, or quadruplesided
battle: In a single, when one Enemy is feared, in a double, when two in a
treble, when three in a quadruple, when the Enemy purposes to give on all
sides. Therefore the March is undertaken sometimes in a single, sometimes in a
double, or in a threefold, or in a fourefold phalange.

(4) A right induction is, when one body of the same kind follows another;
as if a Xenagy lead, the rest follow Xenage-wise; or if a Tetrarchy lead, the
rest follow according to that form. It is so called when the march stretches
it self forth into a wing, having the depth many times exceeding the length.

Against it is opposed the caelembolos or hollow-wedge, which is framed when
the Antistomus diphalange disioyneth the leading wings, closing the rear in
form of the letter V, as the figure after does teach, in which the front is
disseuered, and the rear joined and knit together: for the right induction
pointing at the midst of the Enemies battle, the Caelembolos quickly opening
before, serves both to frustrate the charge of the front of the induction, and
to claspe in and circumuent the flanks thereof.

Furthermore a Triphalange is to be set against the Caelembolos, one Phalange
fighting against one wing of the Caelembolos, the second against the other, and
the middle or third phalange forbearing, and expecting a time fit to charge.

NOTES.
THe Marching of an Army is a principal head of war. Aelian touches it no
further, then to show the order and shapes of battles fit for a March: and were
it possible, that all grounds were alike open, and without impediments, as
namely without trees, ditches, hedge-rowes ragged ways, valleys, hills, brooks,
and such like, the best form of your marching should be to proceed with your
whole phalange in a square battle, which form is teady for all attempts of
the enemy, and is the beginning and sourse of other forms, and with no great
difficulty will take and be changed into any shape you desire. Leo^ 9. ^. 29,
30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
Leo shows the inconueniency of the Hearse or induction in marching through
Champaine and large plains, first in that the Enemy with a broad-fronted
battle may enfold and encompasse the front, and so easily rout it then,
because if the Enemy charge the flank it will quickly be broken, as being
without depth: further, if he fall upon the rear, it is in the like danger of
encompassing, as was the front: lastly neither can the front give succor and
assistance to the rear, in case it be ouerpressed by the Enemy, nor yet the
rear to the front, they being so far distance one from another. And he
concludes that the form of a square or broad-fronted battle, is fit for a
march in all occasions, being easily to be ordered, and without danger. But
seeing it is not possible, as Polib. ^. ^7. 766. B
Polibius says, or else very hard to find out places of 20 furlong, or more,
where in none of the impediments above recited shall be, the forms of marching
must necessarily be accommodated to the ground and ways through which your
forces are to pass: what forms they be, the following Chapters will show.

2. Some kind of March is a right Induction.) The expectation of the enemies
approach is oftentimes a cause of varying the kinds of march: if he always
appeared in front, there should need no other proceeding then with the
file-leaders in front: because he seeks his advantage, and in the March
sometimes attacheth the rear, sometimes one flank, sometimes another, the
Grecians to provide for all attempts, so ordered their March, that wheresoever
they feared the enemies giving on, there they opposed the file-leaders, as the
best men of the Army, and most able to receive the affront: yet for the most
part the March was undertaken in a right induction, that is; without inuerting
the ordinary kind of file-leading in front, which also is our manner of
marching at this day. But yet sometimes in a

3. Deduction on the right or left hand.] There is but one kind of right
induction, viz. a march, that has the file-leaders in the front. Of Deductions
there are 2 kinds: one to the right, the other to the left hand. And because
the file-leaders march on the right or left hand flank, not in front;
therefore the one is called a right hand deduction; the other a left hand
deduction. So that not the body which continues or begins the march, but
the place of the fileleaders in the march, makes the difference betwixt
Induction and Deduction. What the Use of Deduction is, we shall see in the next
Chapter.

4. A right Induction is.] Aelian describes the right Induction by the
marching of several bodies of one kind one after another: as if a A Xenagy and
a Syntagma, are all one: It consists of 16 files, 16 men to the file.
Xenagy lead, all the rest of the forces are to be separated into Xenagies,
and singly one after another to follow the first leading Xenagy: so of other
bodies lesser or greater. Notwithstanding in a right Induction, we must take
this caution withal, that the file-leaders proceed in the front; for otherwise
if they be placed in the flank, it is now no induction, but a deduction,
howsoever the several bodies of a kind follow one another.

This is that manner of marching which is called, marching in a wing, of which
I have spoken sufficiently in my notes upon the 30 Chapter. There are other
kind of inductiue marches set forth in the Greek History, which are not
altogether of the form which Aelian describes: for where Aelian would have
Xenagies to follow one another with the file-leaders in front, his meaning is,
that the whole 16 files of the Xenagie should be laid together all the
fileleaders being laid in an even front. Now you have examples where whole
Companies march in one file; so that all the file-leaders have not the front,
but rest included in the inward parts of the file, and yet many of these files
joined together make an induction. Xenoph. Cyr^p, l. 2. 56.
Xenophon reports, that when Cyrus the elder was mustering and exercising his
Army in the field, there came unto him a messenger from Cyaxares the King of
the: Medes, being Cyrus his uncle, signifying, that an Ambassador was arrived
from the Indies, in which regard, said he, the King would have you to come to
him with all speed, and I bring you from Cyaxares one of his richest garments:
For he desires in regard the Indians are to see you, that your presence may
be adorned with as fair and sumptuous apparel as may be. Cyrus receiving
this message, commanded the first A Taxiarch was a Captain of 100 men.
Taxiarchi to stand in front, having his Company ordered behind him in (...).
one file, and himself holding the right corner file of the battle, and
willed him to deliver that Command to the second Taxiarch, and so the word to
pass to the rest: They quickly obeyed, and put the Command in execution; and
so it came to pass in short space, that the Front had in it 300, (for so many
the Taxiarches were) the depth of the battle 100. After they stood in this
order, he commanded them to follow, as he led, and straightway he led them
running: but because he perceived that the way was too straight to march with
so many in Front, he willed the first This was a body of 1000 men, and they
were now ordered to in Front, the depth 100.
Chiliarchy to follow in the same order in which it then was, and the second in
the Rear thereof, and so the rest: and he sent two Sergeants to the turnings
of the way, to give direction to such as were not fully instructed in the
business. When they were come to Cyaxares gate, he willed the first Taxiarch
to order his Company 12 deep, and the The file was 24, and the Dodecadarchs
commanded the hinder half files.
Dodecadarches to stand in Front all along the palace; and he willed to
signify so much to the next Taxiarch; and so the rest one to another through
the whole Army. They did as they were commanded: and he went in to Cyaxares.
Here have you first a Company drawn into file, and so standing; then 299
Companies fashioned into files, and laid flanke-wise to the first, and so
marching as long as the ground would permit: The ground afterward being capable
of no more then 10 in front, the Chiliarchy of the right hand was drawn forth
to lead the march, which consisted of 10 Companies, the Body being 10 in
front, and 100 in depth: The rest of all the Chiliarchies followed the Rear
one of another in the same order: coming to a place where Alte was to be made,
the first Taxiarch drew out his Company by 12, placing the first file leader in
front with the first 12 of the file, and sleeuing up the Dodecadarch of the
same file to Front with the file leader, and the hindermost 12 of them that
followed him to rank with the former half file; the like was done by the 3
other files, so that each Taxis had 8 in Front, and 12 in depth, and there
being 30000 men in that Army, the whole Army comprehended 300 Taxis, the half
files of 12 a piece, amount to the number of 2400: so many men in number also
making the Front of the Army. And for the leading of the first Chiliarchy in
the straight way, and the rest following in the like form, it was an
induction, which notwithstanding differs from Aelians induction. Aelians
Chiliarchy in the induction requires the file leaders in front, this dispersed
them in the whole body, Aelians Chiliarchy would have had but 16 in depth, this
had 100. For marching in like manner with the Captains before, and the single
files of a Company cast into one file after them, I find another example in
Xenoph Cyrop. ^5. 103. B.
Xenophon. The elder Cyrus being to invade Assyria by night, directs his Army
thus; Let us leave with the carriage beasts and wagons, such as are fittest
for that service, and let Cobrias be their Leader, because he is both skillful
in the ways, and otherwise sufficient for any affair of Command: And let us
set forward with the best and most able horse and foot, carrying with us
victual for three days: for the lighter, and with the less cumber we shall
appoint out selves, with so much the more pleasure the after passing days
shall we dine, suppe, and sleep. Now let the march be ordered in this manner:
First, you Chrysanthas, lead the (...).
armed foot with all their Captains in Front, as long as the way is even and
broad; and let every Company be ordered in (...).
depth soldier after soldier file-wise; for the closser we put our selves
together, the sooner and safer shall we end our march. The cause why I would
have the Armed go before, is in regard they are the heauiest of the Army; and
when the heauiest go before, the light must ^^eds follow a^ ease. But when the
lightest lead, especially in the night, it is no marvel if the Army be
severed and distracted, the light easily slipping away, and hastening in the
Vaunt. Next unto these, let Artabazus lead the Targetiers and Archers of the
Persians, and Andramias the Median, the Median footmen next, then let Embas
follow with the Armenian foot, and Artuchas after him with the Hircanians, and
next Thambradas with the Sacan foot, then Damatas with the Cadusian^, and let
all these march with the Captains in front, and on the right flank of their
Plesium is a hollow square battle.
Plesium the Targetiers (or Peltasts) the Archers on their left; for so shall
they better second one another. After these let the whole baggage march, the
Commanders whereof must be careful to have all things ready before they
sleep, and early in the morning to be at the appointed place with their
furniture, and decently to march forward. After the baggage let Madatas the
Persian lead the Persian Horse with their Captains in front, and let the
Captains order their Companies in a file, as the foot Captains did: Next
after these Rambaces the Median, in the same sort the Horse which he
commands: Then you Tygraues your horse: Then the other Horse Captains every
one the Horse with which they serve me. And as the Cadusians came last to my
service, let them close up the rear of the Army: Thus Xenophon.

The passage is somewhat long, but I thought good to recite it, because it
contains the order of night marches usual of old time. First, the armed
foot march every Nation after other, as long as the ground would give leave,
in a square battle framed of Company laid to Company, every Company drawn out
into a file, the Targetiers on the one flank, the Archers on the other: then
the carriage: last of all the Horse. The reason is added why the slowest have
the Vaunt, namely, lest in the night, when all things (says the same Xenophon)
are to be understood and done by direction to the ear, and not to the eye,
the Horsemen or light armed (who are nimble and quick, the Horsemen by reason
of the Horse that carry them; the light armed, because they are troubled with
no weight of Arms) leading, they might happily with their speed out-goe, and
leave the heavy armed beehinde, who being burdened with the heaviness of
their Arms, can march but slowly.

But my principal end was to show, that the file-leaders in an induction^, are
not always placed in Front; I will add one example out of Xen. de exp. l. ^
284. ^.
Xenophon more to the same purpose; When the Grecians that followed Cyrus the
younger into Persia, returned toward their Country, they came as far^e as the
river Phiscus; they found there a bridge, and not far off a great City called
Opis, at which the base brother of Cyrus and Artaxerxes, leading from Susa and
Ecbatana a mighty Army with him, to give aid to the King, met the Grecians; and
causing his own Army to make alte, he took unto of the Grecians as they
passed by. Clearchus led his Army (...)
2 in Front, and in his march oftentimes made alte. As long as the Vaunt of the
Army stayed, so long the Rear must likewise stay. So that the Grecians were of
opinion they had a great Army; and the Persian was abashed at the sight of such
a multitude.

Whether this march were Aelia^s right Induction, a man would doubt, because it
is not expressed by Xenophon particularly how the bodies of the Phalange did
march: only he says, that Clearchus led (...), in binos says the Latin
translation: I interpret it 2 in Front. For two in depth it could not be,
because Xenophon speaks of a stand made oftentimes by the Vaunt which caused
the Rear to stay. And had the Army been but 2 in depth, it had bean all
Vaunt, the 10000 Grecians being ordered into two ranks and no more, each of
them being 5000 men: besides that, the Persian wondered at the multitude which
passed by him in flank; which flank, if it had consisted of no more then two,
his wonder would soon have ended. But Clearchus used Art to make his number
seem greater, and being but 2 in Front, they must needs be 5000 in file; to
which 5000 giving 6 foot a piece for their open order, the ground will contain
30000 foot in depth, which amou^t to six miles of ours. The usage of the
Lacedaemonians was to march sometimes Five foot make a pace, 30000 foot are 6
miles, 1000 paces making a mile.
with 2 in Front, if the way were straight. So did Dercyllidas in Asia the
less, when entering into a City, his whole Army followed him peaceably (...)
two in Front. So b Archidamus the son of Agesilaus, advancing against the
Arcadians by a cart way that led to Cromnum, ordered his Army 2 in front, as
then his march fell out. When they approached one to another, Archidamus his
army being in a wing by reason of the straightness of the way, the Archadians
in a broad-fronted phalange, with targets close faced together, the
Lacedaemonians could not endure the charge of the Arcadians, and forthwith both
Archidamus was wounded through the thigh, and they slain that fought before
him. He says that Archidamus marched two in front wing-wise by reason of the
straightness of the way. In that he says wing-wise, he shows the army was
drawn out in depth, which is proper to an induction; and when he makes the
way the cause, he gives a reason, why it so marched. But to return to that I
first propounded, the inductions hitherto specified in the former examples
seem to differ from Aelians rightinduction, as neither having all the
file-leaders in front, nor yet single bodies of the same kind one to follow
another, the companies being each drawn into one file, and then two, or three,
or four, or more of these files laid together, according to the largeness of
the way, and the rest of the army following in the manner before expressed.

5. Against it is opposed the Caelembolos.] The Caelembolos is a wedge hollow
in front, and to be opposed against the right induction, says Aelian. I have
noted before that it has been the manner of all famous Generals to fit the
embattailing of their armies to the form which the enemy uses at the time of
joining: and therefore it much concerns the Onosand ^. 16.
Commander of an army to be skillful in all forms, which are of true use, and
to know the advantage that one carries against another. The right induction
is, and always has been the ordinary form to march in. To order your
troops in an aduantagious form against it, the Caelembolos was invented: It
is called by the Greeks a hollow wedge, because it is not filled up in the
midst, but includes a void space bias-wise in front betwixt the points of
both wings, and joins it self together in the rear. So that to one that
shall view it behind it seems a plain wedge, and yet in propriety of speech
it cannot be called a Wedge; for a Wedge has three sides and three points, and
bears the true form of a triangle; and with the former point it charge the
enemy, as has been shown in the horse-mans wedge. This has but one point
and two sides, neither does it charge the enemy with the point, but receiving
the front of his battle into the empty space, strikes upon both the flanks
thereof with the wings, it has opened, and so seeks to distress it; the
Caelembolos having this advantage, that it fights with the best men, viz. the
file-leaders ordered in the inside of the wings thereof, not against the
file-leader of the right induction, but against the weaker sort, who are
ordinarily placed in the flanks thereof. The Latin names are more fit and
significant to express the form. By some it is called a Forceps Veges. l. 3.
c. 18. 19.
pair of tongues, by othersome a A. Gellius l. 10. ^. 9. ^orfex.
pair of sheeres, both appellations serving to set forth the right form of
the Caelembolos: for the one and the other open their foremost parts to a
pretty distance, and the hinder parts, which are pinned and fastened together,
end in a narrow point, as does the Caelembolos. And they were so far from
tearming it a wedge, that they held it the best form to receive and frustrate
the charge of the true wedge, as may be seen in Vege^. l. 10. c. 18
Vegetius.

6. Which is framed when.] The fashioning of the Caelembolos springs out the
Diphalange Antistomus. What that Diphalange is, we shall see in the 40 chapter
of this book. Thus much I may beforehand signify, that the file-leaders
ought to be placed within the hollow flanks of the Caelembolos, as it were a
lyning to the insides; and the Di-phalange Antistomus being once framed (which
is to have the file-leaders in the midst from the one end of the battle to
the other) there needs no further labor, then to dispatch the front in the
midst (leaving the file-leaders on both sides) and to fasten and join
together the rear, to the end that the front of the right induction may enter
into the hollownesse, but yet be mashed, as it were in a net, and neither able
to pass through the rear of the Caelembolos, being close shut, nor yet to
give offense to those that fight in the front of the Caelembolos, having no man
whom they may charge in the void space; nor yet daring to break the form of
their battle after joining. For it is a good observation of Vege^ l 3. 8 89.
Xenoph. Cyrop.
Vegetius, that in fight the manner of your embattailing is not to be changed,
nor any number of Soldiers to be transported to other places then they have:
For hereof tumult and confusion will straight arise, and the enemy will easily
take advantage of such as are not ready or fallout to be disordered. I have
said that the Latins and Grecians differ in the name of this battle, howbeit
they agree both about the form, which may here appear by Aelian, who
resembles it to the letter V, neither can there a better resemblance be made;
for as the letter V consists of two lines which are open in the top, close in
the bottom, so does this form of battle of two sides, which in front are
void, open, and disseuered, in the rear joined and closed fast together. If
you will therefore frame this battle, you must first make a square, the
file-leaders being all in front; then must you wheel the wings of your
battle into the midst, and so your file-leaders shall be in the midst;
lastly, you are to open the front of your battle, leaving half the
file-leaders in the inside of one flank, and half in the inside of the other,
keeping the rear close knit together: and for the opening, it ought to be
somewhat more then will receive into the void space the front of the right
induction, which being once let in, the inward two flanks of the wedge where
the file-leaders are, ought to face to both hands, and to charge the outward
flanks of the right induction, and so circumuent them.

7. Furthermore, a Triphalange.] A Triphalange in this place of Aelian is, when
a square body or phalange is from front to rear divided into three parts. The
figure shows the manner. The Triphalange has as much advantage against the
Caelembolos, as the Caelembolos had against the right induction. The
Caelembolos compelled the right induction to fight with the worst men, and
avoided the affront of the file-leaders, which were the best. The Triphalange
having the file-leaders in front, opposes two several fronts: against the two
wings of the Caelembolos, where there are no fileleaders (for they are always
disposed for the inside) and both auoideth the advantage the Caelembolos
sought, and makes the Caelembolos fight with the worst men, in as much as one
of the Phalanges charge the front of one wing of the Caelembolos, the
file-leaders whereof are in flank within the hollownesse, the other charge
the other. Now it has this advantage besides, that it spares reserues for all
occasions, by off-holding the third Phalange. If the Caelembolos be beaten by
the two opposing Phalanges, all is lost, and no hope left of winning the field,
no other forces being to second it, where notwithstanding the Caelembolos
having gotten the better, may be curbed, and the victory arrested by this
reserve, and by the remnant of the other two Phalanges broken.

Words of direction in the right induction.
1 The right-corner Xenagy march out So is it of all other bodies, if they
begin the march. 2 The rest follow in Xenagies Direction for the Caelembolos.
1. Wheel the wings of your battle into the midst of your body -- So shall
the file-leader be in the midst; but we must note that the two midlemost
leaders must be centors for the other to wheel about. 2. Open your front to
the right and left hand, keeping your Rear close. For the Triphalange.
1 The two wings face to the right and left hand, the middle remaining as it
was. 2 Match out to the distance required: That is, to be able to meet in a
right line the two fronts of the wings of the Caelembolos. 3 Stand, When they
come to the place required. 4 Face as you were 5 Advance and charge.


Of Paragoge or deduction. CHAP. XXXVII.
(1) PArogoge or deduction is when the Phalange proceeds in (2) a wing, not
by (3) file, but by rank, having the commanders or file-leaders either on the
right hand, which is called a right hand deduction, or on the left hand, which
is a lefthand deduction. For the Phalange marches in a (4) double, treble, or
quadruple front, according to the place or part it is suspected the enemy will
give on. And both the paragogies beginning the fight in flank, do (5) make
the length doubt to the depth. This form of fight was devised to teach a
Soldier to receive heedfully the charge of the enemy, not only in front but
also in flank.

NOTES.
(1) DEduction is when the Phalange.] Induction is spoken of, Deduction
follows, which is the second kind of march. For these are no

Cap. 37. A four fronted Phalange against all allemptes of the Enemy
The Front of ye rear The Front of ye right flank The Front of ye left flank
The Front of the Narch



other kinds then Induction and Deduction: the one with the file-leaders in
front, the other with the file-leaders in flank. Neither does the greatness
or smalnesse of the body make any difference herein; be the body never so great
(as is the Phalange) or so small (as one Company) yet must the fileleaders
either lead, or else be in flank of the march. The rear in necessity may well
be made good by the bringers up. Deduction is the mother of many forms of
battles usual in marches: from it come the Caelembolos, whereof we spoke
before; from it are the Antistomus, the Peristomus, the Homoiostomus, the
Heterostomus, of which hereafter.

2 When the Phalange proceeds in a wing.] Suidas has, that Paragoge or
deduction is said to be when the phalange marches with the file-leaders on the
right or left hand; if on the left, it is said to be a left hand deduction; if
on the right, a righthand deduction. He makes no mention of a wing as Aelian
does; for it may so fall out, that the body may be such as has the depth and
breadth all one, as a Xenagy which has sixteen in breadth, and sixteen in
depth: some bodies also, as the Taxies and Tetrarchies have the depth less
then the breadth, the first holding sixteen in depth and no more then eight in
breadth, the last four in breadth and sixteen in depth, so that they march
not in a wing. But because marches for the most part are undertaken in a wing,
it is the cause why Aelian says that deductions proceed in a wing, the depth
whereof manifoldly exceeds the length, and they proceed.

3. Not by file but by rank.] That is, the file-leaders being wheeled to the
flank, after they have settled themselves to march, proceed on their journey as
they stand in the flank, only facing that way the march is intended, and
return not to lead in the front of the battle, as they did at first. To lead
by file is, when the file-leaders proceed, and have their files following at
their back. To lead by rank is, when that which was the flank at first,
becomes the front, and begins the march, and the rest follow accordingly
flanke-wise: yet this is to be noted, that albeit the front of the battle be
changed in the deduction, yet remain the files, files as they were before, and
are not altered into ranks. Aelian himself gives testimony hereto, affirming
that the Phalange proceeds not by file, but by rank, whereas if the files
held not their first name after wheeling to the right or left flank, the march
forward (the file-leaders being in the flank) should be by file and not by
rank.

4. For the phalange marches in a double, treble, or quadruple side.] A
doublesided (...) is that, which has the file-leaders on both the flanks, the
rest back to back within, when the enemy gives on. For otherwise, when they
march forward, all their faces are set one way, that is toward the place
whether the march is intended. A treble-sided battle is, when three sides of
the battle are to be charged, whether the front and both the flanks, or both
the flanks and the rear, or the rear, one of the flanks, and the front, and
the file-leaders are ordered on all the three sides. A quadruple battle is,
when the file-leaders are placed in front in the rear and in both the flanks.
An example of the quadruple battle will show the use and framing of the rest:
for as the rest oppose one, two, or three sides against the enemy, so the
quadruple fortifieth and strengthens all the four sides, by placing the
fileleaders in them. Of ordering the file-leaders upon one flank, deduction
may be be an example; upon both flanks, the Antistomus phalange upon front and
rear, the Amphistomus, on all four sides, the Plesium, of all which occasion
will be given to speak hereafter. Now I may signify that the Plesium is a
square hollow battle, the length whereof much exceeds the depth, having the
armed foot placed on all the four sides, the light-armed thrown into the
midst. The Graecians that followed Cyrus the younger into Persia against King
Artaxerxes, after their Coronels were taken prisoners and put to death by the
subtilty and perjury of Tissaphernes, being but 10000. and to retreat through
open and plain grounds, in which they were like to be charged by an infinite
number of horse and foot, by the advice of Xenophon, cast themselves into this
form; his words are in effect these, We Xenoph. de exp. 13. 304. E.
shall, it may be march in more safety, if we order our selves into a Plesium
of armed foot, and give the carriage and disarmed multitude a place of security
within the hollownesse of the battle. If therefore it be now resolved
aforehand, who shall command in the front of the Plesium, and take charge of
Vaunt, who on the flanks, and who in the rear, we shall not need to take
advise at the approach of the enemy, but put in execution that which is
resolved before. And a little after: And mine opinion is, that Cherisophus is
the fittest Commander for the Vaunt, because he is a Lacedemonian; and let two
of the ^ldest Coronels take care of the Flanks; the youngest, namely my self
and Timasion, will look to the rear. This was Xenophons counsel, and in this
form they marched, and being charged afterward with both Persian Horse and
foot, they defended themselves against all efforts of the Enemy. The quadruple
battle therefore was used, when the enemy was expected to give on all sides;
and he that can frame it, can easily cast his troops into the other two
forms; yet will not every receiving the enemy in flank prove a Deduction; for
in case of necessity and sudden approaches of the enemy, you shall be driven to
Facing, wherein you only turn the faces of soldiers to the flank without
any deduction. See the figure of this battle expressed in the picture.

5. Do make the length double to the depth.] I suspect this place to be
corrupted in the text of Aelian, the rather because before in the description
of a Deduction, he says that Deductions proceed in a wing, wherein the depth
(...).
manifoldly exceeds the length of the battle, as the last foregoing
chapter does show. Besides the example, which is given in the text is not of
double proportion, but of treble and more, ten comprehending three, three times
and more.

Of the Phalange Antistomus. CHAP. XXXVIII.
(1) THe Phalange Amphistomus (for it is so called, because it has two fronts,
and that part of the battle that is set and advanced against the enemy, is
called a front:) seeing then in this form the middle-most are ordered back to
back, and those in the front and rear make head against the enemy, the one
being Commanders in front, the other in rear, therefore it is called
Amphistomus. It is of great use against an enemy strong in Horse and able to
give a hot and dangerous charge, and principally practiced against

Cap. 38 The Phalange Amphistomus


those Barbarians that inhabit about the river Ister, whom they also call
Amphippi, because they change their Horse in fight. The Horse battle to
encounter this form has a tetragonall shape, being for the purpose divided
into two broad squares (they are called broad squares, that have the front
twice as much as the depth) and those squares are opposed severally against the
flanks of the foot-battaile.

NOTES.
(1) THere are many kinds of battles, which being useful for a march, are
described partly in the former two chapters, partly in this and in the chapters
following, whereof some are for ease of the march (as the induction) some for
fight. Those which are for fight, are either offensive, or else defensive. Of
the offensive kind is the Caelembolos before mentioned, of the defensive the
Triphalange to be opposed against the Caelembolos, and both the deductions,
which are represented in the two last Chapters: and in this chapter is
described another of the defensive forms, that is to say the Phalange
Autistomus; in which although the march be not continued (for it is always
taken up in a stand, to resist a charge of the enemy) yet it is a remedy
defensive against the sudden attempts of the enemy which is about to charge
your rear.

2. The Phalange Amphistomus.] The title of this chapter is litigious, and
there is a controversy amongst the learned, which of two names the chapter
should bear. Gaza, Gesner, and Arcierus, would have it inscribed Antitistomus;
Robortellus, Amphistomus: I have in the translation followed the opinion of
Robortellus; my reason was, because of these words in Aelian, (...), they in
the beginnings ((...)) charge the enemy: which word (...), I have not read
applied to the flanks, and therefore took it for front and rear, because the
one, namely the front is as it were the beginning of the battle, the other,
viz. the rear, is the end. In which sense if you take the word, the
description must needs agree with the Amphistomus, which (the enemy charging
both front and rear) with the fileleaders and their half files as they stand,
receive those that charge the front, with the brnigers-vp, and the other half
files facing about to the right or left hand, those which charge the rear. But
since, upon better consideration, I think there is a fault in the text; and
where it is written (...), it should be corrected and written (as I take it)
(...). For that (...) signify the flanks of the battle. Iul. Pellux. l. ^.
c. 10.
Julius Pollux testifies in these words; (...). The forepart of those that
fight, is called the front, the ranks, and the face; the outward parts on each
side ((...)) the flanks, the wings, the right and the left; the midst the
navel; Arr. l. 5. ^09. F.
the depth, the parget, or wall. The like does Leo c. 7.. 58. 59. etc. 14.. 8.
^9. 70. 87. 89..
Leo in many places: and as far as I can read, (...) in the plural number is
generally taken for the flanks; albeit (...) in the singular number I deny not
to be used for the rear sometimes: as in Xenoph. Cyrop. 178. E. Agathias pa.
39. l. 19. who also calls the front-point of a wedge (...)
Xenophon, who describing a fight betwixt the Corcyreians and Lacedaemonians,
has thus; Mnasippus (the Lacedemonian General) embattailing his army put the
enemy, that was near the gates to flight, and followed the cha^^. They being
come near the walls, turned again, and threw and cast darts from the
mountains: other running out of the other gates in good numbers fell upon the
(...).
rear of the Lacedaemonians, who being ordered but (...).
8 deep, and thinking the (...).
rear of the Phalange to be but weak, endeavored to retire and fall off. The
enemy no sooner saw them give ground, but presently fell on more eagerly,
imagining they fled: neither did they turn their faces any more, and they who
stood next unto them soughe with all speed to save themselves by flight.
Mnasippus could give no aid to his destressed soldiers by reason he was
hardly laid to by the Corcireans, that came to hands with him; and his number
by little and little decreased: at last the enemy in great numbers pressed them
sore that stood about Mnasippus, who were now reduced to a very few. And the
armed foot of the City seeing what was done abroad, issued out, and after they
had slain Mnasippus, they followed the chase all of them together. Thus (...).
Diodor. sic. li. 19. 693.
Xenophon. And thus you may see (...) in the singular number taken for the
rear of the Phalange, howsouer* (...) in the plural, signifies the flanks.
The Antistomus Phalange therefore differing from the Amphistomus in this only,
because the last maintains fight in front and rear, the first in both flanks,
and Aelian in this Chapter describing the battle which maintains the fight
1184. C. Suidas uses (...) for the right wing, now the wing stretches in
front, from the middle section to the point of the battle Aelian. c. 7.
in the flanks, it seems that the inscription ought to be of the Phalange
Antistomus, and that the text ought to be (...) and not (...). It may after a
sort appear by Aelian himself in the next Chapter, where making a difference
betwixt these two battles, he says plainly, that the Antistomus fights
(...). Read then in the text, Those in the flanks make head against the enemy,
in stead of these words: Those in front and rear, and all the rest will agree
to the Phalange Antistomus.

3. It is of great vse] The use of this battle is principally against horse,
as Aelian gives to understand; because they are quick and speedy, and can
suddenly turn, divide themselves, and charge where they list. And the flanks
of the battle being the weakest part (for your best men are placed in the
front and rear) it is needful to find out some means to defend them, which
is to instruct your Soldiers how to receive the charge by turning their faces
to the flanks. In front you are always ready; because faces and weapons are
bent that way. Effect the like in the flanks, and you shall be able to resist
any charge of the enemy. For foot, the danger is not so great, because your men
shall be able to face every way, as readily as the enemy; give them only
exercise, and acqaint them with that manner of fight.

4. And principally practiced against the Barbarians.] That it was much used
amongst the Grecians I find not in there history: yet is there no doubt, but
the use may be great in it as well as in the Amphistomus. But I take the
reason, why it was seldom put in practice, to be, because the flanks of pikes
in the Grecian battle were for the most part, guarded with horse and
light-armed. The front and rear having no such defense, were commonly attached
by the enemy, seeking all advantage to distress them; and in case the horse
and light-armed be absent, the flanks are the fairest mark of the enemy;
which can by no other means be secured, but by facing that way where he gives
on; which may be evidently seen by the fight Cyrus the elder had against
Craesus, which example you shall see set out in my notes upon the 46. Chap.
page 79.

5. Those are broad squares] That which I here translate a broad square, is in
the Greek Heteromekes; of which form I have spoken in notes upon the 30.
Chapter.

Cap. 39
The Phalange Antistomus Front



Words of direction for the Phalange Antistomus (for that form is described
in this Chapter.)
1. Half ranks, face to the right and left hands. 2. Charge your Pikes.
To restore to the first Posture.
1. Advance your Pikes. 2. Face as you were.


(1) Of the Phalange antistomus. CHAP. XXXIX.
(1) THe Phalange Antistomus is like to the Amphistomus, the form being a
little altered; so that it accustometh the Soldier to resist the several
kinds of incursions of horse. All that has been spoken of the former
Phalange both for foot and horse, agrees with this figure also. Herein they
differ, that the (2) Amphistomus receives the charge in front and rear, the
Antistomus in flank: but as well in the one as the other, they fight with long
pikes, as do the Alans, and Sauromatans: and the one half of the soldiers in
the files have their faces bent forward, the other half backward, so that they
stand back to back. This form has two fronts, the one before where the-file
leaders, the other behind, where the bringers up stand; And being also divided
into a (3) Diphalange, it makes the forefront with one, the after-front with
the other Phalange.

NOTES.
(1) AS the title of the former Chapter was mistaken, so is the title of this
Chapter. The other should have been of the Antistomus (as I have before
showed) this of the Amphistomus. That it should be of the Amphistomus, the very
words following in this Chapter will prove, which are these: The one half,
says he, of the armed soldiers in the files have their faces bent forward,
the other half backward; so that they stand back to back: and the battle
has two frontes, one before, where the file-leaders, the other behind, where
the bringers up stand. He describes the two fronts by the file-leaders and
bringers up, whose proper places are the front and rear, and not the flanks;
and further adds, that half the armed soldiers have their faces bent
forward, (and change not) the other half turned about backward; whereas in the
Antistomus all the soldiers move, and half face to one flank, half to the
other, and none to the front or rear: besides he says, that half the armed
in the files stand back to back, whereas in the Antistomus half the armed in
the ranks stand back to back, not those of the files. (2) Now that the
Amphistomus receives the charge of the enemy in the front and rear Leo cap.
7. 80. and cap. 12.. 29.
Leo also declares. The manner whereof appears in Appian Puni^^^ page 9
Appian; who recounteth that Asdruball the Carthaginian sought to entrap
Scipio, giving Mago his general of the horse commandment to charge. Scipio
his army in front, whiles himself charged it in the rear. But Scipio turning
the rear of his battle against Asdruball, and opposing the front of it
against Mago; overthrew them both, and slew 5000 Carthaginians, and took 1800
prisoners. To make the manner of fight in this form more plain, I thought fit
to insert an hystory or two out of Polybius and Arrian, as examples to
illustrate that meaning of Aelian. In Polybius this is the history. The Gauls
in great multitudes under the conduct of Concolitanus and Aneroestus their
Kings, transcending the Alps, and passing thorough Polyb. lib. 2. 115. A
Lombardy, and falling upon a part of Hetrucia, had gathered rich spoils out
of that terretory, and being now upon return to their country, they were
pursued by one of the Roman Consuls L. Aemelius and his army, not with intent
to fight with them (for he held it not safe) but to observe fit times and
places to distress them, or else to keep them from further spoil. At the
same time C. Attilius the other Consul having embarked his legions in
Sardinia, and setting sail for Italy arrived at Pisa, and holding his way
toward Rome marched directly in the way in which the enemy was coming. The
Celts being now about Telamon, a promontory of Hetrucia, their foragers fell
into the hands of the Vantcurrers of Attilius, and were taken prisoners; They
informed the Consul of all that happened, and signified the presence of both
armies; telling that the Gauls were at hand, and that L. Aemilius followed
them close in their rear. Attilius partly maruailing at the strangeness of
the news, and parley being full of good hope, because the Gauls seemed to be
surprised and hemmed in betwixt two armies, commanded the Tribunes to order his
legions in a broad-front, and so to lead on leasurely, as long as the ground
would give leave: himself in good time discovering a hill which hung over the
way, in which the Gauls were to pass, took with him the horse, and sought
with all speed to seize upon the top of it, and to begin the medly; conceiting
thereby to have the honor and title of the whole service ascribed to him: the
Gauls were at first ignorant of Attilius approaching, but coniectured only
that it might be Aemylius had led his horse about in the night to seize
vponvseful places: they sent therefore their horse and light-armed to beat the
Romans from the hill: but soon understanding by some captives that Attilius
was there, they presently embattailed, ordering their army (...).
into two fronts, the one before, the other behind; for they knew that one
army was following, and they expected as well by the news they heard, as by
that which they saw fall out at that time, that the other would meet them upon
their march: Aemylius heard that the legions of Attilius were arrived at Pisa,
but could not imagine they were come so near; but after that by the fight
about the hill, he perceived certainly they were at hand, he sent out his horse
to second those that fought for the hill, himself ordering his battles after
the Roman wonted fashion, led on against the eenmy. The Celts embattailed those
that are called Gesates, and dwelt in the Alps, against Aemylius, who they
imagined would charge the rear, and next to them the Insubrians. In the front
they set the Taurtscans and Bo^ans (inhabiting beyond the river Po) turning
their faces a contary way to the former, and opposed to the access of Caius
Attilius, the waines and wagons they placed without both wings, and sent their
pray gained to a hill thereby, appointing a sufficient guard to keep it. So the
Amphistomus Phalange, which the Celtes cast themselves into, was not only
fearful to the eye, but also fitly ordered for fight. The Insubrians and
Boyans came forth to fight wearing bretches and a kind of loose and light
coats; but the Gesates out of a vain glory and rashness cast them away, and
stood naked, saving that they had their arms alone, in the front of the
batell, imagining they were by that means fitter for action, by reason of the
bushes of the place, which would catch hold of any garment, and be a hinderance
to the use of arms. The first fight was about the hill in the sight of all, by
reason that the multitude of so many horse-menout of both armies were mingled
together in fight; wherein it happened Attilius to be slain (while too
venturously he offered himself to danger) and his head to be presented to the
Kings of the Celts, but yet the Roman horsemen bravely fighting, became
masters of the place, and of the enemy: After this the foot ioining, the
accident was rare and maruailous not only to them which were present, but also
to all those, who can by reading represent before their eyes the truth of that
which was done. For first the fight being attached by 3 armies, it must needs
be that the very sight and manner of the conflict appeared strange and wihout
example; secondly, who would not doubt either now or then, whether the Celts
manner of embattailing were more dangerous, the enemy charging them in two
places at once; or the best and aptest for victory, as opposing against both
the enemies at once, and withal securing themselves from encompassing and
invasion of the rear: and which is of most importance, no hope being left of
safety, if they should chance to be foiled. For that is the property and profit
of the Amphistomus battle; it made the Romans more confident, to have the
enemy enclosed on all sides; and yet the bravery and noise and tumult of the
Celts gave them cause of astonishment; For there was an innumerable multitude
of Trumpets and Shalmes, to which the whole army together adding the Paean, the
cry was so great, that not only the trumpets and army, but the places round
about with their rebounding echoes seemed of themselves to speak.
Furthermore, the sight and motion of the naked men that stood in the front,
being in flower of their age, and excelling in tallness of stature, was
fearful. Now all the Gauls that had the front were adorned with bracelets
and chains of gold; which the Romans eyeing, were partly astonished, partly
being filled with rich hopes, were incited much the rather to join battle;
but when the darters running out of the Roman army according to their custom,
threw many and forcible darts at the Celtes, the Celtes of the rear found good
use of their coats and breeches; but those that fought naked in the front,
this accident happening contrary to their expectation, were troubled out of
measure and wonderfully perplexed: for the Gaulish target being not of
sufficiency to cover a man's body, the greater and nakeder their bodies were,
the more were they subject to wounds, and the less the weapons missed the
mark. At the last, being not able to save themselves from the light-armed, who
plied them a far off, nor from the multitude of darts that fell amongst
them, and being troubled and confused with their present state, some of them
out of a rage and brutishness ran vainly upon the enemy, and willingly
offered themselves to slaughter, other retiring leasurely to their friends,
and showing manifest tokens of fear, disordered them behind. Thus the Roman
light-armed allaid the pride of the Gesates. But the multitude of the
Insubrians, Boyans, and Tauriscans, after the Romans had received their
light-armed into their battle, and advanced the cohorts, (of armed) to join
hand to hand, maintained a stout fight, and albeit they received many wounds,
yet fainted they not in minds, being only inferior both generally and
particularly in the kind of arms they bore. For both their targets in
defense, and their swords in offense, had a great difference; by reason the
Gaulois sword is only fit to strike withal. But when the Roman horse from the
hill hasted down in wing, and stoutly came to handy strokes with them, the
footmen of the Celtes were cut in pieces in the places where they fought, and
the horse took themselves to flight: There dyed therefore of the Celtes 30000,
and 10000 were take prisoners, amongst whom was Concolitan one of the Kings,
the other K. Aneroestus, flying to a certain place with a few, killed himself
and his friends that were about him. This example has Polibyus of the
Amphistomus Phalange; wherein he both shows the form, and the use of it,
namely, that it has a front both ways to receive the enemies charge before
and in the rear. Arian lib. 5. 112. A
Arrian has another example in the battle between Alexander the Great and
Porus a king of India; his words are to this effect; Alexander was now come
within the reach of missiue weapons, when he sent his Archers on horseback
against the left wing of the Indians, to molest the enemy on that side, both
with multitude of arrows, and with incursion of the horse: and himself also
having with him the troops of Companies, spurring on against the same wing,
using all celerity to fall upon them (who were yet out of order and in a wing)
before they could reduce themselves into a Phalange. In the mean time the
Indians knitting together their whole power of horse, made head against
Alexander with all speed, giving their horse a full carriere. Then Caenus, as
was commanded, showed himself at their backs. The Indians seeing this, were
forced to order their horse in an Amphistomus, opposing one part (the most and
strongest) to Alexander, the other to Caenus and his troops; which thing
troubled the array and minds of the Indians. And Alexander, taking hold of the
opportunity, charged those which were opposed to him in the instant, while the
other were facing about to Caenus. The Indians endured not the charge, but fled
to the Elephants, as to a castle that was friend. Hitherto Arrian. In these two
examples is lively set forth the nature and fashion of the Amphstomus phalange.
And albeit both the parties that used it were beaten, yet the cause rested not
in the form, but in the valor of them that fought against it, if the Romans
in one example, of Alexander in the other; Alexander himself using this very
form in the battle of Arian lib. 3. 60 C
Gaugamela, obtained the famous victory against Darius, which is described by
Arrian in his third book, as did App. in punicis Page 9.
also Scipio against Asdrubal in Spain: so then by that which has been said,
the difference between the Antistomus and Amphistomus phalange may easily
appear; which albeit they either of them fight against the enemy in two places
of the Phalange at once, and are like ore to another in that respect, yet they
differ in the places of the fight, the one receiving the charge in both the
flanks, other in front and rear. They are both defensive and statary, and if
move with you either of them during the charge of the enemy, you presently
break the form, and lay the back of the soldiers open to be annoied,
especially if the enemy ouertop you in number: otherwise it will be no
inconuenienceto divide the battle, and to fight apart with both; For that the
Antistomus may be divided, Aelian teaches in the next Chapter: for the
Amphistomus, he says the like in this Chapter in these words.

3 And also being divided into a Diphalange.] A Diphilange is when a Phalange
is divided into two; and being in one body, it is called a Phalange, in two
bodies a Diphilange. About the Diphilange Amphistomus there is variance amongst
the writers of this Art. Aelian would have it to be framed of a Phalange
Amphistomus disioyned, and in the midst divided into two parts: so that the
forefront is made with one of the hinder front with the other Phalange. The
Treatise of Military Appellations, annexed to the end of Suidas says, that
that is a Diphilange Amphistomus, which has the file-leaders on the outsides
of both the flanks in a deduction, and the bringers up within. I take Aelian to
be in the right; for if the Amphistomus Phalange must have the front and rear
opposed to the enemy, what reason is there why the Amphistomus Diphalangy
should not be of the same nature, considring

Cap. 40.
A Diphalange Antistomus The Horsmans Wedge Front



that the Diphalangy Antistomus has the leaders, in the flanks, as the
Phalange Antistomus has: which appears not only in the next Chapter, but
also in diverse other places of this Book: neither do I read any where, that
the Antistomus has to do with the front and rear, nor the Amphistomus with
the flanks. The words of direction in the Amphistomus.
The hinder 1 Half files, face about to the right or left hand.

2 Charge the Pikes both ways in front and rear.


To restore to the first Posture.
The hindermost 1 Advance your Pikes.

2 Half files, face as you were.




Of the Diphalange Antistomus. CHAP. XXXX.
A Diphalange Antistomus, is that which has the file-leaders placed not in a
deduction outwardly, but inwardly face to face one against another, and the
reare-Commanders without, one half in right, the other half in a left
deduction. This form is used against Horse, which give on and charge
wedge-wise: for the wedge shooting forth in a point, and having the Commanders
following in the flanks, and indeauouring to disseuer and break the Front of
the foot, the Leaders of the foot foreseeing their purpose, place themselves
in the midst, with intent either to repulse them, or else to give them a
through passage without loss. For the wedge flies upon the foot in hope to
charge the multitude in the midst; and the foot Commanders conceiving well
the fury of that form, leave a little space betwixt the 2 fronts, and stand
like walls on both sides, and jointly facing toward the midst, give them a
fruitless and empty passage. This form of Horse battle is called by the
Tactiks a wedge, which was invented by Philip King of Macedony, who placed his
best men before, that by them the weaker sort might be held in and enabled to
the charge. As we see in a Spear or sword, the point whereof quickly piercing,
makes way for, and lets in the middle blunt iron.

NOTES.
A Diphalange Antistomus.] This Diphalange is thus defined by Suidas; Suidus,
in (...)
A Diphalange Antistomus is that, which has the file-leaders placed in the
midst, and the bringers up ordered without on both flanks in deductions:
which words differ a little in speech, in sense are all one with Aelians. They
both agree that the file-leaders should be placed within the midst of the
battle face to face in deductions, the bringers up on the flanks without. In
the text, and in fashioning of the battle, there is no difficulty. The
file-leaders must be placed in the midst within, the bringers up on the
flanks without; and the battle being first closed, must be suddenly opened
upon the charge of the Horse in the midst, and the file-leaders dividing
themselves half on one side, half on the other, and facing to the middle
space with their whole files push at the Horse with their Pikes, as they pass
through. It is called a Diphalange, because the phalange is parted in two; as
the battle opposed against the Caelembolos is named a Triphalange, because it
consists of three parts several, and in the ninth Chapter the whole
Macedonian phalange is named a Tetraphalangarchy, because the body is divided
into four several parts: and it is named a Diphalange Antistomus, because as
the Phalange Antistomus receives the Horse without in the flanks, and so
repulseth them so this altering that form, only by placing the file-leaders
in depth within, and opening upon the sudden receive the Horse in the opened
void space, either to be overthrown by their Pikes, or else to give them a
passage without danger to themselves. This is one of the defensive battles
whereof I spoke before. It is put in practice says Aelian

When the Horse charge Wedge-wise.] What a Wedge is, and of what force amongst
the Horse-battailes, I have noted upon the 18 Chapter. Against it Aelian
opposes this form of foot. But is there no other use of it? Yes. For both the
Caelembolos and Peristomus are as it were daughters, and proceed out of the
loins of this form, both having their file-leaders in deductions within the
body, and both opening, the first the front, the other the whole body, when
they go to charge; and yet the Diphalange Antistomus is defensive, the other
two offensive forms. I will accordingly as I have begun, illustrate the manner
of the Dephalange Antistomus with an example or two. Xenophon de expied. lib.
1. 270. D
Xenophon describing the fight that was between Artaxerxes the king of Persia
and Cyrus the younger, tells of Tissaphernes (one of the four Generals of
Artaxerxes his army, that he fled not in the first joining of the armies, but
brake through the Grecian Peltasts (targetires) that stood embattailed by the
river. Breaking thorough, he slew no man: for the Grecians opening their
battle, struck and threw darts at his horsemen, as they passed thorough.
Episthenes the Amphipolita, nwho held the estimation of an understanding
soldier, was then commander of the Peltasts. Tissaphernes therefore withdrawing
himself as one that had the worst, returned no more to fight, but going to the
Grecian Camp, met the King there. So Xenophon. Out of which passage we may
perceive the use of this manner of embattailing. Tissaphernes chose of out the
Grecians to charge the Peltasts the weakest kind of soldiers to make
resistance against the horse, by reason they were furnished with small targets
only and darts. Then he charge with his horse in a full Carrere: to avoid
the fury of the horse, they opened and gave him a free passage, but not without
strokes, and darts sent at his horse; and so made his charge more hurtful to
himself then unto them: I cannot say the file-leaders were here in the
midst, as Aelian requires, because the charge was sudden and unexpected. In
premeditated defenses, there is no doubt, but it is the better way to place the
file-leaders in the midst, considering they are accounted the strength of the
battle, and in all conueniences are first brought to fight, especially being
armed men, and able to offend the horse with their Pikes; This opening then
auailed against the giving on of horse ordered in a narrow front: for that was
the manner of ordering the Persian horse; and it may serve for any
horse-battaile if it be wide enongh to receive the horse within the front. Of
ancient time sythed Chariots were in request, to which the foot whether light
or armed could make small resistance; they had two long staves appointed with
sharp iron fastened to the beam of the chariot bearing out before, and sythes
standing out on all sides to cut asunder whatsoever came in the way: the horse
were armed and hardly to be wounded, as you may see in the figure of the 22
Chapter. The reamedy then against them was to open the bataile in front and
rear, to the end to let them pass thorough, which opening was after the
manner set down in this Chapter. Died sic. lib. 17. 592. Arrian. lib. 3. 6^. D
Curt. l 4. 141. 149.
Alexander at Gaugamela being to fight with Darius, who had many of this kind
of chariots, and fearing the danger they might bring to his army, commanded his
Phalange of foot, that when the Chariots approached they should knit themselves
shoulder to shoulder, and beat their pikes upon their targets, that the horse
being affrighted with the noise, might turn, and run the contrary way. But if
by such means they would not be repressed, then he willed them to open and
make wide distances, through which they might hold on their course without
danger to his people. This was the provision of Alexander against the Chariots:
The event follows. After the trumpets had given the sign of bataile, the
armies charged one another casting forth great cries: And first the sythed
Chariots flying out amain, gave much amazement and terror to the Macedonians.
For Mazaeus one of the Generals of Darius his horse, to the end to make the
falling on of the horse more terrible, came thundering with his troops of
horse in the rear of the chariots: But when the Phalange joined target to
target, and every man beat his target according to the Kings direction, there
arose a great noise; by reason whereof many of the chariots, the horses being
affrighted, turned back, and with irresistable violence rushed upon their own
people: other falling upon the Macedonians, who made large distances, those
which entered were partly overwhelmed with darts, partly passed queit thorough;
some being carried with the violence of their course, and working mightily with
their sharp sythes, brought with them many and sundry kinds of death: for the
force of their sythes had such power to destroy, taht from many it cut off the
arms, and targets and all, the necks of not a few were carved, heads falling
to the ground the eyes yet seeing, the countenance not altered; of some the it
tore out the sides, and put them to a speedy death. Hitherto of the history of
Diodorus. But where he noteththe harms, that came from the sythed chariots, I
take it they might have been avoided, if the distances had been wide enough,
because I find in Xenophon in the battle betwixt Artaxerxes and Cyrus
mentioned by me before, that many of the chariots of the Persians ran
thorough the Phalange of the Grecians without hurt to any man. To return then
to the use of this form, it has heretofore, and may at this day be put in
practice against horse; and not only against horse ordered in a wedge, but
also giving on in a square, if it be so they charge by troops, and the opening
be wide enough, and sudden to receive the front of the horse, For against a
gross of horse, they cannot have time to open wide enough; and if they open
too timely, they leave liberty to the horse to charge either of the parts
opened, as themselves shall please; and by dividing themselves, they diminish
their own strength. Words of direction for the Diphalange Antistomus.
1 Wheel the wings into the midst of the battle This is done if the
middlemost 2 fileleaders stand firm, and the rest with their files wheel till
they meet, and then stand: the^ face to the front; and when the Horse charge,
open the midst suddenly, and facing one against another, charge your Pikes
against the Horse. 2 Face to the Front. 3 Open your battle. 4 Face to the
midst. 5 Charge your Pikes.
Restoring to the first Posture.
1 Advance your Pikes. 2 Close your battle. 3 Face to the right and left
hand. 4 Wheel the midst of the battle to the wings. 5 Face as you were at
first and stand.


Of the Peristomus Diphalange. CHAP. XXXXI.
THE Phalange of the Diphalange Peristomus proceed by deduction in a wing, the
oblique deduction on the right hand, having the file-leaders without: the left
hand oblique deduction, having the reare-coma^nders within. The figure shows
the intent of them that fight so ordered: For the battle going to charge,
having been at first Tetragonall, divides it self into two oblique wings,
the right and the left, of purpose to enclose the adverse square battle; and
they fearing to be enclosed, transform themselves into two marching Phalanges,
directing one against the right, the other against the left wing: therefore is
it called Peristomus, as having the front bent against the enemy both ways.

NOTES.
(1) ABout the inscription of this Chapter also there is a controversy amongst
the Interpreters; some would have it of the Peristomus diphalange, some of the
Amphistomus Diphalange, and of the Peristomus. Why any man should imagine that
the Amphistomus Diphalange is here described, I

Cap. 41
The square deured in two and set against y^ Peristomus two wings The
Diphalange Peristomus The uneven front of ye Peristomus The right wing of ye
Peristomus The left wing of ye Peristomus



conceive not, unless he should seem to make Aelian contrary to himself. For
the Amphistomus Diphalange has nothing to do with the flanks, as appears by
Aelian in the 34 Chapter. This Diphalange fights altogether in flank, as the
description declares.

The Phalanges of the Diphalange Peristomus.] What a wing is, and what
deduction I have showed before. The meaning is, that the Phalanges Peristomus
are both of them led obliquely (with the file-leaders in flank) and in two
deep bodies; whereof the one has in purpose to charge the right flank, the
other the left flank of the adverse square battle.

2 The oblique deduction on the right hand.] Albeit both these Phalanges are
(...)
called oblique, yet we may not imagine, that these Loxe-phalanges are the same
that is described in the 30 Chapter. For in that one of the Phalange forbear
the fight, the other aduanceth to join with the enemy; in this both fight at
once, and have their advantage by charging the flanks of the enemy. That began
the fight in front and had there the file-leaders, this in both flanks; this
seeks to encompasse, that to avoid encompassing it self, as I have showed in
my notes upon the same Chapter.

3 The oblique deduction on the right hand, having the file-leaders without.] I
must imagine, till further information, that here is a fault in the text: my
reason is this; all deductions are made to oppose the file-leaders against the
enemy in fight. So is the right hand deduction used, when it is suspected the
enemy will charge the right hand flank: the left hand Deduction, when it is
suspected he will charge the left; so in wheelings we turn the front against
the enemy, so in countermarches. Now this form being invented to encompasse
the enemy, and to fight upon his flanks, I would think the fileleaders ought
to be placed on the inward flanks of the Diphalange; as it is in the
Caelembolos; for were the bringers up to be within, they should sustain all
the weight of the fight, the battle being once divided, and the file-leaders
standing without should idly look on, which is contrary to the military
discipline of the Grecians, whose care was to use the file-leaders in fight as
much as was possible. Neither is it thereupon to be concluded, that this
Diphalange and the Diphalange Antistomus are all one. For although both have
their file-leaders within, yet do they differ both in form and end. In form,
because this moves forward with both Phalanges, the other stands still: this
is oblique, the other in a straight line; that has the front of the two
phalanges even, this (as it falls out in the motion) sometimes the one more
forword, sometimes the other. In their ends, because this goes to assault and
to break the enemies battle, the other stands fast and seeks only to
save it self; the one being offensive, the other defensive. So that, as I said
before, the Caelembolos and this are both framed out of the Diphalange
Antistomus, both having their file-leaders within the midst of the battle;
and yet differ in that the Caelembolos is but one body hollowed within; this
divided into two bodies.

And they fearing to be enclosed.] The case of this square is almost all one
with the square against which the Caelembolos is opposed: For both are in
danger to be enclosed. Now as the other square was feign to cast it self into
a Triphalange, and to oppose two of the phalanges against the two wings of the
Caelembolos, reserving the third for all accidents; so this square divides it
self into two phalanges (but has no third) setting the one against the
right hand battle of the Peristomus, the other against the left; for by this
opposition they inhibit the enemy from attaching their flanks. Of this form I
find not many presidents in the Greek history; I will receite only Arr. l.
5. 111. C. Diod. Sic. l. 609.
one out of Arrian concerning Alexander, which if it hit not this form in
every point, yet it has fully the effect of that which is intended by Aelian:
Alexander being to deliver battle to Porus a King of part of India, lying on
the other side of the river Hydaspes, found his enemies army to be thus
embattailed; He had placed his Elephants in the front 100 foot distant one from
another; and he placed them there to give terror to Alexanders Horse, for he
imagined that no enemy durst approach the spaces betwixt the Elephants, neither
with Horse for fear of the Elephants, and much less with foot, because the
armed on his side were there to receive them, and the Elephants would tread and
trample them under their feet. Next he ordered the foot, not in an equal front
with the beasts, but in a second front after them, so that the files came up
almost to the spaces betwixt the Elephants; besides, he added foot upon the
wings above the Elephans. On both the wings of the foot he ordered his Horse,
and before them his Chariots. This was the embattailing of Porus. Alexander as
soon as he saw the Indians stand in battle array, caused his Horse to make
alte, that he might have his foot come up, who advanced still forward. And when
the Phalange was come unto him running, he embattailed it not presently, nor
forthwith led it against the enemy, l^st he should deliver it weary and out of
breath into the hands of the Barbarians, that were fresh; but circling and
riding here and there in rounds with his Horse, he rested his foot, and gave
them time to refresh themselves. And after he beheld the Indian manner of
Embattailing, he thought it not good to give upon the midst (of the front)
where the Elephants stood, and the Phalange was close ordered against the
spaces of the Elephants, fearing the reasons that led Porus to embattaile in
that form. But, as he was stronger in horse, taking to him the most of his
Horse, he speeded to the left wing of the enemy, in purpose to give on there,
and sent Coenus with Demetrius his troop and his own troop against the right
wing; commanding him, that when the Barbarians seeing his troops, should turue
their strength of Horse against him, Coenus should invade their backs. He gave
the Phalange to Seleucus, Antigones and Tauron to lead; commanding them not to
fall on, before they saw the enemies foot and horse put into a bransle by his
Horse. What the event of the fight was, I have before showed in my notes upon
the Phalange Amphistomus, where I have cited the latter end of this history.
Now may be seen by this example, that Alexander began the fight not in the
front, but in the flanks; and the cause why he did it, was, because the front
was exceeding strong by reason of the Elephants. And by this means defeating
first the enemies Horse, then his foot, he left the Elephants naked, and
without defense against the darts and other missiue weapons of the Macedonians,
and gained a worthy victory against a strong enemy. Now albeit this example
come not home in all points to the Peristomus (for Aelian limiteth it to foot
against foot, this fight was betwixt Horse and Horse) yet is the reason of
war alike in both. For as the file-leaders of the Peristomus give on upon the
flank of the adverse square, which is the weakest part of it; so did the Horse
of Alexander surmounting the Indians both in number and valor, give on upon the
flanks of Porus his army which was weakest, and so began and ended the victory.

It is called Peristomus, as having the front bent.] That is, being divided
into half, the one Phalange marching obliquely, comes up and charge one

Cap. 42.
The Battle called Plinthium The front The Diphalange Homoiostomus



flank of the adverse battle, the other charge the other, and so has the
fronts against the enemies both ways. Words of direction in the Peristomus.
1 Wheel your front into the midst of the battle. 2 Face to the front. 3
One wing march out obliquely, and charge the right flank of the enemy, the
other the left flank.


Of the Diphalange homoiostomus, and of the Plinthium. CHAP. XLII.
A Diphalange (1) Homoiostomus is so named, because a (2) whole file (that is
16 men) moving by it self; another file follows it! and it is therefore
called Homoiostomus, because they that follow, follow in a like figure.

3 This kind is opposed against the Plinthium; (4) Plinthium is a form of
battle, that has the sides equal both in figure and number. In figure,
because the distances are every where equal. In number, because there are as
many men in length as in depth. (5) In this foure-sided battle are none in
the four sides but armed, without archer or slinger to help: when therefore
two Phalanges march together, and both have their leaders in a right hand or
left handed deduction* it is called a Diphalange Homoiostomus.

NOTES.
1 HOmoiostomus is a Diphalange, the battles whereof have like fronts. To
this form is incident, first that it be marching, then that it march in
deductions; lastly, that the deductions be upon one and the self, and not upon
contrary sides, viz. that the file-leaders of the Phalanges, be all of them
either upon the right hand, or upon the left hand of their Phalanges. And
therefore Suidas defines it to be a Diphalange, which has the leaders of
either Phalange ordered in the same side of the march. Where he says that the
leaders are ordered on the same side in both Phalanges (which words are
likewise in Aelian in the end of the Chapter) we must understand no^ the
leaders of the March, but the file-leaders, who are also called (...), or
leaders: (...).
For as Aelian says elsewhere, the march in a Deduction proceeds in wing not
by file but by rank, so that the file-leaders are in the flanks not in the
front of the march; and yet a man may truly term it the front of the
battle, as long as it stands and faceth against the enemy.

2 Because a whole file.] I am out of doubt that this place is corrupted: any
man that marketh the coherence will easily be of mine opinion. The inscription
is of a Diphalange, which consists of two phalanges. The cause why this form
is called a Diphalange, Homoiostomus, is in these words assigned to be, because
a whole file, that is, 16 men moving, another file follows it: let one file
follow another, what is that to two Phalanges? Every Phalange has many files
in it, as the Aelian c. 7.
seventh Chapter will teach us; nor will any man say that a file is a phalange,
nor that the following of one file singly after the other will make a
Diphalange: the truer cause is alleged in the words following: It is
therefore called Homoiostomus, because they that follow, follow in the like
figure: which words albeit they be general, yet being explained and
particularised in the end of the Chapter, they show, that it is called a
Diphalange Homoiostomus when two phalanges follow one another, either in a
right, or a left hand deduction. And by that part of the text the nature of the
Homoiostomus is sufficiently expressed.

3 This is opposed against the A square battle of men and ground both.
Plinthium.] How this form should be opposed against the Plinthium, I must
confess I yet understand not, unless it be that being in a march, the
Plinthium charge one of them on that side where the deduction, (that is in the
front, for the flank is now become the front) (the file-leader facing to the
enemy way) and that the other if it be the leading phalange retiring and
whealing, the following file advancing and whealing) give upon the flank of the
Plinthium, so that the Plinthium be charged both in front and in flank, which
is no small advantage in fight; for otherwise if the Plinthium meet the
Phalanges so following one another, and charge the front which leads (which
indeed is not the front but the leading flank, in as much as the march
proceeds not by file but by rank, as Aelian has) the deducton not only
loses the benefit of bringing the file leaders to fight, but is also subject
to ouerwinging, and by that means in worse case then is the induction which
has the file-leaders in front. There are other uses of the Homoistomus, they
are here specified by Aelian. For the the Deduction directing the front against
the enemy that appears, or is like to appear on the flank of the deduction,
the phalanges may fitly second one another, when either of them is charged; not
unlike the two btatailons of La. Noues second Paradox.
foot, which la Noue holds sufficient to repulse the charge of horse in open
field or Champeign. And if both the deductions be charged at once, they are at
no greater inconvenience, then if they stood ranged in ordinary manner, being
either of them 16 deep, and the fronts which are in the deduction ready to
receive the affort of the enemy, and the rest of the ^immes disposed, as in the
ordinary Phalange.

4 Plinthium is a form of battle.] This definition co^prehendeth not all
Plinthiums, for there is a kind of euen-sided Plinthium (it is called (...),
which has the front and flanks of one length: and it is it which Aelian here
defines. There is also a kind of I linthiu^ that is deeper in flank then the
front is long, which of ancient time was called Evstathius in Ho^^ri versu^:
(...).
(...) in greek, in enlishg a tower, the name of Plinthium is derived from
(...), a brick, because as the brick is square, so is this battle, which is
the reason I think, that it is often confounded Plesium, this being also a
square battle, and the name deduced from the mould wherein brickes are
fashioned, which mould is called in greek (...) to form. The difference
betwixt them according to Aelian is, that the Pliniheum is a perfect square
equal both in length and depth, the Plesium a square longer in front then
flank.

5 In this figure are none but armed in the foreside.] what then becomes of the
light-armed? they must be conuaied into the midst; and the Plinthium ought to
be hollow within as well to receive them, as those of the army that are unfit
for fight. Leo has this precept: If the enemy be horse, you are to order the
army into the square figure of a Plinthium, and cast into the (hollow) midst
the carriage, beasts and carriage, and without them the armed, and furthest
without the archers, that so you may dismarch in safety; yet this placing the
archers without is contrary to Aelian, and to many experiences mentioned in the
Greek history. Polyen. 99. 25^
Timotheus the Athenian purposing to pass by the City Olynthus; and fearing
the Olinthian horsemen, ordered his army into a broad-fronted Plinthium,
casting the baggage and horse into the midst, and causing the wagons to be
driven thronging and fastened together, the armed foot being without on all
sides; so that the Olynthian horse could not come to distress them. Brsidas
the Lacedemonian being in Illyrium Polyen. 210. 7. in Brasid^.
forsaken of the Macedonians his allies, expecting to be set upon by Arrhybeus
and the Illyrians, reduced his armed into a square, and taking the light-armed
into the midst, resolved to retire: the youngest he appointed to fall out if
the enemy charged on any side; Himself with 300 chosen men took upon him to
secure the rear, and to resist the enemy that should first come to charge. The
Barbarians seeing him dismarch, followed with great shouts and cries, imagining
he fled, and hoping to take him and cut his throat: but when the light-armed
fell out and met them, wheresoever they gave on and himself with his selected
band received them, and contrary to their opinion stood firm, and repulsed the
first charge, and ever as they forbore to charge held on his way: the most part
of the Barbarians left the Grecians, and appointing a party to follow their
rear, the rest pursued the Macedonians that fled, an killed as many as they
lighted upon. The like form was used in Elephants by the captains of Eumenes
and Peucestes against a surprise of Antigonus. Diodorus Siculus reports the
history thus. Diod. Sic. (...) 692.
Antigonus being advertised, that all Eumenes his forces were come unto him but
only his Elephants, and that the Elephants were expected out of their
garrisons and were far off alone, and without aid of horse and foot, sent
against them 2000 sp^are-men, being Medes, 300 Tarentines, and all his
light-armed foot; for he hoped that falling upon the Elephants alone, he
might easily become master of them, and deprive his enemy of his greatest
strenght. Eumenes casting in his mind what might happen, dispatched away 1500
of his best horse, and 300 light armed foot. Antigonus people appearing first;
the commanders of the Elephants ordering the beasts into a Plinthium, marched
forward, throwing the carriage into the midst, having 300 horse and no more
to make head in the rear; the enemy falling on with all their might, and hotly
charging, the horse being ouerlaide with number, were put to flight. The riders
of Elephants at first made good resistance and stood to it, albeit they were
wounded on all sides, and not able to hurt the enemy; and being now at the last
cast, the forces of Eumenes unexpectedly showing themselves, snatched them out
of all danger and distress* Polyen. 99. 2^.
Agesilius used this form against the Thebans; the Dioa. Sic. 694. lib. 19.
Argiraspides against Antigonus: the history is this; Antigonus having the
better against the horse of Eumenes, divided his horse into two parts, the one
he took to himself and observed Eumenes, the other he gave to Python willing
him to charge the the Argiraspides and silver targateers old soldiers of
Alexanders deprived of the aid of the horse, but they casting themselves into
a Plinthium retired safely to the river. Aelian remembers nothing concerning
the use of the Plinthium: But we may learn by the examples rehearsed* that it
was then practiced when the enemy was too strong and able to charge every way;
and it is one of the foresided battles that is mentioned in the 36 and 37
Chap. and used principally against horse, but sometimes against horse and foot.
Philip the father of Alexander the Great, being to take arms against the
Illyrians who usurped Died. Sy^ll. lib. 16. page ^1.
many Cities of his kingdom, levied 10000 foot, and 600 horse, and with them
entered the enemies country. Bardilis the Illirian King met him with as many
foot, and 500 horse: when the armies came together, and with shouts joined
battle, Philip hearing the right wing, and the best Macedonian soldiers,
commanded the horse to fall on and charge the enemy in flank: himself giving
upon the front, began a strong fight. The Illyrians ordering themselves into a
Plinthium, valiantly abode the onset; and at the first the fight was equal,
and so continued a good while by reason of the valor shown on both sides;
afterward the horse plying hard the rear and flank, and Philip with his
choice valiantly laying at the front, the multitude of the Illyrians were
forced to fly. Here the Plinthium resisted both horse and foot; I will ad one
example more of repulsing horse, the army being cast into a Plinthium. Marcus
Antonius seeking to subdue Persia, and to revenge the loss which Craesus
received Appian Parthicis 162. Plat. in Antonie.
by the Parthians, (for in that war Craesus himself was slain, and his army
defeated) and having laid siege to a great City called Phreata, and finding not
the success he looked for, determined to dis-march and lead his arm, out of
the Country; having first ^ad^truce with the King of Persia, proceeding on his
journey, he was set upon by the Parthians, but being repulsed, they retired
that day. Antonius hereby resolved what to do: and strenthening his rear and
flanks with many darters and slingers, he formed h^s army into a Plinthium, and
willed his horse ^o fall out and repulse the e^nmy, but not to follow the chase
too far. The Parthians the next four days began to be more cool, and
neither charged nor were charged, and making winter their pretense, were glad
to retire ^o their houses. By this president, we may see, that the Parthians
(who were mighty in horse) were fierce upon the Romans as long a they held
their ordinary kind of march, but after they had ordered themselves into a
Plinthium, so that the Parthians could not come up to them without much
indangering themselves, they thought it best to let them quietly pass and go
whither they would. And thus much of the Diphalange Homoiostomus and of the
Plinthium. Words of direction in the Homoiostomus.
1 Wheel your battles (if they stand in even front) to the right or left
hand. 2 March one battle after the other.
To restore to the first Posture.
1 F^^e about to the right or left hand. 2 Wheel the battles to the right or
left hand, according as the case requires. 3 Face as you were at first.


Cap. 43.
The Diphalange Heterostomus The File-leaders The bringers-vp



For the Plinthium.


If there be 4 battles standing togethler in an even Front, this I would hold
the fittest way to make a Plinthium.



1 Let the first battle stand firm, or march on; in going forward wheel to
the right hand; in falling back use the Lacedemonian countermarch. 2 The 3
countermarch the front with a countermarch, then wheel to the left hand, then
march forward, and place it self behind the right hand flank of the first,
that the Front of it may be in a right line with the said flank. 3 The 4 in
going forward, countermarch the rear with a Macedon countermarch, then wheel
your battle to the right hand, face abount; then wheel to the left hand;
then march and apply it self to the point of the strst battle, as the third
did to the right: then face about, and stand thus: 4 The 2 countermarch to the
right or left hand: then march on til it be beyond the left point of the 4
battle: then face to the left hand; and march up to lay the right-hand-point
eue^ with the right point of the 1 battle, and face to the right hand, to
make the rear of the Plinthium thus:
The several bodies being brought into a Plinthium, must front every way as
long as they make Alte. When they march in a Plinthium, they are all to face
toward the head of their march: that is, the right and left flank battles
are to face the one to the left, the other to the right hand: The rear
battle is to face about to which hand it list, and so march on.

The battles beside have every one their place of dignity: the first battle
having the front, the 2 battle the rear, the 3 battle the right flank,
the 4 the left flank.

Of the Diphalange Heterostomus. CHAP. XLIII.
(1) A Diphalange Heterostomus is that which proceeds by deduction, having
the leaders of the former Phalange in a right-handdeduction, and of the
following Phalange in a left hand Deduction, so that the battles march
counterchangeably, one having the leaders in one flank, the other in the other.

NOTES.
1 A Diphalange Heterostomus.] As the Homoiostomus consisted of two Phalanges,
and both proceeded by deduction, so must this form. They differ in this only,
that the first had all the file-leaders on one side, either on the right or
left; this the file-leaders of one battle on the right, of the other on the
left hand. For if the leading Phalange have the file-leaders on the right hand,
the following Phalange shall have them on the left: If the first have them on
the left, the other shall have them on the right. See the figure. The use of
this form is, when the enemy shows himself on both flanks of our march, and
of it the double sided battle, whereof Aelian spoke in the 36 and 37
Chapters, may be made by the sleeuing up the latter to the former and joining
rear to rear: and if the leading battle have the fileleaders in the
right-flank, it is to make alte when the enemy comes near, and the following
battle to sleeue up by the rear of it, to make an even front with the
leaders of the first. Contrariwise, if it have the file-leaders on the left
hand* Besides, this orme has further use, and you may frame of it a Diphalange
Antistomus, by sleeuing up the following battle on that side where the
file-leaders of the leading battle march: for by such sleeuing, the
file-leaders of both I halanges shall be in the midst.

Words of direction in the Heterostomus.
There need few words of direction in this, only if the two ordinary battles
stand in equal front, let the one wheel to the right, the other to the left
hand, and so march the one before, the other after.

Of the horse Rombe, and of the foot-halfe-moone to encounter it. CHAP. XLIIII.
(1) THe battle framed in a form of a Rombe, was first invented by Ileon the
Thessalian, and was called I Will after his name; and to this form he exercised
and accustomed his Thessalians. It is of good use, because it has a leader on
every corner: in the front the Captain, in the rear the Liuetennant, and on
either side the flank-commanders. (2) The foot battle fittest to encounter
this, is the (3) Menoides or Cressent; having both the wings stretched out, and
within them the leaders, and being embowed in the midst to enuiron and wrap
in the horsemen in their giving on: where upon the horsemen ply the foot a
far off with flying weapons, after the manner of the Tarantines, seeking
thereby to dissolve and disorder their circled frame of march. Tarentum is a
City in Italy, the hosemen whereof are called Acrobolists, because in charging
they first cast little Darters.
darts, and after come to hands with the enemy.

NOTES.
1 THe battle in form of a Rhombe.] Of the Rhombe is sufficiently spoken in
Chap. 6. before; and in the notes upon the same Chapter: The manner of framing
of it, and the diverse kinds thereof are there set down. The Thessalians

Cap* 44
The half Moon or Menoides of foot The Rhombe of Horse The Front



used not all those kinds but only that which fileth, but ranks not, as
Aelian testifies in the 46 Chapter, which kind is there also described. It
Aelian ^ 46.
was accounted a form of great violence, and in that form the Thessalians got
all there reputation, being esteemed the the best horsemen of Greece.

2 The foot battle fittest to encounter this] The advantage that horsemen
have against foot is great, which is the cause that footmen have sought to
help themselves by diverse kind of embattailing to the end to supply by art,
that which they want by force and strength. Of which manner of embattailings,
many are set down in Aelian. If more then one troop charge at once, you have
the Phalange Amphistomus, Antistomus, and the Plinthium to resist: If but one
troop, the Diphalange Antistomus; All which kinds are before described by
Aelian. In this Chapter is another kind described namely, the half moon. and
there follow in other Chapters the plagiophalange, the Epicampios emprosthia,
and the wedge: Of all which we are to discourse in order as they are remembered
by our Authors.

3 Is the Menoeids or Cressant.] Against the Rhombe of horse Aelian opposes
the Menoeides of foot, a name of battle borrowed from the shape of the moon.
For (...) is the moon, and the word (...) (which is joined to make up the
composition) signifies a full shape or form. So the word imports a shape or
form of the moon: and yet this battle is not like all shapes of the moon,
but like to the new moon when she has two horns, and has the shape of half
a circle as it were: In which sense Isis the Egyptian goddess (which indeed
was the moon, says Diod. Sie. l. g. p. ^
Diodorus Siculus) was pictured with two horns from the show which she makes
being menoeides, that is, the new moon, so is a wall sometime called, because
of the hollow form. As when the Rhodians having their wall shrewdly shaken by
the engines of battery of Demetrius, reared an inward wall in shape of a
Cressant, which with the compass, comprehended all the parts of the outward
wall which were battered. The same Diod. Sic. l. 20 p. 783. Ar^. 41. 22. C.
Diodorus calls it Menoeides: the like was don by the Halicarnasseans against
Alexander the Great, and Arrian gives it the name (...); a brick half moon;
the cause of the invention of this form, is laid out by Onosand. c. 21. p. 65.
Onosander and ^ coc. 19. 45. ^ etc. 24. 184.
Leo. Oftentimes says Onosader, those that have great numbers of men in the
field, are wont to figure them into a Cressa^t, supposing that in charging the
enemy will be ready to join man to man, that is, to enter into the semicircle
and fight with them that stand embowed; in doing whereof, they will be hemmed
and wraped in, in the half Circle* the wings of the half Circle being to be
drawn together round about them, and the whole brought into the form of a
Circle. And Leo likewise: The figure bearing there semblance of half a Circle,
seems to be safe and firm; for it incloseth the enemy that comes against
it in the hollownesse of the Circle, by drawing out the wings into a Circle on
both sides, and gives more courage to fight against them. The causes then to
take up this figure in fight are three; one the advantage of multitude of
forces in the field, whereby the General is enabled to encompasse; another,
the ignorance of the enemy, that ventureth within the compass of the half
moon; the third, the efficasie of the figure which serves to entrap the enemy
that is not heedfull and wary in joining battle. It has been used both
against Horse and foot, and sometimes in Sea by one Navy against another,
Aelian esteems it good against horse; no doubt when horse charge; and are
resisted both in front, and plied also with flying weapons in flank, they
find a greater ^n (...)opposition and disadvantage, then when they are
received in front alone. In square battles of foot the front lying even, the
horse in charging abide only the danger before, whereas in the hollow fronted
battles of foot, such as are this form, and the Epicampios emprosthia, they
are endangered also in flank, yea in both flanks, and cannot enter the
hollownesse of the front without loss of many of their horse, the depth of the
hollownes being as strong (in having the file-leaders in front, and the depth
of the file the same) as a square battle to resist, and the wings plying and
infesting them with all sorts of flying weapons: against foot it has been
used oftentimes, and it is the only form that the Turks by reason of his
multitudes, uses both with horse and foot against Christians at this day.

The Cressant may be framed not only before fight is begun, but also in the
heat of fight: Before the fight, you have an example of the Lacedaemonians
against Epaminondas, which I have cited at large in my notes upon the 30 Chap.
Leo c. 19.. 41.
Leo also setteh down the manner of casting a Navy into a Cressant before
fight. During the fight, Aratus the elder framed a Cressant against the
Lacedaemonians: Pausanias recites it in this manner; In the battle of d
Pausanias in Arcadiais 471.
the Lacedaemonians against the Mantineans, The Mantineans, says he, had the
right wing, all the rest of the Arcadians the left. The midst was vssigned to
Aratus, and to the Sicyonians, and Achaeans. Agis King of Lacedemon, and the
Lacedaemonians strethed out their battle to invade the front of the enemy.
Agis and his troops stood in the midst. Aratus after he had imparted his
purpose to the Arcadians: fled himself, and with him that part of the army
which he commanded, as if he feared the impression of the Lacedaemonians; in
giving back he brought the army into the form of an half moon. The
Lacedaemonians and Agis thinking they had the victory in their hands, pursued
Aratus and his troops more egerly. The wing followed the King, esteeming it no
small conquest to have soyled Aratus. In the mean time they perceived not the
Arcadians that were at their back: and the Lacedaemonians being encompassed
round about, lost both many other of their army, and Agis also their King, the
son of Endamidas was flaine. Leo also in sea fight gives his General
counsel how to entrap his enemy with a show of flight; in giving back with
fashioning an half moon: These be his words in effect; Leo c. 20.. 201.
If a General be to retire before the enemies Navy, let him retire, fashioning
his Navy into a battle Menoeides, anasailyng with his poupes forward, and so
seem to shun the enemy: For if he fly not, but retire fighting, he shall
have his ships ready to turn upon the enemy with their prowes bent against
him. And if need require, he may retire with his poupes toward the enemy: for
the enemy shall not dare to enter into the hollownesse for fear of being
encompassed. So Leo. The Menoeides therefore may be framed during fight; but
this caution is to be remembered, that in sudden transmutations of battles,
you use not the service of raw soldiers, but of such as have experience, lest
all be brought into confusion; and the enemy charge you while you are changing
your form. Now as forms of advantage are to be sought against the enemy; so
is it needful to advise what best opposition is to be made against such
battles: in case the enemy use them. The Rombe of horse was of old time
accounted a forcible figure against foot; the horse therein had the better. The
Menoeides was invented to resist and overthrow the horse: The foot had been
the better; what was then best for the horse? to abstain from charging (says
Aelian) and to ply the foot with missiue weapons, to the end to force them to
break their strong form of embattailing. So now they stand upon equal terms
and the foot can with their shot annoy the horse, as well as the horse can
annoy the foot. Aelian then shows a means for the horse to avoid the danger
of this manner of embattailing: for foot using this form against foot, he
shows no remedy. I will set down what I find: and here I need not to
repeat the remedy, that Diod. Syc. ^. 15. 486.
Epaminondas used against the Lacedemonian halfe-moone: it is related at large
in my Notes upon the 30 Chap. Onosand. cap. 66. Leo. cap. 20.. 184.
Onosander gives this advise: Divide your battle, says he, into 3 parts:
with the two outwardest charge the Enemies wings: the third, that is ordered
against the middle, and as it were, the bosom of the Cressant, advance it not,
but let it stand firm; for either they that are placed in the midst of the
Cressant, shall standidle; or else advancing in an even front, will throng one
another and break their battle. For the two fronts fighting in the wings
and keeping their place, it is not possible for the half circle to come
forward with an even front: when they are therefore confused and have broken
their array, let the third battle that remained in the midst for seconds,
charge them, as they disorderl, advance. If they still keep their place in the
bottom of the hollownesse, oppose the light-armed and darters against them,
who will exceedingly distress them with their missiue weapons: likewise you
may do well to frame a Loxe-phalange of your whole Army, and with your two
Loxes, charge the wings, preventing so the circling and encompasing of the
Menoeides. For the Enemy, being a long while hindered from coming to blows
with his whole Army, shall be kept in play with a few, none fighting but those
only that are in the wings, which first of necessity must join, because of
the oblique onset. It will not be a miss also, leisurely to retire with the
Army sometimes, as though you were in fear; or else facing about to make your
retreat orderly, as if you fled; and afterward turning sudd only to meet the
Enemy that presses upon you. For sometimes the Enemy being ouer-ioyed in the
imagination of a true flight, does follow unadvisedly, and make a disorderly
pursuit; every man pressing to be foremost, upon whom you may return without
danger, and again, chase them that follow you; who will be struckes with a
fear in that you dare, contrary to their expectation, turn again and make head
against them. Onosander gives here three ways to resist the Menoeides: one by
dividing your battle into a Triphalange, and opposing two phalanges against
the two wings of the Cressant, forbearing and standing firm with the third
till opportunity be to move (which is the battle that Aelian opposes against
the Caelembolos.) The second by using the Loxe-phalange against it, as did
Epaminondas at the battle of Leustra against the Lacedemonian half moon, as
I have showed elsewhere, namely Chap. 30.. 7. The third in making semblance of
flying; for the half moon is a form, which in standing may well be kept
whole, in moving will soon be broken and fall into disorder, as Cicuta de l. c
disciplimilitar. l. 2. 220.
Cicuta an Italian writer notes very well. If then you feign to fly, keeping
your men in order, the Menoeides following you will break of it self, and so
you have good opportunity to return, and in all likelihood to win the day
against it, especially being in disorder. Leo gives the same Leo. cap. 20..
201.
advise to his General, only he speaks of Sea matters, Onosander of Land
service.

Words of direction for the Rhombe.
For the forming of the Rhombes, see the 19 Chapter, and my Notes upon that
Chapter,. 6. For the Cressnnt.
First order your body into a long square, Plagiophalanx. 1 The 2 file-leaders
in the midst of the square, stand. 2 The next 2 on either hand, move forward
one foot before the other two, their files moving withal, and holding their
distance. 3 So the 4 next file-leaders each before other, on either side a
foot. 4 Then two more on either side, advance before the rest that moved two
foot a piece. 5 Then the 2 next on either side, 3 foot apeece.


To restore to the first Posture:
Face about. Move all at once (excepting the 2 middle files) and take your
first ground.

Of the Horse-battaile Heteromekes, and the Plagiophalange to be opposed
against it. CHAP. XLV.
1 THE horse-battaile Heteromekes is that, which has the depth double to the
length. It is profitable in many respects. (2) For seeming to be but a few in
so small a breadth, it deceives the Enemy, and easily breaks his forces
with the thickness and strength of the embattailing, and may without
perceiving be led through straight and narrow passages. The (3) foot battle
to encounter is called the Plagiophalange, or broad fronted battle. For being
but slender in depth, it bears forth and extends it self in length, so
that albeit it be broken in the midst with the charge of Horse, yet is
nothing broken but a little of the depth, and the fury of the Horse is carried
not upon the multitude of foot, but straight and immediately into the open air
and field. And for that cause is the length thereof much exceeding the depth.

NOTES.
1 OF the 2. battles Heteromekes and Plagiophalanx I have spoken before in my
notes upon the thirtieth Chapter. The Heteromekes is a kind of Hearse, the
Plagiophalange the broad fronted battle therein mentioned.

2 For seeming to be but a few.] Amongst all the stratagems used in War, it
has been accounted always a master piece of skill to deceive the Enemy with
show of forces, that are in any Army: sometime with semblance of more men, then
we have, to fear him, sometime with concealing our number, to provoke him
rashly to fight, and adventure himself in battle. Of these two kinds we
have an example in Caesar at the siege of

Cap. 45.
Plagiophalanx, or ye broad fronted battle of foot Heteromekes or ye Hearse
of Horse The front



Gergouia. Caesar himself writes thus: When Caesar came into his lesser Camp
Cesarde ^ell. gall. ^ 7. ^63. A. ^^. 1.
(he had two Camp^^ at that siege) to take view of his works, he perceived
that the hill, which was holden by the Enemy, was become empty of men, which
hill a few days past, could hardly ^^ seen for the multitude, that covered
it. Maruelling thereat, he asked of the run aw^^yes the cause (of whom great
numbers came flocking to him every day:) It appeared by ^ll their reports,
which Caesar also understood by his own Scoutes, that the ridge of the hill
was almost even, but yet woody and narrow, by which there was access to ^he
other part of the town. That the Enemy mightily feared that place; and were
now of opinion, that seeing the Romans had gained one hill, if they should lose
the other, they should seem well nigh enclosed round about with a trench, and
shut up from issuing out, and from forage; that all were called out of the
City by The french Genorall.
Vercin^etorix to fortify the place. Caesar having gotten this intelligence,
sent at midnight d^^ers troops of horse thither, and commanded them to rid up
and down in all places with greater tumult, then their manner was. As Soon as
it was day, he willed a great number of carriage-horse and Mules to be brought
out of the Camp, and their pads ^o be taken off from them, and that the
Muleters putting on head-pieces, should ride a^out the hills in show, as if they
were horsemen. To these he added a few Horse, who were to spread themselves
abroad hereand there, to amase the Gauls the more. He willed them to address
themselue, and to draw to one and the same place, fetching a large compass
about. These things were seen a far of out of Gergouia (for from thence the
Camp might well be discerned) and yet in such distance ^t could not be
certainly perceived, what the matter was. He sent a legion along the ridge of
the same hill, and placed it (drawing it a little further A peaple in Narbon.
forward) in the nether grounds below, and hid it in the woods. The Gauls here
at increase^ their suspicion, and all the forces appointed for the
fortifications of their Camp were led thither. Caesar espying the Camp of the
Enemy to be void of men, conue ed Soldiers straggling, as it were, and not
in troops, from the greater Camp unto the lesser, hiding those things by
which they might be known, and covering their ensigns of War, lest happily
they might be discried out of the Town; and gave instructions to the Legates,
whom he had set over every Legion, what he would have done. After these
directions he gave the signal: the Soldiers after the signal given, with
all speed fell up to the Munition, and entering, made themselves masters of
three Camps of the Enemy. And the speed of their surprise was such, that
Theutomatus King of the Nitiobrigians, being suddenly surprised in his Tent, as
he rested about noone, the upper part of his body being naked, had much ado to
save himself upon his horse (which was also wounded in escaping) from the
hands of the rif^^^g Soldiers. This example of Caesar contains the two kinds
before remembered of deceiving the Enemy. For he both made a greater show of
horse men then he had, by setting Muleters on horseback, and giving the
(...) ^ieces, and also dissembled the number of them, who were in the lesser
(...) which ga^e upon the Enemies works, by conueying Soldiers (...) of the
(...) Camp piece meal, as it were, and one after another (...)icy yielded
victory to Caesar against the Gauls before: as you (...) in the fifth book of
his Commentaries. And in this very kind, that Aelian speaks of, that is, in
making his front narrow and his Caesar de ^el. gal l. 5. prg. 748. B
battle deep, and so dissembling his forces, Cleandridas the Lacedemonian
won a noble battle against the Thurians, as I have noted in the nine and
twentieth Chapter of this book. Examples of the manner of these flights are
every where to be found in Histories.

3 The foot battle to encounter it.] Diverse kinds of battles are fitter
(as I conceive) to be opposed against this horse-battaile, then the
Plagiophalange. And, I take it, it is not therefore here set dow^e as the best
form to encounter, and repulse the horse, but rather to show, that, if you be
not otherwise able to avoid them, you may in this ^orme sustain the lesser
loss. For so much importes the reason of Aelian viz. that, if you be broken in
the midst by the horse, yet is nothing bro^en, but a little of the depth, and
the fury of the horse is carried into the open field, and not upon the rest of
the foot. If your foot battle were flanked with a river, wood, trench, wall,
or some such other strength, I would the^ well hold with this reason. For then
might the foot open (as in the Di^alange Antistomus) and suffer the horse to
pass through, and to fall i^^o the river, or upon that strength, which you
were flanked with all. B^t when the horse break through your foot, and pass
into the open field, they have advantage to turn again upon your back, and
freedom of a many charges, as they list to give upon you. The Plinthium, the
half Moon, the Epicampios, or hollow-fronted battle described in the next
fo^lowing Chapter, and the wedge of foot, are to be preferred before the
Plagiophalange. For all these kinds are invented to repulse horse, in what
form soever they give on, and some of them, in case the horse be forward ^^
charging, to overthrow and discomfit them. Of some of these we have spoken
before, other some follow to be treated of. The Heteromekes horse battle, is
not in our days much used, except it be in marching. The great Commanders of
our time, rather in fight, order their horse into a Plagiophalange; which form
they hold more fit for thevse of the weapons of our age. But the Plagiophalange
of foot remembered by Aelian to encounter horse, ought to be very shallow in
depth. For if it should be according to the old fashion, 16. in depth (which
number the file of the Macedonians held) or according to our custom ^^. I see
not how it is possible for a troop of horse to break it, or to pass through
it into the open field, the depth of the battle being sufficient to sustain
the ch(...)ge of any horse. How the Heteromekes, and how the Plagiophalange are
framed, I have taught before in the thirtieth Chapter.

Of another kind of Rhombe for horsemen, and of the foot-battaile called
Epicampios Emprosthia to encounter it. CHAP. XLVI.
(1) ANother sort of Rhomboeides there is, whereof I need say no more, but
that it fileth, and ranketh not. I have before showed the use thereof; and that
Ileon the Thessalian was the inuenter, and that ^asan Medeas husband put it in
practice: the use thereof is great, it being directed and led in the four
sides by the Captain, the Lieutenant, and the two flanke-commanders. It is
commonly fashioned of Archers on horseback, as the Armenian, and Persian
manner is.

Against it is opposed the foot-battaile, called (2) Epicampios Emprosthia,

Cap. 46.
Epicampios Emprosthia The Rhombe The front



the hollow fronted battle because the circumduction of the front is like an
embowing. The end of this form is to deceive and ouer-reach the Archers on
horseback, e^ther by wrapping them in the void space of the front, as they
charge, and give on upon the spune, or else disordering them first with the
wings, and breaking their fury, by overthrowing them finally with their ranks
about the middle Ensigns. This kind of battle was devised to entrappe and
beguile. For opening the middle hollownesse, it makes show but of a few, that
march in the wings, having notwithstanding thrice as many following and
seconding in the rear. So that, if the wings be of power sufficient for the
encounter, there needs no more: if not, retiring easily on either side, they
are to join themselves to the bulk of the battle.

NOTES.
(1) ANother sort of Rhomboeides there is.] The inscription of this Chapter
seems not to be right; because the form of the Rhomboeides here mentioned,
differs not, but is the same, that was last spoken of. In the Cap 4^.
former he said it was invented by Ileon the Thessalian, and in use amongst
the Thessalians, and called I Will of his name. In this he says as much, adding
only that Jason, Medeas husband, who was also a Thessalian, put it most in
practice. So that the Rhombes seem to be all one, and the inscription of the
Chapter either corrupted or mistaken; and that it ought to be of the Rhombe
and the hollow-fronted battle to encounter it. I need say no more of this
Rhombe, the form of it, the manner of framing, and the difference of it from
other Rhombes are sufficiently declared in other places before. Cap. 19.


(2) Against it is opposed the Epicampios Emprosthia.] About the form of this
battle there is also some difference amongst the learned* Casaubon in his
translation of Polybius translateth Polib. 28. B. 42^* B ^65. D.
Epicampios in Greek by the Latin word Forceps. Of whose opinion De (...) 4.
dialog^ 7. pag^* 279
Iustus Lipsius seems to be. If I dissent from so great learned men upon good
reason and authority, I hope, I shall not incur the opinion of arrogance,
when I have spoken, what I think, let the Reader judge, as he pleases: I
pre^udicate no man's opinion. For the forceps (tongues) or Forfex (sheeres) which
Lips. ibid.
Lipsius, and Casaubon hold to be all one with the Epicampios, Veget. l. 3. c.
19.
Vegetius resembles them to the letter V. His words are these: Against it
(that is against the wedge) the form of battle is opposed, which they call
Forfex. For this is a kind of battle framed of the choycest Soldiers to the
likeness of the letter V. and it receives and shuts within it the wedge.
Vegetius says, the Forfex or Forceps is like the letter V. Of this form is
the Caelembolos in Aelian; and resembled to the same letter in express
terms; as you may see in his thirty six Chapter. So that having the same
form, it must be the same battle, howsoever they differ in the Greek and
Latin names. This being so, and seeing Aelian in this Chapter describes the
Epicampios by it self, and in another Chapter the Caelembolos by it self
giving a different form to them both, there is no probability to think they
should be one. Now besides the form here set down by Aelian, (which is to be
marked, as it is described,) the description of Xenophon shows the form of
the Epicampios Emprosthia, out of whose words a man may easily discern, that
the Caelembolos and it are not all one. For he resembles it to two G put
together, that is one Gamma on one side, another Gamma on the other. Put
therefore two Gammas together in this sort and you have the perfect form of
the Epicampios Emprosthia. The passage is worth the recital, although it be
somewhat long. For it both contains the form of the battle, and the manner
of opposition against it. Thus then he writes concerning the field fought
betwixt Cyrus the elder, and Croesus: When both the Armies were in sight one of
another, and Xenoph Cyrop. l. 7. 173. A.
Croesus being far superior in number, resolved to ouer-front Cyrus his
battle, ordering his own Phalange in an embowed form (for otherwise there
is no way to ouer-front and encompasse) he framed it on each side like the
letter G to the end that all his forces might fight at once together. Cyrus
seeing this, continued nevertheless his march, and held on with the same pace
he had done before; and marking how the Enemy had made (...)
the inflexion on both sides before, and extended their wings; do you
perceive, said he to Chrysanthas, where they have made their (...)
inflexion? Yes, said Chrysanthas, and I marvel at it. For, me thinks, they
draw their wings to far forward from the front of their own Phalange. True,
said Cyrus, and from our Phalange too. But why do they so? because they fear,
lest the wings being near to us and their Phalange yet far of, we should
gine upon the wings. But how, said Chrysanthas, can they in so great distance
second one another? It is evident, said Cyrus, that when their wings shall come
up, and be right against our flanks, they will turn faces and Phalange wise
come against us on all sides, and fight with us every way.




Thus Xenophon of the form and use of this battle; the form being like two
Gammas on either side closed, the use to encompasse the adverse battle, and
to fall upon it on all sides. And yet the form and practice of the form
together with the manner to oppose against, will more plainly appear in the
following words: Croesus* says Xenophon, thinking that the Phalange (viz. the
midst of the battle) with which himself marched, was nearer Xenoph. Cyrop.
l. 7. 176. ^.
to the Enemy, then the wings, which were stretched forth in length, gave a
signal to the wings, not to proceed further, but to face to the Enemy in the
ground, where they stood; when they had all turned their countenances toward
the Army of Cyrus, he gave them another sign to go and charge the Enemy. So
did three Phalanges set themselves against Cyrus Army; the first against the
front, the other two, one against the right-flanke, the other against the left:
So that the whole Army of Cyrus were put into a great fear. For as a small
Plinthium comprehended in a great one, so was the Army of Cyrus being environed
every where with the Enemies horse, and armed foot, and Targetires, and
Archers, and Chariots, saving only in the rear. Notwithstanding as soon as
Cyrus commanded, they turned their faces against the Enemies: The silence on
both sides was great for dread of that, which was expected. But when Cyrus
thought meet, he began the Paean, and all his Army answered him. After this
they (...)
shouted altogether, and Cyrus putting spurs to his horse, with his horsemen
gave upon the Enemies flank, and with all speed came to hands. The foot
presently following in good order wrapped in the Enemy here and there, and had
a great deal the better; For they charged the wing in a Phalange, so that the
Enemy was forthwith put to flight: hitherto Xenophon. In which latter words we
may see the form of the Epicampios more fully expressed. For first he shows
that wings of the Phalange of Croesus were advanced a good way before the front
of the Phalange it self. Then that the front of these wings advanced, came up
as far as the rear of Cyrus his Phalange. Thirdly, that they marched up in a
right line. For Xenophon resembles Cyrus his battle to a little Plinthium,
the battle of Croesus to a great Plinthium, so that both battles must be
square and figured on al sides in right lines, as we have in the 42 Chap.
Fourthly, that the front of the Epicampios must be hollow to receive and claspe
in, as it were, the adverse battle: the two gammaes (whereof Xenophon spoke
before) joined together in the upper part being a true resemblance of the front
of this battle. The manner of the opposition against it is likewise described
by Xenophon. First Cyrus staid till the wings of the Epicampios were Front.

come up even, and turned their faces against his flanks. Then when they were
come up, commanded he his flanks to face toward them to receive the charge.
When the fight was begun, Cyrus from the rear with reserues of horse and
foot gave upon the flanks of the wings of the Epicampios (for in the fight, by
reason of turning of their faces toward the flanks of Cyrus his Phalange,
their flanks were toward Cyrus his rear) and so charging them in flank and
front they were easily defeated. To return then to the comparison of the
Forceps and the Epicampios, by this example out of Xenophon the difference
betwixt them may easily appear: Epicampios. Front.

Forfex.

the Epicampios making 2 angles in the bottom of the hollow fro^t, the forceps
but one, and the angle in the forceps is acute, the 2 angles in the Epicampios
both right angles, and the figures differ as much one from another, as the two
gammaes joined together differ from the letter V. Aelian in this (...) used
this form against Eumenes. wioder. S^^^. l. 16. 686.
Chapter shows no othervse of the Epicampios, but against horse. But the use
is no less against foot, as the former example teaches, and many other, which
are to be found partly in History, partly are mentioned in my notes upon this
book. A notable experince of this form you may see noted upon the 28 Chapter
of this Book, in the fight betwixt Scipio and Asdruball; another in the
battle of Miltiades at Marathon, against the Persians: likewise in the
battle of Narses against the Franks, of which I shall have occasion to speak
hereafter. For the framing of this battle the words of direction may be
these: First, make a broad fronted Phalange. Then

1 Advance your right and left wings, and let the midst of the battle stand
firm. Under the name of the wings, I understand so many files as shall be
thought enough to march out to make the hollow front: the bringers up of wings
must rank with the file-leaders of the midst.

2 Face and charge into the hollownesse of the front.

To restore to the first Posture.
1 Wings, face about to the right or left hand. 2 March and join with the body
in an even front. 3 Face as you were first.
There is added by some translators of Aelian an Epicampios opisthia to the
Epicampios emprosthia. This battle they would have to be signified in their
words. This kind of battle was devised to entrap and beguile. But he that
shall weigh the words following, shall see that Aelians meaning is to describe
the Emprosthia more fully, even in the self same place. For he speaks of the
few that march in the wings, and of thrice as many that follow in the rear.
Besides, he says, that if the wings be not sufficient to repulse the enemy,
they may retire and join to the bulk of the body. The wings are therefore led
on first, and the ma^se of the body follows, whereas in the Epicampios
opisthia the wings are stretched out behind, and follow the body. And albeit
there be in Aelian no words of the Opisthia, yet I may not deny that there is
an Epicampio^ Opisthia: Suidas in Epicampes.
Suidas proves it plainly; He defines the (...), thus: It is called
Epicampios when the battle aduanceth against the enemy* and has the wings
drawn out in length on both sides behind. The use of the Opisthia is as it
seems, to avoid the encircling or encompassing of an enemy, that has a
greater quantity of soldiers then we, and means to charge our rear.
Alexander the Great, being far inferior to Darius in multitude of men, used
this form at Arbela. Diod. Sic. l. 17. 592. Arr. c. 3. 60. c. 3.
Diodorus Siculus says, that after he had ordered his battle against Darius
in a right front, he framed an Epicampios behind each wing, to the end that
the enemy with his multitude might not encompasse the small number of the
Macedonians. And this may suffice for both the forms of the Epicampios.

Words of direction for the Epicampios Opisthia.
1 Advance your body, and let the wings stand firm. 2 The wings of one flank
face outward to the right, the other to the left hand.
Torustore, etc.
1 Wings face as you were. 2 March up, and front with the midst of the body.
Of the foot-battaile called Cyrte, which is to be set against the Epicampios.
CHAP. XLVII.
(1) THE Battle to be opposed against the Epicampios is called Cyrte of the
circumferent form. This also makes semblance of small forces, by reason of
the conuexity of the figure. For all round things seem little in compass, and
yet stretched out in length, and singled, they prove twice as much as they
appeared to be. As is evident in Pillars which are round, and therefore in
sight show the one half, and conceal the other. The greatest piece of skill
in embattailing, is to make show of few men to the enemy, and in deed to bring
twice as many to fight.

Cap. 47.
The Cyrte or conuex halss Moon The Epicampios The front



NOTES.
1 THE form of this battle, albelt it be a half Moon, and is called by
Polybius Menoeides, yet is it in a manner contrary to the Menoeides described
in the 44 Chapter of this Book. That turned the concauity or hallownesse
backward toward the rear, and the two horns against the enemy, and sought to
encompasse, this turns the conuexe or outward part foremost, not the horns,
and endeavors to avoid encompassing: For the Epicampios, if a man should
enter into the hollownesse thereof, claspeth him in, and is able to charge him
in front, and on both flanks at one time. But the conuexe half Moon avoiding
that danger, meets the enemy with the bearing out of the half circle, and
gives the two wings of the Epicampios enough to do, being not to be annoyed
with the depth of the hollownesse, which remains a pretty distance more
backward then the points of the wings. So that this form is fit to be opposed
against the Epicampios, and loses no advantage of embattailing: and it
auoideth the peril of the hollow front by not entering, and yet maintains the
fight against the two wings that are thru^ out to encompasse; being of
sufficient strength to encounter the Epicampios, either of them not dissoluing
their form, or notwithstanding that the wings of the Epicampios retire, as
Aelian prescribes, when they are ouerpressed, or else the body of the
hollownesse advance to make an equal front with the wings, and so unite their
force. Howbeit I have not read in the Greek hi^tory examples of this form set
against the Epicampios, or used otherwise in fight; only I find in Polybius
at the battle of Can that Hannibal practiced it against the Romans, not
trusting to the strength of the form, but rather with the show thereof,
covering a further drift, to beguile and bring them into his snare. His words
are in effect these: Hanniball, says he, embattailed his army thus; He placed
on the left hand the Spanish and Celtish horse right over against the Roman
horse: next to them of foot half the Lybian heavy armed; then the Spaniards
and Celts, next them the other half of the Lybians. On the right wing he
ordered the Numidian horse: After he had framed an even front of the whole
Army, he advanced the middle Spaniards and Gauls, and cast them into a conuexe
half Moon, gathering up the depth therewith and making it thin, meaning to
hide the Lybians with it, and disposing the Lybians behind them as seconds.
And a little after he declares the manner of fight. Then the heauy-armed foot
succeeding the light armed, encountered together. The Spaniards therefore and
Gauls a while bravely maintained their order and fight against the Romans; but
being ouer-pressed, they turned their backs, and retired, dissoluing the form
of their half Moon. The Roman Cohorts courageously following easily broke
asunder the battle of the Celts, which at first was ordered in a small depth;
themselves transferring the thickness of their battle from the wings of the
midst, where the fight was; for the midst and the wings fought not at the
same time. The midst began the fight first, because the Celts ranged in a
half Moon, bore much more forward the the wings, having not the hollownes but
the prominent swelling of the half-Moone lying out toward the enemy. So the
Romans following and running together to the midst, where the enemy gave
ground, entered so far into the enemies battle, that they had the heauy-armed
Lybians on either of their flanks; of whom those of the right wing facing to
the Target, charged them on the right; those of the left wing, facing to the
pike, gave upon their left side, occasion it self showing what was fit to be
done: so that it cha^ced as Anniball had foreseen, that after the defeat of
the Celts, the Romans pursuing the victory, should fall out to be enclosed in
the midst of the Lybians. So Polibius of the prominent half moon or Cyrte,
which Annibal used; to which of purpose he gave to make thinness, because it
should be broken and beaten, and the enemy drawn into the snares as it were,
and ambush of the seconds, that is, of the Lybian heavy armed. If it had had
the due proportion of depth, it might have stood a longer time against the
efforts of the enemy, and disputed the victory against the broad-fronted
phalange; against which if it may be opposed, there is no question but it may
be set against the Epicampios, because the broad-fronted phalange has all her
forces united together, the Epicampios fights only with her two wings, the
midst of the battle being far from joining; unless a man be compelled to
enter into the hollownesse of the front, in which case both the front and the
wings may annoy him.

Words of direction for the Cyrte or conuexe half Moon.
First, order the body into a long square or Plagiophalange. 1 Then let the two
file-leaders in the midst of the square march out with their files. 2 The
next two on either hand moueright forward one foot short of the first, keeping
distance in flank, as before. 3 So the next four, two o^ each side: the two
next one foot short of the last, the other two one foot short of them. 4 Then
the next four, two on each side, each two foot short of other. 5 Then the
four last, two on each side, each three foot short of the other.
Of the Tetragonall Horse-battaile, and of the wedge of foot to be opposed
against it. CHAP. XLVIII.
(1) THe Tetragonall horse-battaile is square in figure, but not in number of
men. For in squares the number is not always the same: and the General for
his advantage may double the length to the depth. The Persians, Sicilians, and
most of the (...)s do affect this form, and take it to be easy in framing,
and better in use.

(2) Against it is opposed the Phalange called Embolos, or Wedge of foot, all
the side consisting of armed men. This kind is borrowed of the horse-mans
wedge. And yet in the wedge of horse one suffices to lead in front, where the
foot-wedge must have three, one being unable to bear the sway of the
encounter. (3) So Epaminondas the Theban fighting with the Lacedaemonians at
Mantinaea overthrew a mighty power of theirs by casting his army into a wedge.
(4) It is fashioned when the Antistomus Diphalangy

Cap. 48.
The Horsbattaile square in figure, not in horse The foot wedge The front



in marching joins the front of the wings together, holding them behind like
unto the letter A.

NOTES.
(1) THis Chapter contains the description of two battails, one of horse, the
other of foot to be opposed in fight one against another; namely the square of
horse, and the wedge of foot. Of which the tetragonall horse-battaile, square
in figure, or ground (for all is one) is described in my notes upon the 18.
Chapter of Aelian, as also the wedge of horse, from which this wedge of foot
(as Aelian says) is derived. It will be therefore needless to repeat, what is
there written about the forms and diversity of them; or to make comparison of
their use and advantage. Against the Rhombe of horse, if they come to charge
foot, he has set down two forms of foot to receive them; the Cressant and
the hollow-fronted battle called Epicampios emprosthia: which upon this
^eason, because they are hollow in front both, and the Rhombe shoots forth
and charge in a point, must of necessity by receiving that point into their
hollownesse, and plying it with their weapons on all sides, distress the
Rhombe both in front and flank, which is a dangerous kind of fight, and such
a one as seldom may be tolerated or endured.

(2) Against the square horse battle in figure or ground, he opposes in this
Chapter, the wedge of foot, which albeit it cannot with the like art wrappe in
and encompasse the square, yet is it of force sufficient to break and disseuer
it, and so to disorder and deface it. For the square of horse having a large
front and going with full speed to charge, falls upon the narrow front of the
wedge, which according to Aelian ought to contain no more then three men, and
they knitting themselves close, their pikes pretended and being seconded with
the rest of their companions behind pretending their pikes likewise, receive
the charge with a firm stand, so that only the midst of the horse falling
upon the point of their front; cannot reach to the flanks of the wings thereof
(because the wedge from the first narrowing grows backward into an increasing
breadth) without breaking of their form, and altering of the front of their
square, wherein they were ordered: which if they do, their repulse cannot but
follow, because they fight out of order. Now that the form of the wedge in
horse is able to endure the shot of the horse, that came against them in a
square, appears by the 18. Chapter of this book, where it is said that
Philip King of Macedon Alexanders father used this form alone, and that
Alexander himself ordered his horse in the same manner, who were both
victorious in all their fields. That it is as good for foot against horse
besides the reasons before rehearsed may be evident by this, that the horse are
in motion in the charge, and by that means are soon disordered, whereas the
foot stand fast, and keep themselves secure to repulse the violence of the
horse.

3. So Epaminondas the Theban] This battle is excellently described by
Xenoph. Hellen. ^. 7. p. 645. D.
Xenophon in his seventh book of his history of the Grecians. His words sound
thus: After Epaminondas had embattailed his army, as he thought fit, he led not
straight way against the enemy directly, but declined westward toward the
Tegaean mountains lying right over against the enemy, which bred an opinion,
that he had no will to fight that day. For after he came up to the mountain
and had taken a view of his army, he cansed them to (...)
lay down their arms in the uppermost part of all, as if he meant to incampe;
and by this means allayed the preparation of fight, which most of the enemies
had conceived in mind, and likewise their care in maintaining their place and
order in battle. After sleeuing up to the front, his companies that marched
in a wing, he fashioned his whole army into a strong wedge. Then commanding
them to (...).
take up their armies, he led on, and they followed. The enemy seeing him
advance contrary to their expectation, had no leisure to be still, but some
ran to their place in battle, some embattailed themselves, some bridled
their horse, some put on their curaces, all were like to men, that were like
rather receive, then give a foil to the enemy. Epaminondas led on his army
like a gallie with the (...). That is, with the point of the wedge against the
enemy.
prowe against the enemy, imagining that wheresoever he should break their
array, he should thereby overthrow their whole army. For he resolved to bring
the best and strongest part of his army to fight, casting the weakest behind
in the rear, knowing that being defeated they would discourage their own
side, and breed new courage in the enemy. The enemy ranged his horse like a
phalange of armed foot in a great depth without joining foot with them. But
Epaminondas made a strong wedge of his horse also allotting them Light-armed.
foot which had no herses, conceiving that cutting asunder the enemies horse,
he should easily overthrow their whole army. For you shall hardly find any,
that will make good their ground, after they see them of their own side take
themselves to their feet. And to the end, to with hold the Athenians from
succouring those of the left wing next unto them, he placed both horse and foot
right over against them upon the hills, to put them in fear of charging their
rear, if they gave aid unto the enemy, so led he on to the charge, and was not
deceived of his hopes. For having the better wheresoever he gave on, he put the
whole army of his adversaries to flight. So Xenophon. Where you may note not
only a square of horse defeated by a wedge of horse, but also a square
battle of foot defeated by a wedge of foot. And to show more plainly, that
the form of the wedge is forcible against abroad fronted Phalange, I will
recite two examples more. The first is out of T. Liutus, who writes of a
battle fought betwixt the Romans and Celtiberians thus. The Celtiberians
knowing that the Roman army having spoiled ^ huius.
their Country, would retire through a forest called Manlius his forest, ^id
themselves in it of purpose, to the end to fall upon the Romans upon advantage
and unlooked for. When the Roman army had entered the forest by daylight, the
enemy rising out his ambush upon the sudden invaded them on both flanks. Which
Flaccus (he was the Roman General) seeing, stilled the tumult by the
Captains commanding every man to his place, and armies, and bringing the
baggage and carriage beasts together, he constantly and without fear
embattailed his army partly by himself, partly by his Legates and by the
Tribunes of the soldiers, as the time and place required. The enemy came on,
and the skirmish was attached in the uttermost parts of the Roman Phalange, and
at last the battles joined. The fight was hot in all parts, but fortune
diverse: for the Legeons behaved themselves bravely, and the auxiliarie; in both
wings as well. The mercinaries were hardly laid unto by the enemy (who bore the
like arms; and was a better kind of soldier) and had much ado to make good
their ground. The Celtiberians, when they saw they could not match the legions
in the ordinary manner of fight, and Ensign against Ensign, cast themselves
into a wedge, and so assailed the Romans: in which kind of fight they are so
powerful, that they are scarcely to be resisted. Then the legions also
branced, and the battle was almost broken. Which danger when Flaccus
perceived, he rode to the legionary horsemen And is there no help in you said
he? This army will immediately be lost. When they cried out at all hands, they
would gladly do whatsoever he commanded. Double the troops, said he, of both
legions, and with all your might force your horse against this wedge of the
enemy, wherewith they press us: you shall do it more violently, if you give
on, drawing off the horses bridles, which the Roman horsemen have of ten done
heretofore to their great commendation. They obeyed, and pulling off their
horses bridles they passed and repassed through the enemies wedge twice with
great slaughter, eueryone breaking his staff. The Celtiberians after the
breaking and dispersing of their wedge, in which all their hope remained, began
to be afraid, and almost quitting the sight, sought where they might best to
save themselves. Hitherto Liuy. In which passage a man may observe the violence
of the wedge, which if it be rightly managed, is of wonderful power to break
and dispart any square it shall fall upon. The other example or precedent, is
out of Agathias l. 2.
Agathias, where he describes the battle betwixt Narses (the Emperor
Justinians Lieutenant, and Bucelinus General of the Frenchmen. He has thus.
Narses when he came to the place where the fight should be, ordered presently
his army into a Phalange. The horse were ranged in the wings; Himself stood in
the right wing, and next him Zandalas Captain of his followers, and with him
all his mercinary and household servants, that were not unfit for the war,
upon either side of him was Valerian and Artabanus, who were commanded to hide
themselves a while in the thick of the wood, that was thereby: and when the
enemy joined, to fall out suddenly and unlooked for upon them, and to put them
into an amazement. The foot had all the space in the midst, and the
fileleaders joined shoulder to shoulder being armed with curaces and other
pieces of armor reaching down to the foot, and with caskes: Behind them were
other soldiers ordered even as far as to the open fields. The light armed
and such as used flying weapons were cast in the rear, expecting a signal of
employment. The midst was reserved for the Heruly, and remained empty,
because they were not yet come up: Bucelinus advanced his battle, and all ran
cheerfully against the Romans, not leisurely, and in good order, but rashly
and tumultuously, as if with the very cry they would have rent asunder all that
stood against them. The form of their battle was like a wedge; For it
resembles the letter Delta. And the front which shot out in a point, was
covered and close, by reason it was hemmed in with Targets (you would have said
they counterfeited Caput percium.
a Veget. l. 3. c. 1^.
swines head) but both the flanks on each side lying out by files in depth, and
stretching backward byaswise, by little and little were parted and severed one
from another, and bearing out still toward the rear end: at last in a great
distance, so that the ground in the midst betwixt them was empty, and the
backs of the soldiers that were in the wedge, appeared clean through the
files uncovered. For their faces were turned contrariwise one from another, to
the end, they might bear them toward the enemy, and save themselves from
blows, by casting their Targets before them, and secure their back by placing
them opposite to the backs of their fellows. All things fellout according to
Narses his wish, to whom both a fair opportunity was presented, and who had
wisely before contrived what was to be done. For when the Barbarians running on
furiously fell upon the Romans with a shout and outery giving upon the milder;
they presently broake the front of those that stood in the void space, (for the
Heruli were not yet come up) and the leaders of the point of the wedge cutting
asunder all that stood in their way, even to the uttermost depth of the file,
and yet making no great slaughter, were carried beyond the bringers up of
Narses battle, and some of them continued their course further, thinking to
take in the Roman Camp, Then Narses presently turning about and extending out
his wings, and making (as the Tacticks name is) an Epicampios emprosthia,
commanded the archers on horseback to send their arrows by turns, upon the
backs of the enemy, which they easily performed. For being on horseback
higher then the Barbarian foot, they might at their pleasure strike them, as
they advanced forward, being in a great breadth, and nothing to shadow them.
Hitherto Agathias. It would be long to rehearse the rest of the battle which
he exaggerateth rhetorically. I have recited so much, as both shows the
strength of the wedge, and withal the manner which was used by Narses, to
overthrow it. For I find three kind of ways which have been practiced to
resist and defeat it. One by charging it with horse, before it enter the
adverse battle, as Flaccus did against the Celtiberians. The second to frame
the adverse battle empty in the midst (filling it with some soldiers
notwithstanding for show) and when he enters the space, to plye his rear
with shot, and charge it thoroughly as Narses did. The third to oppose against
it a hollow wedge (which Vegetius calls forfex) and receiving and letting in
the point of this wedge into the hollownesse of the other to claspe it in, and
charge it on all sides. Against the wedge says Vegetius, is opposed the
battle called forfex, a pair of sheeres: For it is framed of the best and
valiantest soldiers to the similitude of the letter V. and it receives in,
and embraces the wedge, so that it cannot break through it.

4 It is fashioned when the Diphalange Antistomus.] This manner of framing a
wedge is described by Aelian in the 36 Chapter: and yet that wedge set down
there opens in front, keepi(...) the rear shut, and is opposed against the
right induction, and called Caelembolos; here the wedge is described that
opens the rear, keeping the front close, and is opposed against the square.
But the manner of framing both stands upon one reason: For the file-leaders
being placed within the Caelembolos, the front of the battle is opened and
the rear kept close: in the other, the file-leaders being without, the rear
is opened, the front still maintained shut. Front.

Front.


Now the file leaders place is varied in either of them, because of the
several effects which they work. The hollow fronted wedge Caelembolos seeks
to hold the enemy together, and so defeat him. The other to dispart and rout
him, and so to gain the victory. And because the stresse of the Caelembolos is
within (for the flanks of the hollownesse claspe in the enemy, and fight
against his flanks) therefore are the file leaders the foremost that fight
within; as likewise because the outsides of the wedge of this Chapter bear all
the weight of the fight, therefore in it are the file-leaders without. For as
in all other battles the file-leaders ought first to attach the enemy, so is
it likewise in these two forms. But where Aelian says, that this battle is
made out of the Diphalange Antistomus, by joining the wings in front, and
opening them behind, I take the Text to be corrupted. For the Diphalange
Antistomus has the file-leaders within, to resist the horse that charge them,
as the 40 Chapter teaches: this has the file-leaders without to break the
enemies battle and disseuer it. The Caelembolos indeed is framed out of the
Diphalange Antistomus: But the wedge of this Chapter springs out of the
Phalange Antistomus, which has the file-leaders without. And so I am of
opinion, it ought to be read in the Text. And yet there is no question but
another way of figuring the wedge may be practiced, then to leave it hollow
behind. In this Chapter it is called Embolos, and Aelian faith it is borrowed
of the horse-wedge: Now that the horse-wedge is solid

Cap. 49.
The Peplegmene The Plesium The front



(...) not hollow within, is plain by the 19 and 20 Chapters of this (...)
will conclude this Chapter with the caution of Vegetius, which is this, that if
you shill make a pair of tongs or a hallow wedge, you ought to have reserues
in readiness behind the battle, wherewith you may frame your tongs or
wedge. And yet this caution holds not always; For as a horse-wedge, so a
foot-wedge may be framed without supernumeraries: as the 19 and 20 Chapters
show.

Of the foot-battaile called Plesium, and of the Winding or Sawefronted
battle to encounter it. CHAP. XLIX.
(1) THE battle Plesium has the (2) length much exceeding the depth. And it
is called Plesium when armed foot are placed on all sides, the archers and
slingers being thrown into the midst. Against this kind of battle is set
the winding-fronted battle, to the end that with the unequal figure it may
train out those of the Plesium to cope with them; and by that means dissolve
and disorder the thickness of the same. And the file-leaders of the
winding-fronted battle observe the file-leaders of the Plesium, that if they
still maintain their closeness and fight secret, they also encounter them in
the like form. If the Plesium file-leaders sever themselves and spring out
from their maine force, then they likewise be ready to meet them man to man.

NOTES.
1 THis Chapter contains two foot-battailes, one to be opposed against the
other; the first called the Plesium, or hollow-square; the second the
winding-fronted-battaile or Peplegmene. Of which the first has been used by
all antiquity, especially by the Grecians, whenever the enemies ouertopped in
number, and they feared to be charged on all sides. It is called Plesium of the
figure which is square; but originally and more particularly of the mould
wherein bricks are cast. Etymology. magnum in (...).
Because the battle has the likeness of the mould; as being both square,
and also hollow within, as I have noted before. Neither is this name given to a
battle alone; Plut in vita Alexandri.
Plutarch says, that the chariot wherein Alexander rode, when he returned from
the Indies quaffing and rioting, was framed (...), that is, in a square hollow
form, and the Helepolis (an engine which Plut. in vita Demetrij.
Demetrius invented to batter the Rhodian City) was tetragonall, and had 48
cubits in every side of the Plesium. But in a battle, that is Plesium, says
Aelian, which

2 Has the length manifoldly exceeding the depth.] The length of a battle,
as I have showed heretofore, is that which runs from the point of one wing
to the other in front; the depth, that is measured from the front to the rear.
In the Plesium then, according to Aelian, the length or breadth ought to be
manifold to the depth. But it is not generally so; for oftentimes you shall
read of Plesiums with (...) de exp. l. 3. 310. A. ^rr. ^ 4. 31. ^.
equal sides; and likewise that the Plesium is sometimes hollow within,
sometimes solid and filled up within with men: of which last kind Xenoph.
d'exp. l. 1 264. A.
Xenophon says, many of the Barbarians framed their troops in the battle
betwixt Artaxerxes and Cyrus. Of the first Aelian speaks in this Chapter: for
he would have the four sides to consist of armed, and the archers and slingers
to be thrown into the hollownesse within. He has before in the 42 Chapter
described the Plinthium to be a square battle in figure and number; this he
would have to be a square with the front manifoldly longer then the flank. So
that both battles agree in that they are square both in that they have armed
on all sides, both in that they are hollow within; they differ only in the
form of the square, which is longer in the Plesium, deeper in the Plinthium.
Their affinity also appears in this also, that the Plinthium has the name
from a brick, the Plesium from the mould of a brick; yet are their names
oftentimes confounded: For that which is called in one Author Plesium, is in
another called Plinthium: as namely the battle of Antony in Persia, is by
Plut. in Antonio.
Plutarch named Plesium, by App. in Path. 162.
Appian Plinthium.

To show now the use of this battatle, it is of the kind of Defensiues; and
the Grecians, whenever they feared to be charged in flank, front, and rear
at once, or to be ouer-laid with number of enemies, had recourse unto this
form. There is a notable example of it in Thucyd. l. 7. 550. c. These two
Generals had each of them half the Army under their command.
Thucydides. The Athenians having besieged Syracuse in Cicill both by Sea and
Land, and being overcome in two battles by Sea, thought to march by land to
someone of their considerate Cities in the Island; and fearing to be round
beset by the Syracusians in their way; Nicias one of the Athenian Generals put
his part of the army in a Plesium, and so marched before: Demosthenes the other
Athenian General, followed with the other part of the army in the same form.
The armed took into the hollownesse of their battles the carriage and
unuseful multitude. When they came to the foord of theriuer Anapis, they found
the Syracusians and their allies embattailed there, whom having beaten from the
place, they passed over and continued heir march. The Syracusian horse still
charged, and the light-armed ceased not to ply them with mis^iue weapons; but
yet they came not to hand-blowes, fearing to hazard against men desperately
bent to sell their lives dearly. At last wearying them with many days
skirmish, and disordering their army, they forced them to yield. This History
is at large set down by Thucydides. I have abridged it, lest it should take up
too much room; and yet have expressed both the form in his words, and further
the means, that the enemy used to break it, and to get the victory. This
form was used by the Xenoph. de exp. l. 3. 303. E.
Grecians at their return out of Persia, after that Clearchus and the other
Coronels were ensnared by Tissaphernes, and put to death: and again by
Xenophon, when he retreated, after he had failed of the taking of Asidates
prisoner, not far from Pergamus a City of Lydia. For the means to dissolve
this battle, the principal is, not to charge at hand those that stand so
embattailed, but to ply them far off with missiue weapons; which is manifest
by the fight of the Syracusians against Nicias and the Athenians; and by that
of the Persians, who so assailed Xenophon in his retreat last mentioned. Aelian
sets against it another form of battle which he terms Peplegmene, the
winding fronted battle, which is by some called the saw: what kind of
battle the saw is, I see controuerted. Some would have it consist of a
constant front indented, and not changeable or alterable in any part, during
the charge. If that be the saw, it cannot agree

Cap. 50.
The adverse battle The overwinging battle



Cap. 50.
The adverse battle The ouerfronting battle



with Aelians description, who would have the file-leaders of the Peplegmene to
advance before their battle, and be still in motion, of purpose to train out
the file-leaders of the Plesium to meet them, thereby to dissolve the form of
their battle. And this is but a stratagem to pr^uaile against the enemy. For,
as Leo ^. 2^. ^^^^
Leo says, a good Generallought, as a good wrestler, to make show of one
thing, and to put another in practice, to the end to deceive the enemy, and
gain the victory; as is done in this manner of embattailing; but that the Saw
is no constant or settled form of fight, as the rest are, which are described
by Aelian in the Chapters going before, appears by Fiestus, whose words are
these: Serra praeliari dicitur, cum assidue acciditur, recediturque, neque vllo
consistitur tempore. The skirmish is said to be made in the form of a Saw,
when they that use this for me continually give on and retire, and at no time
stand still. But we must understand that the moving is not by mamples or by
light-armed, as Lipsius de mil. Romans ^. ^. di^^ ^. p, 280.
Lipsius interprets it, but by fileleaders of the armed, as Aelian teaches,
(with intent to train out the fileleaders of the Plesium, and so to disorder
their battle:) the rest of the Peplegmene standing still in their form. Now
then to make a Peplegmene or sawe-battaile, direction is to be given to the
file-leaders alone to fall out confusedly against the adverse Plesium of the
enemy, and to the rest in the files to stand still. Otherwise being not
forewarned, the whole files will move and follow their leaders; which if they
do, this form cannot be made, but the battle remains as a square as it
did before the going to charge. The form of framing the battle called the
Plesium, and the words of command are described in my notes upon the 42 Chapter.

Of Hyperphalangesis, and Hyperkerasis, and of Attenuation. CHAP. L.
(1) HYperphalangesis, or ouerfronting is, when both wings of the Phalange
ouer-reach the enemies front.

2 Hyperkerasis, or ouerwinging, is when with one of our wings we ouer-reach
the front of the enemy. So that he that ouerfronteth, ouerwingth; but he that
ouerwingeth, ouerfro^teth not. For they that match not the enemy in multitude,
may yet ouerwing him.

3 Attenuation is when the depth of the battle is gathered up, and in stead
of 16, a smaller number is set.

NOTES.
IN this Chapter, being the last, that describes forms of battles, are two
kinds of battles set forth, which are (if I mistake not) of more efficacy, I
am sure, such as have been more practiced, then any of the other, that go
before in this book; and they specially give advantage to them, that have
advantage in numbers of men, and can frame a larger fronted Phalange then the
enemy is able. And either of them opposes a large front against the enemy, the
one stretching it beyond the points of both their wings the other beyond the
point one of their wings. The first kind is called Hyperphalangesis,
ouer-fronting, the other Hyperkerasis, ouer-winging. Hyperphalangesis or
ouer-fronting is, faith Aelian;

1 When both wings of the Phalange ouer-reach the enemies front.] To make it
then Hyperphalangesis, the front must be much broader then the enemies, and
extended beyond both their wings, of purpose to over reach and wrap them in,
charging not only the front, but also the flanks on both sides at once; which
is so dangerous a kind of fight, that he that is so assailed, can have no
great hope of making resistance against his enemy; because the front being the
place which is ordained for fight, and the pikes being bent and lying out from
thence, if at the same time the flanks be also charged, the sides of the
soldiers must needs lie open to wounds, no man being able to defend himself,
and turn his weapons two ways at once. The ouer-fronting of Xenoph. Cyrop. l.
7. 173.
Croesus used against Cyrus, rehearsed by me in my notes upon the 46 Chapter,
is an eminent example of Hyperphalangesis, whereby Croesus at one instant
invaded the front and both flanks of the enemies battle. The like maybe said
of the battle of Arr. l. 2. 3 5. E. and l. 3. 60. C.
Darius at Issos and Gaugamela, against Alexander; and of Poly^. l. 11. 6^^. B.
Liu. l. ^^. 204. B. Hirt^us de bell. Afr. 385.
Scipio against Asdruball Gisgoes son in Spain; and of Lau^enus against
Caesar in Africa. The manner of framing this form is diverse: ^or either you
show all your forces at first, or else conceal some part; and showing all, you
march in an even and whole front, and bowing afterward your wings, enclose the
flanks of the enemy, or else in on embowed form at first (such as are the
hollow*fronted battles) and so encompasse your enemy, taking him into the
hollownesse, as you march forward. Of the first kind was the battle of
Labienus against Caesar which I mentioned last, and those of Darius against
Alexander. Of marching in an embowed form, that of Croesus against Cyrus: Of
concealing your number, that of Cleandridas against the Thurian cited by (...)y
notes upon the 29 Chapter of this book; and of Scipio against Asdruball which
is set down at large in the notes upon the 28 Chapter.

2 Hyperkerosis is when we ouer-reach the enemies front with one of our
wings.] Ouerfronting See Diod. Sic of Philip against the Illyrians l. 16 page
512.
is of both wings, ouerwinging but of one. So that albeit your number be
smaller then the enemies, yet it you wrap in a part of his front, and one of
his wings, you so ouerwing him. To show an example of ouerwinging you may find
in Thucidides, that the Argiues with their allies, being in the field against
the ^ acedemonians and their allies, the battles were ordered thus: The
Thucyd. l. 5. 350. D. See the like example in Xenoph. hist ^rek. l. ^. 515. E.
516. A. B.
Lacedaemonians gave the point of the left wing to the Scirites, who only of the
Lacedaemonians have always that place. Next to them they ordered the soldiers
that came with Brasidas out of Th^ace: Next them the new ma^e Citizens by
companies by their si^es, first the Heroeans, then the Menalians, Arcadians
both. In the right wing were the Tegaeans, and a few of the Lacedemo i^^s in
the point of that wing. The ^orse were ranged on both wings. Thus were the
Lacedaemonians embattailed: Their enemies thus; The Mantinaeans had the right
wing, because the war was made in their Territory: by them stood the
Arcadians their confederates. Then 1000 selected Argiues, whom the City had
long time trained up in military exercise; to whom joined the other Argiues;
and after them were ordered the Cleoneans, and the Orneatians their allies. The
last were the Athenians, that had the left wing, and their own horse b^ them.
This was the preparation and embattailing of both parties. When they went to
charge, the Argiues and their allies marched forward with speed and great fury,
the Lacedaemonians leysurely according to the sound of the fifes, placed within
their battle, not for any religion sake, but to the end, that framing their
motion to the sound of the instrument, they might not in the march break their
order of embattailing, which great armies often do in advancing; to join with
the enemy. When they were ready to join, King Agis bethought himself of this
strata gem: It is the manner of all armies in the onset to stretch out their
right wings, and with them to circumuent and encompasse the left wings of their
adversaries; because every soldier careful of his own sefety seeks to cover
his unarmed side with the target of him that stands next to his right hand,
and imagines that the setting of targets close* serves for the best defense
against the enemy. The cause is this; the corner file-leader of the right wing
desiring to withdraw as much as he can his naked side from the weapons of the
enemy proceeds to the right hand, and the rest follow him. And at that time
the Mantineans a great deal ouer-reached the Scirites with their wing. The
Lacedaemonians and Tegeats much more the Athenians, by reason they o^ermatched
the^ in number. Agis therefore fearing the encompassing of his left wing,
seeing that the front of the Mantineans was very broad, and far extended,
gave a sign to the Scirites and Brasideans to stretch out their wing, and to
equal the front of the Mantineans. And for the void space that should remain
upon their advancing; he commanded two Polemarchs or Coronels, Hipponoidas and
Aristocles to lead therein two cohorts from the right wing, and fill up the void
space, conceiving that he should, this notwithstanding, leave himself strength
enough in the right wing, and that the wing opposed against the Mantineans
should hereby be better enabled to the encounter. But it happened that
Hipponoidas and Aristocles followed not these directions, whether the reason
were in the sudden^esse of the command, or in the prevention of the enemies
giving on: for which fault they were afterward banished Sparta, as men
effeminate and cowards. When they came to hands, the right wing of the
Mantineans put the Scirites and Brasideans to flight. And they and their
allies, and the 1000 selected Argiues falling into the empty space, that was
not filled up, made a great slaughter of the Lacedaemonians; and encompassing
them forced them to turn their backs in have, and fly to their wagons, and
slew also some of the elder sort of soldiers, that were left for guard there.
Hitherto Thucydides. I prosecute not the remanen^ of the battle, because it
is somewhat long. That which I have recited is enough for my purpose, namely to
show the manner of ouerwinging. Thus then apply it. The Mantineans had their
right wing far extended beyond the point of the left wing of the Scirites and
brasidaeans; who by marching out to the left hand sought to equal the front of
their adversaries, but left the ground void, wherein they were first placed.
This ground by Agis his commandment should have been filled by the Cohorts of
Hipponoidas and Aristocles. It was not filled, so that in the charge the enemy
had the advantage to enter it, and to circumuent on that side the Scirites and
Brasideans, and put them to flight: which danger will be common to all that
shall be so ouerwinged by their enemy. The danger then of ouer-fronting and
ouer-winging being so great, let us see what remedies and preuentions against
either of them have been devised by antiquity.

Against ^ner-fronting, they sought to secure the flanks of their battles,
Remedies against ouer-fronting.
sometimes by ordering their army in such a figure, as should be sufficient to
sustain the charge of the enemy, wheresoever he gave on. Of which kind The
Plesiu(...).
is the Plesium or hollow-square spoken of in the last Chapter. This was
practiced by the Grecians at their return out of Persia; and oftentimes by
other Grecians, as is every where to be found in their histories. And Alexander
when he was to fight with Darius at Gaugamela (the country being Epicampios
opisthia. ^sod. Sic. l. 17. 592 Ar^. l. 3. 60. C. E.
Champaigne, and Darius abounding in multitudes) defended himself with an
Epicampios opisthia, or a rear hollow battle. I have showed the manner of it
before in my notes upon the 46 Chapter. And sometimes again by foreseeing the
danger and placing reserues in the rear, or some other secret place to charge
the enemy in their flank, while they busy themselves against your flanks.
This Xenoph. Cyrop. 176. ^. Leo. 14.. 8.
was practiced by Cyrus the elder against Croesns, as I have showed in my notes
upon the 46 Chapter. Of Poly^^ l. 1^4. 2
this kind also it is, when you lay an ambush to charge their rear, while
they charge your flanks. The place will likewise help much to avoid
encompassing. For if the battle be fought in a straight place by nature,
where the enemy cannot draw out his Phalange in length, there is no danger of
encompassing. So Alexander at Issos in Cilic(...) was freed from encompassing,
the place Arr. l. 2. 35, 36.
being too narrow for Darius to bring all his forces into an equal front. The
place may also be helped by art in case it be otherwise to open, and fit for
the enemy, that abounds in number to encompasle us on every side. So Caesar
de bello gall l. 2. 36. and l. 3. 323.
Caesar being to fight against multitudes of Gauls, drew a deep trench on
both the flanks of his army to assure it from the charge of the enemy. The like
did Plut in Sylla and Appian in bell. inithrida^ico.
Sylla against Archelau^ the ^enerall of Mithridats in the battle Cheronea,
and both o^ them so securing their armies from circumuention, became by that
means masters of the field and conquerours of their enemies. Of later time
Turkish history 297.. 2.
10. Huniades the Hungarian King, being to fight against a huge army of the
Turks, gained a noble victory against them by placing his army on the one side
against a fenne, and enclosing it on the other side with his wagons. And these
preuentio(...) have been devised against Hyperphalangesis, or ouer-fronting.
Against ouer-winning, they thought it Remedies against ouer-winging.
sufficient to strenthen and make safe the wing, that was like to be endangered
by the enemy; so that all remedies against ouerfronting are good also against
ouerwinging: but the remedies against ouerwinging are not sufficient to
frustrat ouerfronting. Ouerwinging therefore has been avoided sometimes by
drawing out the endangered wing in length to equal the enemies wing, that
opposes against it. This is done by doubling of ranks as Aelian c. 29. fig. 5
Aelian teaches in the 29 Chapter and as it was practiced by Poly ^. l. ^. in
Clea^^rida. ^. 4. Leo ^. ^. ^ 19.
Cleandridas the Lacedemonian against the Thurians. Wherein netwithstanding
this caution is to be held, that you doub^e not your ranks so, that you make
the depth of your body to thin; for Leo ^. 1^. 108.
in so doing your body will be as subject to breaking for want of depth as for
want or length to ouerwing. Beside, it is done by facing to the hand, where the
enemies battle ouerwingeth, and marching out against it paralelly, till your
wing equal the wing of the enemy: but so notwithstanding that the void space,
from whence you drew your wing, be filled up, for fear the enemy give in to
it, and distress you there, as may be seen by the president which in this
Chapter I gave out of Thucidides of ouerwinging, and the example of the
Colchans, who fearing to be ouerfronted by the Grecians upon a hill, upon which
they stood embattailed, led their wings to the right and left hand to match the
front of the Grecians, leaving the midst of their battle empty, into which
the Grecians conueying themselves easily put the Colchans to flight, as Xenoph.
^ exp. l. 4 341. F.
Xenophon records. Leo ^. 12.. 34.
Ouerwinging is also prevented, if you hold reserues secretly in the rear of
your battle to fly out upon the sudden against those forces of the enemy,
that seek to ouerwing you. This remedy was used by Caesar de bell (...) 322.
Caesar in the battle of Pharsaly, when Pompey having abundance of horsemen,
sought to circumuent that wing of Caesar's battle, which lay to the open
field, and was not guarded with a fence, as the other wing was. For to prevent
the charge of these horse, Caesar bestowed certain cohorts, who were to hold
themselves close in the rear of his legions; not facing as his legions did
against the legions of Pompey, but facing into the field, from whence he
suspected the enemies horse would charge; so that when the horse charged, these
cohorts suddenly falling out upon them, and putting them to flight, were the
beginning of Caesar's victory. The place also often gives assurance against
ouerwinging, whether it be a river or the sea, or a mountain, or such like, to
which you may apply the flank of your wing. For a river, you have the example
of Clearchus in the baitaile betwixt Artaxerxes and Cyrus the younger, in which
Xenoph. de exped. 6. 1. 263. C.
Clearchus ordered his troops of Grecians on the right wing close to the river
Euphrates. And when Cyrus would have had him charge the midst of the Persian
Phalange, because the King had placed himself there: (yet says Xenophon)
Clearchus seeing the King was far without the left wing of the Grecians (for
the King so much exceeded in multitude, that the midst of his battle was a
great way without the left wing of Cyrus) would not withdraw his right wing
from the river, fearing to be encompassed on both sides.

The like was done by Alexander the Great in the Country of the Getes: this is
the effect of the words of Arrian; Arr. l. 1. 4. ^.
When they (the Getes) san Alexander industriously advance his Phalarge by the
rivers side, lest the foot might happily be circumuented and encompassedly some
ambus^ of the Getes, and his horse in the front, the Getes for sooke also their
City, which was not very well walled, setting many of their children and wives
upon their horses backs, as the horses could carry, and retired into the
wilderness a great way from the river. By the Sea you may avoid likewise
ouer-winging, if you order one of the flanks of your Army close to the Sea
side. This was put in ure by Alexander when he sought the battle against
Darius at Issos in Cilicia. Thus ha^^ (...) The foot of the left wing were
commanded by Craterus, but the whole left wing by (...)o, who was enjoined not
to forsake the Sea, for fear of encompassing by the Barbarians: for by reason
of their number they might easily encircle the Macedonians on all parts. A
Mountain also that is sleep, will give good security to the (...)auke of a
battle, (...). l. 11. 25^
that may otherwise be encompassed. At the battle of Platea which was fought
betwixt the Grecians and Mardonius, Xerxes his General; the Grecian Army
consisting of 100000. the Persian of 500 thousand, the Grecians at the first
encamped at the foot of the Mountain Cytheron; but finding the place fitter
for the multitude of the Persians, then for themselves, they removed their
Camp, and chose a more commodious piece of ground to pursue the total
victory. For there was on the right hand a high hill, on the l^^t, ran the
river Asopus. The Camp was pitched in the middle space, which was fortisied by
the nature and safenesse of the plot of ground. Therefore the straightness of
the place much favored the wise counsel of the Grecians, toward the obtaining
of victory. For there was no room for the Persi^^s to extend their Phalange in
any great proportion of length; so that many Myriades of the Barbarians came to
be of no use. The Grecians therefore Myrias is (...).
in confidence of the place, advanced their forces to fight, and ordering
themselves according to the present occasion, led against the enemy. Mardonius
being compelled to make a deep Phalange, ordered his battle in such sort, as
he thought most convenient, and with cries set forward against the Grecians.
This example albeit it be a remedy against Hyperphalangesis, or ouer-fronting,
yet because it gives a safeguard by a mountain to one of the wings, I take it
to be proper enough to Hyperkerasis or ouer-winging. Besides that, as I before
noted, all means that are used to avoid ouer-fronting, are good likewise for
the avoiding of ouer-winging.

3 Attenuation is.] This is nothing else but doubling of ranks: whereof see the
29 Chapter.

Of conueighing the carriage of the Army. CHAP. XLV.
THE leading of the carriage, if any thing else, is of great (1) importance,
and (2) requires a special Commander.

It may be conueighed in 5 manners, (3) either before the army, or (4) behind,
or on the (5) one flank, or the other, or in the (6) midst.

Before, when you fear to be charged behind: behind, when you lead toward
your enemy: when you fear to be charged in flank, on the contrary side. In
the midst when a hollow battle is needful.

NOTES.
1 IS of great importance.] The importange of disposing the carriage in a march
is well set down by Leo. c. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Leo: You (says he to his General) ought to have a special care of your
baggage, and not to leave it at randon, but to secure it in the place where it
shall be; nor to lead it unadvisedly into the battle: For it oftentimes
falls out, that servants fit for the Soldiers use, and the soldiers
children and kinsmen are amongst it: and if it remain not in safety, the
minds of the soldiers are distracted with doubtfulnesse and care and fear of
the spoil thereof: for every man of understanding endeavors to possess that
which is the enemies, without loss of his own. This is the advice of Leo. A
pregnant example hereof may be read in Diodorus Siculus his description of the
last battle betwixt Antigonus and Eumenes; In which Antigonus having foiled
Eumenes horse, sent his Median horsemen, and a sufficient number of Tarentines
to invade the enemies baggage; For he hoped (which was true) not to be descried
by reason of the dust, and by possessing the baggage to become vanquisher of
the enemy without travail. They that were sent riding about the wing of their
adversaries unperceived, fell upon the baggage, which was distant from the
battle about five furlongs. And finding by it a rabble of folk unfit for
fight, and but a few left for guard thereof, putting them to flight quickly
(that withstood) they made themselves masters of all the rest. Eumenes hearing
that his baggage was lost, endeavored notwithstanding to renew the fight, in
hope by gaining the victory, not only to preserve his own baggage, but also
to possess that of the enemy. But the Macedonians refused to strike stroke,
alleging that their carriage was lost, and their children and wives, and many
other bodies necessary were in the hands of the enemy. And sending privily
Ambassadors to Antigonus they seized upon Eumenes, and delivered him up into
Antigonus possession. Thus much for the importance of assuring the carriage.

2 Requires a special Commander.] That the baggage ought to have a special
Commander Leo. c. 10. 1^.
Leo also affirms: Vegetius.
Vigetius adds a guard to the baggage, and Leo c. 4. 53, 54 and c. 14. 15.
Leo a proper Ensign, saying; To every regiment there ought to be allotted a
Wagon Master, and a proper Ensign as well to the horse as oxen, that they may
be discerned to their owners by the colors of the Ensign.

3 Either before the Army.] The first of the five ways, by which the baggage
is conueighed in a march, is to lead it before the Army; which manner is to be
put in practice, when the enemy pursues in the rear: For if when the enemy
follows, the baggage should be behind, he would soon have means to self
upon and rifle it, then you could have to wheel about your army to succor it.
For these five manners of conueighing the carriage, Leo agrees with Aelian in
these words: Your carriage, says he, ought Leo. c. 10. 19.
to have a special Commander to order and govern it: and he is to lead it
either before the Army, if you disonarch out of the enemies Country; after the
Army, if you invade the enemies territory; on the one side or other, when you
fear to be charged on the one or either of your flanks; within the phalange,
when you have suspicion to be charged on all parts. So Leo agreeing with Aelian.

4 Orbehinde.] The baggage is to be always disposed of so, that the army may
be betwixt it and the enemy. It ought to be before when the enemy is like to
give on behind; behind, when he seeks to affront you from before. And yet
it sometimes falls out, that all the baggage is not to be led behind the
whole army, according to this precept of Leo. c. 9. 6. and. c. 12.. 125. When
the enemy is not feared.
Leo. Cause every drung or regiment (says he to his General) to accustom
their own baggage to follow after their regiment with their own Ensigns, and
not to mingle with other. For it is necessary, when the enemy is neither
present nor expected in our own Country, to ma^ch either by Regiments or else
by Forms; and not to gather your whole Army into one place, lest thet be
easily starned with hunger, or the number be quickly ^^scoue ^^ by the enemies
espicials, or be severed in forage. In another place speaking of marching
through woddy and rough ways, he Leo. c. 9.. 6^.
has the: In case you have horse or baggage, lead your baggage behind your
Army, and after it the horse, and after them a few light armed targatiers, to
be as it were bringers up of the march, for fear of unexpected incursions
which oftentimes chance to be made by the enemy. Leo. 17. 60.
In another thus: When you enter your enemies Country, you shall cause your
carriage to march in the rear; but when the enemy draws near, you shall
bestow it in the midst of the Army. Leo. c. 10. 18.
And in any case you must have your carriage, and the Captives (if you have
any) separated from the soldiers that are to fight, lest if the enemy fall on
roundly, they be hindered that are to fight. For the distance that the carriage
ought to hold behind the Army, the same Leo has thus; If you think it
convenient for the carriage to follow the Army, you are to order it a full
bowe-shot from the Army, and let every part follow their own bodies in good
array: giving it such breadth in the march, is the Army possesses; lest that
lying out beyond the breadth of the Army, they become vnsuccourable. These are
the precepts of Leo concerning the conueighance of the carriage in the rear.
For the practice of it you have a precedent of ^eno^h. Cyrop. ^. 168. A. B.
Cyrus the elder, which is at large rehearsed by me in my notes upon the 7
Chapter of this Book: and another of Arr^^ ^. 14 ^.
Alexander the Great, when he led against the Persians at the river Granicus,
and an infinite number of other examples are to be found in History every where.

5 Or on the one flank, or the other.] Aelians precept for disposing of the
^^^^ Leon^. ^. 14. 1^.
baggage on the flanks, is very good: For it ought as much as is possible, to
be preserved from the touch of the enemy; neither can there be any better way
to secure it, then your opposition, the Army betwixt it and the enemy; but so,
notwithstanding that it have a guard about it at all times, to save it from the
sudden invasion of your enemies horse. If therefore the enemy appear on your
left flank, your baggage is to be conveyed on the right flank; If contrariwise
the enemy come on to charge your right flank, the baggage is to be removed to
the left. And this holds, only when the enemy appears upon one flank, and
not on both. But in case the enemy appear on both flanks at once, then is the
safest place for it,

(6) In the midst.] There are two manners of leading of the baggage in the
midst, and that according to the nature and condition of the ground, where
our army marches. If therefore the way be straight, Leo gives this precept;
Those that leads their army through streights, having with it either baggage or
prey, ought to divide it into a diphalange, and to march wing-wise in a Leo c.
9.. 46, 47.
right induction. A right induction, that is, which is narrow in front, and
has the depth stretched out in length: And this is to be done especially when
there is a prey in the hands of the army. And if they consist of foot, the
passage will be the easier through rough and cumber some places. If horse, the
are to alight and take the baggage and carriage into the midst. But in such
times and places, you are to appoint some chosen men only for the defense of
the prey, and to order them upon the four sides of the Diphalange, is the
place will give leave, to the end to follow ^^ and repulse those of the enemy
that offer to charge or distract it. And the battle (or diphalange) so
ordered for the preservation of the carriage or prey, be maintained wh^le and
entire. For it is not possible for those of the Diphalangy, both to defend the
prey (...) order, and to join with the enemy that charge, which is the cause
thee there ^^ght to be extraordinary men to march without the four sides of
the army; but especially you are to appoint the best of them to wait upon the
rear* For so may at all times, tough and troublesome places be passed through
with safety. This is Leo^s precept for straight and narrow passages: because in
such you cannot form your army into a hollow square, wherein the baggage is to
be couched, and to be desended on all sides. For if the ground be open enough
to cast your self into a square, he holds the form the safest to give
security to your baggage. These be his words: Place all four carriage,
servants, and baggage, and provision, in the midst of your Leo c. 9.. 36.
army. And in another place, speaking of a retreat to be made after an
overthrow received, he writes thus: You shall order your whole power into two
Phalanges or battles, or into one square Plinthium; in the midst whereof
you shall put Leo. c 14.. 24.
the carriage, beasts, and baggage, and without them the soldiers in order,
and without them the archers, and so retire and depart in safety. Again he
says, In marches, the enemy approaching, it is necessary to have your carriage
in the midst, lest being unguarded, it be spoiled and rifled. With Leo does
Xenophon agree. His Xenophed ^^p. ^^. ^^^. ^.
words have this show* I will not wonder, if as fearful dogs are wont to
follow and bite such as pass by, if they can, and to fly from such as follow
them, so the enemy hang upon our rear. Therefore we shall perhaps march the
safer, if making a Plesium of the armed, the carriage and unprofitable
multitude be thrown into the midst for more security. And if it be now
determined who shall command the front of the Plesium, and who the two wings,
and who the rear, we shall not need to consult when the enemy approaches,
but execute that which is resolved upon. This is Xenophons counsel for the
march in open ground, when the enemy abounds in number of soldiers: which
counsel was often put in practice, and the Grecians being but 10000 secured
themselves against infinite multitudes of Persian horse that charged them on
all sides, and also preserved, and led their carriage sat in dispite of the
enemy. The like was practiced by Xenophon afterward in the last warlike action
of the Grecians in their return out of Persia. He sets down the history
after this manner; Now was it time, Xenoph* d'exp. l. 3. 304. 6.
viz. after they had assaulted a fort in vain, the enemy of the country
gathering head) to think upon a fair retreat, and conue^ing the oxen and
sheep they had taken, and likew^se the slaves into a Plesium, they quickly
dismarched, not so much esteeming their prey, as fearing in case they left it
behind, their departure might seem a plain running away, and the enemy gath^r
heart, the Grecian soldiers be discouraged. So now they departed fighting as
it were about the prey. The Soldiers with Xenophon being shrewdl annoyed wi^h
bows and slings, cast themselves into a ring to the end to oppose their
targets against the shot of the enemy, and with much ado passed the river
Caicus, the one half of them being wounded. Agasias also the Stymphalian
Captain was hurt whilst he maintained fight with the enemy, during the whole
retreat. Yet they all returned safe to the Camp bringing with them about 200
slaves, and sheep enough for Sacrifice. Here Xenophons soldiers figured
themselves first into a Plesium couching their prey in the midst; afterward
being ouerlayed with the enemies shot, they converted their Plesium into a
Ring, in which form they tecouered their Came, notwithstanding the molestation
and often charging of a great multitude of horse and foot, that were enemy and
followed them. Of the form of Rings I find not many examples amongst the
Grecians; the Romans used them often, when they found themselves encompassed by
the enemy, as ^e et l. ^. 6. 26. T. Lia. Caesar. ^. ^. ^^ ^eil. gal^. Hirtuis de
bed. Alexand. 358.
Vegetius has; and may be seen in Cae^ars Commentaries. And let thus be said
of the four manners of placing the carriage in a march.

Of the words of Command, and certain observations about them. CHAP. LII.
LAst of all, we will briefly repeat the words of direction; if we admonish
first that they ought to be short, then that they ought to be without double
signification. For the Soldiers, that in haste receive direction, had need to
take heed of doubtful words, lest one do one thing, and another the
contrary. As for the purpose; If I say turn your face, some, it may be, that
hear me, will turn to the right, some to the left hand, and so no small
confusion follow. Seeing therefore these words Turn your face import a
general signification, and comprehend turning to the right or left hand; we
ought in stead of saying turn your face to the pike, to pronounce it thus, To
your pike turn your face; that is, we ought to set the particular before, and
then infer the general; for so will all do alike together. Like reason is,
if you say Turn about your face, or countermarch: for these are also general
words, and therefore we should do well to set the particular before. As to
the pike, turn your face about, or to the target, turn your face about.
Likewise the Lacedemonian Countermarch, not the countermarch Lacedemonian: For
if you place the word countermarch first, some of the Soldiers will happily
fall to one kind, other to another kind of countermarch. For which cause
words of double sense are to be avoided, and the special to be set before the
general.

NOTES.
IF we admonish first that they ought to be short.] The ordering and motions of
an army ought to be quickly performed, the rather because the transmutations of
the body and the occasions of them are sudden for the most part. And therefore
the means to work the transmutations commanded (these means are the words of
direction) ought to suite to the nature of the motions themselves, and to be
applied to celerity by shortness of speech. Short speech is better carried
away, and sooner put in execution, then speech that is longer. Yet is not such
a shortness to be affected, as will bring with it obscurity, according to the
saying of the Poet; Breuis esse laboro -- Obscurus fio. I labor to be short,
and so become obscure. And therefore I take the practice of French Commanders,
when they command Facing in these words; A droie, a gauche, to the right, to
the left, without adding face, and likewise of the Netherlanders in imitation
of the French Reehes om, slinks om, and of some English in these words; To the
right, to the left, not pronouncing the motion which is to be made to the hand
appointed. These I say, I take to be without the warrant of reason, and of all
antiquity, from which Aelian draws this rule. For the command of right and
left alone shows that the Commander would have a motion performed to the
named hand, but leaves uncertain what the motion should be, so that albeit
some soldiers fall to a countermarch, some other to wheeling, or to doubling,
or to facing, they are to be reputed blameless, and to have performed that
which their direction willed them to do, because the command was of moving to
the right or left hand only, not showing what motion should be made to either
hand. Shortness therefore is required by Aelian, but such a Shortness as is
not wrapped up in obscurity, and which may fully deliver the mind of the
Commander to the soldiers, which he has in exercise. And as the words ought
to be short, so ought they to be,

Without double signification.] Where they have a double signification, that
is, may be diversely understood by them, who are under direction; some of the
soldiers (as Aelian says) will do one thing, some another, which must needs
breed a confusion in the body exercised. For as uniformity of motion in every
particular soldier preserves the whole body, and every joint, or part,
thereof entire, so the dissimilitude of motion in the particulars induces a
disioynting, as it were, and a disorder of the multitude of the whole battle
in general. To avoid then the inconvenience of double understanding in words:
Aelian thinks fit, that the special word should be placed before the
general, and in stead of Face to the pike, he would have the Commander to
pronounce thus: To the pike face (that is to the right hand:) holding the word
right hand to be more special or streighter in signification, then the word
Face. Let me have pardon if I differ from Aelian herein. For Logicians hold
those words more general, that stretch unto, and comprehend under them most
particulars. Now considering there are four motions of the battle, which
cannot be put in use but by words of direction, and in the direction the word
right or left hand is of necessity to be applied to every of them (as for
example Countermarch to the right or left hand. Face to the right or left hand,
and so of the rest:) it is evident, that the word right hand, or left hand is
more general then any one of the motions, because it stretches to them all.
So that albeit we retain the rule of Aelian, namely, to set the special
before the general, yet may we very safely from his example, and not only in
facing, but also in the three other motions pronounce the direction thus: Face
to the right or left hand, Double to the right or left hand, Countermarch to
the right or left hand, Wheel to the right or left hand: because the word
right or left hand is more general, then any one of the motions. But admit it
were more particular, yet the necessity of our language would force us to
forsake this rule of Aelian. For in every language there is an idiome or
propriety of speech, and that not only in the phrase it self, but also in the
very joining and tying together of the words of the sentence. So that that
which sorteth well with one language, will not be received in another. In
Greek, in which tongue Aelian wrote, it sounds well to place the nowne
governed by a verb, before the verb it self. So in Latin, Dutch, French,
and other tongues. In English if a man should do the like (unless it were in
verse, wherein the number of the feet is more respected then the ordering of
the words) he should be accounted ridiculous or vain. For take the example
here set down, to the right han^ face, to the right hand double, or
countermach, or wheel, and let us use the same order of words in common
speech, and a man say to his servant: To the Church go, to the mill corn
carry, boots clean make. To the cutler my rapier carry: Who would not laugh
at his speech, or think him idle in so pronouncing. Wherefore albeit Aelian
hold that form agreeable to the Greek tongue, yet I cannot see how it will be
fit that our English, according to which I hold it better to pronounce after
this manner: Face to right hand, Countermarch to the right hand, and so in the
rest, then after this, To the right hand face, to the right hand countermarch;
the rather because the property of speech avails much to the capacity of
soldiers, who for the most part are vndearned, and will hardly understand, in
case the wonted custom, and ordinary use of joining words be inuerted.

CHAP. LIII.
But above all things silence is to be commanded, and heed given to directions,
as Homer especially signifies in his description of the Craecian and Trojan
fights, saying*

The skillful Captains pressed on, guiding with careful eye
Their armed troops, who followed their leaders silently;
You surely would have deemed each one of all that mighty throng
Had been bereft of speech, so bridled he his heedfull tongue,
Fearing the dread Commanders check and dreadful hests among:
Thus marched the Greeks in silence, breathing flames of high desire
And fervent Zeal to back their friends, on foes to wreake their ire.
As for the disorder of the Barbarians he resembles it to Birds, saying:

As sholes of foul, Geese, Cranes, and Swans with necks far stretched out,
Which in the slimy fens Caisters winding streams about.
Sheere here and there the liquid sky, sporting on wanton wing,
Then fall to ground with clanging noise, the fens all over ring.
None otherwise the Trojans fill the field with heaped sounds
Of broken and confused cries, each where tumult abounds.
And again:

The Captains marshall out their troops ranged in goodly guise,
And forth the Trojans pace like birds, that lade the air with cries,
Not so the Greeks, whose silence breathed flames of high desire,
Fervent in zeal to back their friends, on foes to wreake their ire.
NOTES.
SIlence when a battle is put in order either for fight, or exercise, is one
of the principal points of obedience, which belongs to a soldier; the
breach whereof more endangereth the proceeding of war, then a raw soldier
would think, who only is wont to offend in that kind. I have before entreated
of signs, and showed, that in the observing of directions consists the
greatest help of victory; in neglecting them, the chiefest means to take an
overthrow, and be defeated. For as directions being executed give life unto
warlike actions to effect that which the Commander desires, so whatsoever
hinders the receiving of directions, must needs cross the designs of the
Commander, and by consequence frustrate and disanull that which was thought by
him most fit to be put in practice either for the good order, or for the
preservation of the Army, or else for the gayning of victory: A man that is not
attentive cannot mark the command delivered: Nor can he be attentive, that
whilst it is delivered busieth his head with other thoughts, or else
entertaineth his next standers by with talk, a means to divert as well the
speaker as the hearer from that heed which ought to be given to direction; in
as much as no man has the ability to hear another man's speech, and himself
take at the same instant, or at the same time to discern two men's several
speeches, which are delivered together. All generals have held Silence a
principal point of warlike discipline. And therefore in Commands they make it
the first. Leos precept is this: When the troops are drawn together, and
ordered for exercise, let the crier ^eo cap. 7. ^ ^^.
(for every company had then a crier) give these directions: Do what you are
commanded with silence; keep your places every man, follow your colors. And
in another place he writes thus: When your Army goes out to join with the
enemy, Leo c. 12. 63.
there ought to be a deep silence; For that both preserves the Army from
disorder, and also makes the directions of the Commanders to be heard with
more attention. And again thus: There ought to be as much silence as may be in
the Army, and if Leo cap. 14. 79.
the bringers up of any file, hear but a whispering of their fellows in the
file, they are to prick the parties with the points of their pikes, and so to
redress the fault. Arrian li. 1. p. 6. D.
Alexander when he was returning from the Country of the Taulantians, into
which he had made an inrode, found his way beset with enemies, and being to
cast his Army into a form of battle to fight, he first commanded Holi^shead
684. Col.. ^.
an absolute silence, and then proceeded to other directions. And for the
effect of silence, our own story has a memorable example of the Army of
Edward the fourth in Barnet field.

As for the silence here prescribed by Aelian, it extends not only to
exercise and fight, but oftentimes to the marching of an Army, and to the
Camp, as appears by the last example, and by Leos precept in his eleventh
Leo cap. 11.. 2^.
Chapter. And yet this precept of silence is not inuiolably to be kept in an
Army at all times: for there is a time, when the Soldiers ought to give a
general shout, and cry through the whole Army, to the end to terrify the
adverse battle of the enemy; and that time has always been chosen, and by
all Nations observed, when the fight is presently to be undergone. I need not
bring instances thereof, every man knows it, that is although but meanly
acquainted with History. It is termed in Greek (...), in Latin clamor. in
English a shout of the whole Army; the which being performed, silence is to be
restored in as strict manner a before. And thus much of silence. Now follows
the words of direction in Aelians last Chapter.

Of the words of direction. CHAP. LIIII.
THus then are we to command.

1 To your arms. 2 Carriage away from the battle. 3 Be silent and mark your
directions. 4 Take up your arms. 5 Separate your selves. 6 Advance your Pikes.
7 File your selves. 8 Rank your selves. 9 Look to your leaders. 10
Reare-Commander strengthen your file. 11 Keep your first distances. 12 Face to
the pike.
Move a little further. Stand so.
13 As you were. 14 Face to the Target.
Move a little further. Stand so.
15 As you were. 16 Face about to the pike. 17 As you were. 18 Double your
depth. 19 To your first posture. 20 The Lacedemonian Countermarch. 21 To your
first posture. 22 The Macedonian Countermarch. 23 To your first posture. 24 The
Choraean Countermarch. 25 To your first posture.
The precepts of the art Tacticks have I delivered unto you (most invincible
Caesar) which I make no doubt, will bring to the practice safety, and victory
over his enemies.

NOTES.
THese words of direction here set down, are rather to show the manner of
Command, then to express the just number of directions Le^ cap. 7. ^. 88.
used in exercise: yet does Leo the Emperor transcribe some of them, albeit
not all, out of Aelian; and the last in Leo has a mixture of two motions in
one direction, being delivered in these words, (...); which is in Latin
translated by Sir John Check Laconicum ad hasta(...) triuolue; and may be thus
englished, wheel thrice the Lacedemonian Countermarch to the right hand;
wherein there is both wheeling and the Lace emonian Countermarch commanded at
once, a thing impossible to be performed. For as in wheeling, the whole
battle remains entire, and moves circlewise about the right ot left corner
fileleader, as about a Center; So in a Countermarch Lacedemonian it is broken,
and begins to move by several ranks, and continues the motion in a direct
line from the front to the rear, and not in a circle. But for the precepts of
Aelian I purpose to explain only such as are used by the Soldiers and
Commanders of our time: And after taking of arms I hold this to be the first,
at lest when we begin to move.

6 Advance your Pikes.
Pikes in ordering of a battle must be first advanced before any motion can
be performed, in as much as all other postures of the Pike do hinder, or else
are unfit for transmutations and variety of changes, and from aduaneing the
rest of pike-postures do spring. Ordering of the Pike was devised to ease the
Soldier standing still; shouldering, to ease him in matching; advancing, to
give facility to the other postures, and to finish them, because they both
begin and end in it.

7 and 8. File and rank your selves.
It is needless to note, that no battle can be without filing and ranking.
This we must understand, that the Captain is to see whether the Soldiers be
filed and ranked; but the action it self pertains to the Soldiers, who
knowing their files and ranks, are every man to take their place accordingly:
for so ought it to be in true discipline of War.

9 Look to your Leader.
The file-leader is the life, and giver of form unto the file. He is the life
in that he moves first, and draws the rest unto the same motion; he gives
the form unto it, because it being nothing else but a right line, his
standing, being the first point, directs the rest to follow lineally one
after another. In this precept therefore Look to your Leader two things are
commanded, one that the rest of the file should observe to move and stand
still, as he does; the other, that they should maintain a straightness and
rightnesse in length, which is the form of the file.

10 Reare-commander order your file.
See Aelian ca. 2^.
In the Greek Edition of Aelian is read (...), that is, file-leader. But in a
Manuscript, which I have seen, is (...), the bringer up or reare-commander,
and so is it read in Leos Tacticks; and I take it to be the true reading, Leo
cap. 7. 88.
this command rather appertaining to the reare-Commander, then to the
file-leader: for the file-leader being the foremost of the file, and bearing
his face out of the front, how can he see whether the file that is behind him,
be in right order or not. The bringer-vp has his face toward the whole file,
as it stands out before him: and therefore may easily discern if any man be
in disorder, and reform them that are the cause of the disorder. In which
respect it is evident, that he is fitter for the command, then the fileleader;
which is the cause, that I have translated the word of direction, as before,
Reare-commander order your file.

11 Keep your first distances. That is, stand in your open order. For in that
distance is the exercise first legunne.
It is a seemly thing to see an even proportion observed in the motion of See
Aelian cap. 81.
a battle, and to behold a direct space betwixt files and ranks. For that is
the grace and beauty (as I may term it) of a Phalange ordered for fight. This
proportion cannot be maintained without observing distance curiously. Open
order is six foot both in rank and file betwixt man and man every way. If
then any soldier in file gather up to his leader, and stand at distance of
three foot, it is manifest, that his rank is thereby disturbed and made
uneven, although the file continue straight. Contrariwise, if he bear himself
out of his place, three foot toward either of his sidemen, by this means he
disordereth his file and makes it crooked. This fault if it were committed by
many, a general disorder would follow in the body; and therefore Aelian well
advises to keep the first distances especially till you be commanded to the
second or third distance, which will often fall out in the four motions. Of
which Facing is the first; and the words of Facing. 1 Motion.
direction in it are these as before in Aelian.

12 Face to the Pike.
See Aelian before cap. 25.
That is, Face to the tight hand; For the pike was always borne in the right
hand.

14 Face to the Target.
The Pike-men in the Macedonian army bore targets on their left arms, or on
the left side, so that facing to the target is all one with the word of
command; Face to the left hand.

16 Face about to the pike or target.
That is, face about to the right or left hand. But where he adds [ move a
little further,] he signifies that the direction is not fully accomplished,
and he would have the soldiers continue their motion till their faces were
fully come about to the rear; and then he wills them to stand so, because
they have gained their place. These facings here expressed by Aelian, are of
the whole body. Other facings of the parts he has not set down, which
notwithstanding are oftentimes of great use. For say the enemy charge in front
and rear; your front must continue as it did, but the word for the rear is:

The Amphostomus Phalange.
Half files face about to the right or left hand.
If the enemy charge you on both flanks, then is the word of command.

The Artistomus Phalange.
Half ranks face to the right, halft to the left hand.
If in front and one flank, the front stands firm, and the word for the
flank that is charged, is:

Half ranks of the right (or left) flank, Face to the hand named.
The Plesium.
If in front and both flanks, the front is to stand firm, and both the flanks
to face to the enemy. And this is done in a hollow square or Plesium, and the
word is:

Flanks face one to the right the other to the left hand.
If on all sides or round about, it is as before for the flanks: but for the
rear,

The rear face about to the right or left hand.
Now in Countermarch of the rear, the rank of file-leaders is oftentimes
commanded to face about to the right or left hand; In countermarch of the
front, the rank of bringers up must do the like, as we shall see in
Countermarch. Doubling is the second motion used in battle, the precept
Deubling* a Motion.
of it in this in Aelian.

18 Double your depth.
The word in our exercise for this motion is, Double your files; because See
Aelian cap.
files measure the depth of the battle, or ranks measure the length. This
doubling is made many ways. The first is, when the even files (that is, the 2.
4. 6. 8. 10. file) fall into the odd; As if the doubling be to the right hand,
the right hand corner-file stands firm, and is the first after doubling; the
third is the second file, the fifth the third, and so the rest of the odd
files in order. But the manner is, that the leaders of the second file fall
directly behind the leader of the first file, and the second man of the second
file behind the second man of the first, and so the rest of those two files.
The same order is for the rest of the even files, when they double the odd
files. And the word is:

Double your files to the right or left hand.
Another manner is, when half the body of files conueyes it self into the
spaces o^ the other half of the body; be it to the right or left hand
according to direction given; so that the first rank of the half body, which
is to move, falls into the space next after the first rank of the half body
that stands, and so the rest of the ranks of the half body that moves, and
the word is:

Half the body double your files to the right or left hand.
Another is, when files are doubled by a countermarch: As if the second file of
the right or left hand (as it is appointed) countermarch, and the leader of
that file place himself behind the bringer up of the corner file to that hand,
to which the doubling is to be made; and so the rest of the files of even
number, behind those of odd number; as the second behind the first, the
fourth behind the third, the sixth behind the fifth, and so the rest. The word
is:

Double your files by countermarch to the right or left hand.
The next word in Aelian is

Double your length.
That is, double your ranks, or front: (For as I before noted, the ranks make
the length of the battle) which likewise is many ways done. The first is,
when the ranks of even appellation, as the 2. 4. 6. 8. etc. fall out into the
spaces of the odd, namely, into the spaces of the 1. 3. 5. 7. etc. which stand
before them and place themselves even with them in rank. The word is:

Double your ranks to the right or left hand.
Another way is, when the bringers-vp (their half files following them by
countermarch) advance up to the front, and place themselves in the spaces
betwixt the file-leaders to the hand appointed, and the rest of the ranks
accordingly, namely, the ninth rank in the spaces of the second, the eight in
the spaces of the third, the seventh in the fourth, the sixth in the spaces of
the fifth. And the word is:

Bringers up, double your front by countermarch to the right or left hand.
Another is, when the reare-halfe-files, one half face to the right, the other
to the left hand, and dividing themselves, march out till they be past the
flanks of the standing halfe-files: Then facing to the front, sleeue up and
front with the standing halfe-files. Then the word is:

Rear halfe-files, double your front by division to the right and left hand.
Another way is, when the reare-halfe-files undivided, face to the hand
appointed, and being beyond the flank of the rest of the body, face to the
front and sleeue up, and join in front with the standing halfe-files. The word
is:

Reare-halfe-files, enter double your front to the right or left hand.
It is to be observed, that in all these motions of doubling ranks or front,
the soldiers are to return after their motion to their first posture; which
is done by facing about to the right or left hand, and then by moving, and by
recovering their first place. The word is:

As you were.
Countermarch is the third motion used in the change of a battle. The use and
necessity thereof appears in Aelian before, and that there are two 3 Motion.
kinds, one by file, the other by rank. The words of command that he here
sets down, are only of countermarch by file, which may be reduced to two
kinds, viz. the Countermarch of the front and the Countermarch of the rear.
That of the front has likewise two kinds, the Lacedemonian and the Chorean:
That of the rear only one, and it is called the Macedonian Countermarch. Now
Aelians direction follows.

20 The Lacedemonian Countermarch.
This is one of the Countermarches by file, and of the front. The manner is,
that the file-leaders begin the Countermarch and pa^^e beyond the rear,
their files following them. In our exercise the word is:

Countermarch the front to the right, or to the left hand.
It is done after another sort also, as when the bringers-vp face about to the
right or left hand, and then the whole body facing about to the same hand,
pass through the spaces of the bringers up to the same hand and the ninth
rank, beginning the rest of the ranks after one another, place themselves
every paticular man before his follower in the same file, till the file-leaders
are first. The word is:

Bringers up face to the right, or to the left hand. The rest beginning at the
ninth rank, pass through to the same hand, and place every man himself before
his follower. As you were.
In Aelian follows:

22 The Macedonian Countermarch.
We in our exercise term this Countermarch of the rear, and it is done in
two manners: First, when the bringers up begin the Countermarch, and their
files following, pass through the spaces of the file-leaders, till the
file-leaders become the last of the file, and then the whole body face about,
and stand. The word is:

Countermarch the rear to the right or left hand. Face about to the contrary
hand, and stand.
The other when the file-leaders face about to either hand, and the rest of the
ranks beginning at the second rank, successively pass through the spaces of
the file leaders to the hand appointed, placing themselves every man behind his
next leader, and facing about as they did. The word is:

File-leaders, face about, the rest of the ranks pass through, and place your
selves behind your next leaders.
The next in Aelian is:

24 The Chorean Countermarch.
This Countermarch is of the front, as I said, but it keeps the ground, that
the body had before the file-leaders (their files following them) removed to
the places of the bringers up, and the bringers up to the places that the
file-leaders had. The word is:

File-leaders, countermarch to the right or left hand, and stand, viz. when
they come to the bringers up.
Other Countermarches thereare, which are not here set downeby Aelian, Aelian
cap. 28.
but are remembered in his Chapter of Countermarches; of which the countermarch
by ranks of the whole battle is one, the other is the countermarch by ranks
in the parts. And as in the Countermarch of the front or rear, the ranks
first began to move, so in Countermarch of the flank, the files entire begin
to move; and as in the Countermarch of the front or rear, the ranks followed
one another by file, so in Countermarch of the flanks, the files follow one
another by rank: that is, the soldiers of every rank follow one another. If
you would countermarch the right flank, so to change one side of the battle
for the other, the word is:

Countermarch the right flank to the left hand.
In countermarching the left flank, the word is;

Countermarch the left flank to the right hand.
To countermarch the wings into the midst, both the uttermost corner-files
are to move toward the midst, their half ranks following them, and meeting
in the midst to stand there, and face to the front; and the word is;

Countermarch your wings into the midst of the battle.
Observe, that in Countermarch by rank, the three Countermarches Macedonian,
Lacedaemonian, and Choraean may be practiced, as well as in Countermarch by
file. If the flank nearest to the enemy begin the Countermarch, this the
Macedonian countermarch, because it makes a show of shifting away. If the
flank furthest from the enemy begin, it is the Lacedemonian, in that it
carries a semblance of falling on. But when one flank countermarcheth, till
it come just up to the other, and no further; it is the Choraean, because it
keeps the same ground.

Wheeling is the fourth and last motion; and it is used in the whole entire The
fourth Motion.
battle, or in the parts thereof. Aelian gives words of direction for the
whole battle only, and they are these;

Wheel the body to the Pike, or to the Target.
When the battle is to wheel to the pike or right hand, the right hand
corner file-leader is only to turn his body by little and little to the right
hand, facing even with the rank of file-leaders, till such time as he have
gained the right hand aspect; and the rest are to move about him, making him
the centor, as it were of their circled motion. If to the left hand, the left
hand corner file leader is to do the like. The same order is of wheelin the
battle about to the right or left hand. Aelian (as I ^ai^) gives here no
other words of command, then for the wheeling of the whole body, yet are the
wheelings of the parts of great use; for either the flanks are wheeled into
the front, or the front into the flanks. The front is wheeled into the
flanks, when we desire to form the Antistomus Phalange to resist the enemy,
giving on both flanks. And then the two middlemost bringers up are to stand,
and the middle file-leaders to diuinde themselves, and to move half the
battle to the right, half to the left hand, making those two bringers up the
center of the motion. In this the word is:

Wheel the front into flanks by division.
If the flanks be to be wheeled into the front, the two middle file-leaders are
to stand still, and the two half bodies to move about them, one to the right
hand, the other to the left, till the two flanks be in the front, and the front
in the midst. This kind is practiced when we would frame the Diphalange
Antistomus. The word is:

Wheel the flanks into the front.
It is to be remembered, that after every motion a restitution to the first
posture is to be commanded in these words; As you were.

In facing you are to return to the contrary hand; as if the command were to
face to the right, in returning you come to the left.

In doubling you must do the like.

In countermarch likewise, whether you countermarch the whole body, or the
parcels thereof, you are to return by the contrary hand.

After wheeling, there ought to be a facing to the same hand first before you
return, and then a returning the contrary way about the same corner
file-leader, about whom the motion was first made. This is to be understood of
wheeling the whole body.

In wheeling the front into the flanks, after wheeling performed, the body
before returning is to face to the Commander, then to return about the same
bringers up, till all come to be as they were.

In wheeling the flanks into the front, after the wheeling is made, the body is
to face likewise to the Commander, then facing about to the right or left hand
to return to the first posture about the two middle file-leaders, as about
their center.

Hic caestus artemque repone.
FINIS.
The Contents of the CHAPTERS of this BOOK.
THE broad-fronted Phalange, the deep Phalange, or Hearse, and the uneven
fronted-Phalange. Chapter 30 Parembole, Protaxis, Epitaxis, Prostaxis, Entaxis,
and Hypotaxis. Chap. 31 The Use and advantage of these exercise of Arms. chap.
34 Of the signs of direction which are to be given to the Army, and of their
several kinds. chap. 35 Of marching, and of the diverse kinds of Battles fit
for a march. And first of the right Induction, of the Caelembolos, and of the
Triphalange, to be opposed against it. chap. 36 Of the Paragoge or Deduction.
chap. 37 Of the Phalange Amphistomus. chap. 38 Of the Phalange Antistomus.
chap. 39 Of the Diphalange Antistomus. chap. 40 Of the Peristomus Diphalange.
chap. 41 Of the Diphalange homoiostomus, and of the Plinthium. chap. 42 Of the
Diphalange Heterostomus. chap. 43 Of the Horse Rhombe, and of the
Foot-halfe-Moone to encounter it: chap. 44 Of the Horse-battaile Heteromekes,
and the Plagiophalange to be opposed against it. chap. 45 Of another kind of
Rhombe for Horsemen, and of the foot-battaile called Epicampios Emprosthia to
encounter it. chap. 46 Of the Foot-battaile called Cyrte, which is to be set
against the Epicampios. chap. 47 Of the Tetragonall Horse-battaile, and of the
Wedge of Foot to be opposed against it. chap. 48 Of the Foot-battaile called
Plesium, and of the Winding or Saw-fronted battle to encounter it. chap. 49
Of the Hyperphalangesis, and Hyperkerasis, and of Attenuation. chap. 50 Of
conueighing the carriage of the Army. chap. 51 Of the words of Command, and
certain observations about them. chap. 52 Of the words of Direction. chap. 54
FINIS.

