A CAVEAT FOR COLD CHRISTIANS.

IN A SERMON PREACHED BY Mr. PAVL BAYNE, SOMETIMES Minister of Gods Word at St.
Andrews, in Cambridge.

WHEREIN THE COMMON DISease of Christians, with the remedy, is plainly and
excellently set down for all that will use it.

John 15.9.10. Continue ye in my love. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall
abide in my love.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be
sold at his shop under St. Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in Pope's Head Alley,
right against the sign of the white horse. 1618.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, HIS SINGVLAR GOOD FRIEND, Mr. ROBERT CLAVERING,
Towne-Clarke of Newcastle, all happiness of a better life, and this present.
SIr, considering the good acceptance that some former few Sermons of that
religiously-learned, and learnedly-religious Divine, Master Paul Bayne have had
with the Church of God, the ensuing Sermon lying hitherto by me, I was (without
difficulty) induced to make it public. For if I should longer conceal it,
what know I whether some body else, who had not the like interest to it that my
self have, might not prevent me in printing this, as well as they have done in
publishing some other things of the like nature? Moreover, looking into the
carriage and frame of this draught, I did not see how it could disparage any of
the rest, which are flowne abroad before it. Lastly, if we will ponder the
subject matter discoursed of in the following leaves, I will permit it to any
indifferent wise-hearted Christian Reader, who vieweth the estate of the times,
and waigheth advisedly what singular vice reigns; what especial graces are
ordinarily defective among Professors, whether this Sermon utters not Commoda
accommoda.
profitable things, and profitable things in their season. For when (respected
Sir) did the like woeful declining from the ancient feruor of our first love,
so generally spread it self through all the quarters of our Island? He has but
half an eye, who looking up and down, beholds not, that every little
nothing in zealous forwardness of profession, seems (for the most part) very
sufficient. We will neither diligently provoke our selves to lively proceedings
in the way of powerful walking with God; neither will we patiently endure
others to outstrip us, and to aspire vnweariedly after the highest pitch of
well doing. This leaving our first love, this abatement of former light and
heat in our Christian course, is proved in the ensuing Sermon, and reproved.
When was there so little minding and remembering whence we are (generally) not
slidden, but (as it were) fallen headlong? When were there so few sincere and
settled resolutions, to repent of the evil of relinquishing our first love, a
sin wherein our land has sinned, besides all its other sins? Alas, the
sanctified employment of our memories, to consider whence we are fallen; shame
and confusion of face working true repentance, that we are so fowlie fallen;
are strange things unto us! although only the exercise of these graces can
raise us up to true happiness in this life, and in the next. That we may set
upon these saving practices, we are effectually called upon in the forenamed
Sermon. So that (as I formerly said) it will (I persuade my self) prove both
profitable and seasonable to the Christian Reader; who has a discerning
spirit, both what his own wants are, and how, by this little book, some
pretty supply may be affoorded him for his recovering.

Thus much why the Sermon is published: a word or two (Worthy Sir) why, by a
more especial inscription, I have dedicated it to your name. First (therefore)
I was moved hereto with an earnest desire, to manifest further then ever yet I
have done, the entirenesse of my dearest affections toward you; who after our
many years comfortable loving and living together, of late have been removed
from me into those Northern parts. Not being therefore now able face to face
to enjoy the wonted sweet intercourse of speech, and other friendlike offices,
I longed (notwithstanding) to tell you, you were not so much out of mind, as
out of sight. Secondly, I desired that the dedication might befit the person,
remembering Senecaes counsel: Vtique cauebimus, ne munera superuacua mittamus:
vt foeminae aut seni arma venatoria, aut rustico libros, aut studijs ac literis
dedito retia. Sen. de ben. l. 1. cap. 11.
we must take heed we send not superfluous gifts, as to a woman or old man
hunting weapons; or to a clown, books; or nets to one following his studies,
and learning. On the contrary, to send a book to a scholar; or a Sermon, to an
experienced professor, I cannot see but it will hold good proportion.

Thus not doubting, but you will lovingly receive what was lovingly intended, I
take my leave; desiring that he who has begun the good work some years ago
in you, and has made you graciously proceed hitherto; even he (the merciful
and true God) would perfectly accomplish it, unto the day of Jesus Christ.

Yours in the surest bond, EZ. Chapter
London. 1618.
A CAVEAT FOR COLD CHRISTIANS.
REVEL. 2.4.5. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first love: remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works.


AS a husband absent aduertiseth his wife by letter, of that which is
behoouefull; so it pleases our Savior Christ, absent in body, though present
in spirit, to admonish his Spouse, and this Church in particular, by an Epistle
sent to her. In it we may observe these three parts: Three parts in the
Epistle. 1. The preface.
first, the preface, containing the persons written unto, and writing; the one
we endorse on the backside of our letters; the other we use to subscribe after
them. Secondly, the matter; 2. The matter, in which are three things.
in which three things are contained: first, because love edifieth, he bears
her witness of the things commendable in her; that his rebuke, coming from
love, might be better digested. Secondly, in this 4. verse he mentions that,
for which he had a saying to her, that is to say, that she was fallen from her
first love, it was decayed in her. Thirdly, in the fifth and sixth verses he
prescribes a remedy: in setting down which, he observes this order: first, he
sets down a double practice which would restore her, viZ. remembering her fall
and repenting. Secondly, because the medicine is bitter, and not easily taken;
he shows her the great peril, the mortal hurt which will ensue, if this be
neglected. Thirdly, he encourages his patient; showing, that yet there was a
good sign, that love was not quite gone, though it was in some sort lessened
and enfeebled, because she hated the works of the Nicolaitans: Thus with a
bitter potion, sending her a manus Christi; Christ folding up (as it were) a
pill in gold, that it might be let down the more pleasantly. Having finished
the matter, O yes, he makes attention; and for a close, makes a most
comfortable promise to such who should overcome, outwrestling by repentance
such tentation, as accompanies these declinings, viz. that they should have
further revelation of Christ made in them, and further communion for the
present by grace with him; and hereafter the blessed fruition of him in glory.
The sum of the words.
The sum of these words to be handled is this: though many good things be
found with thee, yet thy first love is left; the flame of thy love which
reached to heaven, wasted all inordinate concupiscence, and was fruitful in
good works, this is sunk down and quenched; therefore advise with thy self,
and well consider how thou art fallen (as it were) from heaven to earth; judge
this thine own iniquity; turning from it, return to God in the ways of
righteousness, bringing forth the same fruits of lively love, which heretofore
have been discerned in thee. Thus we may fitly come to the considerations,
which may directly be deduced from these words for our further instruction.

First, The disease.
that these Ephesians are challenged to have left their first love, we see what
is the condition of Christians; come to some good state, they are ready to
decline; when now they have made great proceeding in love, they are ready to
cool again. Even as it is in the body, when it is in the most excellent
temperature, the durance thereof is not long; so it is in the soul also, when
it is in the best taking, even then it is subject to alteration. So the
Galathians, the Israelites; how soon did the one fall from the Gospel, and
the other from their joy in that God, which had delivered them? Such is our
frailty, and such are Satan's enterprises against us. But for more full opening
of this point, The first opened.
two things shall be unfolded; first, what it is the true Christians fall from,
when they leave their love: 2. whence it comes, ye being so well proceeded they
decline. To the first let, that it is not the transitory flashing, the
sweetness, the delight, or gladness in heart which we feel in our first
love. For this which comes not so much from the things of our peace, as from
the nouelty of them; from this, that the light of them does first shine unto
us; this which by reason of such circumstance is in us, may be lost and left
without sin: the Angels love works somewhat in them touching the conversion
of a sinner, when now he is first converted, which constantly abides not with
them: as for example, the joy there mentioned, Luke 15. Secondly, I say it was
not that divine quality of love, which the spirit of God brings forth in
regenerating of us; for this could not be lost, it being part of our new birth
which abides; according to that, He who is borne of God sins not, for the
seed of God abides him: and Cor. 1.13, Love fails not; not only because
for the kind it abides in heaven, but because the self same in number, which
by the spirit is brought forth in us, shall never have end; it being such a
divine fire, which no waters of tentation can quench and extinguish. It
remains then, that they are said to have left their first love, in regard that
their outward works (which are as conspicuous fruits growing out of this tree
of love), in regard, I say, that these were decayed and impaired, they are said
to have left their first love. These are all of them things subject to
alteration: though the divine quality of Christ remain with us; the Scripture
makes this, to be rooted in love, a distinct thing from having love. Paul
therefore asking in the third of the Ephesians, in behalf of them, that they
might be rooted in love, and so made able to apprehend more perfectly the love
of God to them in Christ, aims at some singular degree of affection. For as
plants are not (when presently set first) deeply rooted: so these divine
graces, faith, love, etc, grow up in us to such a rooted firmness, and
setlednesse, that we are not easily moved and troubled in the practice of
them. A man loves truly at first, yet less groundedly. Whence it is, that
little enticements allure him, and withdraw him into naps of spiritual
forgetfulness; little snibs dismay him, and make him shrink in; little things
make him doubt of Gods love to him; yea, of his own perseuering in love to
God: but being better acquainted by experience with the Lords fidelity, mercy,
patience, etc, he takes rooting more and more in this holy affection. Now it is
so, that the love of these Ephesians began to hang more loose in them, then
sometime it was wont. For look as any thing that now stands stedy, may come to
be loosened, yet remain the thing it was before, though not firm as before;
so it is in love: so joints that are loosened, yet remain joints. Secondly,
the operation, the fervent moving of love was grown remiss. For look as in
material fires, the fervent heat may slake, and fire still abide; as in the
body, the powers of hearing and seeing are safe (as in sleep), though the
exercise of them be ceased and bound for a time: even so our love, which (like
a fire) grows further and further kindled in us for a time, may be by some
occasions abated, in regard of the feruor and heat, when yet the being of it
is still continued. Thirdly, in regard of works, which the operation of their
love produced in their souls inwardly, and toward God and man outwardly, in
this regard they were declined. In their souls, the light of the Lord did not
discuss the clouds of self and earthly lustings, as it had done formerly; nor
were their duties such now, as sometime they had been toward God and man. Look
as in the Sun, the essential brightness remaining the same, the effect
nevertheless of it in dispersing clouds, and in lightening the air is sometime
diminished, sometime quite eclipsed: so here the divine nature or light of love
remaining, yet the effect thereof in their souls, both in clearing them from
earthly desires, and false loves; as also in making them fruitful in good
duties, this effect of it was nothing for measure, such as once might have been
observed in them. ease, then far more with disquietnesse. by this common
contagion. Some think that when we teach, that true love, where it is once,
there it is ever, and so of true grace; there is opened a window to security,
and we make men warrants to live as they list: but there is no such matter,
while we teach that they may fall into such languishing sicknesses, as will
make their conditions seem a living death, rather then otherwise. Were the
conditions of our bodies immortal, yet such, as on any mis-diet might contract
painful and fearful sicknesses; should we then have cause to be secure, and
cast away all care of dieting our selves? so it is in our souls; though this
life of love is eternal, yet it is subject to such languishing maladies
without the greater care taken, that none of us in this respect can want a
sufficient spur to incite our diligence. I will defer a further word of
exhortation to the next instruction. Mark then as these fell away in their
love, so the Lord challenges them for it, as a thing much displeasing his
Majesty, and dangerous to their souls.

Observe hence, are degrees of diligence, and the least well accepted with God.
Even as an industrious husband has some seasons, wherein his labor is double
to that it is ordinarily, and yet his course is at no time idle: so a
spiritual good husband, may (on occasions) be lifted to such powerful
endeavor, which he has not continuing with him at all times, and yet be far
from this sinful remissness. Secondly, it is not a remiss, feeble, weak
walking, which proceeds from a spiritual faintness in us, being under many
tentations; for even feeble and remiss actions in this season, are no small
labor of our love, and most acceptable to God; we must not go all by
quantity. A sick man may show more labor, and tire his feebled strength more,
in doing that which in two hours might be dispatched, then a sound man can
show in a whole days work. For though the sound man does more in quantity,
yet he does less in proportion then the sick, so far the sick is from
being idle. Even as the rich men that offered, though they gave more in
quantity then the widow; yet she did more in proportion (if her ability be
considered) then they all. It therefore not being a comparatiue remissness,
which may be so termed, in regard of more extraordinary bestirring our selves,
nor yet a feeble remissness; what remains, but that it should be such a
remissness, as comes from spiritual sloth, caused in us by lusts, which we
have in some degree entertained? Forwhe^ lusts do get the upper hand so over
us, that we strive not with them, but go on in them, though they eat out the
life and power which we felt in our courses, and make us that we can be well
enough, though we feel not our communion with God in that measure we were
wont; this is ever joined with a sinful falling from the love in which we
walked.

Now the reason wherein this comes to be so offensive,

This then being a thing so displeasing and hurtful, grieves his heart? cannot
we slight over our duties, and put God off with such sorry service, as if any
thing were good enough for him? have we not had sometime good purposes and
endeauours, from which now we are fallen? If we be privy to these things, it
is too sure, our first love is exceedingly abated.

In the second place, we must awaken our hearts, and stir them up to this
love. Let us think, Lord, should I offer this measure to an earthly husband,
never to be afraid after doing that, which I knew would displease him; to take
delight insuch (I knew) never bare him good will; would it not make me blush?
how much less ought I to use thy Majesty so injuriously? We brook not, that
love should not grow in them toward us, with whom we are married; why should
our love be lessened to thee? We would check our selves in affoording unchaste
favors to men; what cause have we to take up our selves, that our affections
give such unchaste kisses to these earthly delights; and dwell so in the embrace
of them, that they are indisposed, and wanting devotion toward thy Majesty? O
let us take words to our selves and blow this spark, that it may flame upward
toward our God. If while our hearts are in the love of some lovely creature, we
find such sweetness; what a heaven should they feel, did they love the Lord
affectionately? in this love there would be no lack.

Again, is acceptable to a husband from a wife, when the love of her heart is
withdrawn and cooled. On the contrary, it should provoke us to renew our love,
because while this is lively in us, God sees many faults, and sees them not: as
in David, whom God counted after his heart, but in the matter of Vriah. It is
plain, that God did not look at any infirmities, while his servant (in this
maine matter of spiritual love) kept upright with him. Look as it is between
husband and wife, while love and fidelity are kept inviolable, little faults
are not observed and stood upon so, as to make falling out betwixt them; so it
is twixt God and his people: while this heat of love is stirred up in our
courses, our souls shall be preserved in healthsome state, and grace
increased. For as that exercise, which does stir up the natural heat, if it
be but ad ruborem vsque, does benefit the body, wasting (in some degree) the
superfluities, which are ready to breed ensuing sickness: So not only those
eminent mouings of love, wherein she exceedes her self; but every course
which is with life and power of love in any measure, increases and stablisheth
grace, and consumes the relics of corruption in us.

Finally,

Thus having considered the disease, The remedy.
we come to the remedy, which stands in a double practice: the one preparatiue
to the other; the one of remembering whence she was fallen; the other of
repenting, which is set forth by the fruit of it, Repent and do thy first
works. In the first we are to mark two things; first, the action commanded,
Remember. Secondly, the object of it, whence thou art fallen.

Whence we observe,

For opening this doctrine, two things must be insisted on. First, we must open
what remembrance is, what it contains within the compass of it. Secondly,
what is to be remembered of us. For the first, as we see it is with man, he
has some work without doors, which he goes out to; some he does, staying
within: so the mind does some things without, some things it does retired
into it self, keeping within it self, and vvorking only on it self; as when
it remembers or deliberates on any matter. Now every vvorking of the mind,
tends either to this end, that we may know better by means of it; or that
we might do something that is behoouefull. Now this remembrance is a certain
operation of the soul within it self, whereby we think on things
forgotten; to the end we may be stirred up to such conscionable practice, as
the nature of the thing remembered requires. It contains three things; first,
an entering into our selves; when a man returns into his thoughts, no longer
vvandring to and fro in these outvvard things, in which he had (after a sort)
lost and forgotten himself: For this is the beginning of that remembrance
which leads to repentance; See Deuteronomy. 30.1. 1. King. 8.47. Secondly, a
bethinking and calling things to mind so far, as to know how things stand
with us. Thirdly, when we are bid remember, we are enjoined to set our hearts
on, keep in mind, consider the state we are in, and consequences of it, Psalm.
50.22, Consider this ye that forget God. Where consideration and forgetfulness
are opposed. I considered my ways, and so repented. Thus you see, what this
duty of remembrance includes in it.

Now for the matter to be remembered, it is our estate, and the declining of it.

For next to God,

Secondly, The sight of our natural deformity in a glass, stirs up nature to
enforce her self to remove it: so here the looking wishly on our spiritual
deformity, excites even feeble grace to do her utmost endeavor for correcting
it.

This which has been spoken, and never once considering what they do, and how
they go on. Secondly, we must make conscience to exercise our remembrance
about this subject, even what sweruings and declinings have overtaken us. In
our bodies and estates we will quickly mark what is amiss, and not easily
forget it: If matter of wrong be done to us, it sticks in memory, as if it
were written in brass: we are not weary of remembering earthly things, such is
our estimation of them, and familiar acquaintance with them. Shall we only be
wanting to our selves in remembering here, when our salvation lies upon it?
therefore as you will have the latter end peace, so remember your ways,
sins, declinings; the more you remember them, the more God will forget them
(protionably to that, If we condemn our selves, God will not condemn us), and
we had need hold our hearts to the remembrance of them; they will not hear
lightly on this side. Such is the love in us to our natural good, and care to
avoid sickness, poverty; that we cannot so soon call to mind our defects and
dangers, but that we apprehend them, and turn from them. But so auerse are we
from our heavenly good, and careless of spiritual dangers; that when we
speak of them again and again within our selves, the soul will hardly be
moved to follow the one, or give attendance to the other so, as to seek the
auoidance of them. Alas, if we will not now be brought to think of our daily
slips, declinings, of the grievous sins in which we go on without
repentance; if we will not, I say, God shall one day enlarge our memories, that
they shall apprehend all our sins: yea this hardness of heart, which would
not let them repent, when exhorted; and that in such sort, that the remorse and
after-thought of them shall be as a worm that never dies. He who does most
willingly forget his sins here, shall remember them there, most fully and
painfully hereafter.

To proceed to the second practice, Remember whence thou art fallen, and
repent. First mark, upon the declinings of grace he bids them repent;
teaching, that the least declinings of grace in our selves and others, is a
cause of repentance.

The falls of others we must repent of, David's counterfeit friends, he humbled
himself in fasting, Psalm. 35. And when one Corinthian being incestuous, was
not cast forth, Saint Paul provoke them all to repentance. Now in our own
declinings we must take them betimes, lest that which is halting turn quite
aside. If a foreign enemy invade us, we stay not till he come to our gates,
but meet him and hold him play betimes. If a bodily disease breed on us, we
love to look forth quickly. Thus it should be, when sin (an enemy, yea a
sickness to the soul) does so much as make entrance into us. And this is
sure, that often smallest declinings are not a little dangerous. It is seen in
nature, that the most temperate distemper (such as at first is in an hectic
fever) as it is not easily found, so it is hardly cured. Thus in our souls
declinings, which we see not to be so outrageous, but that we are well enough
for all them, these often prove most perilous.

Again, this must move us betime to deal with our selves in sin; for the
beginning of it (as Solomon says of strife) is like the opening of waters;
little though it seem at first, yet it will swell and rise till we be
overflowed with it.

This therefore must check us, much for this doctrine, which in the coherence
may be observed.

The matter it self, do thy first works. Now that against this sick state
he prescribes this remedy, Repent; we see what expels and heales all such
matters in the soul, viz. repentance. This will help every malady: were a man
sick of the consumption of his lungs, there were small hope, it is mors lenta,
but certa; well, languishing Ephesus even in a soule-consumption is restored by
repentance. We see in nature every part has a faculty of expelling what is
noxious and harmfull: the lungs have their cough; the brain his sneezing, and
other excretions; the stomach will turn it self topsie turuie, but it will
bring up (by vomit) that which offends. Not to prosecute this, in stead of all
these, and such like, the soul of man in this condition wherein it contracts
corruption, has this faculty of repentance put into it, whereby it empties it
self of all that which is offensive. But for the further edifying you in this
point, I will open two things: first, in what this practice stands: secondly,
how we may excite repentance. The act of repentance is a certain
determination, which the understanding makes and propounds. Secondly, in the
turning away of the will from that sin it lay in; as now having it in
abomination. Thirdly, in certain affections and actions, which the will (now
changed) excites in us. For first, in repentance, the mind apprehends, and
determinately sets down thus much, that we lie in a fearful estate, guilty of
grievous sin; the understanding speaks these things within us: O we have
done foolishly, what is it we have done? we are worthy to be cut off; we have
sinned, done wickedly, peruersly, Dan. 9. Ezech. 20. Ier. 6.8. 1 King. 8. Now
while the understanding speaks this in the soul, the will perceiving by her
understanding, in what evil she has lien, turns it self away, nilling and
having in abomination the sin it lived in. What have I to do with Idols
(says repenting Ephraim), Hos. 14? For look as in the body, not the presence
of sick matter, but the sitrring of it; so that nature begins to feel the
malignancie of it; this stirring is that which makes nature to fight with it,
and drive it forth: so not the presence of sin, but when the sense of it is
conveyed, by this the understanding speaks, then the souls endeavor of
turning it away is excited. Thirdly the will thus abhorring it, causes
certain affections to arise; as grief, indignation, revenge, shamefastness,
2. Cor. 7. Hebr. 12.28. Yea it commands certain outward actions; confession,
humbling our selves in fasting; some, as signs and testimonies; some, as
means also further helping it. For as after a medecin taken, Physicians
prescribe fasting, six or eight hours more or less, as the nature of things
require; and that to this end, that the medecin may more effectually grapple
with the matter to be expelled, having no auocament: so here we restrain
meats, and all delights for a season, that the flesh may be more fully wrought
upon by the Spirit; while the work of the soul, by these carnal auocaments
is nothing hindered. Now for exciting, if having set before us our sin, we
feel not our hearts penitently affected, then must we think how it is with us
in outward evils, and take words to our selves, saying; Lord, if I see any
danger toward my body or estate, sorrow will come before I send for it. In
default but of complement with man, I can be ashamed quickly: what Atheism and
hardness of heart is this, that I canthinke of my sins against thee,
indangering my soul, and that without grief or blushing?

Thus having made this discovery of the hard-hartednesse in us,

Again, Naamans servants spoke to him about the cure of his leprosy: Father,
if the Prophet had commanded thee a hard thing, would thou not hauedone it?
how much more seeing he says, Wash and he clean. If God had commanded thee a
hard thing, would thou not have done it to avoid damnation? How much more
must thou obey, when he says, Be but grieved, and condemn your sins your
selves, I will not condemn you?

Neither must they only, up again, though we rise from hand to knee, and get
up but faintly? O let us be wise in the falls of our souls, take heed to get
up by repentance again.

Thus much of the practice of repentance: do thy first works, I observe, that
sin by repentance removed, our former abilities are restored. Even as in
nature, when the actions of any part are hurt by this or that sick matter
hurting them; take but away the disease, the part will do that belongs to it
as ably as ever: so the soul once healed by repentance, puts forth the powers
of it self as it did before: yea (as they say) a bone broken and well set
again, is stronger then ever it was; so Gods often mending the soul by
repentance, exceeds the former making of it. This most blessed exercise of a
broken spirit, who can declare the virtue of it? whether we look at evils in
the soul, or in the body and condition. It often heals soule-euils, so that
there is no scar left in them of the wound received. Peter a presumptuous man
standing on comparison, though al these leave thee, yet, etc. Peter so full of
self-love, so fearful of death, that he denied his Lord and Master: when now
God had touched him with repentance, mark how clear he rose up (as it were)
from these cuils. The night before he should have been martyred, he slept as
soundly as if he had not been privy to any such matter: and when Christ asked
him, Do thou love me more then these? Peter now had forgot his comparisons,
Lord thou know I love thee. So David, when God had now enlightened his
darkness after the matter of Vriah, he felt such spiritual strength, as if he
could have leaped over a wall, or broken through an army. True it is that
sometime when repentance is not in the more through degree, but done by halues;
then it is as in bodily diseases, which go not clean away, but leave the
party neutrum conualescentiae, that is, not well, but only somewhat mending,
rather then fully restored. This is does in regard of soule-diseases that are
entered; but if we fear their growing on us, then this practice followed, is
an excellent preservative, preventing their entrance.

Now for bodily and conditional evils, this keeps them (used in kind) that
they befall us not. Achabs counterfeit repentance obtained no less. Secondly,
it makes us grow out of them, if they have seized on us. How did Job, now
humbling himself in dust and ashes, mount up (as it were) with Eagles wings,
above all his clamities? If the sentence touching outward evils be irreuocablie
passed, yet so it asswages and sweetens these crosses, that we have peace in
the midst of them, and feel not so much disturbance from them. As in Moses,
who might not enter Canaan; in David, whose child was to die, whose other
calamities threatened, were to succeed.

see who had been feeble, wasted, now having taken physic grow full of blood,
fleshie, able to digest any thing, strong to labor; we would not doubt but
that his disease were fully removed; but that his medecin was right and
effectual: so is that repentance right, and that man healed by it, to whom the
works of grace are now returned: but if we have not fruits which accompany
repentance, then is our turning to be suspected.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line 17. put out Christ. p. 3. l. 26. for let, r. viz. p. 10. l. 22.
for mere, r. new.


