A LETTER WRITTEN BY Mr. PAVL BAYNE, Minister of Gods word, lately deceased.

Effectually instructing, and earnestly provoking to true repentance, love, and
new obedience.

Very profitable for every one that would proceed on in the constant course of
a godly life, showing the way unto it, and seriously exciting unto more
perfection therein.

2 PET. ^.9. The Lord is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.

HEB. 6.1. -- Let us go on to perfection.

1. THESE. 4.3. For this is the will of God even your sanctification.

LONDON Imprinted by F.K. for Nathan. Newbery, and are to be sold at S. Peter's
in Cornhill, and in Popes head Alley. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Master William Halliday, Alderman and Sheriff of
London, all happiness.
SIr, this small, but holy treatise, being given me by him, unto whom it was
written, to send it forth more publicly into the world. And knowing what evil
and injurious entertainment Orphans oftentimes receive in the world, except
they have some special friend to countenance them, I am bold to adresse my
self unto you with this Religious child of a godly learned (but deceased)
father for shelter: and indeed unto whom could I with more assured hope
dedicate it for harbor, then to your self, under whose roof I and mine are
harbored? and therefore that so in some part I might manifest my love and
gratefulnes unto you, I present this with my self always ready to do you any
good service,

Yours humbly N. N.

A LETTER WRITTEN BY Master PAVL BAYNE late deceased; effectually instructing
and provoking to true repentance, love and new obedience.
MAster D. I include your wife in you, both your loves to that Saint departed,
and to my self, does bind me unto you in all Christian duty, especially to
exhort you to repentance, and provoke you to love, the neglect whereof, though
hitherto it has been somewhat excusable, yet hereafter it might justly be
condemned in me; wherefore I will break off silence, laboring to build you
forward in the graces above named. First to deal with you in repentance, then
to help you forward in new obedience. The Lord preaches repentance still to
us: If a messenger knocking at our doors have their answer returned, they are
gone forthwith to them that sent them; so if the plague and such like
messengers which God sends to us, had that they came for, they would not
still ring the bell at our doors, and call upon us. Neither does God wait for
repentance only from the wicked, but he would have his dearest children meet
him condemning themselves; if ye also repent not more and more (when you see
the examples of Gods wrath) you shall also perish). First, to show you what this
is, so I shall stir you up to it more fruitfully. By repentance I mean
nothing else, but 2. Co. 7.10
godly sorrow for sin, wherein the soul humbles it self before God, and
comes home to him. It is not a worldly sorrow (like theirs in the 7. Hos.
7.14.
of Hosea) which makes us whine, because the world is hard, nor yet a hopeles
grief Ge. 4.13.
in fear of punishment like Cains: but a grief for Ps. 51, 3.4
sin as it displeases God, whose love through Christ, we have felt Zac.
12.10
shed into our hearts, Lam. 3.22
whose mercies we see in that we are not consumed, yea, Heb. 12.6
whose fatherly affection does seek to recall us home by loving correction.
Now in this sorrow, the soul does humble it self, for this is the nature of
repentance, it will make us Ezech. 36.31.
take shame to our selves, giving glory to God, partly by seasonable
acknowledging those ways wherein we have Psalm. 51.14. Dan. 9.5.
most provoked God, partly by Ezech. 36.30.
iudgeing our selves as worthy to be cut off, that we may find grace in his
eyes, and not be condemned. And together with grieuing and abasing it self,
the stray soul Act. 26.20.
comes home to God, purposing (through his strength) to leave the ways
wherein it has grieved him, and to cleave to God in all his commandments.
Look then if entering into your heart you find, that as much has been
amiss, so discerning Romans 2.4.
Gods mercy and patience, yea his goodness, in giving you the call of his word
and corrections, you are grieved that you have been so unkind, and undutiful,
to so kind and careful a father; if you find that where it is to his glory
you love to confess your unfruitfulness, and to condemn your self, and do
with true purpose of heart strike a new covenant with God to forbear your own
ways, to walk more fruitfully before him, so far as his grace shall preserve
you from the one, and strengthen you to the other, (for all our sufficiency is
in him); if you find these things in any measure, then rejoice, for God has
given you Act. 11.12
repentance to eternal life. But if your hearts have neglected this exercise
of a broken spirit, and that your consciences tell you there has been little
or no grief this way; then you must be entreated that whilst it is called to
day, that Gods grace does still inuit you, you would not harden your hearts,
but prepare to meet him. Luke 23.28.
Weep not for me, weep for your sins, says our Savior, and blessed are they
that mourn in this kind, the Lord carries a handkercheife to wipe away those
tears, he is near to comfort these hearts; these April dewes bring
May-flowers; such as sow in tears shall Psalm. 126.5.
reap in joy. Is it not better for us to take the rod into our own hands, and
beat our selves gently, then force the Lord to take us into his hand, who is a
consuming fire: if the Lord do but see you are willing to cast down your
selves, and to deal with your own souls, he will cover your heads in the
evil hour, and make love to your souls, when his negligent children shall
taste of his temporary displeasure. Delay not this: our fowls in their
swaruings from God, are like two bones beside their joint, the longer they go
they prove the more painful, if we take them in time they are set more
easily. We will take Physic, purge, sweat, to prevent the growing of disease
upon us; shall we not be wise for our souls; the vomit of the soul, is the
grief of repentance, take it betime, drive not of till the Lord be forced to
visit. Now if God give you to desire that your hearts were broken in his sight,
but yet you find that you cannot (partly for the hardness in your hearts,
partly for outward distractions) do the thing you would, I will help you a
little at this lift. There is an art in blowing up every grace in the spirit,
and this with the rest.

First therefore you must Deuteronomy. 30 1 Lam. 3.40. Apoc. 2.5.
enter into your hearts, and consider your own ways. We will keep a
reckoning what we run upon the score with men, but rare are they, that think
how deep they are in Gods books, such ill husbands we are for our souls. Now
we must here mark warily, whether we have not lost some graces which we
have had; I mean, have them not so powerfully as we have felt them. Whether we
do not give place to sloth, doing Gods service coldly and slightly; whether
we have not forgotten our covenant which we have made with God in Baptism,
viZ. of dying to our own thoughts, words, and deeds daily, and laboring in
our whole course to feel that not now we live, but Christ in us, as Paul
speaks, his spirit teaching us to do every thing as before him in conscience
of his will, to his glory. Yea, you here must call to mind, the most Deuteronomy. 9 7.
grievous sins which you at any time have provoked God with, we must not bid
adieu to the remembrance of our sins past and pardoned, but must ever bear
them in memory, so far forth as may help us with godly sorrow, holy
bashfulnesse, and lowliness of mind. Deuteronomy. 9. Now then thus setting the
matter before you, if you find not your hearts pricked with it, then you must
(as the Prophet speaks) take words to your selves, Hos. 14 3.
and trouble your own souls, as thus; What? shall I think of my sins against
God, and not grieve nor blush at them? If I have ouershot my self, so that men
may have a saying to me, it does cut me at the heart, I am ashamed; if
something cross but my corrupt nature ere while, I have grief at will; and
shall I not grieve for offending my God? If I had broke day, and not kept touch
with man, I could not look him in the face, shall it not go nigher me, that I
have kept my covenant no better with God? If my servant have loytered his day
over, and not done my work, he blusheth, and is afraid to come before me: and
shall not I change my countenance, and be moved that I have been so
unprofitable in the works of God? Thus as men in swoones, being chafed, come
again, so shall your souls, while thus you bestirre them, feel some warmth
returning to them. But if yet the heart will not relent, you must in the third
place, seeing your barrenness and inabilitie, turn you to Christ speaking to
him in this wise: Were it to grieve at earthly occasions, or that my self were
displeased, here my affections would come to me before I sent for them; but
for godly sorrow, none of it grows in our gardens, our foolish hearts love
not holy mourning, our hard hearts will not relent to think how we displease
thee, we knowing there is no strength in us to any thing is good, look to thee,
thou art the Christ and Act. 5.31.
Lord; thou give repentance to thy Israel, and forgiveness of sin; thou
(Lord) do circumcise the heart, thou hammerest Ezech. 36.26.
and breakest by thy Spirit the stone of them, making them fleshie and tender.
Lam. 5.21
Lord do thou turn us, and we shall be turned: Thus while you turn your eyes
to Jesus that quickening Spirit, he will be present to quicken this grace in
you. But what if yet your hearts should not so kindly melt with in you as you
desire, yet al^ is safe, for this is the smoke of repentance, Mat. 12.20.
which Christ will not leave till it blaze forth, he will not put forth a
smoking week. This desire and laboring after it, is happiness it self; Blessed
Mat. 5.6.
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; yea, using this course to
consider of your wants, to chide after some sort your own souls, and to look
to Christ the giver of repentance, the stone of your hearts, the hardness will
come away by little and little, and when in bodily wounds the approuedst
plasters must be often laid on, you must not think, that these spiritual
evils so long growing on us, should be quite gone on the sudden. I do beseech
you therefore, as ever you would taste the comforts of God; as you would find
ease in evil hours, when nothing but God can refresh you; yea, as you love to
escape much worldly sorrow, which tends but to death, so acquaint your selves
betime with this exercise of a broken heart; Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, and we know much
more earthly sorrow then we should, because we will not trouble our own souls
a little, blowing up that godly sorrow which is required at our hands.

Now for the second, of helping you forward in obedience, the sum of the
covenant twixt God and us is this; he in Christ says, he will take us for his
Hos. 2.23.
people, we promise to him, that we will have him for our God. This therefore
does comprise our duty to God, that we set him up in our hearts as God; which
thing we do first, when we grow up to know him, and to acknowledge him in all
things. Secondly, when we make him our trust. Thirdly, when we love him above
all. Fourthly, when we fear him. Fifthly, when we rejoice in him. Sixthly,
when our hearts are thankfully affected to him, making him their song and
praise. This is to have him for our God, when we know nothing, trust in
nothing, love, fear, rejoice in nothing, when our hearts are thankful above
all to him. To speak a little to the seuerals: We cannot have God our God,
till we come to know him in Christ: ignorance does Ephesians. 4.18
estrange us from God, and knowledge does acquaint us with him. This Paul
prays for in the behalf of the Colossians, 1.10. that they might be filled
with the knowledge of God, the spirits of their mind being opened, to look
toward him. Even as our image in the glass does look to us from whom it is
reflected; so Gods Image in us does make the eye of our minds view him, the
author of it in us. Now this knowledge considers of God two ways, either
simply apart from al other respect, and thus it conceiueth a spiritual
essence, in respect of his properties, or persons into which this divine self
same nature is distinguished, the Father, Son, and Spirit, al of them having
the same spiritual nature, as if I and you with some third man, might be
supposed all to have but one and the self same soul and body, being distinct
persons. Or else it considers God, as made manifest in our Nature, for Jesus
the Son, having one, and the same Nature with the Father, has taken such a
soul and body as we have (sin excepted) to fellowship of his person, and
thus is become Mat. 1.23
Emmanuel, God with us, or God 3. vlt.
manifested in our Nature, in which humane Nature God the Son suffered death
for us, in which likewise he manifested his Divine power, raising it up,
glorifying it in heaven; so that he who was dead in his humane Nature, is now
alive in it for ever, having swallowed up death into victory. Thirdly, it
considers God manifested in Christ, as he is become our God by Covenant, in
regard of such things which his faithful mercies do work for us. He in Christ
is our Iustifier, our Sanctifier, that helps us against the remnants of our
corruption; our Redeemer that delivers us from all troubles; the God that
cares for us, gives us every good gift, blesses us in our estates, feeds
us, gives us and all his beloved ones sleep, defends us from al evil,
keeps us by his power to salvation, is the beginner and ender of all his good
graces in us. Now how short are we in this point, we are like infants in a
manner newborn, they are kept by the loving Parent, from fire, water, are
fed, laid to sleep, made ready, unready; shifted in their escape, but they
know not who does all this for them. So does our heavenly Father by us in
Christ, but (he knows) little understanding have we of him: for though God be
light it self, a Spirit which brightly sees all things through heaven and
earth, to whose pure shine the Sun is darkness, yet the weakness of our sight
is such we cannot look against it: as the Bat and Owl cannot endure to see
the bright beams of the Sun in the firmament; you must therefore take notice
of your spiritual blindness, and come unto him that sells eyesalue, Reave.
3.18
that has the spirit of illumination, which opens the eyes of the blind, and
cry to him for mercy. Why if your eyes were sore bloud-shot, etc. your eyes
wherewith you see but one another, creatures like your self, you would seek
out for them, and wash with strongsmarting waters, but you would restore them;
will you not seek to your God in Christ for to restore that sight of your
spirits wherewith you see him, and the things of your peace within the vale,
even in the heavens? nay, you must be ashamed you take knowledge no more of
your God through the whole day. If our children when we are by them, should
through rudeness and carelessness not once cast a look to us, as
acknowledging our presence, would we take it at their hands? might not every
one say, these children they are better fed then taught? they are thus
graceless. Let us apply it to our selves, who serve our God and Father little
better, and you must set upon this suite with better hope, because God has
promised to us, this is his covenant, we Ier. 31.34
shall know him from the greatest to the least of us: the eye looking on a
thing becomes one with it in some manner. But least I grow too tedious, I
come to the second, we must trust on him, hanging all our hopes on his mercy
and truth toward us. And these two go together; men sometime the better we know
them, the lesser we trust them, and that deservedly, but Psalm. 9. Psalm. 9.10.
such as know God, shall trust in him, and who so reposeth al his confidence in
God, he takes him in so doing for his God: as the Scripture in this respect
says, the covetous man is an idolater, takes his money for God; because he
puts his trust in uncertain riches, his wealth is a strong tower in his
thoughts: and he that trusts in the creature, with-draweth his heart from
God (says the Prophet) teaching that our hearts are united to God, Jer. 17.3.
when the affiance of them is set on him. Now though we should live by faith
Gal. 2.20
on the Son of God, trusting upon him for the giving and maintaining of all
our good both temporal and eternal, leaning upon him for defense, and
deliverance from all evils spiritual, yea, and corporal, 1. Pe. 5.7.
casting all our cares on him, Phil. 3.3.
having no confidence in the flesh, but rejoicing in Christ Jesus, though this
is our duty, yet we are exceeding weak in faith, and full of unbelief: this
will appear by our want of fear at the thretnings of Gods word and by our
carelessness, which makes us loosly look after his promises. Did we believe
such threatening, (if you live after the flesh you shall die), Romans 8.11.
we would tremble when we favor our selves in our own ways? the devils
believe and tremble. Again, trusting ciuilly in man's word or bond, we do seek
them carefully, and are glad when we have got the^: and as we say, we write
upon them, to have so much at such a day, upon a substantial man's word or bond
given us. But Gods word that promises all good things in this life, as well as
the life to come, his seals we seek not after them, we are not glad of
them, which is a sign of our great unbelief in them. Secondly, by the resting
of our hearts in outward things, and our being disquieted when we want them, is
a token that our hearts are unbelieving; while we have means and good
likelihoods of this or that, we are well, let these fail, we are troubled:
which shows that we rest not on the word of God, which is as sure in the
want of all things, as in abundance, but lean on such things as we see and
have at hand. Suppose a man had crutches under his arms, but leaned not at all
to them as he goes, take them away, he walks as before. So we, did not we
trust and lean on the things seen, but on God who is not seen, but by the
eye of faith, we should go as upright, when al things to sense speak the
contrary, to that we believe, as when our feeling is fed abundantly, hoping
against hope. Thirdly, did we rest on God, and trust to him, (as who is all in
all) we would seek to him for his blessing, more then for means, which by his
blessing do this or that, whereas we labor not to make him sure to us, but to
get the means, and then we think all is well with us. Now when you find your
unbelief, you must make it odious to your self by such like considerations.
Shall I seek after the word of a man, sometime, to secure but a twenty
shillings matter, and shall I not seek after the precious promises of my God?
shall I trust to a man promising this or that, and shall I not trust my God,
who is truth it self, that cannot lie? will not a substantial man think
much, if I take not his bare word? and shall I not trust my Lords word and
seal and oath (he has sworn to bless us with all blessings in Christ)
unless he leave me a pawn also? Then in the third place, when you find your
unbelieving heart trouble you, Heb. 12.2.
you must look to Christ, who is the author and finisher of your faith,
speak to him. Thou have begun, thou must finish. Increase my faith, I believe,
help my unbelief. The third duty is, you must love him, for love we know
makes the man and woman one, so it does couple us to God. We must labor to
say from our hearts, Lord, what have we in heaven but thee, Psalm. 73.25.
or in earth in comparison of thee. Now though we think we do love him, and
do so, yet it is weakly, and above all things we had need to mende in this
behalf. Try your love and then judge of it. Those you love, do you not love
to be present with the^, as you two one with another? if one of you be forth of
town, do you not think long til you meet together? are (...) but should be
affectioned toward every stranger; if she should not care how long she were
absent from him, but think her self best while they were asunder; if she
cared little how her loving husband were offended, casting that at her heel
which he takes to heart, were not this shameless behavior in her? and shall
not we be ashamed to show no less want of love to thee, to whom our souls are
married in Christ? Then you must turn you to God, confessing that your hearts
are full of harlotry and false-loue. You can love your selves, you have
affection enough to the things of this world, the gifts of God, and that the
meanest, more then the giver, as harlottes to rings, gold, bracelets, more then
the senders, and beseeching him to purge your hearts of this, and fill you with
his love: for this is his promise, I will circumcise your hearts, and make you
love me with all your hearts. The fourth thing is the fear of God: Sanctify
the Lord in your har^s, make him your fear: Esa. 8.13.
Mat. 10.28.
fear to offend him, who when the body is killed can cast the soul into hell
fire. We should reverence his excellent Majesty, and dread to offend him,
because he has been gracious to us, and has power to do with us what ever
he pleases. And with good reason were there from whom we hold our house and
stock, so that he could turn us out of all at his pleasure: would we not
walk very circumspectly, fearing that which might alienate his favor from us?
Again, if the Majesty of a mortal man does affect us (as of the King) with
reverence; how much more should we be affected with the glorious Majesty of
the most high God? Now you must know your hearts are much void of this also.
The thing speaks it self. Do you not feel when in prayer you are to speak
to God, that there is no reverence in your hearts beseeming so high a Majesty?
Do you not feel the want of dread at his judgments, which so long have been
upon us, and still houer about us and what awe is in us, making us fearful by
sin to displease him? Alas, presumption, security, hardness of heart, these
weeds grow so hic, that we can scarce discern ye fruit above named. In the
third place the^ you must work this want upon your heart, as the former,
saying: If I were in the presence of some great personage, and should carry my
self rudely, without due respect, would I not blush? shall I not be ashamed I
have no more reverence when I come before thee, Iam. 2.19.
O thou God of glory? so for want of dread shall the beasts tremble when the
Lion roreth: yea shall the devils tremble to think of thy judgment? O shall I
be senseless and no whit moved? So for want of awe in regard of breaking Gods
law: shall I dare as well to take a bear by the tooth, as to break the Kings
law, where especially it threatens life, limme, or liberty? and shall I not
be afraid to trespass against thy ^^^tutes, the breach whereof is punishable
with eternal death. Is there none but thee that we may make bold with shall I
be so foolish as to fear sickness, poverty, men's displeasure, and not be
afraid of sin, and thy wrath which is Heb. 12. vlt.
a consuming fire? what were this but with little children to be scarred with
a harmless bull beggar, and to be dreadlesse of fire and water. In the last
place, you must look to God in conscience, how this affection is perverted in
you, confessing to him that you can fear the face of men, things that are, or
seem hurtful to your selves: you can ^emean your selves reverently toward
such as are great amongst me^, but toward him you find great want; and go
pray him to work it in your hearts, who has couenanted to put his Ier. 32.40
fear in our hearts, so that we shall not depart from him. Fifthly, to have God
for your God, binds you to rejoice in him: Phil. 2.4.
Rejoice in the Lord, again I say rejoice. Ie^. 9.23. Psalm. 37.4.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire? let
not the rich man rejoice in wealth, the strong man in strength, the wise man in
wisdom, but in this, that he knows me, says the Lord. For what we make
our chief joy, that is our God, for the heart rests chiefly in that with
which it is most delighted. Now what is more equal, then that we should solace
our selves in him, with joy unspeakable and glorious, who has delivered us
from death sin and Satan (who as Gods executioner has power in sin and
death) in him who is a light and a shield, that is a fountain of all good, and
a defender of us from all evil; one able to maintain all the good spiritual
and corporal which we have, and given us whatsoever is wanting: but if we
mark our hearts, their joy is much depraved, (so that Solomon says not
without cause, Eccles. 2.2.
our laughter is become madness); for our hearts are not cheary this way: tell
the^ of the precious benefits are given us in Christ, pardon of sin, peace,
the beginning of everlasting life through the work of grace, hope through
Christ of the heavenly Kingdom; why they can hear this and be so far from
leaping within us, that we can hardly discern them any whit moved. Nay, if we
mark them the better, we shall see, that when we would hold them to the
remembrance of such things, till they have broke loose from us, they are not in
their kind, cannot be lightsome; as if God were the dampe of our mirth, not
the matter of our exulting gladness. Now when you observe, that you cannot
rejoice in the Lord, you must shame your souls, by laying before them their
own course in other matters. If I see some toy and hear some jest, I cannot
contain my self; if I hear some goodness, or meet with prosperus success
in my worldly affairs, I can be pleasant enough; if I be passing the time
with my friends at their courteous inuitements, it goes on merrily, deadness
and vncomfortablenes I feel them not for the time. Fie, shall I have laughter
even till I tickle at a feather at some merry conceit, at good news of some
earthly business, and shall I not rejoice in the Gospel of God in good news
from heaven touching the salvation of my soul? Again, shall I laugh and be
cheary in being with my friend, and shall I be all amort when I draw near my
God? Shall I be glad of acquaintance with a man, and not be glad yt I know my
God in Jesus Christ, which is life everlasting? Job. 1.17.1.
The wicked they exult, in serving sin and Satan to their destruction, shall I
be without joy in serving my God, who gives of his free grace to me life
everlasting? O our rejoicing is earthly, little joy of the holy Ghost dwells
with us. We are like such as are sick of light phrensies, they ^ill laugh at
their shad^ow, at their own phan^es, but can see nothing ^^to, nay, distaste
that which sauoreth of right reason. As therefore against the former, so
against this also we must fight the good fight of faith looking to him, who
has said he will make our hearts glad in his house, who has promised to send
his spirit to us, that our joy may be full; praying him that in this regard
hi^ Kingdom may come and that he would rectify this affection in unto make
us able to tak^ comfort in that which is matter of true reio^^cing. Now for
praysi^^ God, and thankfulne^^ to him, we have this commandment, Phil. 4.6.
in all things give thanks, yea in evils; John 1. Psalm. 104. end.
shall we receive good things from God, and not evil, the Lord has given, the
Lord has taken, blessed be his name. No wonder, for medicine is as good in
due season, as the delightfullest dainties. Now our inward and outward crosses
are by Gods graces made wholesome physic to purge out our corruptions, and
make us partakers of the quiet fruit of righteousness and holiness. Yea, our
hearts should be so thankfully affected, that like a fire it must break forth
and inflame others. My soul, my heart, al within me praise the Lord, Psalm.
104, 35. My soul praise the Lord, praise ye the Lord. He does stir up
himself, and provoke others, as the Cock that first clapping his wings about
his body, rowseth up himself, and after crowing awaketh others. Otherwise
common terms of thankfulness without affection are a court-holy-water (as we
say) which our God that looks at heart and raines does not respect. And truly
there is great cause, look at benefits past (eaten bread must not be
forgotten, thanks must still be green); does not the particular deliverance,
when many fell on each hand of you, bind you still to thankfulness. If all
things you enjoy, you know the temporal blessings, as tolerable health, good
name and reputation, freedom from suite and service, ability rather to ^e
helpful then chargeble, the domestical peace, your liberties without fear of
restraint, all of them in their place no small matters. Will you consider
spiritual blessings, that which you have down in hand is as great a work of
his mercy, as the glorious sta^e you look for hereafter. Is not the Lords
work more admirable in his first making, and quickening the infant in the
womb, then in feeding it there, drawing it forth, and nursing it up to full
stature? so his begetting us who were dead, to be aliu^ (though yet in the
womb of our mother the Church) is more then the bringing of us to a perfect
man in Christ Jesus, when now we are newborn babes in him. And though it
seem strange, yet it is only in this respect, because we are like infants who
live, but know not in comparison that they live; so we having in small measure
that Spirit, which teaches us to know the things bestowed on us, know not how
great that grace is, which is already showed us. It is no small thing when we
were dead in ignorance, and the lusts of our ignorance to be quickened with the
life of God, in knowledge, righteousness and holiness, when we were enemies
to be made friends, yea sons and daughters. The Apostle doubts not to
reason from this (as the greater) to life everlasting (as the lesser) To. 5.10.
If God, when we were enemies, has reconciled us by his death, how much more
will he save us with perfect salvation of soul and body by his life, that is,
by putting forth the power of his Spirit, now he lives to die no more. These
then are great things: his acquitting you from the sin and death for Christ
the su^^ties sake; his sending his Spirit into your heart, and giving you part
in the first resurrection. Beside these, you must remember what adversities he
has helped you in, how he has eased the yoke of your corruptions, which have
had more power in you, then now they have; yea, what evils he has put by you.
Have you not been tempted in ^his or that kind, it is because God in mercy
would not lead you into temptation. Yea this is in some respect more to be
acknowledged the^ victory when you are tempted. For, not to be tempted is
more immediately from God and less in man's power, then to prevail against
temptations. For nothing does ouercom us without our will, but without our
wills, God does lead us into trial; for he knows we would taste little of
these, if it were in our power to be our own caruers. You must be as
thankful for such sins which God has not let you know, as for those which he
has pardoned in you, having committed them. Whither do you think you are
bound to praise God more, if he restore you when you are sick; or if he keep
you, so that you feel no sickness? Now if you weigh what things God has
prepared for you, they are such as never eye saw, never entered fully into the
heart of mortal man. Compare the state of Prince Henry in his Queen Mothers
womb with his condition at full age in all the glory of his Fathers Court,
there is a broad difference which may fitly resemble the diversity of our
present and future condition. We are borne sons and daughters of God, heirs
apparent to the Kingdom of heaven: but while the Church does here travel of
us, we are pent up in dark cloisters, and annoied with much stincks of sin
in ou^ selves and others, but hereafter our state shall be altogether
lightsome, happy and glorious. So that we may well say to God, O how great is
the good which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! How great things
do thou work before the sons of men, for such as hope on thee? You see
then how for things past, for things present, and things God has in store for
us, we are bound to be thankful. Now if you ask what it is in which our
thankfulness stands. I answer; first, in a hearty acknowledgement of Gods
goodness to us in all things, with conscience of our own unworthiness, as
who are less then the least of his mercies. Compare Genes 32.10.33.5. 1. Chapter
29.14 Moses example, Exodus 18.8.
Secondly, we must tell of Gods kindness, that we may glorify him before
others; come, I will tell you (says David) what God has done for my soul.
Thirdly, it does make us cast about, what we may return to God in way of
thankfulness, Psalm. 116. What shall I give the Lord for all his benefits unto
me. Fourthly, it will make us accuse our selves, if we be backward in duty.
Thus we see when we receive any more special kindness from our frinds,
first, our inward affections do acknowledge and intertaine it gladly.
Secondly, we tell what such an one has done for us. Thirdly, we will think
how we may requite him, or testify our thankfulness at the least toward him.
Lastly, we challenge our selves (if time go on, and no token of our good will
be returned) as to blame that forget so great courtesy as was showed to us. Now
then that you have heard what it is to be thankful, what good reason we
have; we must lay our selves to this rule, and we shall find we come as short
here, as in those aforenamed. O we are horribly unthankful! what good
blessings do we receive, not once casting a look to the donour of them. When
we are kept in the night, our houses from fire, breaking into, etc, when
refreshed with sleep, when kept al day in our out-going and incommings, when
fed, do we acknowledge our God heartily in these, yet it is he that
watches, or in vain they keep the City; it is he that rocketh us asleep,
and draws the courtaine of the night about us; he gives sleep to his
beloved, Psalm. 137. It is he that wardeth about us all day, keeping us in our
ways, Psalm. 120. He opens his hand, and like a great housekeeper gives us
our daily bread. If in earthly things which we see, and taste, we cannot
praise him, what taking shall we be found in about heavenly, when you have
your daily sins forgiven you in Christ; when you are kept from the sin of your
own heart, the corrupt examples of worldly men, the spiritual wickednesses that
fight against us; when you go in spiritual peace from morning to night, which
alone is a gift passing understanding, Phil. 4.7.
do you acknowledge God with affection toward him in these things? it is he
that shifts us out of the scapes of our corruption, washing us in the blood of
his Christ from the filth of our sin; he forgiueth us every day our
trespasses; it is his power, 1. Pet. 1.5.
in which as in a tower, we are kept safe against all our enemies unto
salvation. He is the God of peace, the Prince of peace in Christ, who stilleth
the^^ accusing, and subdueth the rage and usurpation of sin in us: we are
like infants, that have much done about them, but know not who does it, take
no knowledge of them. Our God does carry us on in the arms of his tender
mercy. But alas, little do we understand of him. In benefits received often,
I mean not meat and drink, but many other which in the course of the day are
given us of God.
our spirits do not once look up to him, but as swine take the mast, so do
we our blessings: or if we do any thing in way of thankfulness, how ouerly do
we turn over this duty? our affections and inclinations more bent another way,
the^ to that we have in hand, even the thankful praising of our God: we serve
him as our children serve us, when they come in to us from their play, and have
got something of us they wanted, away they go without look or leg to us; but
if they know we will have it, then they do them in some fashion, but so, as we
may see their heart is in their game abroad more then their duty: so for
speaking what our God has done for us, (thankfulness will not slip over a
benefit received) when do we with delight tell of his kindness? When do we
beat our heads, not suffering our temples to rest till we have given our God
some argument of our thankfulness? Alas, we use our God, as if it greatly
mattered not how he were dealt with. Now then take words to your selves,
condemning from your hearts this grievous sin. Say if a man do bid me to
supper once a quarter, I thank him then, when I meet him after, I thank him of
my last being with him, I tell what kind welcome, what good cheer he made
me, bid him home again, check my self if I forget him. But if some greater
matters be bestowed on us, how kindly do we take them, how do we love to
tell of them, how do we yield our selves up to them to be at their commands
to the utmost of our abilities. Shall I thank him that gives me a supper in
love, and tell of his loving entertainment, be ashamed if I make no
neighbourly requital? and shall I not be affectionately thankful to my God,
who gives me all my daily bread; yea, who feeds my soul with himself in
Jesus Christ (here is my body, my blood) that I might live for ever? Shall I
not tell of those fined wines, those fat things even of my God, broken in his
body and soul with sorrows, sheadding his precious blood, wherewith my
unworthy soul has been fed and feasted? Shall I for some small kindness
tell a man I am his to be commanded? and shall I not resign my self to my
God, who has paid my debt, and purchased me a new stock, even the hope of
eternal life with his precious blood? shall I blush upon some more unthankful
part to man, and not be ashamed of unthankfulness toward God? What? shall I be
worse to my God, then an Ox or an Horse is to his owner? If I should show one
exceeding great love, and he should not at all regard me, or return me some
common countenance, could I endure it? Thus then turn your selves to God, I am
become worse to thee, then the whelps that feed under my board are to me:
they will open and fawn in their kind on me, but my heart has no power to
be thankful to thee, to praise thee. O thou who requirest of me in all things
to give thee thanks: and have promised to write thy commandments in my heart,
put into my heart a law of thankfulness, O thou quickening spirit, quicken my
soul this way: labor for thankful hearts: God asks us but this as a rent
for all his blessings bestowed on us: I will deliver thee, and thou shall
praise my name, Psalm. 50.15. We will not forfait things to men for not
payment of rent: let us not give God cause to reenter and strain upon us, and
all we have, for not magnifying and praising him. Thus if my God help you to
stir up your hearts to repentance, and to surrender your hearts to him by
eying him, trusting on him, loving him, rejoicing in him, by making him your
fear, by praising him with spirit, word, and work: then happy shall you be.
If new plagues break forth, you shall have comfort in the hottest: and if you
labor to see how far your hearts are out of frame, in their confidence,
love, fear, joy, thankfulness, in regard of the impenitent hardness, and
impudency that is in them; for they cannot blush for that God knows by them,
though our ears will glow on our heads, if men know ought reproachful by us.
If you labor to find this out, and then in sight of your misery, look to
Gods promise, who has promised to give you a new heart, a tender heart, in which
his commandments shall be written by the finger of his spirit, then you shall
see this course will neither let you be idle nor unprofitable; yea it shall
return you much comfort and true peace: in life and death wise men will take
the sour with the sweet, and the world is not gotten without pains taking;
therefore if it seem to have any bitterness, or to require labor, you must
not be dismayed, I will promise you it is but brackish on the top, the deeper
you go, you shall find it the sweeter.

Your loving friend, PAVL BAYNE.

ANOTHER LETter written by Master Paul Bayne.
MY Christian friend if I had sooner known of your heaviness, I would before
this have written unto you. For the more arguments we have of love borne us by
Gods children, the more testimonies we have of his favor toward us. It
pleased God in December last, to change his hand toward you, and to touch you
in your wife, whom now he has again visited, and I hope all with both your
co^forts. Truly our God (through Christ Jesus is so merciful, yt all things
are sanctified by him unto our good, all afflictions though for the present not
joyous, yet they bring us afterward the quiet fruit of righteousness. These
evils which here ever and anon are present with us they are fitly compared to
wayward and touchie guests, which while they stay, watch every officer, but
when they depart, they pay freely. So it is with these, they oftentimes
disquiet the frame of the whole soul, but when they go away they leave
increase of grace, of faith, of patience, of experience, that the soul says
well, it is good I knew these things. But the present working of sorrows
seems often far otherwise: for in stead of increasing in faith, our faith
seems to be shaken and weakened, rather then otherwise; and in stead of
breeding patience and holiness, our souls do discover more impatiencie,
rebellion, more unholiness every way. Now the soul thinks when thus it is
shaken in belief, how do these crosses confirm faith? and when such evil
dwelling in us does break out, how (says the soul to it self) do
afflictions beget the quiet fruit of righteousness? I will answer you these
questions familiarly: when faith is shaken by evils befalling us, you ask how
it is confirmed? I answer you by a double comparison: When a link burns
dim, to help the light, we knock it, being beaten to any thing it seems
almost to go forth; yet this beating it, does cause it cast light far more
clearly. Again, how does the shaking of a tree by stormy blasts settle the
root and the tree more firmly, though for a while it threaten the downfall?
Conceive of these, and you may understand, how faith though it seem to be
cast down, yet tried by tentations it comes to be strengthened. Now then if
you ask, how they bring forth increase of righteousness, seeing you see more
unrighteousness break from you by occasion of the^, then you have observed in
your self heretofore. When a vessel of any liquor, has mud and dregs settled
in the bottom, it must be stirred, that which seemed pure must be made
muddie before it can be cleansed: even so his troubling of us, vessels full of
uncleanness, is the way whereby God does cleanse us. Now if God be so
tenderly present by us, as it pleases him ere-while to be, it falls so out
that much gold, many precious graces are discerned, which we before could not
discover: and these are such sweet sowers, so pleasantly tempered, that the
grief is not so bitter, as the working of grace in us is delightful. But what
way soever, calamities do not so hurt us, as scarre us; us who are loved of
God, and called home according to his purpose. Thus wishing your peace, and
hoping yt all shall turn to good, the good of you both, I cease to trouble you.

FINIS.

