THE BAYNES OF AQVISGRANE, The I. P^^^ and I. Volume, INTITVLED VARIETY.

Containing Three Books, in the form of Dialogues, under the Titles
following, Viz.

PROFIT, PLEASVRE, HONOR.

Furnished with diverse things, no less delightful, then beneficial to be
known, and observed.

Related by ROG. BAYNES GENT. a long Exile out of England, not for any
temporal respects.

Qui nihil sperat (...) (...) at Augus^^ (...) Germany. M.DC.XVII

The Printer to the Reader.
THIS present Volume, and the rest that are to follow, though they have not
come to the Press till now, yet have they been written some years ago, in the
time of the late Queen Elizabeth.

QVI NIHIL SPERAT, NIHIL DESPERATE. printer's or publisher's device

THE GENERAL PROEME MADE BY THE RELATOR OF THIS WORK, Unto the first Part
thereof, entitled VARIETY, Dedicated in the Names of the Authors themselves,
unto the future Posterity of ENGLAND.
NOT only now, but also for the time to come, some in ENGLAND may be taken to
be Learned who are not, and some may neither be Learned, nor yet taken so to
be. Again some may be Learned who are not so taken, and some others may be
both Learned and taken so to be; whereunto may be added a fifth sort of such,
as take themselves to be Learned, when indeed they be not. And unto this last
sort of Men, for certain reasons (not needful here to be related) this Work
is but reseruedly dedicated; I mean so far forth only, as they shall vouchsafe
to regard it: but principally and directly it is presented unto the first and
second sorts of men above mentioned; that is to say, it is directed first unto
those who be neither Learned, nor yet taken to be so, to the end they may be
able to know somevvhat; and next unto those others who be indeed Learned,
though they take not themselves so to be; who also may esteem it as presented
to them, to the end they may better their supposed Knowledge: For which
respects I presume th^^ this Work vvillbe grateful to them both.

And therefore if any of those others, unto whom it is not directly dedicated
should perhaps go about to calumniate the same, or any part thereof; he may
with more reason and reputation save that labor: because neither is the Work
dedicated unto him, nor yet composed by men of his rank, or degree in Learning,
but by certain curious Trauailers, as the follovving discourse will more
plainly declare, who being indeed Courtiers, make no profession of any other
Science but Humanity only: and therefore for a man of his skill to make any
competence at all with these, or to control or blemish their Endeauours, this
he ought not in reason to do, nor yet permit others to do it. And so much also
the less, because in Dialogues it is not to be expected, that all which is
written, is to be continuate doctrine, but that some Interlocutions are to
enter betwixt; the which being passed over, then the matter of doctrine
returns again.

This trace has Count Baltazar Castiglio in his Courtier, and Boethius in his
Consolation directly follovved; and Plato in his Compositions more then any
other. The which Interlocutions though perhaps they may not fall out still to
be so pleasing as the doctrine it self; yet so long as they be not
unproportionable to the matter which they concern, they may be permitted to
pass: because when all is done, he who will have good store of corn, must
be content vvithall to take some chafe. Yet I cannot well deny, but that some
motions I have had, to diminish here and there some discourses of the
Interlocutors, had I not considered vvithall, that one thing it is to publish a
Book, and another thing to publish but a Pamphlet; and also a Book or Books
of such particular titles, as without some amplification made, some of them
do render of themselves but small discourse of matter.

And therefore I have resolved to let the Books pass with all, and the very
same speeches, which the Authors themselves, have upon different occasions,
interposed: because it will easily be considered, that Argumentations made by
word of mouth, cannot so closely be compacted together, as may things more
considerately set down by pen; though I hope it will appear vvithall, that
comparably unto other English Works, no want of doctrine will hear be
found. All which is done for the instruction of those only, who albeit they
do not aspire to be counted Learned, may yet have a desire to know the scope
of all Sciences, besides much Morality, and some Economy also, which they may
find here. So as with a fevv days reading they may know much, and with the
price of one only volume quit the cost of many. To conclude, diverse questions
no less ple^^^^^ then profitable, not handled in these two Volumes (as namely
touching Policy, and many other curious matters) are reserved for the other
Volumes ensuing; to the end it may be seen in the mean while, how
gratefully these first will be accepted.

Qui nihil sperat, nihil desperate. THE BAYNES OF AQVISGRANE. The I. Part, and
I. Book, INTITVLED PROFIT.
The Dedication of the Relator, to the Professors in England of THRIFT.
DIVERSE there are amongst the variety of men, who though they desire to have
Wealth do not know how to get it. Others there are, who though they know how to
get it, have not either the patience, or will to take the pains to do it. And
other some also there are, who when they have it either left them by others, or
gotten by their own industry, do not know how to keep it. So that the way unto
Thrift, is not only to get, or to have Wealth gotten, but also to know how to
govern and conserve it: not couetously, above the stynt of their convenient
need, as diverse do; but temperately, proportionatly, and decently: since Thrift
ought to be the mean betwixt Liberality and Avarice, like as Liberality is the
mean betwixt Avarice and Prodigality; though yet by error or false
interpretation, the one of these is sometimes taken for the other. As the
covetous Gamester, by his continual loosing, either at Dice or Cards, may be
thought to be prodigal though he be not: And on the other side the thriuing
Merchant opressed at home with children more then he can well provide for, may
be taken to be covetous when he is not: Since, according to the old Saying, He
who has a daughter to marry, has need of money; and he likewise who has two
daughters to marry, has need of more; but he who has many daughters to marry,
has need of a great deal. The which to get, some do use public violence, and
these are commonly deprived thereof again (either they, or theirs) by the
special providence of God: and some others having got their wealth with equity
and upright dealing, do prudently conserve and spend it; and these be only
they, who may truly be termed Thrifty. Unto which sort there needs no more
to be said, because they have the Laws both of God and Men concurring with
them. And therefore unto those other two sorts of Getters before mentioned,
this first Book of the first Volume of my Relation, is only intended, who
though they pretend to be followers also of Thrift; yet is it no thriuing to
get and conserve their goods, by such culpable means, as assuredly rests
punishable, as well by divine, as by humane Justice.

Qui nihil sperat, nihil desperate. INTERLOCVTORS. Aquilonius. Fauonius.
Subsolanus. RELATOR.
THE Intentions of men being by the diversity of Discourse, and imbecility of
nature, subject unto mutation; a difficult thing it is to imagine, and much
more to determine, what resolution to make of purposes, and designs
premeditated; because no sooner is any one thing in terms to be resolved, but
straight there is wont to rise a kind of fear, that some error may be
committed therein. Whereupon I have eftsoons said to my self (since I accepted
the enterprise of this work in hand) that if I err in any thing, it would
seem to be in this, to have taken upon me to set down in writing the words of
other men's disputation and speeches, not put together perhaps with such care,
nor with that correctednes of style, as things better thought of, might have
been. Whereat, though I my self were present; yet was I no more but a
behoulder, as an allied Assistant by name unto one of the company, and chiefly
drawn thereto by my own curiosity, and for my private use only to keep in
record some remembrance of that which passed amongst them: gathering up so well
as my memory might serve me to do, and but one alone to collect all the
arguments of three disputers; making still this account with my self, that if
the matter fell not out to my lyking, nor to be worth my pains taken, then I
might keep my loss secret unto my self without any blame at all: and that if
it happened to fall out otherwise; then I might possibly get some further
recompense of thanks, by imparting the same unto others, such as would be glad
to see so many particularities of things, as this work contains, treated of
in their own language. So that now at last the weight of all that cogitation
o^ mine, is come to depend upon this other point: to wit, Whether my labor may
be any whit grateful unto others, or no, if not for the manner of handling
(which is but by the way of Conference) yet for the diversity of things here
handled? The which I will not undertake to determine, because I will not
preiudicate either the Readers, or the work it self: the one in respect of
the variety of men's Judgments, and the other in respect of my own interest,
not to censure that which has so voluntarily passed through my own hands.
And therefore as one well persuaded of the best, I will put these considerations,
as it were, in a balance, to counterpoise one another, and leave them to
strive as they will amongst themselves, whiles I begin to perform so much of
my duty as unto me belongs, by supplying the office of a true Relator.

Thou shall therefore understand, good Reader, that there happened of late to
meet together in the ancient City of Aquisgrane, three men of one nation,
and of one language, but of different Provinces, and of diverse dispositions.
The first a dexterous Northern-man, who being the conducter of a certain
Gentleman's son of those quarters, and a Politician by profession, was come
thither only for stipend and remuneration of his service, whom we will call for
the present by the name of AQVILONIVS, according to the title of the Climate
toward which he was borne. The second was a far borne Western-man, and by
profession a Protestant, but of the ciuiller sort, come thither only, as
travelers be wont to do, for curiosity to see the place, whom for the like
respect before alleged, we will call by the name of FAVONIVS. And the last a
middle dwelling Estern-man, who being a Catholic exiled, was come thither only
by reason of sickness, to take in that place the commodity of the Baynes (more
vulgarly called Bathes) and him we will call, for the former respect, by the
name of SVBSOLANVS. These three persons, being wont, at one of their lodgings,
to meet together often, were fallen one day into a more serious debatement
then at any time before. Whereupon my self (who was Judged in a chamber of the
same house) hearing them grow somewhat louder then they were wont to be,
resolved to go in unto them: and even as I was entering into the chamber, I
heard Aquilonius say these very words.

AQVILONIVS. The world being a wonderful machine of variety, of greatness, and
of admiration, contains in it diverse sorts of creatures, but all of them
conditioned and qualified like unto it self; that is to say, full of interest,
and rapine: the birds of the air by flying, the fishes of the water by
swymming, and the beasts of the earth by running, to catch and devour
whatsoever they can overtake: why then alone should man be blamed, for seeking
in like manner to provide for himself, as well as the rest; unless you would
think it convenient continually to strive against kind, as the Giants be said
by Cicero to have done, when they strove against the Heavens, the which would
be no small infelicity? Or that on the other side it should be good for us by
laboring all to be Angels here on earth, to derogate from the celestial
spirits their due, and to usurp unto our selves their blessedness before our
time, which I think may be done soon enough, when we ariue unto the place
where they be living: in the mean while, in such sort, and with such an
intermixture of cogitations and actions, as, not depriving us alltogeather of
the way to Heaven, we may not also loose the fruition of those benefits which
the world is still ready to bestow upon us.


FAVONIVS. Your manner of speech is somewhat extrauagant, but yet to make thereof
the most favorable construction, my meaning was not in that which I said a
little before to tax the world in such a general sort, as by this your answer
it seems you understand me to have done: but only to infer upon your own
words spoken in the behalf of your mentioned friend, that the world was like
to have enough to do, to satisfy the worldlines of such swelling spirits, as he
that thought himself to be another Mercurius. And this chiefly for only having
had the hap to vncipher a simple ciphered Letter, and no more: the which by
all likelihood, either a sollicitous Merchant, or a common Notarie might well
enough have been able to do, no less then he.


AQVILONIVS. Though you make but light account thereof; yet I do attribute much
unto the mind of such a man, who being so well persuaded of his own doing,
does redouble thereby the force of all his other sufficiency. The which alone
were able to prick him potently forward unto some notable degree of
Excellency, in whatsoever profession he should betake himself unto: since the
greatest operations hitherto done by any of the most famous men of the world,
have for the most part been seen to take their beginning from a good opinion of
themselves.


FAVONIVS So that, to be a notable well-weaner of himself, and his own
doings, you take to be a principal stimulator unto Excellency.


AQVILONIVS. I see as yet no contrary reason, why, to alter my opinion therein.


FAVONIVS. You put me in remembrance hereby, of a certain Grecian Prince
called Clitus, who for having overthrown by sea some three or four little
Barks, gloryed so much thereof, as he usurped the name of the God of the
Waters, and caused himself to be called Neptune.


AQVILONIVS. If Amasis the Egyptian had not had in him a great mind, and a
greater opinion of himself, and his own doings, then his fortune would seem
by birth to have allotted him, he had never risen to be King of Egypt.


FAVONIVS. That same art of rising, as I perceive by your words, is a very
principal and material point, which greatly occupies and troubles your mind.


AQVILONIVS. I know but few who either are not for the present, or have not
been contented heretofore, to trouble themselves sometimes with such
cogitations as these.


FAVONIVS. An old Philosopher being asked by such an aspiring wordling, as you
have spoken of, what Jupiter was doing in heaven? answered: He does nothing else
but make ladders for some to ascend, and some to descend by.


AQVILONIVS. And what of this, I pray you?


FAVONIVS. His blindness notwithstanding was such, as it rather increased his
folly the^ otherwise, by giving him occasion to perplexe himself about the
ascending ladder only, but nothing at all about the descending.


AQVILONIVS. I expect to hear the end of your intention.


FAVONIVS. My meaning herein is this, that such worldly cogitations, be for the
most part greater in the imagination, then they happen to prove in effect.


AQVILONIVS. Then belike you will resemble a worldly man unto King Ag^^^^ his
shoemaker, who was wont to make great shoes for little feet.

Here Subsolanus interrupting a little their talk, began to say thus.


SVBSOLANVS. In these mystical reckonings of yours, me thinks you pay one
another like as a soldier of Aegipt did, who only with the sound of his money
paid a brawling Cook, for the smell of his rostmeate; since what with variety,
and what with obscurity you determine of nothing.


AQVILONIVS. Indeed, as you say, we Northern borderers be very obscure
fellows, for that we call a Hare a Hare, and a Dog a Dog, when we talk
together in our own domestical language.


FAVONIVS. So that you leave, I perceive, unto me (said Fauonius) to answer
unto the imputed variety of our talk, as also to the not determining of our
things somewhat better. And therefore to follow our proposition a little more
strictly then before, I say now: That whereas worldlines transgresses most of
all in excess, if it be on your part amended, and temperately moderated, the
rekconing will be easily made up betwixt us.


AQVILONIVS. As though in such a man (said Aquilonius) as follows the world
attentively, there might not be tolerated, sometimes, an once of excess in his
actions, to get thereby a pound of credit.


FAVONIVS. This kind of merchandise I do not well understand.


AQVILONIVS. As for example, to commit some sort of excess, either in
extending somewhat too far the opinion of his own sufficiency, or by
undertaking the execution of some greater enterprise, then he is well able to
perform.


FAVONIVS. But what if his debility in either of these cases, should be after
discovered; would not this be rather a discredit, then a credit unto him?


AQVILONIVS. The disered it were like enough to be attributed to his attentive
forwardnes in the affairs of the world, and the credit, if any happen, would
fall unto himself, advancing him thereby not a little.


FAVONIVS. So that forwardnes in worldly affairs, you take to be a sufficient
warrant to excuse any moral error whatsoever.


AQVILONIVS. I do so indeed, Fauonius. But what if a man by loving the world
over well, should utterly loose himself, yet his worldlines will not so easily
loose herself in him.


FAVONIVS. It seems hereby you have not yet considered this other point, that
there is not scarcely any thing in the world to be found so dangerous to be
dealt withal, as worldlines it self, which as says an old Doctor of your
own School, in his book De Ciuitate Dei, leads men unto things that be
vain, hurtful, full of biting thoughts, perturbations, afflictions, fears,
foolish delights, discords, quarrels, wars, intrapments, wrath, enimity,
falsity, flattery, deceit, stealth, rapine, obstinacy, pride, ambition, envy,
slaughters of men, of parents, of friends, of kinsemen, cruelty, malignity,
carnalty, bouldnes, unshamefastness, violence, poverty, fornication, adultery of
all sorts, and other filthiness, which are not fit to be spoken of; sacrilege,
heresies, periuries, oppressions, calumniations, preuarications, false
testimonies, iniust Judgments, inforcements, theeuery, and such like. And
therefore not without cause is it elsewhere said, That the world, with her
worldlings, is an assembly of wicked men a slaughterhouse of good men, a
nourisher of vice, an oppressor of virtue, an enemy of peace, a friend of
contention and war, a sweet receptacle of wicked men, a bitter intertayner of
good men, a defender of lies, an inuentor of novelties, an unquietness of
ignorant men, a Martyrdom of evil men, a table of glottons, an oven of
concupissence, a Carybdes and a Scylla of suffocating thoughts: Whereupon it is
said further by another, that the world does hate those that do love it,
deceive those that trust it, persecute those that serve it, afflict those that
esteem it, dishonor those that honor it, and forget those who do most of all
remember it: Whose conversation is full of affliction, whose mirth full of
melancholy, whose pleasure full of remorse, whose consolation full of scruple,
and whose prosperity is full of fear: Liberal it is in promising, and scarce
in performing, producing many evils; and is the occasion of many miserable
effects, beginning without any prudence, and ending with bitter repentance. And
therefore it is to be beheld a far off, like a monstrous and ravenous beast,
least he that comes too near it, be devoured by it. For the more familiar
any man is with the world, the more perilous it is: using those men worse who
do favor it, then those who do abhor it: And to love it, and not to perish
in it, is a thing impossible, because making show of one thing it deceaueth men
with another, like as Iezabel would have deceived Iehu, 4. Reg. 9. showing to
him her fine platted head, but sought to hyde from him her further
abominations: So as many it deceaueth, and many also it utterly blinds.


AQVILONIVS. Then to begin with your self for one; the world me thinks would
seem to have also blinded you, in not letting you see whom you calumniate
herein. For who made the world, I pray you, that you will needs inueigh so
much against worldlings? and that with such great exageration, as you have
used, to impeach the same?

Here Subsolanus interposing himself betwixt them again, spoke in this
manner.


SVBSOLANVS. Not so ho^tly, Aquilonius: this matter would be talked of betwixt
you a little more calmely. And therefore to allay somewhat your earnestnes, a
convenient occasion of some little pause is proffered. We have now talked
standing a good while: let us therefore take these chaires and sit down, for
that this Conference I doubt me, may continue long. No ceremonies at all, I
pray you. In this lodging of mine, you must be content to be ruled by me. Take
you the patience to sit here, and you there: this other more uneasy seat you
shall give me leave to take to my self. And let this be our custom still
without any more ado, so often as hereafter we shall meet together, admitting
also this other allied Assistant of mine, to be present in the hindmost place,
to supply all occasions which may happen, and likewise for his own instruction
if he think good, to note down any thing that shall be said, for he has ink
and paper there by him: who to the end he may know, before hand, the scope
whereunto our Conference has to tend, and we also keep amongst our selves the
better account of our own endeavors, it will not perhaps be amiss, if I do
here begin (by your good leaves and liking) to set down some arguments fit to
be spoken of, during the twenty and seven days, which we have to abide in
this City. And because three things do chiefly present themselves to be here
considered, namely the Variety of the World, the Subordination thereof, and the
Folly of the same; therefore the first nine days we will treat of Variety; the
second nine days of Subordination; and the last nine days of the Folly of the
world. And so to begin first with the Variety of the World, because, touching
the same, there occur three things to be considered, namely Humane Nature,
the Mind of man, and the Body of man (from the which all Variety does proceed:)
therefore as concerning the first branch, we will the first three days debate
of Profit, of Pleasure, and of Honor: the second three days we will debate of
Ignorance, of Opinion, and of Science: and the last three days our Conference
shall be concerning Education, Travail, and Repose. And now because Aquilonius
a little before has so earnestly asked, who made the world; I my self will
take upon me this burden to tell it you, if you will but lend a little patience
to hear the same. So it is therefore that about the creation of the world, the
Poets first had two fictions, the one, that it was done by Demogorgon,
Eternity, Chaos, and Erebus; and the other that it was made by Jupiter, Hebe,
Prometheus, and Epimetheus, whereof the one is very foolish and fond, and the
other ridiculous. Also the Philosophers had diverse opinions thereof. Aristotle
was of the mind, that the world was ab aeterno, and that consequently it should
endure for ever. Democritus held, that it was created of inseparable Atomi: And
Plato says, that the primitive matter thereof was ab aeterno, but that the
world it self had a beginning, though it shall have no end. Finally our Deuins
(who teach the infallible truth, as well concerning this point, as other
matters of Faith) hold, that the world it self and the primitive matter thereof
were both created, and therefore subject to corruption: all I mean save the
Intellectual spirits, and Celestial bodies only, the which according to some
Deuines are eternized by the excellency of their forms, and also of the matter
that God has given them; yet so, as they are certainly to be transmuted, and
purified again, more then as yet they are. But whether the Intellectual, the
Celestial, and Terrestrial worlds were all created at once, some diversity of
opinions is found even amongst the Deuins themselves. For S. Augustine, S
Thomas, S. Bonauenture, and all the other Doctors of the Schools do generally
hold, that there was of them all, but one creation: and this is taken for the
only true opinion. Though otherwise out of the doctrine of some of the ancient
Fathers, some think it may be probably gathered; that God created first the
Intellectual, and Incorporeall world; that is to say, the Angels or
Intelligences. Secondly the Celestial corporal world, containing the Spheres
of all the Heavens: and thirdly this Elementall corporal world of ours, and
all things therein contained. Which doctrine may more particulerly be drawn out
of S. Damascen, de orthodoxa fide, lib. 1. cap. 14. then out of any of the
rest, where he says: that the good, and all good, and excelling good, that is
to say Almighty God, being Goodness it self, would not suffer his said Goodness
to remain sole in himself, without communication thereof to others; and
therefore created first the Angelical world, next the Celestial, and lastly
the Elementall world. And according to this sense, some also do expound the
words of S. John in his Gospel, the first Chapter, where he says, In mundo
erat, meaning thereby the Angelical world: Et mundus per ipsum factus est,
thereby understanding the Celestial world, Et mundus eum non cognouit, speaking
of this Elemental world of ours; whereof Christ himself also spoke when he
said, Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo. And here have I set down these
opinions concerning the creation of the world, to the end that the verity of
the first may be distinguished from the curiosity of the second. Now then to
descend unto the subdiuision of this Terrestrial world, and the contents
thereof. First it contains the soul of the same, with all the primitive
procreable matters: Secondly it contains the four Elements of Fire, Air,
Water, and Earth, the which are all corruptible, but yet of themselves perfect
and unmixed: Thirdly the mixed Meteors of Hail, Snow, and the like, the which
are imperfect: Fourthly the more perfect bodies of Metals and Stones, the
which are without life: Fifthly the vital bodies of Herbs, Plants, and Trees,
the which are without sense: Sixthly the sensible bodies of Fishes, Fowls, and
Beasts, the which are without Reason. And lastly it conteyneth the vital,
sensible, and also reasonable Creature, to wit Man, whom God has constituted
and appointed to be Lord and Master over all the rest.


AQVILONIVS. Not over all; for that the woods and deserts, he has constituted
for the habitation of wild beasts: The pastures and meddowes for the feeding
of cattle: The air for that habitation of birds: and the seas and waters for
the feeding of fishes.


SVBSOLANVS. This does not alter the case at all, for even as in a magnificent
Palace, although the Kitchen, Stable, and other like places are more to be
inhabited by the servants, then by the Lord and Patron himself; yet the
Palace cannot be said to be made for the servants, but for the Patron only.
And so we may likewise say of the universal World: That though the wild
Beasts, Cattle, Birds, and Fishes do inhabit a great part thereof; yet both
they themselves, and all the rest is made for the benefit of Man only. And that
this to be true, what more manifest argument can you have, then that out of the
woods and deserts the strongest Lions, the swiftest Tigers, and the most
monstrous Elephantes are taken, and tamed by Men, yea led up and down the
world under the obedience and government of Man? Out of the pastures and
meddowes he draws to his yoke, the most untamed Bull: and unto his bridle the
most fierce Horse; and unto his trap the most ravening Bear, or Wolf. Out of
the air he brings into his snares the wildest sort of birds, and makes
them after so tame, that though he turn them loose abroad they obey his voice,
and return again unto his lure. And out of the deepest seas he draws into
his nets innumerable sorts of fishes, yea the Whale himself falls many times
to his Prey, though he be sometimes so bigg, as an hundred men may stand hewing
with their axes the flesh of his back.


AQVILONIVS. Supposing it to be as you say, that man may do great things in the
world, yet this would still (me thinks) be understood, not by his contemning
the world, but by his more and more addicting himself thereunto; otherwise,
either he for ^is part should seem to have been made in vain, or the world it
self, touching temporal things, to have been made to small effect.


SVBSOLANVS. It is no mar^ell at all, though the world, with her temporal
small effects, do herin deceive you, since the same long before, with the only
effect of the beauty of the prohibited apple ^n Paradise, deceived our first
Mother Eve, before, by the Serpent, the reasons were yet given her to eat
thereof, Genesis cap. 3.


AQVILONIVS. My meaning is not to reach so high, as unto things done in
Paradise, for that the case since then is altered with us not a little; only
hereupon I ^elye me, and no more; That the temporal wealth of the world, to
those who live in the same, is not to be contemned.


SVBSOLANVS. To come down therefore ^omewhat lower; the world with her
glittering temporal wealth, like as now it deceaueth you; so heretofore, in
other kinds, it has done the like unto others, as it deceived the children of
Israel with the Moabites, Number. 25. Sampson with Dalida, Iud. 16. Acab with 400.
false Prophets, 3. Reg. 22. and Naboth with the false promise made by Acab of a
better vineyard then his own, 3. Reg. 21. the which while Naboth attended to
believe, he was not only deprived of his vineyard, but also of his life. So
that, the deceauing snares of the world, be Avarice, Pleasure, Sensuality,
Flattery, and Falsehood: whereof, the Avarice corrupts, the Pleasure
infecteth, the Sensuality wastes, the Flattery swells, and the Falsehood
betrayeth: according as in the world, it is easy enough so to do; for that the
world it self is like a City without a wall, a House without a door, a Ship
without a helm, a Pot without a cover, and a Horse without a bridle.


AQVILONIVS. None of all this though it cannot be well denied; yet we also our
selves, being more or less of the same condition that the world is, must be
contented to take the temporal evil with the good.


SVBSOLANVS. Some temporal good, no doubt, there is in the world, though more
be the evil, and more frequently appearing then the good it self. And
therefore in the world there is not any joy without dolor, any peace without
discord, any quietness without fear, any health without infirmity, any bread
without labor, nor any pastime without coffeehouse: and which is worse, each
where the wicked do persecute the good, as Cain did Abel, Genesis 4. Ismael,
Isaac, Genesis 21. Esau, Jacob, Genesis 27. Saul, David, 1. Reg. 19. and Iezabel,
Elias, 3. Reg. 19. who again for their labor, so soon as they, or any such
other, be waxen rich, the world does make them poor, and those that be poor,
it makes them rich, like as an Houre-glasse puts the sand out of one cruet
into another. So as no worldly man, can have in the world any animosity at all,
for the instability of his own estate, readier then to come down when he is
at the highest: and therefore, all the animosity of the world, remains with
virtue, whose state and dominion is high and full of generosity, while being as
it is in the world, yet it pretends nothing of it. For which respect, better
it were for a worldly man, to the end he may the more rely upon virtue, to quit
himself of his Wealth of his own accord, rather then to be corrupted thereby,
or to see it consume away of it self, to his own greater dolor in the end.


AQVILONIVS. This counsel of yours is not unlike unto his, who advised his
friend, because a tooth of his had bitten his tongue, to pull out the tooth
that did it, in revenge of the dolor received thereby; though yet of the two,
better a man may live without teeth, then he may live without wealth, which
must nourish the teeth, the tongue, and all the rest.


SVBSOLANVS. If men were not seen, to become by occasion of their wealth,
worse and worse, according ^s Pharao, Saul, and Jeroboam did, you might have
some color to defend it: but this being so, much better it were, to be unto
virtue a poor slave, then to be a rich freeman to the world: since the worldly
man, while he fol^oweth attentively his worldlines, does together with his
worldly Pride loose God, together with his worldly Envy loose his neighbor,
and together with his worldly Wealth loose himself: making a false show
thereby to have in him that virtue which he has not, and ^herby covering
withal those vices which he has, because he is ashamed of them. And yet for
all this, he is not able if he would, to rid himself of his worldlines, ^ntill
he become so bare again, as when into the world ^e entered first* and men, like
as if all before had been but a dream, he may well resemble himself unto
Jonas, who when he fell a sleep, he was covered with a green Yuy, and when he
waked, the Yuy being dried up, he was left wide open in the parching sun,
^on. cap. 4. Therefore ^ee in what unstable state, the mere worldly man does
^ue and wallow in the world, when he thinks himself ^t the best: though yet
still it cannot be denied, but that, as has been said before, all whatsoever is
in the world, either flying in the air, or swimming in the water, or residing
upon the earth, God, indeed, has made them all for man, and all to be under
his rule and commandment, as Lord and Master of all.


AQVILONIVS. Then if God at leastwise, who made this terrestrial world, have
appointed man, as you say, to be Master and Lord of all, what reason is it,
that he should not love the same?


SVBSOLANVS. Let Fauonius answer to this if he will, for that it most of all
concerns himself, I having already performed so much as my promise was.


FAVONIVS. I have not (quoth Fauonius) directly said as yet, that the World is
not to be loved, but that the excess in loving it is to be hated.


AQVILONIVS. By this which now you say, you affirm neither the one, nor the
other, since whatsoever is indifferent betwixt Love and Hate, cannot properly
be said either to be loved, or hated.


FAVONIVS. Perhaps in this you deceive your self, and so much the rather,
because a great Divine in his Book of Sentences says: That the world is both
to be loved and hated; meaning belike, that it is to be loved as the work of
the Creator, and to be hated as the instrument of temptation unto sin.


AQVILONIVS. Your citation of Divinity, knowing as I do of what School you be,
moves me not so much, as the reason it self of your argument; whereby still
you would make it a sinful thing, I perceive, for a man to live in the world,
like a worldly man; and yet not young men alone, but old men also, do by their
actions argue the contrary; while as none do prove more worldly then old men
themselves, who you know are the wiser sort of men.


FAVONIVS. For all your making so little account of my Divinity, a dangerous
point I can tell you, it is, to determine what is sin, and what is not, by
this or that man's proceeding only, be he young or old.


AQVILONIVS. I speak of multitudes both of the oldest and wisest sort of men,
and not of any one particular person alone.


FAVONIVS. Let them be as old and as wise as they will, it is nether their age,
nor their wit (but some other higher mystery) that can keep them from straying
out of the true beaten path of discipline.


AQVILONIVS. Then belike old men, and the wiser sort of men, do not know what
they do.


FAVONIVS. As though it were not possible for an old Wise man, sometimes to
play the Fool?


AQVILONIVS. If he play the Fool in any thing, it is in this, for not to
attend to the World, and to his Profit, so much as he ought to do; considering
the diverse wantes, to the which Age is daily more, and more subject, as Ease,
Service, Abundance of clothes, Extraordinary sustenance, and the like, which
cannot well be had without some store of money.


FAVONIVS. Nay rather the contrary, for that the more he attends in his age
to worldlines and Profit, the more he may be said to be ouerseene therein;
because having, as then, but a little while to live, the same world which
brings all, carries with it all away again. And therefore so long as old men
be moderate in their desires, and cheerful of Nature, their age, albeit it be
not accompanied with any great store of Wealth, will not be very noisome unto
them: but if they be immoderate and with all melancholy, their age will be
dolorous unto them, notwithstanding they be rich. And not only age, but youth
also it self, in that case, would be no less, because it is not the wealth,
but the mind which makes the well contented, either youth or age.


AQVILONIVS. Me thinks in this account you rest deceived much, since of the
two, the immodest Poor man, who by reason of his bouldnes can shift for
himself well enough, would seem better able to support his age then may the
modest Poor man, whose shamefastnes may be an occasion to make him endure much
want. Besides that, being on the one side afflicted with necessity, and on the
other side with fear of his approaching death, he cannot but pass a most
miserable age. And therefore I do repute the having of wealth, to be a very
necessary thing, not only for all sorts of men, but chiefly for old men.


FAVONIVS. Yet it seems that in this point you forget your self greatly,
since old men be of nature so covetous. that when they have wealth, they be
loath to spend it: so that it were almost as good not to have it, as to live
besides it, and to feel the affliction of poverty, no less then poor men
themselves do, or rather more then they, by reason of the care and solicitude
that rich men have to keep their wealth from being robbed or purloyned from
them, which the poor old men be void of. So that Poverty and Age would better
seem to agree together, then age and welthines; and the rather because when
the hour of death approaches, the poorer sort of men have less anxiety to
leave their poverty, then have the more wealthy to forsake their riches.


AQVILONIVS. You please me with this point very well, and say in effect as I
would have you: for that an old man without money, may be likened to a soul
without a body. And therefore no marvel if he desire every hour to be rather
out of the world then in it: And so much the more, because such a poor and
needy old man carries for the most part his eyes in his pocket, his ears in
his belly, his teeth in his girdle, and his legs in his hands, which is but a
miserable state to live in. All which myseries may in an old man that is welthy
be supplied, by having others to read and write for him, without using his
spectacles: and also by having others to tell him what a clock it is, without
aiming at his dinner time by his hungry stomach: Likewise to have others to cut
and carue his meat for him without carrying about him any knife of his own:
And lastly by having others to bear him abroad either in his chair or his
coach; without using the help either of staff, or crutches: and therefore of
the two, young men might better want the wealth of the world, then old men;
though yet on the other side a young man without money may in a contrary
similitude to that before of an old man, be likened to a body without a soul,
wishing rather in that case to have never come into the world, then so to live
in it. And therefore for ought I can perceive, it is necessary for youth as well
as for age, to attend also unto Worldlines and Profit, some by one kind of
trade, and some by another. And he who has no trade, nor reuenew to live by,
may usurp the title of a Physician, or else of a Lawyet, for that these men
get money by bare words only, if others do but conceive an opinion of them,
though they have no skill at all.


FAVONIVS. Your counsel were good, and sound if it would work effect in
deeds, so well as it seems to do in words: but though an unskillful Physician
may sometimes get money, by practicing with men less skillful then himself;
yet how an unskillful Lawyer may be able to do the like, I cannot well
perceive: because he may happen many times to contend with other such Lawers as
be skillful indeed.


AQVILONIVS. This me thinks might be remedied by two or three ways, according
as I have noted, by observing the proceedings of our own Country: to wit,
either by a firm, and resolute boldness (the which may many times put a sober
learned man to silence) or else by bestowing some part of his own fees, to get
the favor of the Judge: or otherwise by making friendship with his fellow
Lawiers, to favor one another underhand, though they make show to be great
adversaries.


FAVONIVS. Then by means of these helps an unskillful Lawier, you suppose,
might be able well enough to make his Profit by the Law: As if it were no
greater a matter, to become a Lawier, then to become a Clarke of a Market,
whose office it is, whenever he is called upon, to see due measure to be made
of Corn.


AQVILONIVS. And what more I pray you, has to do the Lawier, then to see good
measure to be made of Contracts, by alleging that, and no more which his
Clients evidences and testimonies have already made known unto him, without
further meddling with the Law.


FAVONIVS. This seems strange unto me, how a Lawier may so quite himself
from knowing the Law, who has for his profit to exercise the same; when as it
is necessary for an ordinary subject, that has but only to obey the Law, to be
able after a sort to know it.


AQVILONIVS. It must be (you may suppose) but a very silly knowledge of the Law,
that a common Subject may attain unto, and the rather for that the grounds,
not only of some old foreign Laws abroad, but also of some newer Laws used in
certain parts of England, be so intricate and obscure, that one Law is
contrary to another, and yet both of them houlden for good. As for example
concerning old Laws: The Carthaginians had a Law, that in the time of peace no
soldier might steal, because he might live by any manual trade: but in the
time of war he might steal, to provide both for his present need, and also
for the time to come. The Aegiptians had a contrary Law, that in time of war
no soldier might steal, for not hindering thereby his Military discipline; but
in time of peace he might, because he had not then any pay; yet with this
condition, that he should write his name for a Thief in the book of the high
Priest, and present unto him also a note of the stolen goods, to the end, that
if the owner redemanded them, they might be restored him, excepting only the
fourth part, which was to remain to the thief, as also the whole, if it were
not redemanded. Were not these Laws, think you, one contrary to another?


FAVONIVS. Contrary they were, and so perhaps the people, who made them, were
no less contrary of nature then their Laws.


AQVILONIVS. What say you then to the Athenians, who had amongst them an old
Law. That every man should take two wives, to the end that no man for variety
of pleasure should either keep concubynes, or practice with other men's wives:
whereas on the other side their Neighbors the Lacedaemonians, had a contrary old
Law, to wit, That every woman should take two husbands, to the end that one of
them should be still at home, to provide for the house, while the other was at
the wars. Can there any thing be more contrary then these?


FAVONIVS. You must consider, that those Laws were made in time of Gentility,
and also by Cittyes of several Jurisdictions, that were emulators in all
things one to another.


AQVILONIVS. I propound you then another example at home amongst our selves,
That in one Lordship the eldest Son is to be heir, because he is supposed
best able to serve his Prince; and in another Lordship the youngest Son is to
inherit all, because he is least able to provide for himself: be not these
also contrary Laws the one to the other, and yet both of them houlden to be
good?


FAVONIVS. If both these Laws were in use in two distinct Lordshipes houlden
alike by Kinghts service, they might import some contrariety as you say: but
your latter case, is only for Lands which are houlden in Socage Tenure,
according to our Law term; and not for all such Lands neither, but for the
smallest part thereof, and for that part also permitted only by the particular
customs of some Mannours, and not so commanded by the Law; the which Law may
be known, no doubt, well enough unto all, or the most part of those who have
to obey it, notwithstanding your alleged contradiction.


AQVILONIVS. Let us then consider this other reason, Whether ordinary subjects
should be bound so strictly to know the Law, when as that which was Law the
last year, may this year be no Law at all, by occasion of some new Statute
made against it?


FAVONIVS. Then by this account, because the last year there was peace and
this year war, the subjects should not be bound to know when it is peace,
and when war; not that I will infer hereof, that every common Subject should
know the Law, so exactly and particulerly as Lawiers themselves, who make their
profit of it; but only to know the same superficially and in general: that is
to say, partly by Tradition, and partly by natural Reason.


AQVILONIVS. Then natural Reason by your own confession is half enough of it
self in subjects, to make them to know so much of the Law as is necessary for
their vocation.


FAVONIVS. You say very well, for so much have I confessed already indeed.


AQVILONIVS. But he who does know any part of the Law by natural Reason, may
he not execute by natural Reason so much thereof in his practice as he knows?


FAVONIVS. I will not greatly deny, but that natural Reason alone may serve
well enough the turn to execute all sorts of private Justice, the which
extends it self no further then for one Neighbor to render to another his
dew, so far forth as Humanity, and Charity do oblige him thereunto: But for the
practice of public Justice in Courts of Record, there is required the help of
more art, according as has been said before.


AQVILONIVS. Then by this I perceive you will now allot us two sorts of
Justice, whereof the one has to proceed from the morality of the mind, and the
other from the equity of the Law.


FAVONIVS. Not only from the equity of the Law, which consists in the Reason
thereof; but also from the force of the Law, which consists in the authority
of the same: the first being to be called the Body, and the second the Soul;
and both of them tending together, to teach as well what is good, as to
prohibit what is evil; without which two helps (as says Plutarke, in his
Morals) it were hard for us to enjoy the benefits which God has bestowed upon
the world. And therefore not without cause it is said by Plato, in the ninth of
his Laws, That men without Law, nihil a feris atrocissimis discreparent.


AQVILONIVS. And yet I have heard it said, That those men be better that have
no Laws at all, then those that have good Laws, and do not keep them.


FAVONIVS. The reason is, because good Laws unkept do in some sort extenuate
the ordinary Law of Nature; for that with such as have no written Laws at all,
the Law of Nature is seen to be more of force.


AQVILONIVS. In all places where I have been the Law of Nature is much
extenuated, for that every where I find good Laws enough, but very few of them
executed, except against poor men only: whereas the rich by force of their
wealth, do escape all penalty; like as the great flies do pass through the
Cobwebs, but the little ones, not being able, do rest intrapped.


FAVONIVS. But do you take this to be the fault of the Law, or of those who
should better execute the same?


AQVILONIVS. Of the executors thereof, and not of the Law; for that the Law it
self is always good, and profitable, if it be executed accordingly.


FAVONIVS. All these things being well considered, then how may your ignorant
Lawier, before mentioned, be able by his Ignorance to make any profit to
himself, in the practice and execution of the Law, without knowing the same?


AQVILONIVS. His said practice alone, if not in the principal Courts of
Record, yet in their inferior Courts of Justice, will be able in a little while
to teach him so much knowledge of the Law, as he may make a competent profit of
it.


FAVONIVS. Then you will have him at the first to sell that unto others, which
he has not himself, until at their charges and also losses, his said
ignorant practice may have yielded him both knowledge and profit: which were as
much to say, as for the following of his worldlines, to become a public
deceauer, and a betrayer of Justice.


AQVILONIVS. Me thinks you go a little to far in applying those indecent
Terms, unto such a civil way of getting money, as is the trade of Lawiers.


FAVONIVS. Then what have you to say to the words of Laertius: Quod damnum
potiu^, quam turpe lucrum ^li^^ndum est?


AQVILONIVS. As much as you can be able to say to the words of Iuuenall:
Lucribonus odor ex re qualibet. Let us set the Hares head unto the Goose
giblets, and so make up the quittance.


FAVONIVS. I see by this, you be apt enough inclined to proportion the measure
of honesty by the measure of riches, and not the measure of riches by the
measure of honesty.


AQVILONIVS. I can tell you, that to talk now adays too much of honesty,
chiefly amongst young men who attend unto Profit, is a thing that every where
offends the stomach; and the rather, for that to shun any kind of
commodity, for scrupulousnes of honesty, will be attributed to folly more then to
wisdom.


FAVONIVS. Do you not know that every commodity brings with it her
incommodity, and that commonly, according to the Proverb, Ill gotten goods,
are ill spent.


AQVILONIVS. Let them be spent as ill as they will, while at the leastwise,
this I do know well enough, that he who speaks against Commodity and Profit,
speaks against Industry, against Sodality, yea against Justice it self: for
that if Justice were not commodious and profitable, who would extol her to be
the Queen of the World, according as commonly she is reputed every where to be?

Here Subsolanus perceauing that Fauonius began to make some show of wearines,
said unto Aquilinius, somewhat angerly.


SVBSOLANVS. O sacred Justice, how many be there, that do calumniate thy Name,
and how few on the other side, that do seek to defend thee!


AQVILONIVS. Aliud ex alio malum: there is now another stone fallen into the
well, which is like to disturb all the water. What cause have you (said
Aquilonius) to make any such exclamation in favor of Justice; when as nothing
has yet been spoken, that may any way sound to her derogation?


SVBSOLANVS. As though it were no derogation unto her to be extolled more for
the mercenarie Commodity that may be made of her, then for her own proper
integrity.


AQVILONIVS. Hold your self contented, for I have only made mention of her,
comformably unto that her external part, which is most appropriated unto us,
and to our particular good, leaving her internal integrity unto her self, as
a part of her own Essence.


SVBSOLANVS. Then belike you take the Essence of Justice to be made of many
mixtures, since you impute integrity to be one of them.


AQVILONIVS. Whether integrity be her whole Essence, or but a part thereof, I
will not much stand upon it; since unto me it shall suffice, that she be only
void of passion, because the same obscureth the true understanding of
Controversies betwixt party and party.


SVBSOLANVS. Altogether without passion she cannot well be, for then she
should have in her no anger wherewith to punish the wicked, nor yet on the other
side, no affectionate love, wherewith to incite her to reward the good.


AQVILONIVS. By this it would seem to follow, since you begin to reckon up
appetites, that it were requisite also for her to be somewhat suspicious, to
the end she may penetrate into the malice of all false measures and meanings.


SVBSOLANVS. Your meaning seems to be good, but your terms agree not
therewith, since the same appetite or passion, which in men of little wit is
called Suspicion, may be called in the wiser sort, by the name of
Circumspection; the which of it self may suffice unto the doing of Justice
well enough betwixt party and party; because no Judge is bound to proceed
beyond that which is produced, except in Criminal Causes only: for that in
these, it is requisite, to proceed sometimes by due conjectures; I mean in
causes touching life and death, at the least touching the prevention of diverse
sorts of evils, the which might grow too far, if nothing should be attempted
against the contriuers thereof, until the commenced crime might be iuridically
proved.


AQVILONIVS. If all this be true, that in civil causes a Judge has not to
proceed any further by his art, then according to the proof produced, and that
also in Criminal Causes he may leave, if he will, all art a side, and proceed
by conjectures: then as little Law, for the getting of his living may serve
unto a Judge, as may have served our foresaid practicing Lawier, since natural
reason alone, is able still in Criminal Causes to penetrate far enough by
conjecture, as also to distinguish the right from the wrong in Civil Causes,
when sufficient evidence is given on both sides, and he not to pass any
further, then according to the same.


SVBSOLANVS. Then any man that has not means to live by, may counterfeit
himself for his profit to be of what Trade he will; and so by little and
little ascend unto the highest degree of his counterfaite profession.


AQVILONIVS. You say very well herein, for such is now the practice of the
world. As for example, how many simple Apothecaries have ascended by that
means to be formal Physicians? How many petty Scholemaisters have mounted to
be preachers in Divinity, as if they had been Doctors of that art? and how
many crafty Scribes in under Offices have grown to be esteemed for substantial
Lawiers? and also of these, how many have afterward become to be Stewards unto
Noble men of their Lands, and so by sitting there as Judges, to render Justice
betwixt party and party, perhaps with as little Law in their heads, as they
had abstinence in their hands, from taking of bribes?


SVBSOLANVS. Then a man that has no skill in the Law at all, may not only for
his profit be a practicing Lawier, as you have said, but may now also rise up
to be a certain kind of Judge, and so to know in that office how to execute
Justice.


AQVILONIVS. Albeit you speak this in derogation of that unskillful Judge of
mine; yet so long as he with the good liking and satisfaction of others, can
know how to make to himself a sufficient commodity of his said profession,
what more skill should he need to require?


SVBSOLANVS. So that this Judge of yours, if he have sufficient skill to sell
Justice for money, which is a reproachful thing, you think him for all the
rest, to be able enough to execute that office. As if to know how to make his
own profit, were to know how to execute Justice.


AQVILONIVS. Though you seem to make the execution of Justice so hard a
matter, yet I cannot see why such an unlearned Judge may not do it very well,
only by knowing how to abstain from doing Injustice.


SVBSOLANVS. This is a new kind of learning, scarcely heard of before, and
therefore not thought of by many.


AQVILONIVS. It is not so new as you imagine; for it is the doctrine of
Socrates, who said (as Xenophon reports) that the very abstayning from doing
Injustice, is Justice it self.


SVBSOLANVS. If this were true, as you say (that to abstain from Injustice,
were Justice) then to abstain from not committing any foolish Act, should be
Prudence; and to abstain from not doing any temerarious enterprise, should be
Fortitude; and also to abstain from not eating of poison, should be
Temperance. But Virtue it self being otherwise agreed upon by the
Philosophers, not to consist at all in the leaving of any evil thing undone,
but in the voluntary doing of good things, therefore none of those former
abstinences in manner and former as they be related, can be truly reckoned for
Virtues. As also again, they cannot yet be Virtues, for another reason; to
wit, because whatsoever is equally distant from pain and reward, cannot be
either Vice or Virtue; such I mean, as may be either offensive, or helping
unto others. For if it merit not to be punished, it is no such criminal Vice
as the Law takes care of; and on the other side, if it merit no reward, it is
no such eminent Virtue as is had in any estimation. For where do you find, that
any State or City did ever reward any man, because he was a Drunkard? or did
ever receive any one to be a Citizen amongst them, because he was a Glutton?
or did ever prefer any man to be an Arbitrator in Controversies, because he was
a sluggard? But to the end this may yet appear unto you more plainly, I will
propound you another example. The famous Aristid^ of Athens, a man of great
authority but very poor, was sent by the Senators of that City, unto certain
their Confederate Ilanders, partly to moderate their excess of payments
(because they tended to Rebellion) and partly to gather up certain old
Tributes. This Aristides having by his wisdom set all things in go^d order
amongst them, returned home again, more poor then he went forth, without
having benefited himself any thing at all by that office, as many others would
have done. Here I say, if any one should have gone about to have persuaded the
Citizens of Athen^, that Aristides did merit to be received home with great
Triumph and Honor because in executing the office committed unto his charge,
he had not taken, to sustain his poverty any unlawful bribe at all; would not
this* think you, have been rather laughed at, then granted? Whereas on the
other side, if it should have been said unto them, that Aristides did merit to
be received home with Triumph and Honor for as much as having wisely moderated
the excess of those payments, and reduced down the old tributes unto the
ability of the people, who were before oppressed thereby, and that he had so
prevented a general revolt of all those miscontented Ilanders from the
confederation of the Athenians. Herein this second case; I say the fame being
thus propounded, the Citizens could hardly have thought him unworthy, either
of Triumph, or of some other Honor, because by his just operation in that
action he had stood them in great steed, and done them great service; whereas in
the same very case as it was propounded before, no such Triumph or Honor could
well be granted him, because nothing therein was said to be done by him,
worthy of the Honor demanded, but somewhat only left undone, touching his
own particular, which merited no public remuneration. And therefore for all
these reasons put together, I may now conclude against your former assertion,
that the not doing of Injustice, is no work of Justice at all, because Justice
consists not in the leaving of any unjust thing undone, but in the skillful
executing of that which is just.


AQVILONIVS. Notwithstanding all this, if on the other side it may be truly
said, as all the moral Writers do affirm, that the first part of Virtue, is
to abstain from Vice; why then may it not be said as well, that the first part
of Justice, is to abstain from Injustice?


SVBSOLANVS. These be different manners of speaking, to say, that the first
part of Justice is to abstain from Injustice, and to say, that to abstain
from Injustice, is Justice: for though the extremity of one contrary, may be
the beginning of another; yet they cannot enter the one into the other. As for
Example, the extremity of too much Liberty, may be the beginning of Servitude,
but yet not part of Servitude, for that Liberty and Servitude can have no
affinity together, no more then Justice and Injustice; and therefore though a
man, altogether unlearned, may leave sometimes to do Injustice, yet can he
hardly be a good Iusticer, nor know how to do Justice, without special skill
in the Law: so that the doing of Justice is a thing of greater moment, then the
leaving of Injustice undone; for that this may be common unto every man,
whereas the other is but proper unto Lawiers only.


AQVILONIVS. So as your meaning is, that Justice does not consist in leaving
any unjust thing undone, but in doing of that which is just, not according to
every skillful man's conceit thereof, but as the Law it self ordains, the
which ordains nothing but that which Justice does determine and command.


SVBSOLANVS. You say well, and according to my meaning: whereupon it would
follow, that if to do that which the Law commands, should be Justice, then
the resistance and not doing of that which the Law commands, should be
Injustice.


AQVILONIVS. It may be well enough as you say, though yet your speech be
somewhat too strict, and not according to the common understanding thereof.


SVBSOLANVS. Then you have belike some scruple in your head whether it be so,
or no.


AQVILONIVS. As touching my scruples, take you no care, for when they be of any
moment, they shallbe sufficiently made known unto you.


SVBSOLANVS. So that without any scruple of yours herein, you will have me to
understand that Justice and Injustice, may he said to be contraries.


AQVILONIVS. According as you have laid them so opposite one to another, they
would seem at the leastwise so to be.


SVBSOLANVS. Then belike they be not so indeed.


AQVILONIVS. Since you will needs urge me so far, I must tell you, that as
contrary as you seem to make them, yet diverse times it happens, that one and
the same man, may be both just and unjust as well as one and the same man may
be a Niggard and Prodigal; the which if they were merely contraries, could not
come so to pass.


SVBSOLANVS. I do not understand you well, in neither of these cases.


AQVILONIVS. Tell me then, I pray you, He that is a Niggard in eating, or in
apparrelling, or in paying his servants wages; may he not be Prodigal either
in building, or in furniture of household, or in bestowing upon flatterers?


SVBSOLANVS. I do not deny but that so it may be.


AQVILONIVS. And soon the other side, he that is just to his friends, may he
not be unjust to his enemies, as diverse be seen now a days to be?


SVBSOLANVS. I will not greatly stand upon it.


AQVILONIVS. Then hereby it would appear, that Justice and Injustice are not
so merely contraryes as you suppose them to be.


SVBSOLANVS. To the end you may the better know what my conceyt is herein, let
me ask you ere we go any further this other question; That same worldly Profit
of yours, whereof you have spoken so much before, shall we say, that it is
contrary to Disprofit, or that it is not?


AQVILONIVS. I like so little of Disprofit, and so well of Profit, that I am
content to admit them for contraries.


SVBSOLANVS. So that no Disprofit can be profitable, nor no Profit
disprofitable.


AQVILONIVS. You say very truly herein.


SVBSOLANVS. For, if Disprofit could be profitable, or Profit disprofitable,
they should not be contraryes.


AQVILONIVS. We agree hitherto very well.


SVBSOLANVS. And yet it hapeneth sometimes, that the giving of ten shillings to
a poor friend, that would borrow ten pounds, is a profitable Disprofit: as on
the other side, the taking a horse in gift of one that intrudeth thereby to
soiourne some while at his house, is a disprofitable Profit.


AQVILONIVS. What will you infer hereupon?


SVBSOLANVS. I infer, that as Profit and Disprofit are merely contraryes, by
your own confession, and yet one and the self same thing may be profitable
and disprofitable; so also one man may be just and unjust, though Justice and
Injustice be contraries; which Consequence you seemed to deny before,
affirming, that if Justice and Injustice were merely contraries, one man could
not be both just and iniust.


AQVILONIVS. Whatsoever I have said before concerning this point according to
the vulgar opinion, that which I wished to be debated, and do now affirm, is,
that Justice, and Injustice may be both of them profitable, and disprofitable.
As first, concerning their Disprofit, I say, that as well Justice as Injustice
may be disprofitable to such Judges, or Magistrates, as do run too apparently
without any artificial moderation, either unto the one extremity, or the
other, whereby they become to be either of them poor: the violent Iniusticer by
his infamy, and the violent Iusticer by his scrupulosity; the one of which
causes may be exemplified in the person of Hyperbolus, and the other in the
person of the already specified Aristides, both of them Citizens of Athens;
the first the iniustest, and the second the iustest of the times they lived in,
and acknowledged of all men to be such; who died both of them alike, that is to
say very poor, and in utter disgrace of the people.


SVBSOLANVS. Touching those two men, I shall tell you my mind, when you shall
have made a full end of your narration.


AQVILONIVS. And now on the other side, I say again unto you, that Justice and
Injustice may be both of them said to be profitable, specially unto such kind
of Judges, or Magistrates, as do know how to run a middle course betwixt the
extremities of Justice and Injustice, whereby secretly, and covertly, making
their Profit the one of his Justice, the other of his Injustice, they become
both of them Rich: the first of which causes may be exemplified in Pericles and
Alcibiades in Athens, and the second may be in Lysander, and Agesilaus in
Lacedemonia, who knew the way so well to run the middle course betwixt
scrupulous Justice and defamed Injustice, as all of them died very rich, and
not only well esteemed in their Cittyes, but famous also to the world abroad:
which hap befell not in Rome it self, neither to Graccus, nor yet to Cato,
notwithstanding they were reputed of all other, the iustest men of their time,
who, as I have said; not knowing how to run this myddle course, died both of
them miserably.


SVBSOLANVS. You have here alleged these examples in regard of the successes
happened, not as they were indeed: but yet you do not penetrate aright into the
true causes of the same. For that the City of Athens, in the time of
Hyperbolus, had great fame for the integrity of Justice practiced therein, and
therefore no marvel, though such an iniust man was there of no reputation;
whereas after, in the time of Aristides, Athens was become to be infamous for
Injustice according as Rome was also in the time of Graccus and Cato; and
therefore as little marvel it is, that such just men as they, could not
thrive there amongst them: but when Lysander and Agesilaus lived in
Lacedemonia, and Pericles and Alcibiades in Athens, both of these Cittyes were
neither apparently just, nor apparently iniust; and therefore for men of their
conditions to grow to be great in such Cittyes, as were already like unto
themselves, it is also no great marvel: so as that artificial Justice, and
Injustice, whereof you have spoken, be not always sure to prosper, or to pass
vnreprehended, if not also punished; chiefly if the government under which those
men do live, be just and upright of it self: and therefore your reasons before
alleged in the behalf of those particulers, be not altogether so firm as
you supposed.


AQVILONIVS. These be no more but distinctions of ages and places, when and
where Justice and Injustice may be more or less profitable or disprofitable;
but do not therefore disprove, that Injustice sometimes may not be profitable,
and Justice disprofitable; nor yet on the other side, that Injustice sometimes
may not be disprofitable, and Justice profitable: I mean at leastwise unto
such a Judge, or Magistrate, as knows how to sell the same for money, which
yet it may be, you will also reckon together with the rest to be a kind of
Injustice.


SVBSOLANVS. You say well, and according as I do reckon it indeed; but yet to
be such a kind of Injustice, as is far more tolerable then is the violating
of Justice, by the doing of Iniquity and Wrong: and therefore taking Justice to
be commodious in the truest sense, as when it is executed for Equity, and not
for Gains, in this sort I say, my meaning is not to disprove at all (as you
before would seem to suppose) that either Justice is profitable, or Injustice
disprofitable: but rather the contrary, to wit, that Injustice may be
profitable, or Justice any way disprofitable, either to the public, or else
in particular.


AQVILONIVS. Then all the difficulty rests still (I perceive) touching those
two latter points, wherein leaving aside for a while to speak of disprofitable
Justice, till better place may serve for the same, I cannot for the rest but
marvel with my self, how you have not yet perceived out of my former
Examples, that Injustice sometimes may be profitable.


SVBSOLANVS. You must understand, that I have perceived so much the less for
these considerations following; because if Injustice may be profitable, it must
be profitable either to the whole State in general (the which I think you will
not say) or else to the Executor thereof in particular; and this also but in some
reserved sort of proceeding only, since in Causes of public and apparent
Iniquity by your own confession, it cannot be so; unto which reserved sort I
do now begin to answer you, that though by deceit of understanding, such a
cunning corrupted Judge may suppose to gain thereby, yet in the end when he
comes to put together his reckoning, and to make up his whole account, he
will not find it to be so.


AQVILONIVS. What better account will you have him, or can he desire to make
for himself herein (I mean according to the present state of the world, and
his better means also to be able to withstand the miseries thereof) then to
find himself provided thereby of all kind of necessaryes belonging to the
maintenance of his degree and state, the which some other of his own
profession and trade, either for too much scrupulosity, or else for too little
dexterity do many times want.


SVBSOLANVS. So that you would have him (I perceive) at one and the very same
time, to serve himself not only of Injustice, but also of Justice, using the
one fraudulently, and underhand for his secret gain, and exteriourly using the
other for his reputation only, and to color thereby the Iniquity of Injustice.


AQVILONIVS. The custom of the world now-a-dayes is come, I can tell you, but
unto little better pass.


SVBSOLANVS. Then all those Judges, who will not after this manner be unjust,
may be accounted for silly men.


AQVILONIVS. For silly men you may be sure, and the rather because, by the art
and authority of the said unjust sort of Judges, the Justice of the Just is
many times reputed to be counterfeit, and suborned Injustice.


SVBSOLANVS. So that the iniust Magistrate by this means gets not only
wealth, but also reputation to be accounted an administrator of Justice, while
the just Magistrate lives poorly, and is with all reputed to be iniust by the
false suggestion of his fraudulent Adversaries.


AQVILONIVS. We see it for the most part to come so to pass.


SVBSOLANVS. Whereupon it follows that to learn to be a cunning Iniusticer,
were a very profitable kind of art?


AQVILONIVS. Our intention being here to speak of Profit, I cannot allege
you any Art that may be more profitable; and that profitable Arts are not to
be neglected, is not my thinking alone, but the opinion of Plato (in the eight
of his Laws) who says, Omnes complectuntur arts ex quibus lucrum consequi
potest.


SVBSOLANVS. Though Plato signified in those words that men be prone to embrace
any profitable Art; yet meant he not that all profitable Arts, are to be
embraced (but only such as are lawful) and least of all any Art that tends
to the corruption of public Justice, as it evidently appears throughout all
his Works, and especially in his Books de Republica, and of his Laws, wherein
all his doctrine tends to nothing else, but to frame a most happy Common
Wealth by the administration of sincere Justice: and therefore he specially
endeauoreth to make most just and virtuous Magistrates.


AQVILONIVS. But what say you then to Cicero? Was he not held for a good
Magistrate, and yet he says in the third of his Offices, Cum aliqua species
vtilitatis obiecta est, nos commoueri necesse est. And again: Omnes appetimus
vtilitatem, and ad eam rapimur.


SVBSOLANVS. He says not this to incite men to the practice of all kind of
Profit, but only to show the imbecility of man, desirous of that which
impayreth his Condition; and that Profit and Wealth do so, we may gather by the
Philosopher, in the third of his Politiques, where he says; Lucrum facit
homines detetiores: the which is confirmed by Deip. apud Volat. where he also
says; Nisi lucrum esset, nemo fuisset improbus: and all this the rather,
because (as says another modern Writer) Wealth is a great nourisher of Vice,
and Poverty of Virtue. And albeit this were not so, yet the too much desire of
Profit is the rather to be bridled, because though the manner of gayning may be
never so honest: yet says Seneca (Epist. 95.) Lucrum sine damno alterius fieri
non potest. And so much also the more, when Injustice it self is fraudulently
violated for cause of lucre: Nam tale turpe lucrum accusatio naturae est, as we
read apud Strobaeum.


AQVILONIVS. If Nature be accused thereby, it is rather for taking too much
delight therein, then for any misliking at all it has of the same.


SVBSOLANVS. If your fraudulent Injustice be not only so good and so profitable
a thing as you make it, but with all so agreeable unto Nature it self, as you
say, we may then (me thinks) do well to place the same amongst the number of
Virtues.


AQVILONIVS. If it were not for one exception only, which occurreth to me at
this present, it might be a thing (I can tell you) to be thought on, but that
indeed the words of Cicero (in the fifth of his Tusculans) are plainly against
it, where he says; Nulla potest esse virtus nisi gratuita.


SVBSOLANVS. You have done well to think of that exception your self, for
otherwise you must have been made to remember it out of Pontanus (lib. 2. de
Prud.) where he says; Virtus nihil, quod extra se est, quaerit.


AQVILONIVS. It is so much the worse for her self, you may be sure, since
thereby she lives in such continual penury and poverty as she does.


SVBSOLANVS. But yet at the leastwise by you own confession, we may say that
Justice though she be never so poor, yet has she always her place amongst
the Virtues.


AQVILONIVS. We may so.


SVBSOLANVS. And that Injustice consequently though she be never so rich, is
always to be placed amongst the Vices.


AQVILONIVS. By rigor of speech, you may say your pleasure thereof, though on
the other side for the Profit that rises thereby, more gentle and more moderate
words might be used of it.


SVBSOLANVS. Then you suppose (I perceive) that for these former respects it
were somewhat too rigorous a kind of speaking to say, that Injustice were a
vicious thing.


AQVILONIVS. I do so indeed, as also because, whereas no man knows well how
to be able to live in the world, except he have Fortunes favor, Injustice of
it self alone, and without any other help at all, can get him the goods of
Fortune; the which on the other side, if we will credit him, who commenteth
upon the seventh Book of the Politiques, the first Chapter, Justice of her
self is not able so to do.


SVBSOLANVS. So as Justice and Virtue, you will have them to give place unto
Riches and Fortune.


AQVILONIVS. It is not my censure alone, for Horace himself ( Satyr 3. lib.
2.) is also of the same opinion, where he says, That he who is rich, Erit
vbique clarus f^rtis, sapiens, etiam Rex, and qui^quid volet.


SVBSOLANVS. That is to say, he may seem perhaps to be such, but not so
indeed.


AQVILONIVS. Do you call it but a seeming so to be, when as in flat terms the
said Author says further in the same place, That unto Riches, Non solum
Virtus, sed etiam Fama, Decus, Diuina Humanaque parent.


SVBSOLANVS. He speaks it as a Satirical Poet, only to carpe at the abuse of
the time, as by these other his words elsewhere we may well discover, In pretio
pretium nunc est, and not that he thinks, it ought to be so indeed, but that
the corruption of manners had then brought it so to pass: the which corruption
of manners, is wont specially to reign amongst the followers of Riches, as we
may gather by Lactantius (de falsa Relig.) where he says: Voluntas fingendi,
and mentiendi est eorum qui opes appetunt, and lucra desiderant; and therefore
it were better for you to give ear unto Horace himself, when he speaks
seriously, saying: Quod pecunia studium fidem, probitatem, ceterasqueue bonas
arts subuertit; also unto Salust, where he says, Domat omnia Virtus: and
again; Quicquid homines arant, nauigant, aedificant, Virtuti omnia parent: the
which is confirmed likewise by Plautus, who says, Virtuti Fortuna cedit: so
that not Virtue unto Riches, but Riches unto Virtue stoupeth and obaieth. In
which respect Cicero says, Virtute qui praediti sunt, soli sunt diuites,
because those that be truly virtuous be always firm and stable, and out of
all fear of Fortunes checkes; quia nihil eripit Fortuna, nisi quod ipsa dedit,
as says Seneca (de tranquil.) Now then of all the moral Virtues, none is
either more grateful to God, or necessary and profitable to Man, then Justice,
without the which no Common Wealth can stand: as also on the other side, no Vice
is either more hateful unto God and pernicious unto man, then Injustice, which
destroys all Common wealths and Civil Societies by the just judgment of God,
who, as the holy Scripture testifies ( Deuteronomy. 25.) Auersatur omnem Iniustitiam:
whereof I will speak more amply in the Conclusion of this days Conference;
meaning first to hear all that you mean to say, before I will much press you
with Divine Authority, which (as I presume) you do not mean to contradict.

Here Fauonius supposing that Aquilonius had well near forgotten himself of
the latter part of his former partition, began to say thus unto him.


FAVONIVS. What have you now I pray you, after this your defense of profitable
Injustice, to say further touching that other point of disprofitable Justice,
whereof you also promised to treat?


AQVILON. I have to say more perhaps, then you be aware of, and therefore to
descend now into this other branch, I must first tell you, That two ways
Justice may be disprofitable, the one Private, the other Public: and as for
the former, to wit, how Justice may sometimes be privately disprofitable, I
have already declared it by the example of Aristides, of Graccus, and of Cato:
and how also it may be publicly disprofitable, that is to say, by determinate
sentence given betwixt party and party, I will now show you by other examples.


FAVONIVS. I like it well that you mean to proceed by examples, rather then by
argument.


AQVILONIVS. To content you then according to your own liking: What Profit I
pray you, did rise to the Troyans of the sentence pronounced by Paris, about
the distribution of the goulden Apple, in the Vale of Ida; when as the ruin of
Paris himself, and of his whole Country ensued thereby?


FAVONIVS. This in effect was no more but a Poetical fiction, and not any
formal sentence of Justice; so that it serves your purpose nothing at all.


AQVILONIVS. What say you then to the sentence given in the cause of a Scholar
and his Master, who being promised twenty crowns when he had taught him the
Art of persuading, sued him for his money. Unto whom the Scholar said: If I
can persuade the Judge that I owe thee nothing, then nothing thou art to have;
and if I cannot persuade him so, then nothing also is dew unto thee, because
thou have not taught me the Art of persuading. Whereupon the Master replied;
If thou can persuade the Judge, that thou owe me nothing, then art thou to
pay me, because thou have learned of me the Art of persuading: and if thou
can not persuade him so, then so much the more thou art to pay me, for that
the sentence will fall on my side. So that whether thou persuade him, or not
persuade him, thou art still to pay me. Here I say in this cause, the sentence
being given for the Scholar, what Profit could come unto him thereof: when as
by having persuaded the Judge to believe him, he discovered to have learned of
his Master, so much as he had promised to teach him, and therefore rested still
bound to pay him for the same?


FAVONIVS. This is rather a Paradoxe then a sentence, and therefore can avail
you as little as that other before.


AQVILONIVS. Let us then consider the sentence of Cyrus, while he was but yet
young, about the taking from a little boy, a Coat which was too long for him,
and from a great boy, another Coat which was too short for him, causing them
to be vested with each others coats: which sentence what Profit could it bring
unto either of them, when as neither was contented with that exchange?


FAVONIVS. This was but a Childs play, and therefore by the Tutor unto Cyrus it
was presently revoked, and so serves you also but unto small effect.


AQVILONIVS. I would then know, what you will say unto the sentence of Xerxes
King of Asia, who to save his own life, in a Tempest at sea, was persuaded by
his Pilot to cast over board all his chief Gentlemen, and when he came on
shore, he ordained a Crown of Gould to be given to the Pilot, for having saved
his life, and incontinently after, judged him to be hanged, for having been the
cause of the death of so many worthy Gentlemen: whereupon I would know, what
Profit grew either to the State, or to the Pilot by this kind of sentence, when
as the one lamented still the loss of their Nobility, and the other with his
own death, paid the saving of the Kings life?


FAVONIVS. This was no more but the will and fantasy of a King, and not any
formal sentence given by the way of process, and therefore not auaylable.


AQVILONIVS. Let us then consider this other sentence, in the cause of a poor
Tyler, who falling down from a house brake his leg, and killed another man
upon whom he fell; whose Son suing for Justice, received this Judgment, that
he should go up to the top of the same house, and fall upon the Tyler, and
kill him if he could, as the Tyler fell upon his Father: of which sentence,
what Profit I pray you, ensued either to the one man for breaking of his leg,
or unto the other for his Fathers death.


FAVONIVS. This was but a shift of a cunning Judge, to make an end of an
impertinent quarrel, with a more impertinent arbitrament, and therefore as
little to the purpose, as the rest before.


AQVILONIVS. What say you then to the sentence concerning an Inhabitant of one
of the old Cittyes in Greece, who having delivered his Country from a notorious
peril, was by a particular Law of theirs to be granted any one petition he
would ask, and so he demanding another man's wife, had her; whose first husband
having shortly after done such another like service to his Country, demanded
his own wife again, wherein was given this sentence; Let the Law take place.
If the Law do take place, said the first husband, she is wholly mine, for that I
have won her: and if the Law do not take place, then also is she mine,
because she was mine before. Whereunto the second husband replied thus: If so
the Law take place, she is wholly mine, because the same Law has already given
her me; and if the Law do not take place, then can she not be thine, because
thou have no Law to claim her from me that have received her by the Law.
Whereupon by a second sentence she was sequestered from them both, to the great
coffeehouse of the one and the other: therefore tell me now, if you can, what
Profit did grow unto any of them, by either of these sentences?


FAVONIVS. This is a kind of Riddle rather then a case of Law, and therefore to
be rejected with the rest.


AQVILONIVS. What say you then to the sentence that was given not many years
ago, at home in our own Country, against the Majesty of Mary the late most
Memorable Queen of Scotland; was it not a disprofitable thing to the State, to
sentence in such sort, such an absolute Princess, as was no way subject to the
jurisdiction of those who gave that sentence against her?


FAVONIVS. You be now descended indeed into so notorious a case of our own,
that may not well be so easily rejected, as have been your other before.
Concerning the which, for as much as my self do know certain good and assured
particulers, such as may give you some satisfaction, if they might be related,
I will not therefore stick to say, and affirm unto you, that hitherto at the
least no disprofit has ensued thereof, neither unto our State, nor us.


AQVILONIVS. Do you think that Dishonor and universal foul Imputation to
have committed therein such an act of Incongruity as was never yet heard of
before, nor will ever be left to be spoken of to the worlds end; do you think
(I say) that it is no Disprofit unto your State?


FAVONIVS. Was she not, I pray you, found culpable of all the contrived crimes
that were brought in evidence against her, the which being true, as it cannot
well be denied, what cause then have you to cry out so much, as you do, upon
the Incongruity of that Sentence given?


AQVILONIVS. Can there be any greater Incongruity, then to execute the rigor
of the Law upon one who by prerogative is not tryable by the same? For either
it must be, that those contryued crimes you speak of, were committed before
she came into England, or after; if before, clear it is, that by the Law, and
Reason of State her absolute Sovereignty acquiteth her thereof: and if after,
then must you show (if you will try her by English Laws) how she came to be
deprived of that her Sovereign freedom of birth; the liberty whereof in the
cause of a private person (and much more of an absolute Queen) cannot be taken
from him, without either prescription, consent, or forfaite: but of any such
prescription concerning the Queens Majesty of Scotland, we see no Record of
Consent, no Act, nor any forfait, neither yet any such crime committed, as
might deprive her of her Principality, the which remaining in her still, how
could she (who under no Positive Law was borne) be brought to be tried and
executed in a foreign Country, by the rigor of any such Law?


FAVONIVS. She was a prisoner, and all prisoners be subject to their Laws
whose Prisoners they be.


AQVILONIVS. Then John and Francis Kings of France, the one prisoner in
England, and the other in Spain, might have been brought to the bar of
Transgressors, and tried, by either of those Country Laws, but neither of them
were so handled; therefore belike the Congruity of proceeding would not permit
it.


FAVONIVS. If Congruity, as you said, would not permit it, how happened it then
that Charles the first King of Naples, did in like manner put to death by
sentence of the Laws of that Kingdom, his prisoner Conradine, who succeeding
the Emperor Frederick the second in the Dukedom of Swenia, made also
pretense to the Kingdom of Naples?


AQVILONIVS. This also was houlden for such an Incongruous Act ( Cum nec Par in
Parem potestatem habet, nec inferior in Superiorem. Leg. 3. and 4. de arbitr.)
as all the world cried out upon the same. And particulerly Robert Count of
Flanders, Sonne-in-Law to the said Charles, did for the great indignity thereof,
run his sword through the Protonotary Robert de Bary, who read the sentence of
Conradines death. He also who stroke off his head, had presently after by
another, his own head stricken off in the same place. And this Act was the more
grievously condemned, because the said Charles himself having been taken
prisoner before by the Saracens, in the Wars of the holy Land, was by them
honorably entertained, and Royally released. Whereupon Peter King of Aragon, in
an opprobrious letter of his written about this Act, and sent to the said
Charles, says to him amongst other things: Tu Nerone neronior, and Saracenis
crudelior.


FAVONIVS. It was only iealosy of State, that made the said Charles more cruel
therein, then otherwise perhapps he would have been, because Conradine not long
before was come with a potent army to take from him his Kingdom of Naples:
and the same reason may also seem to excuse the putting to death of the Queen
of Scotland, because she likewise as then made claim to the Crown of England,
and Crowns, I can tell you, may comport no Competitors.


AQVILONIVS. And yet the forsaid Peter King of Aragon, who by the right of
Constance his wife Cosen-german to the beheaded Conradine, having from the said
Charles the first King of Naples the Kingdom of Sicilia, and also taken
Prisoner the Son of that Charles called Charles the second, who still made
claim to Sicilia, did notwithstanding not put him to death, neither in respect
of that claim of his, nor yet in revenge of the death of Conradine his Cosen,
but with Honorable conditions he was after set at liberty by James Son to the
said Peter, at the instance of Edward the first King of England: and all this
still unto the greater obloquy of the forsaid Incongruity of Charles the first:
therefore see now what little cause you had to bring in him for an example to
approve the like used in England against the Queens Majesty of Scotland, when
she was not taken Prisoner by any Law of Arms, as these other Princes were,
but coming into England of her own accord, yea and invited, was retained
there by force: and therefore put the case, that she had conspired against the
Queen of England and her State (as she was charged to have done) she did no
more then she might lawfully do, to redeem her own unjust vexation, and to
procure her liberty whereof she was most unjustly deprived. For which respects
her condemnation was, as I have said, most incongruous; and so much the more
for that she was a Woman, a Widow, the nearest Ally unto the Crown of
England, an invited Guest, an Exile out of her Kingdom, and fled into England
for succor; and finally in such a state, that our State could pretend no
lawful cause of fear: for that being indurance she could neither attempt any
thing of her self, nor yet practice with any others further then the State of
England would permit and wincke at. And therefore by doing as they did, they
derogated from the Laws of Nature, of Charity, of Jurisdiction and Majesty, of
Parentage, of Hospitality, of Protection, and finally from the Law of Nations,
and consequently from human Intelligence and reason. And thus much concerning
the Incongruity of the fact it self, together with the disprofit of that
sentence given; not only in respect of the Universal obliquy risen thereby, but
also of the future harms which by occasion of that evil example left in
memory, may happen to grow hereafter unto some Prince of England in the like
case.

Here Subsolanus interrupting their further talk began to say unto Aquilonius.


SVBSOLANVS. It may suffice herein that we be better content to admit your
example of disprofitable Justice, then your proofs of profitable Injustice,
though there be place enough left of exception to be made unto the one, as well
as to the other, were it not that other matters do yet occure to be also spoken
of: and therefore having hitherto treated of Worldlines and Profit, in old men,
in young men, in Lawiers, in Judges, and in other Magistrates, some by
ouer-weening of themselves, some by excess of forwardnes, some by ignorance
some by skill, some by Injustice, some by Justice; me thinks it were now time,
that we should begin to determine what Profit is, and how many sorts of Profit
there may be said to be.


AQVILONIVS. Take you then the c re thereof upon your self to do it, and for
the rest we be already agreed.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not then do well to say, That Profit is a thing which is
either desired for it self, or else for some other thing to follow thereby?


AQVILONIVS. Me thinks not, because this would seem to have relation rather
unto the vtility rising from the thing it self, then to the gain to be made
thereof, by any Industry annexed.


SVBSOLANVS. We may then perhaps do better to say, That Profit is an Act which
may be reputed to consist in buying good cheap, and in selling dear.


AQVILONIVS. This on the other side would seem to have relation altogether to
the gain which is to be made of things, and not at all unto the Vtility rising
of the thing it self.


SVBSOLANVS It may be, that then this other will content you best, to say, That
Profit is no more but a certain kind of skill, how to turn the use of all
things unto advantage, unto more advantage, and unto most advantage.


AQVILONIVS. It will be hard, I can tell you, unto a word of so diverse relations
to make any one description, that may hit just with them all; and therefore
without searching any further, we will admit this last together with the
former.


SVBSOLANVS. So that heerby already we may begin (me thinks) to discover that
of Profit there be two sorts, the one called Vtility, and the other Gain.


AQVILONIVS. We may so.


SVBSOLANVS. But may we not likewise say, that of Vtility there be three sorts;
one rising of things, another of habits, and the third of men?


AQVILONIVS. And this also.


SVBSOLANVS. The Vtility rising of things either senseless, vegetat^ue or
sensitive, may we not say it to be double, to wit either of such things as be
not desired for themselves, but for some other Vtility that is to rise of them
(as when a man take^h a loathsome medicine to recover his health thereby:) or
else of such other things as be desired both for themselves, and also for some
other Vtility that is to grow of them, as when a man takes a delectable
medicine both because it pleases his taste, and is also profitable for his
health?


AQVILONIVS. This also does content me?


SVBSOLANVS. The Vtility rising of habits, may we not say it also to be double,
to wit, either Speculatiue (as the Vtility that rises of knowledge (be it
Natural, Divine, or Mathematical) or else practical, as the Vtility to rise
of civil, domestical, or political skill?


AQVILONIVS This may also be admitted.


SVBSOLANVS. And the Vtility rising of men, may we not say it to be either
fatal (but yet accompanied with voluntary se^king, as the favor of Princes,
marriage, friendship, and the like:) or Natural, as the Son to inherit unto
his Father, and the Brother to his Brother, or the Nephew to his Uncle; or
Moral, as when one receaueth vtility of another, so far as either decency or
neighborhood does require: or Legal, as when one man receaueth vtility of
another, so far as the Law does bynd him thereunto, and no more, as to keep
the peace, to render his due, and the like: or else Spiritual, as when one
receaueth a benefit of another, not corporally, but for the benefit of his
soul, as the Parishioner by his Curate, who also on the other side may receive
Tithes of his Parishioners for his Service in the Church.


AQVILONIVS. All this may be also admitted.


SVBSOLANVS. So now to speak of that second sort of Profit which is called
Gain may we not consequently say, that of Gayning there be likewise three
sorts; one to be made by Chance, another to be made by Luck; and the third to
be made by Industry?


AQVILONIVS. It does not mislike me.


SVBSOLANVS. The Gain to be made by Chance, which a man does unwittingly meet
withal, may we not say it to be triple, to wit, either by the way of fynding
(as a man to light upon a lost purse) or else by the way of encountering (as a
man to meet in an Inn with a merchant who is contented to bear his charges
out of Italy into England) or otherwise by the way of escaping (as a man to be
delivered out of the hands of theeus by the coming that way of other
passingers?)


AQVILONIVS. All as yet goes well.


SVBSOLANVS. The Gain to be made by Luck, which a man does get wittingly, may
we not say it to be also triple; namely either by the way of gaming (as to win
a great sum of money, either at Dice or Cards) or else by the way of
venturing (as to become rich by far iourneys at sea) or otherwise by the way of
experimenting (as to multiply wealth, by making of things, either commodious
extractions, or commodious compositions?)


AQVILONIVS. It may be allowed well enough.


SVBSOLANVS. And now as touching the gain to be made of Industry, may we not
say it to be double; to wit, either by way of faction, and force, or else by
way of action, and agility?


AQVILONIVS I see no cause to the contrary.


SVBSOLANVS. The gain to be made be Faction and force, may we not say it to be
quadruple, to wit, either vnartificially (as a man to get his living by
portage, or by any other mere labor of the body) or else artificially (as by
fishing, by fowling, and the like) or otherwise husbandly (to wit by tilling,
by grafing, or by breding of cattle) or else mechanically or manually (as by
being a Carpenter, a Shwoomaker, or a Taylour?)


AQVILONIVS. Nothing of this may be well denied.


SVBSOLANVS. And so likewise the gain to be made by Action and Agility, may we
not say it to be double, namely either Mercantile or else Mercenary?


AQVILONIVS. Me thinks we may say so.


SVBSOLANVS. The Mercantile gain, may we not say it to be quadruple, namely
either by buying or selling, or else by commutation of one thing for another of
diverse kinds, or otherwise by usury, or else by exchange of money for money?


AQVILONIVS. You say herein very well.


SVBSOLANVS. The Mercantile gain to be made by the way of buying and selling,
may we not say it to be also quardruple, to wit, either of Lands or
possessions, or else by cattle and other victuals, or otherwise of furniture
of household or building, or else of any other wares whatsoever, either in
Great or by Retaile?


AQVILONIVS. I admit it to be so.


SVBSOLANVS. The Mercantile gain to be made by the way of co^mutation of one
thing for another of diverse kinds, may we not say, that this sort of getting,
is less in use now adays, since money has been invented, then heretofore it
has been, when Jacob (as we read in Ios^e, cap. 24) emit a filijs Emor Patris,
Sichem agrum pro centum nouellis onibus, and fuit in possessionem filiorum
Joseph?


AQVILONIVS. This as you say, is now out of use.


SVBSOLANVS. The Mercantile gain to be made by the way of usury, may we not
say it to be disallowed first by the discipline of the Philosophers, according
as we read in Aristotle (Polit. lib. 1. cap. 6.) next by the Law of Moses, as
we read in Leuit. (cap. 25.) Pecuniam tuam non dabis ad vsuram: and lastly by
the Law of our Savior Christ, who says ( Luc. cap. 6.) Si mutuum dederitis
his a quibus speratis accipere, quae gratia est vobis? nam and peccatores
peccatoribus foenerantur vt recipiant aequalia.


AQVILONIVS. This cannot be denied.


SVBSOLANVS. The Mercantile Gain to be made by the way of exchange, is in some
cases allowable (as when the Gain is no more the^ the difference of the value
of the money in the place whereunto it is exchanged, for the value of the money
in the place where the contract is made, adding only thereunto all ordinary
charges duly occurring:) and in some other cases it is disallowed, as when the
G^ine is greater then the said difference of the value of the money, and the
ordinary charges occurring; and this also either by occasion of the fraud of
the giver of the bill of exchange, or by the necessity of the taker.


AQVILONIVS. There can be nothing more true.


SVBSOLANVS. Now to come on the other side to the Mercenary kind of gayning,
may we not likewise say it to be double, namely either lawful, or else
unlawful?


AQVILONIVS. Together with the rest, let this be also admitted.


SVBSOLANVS. The lawful Mercenary Gain is also double, to wit, either by the
way of war, or else by the way of peace.


AQVILONIVS. I find nothing to be said against it.


SVBSOLANVS. The Mercenary lawful Gain to be made by the way of war, may we
not say it to be likewise double, namely either by Sea (as by receiving the
stipend of a Pilot, of a mariner, of a Gunner, and such like: or else by Land,
as by receiving the stipend of a Captain, of a soldier, of an enginer or such
other?


AQVILONIVS. As you do say, so do I affirm it.


SVBSOLANVS. The lawful Mercenary Gain to be made by the way of peace, may we
not say it to be also double; to wit, either servile (as by receiving the
stipend of a domestical Officer or of an ordinary servant;) or else more fr^e,
as by receiving the stipend of a teacher of any Art, the stipend of a Lawier,
or the stipend of a Physician: the which nevertheless being better considered,
may be said to be improper kinds of gayning, according to the opinion of the
Philosopher (in the first of his Politiques, the sixth Chapter) because the
proper gain which comes of teaching is the Art learned, and the proper gain
of the Law is the counsel given, and of Physic, the health received; and so
likewise in other things that be more Mechanical, as the proper gain to be
made of a pair of shoes, is the saving of the feet by the wearing thereof; and
the price for which they be sold is the improper gain, as rising secondarily
thereof, and not princially.


AQVILONIVS. This subtle consideration never entered into my head before,
albeit I confess that it carries with it sufficient show of reason.


SVBSOLANVS. And now to come on the other side, unto unlawful Mercenary ways
of gayning, may we not likewise say them to be double, namely either secretly
dishonest, or apparently dishonest?


AQVILONIVS. I have looked for this all this while.


SVBSOLANVS. Of which two points, because they may grow to be more copious then
the rest before have been, it shallbe good that we speak of them a part by
themselves.


AQVILONIVS. You may give unto them what scope you will, for I find my self
well enough disposed to say my part therein, as well as you.


SVBSOLANVS. To begin then with the secret dishonest Mercenary Gain, or to say
better, Honest in appearance, though not indeed; may we not reduce it unto these
heads, namely either unto cloked Injustice, or unto dissembled Carnality, or
unto smooth flattery, or else unto cunning Cheating?


AQVILONIVS. Me thinks you have put in enough, as being afraid, belike, to
leave out any thing.


SVBSOLANVS. Of that secret dishonest Gain which is wont to rise by cloked
Injustice, we shall not need I suppose to say here any more then has been
spoken thereof already.


AQVILONIVS I am also of the same mind.


SVBSOLANVS. So that to speak in order next of that other secret dishonest
Gain, which is wont to rise by dissembled Carnality, may we not say it to be
double, to wit either when some one is but a mediator for another, or else a
s^llicitor for himself?


AQVILONIVS. The first of these two, may be well enough omitted, as not being
worthy to be treated of here.


SVBSOLANVS. As touching then the second, may we not say it to be three ways
miserable? One in respect of the filthiness thereof, another for the pleasure
taken therein, and the third for the Gain it self, whereby this Carnal man is
tied the rather thereunto: whereas others, such as pursue the like folly with
their own expenses and loss, do thereby deliver themselves the sooner from
their noisome and loathsome servitude; and therefore we see commonly that a
Mercenary Fornicator who follows that filthy trade, either for supplying of
his own need, or else for desire of superfluity, cannot find in his heart to
leave off, till either his carnality do first leave him, or he leave himself
for altogether, with evident danger of eternal perdition. In whom is
verified the saying of the Prophet Osee, speaking of fornicators ( cap. 5.)
They (says he) will not have in their thoughts any will to return to God
again. Therefore such Carnal men, whether they be mercenary or no (I mean,
whethersoeuer they seek their pleasure, or their gain) may do well ever to
remember not only the prohibition thereof, but also the punishment ordained for
it in Holy Scriptures, as in Leuit. 19. Si moechatus quis fuerit cum vxore
alterius, and adulterium perpetrauerit cum vxore proximi sui, morte moriantur
and moe^hus and adultera. And again (Deuteronomy. 13.) Non erit meretrix de filiabus
Israel, nec scortator de filijs Israel; which is also confirmed by the Law of
Grace, with a precept of greater purity and perfection ( Matthew. 5.) Audistis
quia dictum est antiquis, Non moechaberis; ego autem dico vobis, quia omnis qui
viderit mulierem ad concupiscendam eam, iam moechatus est in cord suo. And
again ( Heb 13.) Fornicatores enim and adulteros iudicabit Deus. And the
rather also because their vice and sin, as says S. Ambrose (lib. 1. de
Abraham) etiam feris ac barbaris detestabile est.


AQVILONIVS. For so much hereof as concerns the mercenary stipend of
fornicators or adulterers, this which you have said, does indeed pertain to
me, who am a defender of Profit: but for the rest (I mean the delights taken
therein) your discourse touches Fauonius, more then me, for that he is a
special favorer of Pleasure.

Here Fauonius, though he did not repyne to be thought a friend to Pleasure in
general, yet taking it to be some reproach unto himself, to be interlaced in
the reckoning of so dishonest a cause, intruded himself into the pursuit of
the other branches of Subsolanus last partion, saying some what angerly to
Aquilonius.


FAVONIVS. Whether I be a favorer of Pleasure or no, I take you to be one of
those, who for Mercenary Gain would make no scruple at all to calumniate one
that is absent, to the smooth flattering of another that is present.


AQVILONIVS. As touching the calumniation we be not yet come so far forward,
though perhapps we may be ere it be long; but for the flattery whenever it
procures any gain, I am no less then you have supposed me to be, and the
rather for that in no place where I have traveled, I have ever hitherto found
the heart of any man so hard, that was not greatly to be mollified with the
hearing of his own praise. For that as verity causes hatred, so adulation
does engender love, according to the old Pouerbe: Obsequium amicos, veritas
odium parit.


FAVONIVS. That is with those who love themselves too much, whereby they think
they be not flattered but duly commended, though perhaps in truth they little
deserve it: whereas such others as know themselves aright, albeit they may be
naturally desirous to hear their own praise; yet will they be wary not to
suffer themselves to be scorned, or mocked with false adulation, like as was
Esopes Crow, which by the flattery of the Fox, let fall the meat she held in
her mout^.


AQVILONIVS. Herein consists the praise of this Art, to be able to work such
miracles.


FAVONIVS. Then you account flattery I perceive to be an Art.


AQVILONIVS. Not only an Art, but an Art of Arts, which goes beyond all other
Arts.


FAVONIVS. Let me ask you then this question, Whether he who flatters, does
use to speak as he thinks?


AQVILONIVS. Such a one as does so, may be rather a true praiser, then a
flatterer.


FAVONIVS. So that a flatterer speaks one thing and thinks another.


AQVILONIVS. If he should do otherwise, it were then no Art at all, but a silly
plain kind of dealing.


FAVONIVS. Then he who will play the Flatterer cu^ningly; must first learn to
be a false dissembler.


AQVILONIVS. If you have no worse to say against him then that, he will do well
enough.


FAVONIVS. So as you take it, that to dissemble is a very tolerable thing.


AQVILONIVS. I make no question of it.


FAVONIVS. Then I pray yo^ tell me, Whether he who utters with his tongue
that which his inward dissimulation has contrived, may not be called a Liar?


AQVILONIVS. I am sorry that word has escaped your mouth, because albeit he
may be so called, yet does he lie in a most pleasing manner, and nothing at all
maliciously.


FAVONIVS. But do you mean that the same pleasing Lie, should be made for the
benefit of the party flattered, or else of the good of the Fatterer himself?


AQVILONIVS. You might think the Flatterer a fool to do it, if it were not
principally for his own benefit.


FAVONIVS. Then his own self-love is the principal cause of his flattery,
thereby to make his advantage of the party flattered.


AQVILONIVS. For whose love else may he have more cause to do it?


FAVONIVS. In so much, as by his flattering he not only deceaueth treacherously
the party flattered, but seeks to infect him also with the same vice of
self-love, wherewith he himself is already infected: and this to the end to be
able so to lead him up and down by the Nose, as we see Bearewardes, with a
ring to lead their Bears; and therefore we may well say, that as flattery
begins with dissimulation and lying, so also it ends with treachery and
deceyte.


AQVILONIVS. I will not deny it, neither do I mislike it, if it be for his
profit and gain.


FAVONIVS. Belike then (to come now unto the last part of Subsolanus his former
division) you will not stick to admit also this Flatterer of ours, to play the
cunning Cheater for his greater gain.


AQVILONIVS. Such kind of cunning cheating it may be, as I will not stick to
admit it in him indeed.


FAVONIVS. As for example, What say you unto one, who having a Gould Chain,
caused a counterfaite one to be made very like it, and offered the better
chain to be sold to a Goldsmith, upon whom (after he had touched, and
waighed it, yea and bargained also for it) he dexterously shifted the
cou^terfaite Chain instead of the other?


AQVILONIVS. I do not directly allow of this, because he was so wealthy as to
have a gould chain to sell, and therefore was not yet brought unto such
necessity, as to be permitted the acting of such a fraud.


FAVONIVS. Let me then propound unto you this other case, of one who pretended
in the time of Lent to have lost a Budget with a hundred Crowns of money in
it, and of another his companion, who by accord betwixt them, was to faygne to
have found it, so he who lost it having commended the matter to be inquired of
in the Pulpit by the public Preacher of the Town, the other discovered to him
in secret the finding thereof, but yet, with such a protestation of his own
poverty, as the Preacher for the pity he took of so conscionable a man, got
him by collection, that Lent, little less then an hundred Crowns, the which
sum he, and his Companion divided betwixt them?


AQVILONIVS. Of the invention it self I allow well enough, but not of the base
kind of begging.


FAVONIVS. What say you then by one, who binding himself by obligation to repay
a borrowed sum of money, cast upon the same obligation such a dust, as eat
out all the letters, and so shifted of the payment by that kind of fraud?


AQVILONIVS. This invention I like not at al, because another may use it
against me that has but once heard of it, as well as I against him.


FAVONIVS. Well then, I will propound unto you yet this other, of one who
taking with him his Neighbor, did hide under the ground an hundred Crowns,
which money his neighbor having need of, conuayed secretly from thence,
leaving in the place a bagg of stones?


AQVILONIVS. It may be he had an intention to use the money a while, and to
return it to the same place again.


FAVONIVS. He returned it indeed, though he had no such intention when he took
it: for the owner thereof having missed it, and suspecting that his neighbor
had taken it, told him that the day following he would hide another hundred
Crowns in the same place; whereupon his neighbor thinking to get the same
also, carried back the first hundred Crowns, and thereby lost the same.


AQVILONIVS. The more I reflect on the matter, the more I disallow it, because
he betrayed the confidence which was reposed in him, without any constraint of
necessity.


FAVONIVS. What say you then to two companions, who carried a hundred Crowns
to a rich old Usurer to keep, taking an obligation of him, that he should not
deliver it unto either of them, unless they came both together for it: after
which it passed not long but that one of them, by the consent of his fellow put
on a suit of mourning apparel, and pretending to the Usurer that his
companion was dead, got the hundred Crowns out of his hands: and shortly
after, the other appearing, he obtained sentence against the Usurer by virtue
of his said obligation, for another hundred Crowns.


AQVILONIVS. To have served an old Usurer such a trick, it misliketh me nothing
at all.


FAVONIVS. But yet the Usurer bethinking him better of the matter, caused the
sentence to be revoked again by alleging to the Judge the words of his
obligation, that he was not bound to repay the money, unless both of them
together came for it, wherewith the suit ended, for such reason as you may
conjecture.


AQVILONIVS. I am sorry it took no better effect, for that the shift (if it had
been in a time of necessity) was both good and clenly.


FAVONIVS. But what do you say the while unto the other sort of cunning
Cheatinges, which be commonly used at all kinds of gaming: I mean either in
the act it self, or the circumstances, as by Charms, Falsifications,
Butty-playing, and the like?


AQVILONIVS. As though unto all kind of gaming there has not always been
annexed a certain aduantagious liberty of playing, which you make so much the
worse, by comprizing it under the title of cunning Cheating: for though true it
be, that it has in it some cunning, yet it is too Courtly a practice, to be
called Cheating.

Here Subsolanus being desirous to return again unto his unfinished
distribution, began to say unto Aquilonius.


SVBSOLANVS. Having treated hitherto sufficiently of that kind of unlawful
Mercenary Gain, which is but secretly dishonest; there rests yet to speak
of that other part which is dishonest more apparently, the which we may reduce
unto these eight heads following; to wit, unto public proceedings, which be
either fraudulent, or violent, or disloyal, or reproachful, or cruel, or
inhumane, or scurrilous, or iniust.


AQVILONIVS. A fair rablement of memorable particularities, and well picked
out.


SVBSOLANVS. That public dishonest Mercenary gain, which is wont to rise of
public fraud, may we not say it to be either by deceit of words, and that
either with oaths, or without oaths, or else by fraudulent deceit in actions,
as for example by the way of buying or selling?


AQVILONIVS. Such proceedings as these be seen indeed sometimes to occur.


SVBSOLANVS. That other dishonest Mercenary gain which is to be gotten by any
public violence, may we not say it to be either, when it is done under the
color of sport, or else when it is done in plain earnest, as to rob on the
high way, to break into houses, and the like?


AQVILONIVS. It must be a great and urgent necessity, that should drive men
unto these extremityes.


SVBSOLANVS. The third dishonest Mercenary gain which is wont to rise of
public disloyalty, may we not say it to be either by way of treachery, or else
of treason?


AQVILONIVS. Such things no doubt, be adventured upon sometimes for desire of
Profit.


SVBSOLANVS. The fourth dishonest Mercenary gain which is to be gotten with
the blot of public reproach, may we not say it to be either with shame of
body, whereof there want not examples, or else with shame of mind; as to bear
false witness, and the like?


AQVILONIVS. All is according as it is taken.


SVBSOLANVS. The fifth dishonest Mercenary gain which is wont to rise of some
public cruelty, may we not say it to be either by the way of slashing (whereof
the marks are rife enough echwhere to be seen) or else by the way of mayming
men in their lymmes?


AQVILONIVS. You will scarce leave place anon for any disorder at all to be any
where committed.


SVBSOLANVS. The sixth dishonest Mercenary gain which is to be gotten by any
public. Inhumanity, may we not say it to be either by the way of infaming men,
or else by doing them some other discourtesy?


AQVILONIVS. A very narrow searcher into matters you show your self to be.


SVBSOLANVS. The seventh dishonest Mercenary gain, which is wont to rise of
public Scurrility, may we not say it to be either by the way of unclean
speaking, or else by the way of more impudent jesting?


AQVILONIVS. Now me thinks you stoop very low, to take exception to such
ordinary imperfections.


SVBSOLANVS. And lastly the eight dishonest Mercenary gain, which is to be
gotten by public Injustice, may we not say it to be, either public betwixt
party and party, or else public by the way of office?


AQVILONIVS. By hemning in things thus together after this manner, you may say
what you will.


SVBSOLANVS. Now then it seems that it is already high time to determine with
all the old Moralists, that nothing can be gainefull which is not just and
honest, whereof the reason shall evidently appear hereafter, especially in the
end of this days Conference, when I shall consider of the Profit, or Disprofit
that the Soul reapeth by fraudulent gain; and therefore in the mean time,
relying upon the known, and excellent Axiom of Cicero in his Offices (to wit,
Nihil vtile quod non sit honestum) I affirm, that no Gain which is
fraudulent, can be truly profitable, as to sell Land which is litigious to one
that knows it not, which is an act that repugneth with Justice, according as
does all other fraudulent buying and selling, for the which Claudius was taxed
amongst the Romans, about a house which he sold to Calphurnius.


AQVILONIVS. If we measure Justice still so strictly, we shall make a fair
hand ere long.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not also say, that no Gain which is gotten with furious
violence can be truly profitable: As to extort any thing by force, under the
color of sport or earnest, according as those good fellows be wont to do, who
purchase their revenues by the high ways; for which kind of faults were
infamous amongst the Romans, both Bargulus of Illyria, and Viriatus of
Portugal?


AQVILONIVS. You need not to have sought so far for examples, since our own
Country does yield us enough of them.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not likewise say, that no kind of Gain which grows of
disloyalty, can be truly profitable: As to betray any other for his own
preferment; as Marius the Roman betryed Metellus to get the Consulship from him?


AQVILONIVS. It may be, that at that time, there were as many in Rome, that did
commend him, as discommend him for it.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not further say, that no Gain which is gotten with
reproach or shame can be truly profitable: As to falsify Deeds, and such like,
nor yet to be consenting unto any such acts; for the which were taxed the two
great Romans M. Crassus, and Q. Horiensius to have favored for their own
gain, the falsified Testament of L. Minutius brought them out of Greece?


AQVILONIVS. To bear any blame with such kind of personages as these, would
rather seem to be a reputation then a reproach.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not say withal, that no Gain which is polluted with
cruelty can be truly profitable: as to be consenting to the shedding of blood,
or to the mayming of any man; as the Athenians were taxed for cutting off the
thumbes of the Ageneti, lest they should be offensive to their City, by rowing
in their own Gallyes?


AQVILONIVS As I remember, some one of the Kings of France, had designed to do
the like unto all such English prisoners as he should happen to take in the
wars, to hinder thereby their Archery.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not say moreover, that no Gain which is gotten with
Inhumanity can be truly profitable; as to defame any man by word or writing, or
to use any other kind of discourtesy, as in Rome first Petronius, and after him
Rapius were generally reproved for their inhumane prohibiting of strangers from
their Cittyes, except such as would compound with them for their Licenses?


AQVILONIVS. To make good this, I could the sooner condescend, for somewhat I
have suffered my self in that kind.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not say as yet, that no Gain which is gotten by scurrility
can be truly profitable, or else by indecent Jesting; for which vices was
infamous amongst the Grecians Aristippus, and amongst the Romans, Sarmentus, as
also Texius?


AQVILONIVS. Of all the rest these kind of Companions do least content me.


SVBSOLANVS. May we not say in like manner, that no Gain which is gotten with
public Injustice, can be truly profitable, whether so it be betwixt party and
party, or else by the way of office; in which kind be condemned the Athenians
for their unjust banishing their iustest sort of Citizens?


AQVILONIVS. As touching the Injustice of Officers and Magistrates there has
enough been said already, and for that other Injustice betwixt party and party,
we have yet time enough to speak thereof.


SVBSOLANVS. Then you will make a difference, I perceive, betwixt the Injustice
of Magistrates, and the Injustice of private men; as if private men were
privileged herein more then Magistrates?


AQVILONIVS. You say very well, for so indeed they seem to be, by reason of
the common use and custom amongst men, which makes private men's Injustice,
frauds, and deceipts in private matters to be either generally approved, or at
least less condemned, then the Injustice of public Magistrates in public
affairs; and therefore according to the common practice of the world, to what
end does any man set up a trade, but to exercise Injustice? or buy any pelting
office, but to gain his living by Injustice? or fetch commodityes from
foreign Countries, but with subtle accounts to deceive others by Injustice;
since seldom times it is seen, that any of these do rise from little unto
much, without having first committed many and many Iniustices?


SVBSOLANVS. Whereupon it would follow according to your opinion, that to learn
also to do Injustice in this sort, were a profitable thing.


AQVILONIVS. A profitable thing, you may be sure.


SVBSOLANVS. But may we likewise say it is honest?


AQVILONIVS. Unto him at leastwise (as has been said) that can do it covertly,
by knowing very well with what counterfeit holiness toward God, and what
feigned sincerity toward the world, to get not only wealth by doing such
Injustice, but also the fame and reputation to be the honestest man in his
Parish.


SVBSOLANVS. Then so much the more as these kind of men be iniust, so much the
more they come to be exalted.


AQVILONIVS. If it were not so, how could so many poor beginners rise daily,
as we see, to be Magistrates in the Cittyes where they dwell?


SVBSOLANVS. Then so much also the more, may every one of these be said to be
just and honest, as he is vnindifferent and partial.


AQVILONIVS. Not only to be honest and just, but also to be grave and constant
in his proceedings; and all this by the credit of his Wealth, which according
to the opinion of the Philosopher, Is a sign of eternal Glory, as the only
thing at this day, that does govern the whole world, having force to throw
unto the ground, not only the power of the Laws, but the strength of Arms,
and the skill of Art, and Wit of man in all things.


SVBSOLANVS. So that unto one who has little or nothing to begin withal, his
necessity, you think, may permit him to deceive any man by Injustice?


AQVILONIVS. You say well; the Profit that may rise of this Injustice, ought
not to be so culpable in him, as the like unjust profit, that may rise unto a
rich Magistrate.


SVBSOLANVS. Then somewhat, belike, you have yet more at large to say, touching
Profit in this lower degree, not in Magistrates as before, but in such others,
as being but poorly borne, have no way else to live, but by their own exercise
only?


AQVILONIVS. Upon what other pillar else may we better lay the foundation of
such a poor man's Profit?


SVBSOLANVS. Will you therefore that we account all sort of Mercenary gain,
which is the reward of Exercise, to be good and lawful?


AQVILONIVS. At leastwise still unto a poor and needy man, as I have said
before.


SVBSOLANVS. But how far do you account this word Exercise to be extended? and
unto what?


AQVILONIVS. Unto all sorts of industryes, as well of the mind, as the body.


SVBSOLANVS. And all this you will have us hold to be lawful unto the supply
of Poverty?


AQVILONIVS. I hitherto see no cause to the contrary, and the rather also, for
that according to Hesiodus, not Exercise, but Idleness is said to be Villainy.


SVBSOLANVS. So that all gainefull Exercises you will have to be lawful still
to a poor man, whether they be of the mind or body?


AQVILONIVS. I have alleged you my authority, confimed also, as some say, by
Socrates, though Xenophon perhaps deny it.


SVBSOLANVS. As for example, it may be lawful for him then to make his gain by
Craft, because it is an Exercise of the mind, and also by Fraud because it is
an Exercise of the body.


AQVILONIVS. You have not hard me to say so as yet.


SVBSOLANVS. Then some exercises belike may be gainefull, which are not lawful.


AQVILONIVS. The censure of the Law is one thing, and the vulgar opinion of men
another, who do many times admit by custom some things to be laudable, which
be not strictly lawful.


SVBSOLANVS. You mean, perhaps, that to use false weights may by the common
custom thereof be laudable, though not lawful.


AQVILONIVS. You choose out still the hardest examples that may be.


SVBSOLANVS. So that some exercises also may be gainefull, which be neither
lawful nor laudable.


AQVILONIVS. It is enough for my purpose, if unto the help of a poor man, they
be but only tolerable.


SVBSOLANVS. You think it then belike a tolerable kind of counterfeit gain,
to falsify one thing for another?


AQVILONIVS. If so it may be done in such a place, at such a time, and by such
a poor person, as cannot well otherwise live, what lets, I pray you, that
it may not be accounted tolerable?


SVBSOLANVS. So as besides the poverty of the person, there must also concur
the conuenience of time and place, to make an evil gain tolerable?


AQVILONIVS. I put in enough to avoid the rather your exceptions against it.


SVBSOLANVS. Then some kind of gains may be tolerable in one place, and time,
that may not be tolerable in another?


AQVILONIVS. I will not greatly stand with you herein.


SVBSOLANVS. And where the exercise is not tolerable, there the gain which
rises thereof is not in any wise to be permitted.


AQVILONIVS. I see as yet no great difficulty, why not to allow it.


SVBSOLANVS. So that one, and the same gain may, by the diversity of the time
and place, be both tolerable, and not tolerable.


AQVILONIVS. Why not I pray you, as well as one and the same gain, yea at one
and the same time, be both profitable, and unprofitable?


SVBSOLANVS. You will make me, I hope, to understand your mind a little better
herein.


AQVILONIVS. As for example, to have gained in the time of war a fierce and
bold horse, is it not profitable? and yet if his fiercenes and boldness be such
as his Master cannot use him, then that which is profitable, is also
unprofitable to him.


SVBSOLANVS. So as by this account it would seem, that every thing which is
contrary to profit, is unprofitable.


AQVILONIVS. It sounds so of it self apparently enough, if I had not
confessed it already.


SVBSOLANVS. Health, Liberty, and Wealth, be they not profitable things?


AQVILONIVS. Profitable I grant them to be.


SVBSOLANVS. Then all that which is contrary to any of these is unprofitable.


AQVILONIVS. How can it otherwise be, by the alleged rule of contraryes?


SVBSOLANVS. As for example, the having of a rich wife is unprofitable, because
it may be an impediment to health; the study of letters is unprofitable,
because it may be a hinderance to liberty: and the eating of meat is
unprofitable, because it is a consuming of wealth.


AQVILONIVS. You be a merry companion, I see, to deal with all, that have
reduced this your disputation of Profit, unto so base and vile a conceit in the
end, as if beggary were a thing to be iested at.

Here Fauonius seeing Subsolanus entered into a cogitation with himself, what
answer to make hereunto, began before him, to say unto Aquilonius.


FAVONIVS. I am nothing at all of your opinion, that Need may serve to excuse
any bad kind of getting.


AQVILONIVS. Nor am I any thing at all of your opinion, for though bad getting,
when so it is known to the world, may be somewhat reproachful, yet poverty I
take to be a greater reproach, because it cannot so well be hid.


FAVONIVS. To hide honest poverty there is no need, for that it brings with
it no shame at all, and consequently no reproach, as you suppose it to do; for
though at the first, it may somewhat greiue the mind with care and solicitude,
yet after it is once received without resistance, and made familiar, it is
facile to bear, and confortable by keeping men sober, modest, continent, and
also secure not only from infirmityes, but likewise from the malice of others.
For whereas the rich man, if so he spend not all, is commonly said to be
covetous; the poor man we see, though his cupidity be never so great, is
always held to be of a free condition full of tranquillity, and repose.


AQVILONIVS. What repose can there be in poverty, when neither the mind, nor
the body receives thereby any contentment, but are still tormented both the
one and the other with the defects which poverty draws after it?


FAVONIVS. If Poverty bring with it any defects, they be of less moment by
much, then those that do accompany wealth, the which, by the Philosopher, be
said in his Ethics, to be these: first Pride, in making men vainly to think,
that together with their riches they have all other benefits, as well of the
mind, as of the body, and that men may any way possess any thing. Secondly
Prodigality, causing men thereby to become superfluous, not only for satisfying
their sumptuous desires, but also to make show and ostentation of their
prosperous fortune. Lastly, it is accompained with Arrogance, making men still
to think, that other do admire, and also affect that which they do possess;
whereby supposing with their wealth to make good all their faults, they become
to be so injurious to their Neighbors, that the Philosopher concludes them in
the end, to be in little better case then fortunate Madmen.


AQVILONIVS. As mad as you make them to be, yet are they able well enough to
defend, and support themselves, which the poorer sort are no way able to do, by
reason that their poverty does so much oppress them.


FAVONIVS. It is rather the injurious cruelty of the rich, that does oppress
the poor more then their own poverty, the which cannot be burdensome as you
suppose, chiefly unto one who is contented to live according to the rules of
Nature, but only when it is accompanied rather with superfluous thoughts, then
with due fear of necessary wants.


AQVILONIVS. You speak so generally against the cruelty of rich men, without
any distinction made of their degrees and vocations, as if he who gets his
riches well, and he who gets it euilly, were both of one Predicament.


FAVONIVS. The rich man spoken of in the Scripture ( Luc. cap. 6.) you do not
find, that he was condemned, because he got his goods euilly, since the
Evangelist does not say, that either he was an Usurer, or that he possessed his
wealth with an evil conscience, but that he used it not well, nor with that
charity as he ought to have done.


AQVILONIVS. So that riches you mean cannot be good unto any, but unto good
men only.


FAVONIVS. Nor always unto good men neither, because we see by experience,
that unto some good men riches do them hurt, by inciting them to Vice, and
drawing them from Virtue, though the riches themselves be neither virtuous, nor
vicious; and therefore not evil things only, but things which be indifferent,
and which in appearance be good, may also do harm, and sometimes more harm
then the things themselves which be apparently evil. And hereof it comes,
that a man may more easily let other men's goods alone, then use his own well,
because on the one he knows that he cannot intrude without offense, but with
the other he thinks he may be more bold, to do with it what he will, without
rendering any account for the same. And therefore it is no safety for a man to
love his own riches too well, though they be never so justly gotten, least
thereby he be induced, not only to be covetous of that he has, but to love
those other also which may be gotten with fraud, because his too much fervent
love and desire thereof may blind his judgment so much therein, as to make him
think, at least, that to be lawful which is not.


AQVILONIVS. Then if riches may be hurtful unto good men, as well as unto
evil men, unto what end has Nature provided them?


FAVONIVS. She has provided them to this end, for men to take thereof so much
only as is sufficient to provide for their states, and professions without
superfluity: for as the Moon does never eclipse, but when she is at the Full:
so the mind is never so much obscured, as it is with the superfluity of riches.
And again, as the Moon is then furthest off from the Sun which gives it
light when it is at the Full; so a man when he is fullest of riches, is
furthest off from that equity and justice, which ought to give him light in all
his proceedings: and therefore he might do well herein to imitate that wary
Fly, which puts not her feet into the great mass of Honey, but only takes
with her tongue, so much thereof as serves her turn and no more, least by
doing otherwise she might remain taken and drowned therein.


AQVILONIVS. So that by this account the more that rich men have, so much the
less liberty they possess.


FAVONIVS. Thereof you may be sure, since gold and silver was never made to
load men withal, as captives thereunto, but to load mules and horses
therewith, which be captives by Nature, and nevertheless do not take upon them
more then their forces be able to bear; whereas the covetous rich man never
thinks he has enough on his back, till he fall to the ground with it, nor
then neither until he has taken upon him so much, as he is overwhelmed and
quelled down under it. And is not this, think you, a thraldom and utter
loss of Liberty?


AQVILONIVS. You say well at leastwise, for so much credit as there needs to
be given to such fabulous similitudes; but the poorer sort the while being
oppressed with their poverty indeed, do loose thereby their liberty for
alltogeather, not fabulously, as you resemble the rich to do, but visibly and
palpably, to the sight and feeling of all men.


FAVONIVS. And yet for all this many poor men we have hard of, not only amongst
Christians, but amongst the Pagan Philosophers themselves, who notwithstanding
their poverty have voluntarily and freely neglected and contemned riches. As
for example, Anacharses refused the treasure sent him by Gresus: also
Anacreontes refused the treasure sent him by Policrates; and Albionus refused
the treasure sent him by Antigonus, besides many more of that profession, too
long to be here recited.


AQVILONIVS. I hold them all to have been unwise, or to say better, for stark
fools: because, if so they had no need of it they might have given it to
others, who were in necessity, but by doing of neither, they did not thereby
make known themselves so much for contemners of riches, as for fishers after
vain glory: the which passion being of the two the more dear unto them,
therefore to buy them fame, they forsook to take money; like as those good
drinkers do, who sell their wheat to buy them malt, not because they hate
bread, but because of the two, they love their drink better.


FAVONIVS. Perhaps in poverty there be yet some greater contentments then you
be aware of, else what should have caused the great Conqueror of the world to
say, that if he were not Alexander, he would wish to be Diogenes, who was of
all other the poorest Philosopher of his time, or that was ever after him.


AQVILONIVS. You have lighted upon a notable couple of fishers after glory, and
very well matched them together, the one by the way of too much riches, and
the other by the way of too little sustenance, yea less then would serve his
need, or the decency of his profession.


FAVONIVS. And yet not only Alexander himself, but many others also did hold
him to be the happiest man of that age.


AQVILONIVS. Excess of passion is the cause of many extrauagancies; and
therefore Diogenes yielded less to the care of his need, then unto the care of
his said excessive vain glorious passion.


FAVONIVS. And I am of another opinion, to wit, that Passion is more flexible
then Need, the which is reputed not to be subject unto any Law at all; whereas
the other we see is restrained many ways, as by penaltyes, by subordination,
and sometimes also by gratuity, all which in their kinds do not a little bridle
men's extrauagant passions.


AQVILONIVS. I do not seek to enter so deeply into the search of such
Quiddityes, but this I know by experience now adays, that not the learned
Philosophers but the richest Worldlings be accounted, not only for the happiest
creatures, but also for the wisest men.

Here Subsolanus, as one that could forbear no longer to hear Aquilonius so
far out of the way, preventing Fauonius his answer, began thus to say unto him.


SVBSOLANVS. Where, I pray you, was that covetous Wisdom, you speak of, at
the very first beginning of things, when there was not yet in the world any
kind of money, or riches to be found at all, but that each where one commodity
was changed for another? Belike the man of those days, if wisdom, as you
say, had chiefly consisted in riches, were all fools, and yet some Wise men
have said, That happy, and most happy were they, who lived in that so simple
and honest an age, while no vanities were as yet discovered amongst men, nor
any disordinate appetites obscured the light of the understanding, with the
temptations of the frail and deceiuable senses, and while there were as yet no
weapons, nor wars, nor locks, nor doors, no robbing, nor stealing, nor any
violent temptations unto any kind of wickedness. For though women and men did
converse together no less then they do now, yet the women were modest and
shamefast, and the men myld, and both of them continent, being accustomed to
mortify and suppress the disobedience of the flesh, partly with abstinence,
and partly with assiduous labor, so as they felt no great motives unto sin:
I mean that innocent and pacificall age, when no Metal was as yet dug out
of the earth, nor no ox, nor horse employed to till the ground, but that every
one lived of that which the earth it self of it own accord brought forth,
without the help of any industry or art; for so God of his bounty had ordained,
that all those things, whereof man had need, as flesh, fruits, and the like,
should be provided for him, and produced for his use above the gound, hyding
and burying all those other things which were superfluous (as gold, silver, and
the rest) within the bowels of the earth it self, to the end he should
neither love them nor desire them, nor be tempted to use them, in respect of
the great harm he might receive by them. Besides that, no timbred Oak, nor
Fur, nor Pyne had then been framed into ships, to furrow the windy seas,
either for curiosity to pass from one Country to another, or else to fetch home
the variety of forrayne unknown delicacyes; the which art of nauigating,
whosoever first found out (were it either the Sorians, or the Phenicians, or
else Jason of Argos and his Confederates) certain it is, that no other occasion
moved them thereunto, but mere avarice only, whereof has ensued both rapines,
violences, deaths, ruins and great dispersions of people. For if Navigations
had never been found out, the King of Colchos had never been deprived of his
golden Fleece, together with the death of his Son, and the rapine of his
daughter; nor the City of Troy had never by the Greeks been destroyed,
together with Priamus the King thereof, and all his posterity; nor Greece it
self had never been so desolated, as it was, by the great navy of Xerxes King
of Asia. Moreover in that age no paper, nor pen was yet in use, wherewith to
write any Statutes, or Decrees, until the time that Minos gave Laws to the
Candians, Lucurgus to the Lacedaemonians, Solon to the Athenians, Trismegistus
to the Thebans, Phido to the Corinthians, Caronda to the Carthaginians, Romulus
and Numa Pompilius to the Romans: for before those times men lived under those
happy, and pleasant constitutions, which Nature her self had planted in their
breasts, full of sincerity, full of meekenes, and full of all other pacificall
consolation, as well mental, as corporal. Therefore now to answer to your
former allegation, that rich men are the wisest men, should these other men who
were so happy for all things else, be therefore said to be fools, because they
chiefly wanted the use of money, and thereby the desire to possess the same too
greedily, as you would have that wise man of yours to do?


AQVILONIVS. Whatsoever in those days they of whom you speak either might, or
might not have been said to be, I will not much stand upon; but this I will still
affirm, that if now in this age of ours such poor plain dealing men, were
living, neither would their sincerity, nor their meeknes, nor their pacificall
spirits be able to get them so much reputation of wit, as their rude poverty
would condemn them for fools; whiles suffering thereby a number of worldly
greiuances, they could neither be grateful to themselves, nor yet acceptable
unto others. For if such a poor man should now, but open his mouth to speak,
every body straight would be ready to laugh at him, and to ask, Who is this?
according to that in Eccles. 13.


SVBSOLANVS. Those worldly grieuances which poverty you say brings with it,
do rather proceed of cupidity then of any necessary need, for that the body may
be sustained with a little, and therefore I see no reason why men with so much
study and care should seek to feed, and nourish the same, or to adorn, and
cover it so sumptuously as they do, spending therein their riches
superfluously, and with very little praise at all, if not rather with rebuke
and shame, since they may otherwise so easily find, not only wherewith to feed,
but also wherewith to vest, without seeking as they do for the spices, and
silks of forrayne Countries; for that chiefly unto these ends, we see, is the
said cupidity of their riches converted, if not unto avarice, the which of the
two is the worst: for though the same, after a sort, may be colored with the
care to be had of posterity, yet in the mean season, none are so miserable as
they who desire overmuch; since thereby they are ready to suffer a thousand
indignityes, and a thousand disgraces, if not also perils for the satisfying
of their insatiable desires, and many times also unto their own ruin, as
happened unto Gresus the King of Lydia, and unto Crassus the Roman, the one
overcome by Cyrus for his wealth already gotten, and the other put to death by
the Parthians in seeking to get more then he had: so as the Rich man sometimes
mounteth, sometimes sincketh, sometimes commands, sometimes serves,
sometimes is splendidous, sometimes obscure, sometimes threatens, sometimes
entreats, and all this for the respect of things which be vile; and therefore
how much more stable and secure art thou on the other side (o gentle Poverty!)
thou, I say, who when thou obseruest the Laws of Nature, do subdue all
paynfull industry, do overcome all mortal honor and do contemn the
vain discourses of men, not caring for the heat of the summer, nor much
esteeming the cold of the winter, but contented to repair the one with the
shadow of the leaued trees, and to withstand the other with the help of the
cheap vntawed skins of beasts, whereby in that homely weed thou shunnest the
temptations of all idle love, of all vain lasciuiousnes, and of all shameful
lust, as also all the envy of men, all the danger of thieves, and all the
disturbance of broken sleeps: wherefore to thee be the eternal praise of all
ingeniosity, of all inventions, and of all arts, as unto the egregious Mother
of all study, of all speculation, and of all operation: whose virtues (to
conclude) be many, whose refuges more and whose benefits be infinite.


AQVILONIVS. These be Sophistical fictions, rather then reasons, all of them
found out by the art and malignity of such, as under a certain kind of
Philosophical authority, do attend to invent those abstracted arguments;
thereby to give credit and reputation to the beggarly and bare state of their
own base fortune, because they are not able to attain unto more; and therefore
annexing Pride unto Beggary, do wax bold thereby, to make an exterior show of
competency with the rich, while interiourly yet they be glad, when they can,
but to finger only some fragments of their felicity and abundance, under
pretense sometimes to buy them books, and other like necessaryes, though they
bestow it after, more lasciuiously then they would willingly be known to do;
and therefore there is no heed to be taken at all unto their public words, and
sayings, but rather to their hidden thoughts, and secret workings, contrary to
that which they preach and teach unto others openly, making them believe in
show that their own state is better, then the state of the rich, though they
think it to be otherwise, and would be glad to change with them. Which kind of
proceeding Pliny writing to his friend Fabatus, does say, That there is nothing
more perilous then to think, that the state of one man is better then
another, because hereby they who find themselves to be in the worst, never
leave to contend, if not also to conspire, against the fame of those others
whom they suppose to be in better state then they. And hence it comes, that
the poor do inueigh so much against the rich, not for that they would not be
rich themselves, but as I have said before, because they are not able to reach
to any more, then their beggarly fortune has allotted them.


SVBSOLANVS. What more in this world should either they, or any other need to
seek for, then a quiet and pacificall mind, well contented with whatsoever God
sends, be it either Poverty, or what other thing else; since with this only
consolation, a man is happy enough, though he be otherwise never so poor; and
without this, he is nothing happy, though his riches be never so great: So that
every state is good, and every state is evil, not so much in respect of it
self, as in respect of the circumstances it brings with it. For who will
deny, that the state of a rich man may not be good, if so it be used with
temperance; or that the state of a poor man may not be evil, if so it be not
supported with patience, since not the sufferance of any adversity does make a
man happy and blessed, but the pacificall mind wherewith he tolerateth the
same; and therefore every one ought to conform himself not unto that state
which he may think of in his mind (because worldly men do most of all inclyne
unto that which their covetousness does make them desire) but unto that state
and degree, whether so it be rich or poor, which God for the more safety of
his soul has put him into. For so we see all other things else conserve the
states which God first gave them, without repining thereat at all; as the
Heavens, the Stars, the Air, the Fire, the Water, the Earth, and all sorts
of beasts, of fishes, and of plants, and all other earthly creatures, only man
excepted, who by his fall into sin, is never contented with his state, but is
always desirous of change: the Countryman would be a Citizen, the Citizen
would be a Soldier, the Soldier would be a Merchant, and the Merchant would
be a Gentleman; and which is most of all strange, the poor man would leave his
quiet, his careless, and his vnpensiue state, to change with the rich man for
his, who neither day not night, nor sleeping, nor waking does possess either
of body, or mind any sweet repose.


AQVILONIVS. It is a very hard thing to be able to persuade men with reasons,
unto that which they feel to be otherwise in themselves by experience; for who
may repose more quietly then may the rich, that have all their necessaryes
provided for to their hands, and also their laboursome Offices executed by
others? or if by chance they break any sleep, it is, you may be sure, in
thinking of golden employments, or else touching exployts of Policy and
Preferment: so that, the not sleeping of the rich, is more comfortable far,
then is the unquiet and half starued sleep of the poor, in the next degree
unto death it self. And therefore, as it is more then necessary for a poor
man, both for his sleeping and waking, to seek to better his state, by the
getting of riches to releive his penury, and to comfort his said unquiet
repose; so is it no less necessary for a rich man to conserve and increase his
wealth already possessed, without being too careless, or too negligent thereof,
at every smattering Booke-mans persuasion; for like as strength was ordained to
withstand violences, and not that the strong should sillily suffer themselves
to be ouerlaid; and as health was ordained to make men able to follow their
affairs, and not that the healthful should retiredly rust away in idleness: so
riches were also ordained to help to provide for necessaryes, and not that the
rich should either foolishly forsake, or consume their wealth lauishly. For
what praise could it be either to Lucius Mummius the Roman Captain (who
subdued Corinth) to have died so poor, by neglecting his own state, as his
Soldiers were driven to make a common gathering for his burial? Or unto
Paulus Aemilius (who subdued Macedon) to have left his daughters so poor, by
the like occasion, that the Common Wealth was feign to give them their marriage
money? Or else unto the younger Africanus (who destroyed Carthage) to have
neglected so much the care of his family, as his Daughters were feign to beg
for their dowryes? These be the brave examples of the neglectors and despisers
of riches, to have greatly damnified, if not utterly undone, their posterity
thereby; contrary unto that which we read of Pallas, of Callistus, and of
Narcissus, the infranchised slaves to Claudius the Emperor, who left behind
them diverse millions of Crowns; as also amongst the Philosophers, we read of
Cicero, of Terentius Varro, and of Seneca to have risen from little to be men
of great riches: and likewise amongst the soldiers we read of Caius Marius,
Lucius Sylla, and of Ventidius Bassus, who by their own industryes rose up
unto infinite wealth, and their posterity after them unto great fame and glory;
where on the other side, what in this world can be more reproachful then
poverty, or a greater enemy unto all kind of virtue, either in women or men? As
for example, in women what more unfaithful a Guardian may there be found of
their chastity (and consequently of all that is good in them) then is want and
necessity, when as the unmarried be easily drawn thereby unto all sorts of
lasciuiousnes, for fupply of their need, and the married be drawn no less to
make like hauock of their honesty? And in the same fort touching the state of
men, what so much does abase them, or makes abject and vile their mynds, not
only in their own conceits, but also in the opinion of others, as does the
burden of Poverty: for (so says the Wise man, Eccles. cap. 9.) That the
wisdom of the poor is despised. And again (Eccles. cap. 40) That it were
better to be dead, then to live in want and need; adding withal in his
Proverbs; That all the days of a poor man's life, be nothing else but misery.
Besides that, what also may be unto gratuity a greater enemy then the same?
What unto shamefastnes, Cum non been conueniunt, nec in vna sede morantur pudor
and egestas? And what unto the observation of all sorts of Laws, both humane,
and divine, unto the which necessity bears no respect at all? So that not
without cause is Poverty called the greatest enemy unto man, the companion unto
all kind of Vice, and of all other evils the extremest, yea worse then either
sickness, or imprisonment: for that unto him who is wealthy, there be remedies
enough to be applied for the one, and consolations enough to be found for the
other; and therefore though you in words do seem to favor poverty never so
much, yet I suppose for the putting of it in practice, you will strive against
it, no less then any other.


SVBSOLANVS. To strive against Poverty, we are not expressly commanded, further
then necessity requires, nor yet prohibited, so long as men get riches without
the violating of Justice, the which is understood to be violated, not only by
fraud, or force, as has been said before; but partly by not restoring that
which is borrowed, and partly by not rendering at the day that which is hired,
and likewise by not abstayning to wear out things left us in custody and
trust. And as none of these iniustices are to be used for the relief of
poverty, so also much less for the increase of wealth, since the superfluity
thereof is not, as you suppose, a shunner of vice, but an enemy to virtue, as
has been told you already, making men so idle, so slothful, and so
lascivious, as they become altogether effeminate, neither given to the
practice of Arms, nor yet to the study of letters. And therefore Democritus
judged the abundance of riches to be foolish, Heraclitus judged it to be
miserable, and Crates judged it to be frivolous and burdensome, for which
respect he threw his Wealth into the sea; though no kind of wealth be so
burdensome as that, which being wrongfully gotten, does seldom times descend
unto the third generation, and therefore the burden of honest poverty cannot be
so heavy to bear by much, as the burden of a rich man's culpable conscience.
For what else does take away either the innocence from the body, or the life
from the soul, but the infection of sin? So that sin alone is more
hurtful unto man then can be the hurt of all the world besides, or of Hell it
self. For what drove the Angels out of Heaven ( Isa. 14.) and Adam out of
Paradise ( Genes. 3.) or the great Flood into the world ( Genesis 8.) but sin?
Or what else overthrew the great Tower of Babylon (Genesis 11.) or destroyed
Amalec, and the Giants ( Exodus 17.) or caused to be cut in pieces the great
army of Senacherib (4. Reg. 19.) but sin? not to speak of the burning of
five Cittyes ( Genesis 19.) or of the persecuting of Aegipt with the seven
plagues ( Genesis 41.) or of the drowning of Pharao in the red sea ( Exodus 14.)
And finally (to omit all other examples ancient and modern) what are all the
miseryes, calamityes, and afflictions that fall upon men, but punishments for
sin? And therefore seeing that abundance of riches is a special motive, and
cause of sin (as I have declared before) it is evident that rich men are in a
dangerous state; in which respect our Savior himself affirms, That it is as
hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven, as a Camel to pass through a needles
eye: whereas poor men on the other side, are in far greater security, if they
be good men withal: for they do still receive comfort from God in all their
distresses be they never so great, and do never want necessaryes. For so God
releiued the poverty of Agar by an Angel ( Genesis 16.) the distress of David
and his people in the desert. (2. Reg. 17.) the misery of Noemi by Ruth the
wife of Booz. (Ruth. 2.) and the poverty of Elias by an Angel (3. Reg. 29.)
besides the like done upon diverse occasions to the Apostles themselves ( Act.
5.12.27.) and to innumerable other good men in all ages, whereof infinite
examples might be alleged. Furthermore the poor man who being confident of
Gods merciful providence, is contented with that which God gives him, wants
nothing, having all that he will have, because in not willing that which is
superfluous, he has whatsoever he desires, and therefore he alone may be said
to be poor, who is not contented with that which he has, and desires
superfluityes. And on the other side, only he may be said to be rich, who has
no need nor want of any thing, more then is requisite, and who desires not
that which he has not, but only so much as he must needs use, and may also
conveniently have: so as it is not the abundance of wealth that makes a man
rich, but the contented mind; nor the want of wealth that makes a poor man,
but the mind afflicted for that which is wanting. And therefore to be rich with
desire of increase, is to be poor, and to be poor without desire of more, is
to be rich: the which is another account then the world does use to make either
of the one or the other, reputing him to be poor who has but little, though
he be content therewith, and him to be rich who has a great deal, though he
live besides it, and never thinks he has enough. And these kind of rich men
be inferior far unto that other sort of poor men, both in life, in death, and
also after death: in life, I mean, because the poor man enjoys more his
liberty, both to go where he will, and to speak what he will, without any
great heed taken unto him; also suffers more easily miseryes, as one who is
more accustomed to bear them, and takes more pleasure in any recreation, as
one not so wonted to have them. Likewise the rich man is inferior to the poor
man in respect of his death, because no body conspireth or desires his end,
for that nothing is to fall unto them by the same; neither has he himself
when he departs any burden to disquiet his mind, for that he has not any
accounts with the world to make, neither is he so loath to leave the world; as
the rich man is, to whom not only the hour of death, but also the very
remembrance thereof is most bitter, as testifies the holy Scripture, saying; O
mors, quam amara est memoria tui homini habenti pacem in substantijs suis!
Moreover to show that the rich man is likewise inferior to the poor man after
his death, there shall need here no other proof, then that which Christ
himself has said thereof ( Luc. 6.) Blessed are you that be poor, for yours
is the Kingdom of heaven. And again; Miserable are you rich men, who in your
riches have all your consolation. So that the rich man has his glory here on
earth and the poor man has his in heaven; and therefore God ordained in the
old Law ( Deuter. 10.) That the Levites who were chosen for the Altar, and for
his own service, should have no possessions: and in the new Law the Apostle
testifies (1. Cor. 1.) that Pauperes elegit Deus ad hereditatem regni caele
is: yea our Savior Christ did not only live in poverty himself, and choose
poor disciples, but also did advise and counsel a young rich man, to sell all
that he had, and give it to the poor: So that poverty, although it be most
where abhorred, yet is it a great, and an inestimable treasure, in respect both
of the world to come, and also of this life, as being the mother of
tranquillity, the excluder of disquietnes, the Port of contentment and rest, a
sufferance without loss, a passion without strife, and the high way to
eternal happiness in heaven, so that it be sought and willingly suffered for
the love of God.


AQVILONIVS. And yet for all this we see few rich men that do abandone their
wealth, to make themselves poor, which is a great sign that there is
something in poverty more contrary to nature, then there is in riches.

Here Fauonius misliking the obstinacy of Aquilonius, said thus unto him.


FAVONIVS. He who speaks against poverty, speaks against riches: for first,
men were poor before they were rich, and so laboring by little and little
against their said poverty, have become to be rich in the end.


AQVILONIVS. Then according to this reason, we might likewise say, that he who
speaks against Disprofit, speaks against Profit; albeit before, we have
said them to be contraryes.


FAVONIVS. As contrary as they are, it cannot be denied, but that Disprofit
goes before Profit, and spending before getting; the Plowman must spend in
tilling his ground, before he can reap any fruit; the Artizan must lay out in
buying of wares to work upon, before he can receive any gain; and the
Merchant at sea must put in venture to loose all, before he can come to see his
own again. Also the Suitor at Law spends much in following of his suite,
before he can come to have any judgment on his side; the cunning Courtier
gives first many Presents, before he can get any reward in recompense; and the
buyer of Land lays out more money in one hour, then he is to see again in
twenty years after. Likewise the makers of paper must buy many rags, before
their paper can be made; the Printers of books must buy paper, before their
books can be sold; and the students of Sciences must buy many books, before
they can make any profit of their studyes; whereby it appears that Disprofit
many times is the beginner of Profit.


AQVILONIVS. So as by this means you will infer, that if you take away
poverty, you take away riches; and if you take away Disprofit, you take away
Profit.


FAVONIVS. You say well, since for as much as belongs to the first part of
your proposition, I do ask you, What delight a rich man might hope to find in
his riches, if so there were no poor man to do his labors for him? As for
example, to till his ground, to keep his horses, to go to the market, to dress
his meat, to fetch home his wood, to plaster his walls, and the like; all
which servile offices, and many other worse then these, if he should be driven
to do them himself, his wealth might lie by him, and stand him in little
steed: so as though by taking away poverty, you do not actually take away the
means unto the getting, and increasing of riches (which may sometimes be
otherwise also obtained, then by industrious poverty) yet in effect you should
bring thereby the rich man to be (for want of Drudges to serve him) in little
better case then the poor man himself; which poor man, by doing but only
those labors for his own proper use, which he is now hired to do for the rich
man, and the rich man thereby forced to do those labors for himself, which now
the poor man does for him for his money, he would be of the two, in worse
case, by being less able then the rich man to take such pains; and therefore
the poor man, if he will, may better live like a poor man, without the help
of the rich man, then the rich man may live like a rich man, without the help
of the poor man.


AQVILONIVS. I think you two have conspired together to sort out betwixt you
all the subtiltyes, that may be found in the favor of poverty, which yet when
you have all done, is like enough (according to the Proverb) betwixt two
stools to fall to the bare ground; where barely also it may be like to lie,
and that for a good while, I suppose, ere either of you both will stoop to
take it up. But what on the other side have you yet to say, touching our
mentioned disprofitable Profit? Belike you mean to reduce also the same unto
such a jesting reckoning, as Subsolanus, a little before, brought the like
proposition.


FAVONIVS. You shall see that, ere it belong, by my manner of proceeding;
wherein I have likewise to ask you, Whether all that wealth which is extant now
in the world, be not each where already possessed?


AQVILONIVS. It can not be denied, but that it is.


FAVONIVS. Then whosoever will go about to make any increase of Profit, must
seek to draw to himself some part of that wealth of the world which others
do yet possess.


AQVILONIVS. If your meaning be of money, either gold, or silver, he must do so
perforce.


FAVONIVS. So as he who has money must first diminish thereof, before he, who
has no money, or else but little money, can be able to increase the same.


AQVILONIVS. Good reason it is, that it should be so.


FAVONIVS. Then the disprofit of the one must precede the Profit of the other,
and so by consequence, if you take away the disprofit, you take away the
Profit, as has been said before.


AQVILONIVS. You deceive your self herein, and that not a little, since it is
not like, that he who has wealth, will so diminish himself of his having,
without some recompense from him who has to participate thereof, either by his
service, or by his work, or else by some other recompense, whereby his
Disprofit one way is to be restored him again, by his Profit some other way.


FAVONIVS. But what do you say moreover unto this other point unthought of,
which yet remains behind: May not that which a rich man does take to be for
his Profit, fall out otherwise to be Disprofitable unto him?


AQVILONIVS. You may do well to explane your self somewhat better, and then
will I answer you.


FAVONIVS. As for example, If a rich Usurer should have need of a poor Brokers
service, to help to put out his money to usury, giving him for every hundred so
put forth a competent reward, and that the Broker being bribed on the other
side, should cause him to lend his money to one who has no means to repay it;
Here I would know of you, by what kind of Profit, the Usurer has to repair
the damage of his Disprofit?


AQVILONIVS. By seeking his remedy of the Broker: or if he be not able to make
it him good, then to stand to his own loss.


FAVONIVS. So that in this case, his Profit like enough may be turned to
Disprofit.


AQVILONIVS. It cannot be avoided, but that sometimes such casualtyes will
happen.


FAVONIVS. But what if the Broker himself should loose hereby the credit of
his office for ever after; would not this be likewise unto him a greater
Disprofit, then the Profit of his bribe received for doing that treachery?


AQVILONIVS. A bird in the hand, I can tell you, is better then two in the
bush; and therefore it is not good for such a poor man, to leave the certainty,
for the incertainty, lest his poverty might wholly oppress him, while his said
credit is yet but a growing.


FAVONIVS. Then in a poor man I perceive you account Treachery not to be
Dishonesty.


AQVILONIVS. Less dishonesty in him by much, you may be sure, then if it were
in a rich man.


FAVONIVS. So as we may now say by this account of yours, that there be two
sorts of honesties; one for rich men, and another for poor men.


AQVILONIVS. You might long since have understood my meaning herein, without
these replications.


FAVONIVS. As for example, you mean that the rich man's honesty must be tied,
at lest, unto all the strictest rules thereof that may be, as well concerning
the habits of the mind, as the virtues of the body, the one to be limited with
sincerity, and the other with equity.


AQVILONIVS. It quadreth very well with his condition.


FAVONIVS. But the poor man's honesty you say, must be permitted to have a
larger scope, chiefly in respect of his necessity.


AQVILONIVS. It is a thing, I can tell you, to be had in consideration.


FAVONIVS. So that, if I should practice with such a needy poor fellow, I must
allow him the liberty to deceive me, if he can.


AQVILONIVS. Such public allowance thereof is not necessary, but only a kind
of silent toleration, in respect of his urgent need.


FAVONIVS. As much to say, as that I must allow him the name of an honest man,
but yet not trust him any more, then if he were a very Knave.


AQVILONIVS. Fair words, I pray you, since Nature you know is of her self
frail, and this world of ours more corrupted the^ ever, according to
Subsolanus his assertion a little before.


FAVONIVS. Will it not then be necessary for these respects to seek to
distinguish somewhat further, whom you take to be a poor man, and whom not, to
the end we may deal with him accordingly?


AQVILONIVS. A poor man, I take him to be, according to the limitation of the
Civil Law, whose wealth does not pass the value of fifty Crowns.


FAVONIVS. Then if any necessity of mine should constrayne me to use the help
of a new set up Notary, not known to me before, I must first ask him, whether
his wealth do amount to fifty Crowns, before I do adventure to utter unto him
the secrets of my intention, to the end to know what kind of honesty I may
look for at his hands, either the strict, or else the more ample.


AQVILONIVS. You seem, me thinks, inclined rather to quarrel, then to
conclude, by picking these exceptions so impertinent to the purpose.

Here Subsolanus being desirous to draw this question to an end, began again
to say to Aquilonius.


SVBSOLANVS. Me thinks it would now be requisite, seeing nothing can be
profitable, as has been said before, that is not just, to add thereunto this
other assertion, that nothing can be just, which is not honest; for that no
justice can stand without honesty, nor no honesty without justice, nor no
Profit without both: and therefore like as Honesty in a Magistrate, is to be
called Justice, so Justice in a poor man is to be accounted Honesty, and both
honesty and justice as well in the poor man, as in the Magistrate, are to be
called Virtues, because he who is not virtuous can neither be just, nor yet
honest; whereupon it follows, that the ground of all lawful Profit, must
first proceed from Virtue, as from the original of all moral goodness, since
he who is virtuous, has always a scruple to get any thing indirectly, lest
he should be urged to make restitution thereof again with shame; for he who
does not this, deceives many others, and himself also, unto his own utter
perdition in the end, as shall appear further hereafter. So that virtue,
justice, honesty, and lawful Profit go always linked inseparably together;
the Profit being directed by justice, and honesty, and both these by virtue.
Furthermore what sufficient excuse or pretense can there be for fraudulent
dealing, when Nature her self has provided sufficient and lawful means for
the relief of poverty, to wit, honest industry, and frugall parsimony, two
such principal, and also familiar kinds of helps, as few men be debarred from
them, at leastwise, for the supply of so much as is needful. For first, as
touching honest industry, it is to be noted, that no man by nature has more
burden laid upon him, then of one mouth to feed, and of one back to cloth;
unto the supply whereof, she having given him two legs, and also two hands, the
number of Purueyours, is double to the number of consumers: besides that, she
has also given him agility of wit to teach him, and strength of body to enable
him, and freenes of will to put him forward unto the lawful applying his said
legs and hands, for the sustenance of his whole body. And as concerning his
frugall parsimony to spare and lay up of that, which he has lawfully gotten,
his own reason, besides the instinct of nature, ought not a little to move
him thereunto, since daily there may happen unto him, not only unlooked for
losses, but also sickness which may hinder his industry, if not age it self,
which is not apt to work any more; and therefore the remedy unto all these
casualtyes, is that frugall parsimony spoken of before, the which may be called
a sure and favorable Hospital, if not rather a Sanctuary to keep men from
penury, and imprisonment, far more sure then heretofore were either the public
Hospital of Cadmus in Thebes, or the famous Temple of Diana in Ephesus; for if
men would be content to leave off all defrauding, and live frugally, that is to
say, with only so much as were necessary, we should see as few beggars, or as
few prisoners for debt, as we see at this day either Centaures, or Gorgons.


AQVILONIVS. These rules of yours against fraud, and deceiving, and in the
favor of lawful getting, were, I confess, to be considered, if every man
would be content to observe them alike as well, I mean, the contented poor man
with his own estate, as he who aspireth unto higher fortune: but since it is
impossible to bring it to pass, but that deceivers of men, for their own
gain, will still be found, I hold it therefore a kind of worldly wisdom,
rather to deceive then to be deceived; so long as it is warily done, either for
the supply of need, or else, as has been said, unto the increase of degree, for
that every man will not be content to live always in low estate, as you by
your former propositions would suppose.


SVBSOLANVS. Though he be never so desirous to increase his degree above the
rank of those of whom we have lastly spoken, yet to promote that desire of
his, he must not go about to deceive others, under pretense of not being
deceived, since hereby it might follow, that he may so deceive those who had no
intention at all to deceive him: besides that, if you will allow profitable
deceiving to be such a badge of a worldly wise man, you take thereby away from
his wisdom, all the reputation of that virtue, justice, and honesty which we
have already spoken of, and so thereby do make no difference betwixt good men,
and evil men.


AQVILONIVS I would not you should take me for such a confounder of these
things so together, but that still, I make this difference betwixt them; to
wit, that these men for the most part, whom you do account to be good, are each
where seen to be poor, needy, miserable, full of aduersityes, full of wants,
full of affliction, and full of all persecution, because either they cannot
flatter, or not tolerate the lightness of men's conditions, or not forbear to
speak of their faults too freely; whereas contrariwise, those other whom for
following their gain you account to be evil, are seen to be rich, iocund,
exalted, laden with rewards, with followers, and with all other felicityes of
this world: in so much as throughout all the places, where I do pass, I hear
in effect no other talk, then whose is this sumptuous Palace of such a
Ribald? whose is that other of such an Usurer? whose is that great Kingdom of
such an Usurper? that other great dominion of such a Murderer? this wonderful
wealth of such a Traitor? of such a Pander? or of such a Flatterer? what say
you to this? Were it not better to be one of these evil men, then one of your
good men? Therefore see, I pray you, now whether I know or not, how to
distinguish betwixt them, and that in such manner, that a man of little skill
may be able thereof welnigh to make his election. So as to conclude, none but
such as either have not the fortune, or not the wit to attain to these
benefits, are driven to shroud their baser condition (and that possibly more
for shame then for love) under the positive titles of honesty, and goodness.


SVBSOLANVS. In this former account of yours, do you make your said fraudulent
rich man to consist of body only, or of both body and soul?


AQVILONIVS. The care of his soul be it unto himself, or to him that has the
charge thereof, for that point depends upon another account.


SVBSOLANVS. But yet let me ask you, whether your recited benefits, happening
to such an evil man, be beneficial also for his soul, or but for his body
only?


AQVILONIVS. Belike you take me for the Curate of the Parish where I dwell, but
you deceive your self therein, let every man render account of his own charge,
for I speak like one of mine own profession.


SVBSOLANVS. Yet this ensues thereof, that put the case, it were never so good
for the body to be fraudulently rich, yet if it be evil for the soul, the one
half at the least of all your evil man's felicityes, is lost by the affliction
which the same may heap upon the soul, of which point I will treat
particularly in the conclusion of this days Conference; and now in the mean
time, we will consider whether all that you have said be true in respect of the
body alone. Therefore I would know, whether he that seems unto you for his
wealth to be so happy abroad, may not be full of other miseryes, and
infelicityes at home?


AQVILONIVS. It cannot be denied, but that some discontentments he may possibly
have.


SVBSOLANVS. Those some belike you mean to be either these, or such like; As
for example, to be afflicted with an unruly, or disloyal wife, a disgracious
or unthrifty heir, a defamed or dishonest generation of daughters, or which is
a more noisome evil, an unplacable nature of his own, either stirred up with
drink, whereby he always rayleth, or ouerheated with choler, whereby
continually he strikes, or else oppressed with suspicion, whereby he never
leaves to torment both himself and others, and so enjoys no pleasure or
contentment of any thing he possesses; or if any little contentment he find,
it is possibly more when he is abroad, then in his own house, albeit abroad
also the reproachful encounters of his external dishonest proceedings, cannot
but much diminish the same, not suffering such a polluted person to look upon
good men with a right eye, nor to talk with them willingly, but casting down
his head to fly and shun their company, for fear least any thing might
escape his mouth to his own condemnation; the which vigilance of his, yet
serves him to little purpose, for that in his very sleep he many times
bewrays his foulest faults, the which is an usual punishment that follows
each where a guilty conscience, declaring thereby what a terror it is to live
in such a state, as neither waking nor sleeping, he takes any quiet
consolation or repose, but is always tormented with the terror of his own
wickedness. But admit that his impudency may somewhat overcome this defect,
and that either in sensuality of life, or scurrilous actions, or other corrupt
behavior, he may happen to find any more contentment abroad then at home; yet
is it still accompanied with little reputation, and also in effect no more
pleasure then the wicked poorer sort of men do likewise find; and so his
estate, by this account, is but little better then the estate of him that
possesses much less, if it be not rather much worse, by how much the care of
keeping his ill gotten wealth tormenteth him more. And therefore let the evil
rich man either stay at home, or go abroad where he will, let him gather
wealth, or purchase revenues, let him build very stately, or feed very
delicately, yea let him fill his Wardrobe with rich apparel, his chambers with
precious ornaments, his chests with plate, his compt-bookes with debts, his
stable with horses, and his house with never so many servants; yet shall he
never be able to rid his heart of grief, his breast of fear, his cogitations
of shame, his conferences of reproach, his solitarines of distractions, nor his
conscience of continual biting remorse, then the which there can be no greater
signs and tokens to be had of a most lamentable and miserable state: the which
is so much also the fuller of torment, and affliction, by reason of his always
most insatiable and greedy mind of having and getting, never contented or
satisfied with that he possesses, but the more he heapeth and boardeth up, the
more he still desires; and all this unto his greater affliction, servitude,
and slavery, by making thereby himself more thrall then before, either unto
the tempestuous variety of sickle fortune, or of filthy vice, if not of both,
the which may be said to strive, as it were, whether shall be able to torment
him most, or to make him most miserable, by reason of his bondage and
subjection alike unto either; albeit fortune without vice, cannot afflict much,
be she never of her self so contrary: but where they accord to assault on both
sides together, there is no unhappiness of state to be compared unto it,
notwithstanding that the party to the show of the world do still maintain a
stately port, and be continually accounted by the vulgar sort, to be the
happiest man of his nation. And therefore I may conclude, that as the Scorpion
has in her the remedy of her own poison; so the evil man carries always
with him the punishment of his own wickedness, the which does never leave to
torment and afflict his mind, both sleeping and waking, according as it
happened to Appollidorus, to Hyparchus, to Pausanius, and many others whom
Plutarch mentions. For where there concur together (as with the rich
peruerser sort of men it is commonly seen to do) desire of unlawful gain, of
unlawful pleasure, of implacable hatred, and of unlawful revenge; there
without doubt concurreth a great deal of hidden infelicity: and which is worst
of all, when the perverse rich man happens by any mutation of fortune, to want
of his accustomed wealth, for the supplying of his frequent iniquityes, then
his unruly desires never leave to exclaim and cry out upon him, till they
bring him in the end to commit some fouler outrages, then ever before; as for
example to steal, to take by force, yea and to violate the very Temples
themselves, or otherwise to be tormented still with incessant stimulations and
dolours. Judge therefore now unto what a happy and pleasant end your forsaid
deceiuer of men, for his own commodity, may be like to come before he dye,
besides all his other perturbations and afflictions spoken of before, being
counter-poyses sufficient to weigh down all the supposed and mistaken
felicity, which you have already attributed unto him.


AQVILONIVS. Because I carelessly condescended unto you, upon your own mere
interrogation, that some discontentments might happen indeed unto such a rich
man, therefore belike you will cunningly threaten it upon me, as though I had in
my meaning the Catalogue of all these Rabblements you have here repeated,
which, I assure you, I never so much as dreamed of; albeit in the mean while,
by your heaping of things in such manner together, you have in words at
leastwise, gotten some colorable show of refuting wholly my former assertion:
but stick you a Gods name to the words, and let me stick to the matter, till
we come to discover betwixt your followers and mine in this doctrine, whether
shall have more necessity, or need of each others help in the end.


SVBSOLANVS. Belike then, honest and upright proceeding will not be able of it
self to gain a man his bread, but that he must be driven to seek for his
sustenance, at the hands of the worse, and wickeder sort of men.


AQVILONIVS. It comes many times, we see, so to pass, for all that you hold
it so strange a thing, contrary to that which affirms thereof the wise
Simonides, who being asked once, Whether Virtue or Riches were of more
reputation, made answer, that the Virtuous did more frequent the doors of the
rich, then the rich of the virtuous. Besides that we see, that the virtuous
themselves do not stick to give to the rich the titles of all the virtues in
the world, yea and bear them all respect, reverence, and honor, without
reproving them of any their vices, be they never so great, no not of their
extorsions, which you do so much speak against.


SVBSOLANVS. Howsoever some that are counted virtuous may flatter wicked rich
men, in such manner as you have said, yet men of solid virtue do it not. But
tell me, I pray you, be there no good men, that ariue to abundance of wealth,
and other worldly benefits by good and lawful means; as well as these wicked
men do by their evil means?


AQVILONIVS. Some few there may be, but not many.


SVBSOLANVS. And on the other side, think you, that there be no evil men,
that for all their unrighteous dealing, do live in want and misery, and seek
for sustenance at good men's hands?


AQVILONIVS. Only some such perhaps, as either know not the way how to cover
their iniquityes, or else spend more lauishly then they should.


SVBSOLANVS. Then it is not you say impossible, but that some good men may by
their goodness attain unto riches, and that some evil men notwithstanding all
their frauds may remain still poor?


AQVILONIVS. My meaning is not to stand with you greatly herein.


SVBSOLANVS. But do you not also mean, that as to abound in worldly
commodityes is a good thing, so on the other side to be an evil man, is an
evil thing?


AQVILONIVS. It were a great error to think otherwise.


SVBSOLANVS. Then where an evil man becomes to possess abundance of
wealth, will you not likewise grant, that there an evil thing, and a good
thing come to be annexed together?


AQVILONIVS. You say well, for it cannot be denied.


SVBSOLANVS. But when in like manner a good man possesses abundance of
wealth, be there not two good things annexed then together?


AQVILONIVS. Of this there is also no doubt at all.


SVBSOLANVS. Moreover, is the good said to be good, because it is good, or
because it is not evil?


AQVILONIVS. Because it is good.


SVBSOLANVS. Then the good rich man, that possesses two goods, is he not
better, then the evil rich man, who possesses but one good?


AQVILONIVS. These sophistications of yours, I cannot well deny, and yet they
do not greatly please me.


SVBSOLANVS. And better then the evil poor man, that possesses no good thing?


AQVILONIVS. Let this also be granted, to get me once out of this Labyrnith.


SVBSOLANVS. But the number you will still say of the good rich men, is fewer
then of the evil rich men?


AQVILONIVS. Of this you may rest undoubtedly sure.


SVBSOLANVS. And the number also of the evil rich men, fewer then of the evil
poor men?


AQVILONIVS. Without comparison.


SVBSOLANVS. So as it is more like, that an evil man may not become rich, then
rich?


AQVILONIVS. I told you the occasion before, in respect of his vnskillfullnes,
or lauishnes, or some other like peruersity.


SVBSOLANVS. But when such an evil man happens, by any such occasion, not to
become rich, is he not in a very bad case, whiles both he is a bad man, and
also a beggar: whereas a good man, though he be not rich, yet because of his
goodness, is he not still in good case?


AQVILONIVS. By your leave not so, for it is an evil thing unto him to want
riches.


SVBSOLANVS. You would then infer hereby, that a good man is not a good man?


AQVILONIVS. Not so neither, but that he may be in a evil case, in respect of
some wants he may have of things necessary.


SVBSOLANVS. You mean, I perceive, because he misseth wealth to comfort him,
and sollace him in his goodness?


AQVILONIVS. That is my meaning indeed.


SVBSOLANVS. Then wealth being annexed to the state of a good poor man, will
make him, you imagine, more good?


AQVILONIVS. I have affirmed in effect so much before.


SVBSOLANVS. I suppose you mean it, because being a good man, it is to be
thought he will apply it well.


AQVILONIVS. You say rightly.


SVBSOLANVS. But if wealth should be annexed to the state of an evil poor
man, would it not also make him better?


AQVILONIVS. Who doubts thereof?


SVBSOLANVS. You mean it (perhaps) because it is to be supposed, that being an
evil man, he will apply it also well.


AQVILONIVS. You make a sollace, I perceive, to jest at your friends.


SVBSOLANVS. If then an evil man may apply his wealth euilly, it would seem
that wealth of it self is not absolutely good.


AQVILONIVS. How can it but be absolutely good, when as it is one of the
principal instruments unto the exercise of virtue, as of Magnificence,
Liberality, Beneficence, and the like?


SVBSOLANVS. So is it likewise one of the principal instruments unto the
exercise of Vice, as of Arrogance, Insolency, Revenge, and the rest.


AQVILONIVS. These effects you speak of, do not consist in the Wealth, but in
the evil man, that does euilly use it.


SVBSOLANVS. But if the wealth it self were truly, and absolutely good, it
would make him the better that possesses it; but this (according unto Seneca)
it does not, who says, What avails unto a Fool his wealth, since he
becomes thereby no whit the wiser, nor the better?


AQVILONIVS. If it make him not the better, it may yet suffice, that it makes
him not the worse.


SVBSOLANVS. If you will believe the Philosopher in his Rhetoric, it makes
him also the worse, seeing that it makes men Proud, Injurious, and Intemperate.


AQVILONIVS. He does not mean, that it makes all men so, but some men only:
for if they be inclined unto Vice, it may make them more vicious; as on the
other side, if they be inclyned unto Virtue, it may make them more virtuous:
and therefore it is to be accounted among those external good things, which
help unto humane felicity.


SVBSOLANVS. There can be nothing more repugnant unto reason, then to make
Wealth a part of humane felicity; since on the other side, the same is rather
held to be either an instrument, or a member of Iniquity. For so says the
Philosopher in the Book before mentioned, That rich men for the most part, are
either Unrighteous, or the Heirs unto those that have been Unrighteous, as
unto some Extortioner, Deceiuer, Periurer, or the like. So as, if Wealth could
make men happy, we might then conclude, that humane felicity were nothing else
but the reward of Iniquity.


AQVILONIVS. If Wealth may not make men happy, you may be sure, that Poverty
may do it much less; for if happiness consisted in Poverty, then might we
likewise say, that Felicity were nothing else, but the reward of a discontented
and disquiet mind, because poverty is accompanied with nothing more.


SVBSOLANVS. If we will believe Arcesilaus, it is accompanied rather with
Humility with Industry, and above all with Security; for that the rich, and not
the poor be the Preyes unto Pilferers, Robbers, and Manquellers. And to the
end you may know, what Poverty is accompanied with true Humility, you are to
understand, that of Pouertyes there be two sorts, the one, as I may say
Vnuoluntary, being incurred, and suffered against a man's will; and the other
Voluntary, being chosen and undertaken of a man's own free election: of which
the first is yrksome and grievous, yea many times vicious and sinful, being
accompanied which Envy, unlawful Desire of other men's goods, Fraud, and
Deceit, Pilfering, and Robbing, and sometimes it causes Murders and all kind
of Mischiefs, and therefore is hateful both to God and Man. The second may be
divided into two sorts; of the which the one may be termed Moral, and the
other Religious, or Evangelical. The Moral was practiced by many of the old
Philosophers, who freely abandoned their wealth, and chose to live in poverty,
to avoid the danger, and disquiet of mind, which commonly follows Riches, as
has been sufficiently signified before. The Religious, or Evangelical Poverty
being that only which is chosen and suffered for the pure Love of God, was
taught and practiced by Christ our Savior himself, and his Apostles, and has
him always, and is still professed and practiced in his Church by many of his
servants. And this sort of Poverty is that which is accompanied with true
Humility, Peace, Contentment, and heavenly Consolations; and the Poor of this
sort are those whom our Savior called B essed, and to whom he promised a
hundred fold in this life, and the Kingdom of Heaven in the next.


AQVILON. If all men should be poor, such a Society would be like a body that
were all head, or all legs, the which would not only be unserviceable, but
also deformed; and therefore Nature having ordained some men to be poor, and
some to be rich, it cannot well be said that Wealth of it self is evil; or if
by chance, it may seem at any time to be evil, this is to be attributed still
unto the evil mind of him that euilly applies it, rather then to any thing
else.


SVBSOLA. Then if an evil man may apply his Wealth euilly, the evil applying
thereof may make an evil man the worse.


AQVILON. As touching this, I will not greatly stand with you.


SVBSOLA. So that Wealth by the same reason may hurt a good man also, if he
should happen to apply it euilly.


AQVILO. Like enough it may.


SVBSOLA. Therefore when God retayneth a good man from waxing rich, it is not a
sign of any hate he bears him, but only that for his more good he preserves
him from a temptation, to become the worse.


AQVILO. It may welnigh be so; but what of all this?


SVBSOLA. And so on the other side, when God does suffer an evil man by any
unlawful means to become very wealthy, it is not a sign of any love he
bears him, but that only for his greater confusion, he means to let him
run the more irrecuperably unto his own perdition.


AQVILON. These melancholy notes of yours, do rather distemper then any whit
tune me.


SVBSOLA. That is because you be already out of tune, and yet are loath to
perceive it; but hearken to this other point which may happen to please you
better, That when God does finally suffer any good man by his own good means,
and industry, to become rich, it is a great sign that he gives him riches for
his greater good, because he foreseeth that by applying of them well, he is to win great merit thereby.


AQVILON. It pleases me indeed so well, as I can be content to leave off with
the loss, and to talk of this matter no more, because the further we go, the
worse we agree.


SVBSOLA. Nevertheless before we end, I will by your leave (according to my
promise made you heretofore) debate with you, how all this your former
doctrine, and discourse stands with divine Authority: which being performed,
I hope you will rest fully satisfied. And therefore for as much as the diverse
kinds of unlawful gain (which you have approved partly in private, and partly
in public persons) may be all reduced, as I may say, to one Predicament of
Fraud, or Deceyt practiced in diverse manners; we are to ponder and waygh the
same in the just and equal balance, as well of the Law of Nature imprinted in
every man's heart, as also of the divine Law written in the Holy Scriptures.
First then for the Law of Nature; Can any man be so void of natural Reason as
to doubt, whether all fraudulent Gain be not flatly forbidden by the Law of
Nature, which teaches this known principle, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri
ne feceris? Therefore if no man would be content to be deceived by other men, it
follows, that whosoever seeks to gain by deceauing others, transgresses
the Law of Nature. Besides that, man being ordained and borne not for himself
alone, but to live in community and civil society; it is evident that nothing
is more contrary to the Common Wealth then Deceyt and Fraud, which being
admitted would destroy all Traffic, and Commerce, and all Trust and
Confidence amongst men, without the which there can be no Justice, whereof
Fidelity (as Cicero says very well in his Offices lib. 1.) is the foundation,
and consequently there could be no Common Wealth. In which respect Cicero also
says in the same place, That nothing does more firmly unite, and hold
together the Common Wealth, then Fidelity, which therefore Valerius Maximus
(lib. 6. cap. 6.) calls Venerabile Numen etc. a Venerable and Divine Power,
and the most sure Pledge of humane security. And the Romans esteemed it so
much, that in the honor of it they buylt a Temple, wherein all Leagues, and
important Covenants were publicly made and sworn, and he that afterward did
break them, was detested of all men. Also man being made to the Image of God,
who is Verity and Truth it self, ought always to conserve in himself the
similitude and likeness of God, which likeness by fraud and deceyt he utterly
loses, becoming the true Image of the Devil, who is worthily called
Diabolus, that is to say, A Deceyuer, being, as our Savior terms him (
Joan. 8.) Mendax, and pater eius, a Liar and the father of Lies. And therefore
no marvel, that the written Law of God does so much condemn deceytfull and
fraudulent dealing, that it accompanies and compares the fraudulent man with
the Bloud-sucker, detesting them both: Virum sanguinum, and dolosum (says the
Psalmist) abhominatur Dominus. And therefore God also threatens to punish them
both alike with untimely death. Viri sanguinum and dolosi (says the same
Psalmist. Psalm. 54.) non dimidiabunt dies suos. And how detestable also in the
sight of God is all deceyt and the Deceyuer, the Holy Ghost signifies, and
inculcateth very often else where in the Holy Scripture saying ( Prou. 1.) Every
Deceyuer is abominable before God. And again ( cap. 8.) I detest the
double-tongued man. And ( cap. 20.) speaking of a common coosenage generally
used also in these our days by false weyghts and measures, he says: Weight
and Weight, Measure and Measure is detestable in the sight of God. Likewise the
Prophet Micheas threatens the Jews with destruction for their frauds, and
deceyts ( cap. 6.) As yet (says he) there is fire in the house of the impious,
treasures of iniquity, and a lesser measure full of wrath: why shall I justify
an impious balance, and the deceytfull weight of the bag, by which their
rich men were replenished with iniquity, and the Inhabitants therein spoke
lies; and their tongue was fraudulent in their mouths, and therefore I began to
stryke thee with perdition for thy sins. Thus said Almighty God by the mouth
of his Prophet. And the like, yea a more terrible threat of eternal perdition,
is denounced by the Psalmist to a deceytfull tongue. Thou have loved (says he,
Psalm. 51.) all words of precipitation, a deceytfull tongue; therefore God will
destroy thee eternally: he will pluck thee up, and remove thee out of thy
Tabernacle, and root thee out of the Land of the living. Lo then how hateful
to Almighty God is all deceitful and fraudulent dealing, be it by word, or
act. And this being true in private persons, what shall we think of fraud and
deceit in Magistrates, Judges, and public Persons? How abominable is the same
to God and Man, and pernicious not only to the Common Wealths which they
govern, but also to themselves through the severity of Gods Justice and
Judgments upon them? In which respect King Iosaphat having constituted and
ordained Judges in the Cittyes of Judah, said unto them (2. Par. 19.) Videte
quid faciatis etc. Look well what you do, for you do not exercise the
Judgment of Man, but of God, and whatsoever you shall Judge, shall redound to
your selves. So he. And the hurt that redoundeth to the Common wealth, by the
injustice of the Magistrates, does not consist only in the iniuryes done to the
members thereof, but also in the punishment that God inflicteth many times upon
the whole State for the sins of the Heads, when the same are not punished and
reformed in the offenders; such being the severity of Gods Justice, that when
the Magistrates are either themselves corrupt, or else negligent in punishing the
faults of others, he commonly imposes some general penalty upon the whole
common Wealth, and many times destroys the same, or transferreth the
government thereof to stranges, as the holy Ghost signifies in Ecclesia^^icus
(Cap. 10.) saying: Regnum a Gente in Gentem tranfertur etc. A Kingdom is
transferred from Nation to Nation for Injustice, and Injuries, and
Calumniations, and diverse Deceits. So as if we duly consider the enormity of
Frauds, Deceits, and of all kind of Injustice, especially in Magistrates, in
whom the same commonly passes without any humane punishment, we shall easily
conclude the Fraudulent to be not only treacherous to private men whom they
deceive and abuse, but also traiterous to the common Wealth, by reason of the
divine Punishment which they draw upon the same; besides the eternal damnation
which they purchase to themselves for their own offense therein if they do not
repent, and do sufficient satisfaction for it in this life; which Satisfaction
nevertheless cannot be done in matters of Injustice and Iniuryes without
restitution of ill gotten goods, honor, and fame, according to the most
Christian and known axiom of S. Augustine: Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum. In which repsect the Publican Zachaeus, being by our
Savior converted, and illuminated with the light of his Grace, did not content
himself to make a bare restitution of the just value only what he had
wrongfully and fraudulently got, but promised to restore the quadruple, that is
to say, four times so much as he had guilfully and unlawfully gained of any
man; alluding perhaps to the Law of Moses (Exodus 22.) where it was ordained,
That in cases of Theft, sometimes the double, sometimes the quadruple, yea and
otherwhiles five times so much as was stolen should be restored. In which
respect King David swore to Nathan (2. Reg. 12.) that the rich man who had
wrongfully taken a sheep from a poor man, should not only dye for it, but also
restore the quadruple, for so indeed it was ordained in the Law. Now then this
being so, it is to be considered, what he gayneth that enricheth himself by
Fraud and Deceyt, seeing that he loses not only his reputation (if it be
known) but also his soul (how secretly soever he do it) in case he do not
repent, and make Restitution of his unlawful gain, so far as his ability
will extend. Therefore, as I asked you before, whether you made account that
your fraudulent rich man should consist of body only, or both of body and
soul; so now I add thereto another demand, to wit, whether you will have him
to be a beast, or a man? for if you account him for a man, that is to say, a
reasonable creature, we must exact of him to do the office of a man, and not of
a beast, to which purpose the Psalmist says, Nolite fieri sicut equus and
mulus, quibus non est intellectus; that is to say, be not lead, or moved
chiefly by sense and pleasure, and by the apprehension only of present objects,
as horses, mules, and other beasts are, but by reason, and the due
consideration of future things, and of the end of every thing, and especially
of that which belongs to the eternal good of the soul, without which
consideration no man either is, or can be worthily accounted a man, and much
less a wise man, for as the Wiseman says ( Eccles. 37.) Est sapiens animae
suae sapiens; and therefore Moses, bewayling the folly of the Jews, in that
behalf, calls them, a people without wit and prudence, saying ( Deuteronomy. 32.)
Gens absque consilio est, atque prudentia; vtinam saperent, and intelligerent,
ac nouissima prouiderent: and the Psalmist speaking of such rich worldlings, as
you have hitherto so highly commended, compares them to brute beasts ( Psalm.
48.) Homo (says he) cum in honor esset, non intellexit; comparatus est
iumentis insipientibus, and similis factus est illis. And little better account
made the Philosophers and wise Paynims of such as prefer honor, riches, and
worldly co^modityes before Virtue. In which respect Aristotle compares them to
children, who esteem their Puppits more then gold: and Seneca says ( Ep. 96.)
that they are far more foolish then children, playing the fools notably, not
as children do in tryfles, and matters of no moment or danger, but in things of
great wayght and consideration, so as, says he, verius, cariusque insaniunt,
they are more truly and costly mad. Therefore now to conclude, concerning all
that Profit and Gain which you have hitherto placed in fraudulent means, it
is most evident, that being prejudicial and hurtful to the soul it cannot be
accounted either gainful, or any way profitable, but most noisome and
pernicious according to our Saviors express testimony, saying: Quid prodest
homini, si vniuersum mundum lucretur, animae vero suae detrimentum patiatur?
whereupon it also follows, that the Philosophers Axiom is true, to wit, That
nothing is profitable which is not honest (whereof I promised you before to give
you now a special reason.) For seeing that all Dishonesty whatsoever is
hurtful to the soul, it cannot possibly be profitable, no more then a
pleasant stong wine can be wholesome in a hot burning Fever, which albeit for
the present seems to refresh and comfort the sick man, yet afterward turns
to his great damage: and even so fares it with all evil gotten gain, which,
though at first, and for a while contenteth the covetous mind of the getter,
yet in the end breeds his everlasting torment, if, as I have said before, he
does not satisfy Gods Justice by repentance, and restitution to his power.
Therefore consider now with your self, what reason you have had in your former
assertions, either to condemn good men so much as you have done, for their
Poverty arising by honest Syncerity, or to extol bad men so much above
measure, for their riches growing by their fraudulent Practices, and other
reproachful Iniquityes. The which is as much as occurreth here to be said,
concerning the whole scope of unlawful Profit, generally considered.


The end of the first Book.

