TWO GODLY AND FRVITFVLL TREATISES: The one, Upon the Lords Prayer:

The other, Upon the six Principles.

Both penned by that learned man, Paul Baine, sometimes Preacher of Gods word
at S. Andrews in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at
his shop at the great South-doore of Paul's. 1619.

To the honorable SIR THOMAS SMITH Knight, late Ambassador from his Majesty to
the Emperor of Russia, Governor of the famous Societies trading to the East
Indies, Muscouia, etc. all blessings of this life and the next.
HOnorable Sir, that Axiom in moral Philosophy so often used, that Bonum est
sui diffusiuum, Good is of a spreading nature, has prevailed with me to go on
in further publishing a parcel of the writings of that worthy Divine and
faithful servant of God, Master PAVL BAINE. The former tractates that are
abroad, I hear to be thankfully entertained in the Church of God. And
therefore the Printers still importune me to set forth that which remains
vnpublished; almost challenging me as one that inuert to my private good, such
things as should be communicated for general benefit. Which aspersion that I
may wipe off from my self, I have given way to the printing of the two ensuing
useful Treatises. To the which that I have prefixed your honorable name, let
it not (I beseech you) seem any presumption. For there being many ends of
dedicating books, yet the two most frequently used, are to procure countenance
to the books so dedicated, and to testify the thankfulness of the
Dedicators. Both which ends I confess my self to have aimed at in this
dedication: howbeit the latter bears with me the greater sway. For having my
self, honored Sir, tasted the fruits of your love, yet my desire is, not
only to be thankful to you for my self, but much more for the many, and
great kindnesses, a long time continued to my dear Parents. To whom what is it
you could well do, and have not largely performed? The particulars I need not
proclaim, what personal love you have vouchsafed themselves; what bounty
(many times) by my loving mothers hand, you have sent to relieve the
necessities of diverse poor people, who have blessed God for you in that
behalf. Go on thus still, worthy Knight, to do well; and as you have had the
honor of religious profession heretofore, so provide that your last days may
abound with such fruits, as are found with them that flourish in the Courts of
our God, (as the Psalmist says) who still bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm.
92.13.14.
being fat, and flourishing. To the helping forward of which things, if this
good and godly Manuel may conduce, (as upon diligent reading I trust it will) I
shall praise the Lord, whom I beseech heartily to bless your self, and your
virtuous Lady, with the young Knight your only issue living.

Lime-streete the 11. of December. 1618. Ready at your honorable commandment
to his power, E. C.

A Treatise upon the LORDS Prayer.
THis prayer has three parts, the first is the Preface; in which is declared
whom we must pray unto, in these words: O our Father which art in heaven. The
second part is the prayer it self, standing on six petitions. The last is the
Conclusion, which renders a reason why we pray to God alone; because the
kingdom, which is all authority to grant our requests, belongs to him: the
power, that is, all ability to execute our desires, is with him: the glory,
that is, all this honor of being acknowledged a fountain of good things,
belongs to him a Father of lights, from who^ every good gift descends; who
in this regard is only to be inuocated and praised. From the Preface in
general observe; No Angels or Saints departed, but God our Father only must
be inuocated of us. In nothing be careful, Phil. 4.6.
but let your requests be known to God with thanksgiving: Whatsoever you ask
my Father in my name, you shall receive it. What an unseemly thing were it,
that children should seek to servants in the house for supply of what they
want, not to their natural parents? so here. Again, we cannot call upon any
religiously, on whom we may not believe. Romans 10. Now to derive faith from any
creature is a thing accursed. Ier. 17. Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm,
and is withdrawn from the Lord. Thirdly, to pray faithfully, (that is, so as
we are persuaded that we shall receive that we ask) requires knowledge of
three things: First, that the party we pray to or call on, does hear us to
know our desires: Secondly, that he is willing to help us: Thirdly, that he
has ability to accomplish what he wills. Now for mental prayers the Angels
often cannot know them; God who only searches the hearts and reins,
understands such prayers as are mental and vocal: the Saints in heaven have
no means how to understand them, for any thing the Scripture teaches. I know
man's presumption voucheth many reasons why Angels should hear vocal prayers;
which are as easily rejected as recited. Had they knowledge, yet the other
things are doubtful; for they can do nothing which they will not, and they
will not do any thing to which God calls them not; they are so perfectly
conformed to his pleasure, and attend his beckoning in all things. Fourthly, it
is his will to be called on, and so to perform that he knows we want; and he
is both willing and able to supply it unto us.

We may argue from this prayer thus: That which is a perfect platform of
prayer, teaches as perfectly who must be called on, as it teaches what is to
be asked: But this is a perfect form of prayer, teaching fully what things
soever may be asked; Therefore it teaches us fully what kind of persons may be
called on. Ob. The Son and the Spirit are not here expressed? An. The Father
excludes all other persons that are pure creatures, not persons which have the
same singular essence with him. Secondly, these are not named, because such is
the divine dispensation, that though when one is inuocated all are inuocated;
yet the Father is fitly alone named, because the Son has the part of a
Mediator, through whom we go to the Father; and the Spirit the office of a
schoolmaster, teaching what to pray, and as we ought. Whence the Council
decreed, yt not Christ, nor the Spirit should be named in directing public
prayers to God; a plain argument that the naming of Saints was not dreamed of
by those times. Let us then make ye name of the Lord our strong Tower, to which
we fly seeking salvation. Parents love not when their children are strange
toward the^ and stand aloof, being in the mean while affable enough to
others. No, let us not with God join others. Men love not to be sorted in any
business but with their peers and equals; so neither shall the living God
like to be matched with his creatures.

Now in particular. First, that he sets down not a single form, but a
form of speech of many conjoined, it does teach, that We must not, because we
pray alone, be careless of joining with others in prayer. He teaches his
disciples jointly to pray, Our Father, etc. Mat. 18.20.
and, Where two or three are gathered together, I am in the midst of them.
Look as if a single prisoner should ask us ought, it has his force; but when
all in the house lift up their voices at once, it is much more piercing; so in
this matter: which lets us see how wide such are, who will make light of
praying with other, they hope they may pray for themselves, and like the old
saying, Every man for himself and God for us all.

Secondly, hence we note that in our prayers we must be mindful of others as
well as our selves. For as he teaches them to pray, and to say, Our Father,
because they were more then one jointly before him; so in this regard that he
might make them mindful of all their brethren, called, or uncalled, that
belong to the election of God: Ephesians. 6.18.
Watch unto prayer for all Saints; not that we may not make a prayer wherein we
must not mention others, but because we must not fail at convenient times in
the exercise of prayer, to mention others as well as our selves, seeking their
peace with God. We are members of one body: and therefore must help one
another; and such as have learned love and mercy, cannot but seek at God the
prosperity of their brethren, whose conflicting state they know by good
experience in themselves; wherefore we must stir our selves up to the
faithful performance of this duty. He were a graceless child that would
never pray for his mother; and we would think he would do little for us, that
would not lend us a good word here or there: so when we remember not the
Church, and will not open our mouths one for another to God, what love is
there? Secondly, let us therefore frequent this duty, not in word or show, but
in deed and truth. From the practice of this duty it comes to pass that a
Christian man is like a rich merchant, who has his factors in diverse
countries: so a Christian man has in all places of the world some that deal
for him with God (that never saw his face) who are petitioners for him unto
God. Thirdly, hence that he teaches us to pray, Our Father, we learn, that We
must in prayer to God come with love to the brethren. If thou art about to
offer thy sacrifice at the altar, Mat. 5.23.24.
and remembrest thou have any thing against thy brethren, go, reconcile thy
self first, then do thy duty after; otherwise the Lord will turn away from
our prayer. If one should give the King a petition, and carry in his hand, or
about him, some stinking savor which the sense of any abhorred, could he
think but the King would turn from him? So he that comes petitioning to God
with wrath and malice, which stinketh odiously in Gods nostrils, must look that
God will turn his countenance from him. Hence Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 3.7.
that by wrath prayers are troubled; wherefore let us labor to be of brotherly
affection one toward another. Should our parents know that we are fallen forth
with our brethren, durst we come in their sight? would we look for other then
to be checked from them? even so the Lord will turn his back to our prayers,
while our affections are turned against our brethren. Further, observe hence
both a ground of reverence and hope, when we come to deal with God: If I be a
Father, Mal. 1.6.
where is my reverence? We come with reverence before our earthly Princes, and
in all our gestures express it: how much more must this be in us, when we have
to deal with the living God? for this Father is impartial in justice, that we
have need to converse before him in fear. Again, it is a ground of hope;
earthly parents will not deny their children good things: much less shall God
deny us his Spirit, and what ever thing is good for us. This therefore does
rebuke the rudeness of some that care not how unprepared they fall upon
prayers, how rude gesture they use in it, how unmannerly they break away after
it, using their Father as if he were a cipher, or a father of clouts, rather
the^ a God that will without respect of persons judge every one. Our doubting
minds must hence be reproved, and strengthened. How confidently do children
come to their parents? If we have a suite to a friend which is reasonable, we
will presume it; how much more may we be of good hope in all our requests
which we make to God?

Which art in heaven, etc. By manifesting the effect of glory; otherwise he
fills heaven and earth, yea all the creature is with him as a moate within
the light of the Sun; but look as a King who by his authority and power
rules over all his kingdom, is at the Court more especially displaying there
the glory of his majesty: so God whose essence and presence of powers is every
where, in the heavens as in the Court of his Majesty, does manifest his glory
more excellently.

Observe then; that In coming to God we must set before us his heavenly
Majesty. For this stirs up reverence, moves devotion, making us to be
heavenly minded, strengthening our faith. The glister of the pomp of earthly
Princes does move the subject to all humble regard of them, to al seemly
submisnesse in their behauiours toward them: and doubtless, the not being
stricken with any consideration this way, does make us so loose and heedlesse
when we approach to God. Again, this does admonish us to be heavenly minded,
if we will have any conjunction with God: for as he that would speak to the
King at Court, must bodily move himself thither where the King bideth; so we
that would speak with God, who dwells in heavenly glory (above all this
visible frame of the creature) we must in spirit by faith move our hearts
thither, where he is. Besides, where our Father is, there our country is: Vbi
pater ibi patria: and therefore as pilgrims and strangers do long after their
native soiles, so must we after that glorious inheritance, which our father in
the heavens reserueth for us. Thirdly, it confirms us in our faith: being in
heaven, he both sees our wants, and is of all strength and power to effect our
desires. Our God is in heaven, and does whatsoever he will. Parents earthly who
have large hearts, have short hands, though they wish us well, yet they have no
power to effect what they would; Were it thus with our Father, faith were
shaken: but when he wants not will as a father, nor power as a heavenly
governor, our faith is firmly underpropped. How then are we to accuse our
selves, who know not how sufficiently to admire and adore an earthly majesty, a
mortal man, and yet are so respectlesse of the high excellency of God? How
slow of heart are we, that we are not raised up higher then these earthly
things, when we are to deal with our God glorious in the heavens? Why do we
dread and trust in the power of man, not awing nor having confidence in this
power, when the power of every creature higher then the earth is irresistable
by it? as what power of flesh can resist the least cloud from dropping his
rain, the least star from sending forth his light and influence? What a
power is this of the Creator of al these things, who dwells in glory above
them? Let us therefore considering this heavenly, glory our Father has, grow
up to more reverence, devotion, and affiance toward him. Now follow the
petitions, in which I will observe this order: First, to open the phrase of
them where it is needful. Secondly, to show the contents of every petition.
Thirdly, considerations how we may feelingly come to make our seueuerall
requests to God. Fourthly, the co^clusions which may be drawn from them.

Hallowed be thy Name. Name is put here for God, by name, or any other ways
notified, that is, made known to us: Name put for the person named, as Acts
1.15, by a Metonymie of the adiunct, and so named, one kind of manifesting a
person, for all other, by a Synecdoche. Hallowed here signifies to be
manifested, and acknowledged holy; as wisdom is justified of her children: so
declared to be, and approved of those that embrace her. The sum is, that God
would so work, that himself howsoever made known by titles, word or works,
may be discerned of us as holy, and so confessed, and accordingly respected of
us; that God would effect this that himself may be more and more honored of
us, who are his chosen, and in all others that are the children of destruction.

on Aarons sons, he said, he would be glorified in such as come near him: if
he might not have it from them, he would have it in them, by sending such
judgments on them, as might be matter of his glory.

Secondly, we ask of the utter extinguishing of his people, he does teach us
that the giving occasion to wicked ones to crow against his people, and
himself their God, is a dishonor of his Majesty; and therefore here we pray
it may be prevented. Yet if it so fall out that the state of Gods people is
incorrigible, and they will not be reclaimed from profaning Gods Name, it is
better that the open enemy should blaspheme them, then that he should receive
such intolerable indignity from his own people.

Thirdly, we ask yt God would make us grow up to acknowledge him, in all
means, and ways of his, wherein he manifests his glory. For as the Sun
shining brightly, should be glorious in it self, but if eyes were not opened
to behold it, it should not be had in account as glorious with man; so the
Lord, glorious in all his ways, has not that glory in his creature, till,
the eye of the mind opened, this be discerned of them.



otherwise. Now for the former we entreat that God would daily bring them home
to glorify him with us, yea that he would give them godly sorrow for such
things as before their visitation they heedlesly neglected, Psalm. 67. For other
we pray, that God would restrain them from their high profanation of his Name,
and that he would turn their rage (and so by proportion all their other
sins) to the praise of his Name, Psalm. 18. Now to say this petition
feelingly, we speaking of him to his praise, not ordering all our works in
such sort as they might be to the glory of him our heavenly Father. How many
ways do we take his Name in vain? Thirdly, does sting us; but when we fault
toward God, we pass it over well enough. Hence it is that if one put the
least contemptuous behavior upon us, using a term of any disgrace, it does
kindle cooles presently; but we can hear Gods Name dishonored, and not be
affected, and moved with it. We had need therefore to pray unto God, that he
would heal this matter. Does it not pity us when we hear that our friends
have such servants as do twenty dishonest parts, which will redound to their
discredit? Did we see their giving no regard to their master, rioting his
goods otherwise then he commands, drinking themselves drunk in his cellers,
would it not grieve us? Thus that Lord of us all, that Master in heaven is
used by those that should be servants unto him; which if we will weigh, we
cannot but cry to him for help that those deluges of his dishonor might be
stopped and diminished.

this is to be dearer to us then our own souls, which made Paul and Moses so
affected, that they could with the hazard of their souls have promoted it.
Romans 10. We see it has the first place; this is more worthy then all the
creature besides. The end is more worthy, then that which serves to the end;
as meat and drink which serve to maintain the bodily life, are not so good as
the body. So when all the creature and all the actions of us, are to tend
hither, that God may be glorified, it is sure that Gods glory is far more
excellent; which must make us seek that he be more and more sanctified of us.
We see that servants of honorable personages they are all for their Lords
honor; they will run into books, and out of good inheritances sometimes, to
maintain a kind of gallancy, which graceth, as they think, the personage they
serve; shall not we to our great good honor our God? O let us seek it. Who
will keep a servant no way to his credit? no more will God let us retain unto
him always, if we be so careless to him this way.

Secondly, when we seek this at God, we confess it is God that teaches and
enableth us to honor him. Our children have no behauiours more civil, to our
credit, which we do not train them unto. None by nature understands, none
enquireth after God; nor yet care to glorify him as God; as he is the God that
teaches us to profit in all points so in this. The use of it is to teach us to
refer all unto God, that we do prosperously this way, who works it in us,
not our selves; as also to teach us on whom we must hang with conscience of our
own wants, that we may more and more be enabled this way.

we beg in words: he that asks his daily bread, and is careless to get, or
save any thing by some lawful calling, should deride and tempt the living God.

Finally, from hence we perceive, that spying Gods dishonor, we must be
grieved: For who can desire that truly but it will grieve him to see the
contrary? Yea we must by eiaculation of our mind renew our requests, (when we
see such spectacles) that God himself would provide for the maintaining the
honor of his own Name.

Thy kingdom come. A kingdom is such an order or state of men, in which one
governs, the rest are subject, unto their good. So Gods kingdom is such an
order, or estate, wherein God has all supremacy, and men acknowledge
themselves liegemen to his Majesty, to their great benefit temporal and
eternal. For the kingdom of power is not here meant under which the devils
themselves live: but that kingdom of heaven prophesied by Daniel: which is
such a government in which God most graciously rules, and we willingly obey,
to our everlasting happiness. This kingdom God rules partly mediatly by his
Vice Roy Jesus Christ; partly immediately when Christ shall resign up that
Mediator-like kingdom, as having now brought all to God his Father. Who then
shall alone with his Son (as the second person, not as Mediator) and Spirit, be
all in all. So we pray that God would that the honor of his Name may be
amplified, make his government spread in the hearts of men, that the number of
his subjects may be increased, and subjection augmented, who are all brought
under him, till all be perfected in the kingdom of glory.

The things that we ask are:

in this God is glorious, as a lawful King in subiugating usurping tyrants.

Secondly, that God

Thirdly, for our selves

That he would continually that he has begun of his mercy.







For such as are uncalled, not belonging to Gods mercy we pray:

of iron.

Motives to the devour asking of those things.

First, to consider the

Secondly, we must weigh what a glory it is to God, and security to us, when
true hearted Israelites are increased, as a Princelike Diadem; such is the
multitude of well ordered subjects.

to God.

Fourthly, to observe

Fifthly, how prone we

Finally, what miseries

These things well pondered will make us feelingly cry to God that his
kingdom may come. Does not every good subject wish the enlargement of the
Kings territories, the rooting out of all opposites, that set themselves
against the prosperity of his kingdom? So must we if we be true subjects to
the kingdom of glory. Did we border upon the Turkish Empire, so that we were
often forraged, would it not make us cry to God for help? and shall the
devil still sink us in our persons, every where inuading, and shall we be
silent? What tyranny to Satan's and sins tyranny? What wants to the wants
of righteousness, peace, joy? etc. in which things Gods kingdom comes. We
should seek it so far as we want it, and joy in it so far as we partake in
it: to be naturalised into our kingdom is a benefit great ones esteem; but to
be within Gods kingdom, o how blessed?

Doctrines to be deduced.

First, who it is that can trample Satan under our feet, and dissolve the
works of the devil: it is God alone: it is he that must turn us before we be
turned out of the kingdom of darkness. Prayer presupposes both want of that
we ask, and impotency in our selves to attain it, or that it is out of our
power. Again, the strong man holds possession till a stronger comes. Now who
is, of any other creature, stronger then Satan, in such degree that to cast
him out the Papists give some place in this work to the liberty of our will?
But though it be true, we turn because we will turn to God, yet (we will
turn) does note, not the principal cause, but a cause subordinate, working by
way of free disposition, which disposition it receives from God, not from
natural strength, so that still all is by him. Men turn not, because they
will not convert; [because] here notes the fundamental, radical, prime cause
of impenitent not converting, which the will does by way of disposition, which
it has by nature of it self unto sin. But it is otherwise when we say, This
man conuerts to God because he will convert; for here God is presupposed the
principal Agent; man a secondary and isntrumental; the habit disposing him
to do this, being grace received from God, not derived to him with his nature.
Away therefore with Papists doctrine, which make the will of man in a manner
almighty. God offers grace like as a Merchant sets his wares to sell,
leaving it to our will whether we will buy or no. Were this true, if you ask
what discerns me from another unconverted? I answer, My will; I by the
freedom I had of will, took that proffered, which another by the same liberty
refused.

Secondly, mark who must strengthen, confirm, and perfect all things begun in
us; he sanctifies us throughout. Even as the Sun first bringing light, does
more and more subdue all the darkness of the air, till it come to full
strength; so the same God that first dispelleth the darkness of sin and
ignorance, does more and more perfect the light begun, till it come to glory:
and as the same Physician which first recouereth us from some deadly lingering
evil, must after restore decayed strength and cleanse all relickes of sick
matter, by such diets as Art advises, so God, etc. What then if we see all
weak, ready to ouerturne; many graces in a manner utterly wanting, so weak
they are in us? God that calls the things that are not, as if they were, is
the beginner and perfecter of his kingdom.

Thirdly, that Gods kingdom is but in part come unto us; we see not all things
as yet put under him; many not called, many enemies and evils unsubdued, many
works of darkness hanging about us: which must comfort us, though we find
these things; we could not say this prayer, were there not matter of this
nature still dwelling with us, in our conflicting course. We are said to be
translated out of the kingdom of Satan, in regard yt we do not volu^tarily
suffer under him as a lawful King, but unwillingly as under an usurper too
strong for us. Again, he is begun to be, and certainly shall be cast out. Now
that is said to be done, which a while is so in doing that it certainly shall
be finished.

Lastly, note what every true Christian must seek with his utmost endeavor,
that both himself and others be in subjection to God. We should with Jeremy
and David bewail the auersenesse of others, and rebellions they live in
against God: and like Paul, bemone the laws of evil which dwell in us, etc.
Every one would have God to save him, but few heartily desire that God would
rule over him. How do Papists seek to propagate the Popes kingdom? They find
out new worlds, rather then his subjects should not be made up: and how would a
natural subject grieve to spy in himself much falsehood, much rebellion
against his Sovereign? So must we grieve that we have hearts so false and
rebellious against God. How do men profess perfect conformity and total
subjection to men?

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

In which words two things are to be noted; first, the doing of Gods will:
secondly the manner. The will of God signifies not his secret irresistable
will, but his will as it is revealed to us, that we should walk after it. [In
earth] Earth, in this place, is put by a Metonymie of the subject, for men
dwelling on the earth. [As it is in heauen] that is, readily in all parts,
constantly, with some resemblance to the heavenly creatures, though not with
like perfection. The sum is, that whatsoever God reuealeth as his will unto
us, which he would have us do, or by event makes known as his will, which we
must suffer, that we may obey him both in the one and the other; like as the
heavenly creatures obey him, though not with like perfection. The things we
ask are and die to our own works; and that he would strengthen us with grace
more fully in all parts to obey him: so that we may increase like good trees,
in bearing the fruits of righteousness, till we feel not our selves, but
Christ, thinking, speaking, working in us. Thirdly, that he would Name.
Considerations moving to the more devout making of this request are these.

thoughts? Our idle light discourse, our inordinate affections, our trespasses
every where, and following our own lusts. Thirdly, how imperfectly, and in a
sorry from pule to sprigge, so we are out and in, and through sloth cannot
hold out at these works, which are a dead work to our unregenerate

in any good action.

The conclusions are these:

First, that it is God we after him in nature, as a boy writing under one who
leads his hand in that he writes. For, longer then God acts the grace we
have, it moves not at all: for as an instrument now set in tune gives no
sound if some Musician touch it not; so we when Gods kingdom coming has
disposed us by grace, and made us fit to work well, yet cannot work any thing
till God moves us unto it, nor yet continue in working, longer then he
vpholdeth us in it. This then is our sanctuary against all our unfruitfulness
and disobedience: hold the Lord who has undertaken to write his Law in thy
heart, and to put his Spirit in thee, and make thee obey his commandment. And
this must teach us to give all glory to him, who is the first and principal
worker of every good thing in us.

Secondly, we note good things we do, we cannot perfect them: the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit a against the flesh, that we cannot do the
things we would. Not that our deeds are sins, but the best of them is
sinful: As wine having some water mingled with it, yet is called wine; for the
best part gives denominatio^ to the whole. The Papists know not what it is
truly to make this petition, that write so much for the justice of works.

Christians must not content themselves in any thing they have attained, but
must strive to perfection: Mat. 5.48.
Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. We must shoot at the
highest mark, though we take our arrows up short enough daily. When we call
men still on, they think we know not what we would have; do they not thus,
and thus? etc. but he that laboreth not to be better, will grow worse and
worse, for who gathers not, scatters.



Petition 4. Give us this day our daily bread:

The words are easy all but the last [Bread;] it is put for whatsoever thing
sustaineth this present life and comfort it. Jonathan eating honey, is
accounted to break the oath of eating bread. Daily bread is whatsoever is
convenient for us to possess for the present; so give of mercy to us, and then
renewing our faith and invocation daily toward thee, who carest for us, all
such things which thou see we may conveniently possess for the present time.
First for those who are Gods, but yet uncalled, whether having abundance, but
without the title of inheritance, or have neither title nor possession of any
thing, (for many belonging to mercy conflict with extreme poverty) we pray
in the behalf of these, that God would give as a Father to the one, as
children and heirs in Christ, the things they have; for the other, that God
would be pleased by a new grant, to furnish them with necessaries, who have
justly, as we all, forfeited all things. We who have something about us, yet
find want of others; we wish that God would supply us so far, as he sees
good for us. We who are called, and have for outward things more then we could
in modesty ask, (for God does for his sometimes this way, and other, above
that they can ask or think:) we do beg at God to maintain these things unto
us; for he must uphold our lot as well as deal us forth our portion. Secondly,
we wish that God would give us his leave to use the things we have. Thirdly,
that he would give us power to take a taste of such comforts which through his
allowance, we have liberty of conscience to use. Fourthly, that he would with
his blessing make them comfortable to us, so that we may with gladness of
heart use them. And from hence we may see that every one has reason to make
this petition which shall be. Now if we be in Christ, and yet poor, having in
a manner nothing, we pray that God out of his secret would minister to us, and
make the fruit of his daily providence a contented portion unto us, be it
never so little; and finally make us see him by faith our all sufficient God,
that will not leave us, nor forsake us. The motives breeding devotions this way
are, First, that God or his grace gives this or this to us. If we sit at board
with great personages, if they carue us a bit and give it us, the whole feast
is not so sweet to us, as their honorable remembrance of us. All the creature
is a deaf ^ut, and no better if God be not perceived in it. Lastly, that he
would bless all means we use, tending to preservation of this present life.
Thirdly, for such as have abundance, they must consider, how he that gives
these things is the maintainer of the^; how easily God might bring the things
they have to nothing, letting riotous servants and children like back doors,
bring down the house. Secondly, how many ways God can keep them from being
able to use or find comfort in any thing they take or possess; if he send a
scruple into the conscience touching the lawfulness of it, if he send
sickness, deep discontents, lingering after that we have not; or otherwise,
if he should give us to such weakness in using any thing, that we should breed
our selves more bitterness in the end, then we take comfort in the first
tasting of them; how little things put us out, that for the time all we have is
nothing to us? Lastly, we must consider how all things without Gods blessing
are nothing, clothes warm not, meats nourish not, physic heales not, labors
prosper not to effect any thing: which those well know, whose false affia^ced
hearts have been well whipped out of all the creature. The Job. Job 1.21.
His blessing makes rich, says Solomon; Every good and perfect gift
descends from him. Iam. 1.17.
Mine is all the earth, I give it to whom I will: he opens his hand and
fills every living thing. For as in a house the Master of the family keeps
(to the dogs) every creature in it, gives one greater another lesser wages:
puts some in honorable place, others in the scullerie: so does God the
great Pater familias, Father of all the family in heaven and in earth; neither
can any deal us a fit state but he. For as the Physician only can prescribe
the diet, so God he sees where a full and liberal measure, where a more
sparing is expedient. The devil he takes upon him that all kingdoms are his,
he gives them as he will; a loud lie; he cannot touch a hog till God seals
him a warrant: and as an executioner that kills by poison, serves the
Magistrate: so does he serve God in giving a deadly sweet poisoned cup to
those God leaves to his power. Again, though our good, friends and our means
help us with this or that, yet God is the first donor; these are instruments
conueighing that which God of grace deuiseth to us, and bestows upon us. He
that sends a present is the giver of it, not the man that puts it into our
hands; which does teach us to be content with that we have. We look our
children and servants should take that of us which we give them, without
murmuring, or discontented semblance, be it fine or course, etc. How much more
must we be willing to stand to Gods caruing, and not dare to quetch against his
disposition?

guests all the year long: he lays the cloth every where. The second thing
is, that the least outward thing is the gift of Gods grace to us; we deserve it
not, we are less then the least of his mercies, says Jacob. Nothing is more
free then gift, yea we ask it on gift, challenge it not as due. These are the
children which God of his grace has given me; such therefore as will challenge
heaven by form of commutatiue justice, because they have given a penny
answerable to that penny worth, were never taught by the Spirit of Christ.

Thirdly, observe hence, that our faith and invocation must be daily renewed
toward God for his care on us in this life. Whatsoever we have, our faith must
be no less on him, then if we were stripped naked of every thing; yea our
mouths must be no less open wide, to him. David though a King, says, The
Lord is my potion, and the sustainer of my lot. Had we done much for one, if he
when he felt himself warm should not respect us, but look at his own
strength, would we not count it treachery? If a substantial man, who deserved
credit alone, should be less trusted when he lays down a sufficient pawn,
would it be well taken? Apply this. But what need we every day to do thus?
Answer. Because all we have, God does let us no longer leases of it then for
the day. Again, this we have of another; we cannot use it though we have it
without the owners leave; as the servants that keep things under us, we allow
them not without our leaves to do their pleasure with them. Besides you heard
above, that God can keep us from touching them, or finding any comfort in them
(though we use them) or feeling his sweet grace, as who is the giver of them.
Wherefore let us take heed of the sensual confidence in the creature, and fly
up in spirit to him that gives and maintains with us all things; as the
Sun which both brings and continues the light with us. Let us not set
down our rest upon things present, and sing with the glutton: Take thy rest
soul, or with the Priest: His requies mea; but by benefit of the things we
have, let us, as by wings, fly up higher into belief on our Creator. God
therefore delighted in this, and often to hear us, does keep us Tennants at
will, as it were, from hand to mouth often, that we might wait on him. Egypt
had Nilus to water it, but the land of the Israelites was to expect, the first
and the latter rain, when God should as a gardener with his spout pot, so from
the bottels of the clouds power upon them.

Fourthly, observe that we must not trouble our selves with distrustful cares
for time to come: some are never well but while they have things so flush, that
they are not forced to go to God. Some though they have never so much for the
present, yet if they have nor provision for times to come, so yt they seem to
themselves out of gunshot, they are not contented. Hence it is that many rent
themselves a sunder with fore-casting, and fearing, touching things to come:
otherwise providence for time to come, which falls within the reach of our
daily course is not forbidden. Joseph laid up in years of plenty against
scarcity. We are sent to the Ant to school, that we may learn in Summer to
provide against winter, and parents de iure do lay up treasures for their
children: God would not have us superstitious Capuchians, who think it an
offense to have any thing unspent over night; nor profane companions that sing
Care away, and set cock on hoope, whose money burns in their pursses till it
be consumed; nor yet foolish improvident ones who buy their fuel when it
freeseth; but care of time to come, which comes from unbelief, and desire to
be greater then that we should need to care.

Lastly, mark hence what he teaches us under the name of Bread which is
necessary, and commonly begged for food. Mark hence that our desire must be
moderate touching things of this present life. Thus Agur prays in the
Proverbs 30.8. Lord let me not want, nor abound, feed me with food convenient
for me. Jacob says, Seeing thou give me bread and raiment, thou shall be my
God for ever: Paul; Having bread and raiment, let us be content. Nature is
content with small things; and as a lamp with a little oil is maintained, with
much extinguished; so is this light, this natural life which the soul causes
in the body. And it is to be marked; for not the having, but the loving, and
affecting of great things is sinful. For, what God casts upon us walking
within the compass of our ways, we are with thankfulness to embrace it. A
man's prosperity is not in abundance; for the dinne and tumult which accompany
the expenses that follow upon it, are more irksome then that exceeding of ones
estate is contentfull. A moderate estate has more ease and comfort, another
more disturbance and ostentation. Let us therefore bridle in our inordinate
appetites, which know not how to say enough. If we have but small things let us
learn to be content, and desire no greater. But how may we know what is a
lawful from an unlawful desire? Even as you know a thirst natural, from an
unnatural thirst, which a dropsy or ague causes; the one with a draught is
so satisfied that another is not cared for: the other once served, does make
way for fresh desire after a second: so these sinful ones, the enjoying one,
is but the beginning of another.

The 5. Petition: And forgive us, etc.

This petition has two thing to be marked. First, the request it self.
Secondly, the insinuation of it. To forgive a sin is to quit us, and set us
free from the guilt and punishment, which by reason of sin we have brought
our selves into; and to accept of us, and to use us as if we never had offended
by our sins: for sin makes us stand debtors to Gods justice, indebted so
far as to satisfy by suffering deserved punishment. As we forgive. These
words do not plead a cause, upon which God should forgive us; for we cannot
love, and so by consequent cannot forgive others, till God has forgiven us
first: as the wall cannot reflect heat upon a stander by, till the Sun has
shined upon it. Neither do they make comparison, in this wise, to forgive me no
otherwise; but as thou see me ready to forgive another; as if our
forgiveness were a master sampler or picture, after which God were to conform
his forgiving of us: but they do serve partly to insinuate with God by argument
taken from the greater; We that have much of the old leaven, by the spark of
thy grace in us, are ready to forgive; be thou much more: or by holding forth a
sign testifying of us, that we are persons to whom belongs forgiveness, not
showing why we should be forgiven: and thus strengthening our faith to believe
that we are heard in that request.

Lastly mark; we are said to forgive trespasses against us; for the sin
against God we cannot, but the injury or damage against our persons we may;
as if the Magistrate take a thief wronging us, we may forgive him his
injurious mind toward us, but cannot absolve him from the offense against the
law.

First, we ask that God would apply that mercy of his, reaching to
forgiveness, unto them that are yet the children of wrath, over whom yet his
anger abides through their unbelief: and this we ask in respect of our
brethren by grace of election, yet uncalled.

Secondly, for our selves, we do not ask that God would justify us; for God
is not off and on, he plays not fast and loose. Whom once he justifies and
forgiueth their sins, he never remembers sin against them. We therefore
whose sins he has pardoned, ask three things; the continuance we ask the
manifestation of it, that he would make us see and feel this forgiveness of
his; for our daily sins do weaken our comfortable apprehension, and dim the
spiritual sight of our souls, and do blot the counterpaine with us of this
release God has made us. Now we get by this petition our release newly
exemplified, our sight cleared, our sense restored. To this second branch
therefore must be referred these three things as asked by us. First, that God
would heal the doubtings and darkness of our minds. Secondly, that he would
strengthen our faith to full assurance in this point, that our sins are
pardoned. Thirdly, that he would make us feel our peace in the joy following
it.

Thirdly, we ask in this petition, that God would spare us as a father does
his children, removing from us those temporal chastisements which our sins
might every way bring upon us, to our great smart: for though God as a Judge
has pardoned our sins, yet as a father he may scourge them in it is when
Gods countenance this way is hid from us, and how heavy it is when darkness
and doubting do grow upon us.

Thirdly, we must get a fear of Gods fatherly corrections which we provoke.
The child that fears the rod will be afraid and cry to have a fault
pardoned: So we must think what a joy and sweet state it is to have our
Quietus est daily by us. Let us then earnestly and affectionatly cry to our
God, Forgive us our trespasses. What will a Malefactor now in danger leave
unattempted to get his pardon? what it one might be released from his debt, but
asking to have it forgiven? who would not seek instantly, who would spare to
speak that have this hope? The conclusions follow.

life on Gods part. Now contrition out of love to God is a supernatural life,
and therefore must needs follow Gods pardon. This is a demonstration against
the Papists; none can forgive sins but God.

Secondly, against the

Thirdly, mark that cured, our scarres, like white swans our black feet.



Peter who knew (by Papists confession) his sins pardoned, could not say this
prayer. Secondly, the construction before, shows, that the continuance in
forgiveness, not the first beginning only is here asked. We may inuert it;
they who may ask forgiveness may come to assurance that they have it.

Fifthly, mark that our faith and invocation touching this point, must daily be
renewed.

Out of the insinuation, that our forgiving others, is a sign we are such to
whom forgiveness belongs, or a help strengthening us to believe the
forgiveness of our sins, observe:

All Gods actions to us imprint their stamp in us: his election makes us
choose him, and choose the household of faith before all others: Know, as the
Apostle says, according to the spirit, not the flesh; his love of us makes us
love him and our brethren; his forgiving us makes us forgive our brethren.
Again, when we find that a spark of grace makes us ready to forgive; how
much more may we assure our selves, that God will out of his endless mercies
be ready to forgive us? and this Act of ours though it is no cause, yet it is
a condition, in which God does make us come to feel the pardon of our sin
which he freely forgiueth. So that as he who sees a print of this or that
Image, does know that the seal has been set there and applied: so we feeling
our selves ready to forgive, do come to know this more surely, that Gods
forgiveness has been applied in us. And as one that does see that done which
is greater, will easily believe the lesser; so we seeing our selves made by his
grace though sinful ones, ready to forgive, may much more be persuaded that
God so infinite in goodness has pardon for us, that we may fear him.
Thirdly, as they who have the condition on which a thing is to be done, may
boldly expect performance of that which depends on it; so we having
forgiveness, in which God has promised us forgiveness, may be bold to assure
our selves that we are pardoned.

Let us therefore nourish this grace, and put away implacablenesse, which once
out, will never return; we so forgive as never to forget: whereas Gods, and so
all true forgiving, is his never remembering any more that which is remitted.

Petition 6. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Here are two things to be considered. The petition, the explanation, or
correction annexed to it. Petition, Lead us not into temptation; the
explanation, But deliver us, etc. that is, lead us not so into temptation, but
save us from the evil of it. We read of three temptations. First, Gods
tempting man. Secondly, man's tempting God. Thirdly, the devils tempting man.
The first is twofold, as when God manifests his grace he has bestowed on
man, and thus he tempted Abraham: or when he makes man see his weakness, and
how unable he is to stand without his grace. Man tempts God, when leaving his
ordinary way of waiting on God in means, he will put him to it, to show his
mercy, power, etc. before his time. Thus the Israelites tempted him. But the
third belongs to this petition: the devils temptation, who laboreth to bring
us into sin, and to withdraw us from God to our temporal and eternal
destruction. Evil here signifies that which makes us worse, not in regard of
our feeling only, but in truth and before God: as which does harmefully
separate our union, or diminish our communion with God, who is our only God
and all-sufficient portion. The sum is: O Lord we know it is to thy honor our
life should be a warfare, neither can we here live without temptation. Do not
join us against Satan in battle, but so as still to have us in remembrance,
that whether he tempt us by adversity, or prosperity, or what way soever, yet
he may never sever us from thee, take us out of thy hand, nor diminish the
blessed communion we have with thee, farther then thou see it needful, to
the end we might receive it in great abundance. The things we ask are these.

First, that God would make this request, yet under the Lords correction, and
with condition it may be propounded; If it be possible, let that cup pass.



this petition, that God, if he see it good so to humble us, as to let us take
the fall, yet he would not let our faith fail finally; but would so strengthen
us, that we may see all the evils that we have suffered working to our good,
and our selves at length more then conquerors, in him who loves us.

Finally, as we ask Now the motives.

in all the duties we go about, and uncomfortable doubtings, yea despairings
touching the pardon of sin; in a word, to bereave us of all good which in the
former petitions we desire; and to bring upon us the contrary evils which are
most horrible. He plays no small games when he begins his temptations.
Secondly, remember beating no longer then it smarteth) we I say, remember the
bitterness of our daily falls the devil gives us, no longer then God lets
the sting of them stick in us; and this does make us that we feelingly cannot
pray against that whose anguish and evil we do not remember. yea in good
deeds; before we do them, when we have done them: as to security and pride
after the^, at bed, at board. For as fools and children, not knowing evils
fear them not, so we not knowing this evil, are less fearful, and flee not
so fearingly, praying to have it prevented; every where snares of temptation
are laid for us. Who that should go such a way, in which he could not take a
step without danger, would not go warily, and often lift up his heart for
protection? so far from being able to withstand him, that all we have of our
own, is readier to follow then he to whistle us after him. Sixthly, we must
remember David, Peter, etc. Yea presidents we have of some hanging themselves,
some tempted to it; for such examples are like the thunder, though it strikes
a few, it fears all: and are not we subject to have our minds distracted,
assaulted, with any even the most grievous things that ever we heard to have
befallen others?

Lastly, we must consider what a joy it is when we go a day more freed. Lord
what an ease is it to the soul? or if we be in a little forwardness to sin,
yet if we be rescued seasonably, how does it rejoice us? what peace does it
speak to us? Look 1. Sam. 25.32. Now could we work upon our hearts the
feeling of this benefit when he have it, the sweetness of it would enforce us
to beg it heartily; whereas not heeding the worth of it, we ask it
vnaffectionatly. Now follow the conclusions.

First, this petition thing permitted, as often man's is; for man may be said
partly to suffer this, not to do it, because other causes have their actiuity
without him, and dependencie on him; but it is otherwise with God.

darkness encounter them; neither can the devils stir, neither we bid
battle of our selves. Can the Lions stir till the keeper bring them out? can
a dog run till he that has him in a leasse loose him? So it is, God he has
them chained up in his almighty power, yea thrown down to the prison of
hell: farther then he does loose them, and bring them into the earth, where
this show is represented, and battle to be seen, they are not able to do any
thing. Again we cannot on the other side, being set upon, buckle with the
adversary power till God does lead us to it. The Kings champion is not to
play at his own pleasure, no more are we farther then God designeth it. But
how can God lead us into those temptations which he sees will certainly bring
us into sin? Answer. Because sin it self is not absolutely evil, but
only in respect of man sinning, who would in so doing pervert the divine
order, though he is unable; as who accomplisheth Gods will, when he does
contrary it, for ought he knows. Again, as vipers are evil substances, or
natures, which yet are good to that art which makes vipers of them; or any
poison which is evil, as it is poison in it self considered, yet is good as
it is poison, to a skillful physician: and as a blister on the flesh is a
natural evil as a blister, yet a blister as a blister is good when a cunning
physician does draw it, and may see it for good use; so is sin to God: we must
then not cast our selves into temptation; he that loves danger shall perish.
We must not make our selves poor as those heritickes that renounce all their
substance, that in voluntary poverty they may commend themselves to God.
Again, this must teach us contentment in all our temptations: not that we must
prevent repentance by this consideration; but we must when we are truly humbled
by this means, keep our selves from being swallowed up of sorrow. For Gods
will, and Gods turning all to good; the devil will whisper them so as to make
us pass by all exercise of a broken spirit in those things wherein we have
offended.

Thirdly, from this consideration we must walk in fear before our God, who as
a shepherd sets his dog on a stray sheep, so can he set the devil on us
to hound us home if we stray from him. Lastly, we see from this to our comfort,
that the devil cannot come against us at his pleasure; we are in the hands of
our heavenly Father. Thirdly, we note hence, that all our strength against
temptation is in God only; he only dissolueth the works of the devil,
trampleth Satan under feet, keeps him that he cannot so much as be
disturbant to us; when it pleases him we are down with the least blast; were
we in state of innocence we would not stand a moment: let us therefore trust
perfectly on his grace, put on the shield of faith only. Our forefathers
acknowledged yt God, not their strength, gave them all salvation against
corporal enemies; how much more must we confess it against spiritual? Who
knows the power of Satan, or the infirmity of their own flesh, that will
not confess this most entirely? But what serves the armor for? Answer. Only
to this end, that we may be able to get and hold God with us, fighting for us.
Fourthly, we see hence, not temptations, but evil of them is simply to be
prayed against; for these are often most beneficial. We must therefore learn
to yield obedience, and bid our God smell a sacrifice from the bitterest things
we taste, so far as they are his disposition; taking shame to our selves in
them, as they are the fruits of folly.

Fifthly, we may note hence, that no temptation shall be able totally or finally
to separate the Saints from God; for that we are taught to pray agreeable with
his will, we are heard in that. Now this were the greatest evil, not only in
regard of our seeming or appearance to us, but of the matter it self.

Sixthly, this is a great daily mercy, when God keeps us from temptation: not
to know a disease is better, then having it to be healed of it; indeed Gods
mending is better then his making, which somewhat alters the matter. Not to fall
when we are ready to fall, is a great favor. If one when our feet are ready
to fall from us, should hold us up, we would count it a great benefit; but to
have our damages advantage us, this is the evidence of power and goodness it
self.

The conclusion follows, partly containing a reason why we ask all these
things at Gods hands; partly a confirmation of faith asking; partly a praising
of God. From which, three things are to be marked. First, that none is to be
inuocated on, but he who has the kingdom, power and glory: therefore no
creature.

These words then contain the reason, why we come petitioning to our heavenly
Father. For as one lacking this or that in a house which is the masters,
comes in by the back door, if he pray a servant to give it him whose it is
not, who has no power so to do, etc: so if we seek our necessities temporal
and eternal, at Angels or Saints, which are servants to God, who have no power
to do any thing farther then beckoned to by God, we take a wrong way to the
wood.

But the Papists think all is made whole while they do call upon Saints or
Angels, not as the principal authors of the things they ask, but as secondary
patrons, who under God work these things for us. To which is answered, that
not only to do religious adoration in any kind to them, as the principal and
chief power, is sin: but also to call on them, or trust in them, as being some
secondarie divine powers, although inferior to God. The Angel-worship among the
Colossians, did not defer thus much, as if they had been the chief divine
powers; and yet is condemned. Nebuchadnezar did not enact that he should be
worshipped as the highest God; yet because he would have honor, in some degree
divine, Daniel did decline it as flat idolatry. Again, this distinction with
which they would salve their fact, may be turned upon them, as making against
themselves. For therefore these may not be called upon, neither may be trusted
to religiously, because they are secondarie workers of things under God who is
the principal agent.

Secondly, we see what may confirm us in assured hope to receive our requests,
namely, to think that God has the kingdom over us, that he is powerful and
glorious. There is a respect between Kings and their people, which binds
them mutually one to another. Hence it is that we promise our selves
protection, maintenance in our life, the benefit of subjects from them, because
we are their subjects, and they have the kingdom over us. That God who by
reason of this obliges sinful men to seek the weal of all their people,
because they have received a kingdom over them; himself will not fail on the
same ground, to procure all good to us, who live under the regiment of his
grace. Yet because it is not enough that God should have the regal authority
over us, unless he had the power also of working all things for our weal,
therefore this is joined [Thine is the power.] What were subjects the better to
be under a gracious Prince, but weak, having as short hands to do them good,
as a large heart to wish it them? So should it fare betwixt God and us, if he
were not almighty, able to subdue all things to himself; our faith were
shaken. For we cannot expect the treading of Satan under our feet, the
quickening of us in our souls to every good work, the justifying, the
protecting of us; we cannot expect these things from one who has not all power.

Thirdly, had God the right to help us, had he the power also; yet were it a
thing that made not for his glory, respected not the advancement of his honor,
our belief might waver: which now it need not do, it being Gods honor to
perform all good things for his chosen. Honor is with men the spur of
actions: have men right and power to effect this or that, notwithstanding if it
conduce not to their honor and glory, they will not move a finger to it. But
now there is nothing that wants to our assurance, while we know that we are
such to who^ God has right; such for whom he has all power; such, whom to
protect and bless with all things spiritual and corporal, is his great glory.
The case standing thus, how can we doubt of receiving the things we ask at his
hand in the Name of his Christ?

Amen] True it is; we thus fly to thee, o Lord, be it according to our desire.
An asseueration, wish, or expressing of earnest longing to obtain all the
things in this prayer above named.

A TREATISE UPON THE SIX PRINCIPLES:

Written by that faithful servant of God, Master PAVL BAINE, sometime
Preacher of Gods word at S. Andrews in Cambridge.

ANCHORA SPEI printer's device of Richard Field

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Milbourne. 1619.

THE FIRST PRINCIPLE.
Question. What do thou believe concerning God?

Answ. There is one God, Creator and Governor of all things, distinguished into
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

All necessary knowledge which man is bound to know, may be reduced to two
heads; The knowledge of God, John 17.1. This is life eternal, to know God; and
the knowledge of himself, heathens acknowledging their nosse teipsum, the
chiefest wisdom. Now the knowledge of God is first in order, as who is the
first sampler after which man was created (for we were made after his
likeness,) as also in whose affectionate knowledge the bliss of the creature
consists. Concerning God three things are set down to be believed: first,
the unity of his divine nature; secondly, his operation or working without
himself: thirdly, his distinction of persons. For the first: beside the
evident testimonies of Scripture, on which our faith is builded, we may by
reason demonstrate this truth. First to unfold it, then to prove it. God is
one not in beginning and kind, in which regard all men may be said one: nor in
consent, as the multitude of believers were said one, Act. 4. But one in
nature, the spiritual essence of God which is eternal, knowing all things,
past, present, and to come; almighty, etc. being but one, and no more in
number: as this elementary lightsome body of the Sun is but one, so that
spiritual nature of God, which is a light to which is no access, is but one
singular nature, which is not nor cannot be multiplied. Sound reason teaches
that God is infinitely perfect above all that man can imagine; but were there
many gods that had every one severally their divine nature, as there are many
men and Angels, that have severally their distinct, humane, and angelical
natures in them; then we might conceive a more perfect God then any, viz. such
a one as had in himself the perfection of all the other. This therefore does
teach us how to conceive of the divine nature; not as the heathens did, who
thought it multiplied as the nature of other creatures, but as of one singular
essence, which admits not any other by it, as having it in self all
perfection which can be found in the divine nature. Secondly, we see hence the
incomparable unity which the Father, Son, and Spirit have; as who have every
one the self same nature. To this we must look, that we may in our own
measure express it in being of one heart, thinking and affecting the same
things. Father, I pray thee that as thou and I are one, so these may be one,
one mystical person.

The second thing is his working without himself, that is, his voluntary
bringing forth the whole creature visible and invisible, in nature and being
different from his own. For as man and woman do some works within their own
nature, as propagating their like; some without, as build houses, make other
artificial devices: so God has his work within his divine nature, as the
eternal begetting of his Son, and breathing of his Spirit; as also his
works without his nature, such as he does voluntarily of his own accord,
having had liberty of will not to have made them, or otherwise to have framed
them then they are. Now first he is said the Creator, which implies two
things: First, his giving a being to all these things we see, and to all
spiritual natures which are not seen with the eye, when they were not at all
in the nature of things. Nothing can make it self: and therefore as seeing
goodly buildings in cities peopled, we gather that there were excellent
workmen; so beholding this earthly habitation with the furniture of it, we may
conclude, there was some most wise and mighty Spirit that framed these things.
The second thing in creating is, that God does continue the kinds of things,
and uphold the being which he gives them. For nothing that is not this or that
by nature, can longer continue to be so, then the working of the cause lasts
which first brought it to be so. As water is not hot by nature, therefore
longer then fire is under, which first made it warm, it will not continue in
heat, but by little and little draw to coldness. So the air is dark, and
therefore as the Sun makes lightsome day, so longer then it abides, the day
lasts not. So things not having of themselves their being, kinds, law of
propagation, but receiving these things from God; longer then he vpholdeth them
in this estate they could not endure, but would return to nothing, whence they
were produced. A man when he has made an house, does leave it, and it stands
without him, because he gives an artificial order only, not the substantial
being, which the matter of the building has in it self, not from the builder.
But did man give the being essential as well as order artificial, were he
withdrawn, the whole frame would be dissolved; as if he stir any thing that
moves not of it self, where his motion stays, the thing so moved does stay
likewise. Secondly it is said, the Governor, that is, he moves them to such
ends as are pleasing to him. A wise householder orders his whole family. A
wise King keeping in his Court, does by his authority and laws rule the
remotest parts of his country. So God, Father of all the family in heaven or
earth, King and Lord of all the creatures; he in the heavens which is the court
of his Majesty, does by his power, laws, Spirit of grace, rule heaven, earth,
hell; for hell is but a prison to the great God. But how fares it then that
such wicknednesses are committed? Answer. There is nothing simply evil, but
only in regard of the inferior instrument, who is willing, but not able to
pervert the divine order; and therefore these evils we see are like two faced
pictures, which seem on one side beautiful women, on the other ugly
monsters. So look at the lewdest works, as from God they are most beautiful,
as from the sinner monstrous; as in the crucifying of Christ the cursed Jew
wrought despitefully, but God most graciously. Ob. He that is a Creator and
governor, which sometimes he was not, is changed; but God now is thus, and
before the world began he was not, and therefore he is changed. The first part
is false, because the terms of Creator, and governor, put no real change
inherent in God, but imply a chang in the creature. For as the Sun
enlighteneth the earth every day, and changes the face of the creatures,
without being it self changed; so God creates and governs. Uses. First, we
see here a ground of thankfulness to God; we count an unthankful child a
monster of men, because he is unthankful to them by whom he received his
being; but how much more gross is our unthankfulness to God, whose
instruments only our parents were in bringing us forth. Secondly, we see hence
what cause we have to walk in fear: for we move, have being, live in him. If
one should have us so over a river, that if his hold should cease we could not
but drown forthwith; o how would we fear to provoke him who had us at such
vantage? but thus it is with God, that if his power uphold not, we should come
forthwith to utter nothing. Thirdly, we see what a lewd part it is, not to
acknowledge God. Not to acknowledge a King in his government, yea not to be
ready to take the oath of allegiance, we disclaim it in any as a part
unworthy a subject; so not to subject our selves to the living God, is a part
unworthy any creature.

The last thing to be believed is the distinction of this one God, in regard of
persons, into the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; for the conceiving whereof
four things are to be noted. First, that these respects of God, begetting,
begotten, and proceeding, do not make any composition as diverse essential
parts of one thing, but distinction only; as East, West, North, South, so
distinguish the heavens, that they are not essential parts whereof they are
compounded. Secondly, it is to be observed, that these three, though there is
order of precedence in nature, as the Father before the Son, the Son before
the Spirit, yet they are all coeternal in time; as fire is in natural
consideration before heat or light, yet in time they are altogether. Thirdly,
it is to be noted, that there are said three persons, not three Gods: for
neither tres dij, nor triplex Deus are fitly spoken, because the one
multiplieth, at least in appearance, the divine essence; the other resists
the divine simplicity. Three persons therefore there are, having all one and
the same divine nature, as if Thomas, John, and Matthew could be supposed to
have one singular soul and body common to them all, and entirely possessed of
every one. Fourthly, we must know that no carnal thing is to be thought of the
generation, nativity, procession, but the mystery is altogether spiritually
to be conceived; but this mystery is in regard of clearer knowledge, reserved,
till we shall be like Angels. In the mean while aspici potest, introspici non
potest, lest that befall us which happens to them that look full against the
Sun, viz. lest our eyes be dazeled.

The second Principle.
Q. What do thou believe concerning Man, and concerning thine own self?

Answ. All men are wholly corrupted through Adams fall, and are become slaves
of Satan, and guilty of eternal condemnation.

The knowledge of man follows, which stands in these four points: First,
to know how he was in his state of creation; which is passed over, and is left
to be gathered by the contrary. Secondly, what is his estate as he is fallen.
Thirdly, what by grace. Fourthly, what it shall be in glory. The three last
are opened in this, and the questions following. The second estate this answer
unfolds, setting down our misery, first in respect of our corruption;
secondly in respect of punishment. The corruption is set down by three
circumstances, first from the parties corrupted, all; secondly from the
quantity of it, wholly; thirdly from the first author of it, Adams fall. The
latter of punishment has two branches. First, our thraldom under Satan.
Secondly, our guilt of damnation everlasting. First then it is to be marked,
that no creature coming of Adam is exempted from corruption. Romans 5. In whom
all have sinned: We, says Paul of the Jewish people, are by nature the
children of wrath as well as others. For like as the root, like will be the
branches, and who can bring any thing clean from that which is unclean? So
that the Virgin Mary is not exempted, who neither was conceived, nor yet lived
without corruption; who was more blessed in believing on God her Savior, then
in bearing his flesh within her belly. Christ indeed was free. For though he
was in Adams loins, yet he was not of Adam, but miraculously framed by the
holy Ghost; and so, as he was exempted from the ordinary line of generation, so
likewise from the corruption which was a consequent of it. Secondly, it is to
be noted, that we are not in part, but wholly corrupted, there is nothing in us
sincere and undefiled. So that look as a man who has a leprosy ouergrowing
him from top to toe, so are we: The imagination of man's heart is evil, yea
only evil continually. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Therefore the Scripture makes us
void of all strength to good. Romans 5.10. We cannot think a thought as of our
selves. Nay, full of enmity against all righteousness. Romans 8. The wisdom of
the flesh is enmity against God: prone to all evil. Romans 3. We are, in a
word, dead in sin and trespasses. Ephesians. 2. Which does let us see how the
Papist is deceived, who dreameth of a power in the will unto good, if it be
loosed and awakened; as in a man asleep, or fettered, there is power to go,
and so forth, if he be waked and set at liberty. But the life of God, in which
all the power unto good was grounded, is gone from us. Ephesians. 4. They were
estranged from the life of God through ignorance: now twixt them and us by
nature there is no difference. Ob. Man has by nature some knowledge of God,
and his duty to God and man. Answ. None at all that is true and saving, but
such as may show the ruins of time in him, and make him more inexcusable.
Secondly, we must labor to have conscience of this our total defilement: I
know in me there dwells no good thing: for it humbles us, and makes us have
no confidence in the flesh, but have all our rejoicing in Christ Jesus; and
know that what good thing we do, it is in him and through him. The third thing
to be marked is, that sin wherewith our nature is defiled, is as a loathsome
corruption in it: it is the death of the soul which makes it rot in filthy
qualities, as odious before God, as the stink and filthy savor of a dead
corpse is in the nostrils of man. Yea it does putrify the body and make it
mortal, fretting it through, often before it be discerned, as a moth does a
garment: which must the more affect us. Were we with Job from top to toe
covered with biles, it would grieve us: but our whole spirits being fraught
with more filthy corruption the^ which breaks out at the eye, mouth, ear,
etc. we are not touched.

The fourth thing, through Adam, teaches us whence our misery is derived,
even from our first parent, whose sin we are guilty of, and whose corruption
is propagated unto all his posterity. For if parents rebelling against earthly
Princes, their children are tainted and disinherited, much more is this just
with God. And as we have the guilt of his fault, so we cannot be free from his
infection: Parentem proles sequitur: Like egg, like bird; as often men having
the falling sickness, and be get children having the same diseases; which must
make us further bewail our condition. Were we descended of one that had been
executed for treason, and so were pointed at as a traitorous brood, without
inheritance in earth; had we but with our nature the stone, or falling
sickness from our next parents, we would bewail our unhappy natiuities. The
second part of our misery first teaches us, that all of us by nature are
slaves of Satan. To be a slave or vassal is hard, but to be the devils
vassals most miserable. Hence it is we are said to be in his power, and in the
kingdom of darkness, and he to be the god of this world. For look as a man
is servant to whom he yields himself voluntarily to obey, so are we, as who
reuolting from God have voluntarily enthralled our selves to Satan. For as the
soul leaving the body, the body dies, so God leaving the soul, not in regard
of the presence of power but of grace, the soul forthwith dies. Again, as a
iailour has from the King and chief Iusticer power over his prisoners, so
has Satan as being iaylour and executioner to Gods justice, power over us;
which must make us still see our misery. Woe to the sheep whom the wolf
gouerns: were we slaves serving under the Turk in his galleys, how would it
grieve us? but thus one might be more free then the Turk himself. Were we as
the Israelites in Egypt, we would lament: but to be thralled to him that like
a roaring Lion seeks to devour us, is much more intolerable. Lastly mark
that we are subject to eternal death, death endless and easelesse, both of
soul and body; the soul is dead, while we live we feel it not, because we
are dead: the body is mortal tending to death, for as a moth is in a garment,
so lies sin in us, corrupting our body by little and little without ceassing,
till it be dissolved. In death the soul is gathered to those Apostate spirits,
who keep it imprisoned in hell till judgment; then at the great day soul and
body, having sinned together, shall suffer together everlastingly. If a man
sin against the majesty of an earthly mortal Prince, he is punished with
temporary death or perpetual imprisonment, if he could be supposed to live
always, he should lie in for ever; how much more deservedly are we subject to
eternal death who have sinned against an eternal God? Which still moves us
to take notice of our estates, and lament them while there is hope. If our
bodies were in such case, threatening death, would we not be touched? if we were
condemned to die as malefactors, would we not wring our hands to think on such
misery? How much more should it move us to think that we are subject to
everlasting death, which has already seized upon us in the spiritual death
of our souls, and mortality or dying states of our bodies?

The third Principle.
Q. What means is there for thee to escape this damnable estate?

Answ. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, being made Man, by his death
upon the Cross, and by his righteousness, has perfectly alone by himself,
accomplished all things that are needful for the salvation of man.

The answer sets down two things, first, the author of salvation, secondly
his perfect saving of us. In the first there are two things, first who it is,
viz. Jesus Christ: secondly what kind of person he is, after a sort compounded,
viz. the eternal Son of God, God with the Father and Spirit; and man also,
that is, God the Son having such a soul and body, as we have for the
essential nature of them, assumed to him into ye fellowship of his person. The
second, his perfect saving of us, is likewise set down, first from his active
obedience, that is, his fulfilling the righteousness of all the commandments;
and his passive obedience, that is, bearing the cursed death, which are the
things whereby our-saluation is wrought for us: Secondly, from the solitary
manner of working these things, viz. that he did and suffered all things due to
this end, by himself, without leaving part of this business to the Saints and
our selves. First, for his Name: such as retain to great personages, they know
their names and their whole style; which comprehends all their Signiories,
honors, and offices which they have and bear in the common wealth; and we, if
we hear of some person more famous for this or that, are not well till we
have learned his name: how much more should we be affected toward the name of
him, that has wrought the salvation of mankind? Now as great men have their
proper names and styles of office, honor, etc: so Christ has his proper name
Jesus, which signifies a Savior; and of office, Christ, which signifies one
anointed. Names should admonish us somewhat concerning the nature of things
named by them: so do these names. For he was called Jesus, because he was to
save his people from their sins, not only from the guilt, which he does when he
brings us to see in him the pardon of our sins; but from the power of sin:
which he does every day, yea hour, while he tameth and subdueth our sin in
us, preserves us from the rage of it, and preuenteth the occasions whereupon it
would swell and rage in us, and trampleth Satan under our feet, who is the
unquiet moouer of sin in us, and musterer of all occasions against us. Now he
is the Christ, or anointed of God; because that which ye priests and kings
anointing did signify, is accomplished in him, in whose humane nature God
dwells personally; adorning it with innumerable gifts of grace and glory
supernatural; as the soul does bring forth in the body many natural
properties, while it abides therein as personally conjoined with it: and thus
he was anointed, that he might be a fit King and Priest, and Prophet to his
Israel. How sweet then are these names of our Savior, so refreshing the heart
as a sweet ointment does the senses! they are mel in ore, melos in aure,
iubilum in cord. We must therefore enquire after them and gladly know them. He
were a sorry servant that should not care to know his masters name to whom he
belongs. What shall become of us, who, professing our selves to belong to God
our Savior, know not the first letter of his name?

Secondly, mark what kind of person our Savior is, such a one who is the
eternal Son of God made man, that is, God and man in one person; the
eternal Son being a perfect person from all eternity, taking our nature into
the unity of his own person. To open it, first note who is incarnate, the
eternal Son; then how. To the first, we are sons but by grace and adoption,
begotten in time by the preaching of the Gospel. The Angels, and Adam in
innocence were called sons, but in time brought forth of nothing, viz. when
time began: but Christ is begotten of the selfsame spiritual essence the
Father has, coeternall with himself. Now to know how they are united, we must
consider that the three persons of the Trinity are one, but in nature which is
one and the self same in all the three; but here two natures are united in one
person, God the Son having a perfect personal being, did take a soul and
body, not into union of his divine nature, but into communion of his person. So
that the nature divine and humane are distinct, but the personal being, which
only before subsisted in the nature of God, does now subsist in the nature of
man, which does no less essentially belong to the Son of God his person,
then the divine nature it self, in which before it only subsisted. The sum
is, God the Son from everlasting a perfect person, being only in the nature
of God, did in his time appointed, create a soul and body, not having
personal being of themselves within his own person; that his personal being
might as really exist afterward for ever in man's nature, with the divine, as
before it had done in the divine nature alone. So that as the soul and body
make up the personal being of one man, so the divine nature and humane are one
Christ after a sort. This is the difference, the soul has no perfect
personal being of it self before the body, but the soul as one part, and the
body as another, do mutually conspire in constituting the personal being: a
third thing, which neither has by it self. Whereas God the Son, does not take
our nature as to make up a personal being, which himself had from
everlasting; but to receive from him, having perfect being, that which it self
had not. So that our nature is a part of his person, not constituting any
perfection in it, but superadded to it, as in it self most perfect from
everlasting to everlasting. This comparison shall serve; for others of the oak
and misceltoe, of a sience engraffed into a tree, are not more plain in
expressing, how the two natures of God-man become substantial parts, as it
were of one person: and all similitudes here must needs be defective, because
there is nothing in nature that has the essence and substance of any thing
without the being this or that thing; as Christ's soul and body were the
common nature and substance of a man, without being this or that man. Again
there is nothing in nature, which being this or that, can communicate that
being it has with another, as the Son of God does his personal subsiste^ce
with this body and soul, which were always without any being but in him. Our
great Savior then is God-man. Were be not man, he could not die, nor have
right to redeem us, as being not our kinsman, with many such like
considerations: were he not God, his obedience and sufferings would not be of
value: God has redeemed us with his blood. Again, man could not sustain the
curse, and those powers of darkness fearfully assailing it; hence it was that
Christ man was not swallowed up, because the Godhead did support it: as one man
may be planted in some standing so impregnably, that he may bear the assault
of a whole army; so how strong was this man which God had created within
himself? This must above all be thought of, this, as the rock: The natural
Son of God is our Savior. Mat. 16. What shall the gates of hell do against
him? The use of this is, first, to consider his infinite love, that has not
abhorred the Virgins womb, that has made our flesh and blood a substantial
part of his person. If great men vouchsafe but to be free of some worshipful
Company, if they condescend to be heads of some Corporation, it is held a great
matter: but suppose there were a great kindred of poor Jack strawes which had
rebelled against the King; should the Prince match himself with some poor
maid of the tribe, that so he might pacify the King toward them, here were
grace, such as no report of story could second. The King of heaven has, when
we were all poor rebels, matched himself with our flesh and blood, by
covenant of personal cohabitation with it, never to be dissolved.

Secondly, we must hence see what reason we have to come to God with boldness.
God in himself is a light, to which is no access, a consuming fire: but lo he
has made himself God-man, that looking at thy own nature thou might not
be afraid of him. The ancient sheepheards to make themselves less awful, and
more lovely to their sheep, were wont to go covered with their skins: So
this shepherd of our souls, that he might not be terrible unto us, makes
himself like unto us in flesh and blood. Though we feared some great man, yet
were he married to our house, very near us, this circumstance would animate us
not a little: think the same of thy God, married as aforesaid to thy flesh.
Thirdly, as this shows love, and encourages; so to consider, that God is he
that dwells in our nature, will be a ground of hope against all evils
whatsoever. Naked man could not help us: thou must never stay in seeing man.
But as when thou see a body, thou know it is such a ones body; so when
thou imaginest that glorious body and spirit, still think whose they are, the
eternal Sons of God. On this person as God fix all thy trust; as man, thou
have encouragement, but as God, thou have matter of confidence, as who cannot
be withstood in his gracious pleasure toward thee: our affiance is built upon
the person that is man, but as he is God, not as he is man. For cursed is he
that trusts in flesh. Lastly, seeing Christ has for our sake taken our base
nature, how equal is it, that we at his request should labor to be partakers
of the divine nature, that is, of heavenly qualities and condition? Should the
Prince having done such a thing for the poor snakes above named, entreat
nothing at them but that they would live at Court with him, and partake in his
glory, were it not an easy suite?

The next thing that follows, is that at Christ has done and suffered all
things for us; even the cursed death. We of our selves are bankrupts, who stand
indebted unto all obedience to every commandment, which is that perfect
righteousness the Law requires; who likewise are in debt to the justice of
God, because we have sinned, in debt, I say, so far as to bear the cursed
death. Cursed is he that continues not in all to do it always. Now God has
put himself surety for us, he has in our room been obedient to every
commandment, if this be to be asked of us; and he has put his body and soul
twixt this cursed death and us, that so we might be discharged. If a man do
this or that office for us when absent, o how kindly we take it, especially if
he do it out of his mere good will unspoken to of us? But how should we take
this to heart, that Christ has, when we could not through our gracelesnesse
once ask him, fulfilled all righteousness, which we were to fulfill? We take
it as love in men, if spoken to, they will do small matters often for us.
Again, he that will bear a blow in our behalf, be bound for us in great
sums of money, especially he that will lie by it for our good: but how much
more are we to acknowledge this grace of Christ, who has been our surety,
paid for our deliverance, not silver or gold, but his precious blood? Again,
this is the sure anchor of our faith, our surety has discharged all that can
be required at us. Now a debt in justice once paid cannot again be demanded.
Who then shall lay anything to our charge? it is Christ that is dead, yea risen
from the dead for the justifying of us. He has once satisfied all in the
behalf of us who believe; who then shall be able to demand ought at us?

The next thing is, that Christ alone has done and suffered all things for us;
not Saints, nor our selves are to be Saviors, but the glory of this belongs
to that Name alone: shall dust and ashes beset to help out the great God in
that he goes about? Let the Sun borrow light of candels when this may be
proved. Whatsoever moves God to save us as without himself, whatsoever
effectually applies it, all is in Christ. Christ's passion the medicine,
Christ's divine power the virtue which works all in all. True it is that
faith, repentance, thankful confession are required: but first, not as causes
working our salvation, but as means without which we come not to this
salvation. I am sick, there is a Physician which heals such as I am only;
he would have his patients have a good persuasion of him, be thankful to him,
be sorry if they rudely provoke him. Now such he with his medicines (by his
art applying the same) restores to health. Who would say, that a man's going to
the Physician, his sorrow for offending him, his thankfulness toward him, do
properly cure him of his disease? every thing necessary to this or that end, is
not a cause of that to which it concurreth as needful. We have need of meat
and drink that we may serve God, yet meat and drink are no causes of
godliness. Secondly, these things needful are begun in us, continued,
perfected by Christ, the author and finisher of faith and all other graces in
us. Now the Papists do in these two branches derogate from Christ his absolute
saving of us. First, that they make man in part to do and endure that which is
the medicine healing of him. Secondly, that they make him out of the power of
his will, not created in him when he is only regenerate, but remaining in his
corrupted nature, to bring forth those things which are necessary to concur,
that salvation may be applied. Let us therefore know that in Christ we are
complete, and having such an one who is able perfectly to save us, let us not
look any other way to any creature in heaven or earth. It is Christ that is
dead, risen, yea that makes intercession. If the Prince should undertake a
thing, who would wish he might for his further security have some poor
subject joined with him; that which is perfect is marred by adding ought unto
i^. And who will say that Christ's sufferings, righteousness, effectual
application are any way defective? Let us then with the Apostle care to know
nothing but Christ, and him crucified. A fifth wheel helps nothing, troubles
not a little; so it fares with all additaments of righteousness and
sufferings that are joined with Christ's, in justifying and satisfiing for us.

The fourth Principle.
Q. But how may thou be made partaker of Christ and his benefits?

A. A man of a contrite and humble spirit, by faith alone apprehending and
applying Christ with all his merits unto himself, is justified before God, and
sanctified.

This Principle lays down four things, first what is the quality of the
person to be saved, in those words, a man of an humble and broken spirit.
Secondly, the grace, by which as a mean he is saved, or the grace apprehending
that whereby we are saved, viz. faith alone. Thirdly, the thing apprehended,
Christ and his benefits. Fourthly, the fruits following upon Christ and his
benefits apprehended, our justification and sanctification. For the first,
observe that none whose spirit is not broken with conscience of sin, has
benefit by Christ. I came not to call the righteous, but the sinner; not such as
think themselus just enough, but such as through my working in them see their
sins, to call those to repentance. Come to me ye that are weary and heavy
laden. God commanded that the Paschall Lamb should not be eaten but with
bitter herbs; to teach us that without the salad of godly sorrow and
contrition for sin, Christ sauoureth not. For look as man must be hungry yer
he will care for bread, and must feel himself sick before he will care for
the Physician; so it is with us: if our souls feel not themselves empty of
all goodness and sick of sin, they will not care for Christ, the bread of
life, the Physician of distressed souls. We must labor therefore to be cast
down in the sense of our misery. Were we guilty of faults for which the law of
man would severely punish us, how would it go near us? for our breach of Gods
laws we take no care: if we have lost little things on the earth, we grieve;
but to be cast out of heaven our eternal inheritance, this stingeth us not.
Such is the working of sin, it is a death of the soul, which takes away sense
of sickness, as in the body, the nigher death ye lesser we feel, and the more
deadly the sickness the less it is perceived. Again, it does like
drunkenness take away the spiritual understanding of our miseries. A drunken
man feels no knocks; so we, the devil having made us drunken, feel not how
we are wounded.

Secondly, observe what we must do to be saved, Believe on Christ. Such as
would be cured of their stings which by serpents they had received, must look
up to the serpent of brass, which God did set up: So we that will be cured of
the poison which the old serpent has conveyed into us, must look to Christ
with our eye of faith. What shall we do that we may be saved? Believe, says S.
Paul. For as it is not enough that there is a Physician which has a medicine
ready for this or that grief; but the patient must go to him and take it: and
as it is not enough for us being hungry, to see and know that there is bread,
but we must eat it if we will have fruit by the one or other: so in Christ, we
must come to him by faith, feed upon him in our hearts by unfeigned belief,
before he will profit us any thing. Wherefore let us not content our selves
with the Papists faith, which confesses that there is a Christ the Son of
God, but does not lay hold on him as their Savior. This is an historical
faith which lets Christ hang in the air, does not bring him to dwell in the
heart. We must say with Thomas, My Lord, and my God: With Paul, Galat. 2.20.
Who has loved me, and given himself for me. For plasters must be spread on
the sore, and medicines taken, before the patient can be amended. Thirdly,
observe that faith only is it which as an instrument applying Christ does save
us. Not that faith goes alone without other virtues, and care of good life;
but because no other grace does lay hold of Christ, as in whom we come to have
forgiveness of sin, and life everlasting. (Love indeed claspeth Christ, yet
not seeking righteousness and life by him, but cleaving to him for that which
we discern him to be unto us through faith:) even as the eye in the head is
not alone without other senses, yet it only sees, and no other sense with it.
Which does let us see what a precious thing this faith is, as Peter calls it,
and why the devil does so much labor against it, because this is it alone
which tyeth us unto Christ our Savior, which holds him as all in all to us.
Suppose one did hang over the sea, clasping a rock with his hands; he that
wished his destruction, need no more the^ to loose the hold he had with his
hands; so it is with us. Fourthly, mark what it is that faith lays hold on
to salvation, only Christ dying for us, and fulfilling all things in our
behalf. This is the only object, or matter about which faith is occupied, as
it is the instrument of justifying and saving of us; and in regard of this that
it apprehends, it is said only to save us. Faith justifying does believe the
story of the Bible, the threatenings of God; yea may upon some particular word
by instinct or otherwise coming to us, work a miracle: but it does not
justify, and save us, but only as it looks to Christ, who is the
righteousness and the salvation of our God; not as believing other things. As
a reasonable soul in man does bring forth sense and motion, does concoct,
expel, does exercise, animal, sensitive, and natural functions in the body;
yet it is not reasonable as it does these things, but as it conceiueth of
things simple, or otherwise discourses: and in this respect only it is said
to save us, because that it lays hold on Christ our Savior; so that the
meaning of this, faith saves us, is, Christ apprehended by faith does save us.
Whence Romans 3.9. and Act. 3.9. these phrases are made aequiualent, to be
justified by Christ, and by faith, to be healed by the Name of Christ, and
faith in his Name. As if one should say, this pot of money makes me a rich
man; we would not think the pot made him rich, but the treasure in it. So when
faith is said to save, it is not to be meant that the act of believing
absolutely considered does save us, but respectively in regard of Christ our
Savior, whom faith holds. Wherefore let us only hold Christ as beside whom
we lack nothing fully to save us. This makes the devil as he labors
against faith, so he seeks to corrupt men in resting only upon Christ.
Hence he teaches them to trust on their good prayers, serving of God, meaning
works; and in the popish Church many other things, the Church treasury, the
intercession of Saints, humane satisfactions, indulgences, works; that thus he
might bring them, while they catch at a shadow of righteousness, to let fall the
true righteousness; as Aesops dog making to the shadow of meat he saw in the
water, let fall that which he had in his mouth. Christ and these will not stand
together; so much as we lay hold on these, so much we let go out hold on
Christ. Lastly, note what benefit we have being in Christ; we have
righteousness and life eternal. We by Adam, first stand guilty of sin:
secondly, of everlasting death. Now Christ having been made a sacrifice for
sin, that is, for the taking away of sin, and pacifying of God his Father,
does not only obtain forgiveness of sin for us that are his, but the grace
of adoption and free donation of life everlasting. Hence it is, that as by
generation and coming of Adam we partake in sin and death; so by
regeneration, being set into Christ, we are made partakers of righteousness,
and life from him. And look as a griffe partaketh in the sap which the stock
contains, or as a member coupled unto the head, communicates in the sense
and motion which is thence derived: so we by faith set into Christ, have his
righteousness conveyed unto us, God imputing it to us as ours; and life
likewise conveyed from him the fountain of it.

Ob. But then we are saved and made righteous with another righteousness, as
if any can be made wise with another wisdom. Answ. Christ's is not another,
but after a sort ours, when we by faith are made one with him. Secondly, how
was Adams sin made our sin? Thirdly, if the Pope be pleased, he may in his
indulgences impute the sufferings and righteousness of other men, to such as
never knew the^; shall it then be unlawful for God to impute to us the
righteousness of his Son? And it is to be noted that he says: we are
justified, that is, have in Christ forgiveness of sin; and are sanctified,
that is, have the life of glory begun in us. For grace is the beginning of
eternal life, according to those sayings: To such as are in Christ there is no
condemnation: and, Who so believes has everlasting life: whom he has
justified those also he has glorified; by faith their hearts were purified.
For look as not only Adams fact in eating the forbidden fruit was imputed to
us, but his corruption which was in his nature, being the death of the soul,
was also propagated to his posterity: so not only Christ's obedience to the
cursed death, is reckoned as if we had borne it, but the glorious life which
rests in him as a root of it, is conveyed to us. We see then what wonderful
benefits we have being in Christ. If we had faulted against some great man, we
would count it no small benefit to have it released and freely forgiven us.
Again, to be recovered unto bodily life out of some great dangerous sickness,
is no small mercy; what blessedness then is this, to be set free from all our
offenses against God, and of dead men in soul, to be made alive to God?

Secondly, if any thirst after these things, whither must they go? even to this
fountain. Thirdly mark, that the pardon of sin never goes to a man, but that
clensing of his nature and sanctifying of him goes with it also. A
counterpoyson coming to the heart, poison is expelled. So Christ and Belial
will not dwell together in one person.

The fifth Principle.
Q. What are the ordinary or usual means for obtaining of faith?

Answ. Faith comes only by the preaching of the word, and increases daily by
it: as also by the administration of the Sacraments and prayer.

This answer lays down two things, first, the mean or instrument both of
begetting, and increasing faith, viz. the word preached. Secondly, the means
which serve only to the further increasing, not to the first begetting of it,
viz. the Sacraments and prayer. For the first, we may note hence that true
faith is bred in us by the hearing of the word, and nourished by the same. Romans
10. How can we believe without hearing? so the Gospel is the powerful
instrument of God to salvation, from faith to faith, I commend you to the word
which is able to build you up. For faith is the credit and assent which we give
to matters: now how can we give credit to any thing we never heard of? Again,
as we cannot hear what is done in France till some messenger do bring us word
of it; so we cannot hear what Gods pleasure in heaven is toward us, till he
dispatcheth his messengers unto us. The same word does after increase faith in
us: for if we believe an honest man so much the more, because he often goes
over, which affirms this or that to us; how much more must we be strengthened
to hear God reiterating his testification of this or that which he formerly
had spoken? Even as in the natural birth, the same blood of the mother whereof
as a seed it is framed, the same I say, is after her delivery by benefit of
the kernels in the breast turned into milk, wherewith the babe is nourished:
so this word is both the seed which breeds, and the sincere milk of the
Gospel which feeds faith in us. Yet we must not think that this word we
preach is the principal worker of faith, for it is but an external instrument
which God uses; which as it cannot work faith without God, so God will not
work faith without it; It has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
save his: otherwise. Ephesians. 1. The same power which raised up Jesus from the
dead, is it which brings us to believe. If one were borne without an hand,
none could set a natural hand on such a body, but the power which creates and
makes a body; so much less can any power but the Lords, create this grace in
the soul which is as an hand that reaches into heaven. The use of this, is,
first to examine our faith in this point, by what means we found it wrought in
our hearts, by what mean it is preserved and increased in us. If it be a true
faith, the word preached did beget it, and it feels it self to grow in
strength by mean of the same word. When as many that say they believe, they
never found any use of the word to begin their faith; for they cannot remember
they say, that ever since years of reason, they were without a good belief to
Godward; neither do they feel any need of the word to grow by; the less they
have of it, it is the better with the^; such men's faith is a devilish
delusion. Contrariwise, if we have come to our faith by hearing, and find that
the word is effectual in us to the augmenting of it in us; in all this, it is
with us as it is with true believers. Secondly, we see how needful the word
preached is for us; no word, no faith; no faith, no salvation. This makes the
devil so malicious to persuade the contempt of it, or at least to bear us in
hand that it is not so necessary. What, were none saved that had not Preachers?
may we not read, and pray at home, and serve God without this? who are worser
the^ many that gad after it? What can they tell thee more then thou know?
They speak great things of it, but what do thou feel? He knows that if he
can keep us from attending on the Word, we shall never be brought to faith,
and so never have benefit by Christ Jesus. Wherefore let us come within this
net; and if we be already borne to God, let us like newborn babes cry after
this milk that we may grow by it. Secondly, note that by the Sacraments our
faith is confirmed in us. For even as men do further secure those they deal
with, by putting to their seal unto their covenants; so God, willing to give
us full assurance, has not contented himself to make a will paneld by word
only, but has written it, yea has by oath confirmed it by the witness of
his Spirit. Finally, has put to his seal, that nothing might be wanting which
might the better secure us; and all this is not to make his word more sure in
it self, but to make it more sure in our persuasion. This is the use of
Sacraments; for the Scripture calls the^ the Covenant, signs of the
Covenant, signs and seals of the righteousness of faith: and therefore
signs confirming the weakness of our belief, ratifying Gods covenants with
us; not distinguishing only from unbelievers (which is Anabaptistrie) nor yet
instruments infusing the first grace into us; for Abraham the father of all the
faithful, now being a believer, received circumcision: so Cornelius now an
approved believer, was baptized; and we never find the fruit of our Baptism
or the Lords supper, till we be taught to believe. This then should teach us
both to acknowledge Gods great grace toward us, that thus condescendeth to our
infirmity. If a man of worth be not believed on his word, especially if he
give a deed of his hand, he will snuff at it, not take it well; but our God
who cannot lie, deals otherwise. As also we must rejoice to come unto these
Sacraments: should we come to have the seal passed of some great earthly
matter made over to us, how would we rejoice? shall we not be glad when we come
to have the seals which assure to us pardon of all our sins, and life
everlasting? Thirdly, we must hence give glory to God, in believing him
without all doubtings and uncertainty, which popish religion persuades. If an
honest man should give us his word, deed, oath, before witness should seal
this or that; would we not be ashamed to be incredulous? Much more shameful it
is to distrust the living God.

Lastly mark, faith is increased by prayer, not begotten, for we cannot pray
to him on whom we have not believed; it is the first fruit that faith brings.
When babes are borne, they say they cry presently; but when by faith once the
babe of the new creature is borne in us, it presently cries, Lord help my
unbelief; I believe Lord, Lord increase my faith. And as children have no more
compendious way to get any thing then to beg it at their parents, no more have
we then to beg at our God; who, if parents sinful give good things to their
children that ask them, will much more give us his Spirit that desire it. Let
us then beg increase of this and all other graces. Spare to speak, and spare
to speed; open thy mouth wide, and God will fill it.

The sixth Principle.
Q. What is the estate of all men after death?

A. All men shall arise again with their own bodies, to the last judgment;
which being ended, the godly shall possess the kingdom of heaven: but
unbelievers and reprobates shall be in hell, tormented with the devil and his
Angels for ever.

Having thus inclusiuely laid down our state by nature, and expressly handled
our estate present by grace, he now unfolds what shall be the future estate
of man in glory, or endless torment. In the answer three things are laid
down as matters to be believed; first, the general resurrection of us all;
secondly, the end to which we are raised, that we may come to judgment:
thirdly, the things which shall follow upon judgment: viz. the execution of
Christ's sentence, both touching the blessedness of the faithful, and the cursed
damnation of the wicked. For the first mark this, what we are to persuade our
selves of our bodies and the bodies of all other, viz. that they shall at
length be raised up. This resurrection of the body, and of every man's own
proper body to himself, is a point of belief grounded in the Scripture, and
power of God, which can subdue all things to it self. Yet sounder reason may
make it probable: for as the seed sown does not so corrupt that it should
come to nothing, but that a new body may be engendered; so our bodies do not
return to dust, that so they might vanish to nothing, but that so in their
time they might through Gods power fpring up into immortal, and strong bodies.
And why is it not as credible to think that God can bring again all those
bodies that have been, as to be persuaded that he can create new generations of
bodies that never yet had being? for, that this should be, which sometime has
been, is not more marvelous then that such a thing should be, which never yet
had being in the nature of things. He that should see a little portion of seed
in a glass, and should see the portraiture of a perfect man, (say he had never
seen the procreation of mankind) he would as hardly believe that ever such
seed should become such a creature, as that dust should be raised up, had he
no more seen the one then the other. But God has spoken it, and his power can
subdue all things to it self; and these two are the props of our belief in
this point. Now though all shall be raised up, yet in diverse manner, to diverse
ends; these by Christ as a head bringing salvation, those by him as a judge of
all flesh: these to glory, those other to shame. For as for the wicked it were
better for them if they did not rise; as Christ says, it was better for Judas
he had never been.

The use of this is comfortable to the godly, they die not to be held for ever
under it, but to rise more glorious. Who does not endure to have an old house
pulled down, that may have a new built up in the room? Who takes it
grievously to lie down to sleep, that knows he shall rise again in the
morning? Yea this is true, if we could be as sure of this our rising, as we
are of the other. Answ. Why should we doubt? God has said it, who gave being
to all things out of nothing, and can much more make us this or that, being
something. Again, reason does demonstrate it as being not absurd. Finally, thou
have in thy self already the first resurrection of thy soul from death in
sin, which is greater; will thou not then believe, that he whom thou have
found able to raise thy soul from death in sin, is able to raise up thy body
likewise? And it is terrible to the wicked; it were well with them if death
coming there were an end. Nay the body must rise, that as it was partaker with
the soul in sinning, so it may be partaker with it in judgment.

The second thing is the end to which all are raised, to judgment. Observe
then, that every one shall come before Jesus Christ the great God to judgment.
Earthly Princes have their Iusticers riding their circuits, and in fit times
judging all causes, and persons subject to judgment. So God has his Christ, to
whom he has committed all judgment, who shall come gloriously from heaven in
his time, and judge all flesh righteously. And needs it must be, for here in
this life is not seen, the punishment of wickedness, nor the reward of
virtue. Now if a King in his common wealth cannot justly suffer sin unpunished,
nor virtue without encourageme^t, how much less shall the just God let the
wicked carry it away for ever, and the godly unrewarded? shall not the just
Judge of all the world set all at right in his time? But the Scripture says,
that he that believes shall not come into judgment, Ioh. 5. and that he who
believes not, is already condemned. Ans. The righteous shall not come into
judgment of condemnation, but he shall appear to be formally and publicly
absolved. The wicked is already judged and condemned by the word, in his
conscience, Sententia Iudicis interloquutoria, not definitiua. The word judges
him, his conscience condemns him, but the definitive sentence is not solemnly
pronounced. This then is to be thought on, that God will have all brought to
judgment, yea he shall reckon with malefactors to the least idle word. As
malefactors are brought out of darksome prisons, so shall the bodies and souls
of wicked ones be drawn forth of the prisons of hell and the grave, to receive
their doom. This not thought upon, men are bold to commit wickedness, as we
say, the thief wots not the hemp grows when he steals. Many think, let
them have but this day, they will make shift good enough; but the more thou
presumest, the more shall thou be confounded; the lighter thou set by it,
thou shall feel it the more unsupportable. We are afraid to fall into ye
lapse, to do any thing amiss which we are sure to answer before our betters,
if we do it: how is it then that we are not afraid, to do any thing, though we
must answer it before God? This is comfortable to the godly, that they have yet
an appeal lying to a higher judgment then upon the earth.

The last thing follows, the glory of the believing, the eternal damnation of
the unbelievers. When sentence is once passed in earthly affairs, forthwith
there are inferior officers, which see execution accordingly: so when this
great God has passed his sentence, he has good and evil Angels which shall
be executioners unto him. First, the godly shall enter their eternal lise, and
be made partakers with Christ in his glory: for, this is part of their dignity,
yt they should as benchers sitting with Christ, applaude his most righteous
judgment on wicked ones, who have not believed, nor obeyed the Gospel; and so
after a sort judge the world with Christ. Know ye not that the Saints shall
judge the world? Now their eternal life is a thing we believe. I believe life
everlasting; for if a man do out of his bounty give often to some seruitor that
has done him the better service, a free hold to him and his heirs after him
for ever, and so (if the world could be supposed to continue, and his name not
to grow extinct,) an everlasting reward; how much more does it agree with Gods
bounty to recompense the momentany services of his children, with giving the^
this everlasting inheritance, which out of his fatherly love he before worlds
prepared for them? Here then is matter of joy, the best dish is to come, our
life is yet hid; we live now as a tree in winter, whose life is hid at the
root of it, so is ours with God in Christ, the root of us: but when the
Spring of our resurrection comes, it shall be manifested.

Finally, mark what is the end of wicked ones, eternal damnation with the
devil and his Angels. I showed in the end of the second question, how it is
meet that momentany wicked ones should have everlasting punishment; for it is
against an infinite and eternal majesty: and kings may justly punish with
perpetual imprisonment, which a man should ever endure, could he be supposed
to live always. What pain shall here be, when the pain of one tooth may be
so great as seems unsupportable; what shall it be when every part shall be
filled with such horrible grief as never entered into the heart of man? To see
one devil often, is so fearful that it exanimateth those that behold it;
what shall be this horror, when the soul and body shall live in one mansion
with the devil and all his Angels, and be tormented by them for ever? for
ever, ever while God is God, no hope of redemption. To be put by little things
and miss our mark in this or that earthly hope, how does it grieve us? but to
be put by the joys of heaven, the blessed fellowship of God, his Angels, the
righteous, how shall this sting us? When after-thought, of having ouershot our
selves in little matters, does go so near us, that we are in a hell for the
time; what shall it be when this thought shall vex us, to think of our
follies in rejecting, and not regarding eternal blessedness when it was
offered us? The Lord therefore keep us from sin; it is sweet, but the sauce is
sour, this last dish will mar the feast: a woeful shot will come in for us,
who learn not to know God, our miserable estates, and with sorrowful hearts
to fly to his mercies in Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

