THE MIRROVR OR MIRACLE OF GODS LOVE UNTO the world of his ELECT. PREACHED ON
THE third of John, verse the sixteenth: Wherein the said Scripture is very
learnedly expounded, and the rich treasures of Gods grace in CHRIST are
accurately opened. By that faithful servant of Christ, and preacher of his
Gospel, Mr. PAVL BAINE.

Romans 5.8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all: How shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? London, printed by H.L. for Nathanael Newbery: and are to be sold at
his shop under St. Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in Popes head Alley, at the
sign of the Star. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS ROBERTS, KNIGHT, and the very worthy
Gentleman, Mr Walter Roberts, his Son and heir; with all external comforts,
the eternal blessing of GODS love in CHRIST.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
WHat some rich men, who are themselves childlesse, with good proof and
comfort do, in bringing up the orphane child of some deceased friend; the
same, or some such like thing have I assaied to do in the publishing of this
Sermon. I my self go childlesse for any public birth of mine own brain:
nor is that any grief unto me. There is no need (I well perceive) of my
slender help in this kind, either (...) this superfluity of vselesse
pamphlets, (to say no worse of them) wherewith our age ouerflowes; or in this
store (which to the glory of Gods grace in our days, and just praise of their
authors, I acknowledge) of well meant and well deserving labors. And what
need soever there were, I am too weak an Atlas to uphold this firmament.
Authors non oportet libros sed thesauros componere. Domiti^^ P^so.
Writings of Author^ (says one well) should be, not so much books packt up
with paper, and blackt over with ink, as Treasuries replenisht with variety of
choysest learning: Nor (as I conceive) empty coffers filled with the foam and
fume of idle heads, nor dead men's coffins pestered with the rotten carrion of
profane, filthy, and corrupted hearts, nor old chests stuffed with rusty
iron, thread bare rags, and refuse gear; but rich cabinets, at whose opening
the Reader might find store, new and old, of the best and rarest things which
Canaan, Greece, or Rome does yield. With which variety I do too well know, that
it is beyond my scant store to furnish the table, and entertain my guests. I
am therefore well content to sit still, and choose rather to feed upon the sweet
and wholesome honey which other industrious Bees gather and bring unto the hiue,
applauding their well furnished and well polisht works; then to come upon the
public stage to do that which needs not, or attempt that which I cannot,
either with just shame for my Bayardlike boldness, or even from the most
favorable, with more pity for my well meaning, then praise for my well
deserving. Notwithstanding, lighting upon this Sermon of that both learned and
godly Divine, Mr Paul Baine (of whose gracious ability in preaching Gods word,
sometime your own ears, and, I persuade my self, your hearts also were
witnesses) as a poor orphane babe of a deceased friend, as for the memory of
its Author, which will ever be dear unto me, I did gladly embrace and
entertain it: so induced by the example of others, who with good acceptance
and service to the Church, publish both larger Treatises and brief Sermons of
his making; I have ventured to show my self so far on this Theater, as to
set it forth to public view, and make it common unto others with me. Wherein
good men, I presume, will both accept my good meaning, to do that for them by
the labors of other men, which I cannot by mine own (that is to set forward
their knowledge in the great mystery of godliness) and conne me thank, who
have set up for them such a fair and clear light, to discover that abstruse
mystery, and to light them onward in that way. For, there is scarce in the Book
of God, a Mine that is more rich and abundant in divine metal and mystery,
then the Text handled in this Sermon. In which at one view, as in a clear
mirror, there is presented to us the fountain (Gods eternal love) from which
all good blessings issue and flow forth unto us; the common cisterne (Jesus
Christ, the only begotten of God, bestowed on us) in who^ al these blessings
(as al waters in the Sea) are gathered together, and enclosed; the bucket
(Faith) whereby we may draw out of this Well whatsoever grace we do need;
Lastly, the most precious and sweet waters, which are here in plentiful
manner for us to draw and drink of: that is, everlasting bliss and salvation
of soul and body. It is much then to be wished, that as this Scripture is
familiar in the mouths of many; so the mysteries thereof were well understood
and close applied to their hearts. Whereunto this Treatise, I dare promise,
will afford some good help to those that will deigne diligently to peruse it*
For, herein the foresaid points are discussed and discoursed, with that equal
mixture of learning and piety, that both the learned shall meet with some
things not very common perhaps not to increase, yet to renew his more secret
knowledge, and when his judgment; and also the godly Christian shall not want
wherewith to feed his deuoutest meditations, and enkindle his best affections
toward God. Landat ven^les qui vult extrud^remer^es. Horat.
But least I do seem like some deceitful Broker, to set worth on worthless
wares, by goodly words; I will leave the proof hereof to your own, and the
judgment of other Christian, and not fastidious Readers. Only (good Sir) give
me leave to send it abroad under the shield and shadow of your Worships name;
and in the patronage thereof, to associate with you your very worthy son. I
could not well separate you in this small office of kindness, whom nature has
joined so nearly by the second of her straitest bonds; and much goodwill in
sundry favors, have made joint partners and patrons unto me. Fulmen Lauri
frut. cem non icit. P^in. l. 2. c 55.
Your two names, as a Laurel Garland wreathed on the forefront hereof, this
Sermon, will (I trust) help to guarde it from the blasting of evil tongues;
or like the fortunate Stars of Castor and Pollux, Plin. l. 2. c. 37.
when they appear double, give hope of the more secure passage, unto it. It is
a Work, I am sure, that will well beseem your gentleness, To patronize this
Posthume Orphane; nor can it be any blemish to your reputations, To lend your
countenance to the child of so good a man. Accept therefore (much respected
Sirs) this slender present which I offer you, as the best acknowledgement which
I can make of your constant love and kindness, whereby I have had special
comfort in the place where I live. It were happily more credit for me to make
this whatsoever satisfaction out of mine own stock: but it will be your
greater gain, that I do it out of another purse: Mine own would prove but
short pay, and copper coin; whereas what here I have borrowed to tender unto
you, is current and pure gold of Gods sanctuary: which, if it please you to put
it up, will add some good increase to your spiritual treasure of saving
knowledge. What on my part is wanting in performance, I will make up with my
hearty desires and prayers for your prosperous state in the world, and
spiritual welfare in the Lord.

At the Free-schoole in Cranebrooke in Kent, December the 14. 1618. Your
Worships, in all Christian services, J. E.

THE MIRROVR OR MIRACLE OF GODS LOVE UNTO THE WORLD OF HIS ELECT.
JOHN 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.


THERE is no wisdom to be compared with the knowledge of God in Christ. The
excellency of the knowledge of Christ.
This has not a few Arguments to commend it. 1. Cor. 2.7. Ioh. 17.3. It is not
simply wisdom, but Gods wisdom, in an eminent and high degree, wrapped and
folded up in a mystery which all men cannot conceive. It is a secret hidden
wisdom: and that not lately devised, but thought on of old, resolved and
decreed by God, even before his purpose to create the world, for a more
special advancement unto glory. Yea, to know God in Jesus Christ is life it
self that life which is everlasting: which it brings us not only in a sure
hope and expectation; but in some fruition of it, in the foretaste and first
fruits thereof. I have therefore made choice of this place, as in which both God
our loving Father, and Christ the gift of his grace are unfolded unto us. But
before we come to handle the words themselves, it is fit by observing their
coherence, to know the true scope they aim at, and if any thing be obscure to
unfold it. The coherence of the words.
The dependence they have on the former words is on this sort; Christ in the
verse immediately going before gave this out generally: That whosoever
believes shall have life everlasting. Now the Jews given to emulation, might
think much that the privilege of life should be communicated with the
uncircumcised Gentiles. Christ therefore meets with this corruption, Which
come in to meet with a scandal of the Jews.
and confirms the universality of that proposition, with this reason. What
GOD proposes as his end, shall certainly be. My counsel shall stand, and I
will do whatsoever I will. Isay 46.10. But God has set down with himself
this end in giving his Son; that whosoever believes shall have life: Ergo
Whosoever believes shall have life everlasting. The Minor is in these words of
my Text: the conclusion in the fifteenth verse: the proposition is from
elsewhere to be gathered and supplied. In the words there is only one phrase
of speech that does need to be unfolded; that is, what is meant by the world.
Their sense.
Theophylact gives two significations of this word, What is meant by the world.
in the eleventh of John, the one (...), that is, the whole universe. The
other, (...), that is, men worldly minded. Some taking it in the former sense
very largely, Not all mankind a^ some think.
though not for the universality of the creature, yet for all men universally,
give these two interpretations of it. The first, thus. God so loved all men,
that he vouchsafed to give and offer his Son in the preaching of the Gospel
unto all; according to those places: Go, teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19. Preach
the Gospel to every creature. Mark 16.15. A truth, I confess, but not meant
in this place. For here is not meddled with the Ministry: but the Decree of
God, and manner of our Redemption, is manifested. And when we come to handling
of those words of giving the only begotten, we shall see that agreeably unto
the context, they are to be taken in another sense. The second exposition is,
that God so loved all, that he gave his only Son to death, of purpose and
effectually for all. But this is false. For even this one reason overthrows
it. For God did not purpose the salvation of all mankind by Christ.
Whatsoever the Lord purposed, Christ perfectly performed. I have finished the
work thou gave me to do. John ^7.4. But Christ did neither make
intercession, nor dye for all. Ergo. The first is proved: John 17.9. Since
Christ did not intercede for all mankind.
etc. I pray not for the world. That is, say some, not that they should
continue in worldly courses. Ans. There is an opposition between the world,
and those that were given unto Christ; which plainly shows that he does
exclude the world from the benefit of his prayers, as being none of those which
were given him by his Father: which opposition does also infer and enforce
thus much, that if in one member (as, for them which thou gave me) persons,
namely Gods elect are meant, as is most evident: then in the other we are to
understand not worldly courses, not approved of God; but men, passed by and
neglected of him.

But this prayer is not made by him as Mediator. Even when he prayed as
Mediator.
Ans. Thi^ sh ft is utterly overthrown by the context of this Chapter. For
this was made when the hour of his offering up approached; was as it were the
sanctification of himself thereunto; was not made for a few godly, but all
that ever should believe, verse 20. Which Cyril says to be put in, least that
the high Priest and Mediator of our souls should not seem to intercede for
us. Pontifex and mediatar animaru^ nostrarum pro nobis minime interrogare
videretur.
And the judgment of Cyril is, that he makes this prayer as Mediator on the
ninth verse of this Chapter. Where he has these words; Christus suos a non
suis separans, pro his qui verbum audierunt, qui iugum susceperunt, rogat,
quorum Mediator atque Pontifex est, istis tantummodo mediationis bonum non
iniuria attribuens: that is, Christ separating his from those that were not
his, does pray for those which heard his word, which had taken his yoke on
them, not unjustly bestowing the benefit of his mediation only on those, whose
Mediator and high Priest he is.

Not did die for all mankind, but his sheep only.
The second thing, that he died not for all, appeapeareth, John 10. verse 15. I
lay down my life for my sheep. Yea, but may it be said, all are his sheep.
Ans. Not so. For his sheep have their note and name given ^^em of separation
from others which are not so: Secondly, in the twenty sixth verse he says to
some present, that they were not of his sheep. That is, wilsome say, because
they would not believe. Ans Nay rather because they were not his sheep, they
believed not, as there appears. And at the last judgment we shall know that
there is difference betwixt goats and sheep.

Some third signification then is to be inquired: which we shall see by
comparing 1. John 4.14. and Mat. 1.21. to be the people of God whom he saves
in the world, and to note no more. He is the Savior of the world, But it
notes Gods people in the world.
says John: and who or what is this world that he saves? All men? Not so, but
his people: as in Matthew is expounded; Thou shall call his name Jesus: For he
shall save his people from their sins. Which all are not.
But all are Christ's people Answ. If his Kingdom of power be considered, it is
true: but not so of his kingdom of grace. His people in this regard are
described, Tit 2.14. 1. Pet. 2.9. But only the Elect.
to be a peculiar and chosen people. Diverse Fa^hers call the dispensation
committed to Christ Oeconomia, which notes a domestical regiment over the
hous-hold of faith. And thus Austen often construeth the word world; pro mundo
seruandorum, mundo redemptionis. For the world of the saved ones, the world of
the redeemed, to which is opposed, mundus damnandorum et perditionis; the world
of the damned or lost wretches. And so on the seventeenth of John, verse 23.
that the world may know, etc. Tha^ is, says Camerarius (...), those which are
saved in the world. Called the world for three causes.
And there are three reasons why the Church of God, the body of Christ which
only belongs to salvation, is called by the name of the world. 1. They have
their particular universality. For all kinds, and all times have made up this
number. Secondly, now the fullness of time approached that the Church was to
become Catholic, in regard of place. The whole world after a sort was to go
into it: not the Jew and Grecian only, but even the Scythian and Barbarian too.
Thirdly, in respect of their state, before they are effectually called, and
actually made the sons of God. For before this they walk after the course of
the world. Ephesians. 2.2. So then, the true meaning of these words is this. God so
loved his people chosen to salvation through the world, that he gave his Son,
that they should not perish, but have life everlasting. The which words fitly
cast themselves for matter into these three points. Three points of this
Scripture.
1. The special love of God toward his. God so loved the world. Secondly, the
effect of his love, that he gave his only begotten Son, Thirdly, the end,
that whosoever believes in him might have life everlasting. First, I will give
the instructions which offer themselves to our consideration in the two first
members. Secondly, I will come and peruse the words more particularly.

Doct. I. God does bear a special love to his.
The first doctrine is intimated in the first word, So. So God loved the world.
For here is insinuated so much: That the Lord regards his with an especial
favor. To understand this the better, we must see how the comparison
stands. God loves all his creatures, and hates (as the Wiseman speaks)
nothing he has made. For to love, is nothing but to will well, and to do well
to any. Now the Lords goodness is over all. God is generally good to all
creatures. More specially to Man.
For in him we live, euerything has life, motion, and being from him. Act.
17.28. He does preserve the very beast. Psa. 36.6. But much above all other
creatures does he love mankind. The arguments whereof are; Four signs
thereof.
First, his long sufferance toward us: Secondly, his indulgent grant of the use
of his creatures, whereof we have made our selves justly unworthy. Act. 14.17.
Thirdly, that Christ took not the nature of Angels, but has assumed into one
person with his Godhead the seed of Abraham. Fourthly, that he does vouchsafe
the Gospel of his Son to all mankind. But though his mercy is over all,
and above other creatures showed unto man: yet the love wherewith these are
embraced, But his love toward his elect is most entire and above al.
compared with that love wherewith he has his children accepted through
Christ, is called hatred: and therefore CHRIST setting down this, does by this
word (So) make a distinction of this kindness and love from all other. (...).
Paul who sounded deeply both our misery in our selves, and happiness in
Gods love, when he comes to consider this love to his in CHRIST, does raise
his style, as if no words were sufficient to express it: as may be seen,
Ephesians. 1.6. But specially Ephesians. 2.4. and 7. where this his kindness toward us
in Christ, is called great love, rich mercy: Yea, and more, the exceeding
riches of Gods grace. Most rich.
And speaking of Gods love in Christ (for this and the love of Christ, because
God was in Christ, may and does sound all one: as Romans 8.35. The question being
asked, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ: The answer is, nothing
shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ, verse 39. making
them to be the same) speaking, I say, of this love, he does wish, the
Ephesians might be able to know the same, though indeed passing knowledge.
Pas^ing knowledge.
Ephe. 3.19. where he makes it to be a love inco^prehensible, much more
unspeakable. It is therefore compared with the love of a Father. Psa. 103. Most
affectionate.
13. As a father has compassion on his children; so has the Lord compassion
on them that fear him. And preferred before the most tender bowels of a
mother. Esa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Though they should forget, yet I will not forget thee.
And as it is most rich and abundant, so it is a love no less sure and
constant: And constant.
for it has for its ground only the good pleasure of God, Romans 9.11.15. and
therefore shall never change, nor can be altered.

Uses. 1. From gods love to us we must learn the love of our brethren
For the use hereof; First, Gods example in moral duties is every where made to
us a pattern of imitation: Be ye holy, for I am holy. 1 Pet. 1.26. We
therefore from this love of God toward us, must learn to love one another, as
John does urge it on us, 1 John 4.11. Beloved, if God loved us, nay, so loved
us, that is, with so admirable and superaboundant love, we ought to love one
another: For what? are we too good to love there where God himself does love:
and that with marvelous love above all creatures? or does God bestow such
singular love on any man, who is not thereby made worthy of our love? As
nothing does more become a sort of beggars children whom some rich and noble
person should so love as to adopt them his sons and fellow-heires, then to
love dearly and entirely among themselves: so is it a most seemly thing that
we should follow God in this love, and embrace them with true and fervent love
whom he has made fellow-heires with us; yea, and in our love we must keep the
same order which the Lord observes; Be ye merciful as your Father is
merciful. Our love ought to resemble Gods for kind and order.
Luke 6.36. says our Savior. As the same mercy is to be showed by us not for
measure and degree, but for kind, which God shows: so must we tread the
same steps for order, wherein our heavenly Father does go before us. There is
no creature specially of those that are serviceable to us, but we must be
loving and kind thereto. Showing kindness to beasts, more to men: most (...)
the godly.
A righteous man does regard the life of his beast: Prou. 12.10. Next, all men
must be loved: but as God does embrace his elect with a singular love above
other men; so must we be more especially affectioned toward the godly, as Paul
does direct us, Gal. 6.10. Do good to all men, but especially unto them which
are of the hous-hold of faith. 2 Our love to God a^^ our (...) neighbor ^p^
get^ from Gods love to us.
Secondly, this point touching Gods love toward us, does show whence it is,
that our love to God and our neighbor is engendered; even hence does it proceed
from Gods loving of us. Saint John, 1. John 4.12.16. does prove and conclude
that we are in God, and have the knowledge and faith of Gods love to us, even
from our love to God, and our Brethren. For God is love: yea, that maine and
vast sea of love, from whom all those streams and riuelets of love that are in
men do issue and flow.

If water be vvarme and do heat, We are this way key cold unless God warm
us.
it is not of it self (for it is an extreme cold element) but by virtue of
fire in some sort dwelling in it, which the Philosopher calls the excess of
heat: So the holy love of God and our brethren, cannot kindle of it self in
our hearts, which are most auerse there from, but must come from God, who is
love himself, dwelling and residing in us, and our taste of this infinite
favor unto us. As Saint John says plainly, 1. Ioh. 4.19. that we love God,
and so our neighbors, because he loved us first. The cold and frozen earth
cannot cherish the trees and plants with any kindly heat and juice, except it
first be thawed and warmed with the aspect of the sun shining on it, and
approaching to it. And so the love of God looking out upon us in Jesus Christ,
must first melt our frozen, and warm our cold hearts, before we can show and
put forth any affection, or work of love to God and our brethren. Nor is this
point needless to be known. A point needful to be known.
For if we know it not, we shall neither give praise to God when this
affection sparkleth in us: nor know when it is frozen whither to repair, that
it may be revived and inflamed in us.

3. The folly of the world, which hates most whom God loves.
Thirdly, from this love of God to his, we may take notice of the folly of the
world. For they hate there most, where the Lord loves most. I (says our
Savior) John 17.14. have given them thy word, and the world has hated them,
because they are not of the world, etc. The more love God does manifest unto
any in giving them his word and grace, to obey and embrace it, the more the
hatred of the world does boil and break out against them. Water for the
contrariety that it has with fire, A note of their comitie against God and
the godly.
does hiss, spet and sputter, not only when fire falls into it, but if any
thing thoroughly heated with the fire catch it. And whence is this in worldly
men, but from their adverse disposition to and hatred of God, that they hate
the dearest people of the Lord, and those in whom his grace is most apparent?
In Princes Courts are not they rebellious spirits and foolish men, And the next
way,
that profess open and mortal hatred to the greatest Favorites of the King?
Do they not take the right way to ruinate themselves and their estates? Such
as are politiquely wise, and intend to rise to any matters or estate in the
Court, will rather observe the Kings special favorites, love them, and
insinuate into their acquaintance: So is it a most sottish folly in men of the
world, to hate the Lords holy and dear children. For be they sure that the
Lord will hold them (as they are) enemies to him; to k^ep th mselues from all
blessings.
that they shall want many a ble^sing from the King of Heaven, which the
prayers of the godly would obtain for them. Yea, N^y to ruinate themselves.
many plagues will light upon them in this respect. If they will be wise for
their souls and bodies too, it is their best way to love and embrace with all
kindness the people of God, which God would take as a token of love to
himself, and they should have the benefit of their prayers, which can obtain
great things from God.

It follows, that he gave his only begotten Son.

Doct. 3. Gods dearest love is manifest not in outward things, but in Christ
given us.
Observe here wherein the special love of God consists: not in health,
wealth, honors, countenance, liberty, and such like, but in the gift of
Christ. As his love toward his was exceeding great, yea infinite; so he had
no better way to evidence this love, but by the gift of his Son. By this
therefore does the word of God in sundry places commend to us the love of God.
God sets out his love unto us (says Paul, Romans 5.8.) that while we were
sinners, Christ died for us. So 1. John 4.9. In this appeared the love of God
toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, etc. God did
manifest and magnify his love in nothing so as in the gift of his Son unto
us: All his other love in distributing unto us wealth, No other love at he last
comfortable without it.
liberty, honor and pleasures, is more then we are worthy of: but it h^d
been poor and cold love in respect of any good and comfort to usward,
without Christ given us. Wherein therefore does Paul place, Ephesians. 2.7. the
exceeding riches of Gods grace and kindness, but in Jesus Christ? that is, in
this that he has given us Christ: without whom notwithstanding all the worlds
good and glory, B^^ we most miserable.
there is no brute beast, nay, there is not the vilest and basest creature on
the earth, but it is in more happy state and condition then we are.

Uses. 1 We err to doubt of Gods love under the Cross.
The use of this briefly is, to take away the scandal of the Cross, and
comfort us therein. For we, when evil does whip us, the Cross lies heavy on
us, and some bitter cup is measured out unto us morning by morning, begin to
question Gods love, and think that we are not beloved of him. But we go by
a vvrong line, and false rule. For we must look off from these things, and
examine whether he has given CHRIST unto us or no. If we find this only
begotten Son revealed in us, Specially if we know and have Christ,
we may then assure our selves, that we are loved of GOD, and that even with
this special love. Who is the sole ^^r^est of Gods love.
CHRIST is the surest, yea, the only pledge of Gods love; whom, if we have
bestowed on us, let other matters go as they may, we need not to doubt, but
that we are of Gods best and dearest favorites.

2. They dream who presume on Gods love for their worldly prosp^ritie.
Secondly, this may serve to quell and pull down that vain prefidence that is
in many: who, upon the bare enioyment of outward things in great plenty,
presume themselves to be most deeply in the Lords favor, and before others
in that point. For this is a most fond presumption and mere delusion, to build
our hopes of Gods love, on such sandy grounds. No man can know whether GOD
love or hate him by these outward things, Eccles. 9.1. In ^^ ir ^uffe without
Christ they are but as traitors without a Pardon, frolic ng it by the King^
patience.
Were it not fond for a Traitor to presume of the Kings Mercy that he does
let ^im in the Tower take his revenues, enjoy his Lady and children, ride his
great Horse, and use what Lordly sports he please? Can any thing assure him of
this gracious mercy of his Prince, but his pardon sent unto him under the Kings
hand and Seal? So have thou as much of this vvorldly happiness as thou can
wish: be thou for outward things the mirror and envy of the world, yet art
thou never the farther in the favor of GOD. Thou stand but as a condemned
Traitor before him, unless thou find that he have given CHRIST unto th^e,
to be thy peace and thy atonement. Only so far as thou have the knowledge
of of this Just One imparted to thee, as thou do love him and his Gospel,
as by faith he is become thine; so far can thou have any assurance of Gods
love and mercy.

All other things notwithstanding, No better th^^ Cain.
without Christ given to thee, it is no better with thee then Cain or Judas,
nay, then with the Devil himself, Nay, then the Devil.
who is the Prince of the world, and has the glory and happiness of it above
the greatest Monarch of the earth.

Doct. 3. God does love his, before Ch is it be given to die for them.
Thirdly, since God out of love to his, gives Christ for their redemption,
observe that there is a love of God to his now in misery, before Christ
himself comes in as Mediator for them. Love, though in God it is but one most
simply, as himself is most simply one: Gods love twofold.

A latter ensuing of Christ's death.

M^nifest in our iust^fi^ation.


yet for the change that it makes in the creature, and to help our weak
understanding, a former and a latter love and grace may be considered. For
there arises a grace of God unto us from the blood of Christ, in which mercy
this new testament of giving to us believing justification unto life, is
stricken. Therefore Christ is called the Mediator of the new testament. Heb.
9.15. and 12.24. his blood, the blood of the new testament: Mat. 26.28. And of
this grace, that place in the third to the Romans, verse 24. may be
understood, where the Apostle says, that we are justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. And reconciliation.
And in this respect the scripture puts our reconciliation to God, in the
death of Christ. 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 2.16. Romans 3.25. and elsewhere. But now
these places must not be so understood, as if the Lord within himself before
entirely hated us; but therefore these phrases are used, because that in Christ
that former love of God springs forth, which while justice was unsatisfied,
might not bud out, but lay hid and couched. A former love showing it self in
the gift of Christ.
For there was a love to us before Christ, of which here is spoken; and the
effect whereof, the giving of Christ himself, is here affirmed. A
kinde-hearted father does often bear a secret and inward affection toward an
ungracious son, whom he has cast out from him: as David toward Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.39. and 14.1. etc. though he will not suffer it to appear, till by the
suit and request of some friend whom perhaps himself suborneth, he be
reconciled to his son: no less was there in God a hid love toward us before
Christ, which the Lord would not suffer to break forth to our knowledge, till
Christ by his death had made our peace for us. Neither need we fear the
putting of contrary wills in God by this means: Before whom God was estra^ged
from us in regard of sin: but did love us as foreknowne of himself.
for though, as we were in a sort our own work through sin, in regard of
justice he did stand separated and estranged from us; yet as we were his
work, or rather as he had of his gracious pleasure foreknowne us, he loved us,
and in love elected us, and therefore nothing hinders, but that his immutable
favor in these respects might be still continued toward us, and so it was. For
as his justice for sin held us under wrath and death: so his love works
another way, taking us out of the hand of justice by giving his only begotten,
in whom justice and mercy do kiss each other. And to say that the Lord
altogether hated us in himself, until Christ made intercession, is such an
assertion as we shall be easily enforced to reuerse. For Christ made
intercession, called or uncalled: if called, there was great love in the
Father, calling him to do such a kind office for us. If we say uncalled, we
go against the Scriptures of the old and new testament, in which nothing is
more evidently taught then the calling, anointing, and the sending of the son
by God the father. The use to commend Gods love as very ancient.
This now ought to make Gods love the more dear and precious unto us, as being
very ancient, and freely borne toward us: ancient I say, for we are loved of
God before Christ was appointed our Mediator, who yet was ordained before the
foundation of the world. 1 Pet. 1.20. Wherefore Gods love has been toward us
from all eternity. Now love, as wine, does receive the greater praise by the
age of it: old wine is the best and ancient love is the most approved. How much
do we esteem of such a friend as has borne us good will for some twenty or
forty years together? The more reckoning should we make of Gods love, which
has been eternal. Then also it is most free; And most f^ee.
for before Christ we were enemies to God, there was nothing to be seen in us
but sin and misery, nor any thing to draw Gods affection toward us, but his
own free and good pleasure: now that love which we have deserved, we the less
esteem; but such love as is freely conferred on us, we do make more store of.
And this is the excellency of Gods love unto us, that it is most free and
gracious; no way procured by our selves who were children of wrath; no nor by
Christ himself in the first motion of it: but it did give Christ as a pledge
thereof, and a mean to make way more plen^ifully to pour out it self upon
us. Fourthly, 4. Doct. Our redemption by Christ does best of all manifest Gods
love.
Whereas God loving us gives Christ unto us, we are to observe that this
course of redeeming us by Christ is most answerable and agreeable with the love
and grace of God. True it is, if Gods absolute power be considered, and the
freedom wherewith he inclined to all, which from eternity he decreed, we may
say, Another way was possible, but this most fit.
he could have taken another course for our redemption. But if a way be
considered wherein his justice e^pecially his love might be made manifest, this
is of all most fit and expedient. For it follows (as he^re you see) on Gods
love, as if love it self had designed it, and he has chosen this way: who as
he is most powerful; so is not his wisdom any whit inferior to his power.
And that this point may be the more cleared, as also that we may see that when
Paul falls into the argument of Gods love, he does not without cause speak
so loftily, we will sift these words somewhat more narrowly. Setting ou^ Gods
love in four circumstance^.
Wherein four circumstances are to be noted, whereby the love of God is much
amplified. First, the party loving: Secondly, those that are loved: Thirdly,
the thing given: Fourthly, the manner of giving.

First, in this that God loves, 1. In ^o^ who first sought love, when we gave
the ^^^st offense.
his exceeding grace is not a little commended. For when two men are at
variance, if the party wrongfully offended do seek him, who gave him the
offense, how is his meekness and gentleness thereby declared? Even thus the
case stands twixt God and us: we had provoked his displeasure; he procures
our reconciliation and atonement. And for this cause our righteousness and
Redemption is said to be made of God to us. 1. Cor. 1.30. Saint John, also
expending and weighing this thing, does from it magnify the love of God. 1.
John 4.10. In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us.
Secondly, 2. In the persons loved: v^z. our selves being sinners, and his
enemies.
to consider the persons loved, is no less argument, whereby this love may be
extolled For who^ loved God? Us, says John. Being now like the world, no
better then the Reprobates; when our deeds, words, and wisest thoughts were
enmity against him; then I say, did God regard us. From hence Paul brings in
the love of God most gloriously clothed, saying, that it was great love and
rich mercy in God, that he did then quicken us, when we were dead in sins and
trespasses. Ephesians. 2.4.5. And Romans 5.7 from hence also does he extol it.
In this God sets out his love unto us, that when we were his enemies, Christ
died for us. The third circumstance is the thing given, 3. In the thing given:
viz the only begotten Son of God.
and that is in this word, the only begotten: which is a word putting a
difference betwixt this person, and any other. Every where in Scripture
excellent privileges are bestowed on Gods children: but so that Christ has
still the pre-eminence. We call God Father, as Christ teaches us, Mat. 6.9.
and this Abba Father is the voice of the Spirit which is in us. Gal. 4 6. Yea,
so did the Church, when this spirit of adoption was not so plentifully powered
out. Isay 63.16. Thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel know us not. But Christ calls God, as the Jews rightly gather, John
5.18. (...), that is, his own, his proper father, Unto whom God is a proper
father.
in such a sort as no man else did or could; otherwise they would not so have
stormed at him. So we by nature are the sons of wrath, yet by faith we have
this privilege to be the sons of God. John 1.12. But Christ is called his
own proper Son, He is Gods proper Son.
Romans 8.32. who spared not his own Son. So, we are begotten not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, John 1.13. but God of his own will by the word
of truth has begotten us. Iam. 1.18. And one^y begotten: Not because of the
strange framing of his humane nature. As Seruetus falsely.
But Christ is the only begotten even from the Father. Ioh. 1.14. Where by the
way, we may not unfitly consider Seruetus his exposition, who says, that
Christ is said the only begotten of God only in regard that his humane nature
was framed in a sort proper to himself. But this is but a fiction. For first,
consider what it is to beget, and Christ cannot in regard of the humane nature
be said begotten. To beget, is ex substantia gignentis proferre simile secundum
substantiam, that is, Out of the substance of the begetter, to bring forth a
like thing according to its substance. But now the humane nature, and divine
essence are wholly different. Secondly, he should rather in this respect be the
only begotten of the holy Ghost. For that person immediately and
determinatiue, did frame of the substance of the Virgin, that immaculate mass,
and unite it to the divine nature. Thirdly, Adam and Eve might thus as well be
said the only begotten of God, who were after a proper manner made of God.
Fourthly, Christ as man has always been held as without father, and (ergo)
unbegotten. For these two stand in relation one to the other. Fifthly, the
Scripture auoideth this phrase, saying of Christ, John 1.14. that he was made
flesh; and Romans 1.3. made of the seed of David: and Galathians 4.4. made of a
woman. (...) is sometime used; but it signifies nothing but (...) to be borne:
Mat. 2.1. and so Ialad is used answerably with the Hebrew. If this (...) be
further urged, as it may, it must be only to prove that Christ was not in
Maria only, but ex Maria also, against Marcion. So then if you ask what this
thing borne in and of the Virgin was, I answer, the only begotten Son of
God. If you ask how; I answer; But because of the personal union of it with
the only begotten Son.
not because the humane nature was thus strangely framed, but because it was
personally united to the only begotten of God. Now then we may fitly come to
consider what this is that God bestows; in a word, his only begotten made
flesh, God with us. Immanuell. A great gift. A wonderful gift:
For the Father after a sort has given himself. For he has given that
person, in whom he is wholly, and who altogether is in him. But if we will
view the rich pieces in this Jewel, what rare matter can we wish, which is not
here included? We are (as Zophar speaks) borne like wild Ass colts. Job
11.12. Would we have wisdom? Wherein we have wisdom,
Here is the essential wisdom of the father, the object of all true
wisdom, which tends to salvation: yea, in him is our wisdom, not only
while we walk by faith at home in this body, but also when we shall walk by
sight with the Lord, seeing him as he is. All the treasures of wisdom and
understanding are hid in him: Col. 2.3. Would you have Righteousness?
Righteousness,
He is essentially righteous, as God; in our nature habitually and actually
righteous: He is Jehovah our righteousness, the Sun of righteousness, that
person which has brought with him everlasting righteousness. Would you have
Redemption? Redemption,
With him is great redemption. Psalm. 130.7. Through him have we redemption,
that is, forgiveness of our sins: Col. 1.14. By him we do wait for the
redemption of our body: Romans 8.23. and lastly shall have the redemption of the
inheritance purchased unto the praise of his glory. Ephesians. 1.14. Would you have
Sanctification? Sanctification,
He is our sanctifier. The spirit is given to him, not by measure, that we
might draw from him grace for grace. John 3.34. and 1.16. The fullness of the
Godhead dwells personally in him, that in him we might be complete. Colos.
1.9, 10. Which place speaks not so fitly of any thing imputed to us, as of
those graces which from him are infused. Would you have life? Life,
He is the resurrection and the life: John 11.25. Both the first and second
resurrection come from him: And we do not now live, but it is Christ who
lives in us; Galat. 2.20. Yea, every parcel of that glorious life we lead
in the heavens must come from him. For this life is hid with Christ. Col. 3.3.
Would you have any thing? Why this only begotten is heir of all things; and
plenty of all things for salvation.
those that believe on him, are coheires with him, and have interest to that
new heaven, and new earth which shall stand before the Lord for ever. Hence it
is that the Church seeks out the comeliest, the sweetest, and the richest
things to resemble him. This should excite us, who seek Whom wanting, seek we
to enjoy him.
things transitory and vanishing, with great care, to give our temples no
rest, nor our eyelids no leave to slumber, until we have interessed our
selves in this only begotten, in whom as a common treasury and conceptacle
all blessings spiritual, from all eternity purposed, and in time given us, are
reposed. And on the other side, such as have this rich pearl of the Gospel
should with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 6.10. in heaviness be reioicing; And having
him to rejoice in him.
in poverty making others rich; and when they have nothing, be as those which
possess all things.

The fourth 4. In the manner of giving him.
and last thing is the manner of giving. This that we may more fully conceive,
may fitly be considered in three degrees. That was three ways.
First, Christ was given in the moment of incarnation: Secondly, in the whole
course of his life, to fulfill obedience on our behalf: Thirdly, he was given
to suffer death, the accursed death of the Cross, that we might be delivered.
The first of these is clear many ways; 1. First, in his very birth.
by scripture, 2. by the confessions of the ancient Churches, 3. by reason: and
in the fourth place, the contrary has been condemned of heresy. We must not
conceive Christ to come into the world as for himself and his own business,
Our salvation being his only errand, and not his own advancement.
and to take the work of our redemption as a matter by the way: but we are so
to take him in the moment of his incarnation, as bestowed on us by God the
Father: as is plainly affirmed, Esaias 9.6. Luke 2.11. Romans 8.3. Heb. 2.14. And
in this last alleged scripture the Author plainly shows, as the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, And he being incarnate.
so the cause and end for which Christ took flesh. Because (says he) the
children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part with them, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil. In which place two things are very obserueable; 1. 1. That he might die
for us.
that Christ took flesh, that in this nature which was capable of suffering,
through death he might obtain victory. 2. Be like to us.
Mark, that the flesh of Christ is made respective to a former type, to wit;
the nature of the children, the work of whose redemption was commended to him.
And this point is to be laid up against such, who holding the coming of Christ
in the flesh, though man had not fallen, make him the first in intention,
though the last in execution. If that Christ's flesh and blood had been first
intended, then the children should have reference to him as the first sampler;
who are now made the pattern of his humane nature, as for whom it was only
undertaken. And so all the Confessions, the Nicen, that of Damasus, the
Ephesine, the Chalcedon, run perpetually in this style, Propter nos, nostramque
salutem, propter nos homines, et ad implendas scripturas, descendit a Patre,
natus ex Maria, homo factus est; that is, For us and our salvation, for us men,
and to fulfill the Scriptures, he came down from the Father, was borne of the
virgin, and made man: And none consider Christ as coming for himself, but as
given to us in his first entrance. And in the hymn of Saint Ambrose, Te Deum,
thus much we still confess, when we say, that Christ taking on him the
redemption of mankind, did not abhor the virgins womb: namely, that his
conception and birth was for our avail. Lastly, antiquity did oppose no other
thing to Marcion and the Manichees, then this defense. For when they objected,
that it beseemed not the super eminent excellency of the divine nature, who
would not take the nature of angels, to assume flesh consubstantiall with
ours, who are but dust and ashes: and when again they replied, that seeing the
Angels appearing did not use in their ministry true but imaginary bodies; and
if true, yet they never took them into unity of their person; it was unlikely
that the Son of God would ever personally unite our nature unto him: To these I
say, and such like humane conceits, the ancients opposed this simple
confession, that though Christ for himself need not, yet for our sakes he did
not eschew the womb of the virgin. Thirdly, in reason this is convinced as a
truth. For, when incarnation is a degree of humiliation unto God, what had the
Son of God done, that he should by putting on the veil of flesh empty
himself of glory, and become of no reputation? And therefore the Author to
the Hebrews puts all the decency of Christ's afflictions and abiection in
this, because many by him were to be advanced. Heb. 2.10. Neither was there
any cause why he should become God-man before the fall. There was no cause on
Christ of his incarnation but for us, nor no need our before the fall.
It is said that else he could not be a fit head. I answer; How was he a head
to all the Angels before their fall, and is still to those elect ones that have
kept their first estate? when yet their nature is not assumed. Lastly, Cyril
takes this in his third book of his Thesaurus, as a conclusion of Artianisme,
that Christ magis vt ipse exaltaretur, nomenque maximum consequeretur, quam pre
nostra salute, homo factus esset: that is, was made man rather that he might be
exalted, and obtain a great name, then for our salvation. And afterward asks
why he should be called our Savior, if he did more for himself then for us.
There is somewhat, Phil. 2.9. that seems to make for this, that the end of
Christ's humiliation was that he might be exalted. But the illatiue particle,
wherefore, there notes not the end nor any cause, but the event and consequent
of his humiliation; it is taken (...), co^secutiuely, not (...), causally. It is
true indeed, that Christ could not recover glory to us, but that it must be
first received in him, as who is the head and common conceptacle of all his
members: Christ's coming for himself obscureth gods grace.
but to hold Christ in his coming and humiliation, seeking himself, may well
be reputed erroneous. For it obscureth that grace which the Apostle extolleth,
2 Cor. 8.9. You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that he being
rich, for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might be made
rich. What words can more plainly show that Christ of himself needed
nothing; but that it was only to supply our need, that he did humble and abase
himself?

2. In his life to obey the law for us.
Secondly, He was given in the whole course of his life, to fulfill the law in
our behalf. Of this is spoken, Gal. 4.4. When the fulness of time came, God
sent his Son made of a woman, and made under the law. Where though his
subjection unto the penalty of the law be most fitly understood, yet his other
obedience must not be excluded. For Christ even in his circumcision testified,
that he was subject to the whole obedience of the law, as well active as
passive; as which did not only declare him to be a true man, To which ^e
be^^^^e ful^^
fit for the ministry; but made him also for our sakes debtour to the whole
law (as Paul teaches, Gal. 5.3. that the circumcised person was bound to keep
the whole law) for our sakes I say, not his own. Not of (...).
For Christ by nature was a son over his Fathers house, and not tied to the
self same tenor of obedience, whereunto we are obliged. If it be objected,
that as he was the son, so he was a creature also, and therefore subject to
the law: the answer is ready; Though he w^^^ m^^.
that a reasonable creature must be conformable to the righteousness of the
law, but not subject to this or that obedience; because that such subjection
depends not on creation, but on the will of the Creator. Adam was not subject
to that prohibition concerning the eating of the fruit, until it pleased the
lawgiver to impose it on him. Ob. But Christ was in Adams loins, with whom
the covenant of works was stricken; and therefore he must fulfill the law for
himself. Whereto I say; 1. That the covenant was stricken with those who were
not only in Adam, but were by him also: but our Savior came not by him
through carnal propagation, as do other men, howsoever he were in him taking
his flesh of the virgin. 2. The hypostaticall union, whereby his humane nature
did grow into one person with the Son of God, did exempt him from this
subjection: but that it pleased him for our sakes to submit himself thereunto;
B^t by his own will for us.
whose cause as he had undertaken, so was he to perform our obedience: He
b^coming our surety.
which this one reason may further show and confirm. What we stand charged
with, Christ was bound to discharge: For he became our surety, whose office is
to pay all the bonds of the poor debtour for whom he does undertake. But we
are charged, Who are bound to keep the law.
not only breaking the law, to undergo the curse; but to do it also unto
life. For thus Moses describes the righteousness of the law; He that does
these things shall live in them. Do this, and live. It is excepted; This
stands in force only while the covenant of works obtains and takes place;
which is now abolished. To which I answer; that so the law is changed, that it
remains as a rule of righteousness: and this order, that the righteousness of
the law must be fulfilled, ere life be obtained, in it self is not altered.
And this order being immutable, that right^ousnes must be fulfilled, ere life
be obtained.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one jot or tittle of the law shall not
pass unaccomplished. Mat. 5.18. This, the phrase of the scriptture teaches
also: it says the curse is taken away, not the law; Ye are dead to the law.
Romans 7.4. And, I am dead to the law. Gal. 2.19. It does not say, that any
particle of the law is dead or abolished: teaching hereby, that the alteration
is in us who are variable, not in the Lords order which is immutable.
Wherefore, Do this, and live, must be fulfilled, and so it is. But here is the
difference, that the accomplishment of this righteousness which the law
prescribes, in the gospel is translated to the person of a Mediator. In the
law by our selu^^, in the gospel by our Mediator
I come (says our Savior, Mat. 5.17.) not to abolish, but to fulfill the law
and the Prophets. And therefore Paul doubts not to say, that the
righteousness of the Law is still fulfilled in us. Romans 8.4. Namely Euangelice
and applicatiue, according to the tenor of the Gospel, and by application;
but in Christ, legaliter and inhaesiue, according to the Law inhaesiuely in
himself. 3 Cause^ w^y in Scrip^^r^^^ so small mention of C^^^st^ act^ue
ob^d^e^ce.
Why then (will some say) does the Scripture speak so little of this kind of
obedience, and so much of his passion? There are sundry causes of it. First,
because That of his Passion was most sensible and exposed to the eyes of all.
Secondly, because that the Ceremonial types had in that, their accomplishment.
Thirdly, because his Passion has in it the chief actual obedience. See
Chrysostom in the second homily on the Acts.

The third degree of the giving of Christ, 3. In his death to suff r for (...).
which stands more agreeably with this place, is the giving of him to be lifted
up upon the tree, that there in his body he might bear our sins. 1. Pet.
2.24. For in his lifting up (which phrase notes the manner of his death) he
answers to the type of the brazen Serpent; John 3.14. Which as whosoever looked
on had cure for the stings of the fiery serpents; so we looking on Christ by
faith, are cured of the sting of that old serpent, sin and death. Of this
giving, Paul speaks, Romans 8.32. He has given his own Son for us all. Which
i^ the height ^f God^ lou^.
And the Epitasis and height of Gods love is made manifest in it, that our
hearts should burn within us. Yea, with the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant.
2.5. we should swoone to consider it. For what unspeakable love is it that
Almighty God a father so glorious, and full of Majesty, should give his only
Son, a son like and equal to himself, for his enemies, to be made under
the Law, yea, the curse of the Law, and to be delivered up to the powers of
darkness. This doctrine has four uses.

Uses. 1. To make us mourn for our ^^nnes,
First, it serves to show us how horrible sin is, to engender in us godly
grief, and to make us studiously avoid it. Such Epicurisme is in us, that we
count sin a light hurt, which any thing will salve. But whosoever duly weighs
this, that sin ere it could be done away and satisfied, has made the Lord
of glory to empty himself of his Majesty, the Son of God to walk as a
servant, God himself to shed his blood; this will make his heart to melt and
bleed within him for his sins, and to water his cheeks with tears, no less
abundantly, then he has before laughed merrily and blithely. I will pour
(says the Lord, Zachary 12.10.) upon the house David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and compassion, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall lament for him as one mourns for his
only son, and be sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first borne, etc. If
once the Lord make us turn our eyes to Christ, and to regard what he has
suffered for our sins, nothing will more then that humble us with godly
sorrow, and bruise our hearts for them. For what sorrow can we think deep
enough, what tears sufficient, for our sins which have pierced the Son of
God with extreme sorrows, and put him to most base, vile and painful
sufferings! And this grace also will curb a man most effectually from breaking
forth into evil. and ^o curb us from sin.
As Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God which brings salvation unto all men has
appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts.
What is this grace of God? but that favor and love which God has showed us
in the sufferings of Christ; then the which there is no better master to teach
us, and to press upon us this lesson of using all endeavor to shun sin.
For therein as in a clear glass may we contemplate and behold what Christ
has endured to free us from it: what fearful torments it deserves: how
odious and hateful it is to God, which he would so severely punish in his own
Son: And lastly, into what horrible misery, it will eternally plunge us, if
we do not shake it off, and abstain therefrom.

2. To comfort in temptation.
Secondly, it is comfortable in temptation. For when Satan shall trouble our
minds, and charge us with our sins and want of righteousness, there is
nothing in the world that can quiet our minds, and stop his mouth but this,
that Christ's righteousness and satisfaction is ours; Showing Christ to be ours.
and that by his death we are acquitted from our sins, and by his
righteousness made righteous before God. But how is Christ's righteousness and
satisfaction made ours? Even by the gift and donation of God. For, as we have
heard, By Gods gift.
God has given us his Son: and if Christ himself be given us, doubtless
with Christ we have all the merits of his obedience conferred on us by the
same gift. And what better right and title can we have to him and his
righteousness then this, that God who is the sole owner and possessour of him,
has bestowed him on us?

3. To make (...) trust to God ^or all other good things Romans 8 3^.
Thirdly, it is a ground of hope in all our wants, that God will supply unto
us all things good and needful. For has God given us Christ his Son? How
shall he not with him give us all things also? No man, whose kindness and
love to us has been so great as to bestow on us the best and dearest thing he
has, will hold back any thing that should make that gift sure and
behoouefull to us, or see us in distress for want of smaller matters. Lo: God
has given us his Son, the most excellent, dear and precious thing he had.
And can we think that his love is so cold, as that he will stick to bestow
upon us earthly things, that are toys and trifles to this great gift, if he
see them fit for us? or that he will not give us faith and other graces,
whereby this gift should be made certain, and of use unto us?

4. To ^ssu^e us of the continuance of ^o^s love her^a ^er.
Fourthly, it does assure us of Gods love for the time to come. If when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. Romans 5.10. If a man out of love
have sought the friendship of his enemy, and used means to be reconciled to
him, is it not likely that he will be constant in this love, and take all ways
to maintain it unto the end? But howsoever it fall out with man who is
variable; most sure it is, that GOD since his love was so wonderful toward us
when we were enemies, that he gave his Son for us, to reconcile us to him,
will now much more freely exercise his love toward us, and firmly abide in his
good will unto us, that enmity being undone and dissolved.

Now the end follows in these three things. First, the means, whosoever
believes on him. Secondly, the state from whence we are delivered, shall not
perish: Thirdly, the condition to which we are reserved, but shall have
everlasting life. In the first, viz. the means, I consider these three things.
First, that the believer has a benefit above others. Secondly, the
universality of this benefit, whosoever believes. Thirdly, the object which
our faith must rest upon; believe on him. These remain to be handled, and
then we will proceed to the state from whence we are delivered, and
condition whereto we are reserved. First, then Christ makes this the end of
Gods giving him, that every one believing should not perish, etc.

Doct. 5. All of wha^ sort soever, believing are saved.
The point which we are here to observe, is, that without regard of any
outward circumstance, as well one as other, is by faith justified, and shall
be saved: All sorts of people that believe, are made thereby heirs of
Salvation. Which is plain by testimony of the Scripture, and evident by
reason: The grace of God has appeared, and does bring salvation unto all mon.
Tit. 2.11. So Romans 3.22, 23. The righteousness of God is now made manifest by
the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. For there is no
difference: There is in this case, no Nation before Nation; no pre-eminence of
any sex, sort, kind or degree above other: but as well the Gentile, as the
Jew; the poor, as the rich; unlearned, as learned, every one that believes is
an heir of life, and child of God. For thus is it expounded, Romans 1.16. The
Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes; to the
Jew first, and also to the Grecian.

Reasons. Reason 1.
Now the first reason of this universality in the subject of salvation, Paul
does set down, Romans 3.29. For having laid down this general proposition,
that a man, even every one is justified by faith; lest the Jew (as he was apt
to do) should stomach and disdain this equality and fellowship of the
Gentile in the matter of salvation, does add a reason for it. What (says he)
is God the God of the Jew only, and not of the Gentiles also? Yea, of the
Gentiles also. If then you ask why the world believing does inherit the
blessing: we answer, even because God has pleased to be the God of all
without difference; of Gentile as well as Jew, of one as well as other. So
again, Romans 10.11, 12. Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. What?
Gentile as well as Jew? Yea surely. For there is no difference between them:
and he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call on him.

Reason 2.
A second reason is opened, Romans 11.32. from the purpose of God in shutting the
Gentiles up in unbelief. And what was that? Not that they should be utterly
and finally rejected, but that he might at length show mercy on them; his
justice ministering and making way unto his mercy: even as now he deals with
the Jews whom he has cast off for a season, to receive them again with the
greater mercy.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, it is necessary that it should be so, that the Lord might clear and
manifest his equity, as most free from acceptance of persons; that it might
be seen that neither Jew found acceptance with him as a Jew; nor the Gentile
was the less accepted with him as a Gentile. Wherefore Peter when he saw in a
manner the first fruits of the Gentiles, says; Act. 10.34, 35. Of a truth I
perceive that God is no accepter of persons: But in every Nation he that
fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, this was prefigured in Abraham; Romans 4.10, 11. who by faith obtained
the account of righteousness, even when he was uncircumcised, as well as
after circumcision.

Reason 5.
Lastly, it was foreprophesied, that in the seed of Abraham all the Nations of
the earth should be blessed: Genesis 22.18. that is, have the blessing of
righteousness, and life through faith.

But now when was this specially accomplished, Salvation was impa^te^ to ^ll
so^ts of people most ple^tiful y under the Go^pell.
that the world through faith did receive righteousness? even in the day of
salvation, in the acceptable year which was foreprophesied of, and which the
Apostle applies to the times of the Gospel: 2. Cor. 6.2. and began from the
Ascension of Christ to receive general execution. Act 13.46, 47. Wherefore
this universality of believers is here made to follow the lifting up, and
giving of Christ, as procured thereby: as also he speaks elsewhere. John
12.32. when I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me. In Christ then is the
world reconciled; in his death the wall of partition broken down, and both Jew
and Gentile created into one new man. The Jews only were, before, the people
of God. And no wonder is it that saving knowledge was so straightly confined: For
they had Christ but in the shadow only; and the light which did shine to them
was as the light of a Candle, and might easily be bounded in little compass:
but when the Sun of righteousness appeared, it was impossible but that the
beams of it should be spread through the face of the earth.

Uses. 1. An help to explicate some Scriptures speaking of the salvation of
all.
First, this helps for the understanding of many Scriptures: as of that 1.
Ioh. 2.2. that Christ is a reconciliation for the sins of the whole world;
and Heb. 2.9. that he tasted death for all men; with the like. 1. Tim. 2.6. 2.
Cor. 5.15. What is in these Scriptures the world? What all men? Must we
understand thereby, as some would have it, the whole body of mankind, and
every particular person in the world? There is no such thing. But these
universals must be understood, as in this place, All that believe. So there is
a threefold universality: A threefo^d vniue^silitie.
first of all in general, both good and evil, we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, etc. 2. Cor. 5.10. Secondly, of all evil and
unbelieving persons, expressed by the world, John 17.9. Thirdly, of all
believing ones, as in the former Scriptures; a special universality, as
Ambrose does call it.

2. A lig^t to show us our happiness above the Gentiles before Christ.
Secondly, this teaches us our happiness above the Gentiles of former times,
who four thousand years almost were no people, without God, and estranged
from the life of God: but we now believing are become consederates with God.
We see his salvation; as they who live in the acceptable time which he
ordained. When the holy men of God looked unto this time, with what joy were
they replenished? As it is said of Abraham, that he saw this day of Christ, and
reioiced thereat. John 8.56. And if the contemplation of it before hand made
them to rejoice; How much more should we rejoice in this grace of God, and in
this day of salvation, unto whom it is risen, and who enjoy the comfortable and
blessed presence of it?

3. An exhorta^ion to embrace the present grace offered us.
Thirdly, it is a ground of exhortation to us, that we put not the grace of God
from us. Every one that believes shall be saved. That is, no condition, no not
of the greatest excepted, of whom this is not required, To believe. Look to me
all ^ee Nations of the earth, and be you saved.

Be men what they will be, never so rich, noble and great, they must look and
go to Christ if they will have salvation. What happiness is this then, that
christ is come unto us, and this grace is offered us? It is just with God that
we perish, if on any worldly confidence we neglect this salvation, and do not
with both arms embrace and lay hold of it, being thus brought unto us.

Doct. 6. The only object of our faith as it iustifies us, is Christ.
Now it follows, every one believing on him.

This does teach what is the object of our faith: that is Jesus Christ, whom
only faith does look unto and respect, as it does make us righteous in the
sight of God: which other Scriptures plentifully confirm. To as many as
received him he gave this privilege, to be the sons of God, even to them
that believe in his name. John 1.12. A worthy honor to be made the Son of
God, which faith only can advance us to; and that only as it does believe in
Christ, and receive him. And so Acts 16.30, 31. What says the Iayler must I
do to be saved? Believe, does Paul and Silas answer him. But on whom? on the
Lord Jesus: And Acts 26.18. that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them that are sanctified through faith in me. It is
therefore called the faith of Christ, because Christ is he whom faith does
apprehend to righteousness and life; according to that in the twenty sixth
Verse of this Chapter; He that believes on the Son of God has life. And
righteousness is every where tied unto faith, even to faith in Christ, whom
only it does and can look unto as it justifies us. It is true, that a
justifying faith may work a miracle, may believe an history: but it does not
justify us, as it is occupied this way; neither in these things does it only
eye Jesus Christ. For there are those who may believe the history of the
gospel, yea, and work miracles also, who were never justified: as we may
read, Mat. 7.22.23. But this matter will be better cleared, if we consider
what it is to believe on Christ. The papists say, it is to give credit to the
doctrine touching Christ his person, offices, passion and merits: we say, it is
confidence of mercy in Christ, Which faith is a confidence of mercy in Christ
touching pardon of sin, and life. In handling of this point I will first
clear the truth, then answer what may be objected against it. This then, that
faith is an affiance of mercy, is proved by the nature of the phrase; secondly,
by the interpretation of scripture; thirdly, by reasons.

As is manifest by the phrase.
The phrase, to believe on Christ, notes confidence and assurance: as may easily
be convinced. For so these three phrases, Credere de Christo, credere Christo,
et credere in Christum (To believe concerning Christ, to believe Christ, and to
believe on Christ) must be distinguished, that the former two include a bare
knowledge and assent, and may be where there is no justification; but the last
contains confidence in it, and ever does justify. This phrase, (...), or
(...), answers to these Hebrew phrases, (...) or batach, in construction with
beth. (...)
For these referred to God are all one, ^sal. 18.22.
used sometime in way of exegesis and exposition the one to the other. That
these answer to this greek phrase, is apparent both by comparing the Syriacke,
and by the translation of the Septuagint, who so translate it; (...), or (...),
out of the 28. of Esaias, verse 16. as Paul cites it, Romans 10.11. Look now how
the Scripure expounds these phrases. 2. By the Scriptures exposition.
In the 50. of Esaias 10. you have one expounded. Trust in the Lord, the meaning
whereof is given us in the next words, and rest upon him. So Esaias 31.1. the
same phrase to trust, is expounded by staying, even as a man would stay
himself on a staff, wherewith he is underpropped: So also Ier. 17.5. To trust
in man, is to make man his arm, letting the heart go back from God. In Psalm.
62.7. To trust on the Lord, is to place our strength in the Lord. And Psalm.
37.5. To trust in him, is for a man to roll himself and his actions on him.
If to believe on God, were to hold dogmatically this or that revealed of him,
then this belief were common to other things with him, and we might as well
believe in creatures as in God. For what does let, but that we may without sin
hold and assent to those dogmaticall truths, which are taught concerning
them. Add to these things the judgment of Augustine on the 77. Psalm. Ho^ est
credere in Deum. credendo ad ^a^ere ad been cooperandum bona operant. Deo. Aug.
in psalm. 77.
This (says he) is to believe in God; By believing to cleave unto him. And
more largely on Ioh. 7. tract. 29. Si creditis in eum creditis ei non autem
continu^ qui credit ei, credit in eum, etc. De Apostolis possumus dicere,
credimus Paulo, sed non credimus in Paulum; credimus Petro, sed non credimus in
Petrum, etc. Quid est ergo credere in eum? credendo amare credendo diligere,
credendo in eum ire, and eius membris incorporari. Augustine in Iohannem: cap.
7. tract 29.
If ye believe in God, ye also believe God; but not forthwith does he believe
in God, who believes God. Again we may say, we believe Paul and Peter, but
not we believe in Paul and Peter. What is therefore to believe in him? it is
by believing to affect him, by believing to love him, by believing to go into
him, and to be incorporated into his members. In which sense and words also
Lumbard: Credere in Deum est credendo amare, credendo in eum ire, credendo ei
adhaerere, et eius membris incorporari Lomb lib. 3. distinct. 23.
does expound the same phrase, lib. 3. did. 23.

Lastly, it is manifest by the scripture, Col. 2.6. and John 1.12. that
believing on Christ is the receiving of him. And what is this receiving? Not
only a comprehension of the understanding, but an embracing of the heart and
affections; laying hold on him, as we would on any thing with our hand which
is reached unto us. And John 6.35. to go or come to Christ, is made all one
with believing on Christ: which going no doubt is rather a spiritual motion of
the heart and affections toward Christ, to enjoy him and cleave unto him, then a
contemplation of the mind contented to see and behold him.

3. By reasons.
In the third place we must clear this matter by reason, that to believe on
Christ is to trust upon him, and that for the grace of remission of sins, and
life everlasting. For the papists say, that when we construe to believe in
Christ, to be, to believe the pardon of our sins in and for Christ, that
this is a gloss of our own devising. Wherefore to show it, let this be the
first reason; So faith does receive and rest on Christ, as Christ is set forth
to the believer. Reason 1.
But Christ is set forth unto us as our redeemer from sin and death; ergo
faith staieth on Christ as our redeemer from sin and death. For, this we are
always to have in mind, that Christ is the object of our faith, Not a naked
Christ is the object of our faith, but Christ clothed with his benefits.
not abstractly and nakedly considered, but Christ with his benefits, Christ
lifted up as the brazen serpent, Christ set forth as a sacrifice propitiatory
for our sins. And thus to receive Christ and believe on him, is to believe
and receive in him ransom from sin and death.

Reason 2.
Secondly, I prove this from the disposition of every believer. That which
pricketh and spurreth the soul to Christ; that the soul first of all ^eacheth
at, and receives in Christ. But sin and death makes the soul go forth to
Christ; Ergo, it first lays hold on pardon of sin, and deliverance from
death. These things are evident truths, in the experience of every humbled and
believing soul.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, it may be proved by the order of justification, that a justifying
faith is to stay on Christ for the pardon of sin, or to believe in him
forgiveness of sin.

The believer that has got his sins covered, he has believed the pardon of
them. But every believer whom God iustifyeth, has first got his sins covered;
Ergo, he has before justification, believed their pardon. It may seem
strange, that I say, that the sins of the believer are covered before his
justification: but in nature thus it must be considered. For the Lord cannot
pronounce us as just, till some way he see us innocent. To absolve the guilty
is abomination with him. The order that is observed in our justification The
order of our iustificat^o^.
will clear the matter. First, there is a sight of our misery; to which we are
brought by the Law: Secondly, there is by the Gospel an holding forth of
Christ, as our Redemption from sin and death: Thirdly, there is a working of
faith in the heart to rest on Christ, as the ransom from sin, and death. Now
when a man is come hither, he is truly and really just. For he has hold of
the ransom from all his sin. Then in the fourth place follows the Lords
voice, justifying this party, thus in Christ made righteous.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, it may be proved by the effects of faith: For that faith which
iustifyeth before God, which sanctifyeth, which brings Christ to dwell in our
hearts, which breeds peace, yea gives entrance unto God with confidence, and
boldness; that stands in the trust of mercy, and in knowledge only. But all
these are made effects of believing on Christ. The first part of the reason is
evident: For if faith be only the crediting of things to be believed, then
these eff^cts belong not unto faith. For wicked men in their kind, and the
Devils in their kind, may have such a persuasion.

Thus having proved sufficiently, that to believe on Christ, is to have
confidence of mercy, touching remission of sin; I will now show what may be
objected.

Objections answered. Scriptures that seem to affirm faith to be only a
right persuasion of Christ's person and offices.
The arguments are either drawn from Scripture or Reason. The first rank
proves that it is true faith to think aright of Christ's person and office. The
Scriptures may be recalled to these three heads: Mat. 16.16. Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God. John 1.49. Rabbi, says Nathanael, thou art
the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. John 11.26, 27. He that
believes in me (says our Savior unto Martha) shall not dye. Beleeuest thou
this? Yea Lord (says she) I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of
God that should come into the world. So John 20.31. These things are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, etc. See
Acts 8.37. and 1. John 5.1. From all these Scriptures it may thus be concluded.

Ob. To be persuaded aright touching Christ's person and office, is no
particular assurance of mercy: But rightly to hold this, is justifying faith:
Ergo, justifying faith is no particular affiance, but only to hold truly the
doctrine of Christ.

Answ. But it is false, that these examples mention no more but the holding of
the doctrine in truth. For they all include an affiance of mercy, Which yet
include in affiance of mercy in him.
which may be thus proved. First, it is a general rule, that words of
knowledge include in the party the affections also: much more, words of
belief. Secondly, to see the clear truth of all these examples, we must
consider the disposition of Gods people touching the Messiah. As therefore they
looked for the Messiah, so according to the prophecies they promised to
themselves in and by the Messiah all good. The woman of Samaria, John 4. could
say, when the Messiah comes, he will teach us all things. And therefore Math.
11.3. the Disciples of John ask Christ, Art thou he that should come, or
shall we look for another. Where we may see, that there was not a knowledge
only of Christ to come, but an expectation and an hope placed in him, as in
whom all good promises should be accomplished unto them. So that if we
consider the disposition of this people, whose hopes did hang on the Messiah,
we may plainly understand how that to believe the Messiah, is not only to
know and give credence; but to have an affiance in him.

Thirdly, we must consider these examples by that of Thomas, John 20.28. who
as he confessed Christ and God, so was it with terms of affiance, saying,
Thou art my Lord and my God. Fourthly, this may be gathered by Marthaes words:
John 11.26, 27. For when Christ asked her, Do thou believe this, that whosoever
believes on me shall not die everlastingly; She does answer, Yea Lord: I
believe that thou art the Christ: that is, Since I believe this that thou art
the Messiah, I cannot doubt but that those that cleave to thee shall have
everlasting life; teaching that these confessions imply an affiance and trust
of all good through him.

The second rank of places prove, that to believe the power of God is
justifying faith. Scriptures affirming faith to be a belief of Gods power.
Mat. 9.28. etc. Christ required no more of the blind man, then to believe
that he was able to heal him. And Luke the seventh, that faith of the
Centurion which Christ commended to be greater then he had found any in
Israel, seems to be no more then a persuasion of Christ's power to restore
his sick servant: Say the word and my servant shall be whole. verse 7. So
Mark 1.4. The Leper seems to doubt of Christ's will, but was well persuaded
of his power. If thou will thou can make me clean. And how is Abraham's faith
otherwise set out unto us? then by this, that he was fully assured that he
which had promised was also able to do it. Romans 4.21. Hence it is thus argued.
That faith which Christ requires, and confirms by miracle, that is a
justifying faith. But to be persuaded touching the power of God, is that faith
which he requires, and has so confirmed, Ergo etc.

I answer to the first part of this reason; that it is false. For the faith
which Christ requires to justification, is such a faith as does acquit us
from our sins, and procure us righteousness: but such a faith is not here
required, but only a faith serving to receive a temporal blessing: Which
speak not of justifying faith, but of a faith auailing to temporal blessing.
to which faith it suffices to be persuaded of Gods general goodness and
power, as he is a Creator. The which faith since it does give, unto God, the
glory of power above all his creatures, it pleases him to reward with
temporal benefits, as a thing good in it self, though it do not justify us
in his sight.

But Abraham's example must be further examined and explaned, from the which
they go about to conclude the same thus. Abraham's faith Abraham's faith,
was a justifying faith. But his faith was not a persuasion of mercy.

To confirm which, they make two maine exceptions at this example. First, that
it was of a temporal promise; and ergo, the object of it was not forgiveness
of sins in Christ. Secondly, that it was of Gods power, Romans 4.21. and not of
any special grace and favor.

For the first, this promise was as well spiritual, was of a spiritual
blessing.
as temporal. It was as you may see, Genesis 15.5.18. and 17.5, 6, 7, 8. etc. of
a seed which God would raise up out of him, and of Canaan which should be
given to his seed; and in that seed, the blessed seed Jesus Christ: In Jesus
Christ
and under Canaan as a type, heaven was figured and promised. Now the object of
Abraham's faith, so far as it did justify him, was that blessed seed which
is Christ, Gal. 4 16. For it was rather the sight of Christ which he had by
faith, then the persuasion of a son to be borne to him, and Canaan to be
given his seed, that made him to rejoice: as John 8.56. Abraham reioiced to
see my day, and he saw it and was glad. For the second, when they say it was a
persuasion of the power of God, and not of his favor, they are mightily
ouershot. For the text says first, verse 20. that he did not doubt of the
promise of God. Now the promise always implies Gods good will, Looked first
to Gods good will in the promise.
and grace. The promise runs not, I can give thee a seed, Abraham, and this
Canaan to be possessed by thy seed; but, I will do thus and thus. How then
does the Apostle set out Abraham's full belief in this, that he was assured
that he who had promised was able also to do it? I answer: Not because
Abraham's says did justify him, as it did believe the power of God; but
because his justifying faith which was fixed on the promise, did sustain it
self Next, to Gods power, to sustain himself in temptation.
by this consideration of Gods power, in the time of trial between the
promise and execution. For usually the Lord puts a time of delay between
these; wherein faith is exercised. Thus it was with Abraham, he had a promise
touching a seed; the execution is deferred. Hereupon his faith is assailed
thus. Thy body is dead Abraham, thy wife hopeless that way. These things
foiled Sarah. Now, when Abraham's faith on the promise is likewise set upon, he
holds fast the promise, and against these arguments of unbelief, faith
opposes the all-sufficient power of God, and sustaineth it self with this
consideration; God is able.

A third rank of places tends to show, that to believe Christ dead and risen
Scriptures putting faith in a belief of Christ's death and resurrection.
is true faith: As Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. And 1. Cor. 15.3, 4. etc. it is made the sum of the Gospel,
To believe the death and resurrection of Christ.

Hence thus they reason; To give credit that Christ is dead and risen, is a
justifying faith: but this is no persuasion of mercy. Ergo. I answer; The
Apostles must interpret and construe themselves. To believe Christ dead and
risen, as they taught him, is true belief, but they teach these things still
with application; But these are to be understood with application
as, Romans 4.25. He was delivered to death for our sins and is risen again
for our justification. And Romans 8.34. Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is
dead, yea, or rather which is risen again; for us: for that is to be
understood in every member of this sentence, which is added only in the last,
that he makes request for us. So also say the Apostles, Acts 5.31. that God
had raised up Christ to be a Prince and Savior, to give repentance to Israel,
and forgiveness of sins. Now thus to believe the death and resurrection of
Christ, as thereby to look for forgiveness of sins, is not bare knowledge,
but true affiance and assurance.

And these are the scriptures from the which they would prove this general
faith to be true faith. Now follow the reasons Adverse reasons answered.
by which they go about to show, that there is not any particular assurance
of mercy in faith. First then, thus they dispute; There is no faith where
there is no word: but there is no word that says to any of us, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. Ans. We have a particular word infolded and wrapped up in the
general promise, How we have a particular word for the pardon of our sins in
particularly
as it has a commandment annexed thereto, for every one to apply it to
himself. If a King shall by proclamation exhort his subjects, that are risen
in arms against him, to lay down their arms, and submit themselves unto him,
and withal promise that whosoever shall so do, shall have his pardon: is it
not as good and firm to every one that comes in accordingly, as if the King
had by name said to him; Thou and thou shall have thy pardon? Now does not God
promise pardon and mercy to every one that believes in the name of Christ? and
does he not command every one to believe in Christ, and to take this promise as
made to him in particular? What then is this? but even as much, as if he did
say to every believer by name; Thy sins are forgiven thee. Secondly, they
object, Justifying faith goes before justification, but the belief, that our
sins are pardoned, must follow the pardon of them: which they thus prove; The
belief of the pardon of our sins does follow our justification, or else we
believe our sins pardoned when they are not; Faith and pardon of sin go
together.
but this were a false and foolish faith: Ergo, etc. Ans. Neither of these is
true; For neither does the belief of the pardon of our sins follow our
justification, nor yet do we believe our sins forgiven before they be
forgiven. For God has thus appointed, that whenever a sinner believes and
repents, his iniquity shall then be done away. They go together. But it will
be asked, How faith can believe the pardon of sin before the pardon is
really made? we cannot see a thing before it be, and something is presented to
us that is visible. Ans. Faith requires one kind of object, sense another:
the object of sense must be actually existing in the nature of things: but it
suffices, that the object of faith be in the word of promise. Now the pardon
of sin Pardon of sin has its being in the word of promise before we enjoy it.
has its being even before it be believed; in regard of Gods decree, then also
of Christ's merit and purchase, and lastly, in the word of promise, which does
assure thee, that upon thy believing, thy sins are pardoned. Now, faith
takes this pardon presented to it in the word of promise, and travailing with
it brings forth the actual remission of our sin, which upon our faith we
receive from God. Again they say, if this be justifying faith, to have trust
and assurance that our sins are pardoned, then we cannot say as we are taught
to pray; Forgive us our sins. Ans. That does not follow: for as in other
graces, so in faith we must grow, and go from faith to faith, more and more
strongly to believe the pardon of our sins, How we do pray for the daily
pardon of our sins.
which already in part we believe: this is it then which we crave in that
petition, (which we may well do, yea, and ought to do) that for our daily
trespasses which we fall unto, we may by faith apprehend and obtain the
pardon of them; and for our former trespasses, that the pardon of them may be
made good to us, and by a greater measure of faith more firmly apprehended and
confirmed to our souls. Lastly, they object; Faith is the cause of confidence,
ergo not confidence it self. Ans. It does not follow; but rather the
contrary: it breeds confidence, ergo it has it: for nothing can make
another thing hot which has not heat in it self: nor could faith engender
confidence in the believer, if in its own nature it did not contain the same.

Doct. 7. Faith does justify us not of it self, but for Christ whom it
apprehends.
That we believing on him) Before we come to the uses of this point, we may
here fitly observe another point that has much affinity with the former: that
is, Whence it is, that faith saves and justifies us: it is not for its own
worth, but for Christ on whom it rests. GOD gave his only begotten Son
(says Christ) that we believing on him might have life, teaching us, that for
this object (that is, Jesus Christ the only begotten of God) to whom it is
referred, whom it apprehends, we are justified and saved. We are to know
then, that when we say we are iust^fied by faith, it is all one with this, that
we are justified through Christ apprehended by faith. The Papists say indeed,
that this is a gloss of our own making. Wherefore we will a little further
clear and confirm the point. First then, the phrase of Scripture (if we well
mark it) will teach us thus much; that it is not the worthiness of faith for
which we are justified: for we read, that of faith, and by faith, and through
faith we are justified; as Romans 3.30. and 5.1. but we never read, for faith we
are justified, as if it were ascribed to the worth of faith. But not to stand
on this, the equivalence of the former phrases is the express word of the
Scripture. To be justified by faith, and by Christ apprehended by faith, is all
one.
In the third chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and elsewhere, often we meet
with this phrase, We are justified by faith: now in the fifth chapter of the
said Epistle it is said, verse the 17. that we shall reign in life through
Jesus Christ; and verse 19. that by his obedience we shall be made righteous.
What in the first place is called justification and salvation by faith, that in
the other is called making righteous, and reigning in life through Christ and
him believed on. So also Acts 3.16. First, (says Peter) his name has made
this man sound through faith in his name: and then the faith which is by him,
has given to him this disposition of his body. Is it not plain here, that
faith has healed him, is as much as his name, or Christ believed on has
healed him? the one phrase does expound the other.

Reason of the point.
But beside this, there are pregnant reasons to manifest this thing. First, then
Faith does only so justify us, as it apprehends the righteousness of God.
Reason 1.
But Christ only is the righteousness of GOD. Christ is Gods righteousne^^e
He is Iehoua our righteousness, Ier. 33.16. the Sun of righteousness Mal
4.2. No righteousness can suffice to our justification, but such as one as God
does ordain and allow; nay, such a righteousness as is of and in him, who is
not only man, but God also; for it must counteruaile infinite sins, and
suffice for many thousands that are to be saved. Nor can such a righteousness
do us any good, unless as it is most sufficient in it self, so it be made
ours? Whom faith only does make ours.
And where is such a righteousness to be found, but in Christ? And how can any
conceive it otherwise to be made ours, but as by faith it is apprehended of
us? Here the Papists say that Christ is our righteousness How Christ is our
righteousness.

Not by sanctification;


two ways. First, because he meriteth the pardon of sin, which is reckoned
ours. Secondly, because he works righteousness in us. Answ. It is very true,
that Christ does sanctify us: notwithstanding he does not make us righteous
before God, by this inherent righteousness. For, we are the righteousness of
God, not in our selves (as we should be, if this infused righteousness were
the matter of our justification) but in him. 2. Cor. 5.21. And Phil. 3.9. But
by imputation.
when Paul does oppose the righteousness which is of Christ and of God, to
that of the Law, which also he does call his own, as being inherent in him,
he does clearly show that Christ is not our righteousness by that
righteousness which the spirit does beget in us (for that is legal) but by
another righteousness resting in his own person, and not transfused, but
imputed to us.

Reason 2.
Secondly, Faith and works in this matter of justification are always opposed.
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Romans 2.27. But now if faith justify us as a work, they are not
then opposite, but may well stand together.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, when we say that faith does save, justify and purify us, if we
understand this of the inward act of believing, we are made our own Saviors
and sanctifyers. For it is clear, that we save our selves, when from our
selves does proceed that act, by and for which we are saved.

Reason 4.
Further, the least true faith, though it be imperfect does justify. It cannot
then be, that it does this by its own value. For how should a weak and small
faith, that is as a grain of mustard seed, be of equal value to a greater
measure of the same? when things of the same kind differ in value according to
their quantity: as there is much odds in worth between a mite, and a massy
wedge, though both be of the purest gold. Wherefore this excellent work of
justification, must be ascribed unto the thing believed on, that is, Jesus
Christ: which a small and weak faith does as truly apprehend and possess us
of as a stronger.

Reason 5.
Lastly, it was an error which the Gnostics held, that their faith did
justify for the excellency of it.

Uses. 1. It cleereth objections about this doctrine.
First, this does serve to clear some objections about this doctrine. For, to
some we seem not well advised, to exclude works from justification, when
faith is an habit and work of the soul, as is love, and other graces of the
spirit; and others may think that we prize faith at too high a rate, to make
it that which does give us righteousness, and procure us title to that super
excellent weight of glory. It were somewhat, that these say, if we did reach
that faith did justify as a work, or should make faith it self our
righteousness, which formally does so present us to God. But that is far
from our mind. It is Jesus Christ only that is our righteousness: it is
only his obedience, by and for which we are righteous before the Lord. Faith
has no further hand and stroke in this weighty work then as it does look to
Christ, lay hold and possess us of him, that we may have him with his
merits, to present to GOD in our behalf.

2. It comfort the weak in faith.
Secondly, this doctrine does not a little comfort those that are weak in
faith. Weakness of faith is a want that many of Gods people do bewail in
themselves; and for which they do wel-nigh despair of themselves. And it is a
worthy grace, to be strong in faith, as was Abraham. For by it the heart is
stablished against all assaults, and is filled with peace and joy in all
estates: and the more our faith is, the more do we abound in the assurance of
our justification, and the pardon of our sins. Notwithstanding, let not any
be out of heart, for the small and scanty measure of his faith, if he have true
faith: It is not the excellency and great measure of his faith that does make
him righteous before God; Since faith is not our righteousness; But Christ.
but christ whom faith does receive and apprehend, which a weak faith can do
as well as the strongest. Say not then my faith is weak and feeble: Is it a
true and sincere faith, which renouncing all other matter of righteousness,
does depend and cast it self on Christ for pardon of sin and salvation? Be
then of good comfort: thou art as fully and perfectly righteous before God, as
he that has the strongest faith in the world. For thou have Christ; who is
righteousness, and perfect righteousness, to every one that does believe:
even as well to him that believes with a feeble faith, if a true one, as to
him that believes with a strong faith.

Who is apprehended by a weak faith as well as a strong, Even to salvation.
Look not then on thy faith; but consider him, that is Jesus Christ, on whom
thy faith does look and repose it self, and know that he is righteousness
alsufficient to thee. They that did look on the Brazen Serpent but with one
eye, yea, but with half an ey, were as well and fully cured of the deadly
stings of the fiery serpents, as those which beheld it with both. If the Prince
be disposed to bestow on sundry male factors their Pardon, or some precious
Jewels upon Beggars; they are as fully acquitted from their sins, and made as
rich by the possession of that Jewel, which accept of these, albeit with
shaking and trembling, as they that receive them with lusty and strong hands.
Even so is the case here. Have thou but a dimmish faith, yet such a one as
does look up to Christ, and only to him for salvation? Have thou but a weak
trembling faith, yet such a one as thou do reach out to receive Christ that
rich Pearl of heaven, and the pardon of thy sins offered in him, and do
claspe it about him with all thy feeble strength? Make no doubt, but that thou
art justified in the sight of God, do stand clearly acquitted from all thy
sins, and shall be healed of all their deadly stings. It is the possession of
the Jewel, not their strong holding of it that does make those beggars rich;
and the Kings Pardon that does discharge Malefactors from the danger of the
Law, so they be willing to accept and plead the same. And so it is not our
strong Since the true possession of him saves us, not our strong hold of him,
or weak faith that is our righteousness, and discharge before God; but Jesus
Christ, and his obedience. This only is required on our part, that we accept
him offered us in the Gospel, and rely on him for full righteousness, and
redemption; which a weak and feeble faith does as truly and entirely (if not
more) as the strongest. Nay, let me say more, for the comfort of such as are
weak in faith: If they have but a true desire to believe, He is enjoyed even
by a desire to believe.
and cannot yet in an express and explicit manner believe on Christ, they
have Christ, and enjoy him unto righteousness, and the pardon of their sins.

If a man should want hands to receive his Princes Pardon tendered to him, it
would suffice to entitle him unto it, and the benefit thereof, To show his will
to accept it; even so will God in rich mercy accept in a broken and humbled
soul a desire to believe, for faith it self: and thereby shall they become
possessed of Christ with all his merits, to the salvation of their souls.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness: for they shall be
satisfied Math. 5.6.

3. It accords grace and faith in our justification.
Lastly, this does show how grace and faith do well agree in our justification.
Works cannot stand in this matter with Gods grace, as they are urged to merit
any thing toward it. For that it is not wholly of grace, which in the least
degree does come of merit. But faith as it does justify us, does bring nothing
of its own to present to God, and to make the believer righteous, it does
challenge nothing for its own worth; but does seek all righteousness in
Christ alone; Since faith does seek for all from Gods grace in Christ.
does only take Christ for its righteousness, as he is ordained and given by
the grace of God; does only present him, and his obedience, and plead Gods
grace and mercy promised in him. It does nothing derogate from the Kings grace
in giving a Pardon to his subject, and from having the whole praise of his
safety, that his subject does receive, and plead the same for his life: nay,
rather hereby does the subject proclaim to all men, that he has no other
means to escape the gallows, but the gracious pardon of the King. Even so
faith does not any thing obscure Gods grace toward us, but rather advance it.
For can a poor sinner give larger testimony, and more amply set out the glory
of Gods grace, then when disclaiming himself, and his best works, as filthy
clouts, he does wholly fly unto, and rely upon Jesus Christ his obedience,
and Gods gracious pardon of his sins, by and through him? And if the life and
safety of a Malefactor saved by the Kings pardon, notwithstanding his receiving
of it, be wholly ascribed to the grace and mercy of the Prince; how much more
must our salvation, notwithstanding that we believe in Christ be the praise and
glory of Gods rich grace? whose grace it is first to prepare and offer Christ
unto us, and salvation in him; and then also to give us faith (which otherwise
we could never have) to receive and believe on him.

It follows; should not perish, but have life everlasting. We are now at
length from the means come to consider the benefit: which does stand on two
parts, as has been before touched; 1. in deliverance from that miserable
state wherein we were; should not perish. 2. in conferring great good upon us;
but have everlasting life. The first thing that here we may observe, is, what
we are before and without faith, even lost wretches. Doct. 8. We are by nature
lost wretcthes.
It is by faith in Christ that we are kept from perdition: which teaches
plainly, that by nature, before the Lord has quickened us by faith, we are
all children of perdition. But of this more largely and more fitly in another
place. Doct. 9.
Secondly therefore observe, that though we be by nature dead, yet by faith
we are quickened, By faith we are quickened and entitled to eternal life.
and made partakers of life everlasting. So Christ, verse 36. of this chapter;
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life. And chapter 5.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you; He that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death to life. And John 17.3. This is eternal life, to know
(that is, with the knowledge of faith) thee to be the only true God, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ. For Christ is our life; For Christ is our life,
whom by faith we possess.
our life is in him, Col. 3.4. And therefore whosoever do believe in him, have
life through and with him, As 1 John 5.11.12. From this principle we may see
the same conclusion to be gathered; God has given us life, and this life is in
his Son: he that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has
not life. But to see this better, how by faith we come to have life
everlasting, we must consider that we have it either in regard of the
beginning, or of the accomplishment and perfection. If once we be brought to
believe in Christ, life eternal is then begun in us; 1 Eternal life is by
faith begun in us,
John 7.38. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall there flow
rivers of water of life. And the nature of these waters is such, that they
never let the soul thirst again, but they are in the believer a well of water
springing to eternal life. Never to be extinguished.
John 4.14. Neither let any man except, That they shall be so, unless a man
cast them up again: for that cannot be; since if they could be cast up, how
should they then be a well in a man still springing to everlasting life? By
faith we receive the promised spirit. Gal. 3.14. By faith we have Christ living
in us. Ephesians. 3.17. Who since he cannot die, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 6.9.
we must not think that this life begun once in any member, can utterly be
extinguished. For this life is a fruit of the spirit, the first resurrection, a
life in substance all one with that blessed and glorious estate which we
shall enjoy. It is an eternal life, even for the quality and condition of it,
and not only by reason of the promise of God, the merit and intercession of
Jesus Christ. Secondly, 2. Thereby we obtain even here the fulness of it.
If once we believe, we also come to have the fulness of life everlasting, and
that 2. ways, de facto, or de iure, in regard of the thing it self in very
deed, or in regard of right unto it. For every believer has in very deed the
fulness of life and glory, though not in himself, yet in his head Christ Jesus.
He may say; My head Jesus Christ is glorified, In deed in Christ who is
glorified for us.
and I in my head sit in heaven. Thus the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.6. God has
raised us up together, and made us sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
Secondly, 2. In right, we having right thereunto.
we have the accomplishment of glory, when we believe, in regard of right and
propriety thereunto. When first we believe, then we are entitled to life
everlasting. Even as the title to an outward inheritance follows upon the
birth: so the right and hope of this kingdom does follow our spiritual birth.
By our spiritual birth.
None that are not begotten of God by water and the spirit shall enter into the
kingdom. He has begotten us unto an inheritance. 1. Pet. 1.3.4. Now the Lord
begets us his sons and daughters, when he gives us to believe. For first, the
good pleasure of God rests on his natural and only begotten Son, on whom
when we come to lay hold by faith, we are then made sons. John 1.12. Yea,
sons accepted. Ephesians. 1.6. And being sons accepted, we are heirs, As Gods
sons and heirs.
even ioynt-heires with Christ. Romans 8.17. The glory of heaven is therefore
called by the name of Adoption, because it follows thereon, and is the thing
to which we are adopted. By faith therefore when we obtain to be the sons of
God, we also thereby obtain that everlasting life which is to be revealed.

Which truth that we may clear somewhat better, observe with me briefly
these three things. First, then, Christ has merited life everlasting no less
for us, For Christ has merited it for us.
then righteousness: as Heb. 10.19.20. By the blood of Jesus we may be bold to
enter into the holy place, by the new and living way which he has prepared
through the veil, that is, his flesh. And Heb. 9.15. Through the death of the
Mediator we which are called, receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.

Secondly, 2. Faith does apprehend it also as well as righteousness.
faith applies and apprehends the one as well as the other. We are saved by
grace through faith. Ephesians. 2.8. It is the Apostles meaning, that faith does
look unto, and lay hold even of salvation it self, which we have of Gods
grace, as well as of any benefit tending thereunto. And if it be objected, that
he speaks not of life everlasting, which is laid up for us in due time to be
revealed, but of the present salvation and redemption, whereof here we are
partakers; I answer: It is manifest in the verse going before, what he means
by salvation; even specially the treasures of glory: God has raised us up
together, and made us sit in heavenly places, etc. For we are saved by grace
through faith.

3. Faith does ever rest upon it, until we come to enjoy it.
Thirdly, Faith does not only begin to apprehend it, and then leave us to
works that we may attain it: but faith does still apply life unto us, till
we are justified and saved. By faith we stand and rejoice under the hope of
the glory of God. Romans 5.2. We are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, which is to be revealed. 1 Pet. 1.5. So that our faith never gives
over, till we have this salvation, even the end of our faith. And these
considerations do sufficiently show, that faith is it, or rather Christ
received by faith, by and for which we are righteous and accepted, yea, and at
length attain life everlasting.

The opinion of the Papists touching life eternal,
Now let us consider a little what is the sentence of the Papists in this point.
The Papists then confess, that life is merited by Christ, and is made ours by
the right of inheritance: so far we go with them. Yea, touching works they
hold many things with us, that no works of themselves can merit life
everlasting: 2. that works done before conversion can merit nothing at Gods
hand, and merit of works.
much less life everlasting: 3. that there is no merit at Gods hand without
his mercy; no exact merit, as often there is amongst men: all these are true.
The point whereabout we dissent Our dissent from them.
is, that with the merit of Christ and free promise, they will have the merit
of works joined, as done by them who are adopted children. That which directly
must be opposed unto this, is; that Gods gracious promising, Gods grace and any
merit of works cannot stand together.
and giving it to us in Christ, cannot stand with the merit of our works.

And the Scripture herein is so evident, As it is evident by the Scripture.
that some of the Papists are forced to deny this conjunction of a double title
unto life eternal. For in the fourth of the Romans, 4. the wages cannot be
counted both by mere favor, and also by debt and desert: and Romans 11.6. If it
be of grace, then not of works; for grace then were no grace. In which place
observe this, that favor and grace are meant and to be taken for the rich
grace of God, which is now made manifest in Christ. For otherwise, there is a
grace which may stand with works. It was grace that God did covenant with man
in Adam, that, had he stood in righteousness, he should have deserved
eternal life: but the riches of grace, of mere grace, cannot abide one work
as meritorious to be coupled with it. If any, here, except: The Apostle
speaks of works of the Ceremonial Law, or done by force of nature, not by
the grace of Christ; I answer, that in the first place, Works of grace being
excluded from justification.
the Apostle reasons of the works of Abraham, being now justified, and even in
the flower and prime of works.

Further, we may see plainly, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. that grace does exclude al
works of regeneration. We are saved (says the Apostle) by grace, not by
works. What works? Such as are ceremonial or done in our natural state? No,
nor by works of regeneration, even such good works, as we are created to in
Christ Jesus. And mark here the reason of the Papists. All our works (say
they) come from the grace of God in us, and are from Christ dwelling in us:
Ergo, it hinders not the grace of God, nor Christ's merit, that we have them,
and merit by them. Now the Apostle does infer the quite contrary. Our works,
even our best works cannot save us. Why? For they are not ours; but they are
of God, whose workmanship we are, being by him created unto them.

Gal. 3.11, 12. And faith and the Law being opposed.
Further, The just does live by faith: Ergo, he cannot live by doing. For, The
Law is not of Faith. Nor is faith of the Law; neither can these two be
conioined. As Gal. 3.18. If the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more by the
promise: but God gave it freely by the promise. Mark here that there is such
opposition between works and grace, that a thing cannot be together a
donatiue of mercy, and deserved by working. If any thing be joined with
Christ, as together meritorious of righteousness and life, it abolisheth
Christ.

But why then does God promise life everlasting to works? If ye mortify the
deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. Romans 8.13. If ye sow to the Spirit, you
shall reap of the Spirit life everlasting. Gal. 6.8.

I answer hereunto; that there are some conditions The conditions of the
Gospel, are not couenant^ binding (...) merit, but simple conditions,
according well with mercy.
simply conditional, that do well stand with grace. Such are those
conditions, whereon they only interceding, we promise and undertake to do a
matter, or bestow a kindness on any. As, Go with me to such a place, and I
will give thee hidden treasure. Come to me to morrow, and I will give thee an
hundred pound. There are other conditions, which have the reason of a cause
meritorious. Such do not only intercede, but deserve upon contract as much as
we promise; as, Do my work well, and I will pay you truly. Of this kind
are those conditions which are contained in the Law: Do this, and thou shall
live. As for the other of the Gospel, they are only bare and simple
conditions, which deserve nothing; but must intercede, and precede the
bestowing of eternal life.

And here it were worth our labor, to consider the grounds of merit, 4.
Grounds of the merit of works laid by Papists
which the Papists lay down in the chief of their arguments. They are these;
First, Christ's Merit: Secondly, our Adoption: Thirdly, our Works: Fourthly,
Gods couenanting with us. But none of these are sufficient to establish merit.
But they are false ones.
For first, we cannot merit as children eternal life; because it is our right
by birth. No child can be said to merit the inheritance to which he is borne:
and how does any merit that which is his right already? Nor do our works of
themselves merit; when all obedience is but a witness of our thankfulness;
nor is there any proportion between the duty and the inheritance: Neither yet
as they are died with the blood of Christ, or do come from his spirit. For, as
they are of Christ, dwelling in us by his spirit; so are they also from our
selves, having a Law of sin dwelling in us, and lusting against the spirit,
which make them to be done imperfectly and by halues. But this (say they)
makes them the more meritorious, because they be done with the greater
difficulty. Yea, but this is a doctrine which the Apostle knew not. For then
he needed not to have cried out in that respect; O miserable man that I am,
etc. and to fly to Christ that he might escape condemnation, as he does, Romans
7.24, 25. And for their covenant, it is not a covenant, binding us to do any
thing meritorious toward the obtaining of life; but only a simple condition,
requiring some thing to be done before the full fruition of glory, but well
agreeing with, and no way hindering mercy.

It is further objected, that life everlasting is a reward, and that rewards
are deserved.

Answ. All rewards are not due upon, nor given for, desert; there is a reward
given by favor. Romans 4.4. There are rewards of favor as well as desert.
When Paul says, that to him that works, the reward is counted not by
favor, but by debt; does he not insinuate so much, that some often receive even
liberal rewards only upon the favor of the donour? And our Sauiuiour says:
Luke 6.32. And if ye love them that love you, what thanks shall ye have? etc.
The word (...), which signifies a gratuitie, as it were, and a reward of free
favor, importing thus much, that what reward men have of God, even upon their
best service, it is but (...), a gratuitie; no (...), no debt upon desert.

Lastly, they say, that which is given according to works, is deserved by
works. But so is eternal life.

Answ. That indeed which is given according unto works, as the meritorious
causes thereof, that may well be said to be deserved by works. But now eternal
life is not so given, but is bestowed according to works, as they are
testimonies of our faith, Works have a reward not as merits, but as
testimonies of Faith.
whereby we rest on Christ, only for our salvation, and for whose sake only
believed on, they expect eternal life.

Uses. 1. It shows the prerogative of the faithful:
Now for the uses of this point: First, it does show us our prerogative that we
have by faith, and should excite us to rejoice therein; yea, to long and labor
fully to enjoy it. What is then the prerogative of such as believe? Surely, as
Saint Paul says of the Jew, Romans 3.2. much every manner of way. For thereby
we are brought out of dismal darkness, to walk in the light of Gods
countenance and truth, we are translated out of the woeful condition of
eternal death, to life and immortality; both which are brought to light for
us, to behold and enjoy by the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.10. we are made alive to
God; exalted to the dignity of Gods sons and daughters; Who are thereby Gods
children and heirs of life.
called to the hope, yea, invested with some possession of everlasting life.
And are not these, great preferments above the residue of mankind, who through
unbelief, abide still in death and misery? Are not these worthy dignities for
earth and ashes as we are to attain to? Behold (says John, 1. Ioh. 3.1.)
what love the Father has showed us, that we should be called the sons of
God: Yea, it is an honor and dignity Which is a great dignity.
so to be. John 1.12. When Saul did offer unto David to make him his son, by
the marriage of his daughter, it did seem too high an honor for him, whose
parentage was mean, for to accept. Seems it unto you (says he) a light
thing to be a Kings son in law, seeing I am a poor man, and of small
reputation. 1. Sam. 18.23. What an unspeakable dignity is it then, that by
faith we obtain to be the sons of the great King of heaven and earth, are
made his heirs, and adopted into fellowship of eternal life and glory, with
Jesus Christ? For God deals not with us, as Abraham did with his base sons;
so to call them unto whom he gave gifts, and then sent them packing. Genesis 25.6.
God does not so turn off his faithful ones: but he receives and keeps them
in his family; and admits to be partners in the inheritance, wit^ ^is Isaac,
even with his Christ, who is the heir of all things. It is then an
inheritance, that by faith we are b^gotten too; and such a one as is immortal,
undefiled, and never fading. It is life that we obtain; life I say, which of
it self is most sweet, chiefly to such as we were, who were condemned to die,
and could look for nothing but death: and such a life as is both accompanied
with all fullness of joy, peace, glory and happiness, and shall also ever
endure.

Now then this being our prerogative, how should we rejoice therein? Wherein we
should rejoice.
And what should we more long and labor to enjoy then this? Rejoice not in
this (says our Savior to his Disciples, Luke 10.20.) that spirits are subdued
unto you; but if you rejoice in any thing, rejoice that your names are written
in heaven, and that you are appointed to live in glory there. And truly
blessed Paul did so prize this hope laid up in heaven for him, that for it he
neglected and forgate all things behind, and did only look and endeavor
himself unto this happiness which he saw before him, following hard toward
the mark, for the price of the high calling in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13, 14.
Yea, the desire of it was so vehement, that it made him sigh and groan,
longing to be clothed with this Tabernacle which is from heaven. And long to
enjoy it in heaven.
2. Cor. 5.2. Would not a poor beggar, if he should understand of some great
and goodly living fallen to him in a far country much rejoice therein, long
to go to see it, and take possession of it? And if any man should offer to
detain it, would he not strive with all might, and sue for it at the law, in
forma pauperis, as we say, rather then go without it? Doubtless, we have
dead and dull hearts, if we do not rejoice in this life and glory, which by
faith in Christ we obtain; if we do not long to take our journey unto
heaven to have the full fruition of it; and do not strive for it with prayers
to God, and struggle with all our power against the world and Satan that would
defeat us of it. Children, for want of understanding, Which we do^ not, or
want of understanding
mind not those goodly possessions they are born to; content if they have a
hobbyhorse to ride, a painted rattle, or cou^ters to play with: And is it not
of a childish ignorance concerning the glory of eternal life, that we so
little mind it, and carelessly look after it? but are well contented with these
painted bables of the world, and spend all our thoughts and strength about
them? It should therefore be our continual prayer unto God, That we are to
beg of God.
(as Ephesians. 1.18.) that the eyes of our mind may be lightened, that we may
know what is the hope of Gods calling, and what is the riches of this glorious
inheritance. One clear view of this glorious condition would ravish our hearts
with the love of it, and excite all the powers within us to lay hold of it.

2. It teaches us patience in worldly losses and crosses.
Secondly, we may learn patience, and with the more quiet minds to bear
afflictions and worldly losses, from the contemplation of this everlasting
life, which we have by faith in Christ. Abraham did leave his friends, his
native country, and all his earthly hopes there, which were not small, and came
to dwell in a strange country, where he sustained many grieuances by the
uncircumcised and heathnish people, and was exercised with sundry troubles; all
which he passed over with singular patience, by the hope and desire of
eternal life, and that heavenly country to which he was called. Heb.
11.8.9.10.16. So likewise Moses, that man of God, did quit Pharaohs court, and
set light by all the pleasures, wealth and honors of it, choosing above these
the rebuke of Christ, and to suffer affliction with Gods people. And what gave
him in these and all his sufferings, encouragement? but the large recompense of
eternal life, which he saw before, and had respect unto. Heb 11, 24, 25, 26.
Finally, the faithful Hebrews are highly commended by the Apostle, Heb. 10,
32, 33, 34. for their great patience which they showed in bearing afflictions,
enduring reproaches, being partners with Gods persecuted people, and suffering
with joy the spoiling of their goods: of which their patience, this was the
ground, that they knew in themselves, Since by faith we know of better things
reserved for us.
how that in heaven they had a better, and an enduring substance. If a man of
noble birth and rich revenue, travailing homeward through a foreign land,
should there have base indignities offered him, nay, should fall into the hands
of thieves, and by them be stripped of his rich apparel, and robbed of all his
money; all this would the less trouble him, for that he meant to stay among
these churlish people no longer then needs he must: and if he could make
shift for a season, till he came to his native country, that he knew himself
there to have friends that would honor him, and gold and silver enough to
supply this loss, and fully to furnish him. Why then should we fret and grieve
at the base entreaty which we receive from worldlings? at the wrongs and
reproaches that are offered us? at our worldly losses? and generally all the
miseries of this life? Which will recompense worldly discomforts.
For have not we an heavenly home, and an eternal life by Christ prepared for
us? at the which if we once arrive, we know by faith that there we have
friends, even God, his Saints and Angels, who will honor us, riches and
treasures inestimable to store us, joy and glory unspeakable to refresh us.
Thou^h w^rldly ^^en^^ such cases whine not without c^^^e, wh^ leesing their
worldly comforts, lee^^ all.
None would think it strange to see a poor man that did carry al his treasure
about him, to whine and cry, if falling into the hands of thieves he did at
once leese all; for he is clean undone, and has nothing left to succor him:
but it were extreme baseness in a wealthy man to take on for the loss of some
small sums, when it is well known, that he has thousands at home that are
safe and entire. Thus for worldly men, we may well allow them to chafe and
fret, howl and cry at the loss of their outward peace, wealth, mirth, honor
and reputation. For (alas!) how can they do otherwise? they are become stark
beggars; are clean undone; have nothing left; nor know not whence to look for
a supply: but truly Gods people do too too bad shame their profession, who in
outward afflictions and losses grow impatient, and are out of heart; whose
losses are nothing to that which is left them, and whose hopes, which are in
heaven reserved for them, will abundantly recompense all the miseries of this
life.

3. It staieth our heart in worldly cares and fears.
Thirdly, This does serve to establish our hearts against sundry worldly cares
and fears: we are in restless manner tossed in our selves, and distracted
hither and thither, one while affecting earthly greatness and abundance; another
while carking for earthly necessaries, and fearing the want of them: But all
without cause. For what need we so admire at, For we need (...) ^^o^t^on
(...) b^^^^^^es, who (...) heavenly, which are better, meant us.
and aspire unto the glory and happiness of this life, who have an eternal
life? that has most excellent glory, riches, and happiness joined with it,
prepared and given us through faith in Christ. Is it not a base mind in a man,
that is owner, or at least heir, of most sumptuous and stately palaces, to
covet the poor cottages of beggars, that stand by the high way side, and
repine if he cannot get them? What will satisfy us, if heaven and etenall life
cannot? Doubtless, David made account, that in this possession, he was as well
as heart could wish. The lines (says he, Psalm. 16.6.) are fallen unto me in
pleasant places: yea, I have a fair heritage.

So also is it very strange, to see a godly man toil and moile for earthly
matters, in fear of want. Fear not, little flock: for it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom; Not doubt of earthly necessaries, when God
has given us an heavenly kingdom.
says Christ. Luke 12.32. What is it that we are bid not to fear? The want of
food, raiment, and earthly necessaries, which are mentioned in the former
verses. And why? Because our Father in heaven does mean us a kingdom. For,
what? has God prepared an eternal life for us, and will he not maintain this
temporal? Has he purchased heaven, and the glory of it for us, and will he
see us perish for want of earthly things? There is not any earthly father, that
does with great sums of money, purchase large possessions for his son, and
means to bestow on him his whole estate, who will neglect to find him with
food and raiment, and give him such maintenance as is fitting. Perhaps he will
keep him somewhat short during his nonage, and not let him have his purse
always full of money, for his idle expenses, until he have wit how to lay it
out, and manage so great an estate: So here, God does not give to his children
outward things, always in that fullness that they desire, because they have not
understanding in this their nonage to dispose of them; and it might be
dangerous to feed their humors: but if by faith we can once see that he has
meant us his kingdom, and appointed eternal life for us; it is foul distrust
to doubt that he will forsake us, and put us to our shifts, for our earthly
necessaries.

4. It is an incitement to faith.
Fourthly, it must excite us highly to prize faith, and make us look about to
get faith, and how to grow in it; Peter (1. Pet. 1.7.) calls faith a precious
thing, yea, much more precious then gold. And surely, there is not a more
precious jewel in the world then it is: by which we obtain Christ, and all
his riches; As by which we obtain salvation in Christ.
are drawn out of deaths dungeon, quickened with a spiritual, and interessed
in eternal life. It is not all the gold of America, nor Rubies of the Ocean,
that can do this for us: No, there is no other grace of the Spirit, but faith
which can help us to this benefit, possess us of Christ, and entitle us to
heaven. For as we can only see the light of the Sun with the eye, and take
our food with the mouth; so is it faith only, And that only.
by which we can see Jesus Christ, and enjoy him for our righteousness unto
life. Yea, Which is its special dignity above other graces.
there is more moment in a weak faith to our salvation, then all other graces,
though they were perfect in us. Light and heat cannot be separated in the
Sun: Nor can faith, love, repentance and other graces, be found single in a
godly soul. But had a man perfect repentance, knowledge and love, these could
not save him, if there were not faith, to apprehend Christ for his satisfaction
and a propitiation for his sins. A dim eye to look on the Brazen Serpent,
was of more avail to a poor Israelite stung with a fiery serpent, then the
use of all his other members. For what would the swiftness of his feet,
strength of sinews, nimblenesse of hands, etc. stand him here in stead, if he
had not an eye to look on the Brazen Serpent? So without faith we lie dead in
sins, and cannot but perish of the mortal stings which Satan has given: It
it only faith in Christ that can cure our souls of them, and make us here to
live unto God, and hereafter in all happiness with him.

FINIS.
A Pillar, erected on the Grave, and inscribed, to the dear memory of that
learned and godly Divine, Mr. PAVL BAINE. By I. E.
SOme Men in shape, are Devils: and other some,
Misshapen monsters, we may truly say:
Brute beasts full often in humane shape do come,
Whom carnal sense and furious rage does sway.
The form and name of Men many retain,
That come far short of the right humane strain.
Again: Some babes are demy-men, I know;
In whom of man some ruder lines appear:
But to man's stature few there are that grow,
Or the ripe nature of a man do bear.
In troops of men, to find a Man at Noon
(With Torch-light) were a task not easily done.
Aye me! (dear Baine) what treasure then we had
Whilst thou amongst us did alive remain!
And by thy death (which good men made so sad)
What loss vnvalued do we now sustain!
Ah, harmefull Death! what Age shall us requite
So great a damage, and so foul despite!
Dear worthy Baine, a man complete to be,
And more then any one mere man, I find.
The virtues, which in most we single see,
As choice Ingredients were in him combined,
Him to set forth; though made of humane blood,
A rich Pandera of diuinest good.
Rare is a faithful, zealous Christian:
More rare, good conscience and great learning meet.
One, of a thousand, proves a godly man.
A learned Scribe; a skillful, a discreet,
A watchful Pastor; Teacher excellent;
Such who can find? unless Paul Baine be meant.
There was in him a blameless innocence,
A fervent zeal, sound judgment, pearcing wit,
Not vulgar learning, moving eloquence,
An understanding of deep points, to it
An heart high-mounted, far above the sky;
Yet low as earth, in true humility.
O Death! I nere should cease of thee to plain,
Who of such treasure have us now bereft;
Did not our loss turn to his greater gain,
And had he not a world unthankful left;
Which sets at naught (as dross and basest Mine)
Most precious Pearls, and of the brightest shine.
Worthy Elisha, when thy Master dear
In flaming coach was rapt up unto God,
Thou did obtain, that (O thou happy Seer!)
His doubled spirit on thee might make abode.
Oh! well were me, if so within my breast
But half the spirit of this blessed Saint might rest.
I. E.

