(...) the Pope (...) OR, The Pope of Rome is Anti^^^

Proved in two Treatises.

In the first Treatise, 1. By a full and clear definition of Antichrist, (...)
from Scripture only. 2. By a plain application of every part of his
de^^^^tion agreeing ^nely with the Pope. 3. By the weakness of the A^guments
of Bella^^ Florim^^d Reymond, and others; which they (...) to prove the
contrary. All which are here plainly and fully answered.


In the second Treatise, By a Description 1. Of his Person. 2. Of his Kingdom.
3. Of his Delusions.


In all which, the great Questions and Doubts about Antichr^^t, are pithily and
briefly handled, yet fully and amply cleared.

By Tho: Beard, Doctor in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods Word in Huntington.

Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord:) Curse ye bitterly (...)
I^ha^^^ants ^hereof because they came not to the help of the Lo^^ to the help
of the Lord against the mighty. Judge. 5.23. Printed by Isaac ^aggard for John
^ellamie, and are to be sold at (...) Shop at the three golden Lions in
Cornhill (...) t^^ Royal Exchange, 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, One of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
AElian reports, that when Diogenes saw certain Rhodian Gallants gorgeously
attyred, he laughed, and said, Hic nihil est prater fastum: and after seeing
certain Laconians in base and sordide apparel, Et hic (said he) alius fastus
est. So it may be thought a kind of pride and vainglory, to thrust forth
many Books in this scribbling Age. And again, for such to put forth none that
are best able, and that against the common Adversary; may be thought to
proc^ede

(...) But in regard of your Lordshippes manifold and weighty businesses of
State and Church, I forbear any further speech: only I humbly entreat a
pardon of my boldness, in presuming to dedicate this Book to your honorable
protection; which to do two reasons moved me: One, that your Lordship is a
known and renowned Protector of Religion and Learning: and a second, because
you are my Diocesan, and so it is your Lordships right by bond of duty.

The Lord of heaven that has advanced you on earth, p^otect you with his grace
in your honor, and at length inu^st you with an exceeding far greater honor
in his kingdom. Thus prays he that is

Your Lordships in all Reverence and Observance: THO: BEARD.

The Praeface.
NExt unto the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, there is nothing
so necessary, as the true and solid knowledge of Antichrist, the cruellest
enemy to Christ and his members. For, as except we know Christ, we cannot
either put our affiance in him, or obey his word, and so obtain salvation by
his means; so, except we know Antichrist we can never beware of him, nor
resist him, nor fight against him. Besides, as it is a notorious injury and
outrage, to call any one by the name of Antichrist, or to fly from him, he
being not so; so it is a palpable flattery unworthy a Christian, to honor,
reverence, and adore as a God on earth, him whom we ought to detest and
abhor, as the most pernicious Organe of the devil.

Now, that Antichrist ought to come into the World, there is no controversy
among Christians: but who, and what kind of man this Antichrist should be,
falls into great variety and diversity of opinions. For the most Ancient
Doctors which wrote before the time of his revealing, expressed themselves with
so many doubts, repugnances, and light conjectures (as it ordinarily falls
out in the unfolding of Prophesies) that a man may easily perceive thereby,
that they meant not that their opinion should be received as certain and
undoubted trueths. As also, the luster, authority, and brightness of the
Church of Rome, especially at that time when the chief glory of their Bishops
was this; to shed their bloods for the confession of Christ, so dimmed and
dazeled their eyes, that they could not persuade themselves, that such a
Monster should one day establish his Tyranny, in so flourishing a part of
Christ's Kingdom.

As touching those that came after, and could more clearly discern the marks
by the which he is painted out by the Spirit of God in holy Scripture: some of
them have confessed and divulged him to the world. Others carried with the
current of the inueterate opinion of the authority of the Church of ^ome, have
not only confessed the truth, but also banded themselves against it, with all
their force. Albeit that God notwithstanding these clouds of darkness, and
the fury of Antichrist, which ruined all that durst open their mouth against
him, raised up always certain holy men, who neglecting their own lives, gave
glory to God, and discovered the impostures of this Son of Perdition:
insomuch, that since diverse centuries of years, it has pleased the Lord to
manifest more fully his abominations, by the preaching of the Gospel.

But as this excellent benefit amongst all those that wa receive from God in
this decrepite Age of the world, ought to be prized and acknowledged in all
respects; so there are very few which regard it as they ought Some by their
negligence, suffering the Empire of Antichrist to be repaired where it was
abolished: Others, by their miserable dissentions, opening away for this
Woolfe, to enter into the Sheepe-fold of Christ: And others, by gathering
together all their dexterity and quickenesse of frauds, sophismes, and lies,
laboring to uphold his seat from falling. For to this purpose serve the new
writings of those that endeavor to make the world believe that Antichrist is
not yet come, to the end, to lull men asleep under his tyranny. And therefore
as these men employ all their diligence to maintain the life of this Beast,
against whom all ought to arm themselves: So ought the true Servants of God,
stiffely to bend themselves both with voice and pen against him, for the glory
of their master Jesus Christ.

It is true, that there a sort of men too politic and timorous: who otherwise
being sound of Religion, yet think, that truth may be sufficiently taught, and
error confuted, without making any mention of Antichrist: a kind of people
which require of us another manner of discretion in the execution of our
charges, then was used by the Prophets and Apostles, and which consider not how
great imbecility is in man, and how easy he is to be transported into error,
especially then when it creeps in under the mask and appearance of Holiness
and Meekness: and therefore how needful it is to be pressed to the quick,
that he may be retained constant in the profession of the truth: and in a
word, that regard not what duty of obedience they owe to the Commandment of
God, made to us all, Apoc. 18, 6. For what a tyrannous part would it be, to
hinder those that know and see the Wolf, from making an outcry against him?
What a laziness to spare him, that spares and cares not for the ruin of so
many souls, which he holds Captive? Nay, so far it is, that faithful
Teachers ought to hold their peace, that they ought rather with full throat to
cry out, and unite their Veins with that which resounded from heaven; Come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins: for her sins are
ascended up unto heaven, and the Lord does remember her iniquities. And albeit
no man should answer to our cry, yet at least we should deliver our own
souls from death, and carry this witness in our consciences, that we have not
held the truth in unjust silence, to the danger of souls, which Christ has
bought with the price of his blood.

This is that which causes this Treatise to come forth into public, that
they which yet know not Antichr^st, may at length know and detest him: and they
which both know and detest him, may be confirmed in their knowledge, and
increased in their detestation; and so hereby may make more account of the
benefits of Christ, and be more ravished with his love. For the more we know
and detest Antichrist, the more are we enamored with Christ, and long for his
coming, and desire the full revelation of his glory. So that such as do not
with all their heart abhominate this Man of sin, let them vaunt of themselves
what they will, yet are they far estranged from true piety, and that holy
zeal, which made David to say, Psalm. 139.21.22. Lord, should not I hate them
that hate thee? and shall I not be offended at them that rise up against thee?
Yes, I hate them with a perfect hatred, as if they were my enemies. Now if this
plain confession does further enrage Antichrist against us, and it come so to
pass that we must seal it with our blood, we shall be thrice happy: for then,
shall we be received into heaven, there to sing alowd this blessed song;
Aleluiah, salvation, glory, honor, and power be to our Lord God: Apoc. 19, 1,
2.
for his judgments are true and just, because he has taken vengeance of the
great Whore, which corrupted the earth with her Fornication, and revenged the
blood of his Servants from her hand.

The method which shall be observed in this Treatise for more facility, is
this. The first part shall contain the definition of Antichrist, drawn out of
holy Scripture: The second, shall be an application of this definition to the
Pope, by certain proofs. And the third, shall refell the opinion of the
Romish Doctors touching Antichrist.

For the rest, I protest that my intention is not to offend men's persons: I
only desire to destroy error, according to the gift of Grace given me of God,
and to labor the revealing of the kingdom of Antichrist, in what person
soever I meet withal. And in that I conceal my name, it is not in
apprehension of any feared censure, which shall be always most acceptable to
me, if it proceed from the Spirit of Charity, which ought to guide the hearts
and hands of Christians. But I have always been of opinion in this subject,
that truth has more force, being all bare and naked, then shadowed with the
names of men. And if after the labor of so many learned men, that here
illustrated this matter, and whose footsteps I have purposely followed, there
be found some clearing by this Treatise, as I hope will be to them that shall
take the pains to read it through, and especially the third Part; I desire,
that the glory thereof may be rendered to GOD alone, who will right soon make
known to the world by the coming of his Son, the utter abolition of him,
whom he has already so clearly discovered by the Torch of his Gospel.

The Table.
A
ABaddon Apollion. Page 6. Abbay of Beak founded in Normandy myraculously.
page 354 Abomination of desolation what. 76 Adriancureth a man born blind. 328
Agnus Dei described. 282 Alexander the 6. a vile Pope. 30 Albigenses, 100000.
slain by the Pope. 60 An Altar paganish working wonders. 329 Angel of the
bottomless pit. 5 Angels the Doctors and Teachers of the New Testament. 8
Antichrists name in general. page 1. in particular, page 2. his other names,
page 2. his definition, ibid. he is a man, 3. one in number, 3. a Christian by
name, 4. his (...) horns a double power, 5. in the Church as God, 6. to come
with miracles, ibid his idolatry, ibid. ambition, cruelty, impurity, discovery,
7. affeebling, 8. and ruin, 9. not by Nation a Jew, 69. nor the Jews Messiah,
72 his miracles, 75. his seat, 77. and 133. how long to reign, 84. his
destruction, 94, 95. his name, and the number of his name, 97. and 109, 110.
he is the eight head of the Beast, and yet one of the seven, 150 he is an
hypocrite, 272. no open adversary, 273. by consequence he denies Jesus to be
Christ, 284. h^ is in show a Lamb, 194. he shall not abollish Christian
Sacrifice, 217, 218. his persecution, 223, 224. the continuance of his reign,
3. years and half, 223. his growth and progress, 166. borne in the Apostles
time, 167. his infancy, Ibid. his youth, 169. his man's estate, 173 which has
three degrees, p. 174, 175, 176, 177. and his declining estate, 181. his
persecution, 63, 64 87. Apocalypse 11, 3. expounded and cleared, 58. the 20.28.
expounded and cleared, 66. the 11. and 8. expounded and cleared. 78 Apollonius
Tyantus miracles. 328 Apostasy in Antichrists time how to be understood, 245.
out of the Apostasy five observations, 246. of Apostacy, whether we, or the
Papists are guilty, 247, 248. Authors calling the Pope Antichrist, and Rome
Babylon, 30, 31, 32, etc.
B
BA-Bell, the two first syllables of the two great pillars of Popery, 283
Babylon mystical Antichrists seat, 4. and 146 Baptism the character of
Christ and Antichrist. 127 Battayles of Antichrist. 89 Bishops of Rome not all
Antichrists but since the year, 605. p. 10. at at first holy men. ibid.
Bishops of base parentage and quality came in, when Antichrist began his reign
at Rome. 193 Blasphemy of the Laterane Council 278 A blind man discovered to
be counterfeite, page 321. and one feigning the Falling sickness. 322 Bonds
of Nature dissolved by Popery, 131 Boniface the third, first open Antichrist.
10 Bottomless pit, profundity of errors, page 5. A Bull sacrificed at Rome.
329 Buying and selling forbidden to all that have not the Beasts name. page 130
C
CArdinals first beginning. 179 Ca^herinus mocketh at Caietaines distinction.
289 Ceremonies Popish, the Beasts Character. 1^0 Character or mark of
Antichrist, 123. diverse opinions concerning the same, 124. is but one, yet has
many branches, 125. Character of a Christian, 126. imprinted four ways. 127
Chair of Peter gives holiness. 294 Christ's name of union incommunicable, 12.
he is the only Spouse of the Church, ibid. how he is said to be crucified,
79. denied to be Jesus, 266. crucified in Peter, pa. 123. the only universal
Bishop of the Church. 175 Christians preserved from the destruction of
Jerusalem. 85 Church of Rome, how a Church, 138 it is revolted from it self,
256. true Church called heaven, pa. 211. not extinguished by persecution, Ibid.
ours the persecuted Church, page 217 Clergies character. 132 A Cock sacrificed
to S. Christopher, 341 A Comprehender cannot merit. 272 Communion alone
condemned in the ancient Church page 257. in one kind also condemned. ibid.
Confirmation imprints the character of a Christian. 127 Confutation of Popish
opinions concerning Antichrist. 37 Constantine the Popes Lacquey, 25. his
donation. 19 Cross worshipped with Latria. 24 Croysado, a trick to catch
riches. 334 A Crucifixe dragged into the mire. 329 Cruelty of Popes to
faithful profesfessors of the Gospel, 213, 214, 215 216, 221.
D
DAmianus denies the temporal sword to the Pope, page 197, 198 Dan, why not
mentioned in the Apocalypse. 69 Daniel 11, 45. explained, 96. his prophecy
explained, 31. and 49. and cap. 11.3. expounded, 298. the 2. and 7. likewise.
49 Days 1290 in Daniel how to be understood, 67. Days 1260. 42 months, and
three years and an half how to be taken, 230, 231, 232. Definition of
Antichrist applied to the Pope. 10 Delusions Antichristian, 301. by miracles.
302, 303, 304, etc. by Purgatory, page 330. by invocation of Saints, 339, etc.
by Relikes, 350. by Images. 355. by Popish excommunnications and pardons, 368.
by monastical Vows and the Sacraments of the Romish church, 380. by abuse of
holy Scripture. 396 Denial of Jesus to be Christ, the 3. mark of the
Apostacy. 265 Saint Denis body contended about, p. 353 Destruction of the
Roman Empire. 48 Dipping bread into the Wine condemned in the ancient Church
of Rome. 257 Diseases all cured or procured by some Saint, or other. 344
Doctrine proper to Antichrist, 283 three doctrines peculiar to the Apostasy.
259 S. Dominicke equalled and preferred before Christ. 348
E
ECclesiasticus 48, 9, 10. cleared. p 56, 57 Eden what and where it is, 203. it
was defaced by the Flood, p. 204 205 Emperors, Princes, and Priests, 5.
Emperors crowned by the Pope, page 26 Empire of Rome a let to Antichrist, page
10 Enemies of Christ, of two sorts, 110, 111 England interdicted six years,
175 Enoch and Elias coming, 53. why preserved alive, 62. they shall not arise
as witnesses against Antichrist, 200, 201, 209, who are meant by them, 201,
202. they live not in the earthly Paradise, 202, 203. are taken up into heaven,
205, 206, 207. Objections to the contrary answered, 208. their arising from
death to life after 3 days and an half. 210 Epicurus helds not this
proposition, there is not a God, and yet an Atheist. 285 Not to Err proper to
God, assumed by the Pope. 289
F.
A FAble of Christ's incarnation, 26^. another of his resurrection, 269. another
of his mission of the holy Ghost. 270 Facere, signifies to reign. 232 Fathers
dissent about the two witnesnesses, 61. about Antichrist, 70. 71. their
opinions of Enoch and Elias. 201 Figures of Antichrist in the old Testament.
112 Fire caused to descend from heaven, page 76. Forgiving of sin, what. 293
For most^ body drawn out of it grave page 28 Mast. Foxes particular opinion of
the 42 months in the Apocalips. 233 Frederick holds the Popes stirrup, page
25 Friar Francis descended into Purgatory every year on his Feast day to
deliver all that had been liberal to his Order, 337. he is equalled to
Christ, page 34. ^a Friar immeasurably rich. 331
G
Gain, the end of Popery. 335 Genesis 49, 17. expounded and cleared. 69 S.
George, a counterfeite Saint, page 24 A new God worshipped in the Church of
Rome. 299 Gog and Magog. 92 93 94 Gospel preached through the whole world,
234. how, 44 45. 237. reasons why in the Apostles age, 235. testimonies of the
Fathers that it was preached, 238. Remond answered concerning Granada, 239
traces of it remaining in most countries, 241. in both the Indies, 241, 243
Greek Article explained. 40 Gregory the first, the last good Pope, the seventh
a notorious Antichrist p 11 S. Gregory against merits, the Mass and universal
Bishop. 259
H.
Heaven has three significations pa 206 Head ministerial of the Church and
Husband, proves the Pope to be Antichrist. 277 Heresy falsely imputed to us
by the papists, 255 revived in the Papacy. 249 Saint Hieromes opinion of Rome
pa. 81. Hildebrand poisoning six Popes, by Brazutus, to ascend unto the
papacy. pa. 28 Horns, ten Kings, 150 the two horns of the Beast what. 194,
195 196 How the Pope denies Jesus to be the Christ. 73 How he makes himself
a God. 74 How he makes the image of the Beast speak. 75 How fire to descend
from heaven, 75 76
I
IAcobines tale of the Virgin Mary's going into Purgatory every Saturday. 337
Iamblicus lifted up into the air, 327 so Simon Magus. Ibid. Idolatry of the
Church of Rome, page 298 Jerusalem not Antichrists seat, 78. and 140 Jesus how
denied by the Papists to be Christ. 265 Image of the Beast made to speak, pa.
75 Images speaking. page 76, 322. 183 184 Images contemned. 323 Images
sweating, nodding, moving, 324 Images come from heaven. 359 An Image full of
Blasphemy. 291 India has traces of the Gospel, page 47 Indulgences opposed.
35. 36 John the thirteenth, a most vile person. John Baptist, Elias truly. 55
John chap. 5. verse 43. expounded pa. 70 Iubilee of Boniface the eight. 19
Judas freed from Hell every week once, by the Prayers of the Church. page
337 Jupiter Olympius set up in the Temple. 299
K
S. KAtherine, a counterfeit Saint, pa. 24 Key of the bottomless pit. 5 Kingly
Office of Christ, usurped by the Pope. 276
L
LActantius error concerning Antichrist: pa. 42 Lateinos. 99, 118. 120
Laterane Council blasphemeth. 20, 278. Latin Service brought in in the year
666. 121 Leo, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, 278 Lights of the Firmament,
powers in the Church. 20 Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Ibid. Lucius King of
Britain head of the Church. 257
M
MAlachy chap 4. verse 5. expounded. 54 Maldonate against Bellarmine. 39 Maozim
what in Daniel. 299. 300 Marriage of Priests allowed in the ancient Church of
Rome, page 258. the prohibition of it there is a sign of the Apostacy, 260.
allowed by the Fathers, confirmed by reasons, 260, 261. impure by the Papists.
262 Mark of the Beast. 184, 185. Mary the blessed Virgin equalled to Christ.
23 Mass, how called the sacrifice of the Church, 220. it is the soul of the
Popes Kingdom. Ibid. Matthew 24. expounded and analyzed, 45. 234. the 17. 11.
expounded and cleared, 57. the 24, 21. likewise. 65 A young Maid desired of her
Confessor, that she might have little dogs in keeping. 343 Meats prohibited a
sign of the Apostacy, 262. in this they agree with Montanists, 263. and the
Manichees. 264 Melchizedek represents Christ, 280. his Priesthood, (...), 281
Merchandise of souls in Purgatory. 131 Miracles ordained for Infidells not
believers, 303. not trials of Doctrine but doctrine of them, 304, 305. they are
not so common in the Romish Church as in former time, 306. Indian Miracles
discovered 307. miracles of 3 sorts, 307 counterfeit, 308, 309, 310. suborned
by Priests, 321. effected by the devil, 326 in show, not in truth, 318. 319.
Miracles of Saint Francis, 311. 312. of S. Dominick 313. of Augustine the
Monk, 314. of Juniper, ibid. of the virgin Marie, 317. of Saint Anthonies
Priests. 319 Mystery imprinted in the Popes Miter. 152 Mockage of Christ by the
Papists, 265, 267 Moses abused, 27. his horns confuted. 357 Multitude of the
wicked the City of the devil. 141
N
NAhash the Ammonite a figure of Antichrist. 112 Name, number, and mark of the
Beast, 99, 100, 101. names expressing the Number 666. page 121 Nation of
Antichrist. 69 Nero held for Antichrist by some, page 42 Nichodemus puts some
of the blood of Christ into the finger of his Glove, which works miracles,
354 Number of Antichrists name, 114, 115. mystical interpretation thereof, 115.
literal interpretation, 117
O
OAth to the Pope, the Beasts Character, 128. of the Emperor at his
Coronation, 128. of Bishops at their Consecration. 130 Two Olive Trees, Zach 4,
3. what. page 60 Opinions of the Fathers diverse concerning Antichrist. 42
Orders of the Popish Clergy. 132 An Ox speaking. 328
P.
PAll of Archbishops. 1^2 Pantheon turned into a Temple dedicated to all
Saints. 341 Papa admirable from pape. 20 Papacy not true Church, yet has
certain traces thereof, 22 the living image of the Roman Empire, 186 187.
188. Papists imitators of the Manichees, 251. pelagianize. 253 Paradise bought
for money, 334. its sunderly interpreted. 204 Paul's epist. traduced by
Rhemists, page 257 Pepin kisseth the Popes feet, page 25 Persecution under
Popes greatest, 69 213. 214. 215 216. 221. 222. 223 Periods of Antichrists
being, page 113 Saint Peter's chains join together. p. 358 Pope by name a
Christian, but yet in deed contrary to Christ, 12. he usurps Christ's
offices, page 12. his kingdom erected by Satan, p. 17 Popes Haretikes, 13.
He challenges a double power, 18. carries himself as God, 19. works
miracles, 22 is an Idolater, p. 23. ambitious, 25. full of cruelty, 27. of
impurity, 29. sends a sword to Princes, p. 21 Popes by diabolical Arts work
miracles, 22. He is the sovereign Bishop, 27. his spiritual cruelty, p. 29.
his Primacy when first brought in. p. 52. he is Monarch of the world, p. 89
90. called God, 159 Popes modern contrary to the ancient, 257. ancient
servants to the Emperor, 259. stiling themselves Friends and Husbands of the
Church, Antichristian titles. 273 Pope not bound to his own Decrees, 276 they
exalt themselves above Kings, 278, erring ex cathedra, p. 289. Pope styled by
the name of Christ, p. 286. usurps his titles and dignity, p 287. the power
and authority of God, 288. challenges to himself to depose Kings, 290. is not
subject to any Law, 298 above Angels and Magistrates, 292. adored with
Hyperdulia. p. 293. is called and calls himself God, p. 294. interdicts
Kingdoms, 295. Is above the Saints and Images, p. 296. dispenses with the Law
and Gospel 29^ alters the Sacraments, 298 makes more account of his own
Traditions then Gods Commandments, 298. is elected by the people, confirmed by
the Emperor, 175. the beast with 2 horns, p. 194 195 persecutes more then
Antiochus or the heathen Emperors, 213 214. 215. changes the whole service of
God, 218. is Antichrist both as one particular person, and by succession p 229.
230. Popes worshippers of the devil, p 300 Popish doctrines contrary to
Scripture, 13. 14 15 16 Popish prayers to Saints concluded with the name of
Christ. 283 Power spiritual and temporal usurped by Popes, 196. denied by
diverse 197 Priesthood of Christ usurped by the Pope. 280 Priests crowns
shaven. 172 Printing, when found out. 182 Prophet call office of Christ usurped
by the Pope. 274 Purgatory a net to catch riches, 333. scoffed at, 335. proved
by fables, 336. and cable tales, 337. 338. Purple worn by Popes and Cardinals:
from whence and what it signifies. 158
Q
QVestions profane about Christ, ^67. 270. Popish idle questions. 406
R
A REcapitulation of all the contents of the first book. 103 Relikes strange
and ridiculous, 352. 354 356, 357. Remonds opinion confuted concerning
Antichrists evil spirit, 227. 228 Revolt from the faith. 245 Rome the seat of
Antichrist, 4. built upon many waters, the Whore of Babylon, 4. the Popes
seat, 17. her numerall letters note the time of its destruction, 51. was the
great City when Christ was crucified, 78. 79. Rome not Pagan but Christian, the
seat of Antichrist, 142. 143 145. Its one and the same from the beginning,
142. Rome not ruined is Antichrists seat, 145. Rome Christian mystical
Babylon, 147. its Sodom and Aegipt, 153. betwit 2 seas, Dan. 11.45. page 154.
painted like a woman, 155. a City situate upon many waters, 156. worshipped as
a Goddess, and full of idolatry, ibid. full of blaspemy, 159. is Babylon, 161.
162. 163. Romes secret name. 160 Roman Empire how to be taken away. 50 Roman
Church and Roman Babylon. 148
S
SAcrament of Eucharist carried about as the Persian fire. 24 Sacrifice of
Christ cannot be reiterated, 281. Sacrifices abominable at Rome. 330 Sackcloth
what. 210 Satan the Architect of Antichrists kingdom. 3 Samson a Friar
enriched by a Croysado. 332 Saints merits and satisfactions condemned by the
ancient Church of Rome, 258. false Saints inuocated, 219. Popish Saints and
Saintesses like heathen Gods and Goddesses, 339 in their offices, 340 in their
protecting of Countries, 341. their names fitted to their Trades, 342. in
devotion to them preferred before God, 342. 343. their offices differ. ibid.
one or other can cure all diseases, 344. if one be displeased, they fly to
another, 345. they must needs be at odds when their Clients are, 345. 346.
more honored of the Papists then God or Christ. 346 Seat general of
Antichrist, 134. 137. and particular, 140 Sybils prophecy that Antichrist
should be a King with a Miter. 149 Sit in the Temple has 4 interpretations,
137. sitting in the Church what it is, 6. the Popes reign designed thereby. 19
Sixtus Quintus commends murder. 28 Spanish Armado sacrifice to the Virgin
Mary before their going forth, 346. and vpbraid her after their overthrow. 347
Star fallen from heaven. 3 Sword temporal and spiritual ascribed to the
Pope, 196. denied by diverse, pa. 197. what meant by 2 Swords. 198 Superstition
in the Church the first 600 years. 172
T
TEitan the name of Antichrist according to Ir^naeus. 116 Temple of God the
Church, 6. 134. 136. Temple at Jerusalem not to be built, 82. 134, Temple^
Christian Churches. 82 Ten Kings shall share the Roman Empire between them,
and join with Antichrist. 80 At Saint Thomas of Canterburies death, how many
died in the world, and how many saved, 338. his Saintship questioned, 351 Three
insatiable things, Priests, Monks, and the Sea. 333 A Time, times, and half a
time, 42 monetht, 1260 days expounded. 84. 85. Tollet against Bellarmine, 39.
136 Transubstantiation condemned in the ancient Church of Rome 258 Triple
Crown of the Pope. 186
V
VEronica her linen picture, 358. her whole Legend. 359
Vespasian cures a blind man. 328 Vicar of Christ the title of Antichrists.
272 Victory at Depant ascribed to the Virgin Mary, not to Christ. 346 The
Virgin Mary's smock. 552 Vulgar edition preferred before the Hebrew and
Greek, 276. its faulty by their Popes own judgments. 275
W
What it is for one to come in his own name. 37 What were the two Witnesses
that should prophecy against Antichrist. 59 Whether Antichrist be no singular
person. 38 Whether Antichrist be come or no. 44 Whore of Babylon by Rome
called. 151 Whore, the name of an Jdolatrous City. 154 Whores in Rome 45000 in
Paul the thirds time. 332 Two Witnesses, 119. confuted, 200. what they were,
200. not agreed upon by the Fathers. 61 A woman Bishop of Constantinople falsely
devised. 68 A woman offering a candle to Saint Michael, and another to the
devil. 445
Z
ZOzimus alleged a false Canon for the Popes supremacy. 52
ANTICHRIST the Pope of ROME, OR The Roman Antichrist.
The First Treatise. The definition of Antichrist by the holy Scriptures.
THE name Antichrist is not extant in the whole Scripture, save in the Epistles
of S. John, and it is taken in two senses. For either it signifies in general
all those that in any sort calling themselves followers of the doctrine of
Christ, do contradict the same, and under the name of Christ, oppose
themselves against him, and destroy his Doctrine, whether it be wholly, or in
part. Thus it is taken in the second Chapter of the first Epistle of S. John,
when he says, that there were already many Antichrists; and that he is
Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. And in his second Epistle, Many
Seducers (says he) are entered into the world, which confess not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh; such an one is a seducer, and an Antichrist. And
such are those, which either heretofore, or at this day have erred either
touching the Person, or touching the Office of our Lord Jesus Christ. But in
particular, it is taken for that grand and famous adversary of Christ, who by
a special prerogative is called the Antichrist, and to whom all the other
former Antichrists served as forerunners to make way for him, and open him a
passage into the Church, by that change and alteration which they have already
brought to true Religion by their errors.

2 These. 2, 3.4 Apoc. 11, 7. and 13, 1. and 17, 5. and 19.20.
It is of this Antichrist properly so called, that Saint John speaks in his
first Epistle, 4. chap. 3. verse. To whom are given diverse other Titles in the
holy Scripture, as the Son of Perdition, the Man of sin, the second Beast,
the Whore, the Mother of Fornications, and such like: and concerning whom we
are at this day in debate with the Factors of the Church of Rome.

Now mark that which the Scripture reports in few words concerning him, which
I will explain and prove in every part afterward: to wit, that Antichrist
shall be a certain man stirred up by the efficacy of Satan; one in number
at one time, but yet varying by succession and subrogation: who shall make
profession of the name of Christ, though in effect he wholly opposes himself
to his Doctrine, shall have his kingdom in the great City which reigns over
the Kings of the earth: shall exercise a double power, one spiritual, another
temporal: shall carry himself in the Church of God, as if he were God:
working signs and miracles, but false and lying: shall be an Idolater,
Ambitious, cruel, full of all filthiness, revealed in the last times, and
finally shall be fully destroyed by the glorious coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The person.
1. We say, that Antichrist is a Man: conformable to that of the Apostle, who
calls him a Man, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. We add, that this Man is one in number, at
one time, but varying by succession; because the Scripture attributes unto
him, things which cannot agree to one only man. For the Apostle tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 7.
that this Mystery of iniquity was in working in his time: 1 John 4, 3.
to whom accords Saint John when he says, that he was even then in the
world. And yet the same Apostle shows, that he shall continue to the end of
the world, and shall be abolished by the presence of Christ; both which cannot
be truly spoken of any one man. Whereunto we may adioyne this, that that revolt
whereof the Apostle speaks, and of which Antichrist shall be the head, is
not a work of one or few years. Therefore we conclude, that this Antichrist
shall indeed be always one only person in number, reigning ordinarily: but
that this person shall be changed from time to time for the continuation of the
order. Even as in a Monarchy, one only at one time has the dominion, who
coming to fail, death seizes the living (as the ordinary phrase speaks) and
the next heir takes his place in the kingdom: or at least, another is
surrogated into the deads room by a new Election, as in the Empire. But the
Apostle speaks of Antichrist, as of one sole person, and not as of many,
because all these Seducers shall have but one end and aim, to wit, to reign
at their pleasure in the Church: so they shall maintain their tyranny by one
means, to wit, by false doctrines, and by false miracles.

2. The Author and Architect of Antichrists kingdom, The Author.
is Satan. For the Apostle says, that his coming shall be by the efficacy
of Satan: and in another place, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 9. 1 Timothy 4, 1. Apoc. 13, 4. Apoc.
18, 2.
he calls the doctrine of Antichrist, the doctrine of devils. In the
Apocalipse it is said, that the Dragon shall give his power to the Beast. And
that the great Babylon is the habitation of Devils, and the resort of every
unclean spirit. The which God will suffer in his just judgment, to the end,
that al those may perish, which received not the love of the truth, 2 These. 2,
11, 12.
that they might be saved; and that they might be damned which believed not the
truth, but took pleasure in iniquity.

The Religion.
3. That he shall be a Christian in name, but indeed shall oppose himself to
the doctrine of Christ, appears by that which the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians 2, 8
That he shall sit in the Temple of God. Apoc. 13, 11.
And Saint John, that the second Beast, that is to say, Antichrist, has two
horns like those of the Lamb, but speaks as the Dragon. Whereunto may be
referred that exclamation of S. Chrysostom: Chrysostom. him. 4^. in ma^t.
What is it that Antichrist shall not attempt, doing the works of Christ, and
performing the offices of Christians before Christians? ^o signify, that
Antichrist shall serve himself of the name of Christ, to fight against Christ,
and under that fair pretext, introduce his own pernicious Traditions amongst
Christians.

The habitatio^. Apoc. 17.9.
4. It cannot be denied, that Rome is pointed out to be the place of
^ntichrists habitation, seeing S. John tells us, that the whore is seated
upon seven hills, which has express relation unto Rome, called by the Ancients
(...), septicollis, a City situate upon seven hills. Witness this Verse amongst
infinite others: Propert.
Septem vrbs altu iugis, toti quae praesidet orbi. The high City on seven hills,
reigning over the whole world.

Which also is called Babylon, as succeeding to the ancient Babylon in
idolatry, pride, covetousness, and extreme cruelty against the Saints. Tertul.
aduer. Ind. and aduers. Marcion lib. 3.
And thus was it expounded by Tertullian long ago. For to what else can that
be applied, which is declared by S. John, that this Whore is set upon many
waters, Apoc. 17.1.15, 18.
which are so many Peoples, Multitudes Nations, and Tongues? And what is that
great City that reigns over the Kings of the earth, but Rom^, in ancient
time the Empress of the world? Yea, if we look to the local situation of
Rome, we shall find it in effect built upon many Waters: for it is built upon
Tyber, into the which (besides Fountains and small Brooks) two and forty
Rivers discharge themselves: Besides that, Rome was replenished in every part,
with Bathes, Fountains, and Conduite-pipes, to serve not only for the
necessity, but also for the curiosity and lasciviousness of the dwellers
therein.

5. His double power; one spiritual, another temporal, The power.
is signified unto us by that which S. John says, Apoc. 13, 11.
That the second beast had two horns; that is to say, a double power:
according to the ordinary manner of speaking in holy Scripture, where a horn
is taken for power, as may appear in many places of the prophecy of Daniel.
For this cause he foretells, that this same Beast shall exercise all the
power of the first Beast, that is to say, of the Roman Empire: and yet calls
him the false Prophet, which is a spiritual acculity. Like as in Ancient times
the Emperors themselves assumed to them not only the dignity Royal, but also
Pontifical, calling themselves Pontificis Maxima, Sovereign Highpriests. But
above all, this Spiritual Power is manifestly deciphered by S. John, Apoc.
9.1. I saw a Star, that fell from heaven on the earth, and to it was given
the Key of the bottomless pit: and it opened the bottomless pit, and a smoke
arose out of the pit, as the smoke of a great Furnace: and the sun and the air
were darkened with the smoke of the pit: and out of the smoke of the pit, issued
forth Locusts on the earth: and to them was given power like unto the power
which Scorpions have on the earth. And after, speaking of these Locusts, he
says, that they had over them for their King, the Angel of the bottomless
pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, that is to say,
Destroying. For we know, that the Spirit of God is accustomed to design
Bishops and Pastors of the Church by the name of ^ngels, Mal. 3.1. Apoc. 3.20.
and of Stars, Apoc. 1.20. So that this Star falling from heaven, denotes
out a Bishop or Pastor, abandoning the preaching of heavenly doctrine, and
reuolting from the purity of the Gospel. The key is a spiritual power of
binding and loosing, as is manifest by the words of our Savior Christ, Mat.
16 19. And the bottomless pit is a profundity of ^hicke and abominable
darknesses, frauds, errors, and superstitions. So that this Bishop arrogating
to himself the key of the bottomless pit, that is to say, an absolute power,
to teach, decree, and establish at his pleasure all sorts of errors, without
the authority of holy Scripture, is by good right called the King or the Angel
of the bottomless pit, in Hebrew Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, that is to
say, destroying: which is the same title that the Apostle gives unto
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians 2.
calling him the son of perdition.

Divine honors. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 4.
6. That he shall carry himself in the Church of God as if he were God; the
Apostle teaches when he says, That he shall sit in the Temple of God,
carrying himself as if he were God. For by the Temple of God we cannot here
understand any thing else but the Church, which is the true Temple, and the
house of God: seeing that the Temple of Jerusalem having been destroyed by the
Romans, 1 Timothy 3. Dan. 9, 26, 27.
must never be reedified according to the prophecy of Daniel. And as touching
this sitting whereof the Apostle makes mention, it does not simply signify a
situation of body, as if he should only have place, and sit in the Church: but
also power and dominion after the manner of holy Scripture. As when God the
Father says to his Son, Psalm. 110, 1.
Sit thou at my right hand; the Apostle expounds it thus: 1 Cor. 15, 25
That he must reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet. And in
the same sense it is, that Babylon her self swollen with unsupportable pride
vaunteth herself in these words; I sit being a Queen, and am no widow and
shall see no mourning. Apoc. 18, 7.
Where in few words she glories of four prerogatives which are so famous at
this day: to wit, of her Seat or Chair, her Royal authority, her Succession,
and perpetual durance.

Miracles.
7. Touching Antichrists Miracles and what they shall be, we have the Apostles
express testimony: That his coming is by the efficacy of Satan, 1 Thessalonians. 2,
9.
in all power, and signs and lying wonders. Whereunto accords that which is
spoken by S. John, Apoc. 13.13, and 16.14. Concerning the spirits of devils
issuing out of the mouth of the false Prophet, and working wonders before the
Kings of the earth.

8. His Idolatry is represented by that wine of fornication, Idolatry. Apoc.
17, 2.
wherewith the great whore shall make drunk the Inhabitants of the earth: as
an insatiable Strumpet, that with her Sorceries and Loue-potions enflameth her
lovers. And this according to the instance of holy Scripture, which oftentimes
calls Idolatry by the name of Fornication; as when the Prophet Esaias cries
out: Esaias 1, 21.
How is the faithful City become an harlot? And the Lord vpbraydeth his
people, that they had employed the Gold and Silver which he had given them, to
the making of themselves Idols: Ezech. 16, 17
with the which they had committed fornication. The Spirit of God tearming
Idolatry by this name, not only for that it is a perfidious treachery against
the true Spouse of our souls: but also because ordinarily it is accompanied
with all outward filthiness, and unbridled luxury; as was to be seen in the
ancient Babylon of the East, and is foretold of the Western spiritual
Babylon, the seat of Antichrist.

9. Ambition.
His ambition has heretofore been notoriously discovered, and is most
evident in this; because he must exalt himself above all that is called God.
For if he lifts up himself against God, how will he spare Kings and
Magistrates, Psalm. 82, 1. Apoc. 13, 12. Apoc. 13, 15.
to whom the Scripture also gives the title of Gods? And also in this, that he
shall usurp the power of the first beast in his presence: that is to say, the
dominion of the Empire, in the view and knowledge of the Emperors. Besides
that he shall take to himself authority to give a soul to the first beast:
that is to say, Vid. Bonha. Aret. and ali^s in Apoc.
to authority and confirm the new Emperors substituted by him in the room
of the old, whose election he holds void without his approbation.

10. Cruelty. Apoc. 17, 6.
Antichrists cruelty is figured by the woman made drunk with the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs of Jesus Christ.

11. And his impurity, Impurity.
by the names of Sodom and Egypt, and of Babylon. Apoc. 11.8, and 14.8. and
19.2.3.

12. Discovery.
That he ought to be revealed and affeebled in the last times, by the
preaching of the Gospel: may be proved first by that of the Apostle, Then
shall this wicked man be revealed in his time, 2 These. 2, 6, 8
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth. For what is this
spirit of Christ's mouth, but the word of the Gospel? The which the Lord has
drawn out of darkness into light in these last times: as when the Prophet
says, Psalm. 33.6.
That the Heavens were made by the word of the Lord, and all the host of them
by the breath of his mouth. And when Esaias says, That God will smite the earth
with the rod of his mouth, Esaias. 11.4.
and slay the wicked with the breath of hi^ lips. And when the Son of God
denounces against these that follow the doctrine of the Nicholaitans, Apoc.
2.16.
That he will fight against them with the sword of his mouth.

Secondly, it may be proved by that which S. John speaks concerning the fall
of Babylon, A^oc. 14.8.
and the revolt of those very same from her, which had given the kingdom to
the beast: who conceiving hatred against her, shall make her desolate and
naked. Apoc. 17.17
For albeit that in all ages ever since the conception and birth of Antichrist,
God has raised up faithful witnesses that have courageously set themselves
against his abominable Idolatries and corruptions: notwithstanding so it is,
that the principal dissipation of his kingdom is reserved till the last
times. The which is plainly represented in the Apocalipse, by those three
Angels; one of which carrying an everlasting Gospel, Apoc. 14.6.7.8.9.
calls men to the fear of God, because the hour of his judgment was come.
another proclaims and publishes the fall of Babylon. And the third,
aduertiseth men of the wrath of God, against all them that shall worship the
beast and his Image; or take his mark on their forehead, or in their name. To
the which three Angels, two other are joined with like denunciations. Chap. 8.
For what are all these Angels, but the true Doctors and Teachers of the New
Testament; who publishing with a loud voice in the Church the Gospel of the
eternal ^on of God, dispose men to the obedience thereof, and arm them with
the sword of Gods word to the destruction of Antichrist.

Destruction.
13. Lastly that the total destruction of this man of sin is reserved til the
glorious coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Apostle declares when he says,
2 Thessalonians. 2.
That he shall abolish him by the brightness of his coming: to which
answers very fitly the representation of S. John, That the beast, and the
false Prophet, that is to say, the troup of Teachers, Priests, and Supporters
of Antichrist; (for the word false Prophets is thus taken collectiuely, as we
use to speak in schools, for all the false Prophets, and Seducers, which
shall authorize and uphold the doctrine of Antichrist;) shall be cast alive
into the Lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented day and night for
evermore. And the residue of his followers shall be sl^ine with the sword of
the mouth of him that was mounted upon a horse: that is to say by this
sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, pronounced by the mouth of the
Son of God, represented by Saint John as a Monarch triumphing in judgment over
all his enemies.

I might add here many other qualities by which the son of perdition is
marked out in ^oly Scripture, and also amplify those which are recited. But I
suppose that the matters fore specified, being out of all controversy amongst
spirits not contentious, are sufficient to make this beast to be known to the
claw, and to lead us by his footsteps unto his den.

The Second Treatise. The Application of the definition of Antichrist to the
Pope of Rome.
THis is a Maxim received of all, that when the definition and properties of
any thing belong to a Subject, then the name also, and all that is thereby
signified belongs to the same Subject. So that if we make known that all
that which we have reported out of holy Scripture concerning Antichrist, do
properly and singularly agree to the Pope of Rome; no man can deny, but that he
is properly that Antichrist, whose communion we ought with all our heart to
detest, at least if we desire to be received into the communion of Jesus Christ.

But when we say that the Pope is Antichrist, and that Rome is his seat, we
do not mean that all those that have been Bishops of Rome since the Apostles
times have been Antichrists: we would in no case wrong those holy Lights which
have shined bright in it in the primitive Ages, when this Church was set forth
unto others, as a rare example of holiness and purity, in doctrine, and
manners, and constancy of martyrdom: But this is it we affirm, that all the
Popes of Rome, About the year. 605.
since the time that Antichrist has been revealed, and begun his kingdom,
are this very Antichrist of whom we have before discoursed: And that Rome is
the seat of Antichrist, since the time that it began to war against the
Saints. About the year. 1073.
And if any demand when that time was; we answer, that it was then when Pope
Boniface the third obtained of the Emperor Phocas, a murderer of his Master,
the title of universal Bishop or head of all Churches. But after a singular
manner, when the Popes to the end to establish their spiritual tyranny, served
their turns more furiously with the temporal sword against Kings and Nations.
As above all in the time of Gregory the seventh, before surnamed Hildebrand,
who filled Christendom with murders, seditions, sackings, and turboyles by
those bloody wars, which he moved against the Emperor Henry the fourth.
For albeit that the mystery of iniquity begun to advance forward in the
Apostles time, whereof we have a notable figure in the Harlot Iezabel mentioned
Apoc. 2. nevertheless the simplicity of the Pastors of the Church, and of the
faithful and their zeal, to preserve the Evangelical purity, with held (as
the Apostle speaks) this man of sin, from spewing out his poison openly:
besides the puissance of the Roman Empire which was then in fullest vigor,
suffered him not to lift up himself in that arrogant power, which he has
phantasied to himself since that time. But when this simplicity Evangelical
began to decline, both in the hearts of the Pastors, and in the Church in
general: and on the other side, the Roman Empire began to be weakened by the
invasion of the Goths and other Nations, which coasted upon it on every part;
then this son of perdition began by little and little to establish his power
even in the sight, and under the nose of the Emperors: In such sort
notwithstanding, that this was not done without opposition and resistance, and
particularly in respect of the Bishop of Constantinople, who in the time of
Gregory the first, assumed to himself the title of universal Patriarch, and a
primacy over all other Churches: which practice was afterward defeated and
stifled by the Emperor Phocas. But howsoever the Popes for this effect and
purpose often abused the spiritual sword, yet they took not up the temporal
sword until Gregory the seventh, Apolog. of the league, published An. 1106.
who (as an Author of that time speaks) was the first that girt himself with
a warlike sword against the Emperor, and gave thereof an example to other
Popes. So that we affirm and avouch, that since the time of Gregory the first,
the Pope is he to whom the definition of Antichrist agrees: but whose
dominion and cruelty has been more manifested to the world, since Gregory the
seventh. And now behold our reasons.

The Pope is a singular man.
1. First, he is a man that by a continued order and succession, reigns over
many people, nations, and languages.

That calls himself Christ's vicar.
2. He vaunteth himself of the title of a Christian, yea he calls himself
the Vicar of Jesus Christ: he reteyneth the sacred Bible, and those that at
this day show themselves as the principal instruments of his kingdom,
ambitiously take to themselves the title of the society of Jesus; but in very
deed, he is wholly contrary to Christ and his doctrine. To Christ: for he
robs him of his principal Offices, as of the head of the Church, the Prince
of Pastors, the Sovereign High-Preist: Heb. 7.23.24.
an office which cannot be attributed to any, save to him that lives for
ever, yet he arrogateth it to himself, Bell. de sum Pontifi lib.
not forbearing the very name of the husband and spouse of the Church, though
it be so, that the names which are given unto Christ to signify the strait
union and conjunction betwixt him and the Church, as those of the head and
spouse are incommunicable. For what creature is there, which without blasphemy
can assume to it self in respect of the Church that which is the property of a
head, to wit, to reign over the body, to govern it, and to give sense,
motion, and life to every member thereof? If amongst men any man should name
himself the husband of a woman, whom he knew to be coupled to another husband
by lawful marriage, should he not give to the true husband of that woman matter
of jealousy, and just cause to revenge by all means such a lawless attempt?
And dare any mortal man, in this sacred mystery of the conjunction of the
heavenly spouse Jesus Christ with his Church, open his mouth in blasphemy to
parragon himself with Christ, in calling himself with him the Churches
Spouse, without considering that a crime of that nature must needs be
abominable before God and the Saints? Sure the Apostle would not have us
joined to any other husband, save to him who by his infinite love giving
himself to death for us, Romans 7.4.
is risen again; to the end that we might bear fruit unto God, and for this
cause he thus speaks to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 11.2.
I am jealous of you with a godly jealousy: for I have appropriated you to one
only husband, that I might present you as a chaste virgin unto Christ. As for
other Titles which are referred to the Ministry, by the which Christ works
effectually by his Ministers, as are the titles of a Pastor, or Doctor, they
may well be communicated unto others: but yet this cannot be either
Soueraignely or Universally over the Church. But as S. Cyprian has well said,
Cyprian de simplic. pralat.
It is but one Bishopric, whereof a Portion is solidly assigned to every
Bishop.

As touching Doctrine, he utterly ouerturneth that; But destroieth his
Doctrine.
for not to speak of those ancient Heretical Popes, Liberius an Arrian,
Honorius a Monothelite, Anastasius a Nestorian; or of others that have erred in
the principal Articles of Christian Religion, as John 22. thinking amiss of
the souls immortality: the bare and only comparing of the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, with that which is at this day received in the Papacy, shall
determine this matter.

For first, as touching the Scripture, Jesus Christ declares, that the
Commandment of God is made of no effect by the traditions of men, and that God
abhors that is offered unto him, Mat. 15.6.7.8. On the contrary, the Pope
teaches that traditions ought to be embraced with equa l affection of piety,
as the word of God, and the holy Scripture. Council Trid. Sess. 4.


Saint Paul calls the Gospel the power of God to all that believe, Romans 1
16. and says, That the whole Scripture is divinely inspired, and is profitable
to teach, convince, correct, and instruct according to righteousness, that the
man of God may be perfected and fully instructed to every good work. 2. Tim.
3.16.17. But the Pope teaches, that the Scripture is imperfect, ambiguous, a
leaden rule, a nose of wax, obscure, the book of Heretics, the cause of
errors: read the Treatise of Cardinal Peron touching Traditions, or of the
insufficiency of the Scripture: and Bellarmine De verbo Dei; and Charron in his
three verities, with others.

As concerning sin, the Scripture teaches us that Original sin is a
vicious habit, cleaving so close to our Nature, that it cannot be utterly
destroyed, no not in the Regenerate, so long as we live in this world. From
whence proceeds that complaint of the Apostle: That he was led captive to the
law of sin which was in his members; in such sort, that he cries out by way
of complaint, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? But the Pope teaches, that the gifts of Nature remained sound and
entire in man after his fall, and that Original sin is nothing but a
privation of that justice which ought to be in Nature. In brief, that this
sin is wholly washed away by Baptism, in such sort that there remains not
any thing in the Regenerate which may properly be called sin. Council. Trid.
Sess. 5. Council. Trid. sess. 5.
and all the Scholasticall Doctors.

The Apostle affirms in express words, that concupiscence is sin, Romans
7.7.
because the Law says, Thou shall not covet. The Law I say, that pronounces
every one accursed, That continues not in all things that are written in it to
do them. But the Pope denounces Anathema to him that shall call Concupiscence
properly sin in the Regenerate. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Council. Trid. Sess. 5.

The Scripture says absolutely, That the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23.
and that he that fails in one point of the Law is guilty of the whole Iam
2.10. But the Pope denies that death is the wages of all sin: but declares,
that there are venial sins as well as mortal.

Touching Freewill: the Scripture teaches us, That the very wisdom of the
flesh is enmity against God. Romans 8.7. and, That the Natural man perceives
not the things that are of the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2.14. and, That all the
imaginations of man's heart, are nothing but evil continually. Genesis 6.5. So
that in our flesh dwells no good. Romans 7.18. But the Pope quite contrary
teaches, that there remains in man after his fall a native faculty to
cooperate with God by Freewill, for the disposing of himsefe to the great
Justification. Council. Trid Sess 6. and all their Doctors.

Touching Justification wherein consists the principal foundation of our
salvation; there is no whit less repugnance: For first, the Scripture makes
the efficient cause of our Justification and Salvation to be God alone,
according to the good pleasure of his Will, his Mercy, and Eternal purpose in
Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9. ^phes. 1^, and 2.4, 5. Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. o.
7. Bell. de Iustif. lib. 1. Biel. in sentent. etc.
But directly contrary the Pope says, that there that is in man a certain
preparation unto Justice, by the which he disposes himself to his
Justification by the natural strength of his Freewill, so that he is able to
merit of God, Ex congruo, of congruity, as they speak. Secondly, the Scripture
propounds unto us for the material cause and foundation of our
Justification, the only obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 4.16. and
Christ himself is called our Righteousness, Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 7. Bell.
de Iustif. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Ier. 23.6. 1 Cor 1.30. and we are said to be made the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. But the Pope makes the material cause of our
Justification to be the soul of man wherein righteousness is inherent, as in
it proper subject and seat, whereunto they refer the dispositions of
Freewill; by the which (they say) a man does acquire the gift of
Justification. Thirdly, the Scripture teaches that the formal cause of our
Justification is the free imputation of the righteousness and satisfaction of
Christ, which we apprehend by Faith, and by that means are reconciled unto
God. Romans 4.24, 25. and 5.10. whence it comes, that the Scripture so often
affirms that we are justified by Faith, Romans 3.24.25. and that not only in
respect of the beginning of our Justification, but also of the consummation and
finishing thereof, which is eternal life and salvation. Romans 1.16.17. Council.
Trid. sess. 6. ^an. 9. 1^ and cap. 7. Bell. de Iustif. ^ib. 2. cap. 2.
But the Pope in opposition to the Spirit of God, denounces Arathema against
whomsoever shall say, that we are justified by Faith alone, or that we are
justified or formally made just by the Justice of Christ, by which he has
merited for us. So that he places the formal cause of our Justification in
an inherent quality in our selves, and in our own Justice.

The Scripture teaches, that the salvation of all Believers in our Lord Jesus
Christ is certain and assured. Romans 8.37.38. even to that, that he which
doubts, can obtain nothing of God. Iam. 1.6. On the contrary, Council. Trid.
sess 6. c. 9 and ca^. 13.
the Pope denounces Anathema against him that shall say, that we ought to
believe without doubting that his sins are forgiven, and calls this
confidence of the remission of our sins vain, and far from piety.

The holy Scripture witnesses, that it is impossible to fulfill the Law, and
consequently that we ought not to hope for salvation, or righteousness, by the
obedience which we render unto the Law. Romans 8, 3. Gal. 2, 16. Act. 15, 10. But
the Pope denounces Anathema against him, that shall affirm that a man cannot
perfectly keep the Law of God. Council Trid sess. 6. cap. 11. and Can. 18.
Yea more, he not only teaches that a man may perform the Law, but also do
something more then the Law requires. Whence spring their works of
Supererogation, and their treasures of Indulgences mentioned in the Council of
Trent. Council Trid sess. 21. cap. 9.
And whereas they deny, that that great work of Supererogation, which the
Son of God added by his death to the active obedience which he rendered to
God for us to the Law, is imputed unto us for righteousness: yet he dares
notwithstanding affirm, that the works of Supererogation of the Saints are
imputed unto us, by his Jubilees and indulgences: and by this means robbing
Christ of his Glory, (...) gives it to his Idols.

Saint Paul places amongst the doctrines of devils, (...) prohibition of
marriage, and the commandment to abstai^ (...) from meats. 1 Timothy 4, 1, 2, 3.
and calls the abstinence from meats and the distinction of days, Shadows,
Rudiments of ^he world, and Doctrines of men. Col. 2, 16, 17, 20, 22. In all
which things a power of meriting with God, is placed by the Pope.

The Scripture says that marriage is Honorable amongst all men, And the bed
undefiled, but that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Lig^is. Eckins.
B^l^de monac^ lib 2. cap. 30.
Heb. 13, 4. But the doctrine of the Popes, that it is better for a Priest to
be a Whoremaster, then to be married. Yea, some of them is not ashamed to say,
that the use of married women ought to be common, as well is of the air and of
the Sun. Cans. 12. ^^.


In sum, it would be a subject of no small Treatise, such as we intend this
shall be, but of a great volume, to rehearse at length al doctrines of the
Papacy, touching Images, fained-Gods, Indulgences, Purgatory, and a number such
like things, which are directly contradictory to the word of God.

3. Now if any desire, He is accompanied with the efficacy of Satan.
to understand how Satan has bestirred himself and wrought in the
establishing of the Papal kingdom, let him read that which is written by
Cardinal Benno, concerning those Popes which reigned after Siluester the
second: or if he will, Platina the Popes Secretary: and he shall soon see how
many Popes gave themselves to the devil, that they might obtain this dignity
of a worldly Prince; that I may not stuff this Treatise with a recital of
their wretched lives.

4. That the Pope has his seat at Rome, there is none so ignorant that
knows not: Has his seat at Rome.
for albeit it it has been some^^^ ^ffered to another part, as to Auignon:
nevertheless (...) but seldom, and that out of order. And that (...) ^mpasse
of many ages, does in manners an^^ (...) ^^bylon which is figured in the
Apocalipse. (...) ^ges, that have either read the writings (...) ^cace, with
the Satyrs of Ariosto and o^ (...) their own eyes beheld the debauche^ (...)
of the Popes Court. Witness he, who (...) bids it adieu in this Distick ^a
vale, vids, satis est vidisse, reuertar,
Cum leno, meretrix scurra, cynedus ero.
O Rome farewell, I have thee seen, and that is enough for me:
I will return, when bawd, whore, knave, buggerer I mean to be.


Yea not so much as the Author of the gloss upon the Decretalls but speaks
of it in as plain terms. Glos. 1. de El^it in. 6. c. fundament.
Rome (says he) founded by thieves, retains yet the seeds of her beginning.
For it was called Roma, as if one should say, Rodens manus, gnawing hands:
whereupon he cites this verse which out of Latin loses it grace.

Roma manus rodit, quos rodere non valet, odit.
Rome gnaweth hands, and those she cannot gnaw,
With hatred she pur^ues, and keeps in aw.
Has both a spiritual and a temporal power.
5. The Pope challenges to himself a double power, one Spiritual, another
Temporal; which to be so, Pope Boniface labors to prove after a most
impud^nt manner. In this Power (says he) there are two Swo^d^, the Spiritual
and the Temporal, which we are taught by the woe ds of the Gospel: Extra de
Ma^^^. et obe ^^c. vna^ Sa^ctam.
for where the Apostle said, behold two Swords here; that is to say, in the
Church, our Savior Christ does not answer them thus, These are too many, but,
It is enough. And certainly he that denies the Temporal s^o d to be in the
power of S. Peter, does not well consider the words of our Savior, when he
says, Put up thy Sword into thy sheath. In brief, the Pope does so openly lay
claim to the Monarchy of both powers, Spiritual, and Temporal, that the
Author of the Books entitled, Thom. de regni Princip. lib. 3. cap. 10.
The government of Princes, which are amongst the Works of Thomas Aquinas,
calls the Pope both King and Priest, As our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
And Bellarmine who in this point is so modest that he min^^th the Popes
temporal Soueraign^ty to Indirectly: Bell. de Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 6. et 7.
yet affirms that he has power to change Kingdoms, by taking them from
one, and giving them to another. And whereas the ancient Christians did not put
in practice this power, in de^posing Nero and Dioclesian persecuters, Julian
the Apostate, Valens the Arrian, and such like, it was (says he) because they
had not in their hands sufficient Temporal forces, Gregor. epist. lib. 7 ep. 1.
though they wanted not the right to do it. Far from the modesty of Gregory
surnamed the Great, who speak^ng of the Lumbards that were Arrians said; If I
that am their servant would have intermedled with the death of the Lumbardes,
at this day the Nation of the Lumbardes had had neither King, nor Duke, nor
Count: but because I fear God, I fear also to meddle with the death of any
mar. And of S. Amb^ose, Ambro. in orat. cont. ^ux cut.
who in encounter to the barbarous Goths says: My tears are my weapons: such
are the defenses of Priests, otherwise I may not, I cannot resist. In fine, as
this Boniface the eight was not sparing of words to authorize his usurpation,
so he was no less audacious, to represent the same in ceremonies and deeds.
For it is recorded, how in that great Iubile, which he celebrated in the year
1300. he sets forth himself the first day in his Pontifical habit, giving
his benediction to the people: and the next day, came forth adorned with a
crown, and the Imperial vestiments, causing a naked sword to be carried
before him. Breefly, to this usurped power, appertains that pretended
donation of Constantine so often brought upon the stage by the Popes: Laurent.
Valla de falso credita et ementita Constant, donat.
the which Laurentius Valla a Senator of Rome so plainly conuinceth of
salsity. And an Italian Poet sends to the country of the Moon together with
the alms which are made for the dead: and Roulands wit, answerable to that
Elogie which the Scribe that wrote the original copy now kept in the Vaticane
Library, in letters of gold, Ari^st. Cant. 34.
added thereunto in his barbarous g^^bridge.

Quam fabulam longi temporis mendacia finxit,
A fable which an old aged lie has forged.
6. The Pope also sits in the Church: Carries himself in the Church as if
he were God.
for he braggeth of nothing more then of his seat and chair: neither is his
manner of government designed ordinarily by any other word then by sitting:
insomuch, that when they count the years of their Popes, they say he sat so
long in the Apostles seat. In brief, they sight and contend for nothing so
much as for the pretended chair or seat of Saint Peter, directly contrary to
the manner of speaking used in holy Scripture, whereby the ministers and
seru^nts of God, yea the Angels themselves, are said stare, to stand, and wait
before God, as servants before their master to receive his commandments, and
not to be set as they reigned and commanded. Thus the Pope fits in the Church,
and that he sits as if he were God, appears by his usurpation of the name,
the power, and works of God: from the name of God, Did. 96. cap. satis.
euidenter.
which he says was given him by Constantine the Emperor, he concludes that
he cannot be judged by any power; because God cannot be judged by men. D^
E^^ct. cap. fundam in sexto.
And so also the gloss speaks, that the Pope is not man, but calls him
admirable, which is the title of the Son of God: The Pope, Papa (says it) is
called admirable, from the interiection Pa^^, Esaias. 9. In pr^^^ C^^.
which signifies admiration, and indeed he i^ admirable for he holds the
place of God upon earth: which made the Engli^h Poet in his late poesy to say,
-- Tu maxim rerum
Nec d^u^ es, nec homo quasi neuter es inter vtrumque
O thou that art the greate^t of all things create,
Art neither G^d nor man, but twixt both situate.


Extr. ne sid^ vacan^^ O si siatrum.
As touching power, he himself says: That God has committed unto him the
rights of the heavenly and earthly Empire: In the Council of Laterane he
suffers himself to be titled, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of
David, the Savior, De con^ess. preb C^propo^^i^^i.
etc. and in the ^6 Session of that Council, he permitt^d that sentence,
which is proper to the Son of God, to b^ attributed unto him: All power is
given unto me, both in heaven and in earth. G^s^^^b. f^^. Exer. (...) ^nter.
D^st. 1^. C. R^^an^tum.
The gloss says, that he can make any thing of nothing: It calls him,
Dominum deum nostrum papam, our Lord God the Pope. He assumeth to himself the
pow^^ to g^^e authority to the word of God: The old and the new Testament
(says he) ought to be received, not because they are in the volume of
Canonical writings, but because the h^ly Pope Innocent, seems to have
decreed that they should be received. It is strange to see what sport he
makes with the holy Scripture, for the establishing of his earthly
Sovereignty. God says he has made two great lights in the firmament of
heaven, C^s^^ d^ ma^^r^^ (...) obe^.
the greater to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night: both great, yet
one greater then the other: God therefore the firmament of heaven, that is, for
the universal Church, has made two great lights: that is to say, has
ordained two dignities, the authority Pontifical, and the power Royal: but
that which bears rule over the day, that is in spiritual things, is by far
the greatest: and that which rules over carnal things, the less: Insomuch
that we may acknowledge as much d^fference betwixt Popes and Kings, as there is
betwixt the Sun and the Moon. Where the gloss adds, that according to
Ptolomy the Sun exceeds the Moon in greatness, seven thousand seven hundred
forty four times. So that it is no wonder, if Pope Alexander durst set his
foot upon the Emperor, neck, lying prostrate on the ground, uttering withal
this verse of the 91. Psalm, Thou shall walk upon the Basili^^ and the Ass
and the Lion and the Dragon s^alt thou tread upon; s^^ing he^d b^seth them so
lo^^ under his Holiness. Thus we read in the book of ceremonies, Lib. 1.
Cerem^n. ^ontis. C. 7.
That the Pope on the night of Christ's nativity, blesses a sword, and then
gives it to some Prince, in sign of the infinite power giu^n to himself,
according to that sentence of the Gospel, All p were is given unto me both in
heaven and earth, and he shall re^^ne from sea to sea, and from the floods to
the worlds e^d. Further, besides all this, the Pope by Canonization makes
Saints at his pleasure, as the Roman Senate used in former times to make Gods.
And that which is above all, (...) it b^ God only that throneth and dethroneth
Kings, as ^^firmeth the Prophet Daniel, and reigns over the kingdoms of men,
and bestows them on whom he pleases, and that it belongs to him only to
write with his finger, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin, Dan. 5, 25.
as he that only does calculate kingd^mes, and weigh them in the balance, and
dispose of ^^em: nevertheless, the Pope arrogateth this power and authority to
himself, to depose Emperors and Kings, to change Kingdom, and States, and to
bestow them where he l^^t: a^ is not only apparent by the challenge made by
himself in his decrees, but also by the manifold examples recited by Cardinal
Bellarmine at large hereof. Bell. de sum. Pontif. lib. 5. C. 8.
So that it is most probable that the Legate that came not long since into
France, to induce that form of practice into that kingdom, which was
practiced upon the kingdom of Navarre, was assisted by him, and had taken
place, if God (who is the protector of Kings and kingdoms against all vn^ust
powers) had not turned aside this blow by his mighty hand. Now we say further,
that the Pope exercises his tyranny in the Church of God: for albeit that the
Papacy be neither the true Church, nor a sound member of the same:
nevertheless there was on^^ a tru^ Church in that place where the Pope has
now established his seat, and as yet to this day the name remains, and
certain traces and footsteps thereof, as well by the Sacrament of Baptism,
which God has still preserved therein as by the holy Scriptures which are
there received, and by the pure doctrine of the T^^^ity still professed and
maintained by them.

Works lying (...).
7. Conc rning miracles, we may find an infinite number registered in the lives
of their Popes: but such I dare say, that a man may easily know in what shop
they were forged. Thus we read, that the Sepulcher of Pope Siluester the
second (who was promoted to the Popedom by diabolical Arts, and dyed at the
^ame time that was defined unto him by the devil, gives c^^taine sign of the
death of other Popes, either by a clattering of bone^ heard in the grave, or by
one sweat and moisture which it cast^th forth. Gregory the seventh, formerly
called Hildebrand, cast the Sacrament of the Lords body into the fire, that he
might have thereby some divine answer or sign against the Emperor Henry the
fourth. Benn^ Ca^din, in vita Hildebrand^.
The same Hildebrand (says Cardinal Benno) when he lifted would shake his
sleeves, and thereout cause to issue sparks of fire; and by these, and such
like miracles, as by certain marks of his sanctity, abused the eyes of the
simple people. And when a the devil could not openly persecute Christ by the
Pagans, he l^boured fraudulently to subvert the name of Christ by this false
Monk, under the habit and app^arance of Religion. Benno. ^^^d.
^ennet the ninth, giving himself to the sacrifices of devils in woods and
forr^s^s, made women to run after him, and to be inamored of him by his
Magical Art. ^l ^n^ ^^^ta G^egor. ^.
Gregory the sixth, as Platina reports, being sick of that sickness whereof
he dyed, called to him the Cardinals, and reproved them for that, in I know
what envy they found fault with those things which he had holily and justly
done: And to the end (says he) that you may know after I am dead, whether I
have done well or evil, set my body within a Church, the doors fast locked,
and if the doors open of themselves by the only will of God, judge me worthy
of Christian sepulture; but if it happen otherwise, cast my body where you
will, as being damned together with my soul. Which request of his, the
Cardinals obeying, the Church do^res opened of their own accord, with a great
wind, that suddenly arose: and so his body was buried within the Church, not
without great admiration and opinion of his holiness. And yet this Gregory the
sixth, was one of Hildebrands Masters in the Art of Magic, as is recorded by
Benno. And it was he to whom Bennet the ninth had sold he Papacy for ready
money: which notwithstanding he was constrained to quit and give over by Henry
the fourth: as also two other like pernicious Monsters, Bennet the ninth, and
Siluester the third. But what need I to heap up together a long R^ll of such
particular miracles of Popes, seeing all those which we find in their golden
Legends, the Chronicl^s of S. Francis, and the lives of their Saints, were
forged by the idle spi^its of lazy Monks, to no other end but to authorize
the Pope and his doctrine against the divine truth of holy Scriptures.

8. Is an Idolater.
The Idolatry of the Pope is no whit less palpable then hi^ former qualities;
Council. Trid. s^ss. 21. dec. 2. Ibid sess. 5. art. 5. e^sess. 5. can. 25.
Mary's psalter. ^mp^at paris. an. 16 n^ fol. 34, 69, 8^, 90, 91, etc.
for he not only communicates the worship of God to the Saints, and in a
special manner to the blessed virgin Mary, whom sometimes they make equal to
the Son of God, by exemption from all sin, and anon lift her up above her
Son, when they thus cry unto her: Show thy self a Mother, and by the right
of motherhood command the Redeemer. And when they exalt her even to the throne
of the Divine Majesty, calling her the Queen of Heaven, the Queen of Angels,
and say, that the Heaven, the Earth, the Air, and the Sea worships her, and
that her power and her mercy are infinite. Council. Trid. sess. 25. dec. 1.
But that which is more abominable, he divides the honor of God, with dead
bones, with Relics, and Images; yea, and with men, whose acts give just cause
to presume, that they are rather tormented in hell, then glorified in heaven:
or with Idols that never were, and consequently are by their own definition
true and absolute Idols. For what shall we say of S. George whom the Church of
Rome inuocateth and adoreth amongst the holy Martyrs? Athan. Apol^^ 1^ de
sugas^^.
of whom notwithstanding S. Athanasius witnesses, that he was a wicked man and
an Arrian Heretic, who being sent for by the Emperor Constantius, by force of
arms seized upon the Bishopric of Alexandria: who afterward being put to
death by the Pagans in the time of Iu^^^n the Apostate, and his body burnt, and
ashes scattered in the wind, not for the confession of the name of Christ, but
for the outrage and violence which he had committed in his charge, Epiph
i^^aeres. 76.
as writteth Epiphanius; nevertheless was by some held for a Martyr, and the
History of his Martyrdom committed to writing by his heretical followers,
Gelas. ^^^cta Rom D^^t. ^5. Bar^^^ mar^y^^log. Roman.
as both Pope Gela^ius, and after him Baronius acknowledge: which last says,
that all the story of the acts of this George, was nothing else but a Fable
and invention of the Arrians. And yet this is that George, the iron of whose
Lance is va^nted of to be kept amongst the adored Relics at Rome. What shall
we say also of their S. Katharine, so famous amongst the Virgins of the Roman
Calendar; Osorius con^^d^ San^t Cathar. Legend. Aurea.
so that they place her next in rank to the Virgin Mary: whose legend
notwithstanding, is no better then a pure Fable? For where did we ever read of
a King Costus that reigned at Alexandria, whose daughter they make her to be,
or of an Emperor Maxentius in that Country, by whose judgment they say, she
was put to death? I know well that they think to escape this blame of
Idolatry by answering that they reserve only unto God the worship of L^tria,
and afford unto Creatures that only of Dulia. But this is a vain and
deceitful star^ing stole: for they ascribe this worship of Latria which is
proper only unto God, Concis. T^^d. sess. 13. cap. 5.
not only to the Sacrament of the Eucharist; the which in a more then Pagan
superstition they carry about in their Processions to be adored as God, and
cause it to march before the Pope, as the Persians carried fire, which they
held for God, before their Kings: But also to the Cross of Christ, and this
Image thereof, whether in Wood, or in Stone, ^in any other matter: Thom. 8. n.
p. 3. q. 25 Art. 4. et Ca^et. Ibid.
Directing their speech and prayer vn^it as to himself that was, as says
their Thomas: according (...) may be heard and seen in that Hymn which they
vsual^^^ sing unto it: O crux, aue spes vnica, hoc passionis tempore, ^^ge pijs
iustitiam, reisque dona veniam.

^ll hayle, O cross, our only hope in this our time of passion,
^ncrease good men with righteousness, to sinners grant remission.
This is as the Idolaters persons reproved by the Prophet ^^remy used to do;
Ier. 2.27.
To say to a piece of wood, Thou art my Fa^^er and to a stone, Thou have
begotten me.

9. He is ambitious.
The ambition of the Pope makes it self sufficiently ^howne by the excessive
honors which he requires of ^mperours and Kings: D st. 96. C. Co^stantinus.
if we will beleeu^ the Canon Con^antinus. The great Emperor Constantine
holding the ^ridle of Pope Siluesters Horse, served him as his Lackey or
^ootboy. Platina writes, that Pepin one of the Kings of ^^rance having kissed
the feet of Pope Steven the second, Platinum vita Stephan. 2.
per^ormed the same office unto him, which Constantine had done before to
Siluester. In the book of the Papal Ceremonies it ^s ordained, that all men
of what degree or dignity soever, when they come before the presence of the
Pope, Ceremen. Pontific lib. 3.
do three ^mes bend their knees before him, with distance of place ob^^rued
for each courtesy, and kiss his feet: and that Kings and Emperors hold his
stirrup, when he either mounteth or lights from his horse, and lead his Horse
by the bridle. And if he must leave his Horse, then that the Princes and
Emperors carry him on their shoulders; and that they hold the Basin when he
washes before meat, and bring in the first Mess to his Table. In brief, he
shows no reverence ^o any of what quality or dignity soever he be: only he
^ifteth himself up a little to kiss the Emperor. So great ^s his pride, that
when the Emperor Frederick presented ^imselfe to hold the stirrup of Pope
Adrian the fourth, and mistaking his office, held one for another; the Pope was
so incensed hereat, that this fault was like to have cost the Emperor ^^ill
dear; although he excused his error by this, that he was not as yet ^o well
expert in that service, as in time he might be. A title of this high ambition
is to be seen in that picture which Pope Innocent the second caused to be set
up in the Temple of Laterane, which represented the Pope sitting in his
Pontifical Chair, and the Emperor Letharius kneeling at his feet, and
receiving from him the Imperial Crown, with these two Latin verses.

Rex venit ante f^res, iuran^ prius vrbis honores,
Post homo sit Papae, sumit quo dante coronam.
See the Ec lesiast. History of Nich. V^gnier.
But his ambition will more clearly appear, by the ceremonies which are
observed at the Coronation of Emperors, as they are recorded by an Author that
lived about the year 1300. The manner (says he) how Emperors were
consecrated and crowned, was this: The Pope having taken an oath of the
Emperor that was to be, upon the staire, of the porch of Saint Peter's Church,
that he will faithfully defend the Church, and that which belongs to it,
maintain right Justice, and fully and entirely restore all the possessions of
S. Peter's patrimony, and the Church of Rome, if any thing be taken from it.
Then the Emperor and the Empress, are conducted by the Pope into the Church,
where during the Mass, which is celebrated with great solemnity, the Pope
annoynteth first the Emperor, and then the Empress, with the accustomed
formal words. Then sitting in his Pontifical Chair he holds the Crown
betwixt his feet, which the Emperor and the Empress bowing down their
heads, lift from his feet: and presently the Pope striking the crown with his
soote, casts it on the ground, off from the Emperors head; in sign that he
has power to depose them again if their merits require. And then (in like
manner) the Cardinals that stand round about, take the Crown and set it with
great reverence upon their heads. But how should a man better represent their
ambition, then by the words of their own flatterers? These be the speeches of
a Bishop, a chief officer to Pope Paul the second. Redoreicus, Zamerent
e^^sc^p. Castella^^t Refer e^a. p^. Pa^l. 2. in spec^l vit. human, L. 2. C. 1.
What should we think (says he) of this Sovereign Bishop, that possesses
the place of the true God on earth, who is lifted up to the fullness of power,
to the throne Apostolic, to the top of all honors? From whom as from their
fountain, issue all rivers, as branches from a tree; who is not only
established for h^mane Principality, but also for Divine: not only for command
over mortal creatures, and men; but also over the Angels: not only to judge
the living, but al o the dead: not only in earth but also in heaven: not only
to rule over Christians, but also Infidels. And to make short; who is ordained
and elevated by the Sovereign God, in his place, to the same Dignity,
Jurisdiction, Universal power, and Sovereign principality, over all the whole
world: of whom it is written in Job, that before him tremble those that bear
up the world, and that the Kings of the earth, and the Tyrants thereof are no
better then a laughing stock in his presence: and that he imbraceth all power,
and as the Scripture speaks, He is alone and there is no second. And again,
of him it is written, Thou art alone and there is none with thee: and again,
Mighty above all the mighties of the world: to whom (as witnesses the Prophet)
appertains Justice, Power, and Empire: and whom David signified, when he
said, To him is given power, and the kingdom, and all people and tongues shall
serve him. Thus this man enhancing the Popes dignity by one degree after
another, at last proves by Var^o, Cicero, Aristotle, S. Dionisius, and S.
Jerome that all order of things would perish, if there were not such a
sovereign High Priest, whom he not only prefers before stammering Moses
(so impudently he terms him) and before Aaron, but before Jesus Christ
himself, whom he robs of this prerogative, to offer up himself in
sacrifice for our sins, and attributes it to his Papal Idol.

10. Concerning his Cruelty. Is full of cru^^ty.
Who can recount without horror, the savage cruelty which Popes have exercised
one toward another? Pope Stephen the sixth, in a more then Neronian fury,
having caused the body of Pope ^ermosus to be drawn out of it is Sepulcher, P
atina in vt^a Stephen. 6.
and to be deuested of the Pontifical ornaments, commanded it to be burned
amongst the Laics, having first caused the two fingers of the right hand to
be cut off, which are used principally in the consecrating of Priests, that
they might be thrown into Tiber. But Pope Sergius the third, Id^^ vita ^erg^
3.
desirous to carry the prize of cruelty in this very subject, caused the same
body of Pormosu^, to be drawn again out of it is grave, eight years after
his death: and cutting off his head, as if he had been alive, commanded his
body to be cast into Tiber, as unworthy of burial. Benno in vita Gregor. 7.
Six Popes died of poison within the space of 13. years, by the practice of
Hildebrand, afterward Pope, by the name of Gregory the seventh: So that until
he himself was advanced to the Popedom, all in a rank were poisoned, by his
familiar friend Brazutus, as says Benno. This is the same Hildebrand, that
would have murdered the Emperor Henry the fourth, in S. Mary's Church in Mount
Auentine, if God had not defeated the blow by the death of him, whom he used
as the instrument of his villainy. By whose example Pope Sixtus Quintus learned
in our time to plead in favor and commendation of the Assasinates of Kings,
Ser. Six Quint. de Henrici 3. morte. habit. 11 Sept. an. 1 89 an Antisixt^.
as is manifest by that Oration which he made in the Consistory of Cardinals,
in praise of James Clement the murderer of Henry the third King of France:
whose act, with a mouth full of blasphemies, he dares compare with the work
of our Redemption. It is not unknown also, how poor Celestine was handled by
Boniface the eight, when by his cunning practice he was deposed from his
Papacy. In brief, there would be no end, if I should set forth all the
murders, assasines, and bloody wars, caused and raised up by Papal Schisms.
And what sorts of cruelties (I pray you) have they not made known to the
world, then when they banded themselves against the Emperors, either for the
defense, or increase of their Tyrannical power? What mischiefs have they not
procured, when they armed the West against the East, under pretense of
recovering the Holy Land? What butcheries did they execute upon those who were
called Waldenses, by their Croysadoes? And if we will draw nearer to our own
times, have we not seen all the Rivers of this Kingdom, stained with the
blood of those that made profession of the truth of the Gospel, shed by the
instigation and solicitation of the Popes? An. 1556.
Principally since the sending of that brave sword by Pope Paul the fourth, to
King Henry the second, which was as it were an ominous presage of the fury of
Gods wrath which he meant to power down, as well upon the King and his Lineage,
as upon the whole Kingdom. As in very deed, since that time, there has
nothing been seen but miseries, calamities, civil and forreyne wars, famines,
maladies, and other scourges of Gods divine Justice, that have followed and do
still follow, one in the neck of another every day. If any say, that all Popes
have not been thus transported with cruelty, blood, and butchery; I confess
as much: But yet, as he is no less cruel that poysoneth with Sugar, then he
that poysoneth with Gall: so neither are they less cruel that hale poor
souls to eternal perdition by a counterfeite show of sweetness, then they
that throw them headlong thereinto by force and violence. Yea, rather they are
more dangerous, that coming in sheeps clothing, insinuate themselves more
easily into men's minds, then they that openly showing themselves to be
wolves, make men suspicious of them by their behauiours.

11. The examples of the impurities of Popes, Full of inpurity.
are registered by all those that have written their lives and gests. It is not
unknown, how they permit public whoredom, and draw at Rome a great revenue
from the Stews. What need we to speak of this, when as that infamous kind of
impurity which is against nature, and incestuous copulations, cease not to
reign and rage amongst them? Nicholas of Bebrach borne in the City of
Erphord, has certified the world by public writing, that being at Rome in the
time of Pope Martine the fourth, Lui^pra^^^^.
(whom the Popes flatterers notwithstanding number amongst the most holy of the
rank) he was solicited by him, Plati^a.
to yield himself to serve him as his Ganimede in his pleasures. John the 13
was deposed from his Papacy by a Synod of Bishops assembled by the authority
of the Emperor Otho, for being a murderer, a Churchrobber, a perjured, and
incestuous person, an^ guilty of Whoredom. Idolatry, and Invocation of
devils. And in the end this monster (so Platina calls him) being surprised in
the act of Adultery, (...) ^ine.
was killed by the woman's husband whom he ab^^ed. Pope Alexander the sixth,
ab^sed his own daughter Lucretia, and had concurring with him in this incest,
his two sons: It was this Lu^^cee upon whose Tomb a certain Po^t writ this
notorious ^p^taph, Conditur hoc tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia sponsa, nuru^.


In sum, that I may not heap up together too many of their Villainies, that
which was spoken of one of the Popes, agrees to the most of them.

Matthew Pari^ of Innocent the fourth
'Eius auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis:
Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
Revealed in the e last times.
12. Now, after that many Kings and Princes had complained of the excessive
tyranny, insatiable avarice, and damnable debauchments of Popes, as Henry the
fourth, that reproched Gregory the seventh, Lib. de vnitat. eccles. conser^^.
To teach without the Doctrine of Christ, and to speak without the truth of
Christ: and as Antichrist to be exalted in his own heart, and to say, I am
God, and am set in the chair of God, to be a murderer of bodies and souls:
And the Emperor Frederick the second, who in one of his Epistles directed to
all the Prelates of Christendom, calls Gregory the ninth, the Father of
discord and desolation, Pet. de vinei^ lib 1. epist. 3^.
the great Dragon that seduceth the world Antichrist, a second Balaam, the
Angel rising out of the bottomless pit, having viols full of bitterness, to
hurt the Sea and the earth: And that the Waldenses had scattered the true
religion, in France, Germany Italy, and other places: teaching amongst other
points, that the Church of Rome, was the whore of the Apacalypse, Babylon
mother of fornications, and that the Pope was the head of these errors: Ex.
Relat. Iacobi de Riberia.
And after that, also many good men, too much affected to the errors of their
times, and dazzled with the brightness of the Papacy, were notwithstanding
constrained to cry out against the Court of Rome, and to paint forth in lively
colors the abominations thereof: as S. Bernard, Peter Belsensis Archbishop of
Roan, Bernard ser. 3. an Cant.
the passages of which Authors, are elsewhere to be seen at large: And
Arnulphus Archbishop of Lions, who for this cause was put to death at Rome
under Pope Honorius the second: I say, after all these, Pet. Belsens. epist. 25.
many there arose that passed a great deal further; Platina in vita Honor. 2.
for Michael Cesenas general Priour of the Gray-Friers, in the time of John
the 21. or 22. wrote directly against the Pope, and called him Antichrist, An.
325.
and the Church of Rome, with her Prelates, the whore of Babylon made drunk
with the blood of the Saints: said that there were two Churches, one of the
wicked which is flourishing, Vide Jacob. de Misnia lib. de a^uent. Antichristi.
1321.
where the Pope reigns; the other afflicted, which is of the faithful. About
this time, or little after, lived the renowned Italian Poet Dante, who in his
19. Sonnet of Hell, says (speaking of Pope Nicholas the third) that it was
he, of whom the Euangilist S. John intends to speak, under the name of the
Whore which sits upon many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth
committed fornication. The same Poet in his sixth Sonnet of Purgatory, makes
this complaint, That Rome had once the shining torch of two Suns, which made
the most ignorant better to understand, both the things of this world, and of
God: But that now the one has banished the other, the sword being joined to
the Pastoral staff, so that they cannot well go together, the one not
standing in awe of the other. If any believe not this (says he) let him judge
the tree by the fruit, and he will confess, that since the Church of Rome
consounded in her self the two powers, she is grown to all wickedness, and
destroys with herself the Commonwealth of Christians. About the year 1381.
Matthew Paris borne in Bohemia, composed a large Volume concerning Antichrist,
wherein he labors to prove, that he was already in the world, and that the
Pope was he: adding amongst other reasons this one, because according to his
ordinances, men worshipped the Saints as Saviors, and their Images and
relickes in stead of Jesus Christ. A Chanon of the City of Prage in Bohemia,
called Militsius, a Doctor of Theology, preached in the time of Pope Gregory
the eleventh, that Antichrist was already in the world, and that he reigned
visibly in the person of the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, who not teaching the truth, by their ambition and
negligence, made the Church desolate, filling it with temporal riches, and
despoyling it of spiritual. Insomuch, as having gained to himself many
Auditors and Disciples, the brute hereof came to the ears of Pope Gregory,
who excommunicated him. About this very time, Wicleffe began in England to
preach the pure doctrine of the Gospel, against the traditions of the Church
of Rome, not sparing it in his writings any more then the rest had done. This
man was followed by many others, as by name, by John Pourney an Englishman, who
writ a Commentary upon the Apocalipse, where he calls Rome the devils
Brothel-house, and the Church of Rome the Whore of Babylon. Then came John
Husse after the year 1400. who greatly promoted this doctrine, and lost his
life together with Jerome of Prage for the confession thereof, at the Council
of Constance. This was about that time when Pope John 23. having caused the
Croysado to be publ shed for the maintenance of war intended against
Ladislaus King of Naples: Aeneas Silvius Hist r. Bohem. cap 35.
when it came to be divulged at Prage, certain of the people cried out with a
loud voice, that the Pope was Antichrist, who ordained a Croysadoe against
Christians: which persons were presently clapped up in prison, but the people
arising in Arms, demanded them to be delivered and set free, and when they
were appeased by the Council, with promise of assurance of their lives, and so
returning to their houses, the prisoners were secretly put to death. But their
death was di covered by the blood that ran under the prison door: whereupon,
the people running again together, took away their bodies by violence, and
wrapping them in linen clothes, carried them through all the Churches in the
City, crying: These are the Saints that have delivered their bodies to death,
for the testament of God. Histor. Eccles. Nichol. Vignier.
Also about this time Manfrede of Versellas a Iacobin preached publicly, that
Antichrist was in the world. Hereof James of Misny wrote a book, as did also
Thedorick Vrias an Augustine Friar. Peter Clarke an Englishman maintained
publicly the same doctrine, for which cause being chased out of England, he
retired into Bohemia, where he composed a book against the Synagogue of
Antichrist, and in the end was burned for the same, An. 1433. Yea even diverse
of those that firmly adhered to the Church of Rome, yet in those times were
constrained to reprove an infinite number of errors and abuses that raged in
that Church: as Peter of Ally, Fascicul rerum ex^ttendarum.
or of Alliaco, Cardinal of Cambray: Gerson, Clem^^gis, and others that lived
about that Age: Clemang tr^act de ra^ace^ repar. eccles.
Insomuch as the foresaid Clemangis is bold thus to speak unto her: What
think thou of the Prophecy which is in the Apocalypse? do thou not believe
at least that it is directed against thee in some part? Thou have not so lost
thy shame together with thy understanding, that thou will deny it: Regard it
therefore, and read the damnation of the great Whore that sits upon many
waters: and therein behold thy goodly deeds. And a little after: It is long
since thy monstrous pride, not being able to uphold it self, began to fall,
though slowly and by little and little: and has not thy ruin been perceived
by many? But at this day it tumbleth headlong to destruction, like a swift
torrent toward the Sea. Laurentius Valla a Roman, Laurent. Valla declar. de
ementita Constantini donatione.
declaimeth in his time most bitterly against the Pope after this manner: That
he practiced in the commonwealth not only that which Verres and Cateline, or
any other notorious thief durst not: but also made traffic of things
Ecclesiastical, and of the holy Spirit: such as Simon Magus would have
detested. About the year 1440. Baeleus Centu^ies.
Roger Onley Priest was strangled with certain others in the prisons of
London, and the Duchess of Gloucester banished for the doctrine of Husse. A
Provincial Friar of the order of the Mendicants preached in the year, Nichol.
de Cusaan s^m.
1454. that the Church of Rome was that Whore mentioned in the Apocalypse.
Reynold Peacock Bishop of Chichester in England, defended both by word and
writing the doctrine of Wiclefe, Balaus. et f^x. ex d^ctionatio. theologico Tho
Ga^o^gnij. and ex Lolando.
and for the same by the rest of the Bishops, declared an Heretic. Baptista
Mantuan, in the year 1464. wrote his Eclogues, wherein he painteth out in most
lively and elegant colors, the corruptions of the Pope, Prelates, and Court of
Rome: as may witness these verses amongst many other.

-- Petrique domus polluta fluente,
Mac rescit luxa (nulla hic arcana reu^lo,
Non ignota loquor liceat vulgata refer:
Sic vibes populiquod ferunt, ea sama per omnem
Iam vetus Europam) mores extirpat honestos:
Sanctus ager seueris, venerabilis ara cynaedis
Seru^t, honorandae diuium Gaenimedibus aede;
Quid miramur opes recidi^aque surgere tecta?
Thu^ is odroati globulos, et cinnama ve^dit
M^llis Arabs, Tirij vestes: venalia nobis
Templa, sacerdotes, altari, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura preces, coelum est venale, ^eusque.
In English thus.

Saint Peter's house defiled with filthy lust
(I speak not secret, nor things unknown tell,
But such as Europes people needs know must)
Does languish sore, and Virtues all expel:
The sacred field with Ruffians is replete,
And holy Altars are with knaves beset:
The Temples to the holy Saints devoted,
Do serve as Stews for unclean Ganimedes.
Yet rich they are: no wonder to be noted,
For Arabs druggs, and Tyrus silks out-spreads,
By sale whereof they purchase riches store,
But Romish wares are far in number more.
Here Temple, Altars, Priests, are to be sold,
With Incense, Prayers, Heaven, and God, for gold.
In the year, 1498. Jerome Sauanarola a Iacobin at Florence, was burned by the
sol^citation of Pope Alexander the sixth, for calling the Pope Antichrist, and
condemning his excommunications. Upon the Iubilee of which Pope, which fell on
the year 1500. were made these verses.

Pollicitus co^lum, Romanus et as^ra sacerdos,
Per soelus et c^^des, ad Stigia pandit iter.
The Roman Priest of heaven that promise made
To others (...) himself to hell conuayde.
The Walde ^ses, though they were persecuted on every side, yet by their
public writings, and particularly by that confession of their Faith which
they presented unto Princes, the form whereof we have in that which they
addressed unto Vlad^slaus King of Bohemia, An. 150^. declared what ^^st cause
they had to separate from the Church of Rome: and how far they were from
those errors, which their adversaries wrongfully charged them withal.

So that King Lewis the twelfth, Charles de Moulin. lib. de Monarch. Franc.
understanding by report the demeanours of those of Merindoll and Labriers
against whom certain Cardinals and Prelates desired to incite him: swore that
they were more honest then himself, or the rest of his people. And presently
after, the King by the consent of the Prelates of his Realm caused a Council
at Lions to be called against Pope Julius, and money to be stamped, which
should be current through the whole kingdom, Arnoulp. de feron. i^ continuat
Paul. Acmilij.
bearing this inscription on the one side, Lud. D. G. Rex Franco. Dux
Mediolani: and on the other side, Perdam Babylonem: that is, Lewis the twelfth,
by the grace of God, King of France, Duke of Millaine. I will destroy Babylon.
At the last, Nichol Vi^^^e hills Ecclesiast.
in the year 1517. under Pope Leo the tenth, followed the preaching of
Indulgences, for full remission of sins, and deliverance out of Purgatory and
obtaining of the kingdom of heaven, by all those that should give a certain
sum of money for the purchase of the said Indulgences, what crimes soever
they had committed. Which gave occasion to Martin Luther a Doctor of Divinity,
and of the order of the Augustine Friars to oppose himself against so
shameless a Merchandise, and to demonstrate by the word of God, that the Pope
is very Antichrist. Wherein he was followed afterward by a great number of
learned men, whom God used in this last Age as Instruments to reform the
Church as well in Germany, England, Scotland, Denmark, as in France and other
Countries. In whose steps all they ought to tread, whom God has called to the
government of his Church, to reveal more and more the Son of perdition, and
to discover his filthiness, if they will not be reputed Cowards in the defense
of the truth, and traitors unto Christ.

13. There remains then no more, but that possessing our souls in patience,
And lastly shall be destroyed by the glorious coming of Christ Jesus.
and perseuering constantly in the profession of this truth, what persecution
soever Antichrist may raise up against us for the same, we expect in the end
that he shall be utterly abolished, by the brightness of the coming of our
Lord Jesus, who assures us, that he will come quickly. Yea come Lord Jesus.

The Third Treatise. Containing a Refutation of the opinions of the Romish
Doctors, touching Antichrist.
HItherto I have sufficiently discovered by Divine testimonies, what kind of
person Antichrist ought to be, and by so plain demonstrations, proved who it
is in the world that is to be acknowledged to be he, that no man can choose but
understand and comprehend the same. Nevertheless, seeing this Antichrist
wants not his defenders and vpholders, that labor by all means to heal his
wound, and hinder the fall threatened against him by the Spirit of God:
therefore to the end that in this controversy no scruple may remain, I will
with as great breuity as the purpose of this writing will permit, resolve
whatsoever either the Jesuits or any other shall produce to the contrary. Now
all that they say touching Antichrist, may in few words be reduced within the
compass of this Definition, Bell. de sum. Pont. lib. 3.
the particulars whereof shall be refuted in the same order, as has been
observed in the two former parts. Peter l^b. 5. in Dan.
They say therefore that Antichrist shall be one only singular man, who is not
yet come: but shall arise out of the tribe of Dan, and be circumcised, Remend.
lib. de Antichrist.
and received of the Jews for their Messiah, and shall reign in Jerusalem
three years and an half, and fight against many Nations, and at length
attempting to mount up into heaven shall be slain by Christ, on the Mount of
Olives. Now out of this Definition arise these seven questions to be discussed.
First, whether Antichrist must be one singular person. Secondly, whether he be
come or no. Thirdly, of what Nation Antichrist shall be borne, and what
Religion he shall be of. Fourthly, of his seat. Fifthly, of his durance. Sixthly,
of his battles. And seventhly, of his end and destruction.

1. Question. Whether Antichrist be one singular person or no.
When the Romish Doctors say that Antichrist shall be one singular person, they
do not mean as we do, that he is one only person at one time, which
varieth and changes by succession and subrogation: but that he sh^llbe one
person alone, that shall continue b^t a certain time, and shall have no
successor. The which Bellarmine labors to prove by five passages of
Scripture.

Bell de sum. Pont. l. 3. c. 2.
1 Ob^ection.
The first passage is in the first Chapter of the Gospel by S. John. v. 43. I
am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his
own name, him you will receive. Now this text (says he) is to be understood
only of Antichrist, as witness, S. Chrysostom. S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and
others.

Answer.
Our Savior Christ does not speak here of Antichrist alone, but of all those
that shall come in their own name, and not in his: that is, not being called
of o^ him, albeit they shroud themselves under his name. Mat. 14.4.
As when he says in another place, Take heed that no man deceive you, for many
shall come in my name saying I am Christ: that is (says Maldonate the Jesuit)
as if he had said, whosoever he be that shall come in his own name you will
receive him, Maldon^n Johan. c. 5.
so is your judgment depraved: So that it is more fitting that we interpret
it not only of Antichrist, but also in general of all false Prophets, which
run without sending: for this was the ordinary fashion of the Jews, to receive
them rather then the the true Prophets. The Fathers also whom they allege,
when they apply this unto Antichrist, exclude not other false Prophets: but on
the contrary, under him comprehend all others. Repl. I but (say they) Jesus
Christ opposes man to man, and person to person; as therefore, Christ was but
one person, so also Antichrist shall be but one person. Answer. Christ opposes
here person to person: but yet a certain person to an uncertain, an
individual singular, to a common indefinite: for elsewhere he says, many
shall come in my name, saying I am Christ. Repl. But Christ says, that
Antichrist shall be received of the Jews for their Messiah. Answ. This is
false, our Savior says simply: If any one come in his own name, you will
receive him: but he does not say, you will receive him for your Messiah. For
neither received they thus all the false Prophets that came unto them. Repl.
But all the false Prophets came in the name of another, but our Savior
speaks here of one that shall come in his own name; that is to say, shall
acknowledge no other God but himself. Answ. This interpretation is false,
Maldonate says far better, Maldon. in Ioh. 5.43.
That our Lord Jesus aduertiseth us of one and the same thing both here and
Mat. 24.2. And that there is no contrariety when he says there, that they
shall come in the name of Christ, and here that they shall come in their own
name: for there to come in the name of Christ, is falsely to say that he is
Christ, and sent of God, though he be not: and here to come in his own name,
is to come without being sent of God. And to the end that we may oppose not
only a Jesuit to a Jesuit, but also a Jesuit Cardinal, to a Cardinal
Jesuit, Tolet. in Ioh. cap. 5.
Tolet thus interprets this passage: He (says he) shall come in his own
name, that shall have in truth no Divine virtue: but shall maliciously feign
himself to be sent of God, as the Son of God. Like as the false Prophets
came in their own name, because they were not truly sent of God. And this is
that which he now says if any one come in his own name, that is to say, not
being truly sent of God, nor having the power of God: but faigning himself
such by his own malice. In brief, as Maldonate says very well: Maldon. in
Mat. 25.5.
where a sentence may be understood generally, we must not restrain it to one
particular, least we set limits and bounds to the holy Spirit by which Jesus
Christ spoke.

2. Objection.
In the second Chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, the Apostle
speaks of Antichrist as of one singular person, for he uses the definitive
or demonstratiue Article when he speaks of him: (...): The man of sin: the
son of perdition. For according to Epiphanius his rule, the Greek Articles
restrain the signification of names, otherwise common, to one certain and
particular thing.

Answer.
We agree to all this: for Antichrist shall be always one singular person, one
in number, one in seat, and one in power; as is to be seen in a Monarchy, or
rather tyranny. But this one person shall vary by succession, albeit this
Maxim of Epiphanius is not always true, as may be observed in Mat. 12.35.
Luke. 4.4. and many other places, where the Article does not demonstrate some
one particular person.

3. Objection.
When S. John speaks of Antichrist so properly called, he adds the Article,
and yet he adds it not when he speaks of Antichrist in common: to signify
that Antichrist properly so called, shall be one singular person. As ye have
heard (says he) that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists. 1. John. 2, 18.

Answer.
We consent that this Tyrant is always one at one time: but yet hence it does
not follow, that many do not succeed one another in this seat of Apostasy.
And indeed if this Article demonstrate one certain person and no more, let
them point us out one which has been from the age of the Apostles, and must
continue to the end of the world. For S. John says: Every spirit that
confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is not of God: and this is
the spirit (...) of Antichrist, of whom you have heard said, that he shall
come, and he is now already in the world. 1. John 4.^. Now if this Article
(...), demonstrateth one certain person: how many Ages must this Man of sin
continue alive, whom notwithstanding (they fancy) shall endure but three
years and an half?

4. Objection.
In the seventh, eleventh, and twelfth Chapters of Daniel, Antichrist is not
called a Kingdom, but one certain King, who of the ten Kings which he shall
find in the world shall destroy three, and also bring under subjection the
seven others. And Calaine himself confesses, that A^tiochus was a figure of
Antichrist. Whereupon it follows, that seeing A^tiochus was one singular
person, therefore Antichrist shall be also one singular person.

Answer.
The Prophet Daniel does not only not call Antichrist a Kingdom, but he also
does not so much as call him a King; for these Texts do not speak of
Antichrist, but of Anti^chus p^p^^anes: as is apparent by the Commentaries and
Anno^itions of Francis ^unius upon D^^e^, as al^o by that which is written by
Sc^liger in his sixth book of the Emendation of times: And if we shall refer
allegorically unto Antichrist that which literally is meant of A tio hus, every
one know^th that no sound argument can b^e drawn ^^om Ilego^ies. Hows^euer it
be the consequence is not necessary, that se^ing ^ntiochus the figure of
Antichrist was one only singular person the efore Anti hrist himself must be
^^t ^o. For a fig^^e does not always in every part ans^ere to ^h^t ^^^h;
otherwise our Savior Christ should not be one singular person, seeing he was
figured by many Sacrifices, and Pri^sts in the Old Testament.

5. Objection.
Saint John in the thirteenth and seueteenth Chapter of the Apoc^l^ps, speaks
of Antichrist as of a King, that shall come in the time of ten other Kings, and
whose reign is determined by three years and an half, as in Daniel. So that
as Danie^ speaks of one certain King, so does also S. John in the Apocalips.

Answer.
This consequence is fri^olous; seeing Daniel speaks not at all of
Antichrist, as we mean to prove: and besides, does it follow, that because S.
John represents Antichrist as one King, therefore he must needs be one
singular person? The Prophet Daniel represents the Kingdoms of the Persians,
and Medes, and Babylonians, by several Beasts and yet there is none so
blockish as to conclude, that therefore these Kingdoms are no other then
singular Persons, or Kings. As touching the three years and an half, during
which they affirm Antichrists kingdom shall endure, we shall have fit
occasion to speak hereafter, and therefore here pass it over in silence.

It remains now that I should here give satisfaction to some testimonies of
the Fathers which they use to produce for this purpose. But they that have cast
but their eyes never so little upon the writings of the Ancient Fathers, shall
find them to have so, Sulp^t. Sever. ^ib 2 histor. sac.
as it were, groped in the dark, about this matter, that it is hard to draw
out of them any solid conclusion. For some of them have thought that N^ro was
the Antichrist, who should rise again before the end of the world, or at least
should be preserved alive till then, and be revealed and reestablished in his
kingdom: which opinion was taken from the Author of those verses which go
under the name of Sybills: as is to be seen in the fifth book of the
Sybilline Oracles. Others have been of opinion, that he should be the devil
who should appear in human shape, Hipp^litus Martyr.
and feign himself to be borne of a Virgin. Others have thought that he
should be begotten of a woman by the Devil. S. Jerome affirms, that he
should be a man in whom the Devil did inhabit corporally. Papius, Iust^n
Martyr, Lactantius, and others, refer the coming of Antichrist, till after
the resurrection of the Saints. For they say that after Six Thousand years
accomplished, all the Saints shall rise again out of their graves, and that
our Lord Jesus shall descend upon the earth, and reign with them in great
glory and abundance of all things for the space of a Thousand years.
Lactant^^^b. 7. cap 24.
In such sort (says Lactantius) that the earth shall then display her
fr^itef^lnesse, and of it own accord bring forth all abundance and plenty,
that the Rocks and Mountains shall sweat Honey, the Rivers run with Wine, and
the ouer-flowing floods shed forth Milk. In brief, that there shall be such an
Age, as the Poet's fansied of an Age of Gold, during the which the Saints
should marry and beget Children like to themselves in holiness: But that after
the expiration of these Thousand years, Satan should be unbound and let
loose, and raise up a grievous persecution against the Elect, by the means of
Antichrist, and that after that should follow the general judgment. Hieron.
in Ierem. lib. 4.
This opinion has found heretofore such strong Defenders and Abetters, that
S. Jerome albeit he does not approve it, yet dares not condemn it: and S.
Augustine confesses, that he had been sometimes of that mind. In sum,
look how many heads, Aug. d^ ciuit. Dei. i. e. 7.
so many differing opinions shall we find, as it comes ordinarily to pass
in matters prophetical and far removed. Albeit in the midst of these doubts,
the Ancients have manifested, that by that which they spoke concerning
Antichrist, they never intended that he should absolutely be but one singular
person: but rather an estate and government, as witnesses S. Augustine when
he says: Idem. Ibid. lib. ^^. cap. 19.
That diverse do not think that by Antichrist is to be understood the Prince
alone: but all his whole b^dy in general; that is, all the multitude of his
adhere^^s together with their Prince. Aug. hom. 3. in Apoc.
And in another place (he says) that the Whore and the Beast are one, and the
same thing; to wit, the whole body of the wicked fighting against the Lamb,
and all the true Babylon. R^per. com^n Ap. ca. 8.
To which agrees Rup^tus, when he affirms, That the Beast (by which he
means Antichrist) and the Dragon are all one, to wit, the Devil with his
bod^; that is, with all the congregation of the wicked. Lyra. in Apoc. 17.
And Lyra says, That the Beast is the whole body of the wicked.

So then by this that has been said, is utterly ouerthrown one of their
Arguments whereby they labor to prove that the Pope is not Antichrist; namely,
because Antichrist must be one singular person, and the Popes have been many
in number. For we avouch clean contrary; that seeing Antichrist must be one
indiuidual person at one time, but v^rying by succession, and that the Pope is
such a person: therefore there is no let hereby, but that he may be truly
Antichrist, forasmuch as this mark fitly agrees unto him, together with all
the rest, as we have already proved before.

2. Question. Whether Antichrist be come, or no.
The Romish Proctours, to the end to make men believe that the Pope is not
Antichrist, auerre and maintain that he is not yet come, neither shall come
until about the end of the world, the precise time whereof cannot be known.
For the proof hereof, they produce six reasons, which Bellarmine calls
demonstrations: for say they, the holy Ghost gives us six marks or signs of
the coming of Antichrist: of which two go before ^ntichrist, to wit, the
preaching of the Gospel through the whole world, and the destruction of the
Roman Empire: two accompany him, namely the preaching of En^ch and Elias, and
an extreme persecution, by the which all the public service of God shall
cease: and two shall follow him, to wit, the destruction of Antichrist after
three years and an half, and the worlds end, none of all which marks are as
yet arrived, therefore Antichrist is not yet come.

First mark: the preaching of the Gospel through the whole world.
Viega^ in Apo^. cap. ^3. sect. 17.
The Scriptures (say they) bear witness, that the Gospel shall be preached
through all the world, before the last persecution, which shall be raised up by
Antichrist: Mat. 24.14. and this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in
all the habitable earth, Remond. cap. 8.
in witness to all Nations; and then shall the end come. Now this Prophecy was
not accomplished about the year 600. or 700 where some fix the time of
Antichrists coming: nor in the time of S. Bernard, whither others refer it:
nor is yet fulfilled in our time; for every day new Countries are found out
both in the East and West, where there is no sign or token of the preaching of
the Gospel. It follows therefore, that Antichrist is not yet come.

Answer.
It is a false supposition, that the holy Scripture should give us for a sign
of the coming of Antichrist, that the Gospel should be preached throughout
the whole world; for there is not so much as one word hereof in the holy
Scripture. For that speech of our Savior Christ alleged out of S. Matthew,
does no w^yes aim at any such thing; forasmuch ^s he speaks not of the
universal persecution, which shall be stirred up against the Christian Church
by Antichrist: but of a particular persecution, by the which, the Nation of the
Jews should be oppressed, and the Temple destroyed, as it come to pass abo^t
five and thirty years after the death of our Lord Jesus Christ: God in the
mean while, having before this desol^tion of the Jews, gathered together his
Church out of all Nations of the world by the preaching of the Apostles, as is
manifest in the book of their Acts. And as S. Paul, Romans 10. says, That their
sound was gone out through all the earth: and Col. 1. That the Gospel was come
into all the world. Now this will easily appear if we rightly consider the
Text of the Gospel: for when the Apostles had showed unto our Savior Christ
the goodly buildings of the Temple, he says unto them: See you all these
things? of a truth I say unto you, that there shall not be here left a stone
upon a stone that shall not be cast down, Mat. 24.2. Whereupon our Savior
sitting upon the Mount of Olives, his disciples said unto him, Tell us when
these things shall come to pass, and what shall be the sign of thy coming,
and of the end of the world: which Question stands upon two parts: First,
concerning the destruction of the Temple, and secondly of the signs of the
coming of the Son of God, and of the end of the world. Now our Savior
answers distinctly to each part of the question, and that according to the
order wherein it was propounded: And so he handles the first part touching
the destruction of the Temple unto the 22. verse: and from thence to the end of
the Chapter, he speaks of the end of the world, which is the second. Now
that which the Jesuits here allege, is the 14. verse, which appertains yet
to the first question: and therefore when our Savior says, That after the
Gospel shall be preached to all Nations, then the end shall be; he
understands not the worlds end, which is called in this Chapter (...), the
consummation of the world; but the end of the Temple and Common wealth of the
Jews, whereof he had said in the sixth verse, All those things must come to
pass, but the end shall not be yet, to wit, the end of Jerusalem. And thus
Euthymius following S. Chrysostom, and Theophilact them both, expound the
place. Secondly, admit that by the end should be meant the end of the world, as
S. Jerome and others have taken it: yet it will not follow, that the preaching
of the Gospel to all the world must go before the coming of Antichrist, as
they pretend, but only before the end of the world. In brief, if we should
consent to that (which is not true) that this persecution whereof our Savior
Christ speaks, should be the last persecution stirred up by Antichrist (as
they would have it,) yet would they be far from their reckoning: for, that
the Gospel be preached throughout the whole world, before Antichrist
attempteth his great and last persecution, is one thing: and that this be done
before the coming of Antichrist, is another; and yet this is the foundation
which they lay: but a false and weak one, 1 John. 4.3. 2. Th^ss. 2.
God wot. For the Apostles tell us, that in their time Antichrist was already
come, and was in working, but he was not yet revealed, nor stirred up this
great persecution. Besides all this, when Christ says, That the Gospel shall
be preached through the whole world, he speaks not of all the world,
considered simply and universally in it own latitude, but comparatively, in
conference with the bounds of Judea and Israel; wherein the preaching of the
Gospel had been locked up, as it were, until his ascension into heaven. Or as
Ma^donate speaks, Maldon in Mat. 24.14.
this was but an Hyperbolicall manner of speaking, by the whole world,
signifying the greatest part of the world. For at that time (says he) when
Jerusalem was destroyed there was scarce one Region to be found of those that
were then discovered, wherein the voice of the Gospel had not sounded. And
that which is more then all this, I say that it is a false pretense of theirs,
that there are any quarters or countries of the earth, either in the East or
West, wherein no sign of the preaching of the Gospel is to be found. For all
those that write of the newfound world, and such Countries as are daily
discovered, do verify the contrary. For they affirm that in India there are
many Christians which say that they received the Gospel by the Ministry of S.
Thomas, and these admit Baptism, and receive the Lords Supper under both
kinds, and execrate the doctrine and manners of the Jesuits: In such sort,
that in the year 1567. as in the City of Cochim, not far from Calecut, an
Armenian Bishop exhorted the Christians that pretended to follow the doctrine
of S. Thomas, to beware of Popish superstitions: and that one Melchior
Carnerius a Jesuit, instiling himself the Bishop of Nicea, opposed against
him: the ^esuite had been oppressed with darts discharged against him by the
Ind ans, had he not saved himself by flight into the land of China, which
bordereth upon India on the East, amongst the idolatrous Pagans, where he was
miserably buried. Nevertheless, even here also are occurrent I know some
shadows of ancient Christianisme, expressed by certain pictures which they
retain. For they have an Image with three heads, which heads look toward one
another, and in the same three faces of one God, which they say are of one
intelligence and will. In like manner, they have the Image of a Woman, holding
a Child in her arms, who they say was a Virgin both before and after her
Childbearing. They confess the immortallity of souls, and believe that there
are rewards for just men, and eternal punishments for the wicked after this
life.

In America, the Religion is wholly Pagan: but yet altogether unlike to that of
the Ancient Gentiles, and such as gives probable conjecture, that Christianity
has been before time there preached. For Peter Martyr says, that toward
Dar^en there are certain American Priests, that Baptize infants of a year
old, casting the water in cross upon their heads, with certain ceremonies and
speeches, which the Spaniards understood not. And John de Lery does report of
those of Brasil that they believe the immortality of souls: and that at a
certain time discoursing with them about the true service of God, the creation
of the world, the fall and reparation of mankind, and such like points of
Christian doctrine: when they had heard him attentively and with admiracion,
for the space of two hours, at the last one of the most Ancient of them, thus
answered: That they had heard of their Ancestors, that a great while since,
there was a certain man that was bearded and clothed as we are, which
preached unto us these things. But when their Fathers would not give credit
unto him, then another came after him, that give them th sw^rd, which they use
as a Symbol of malediction, and that ever since, there ha^h been nothing but
wars and dissentions amongst them. These are manifest tokens of the
publication of the Gospel in those Countries, and of the contempt which they
made thereof. All which things may incline us easily to judge, that no man can
pret^nd that the Gospel has not been preached through the whole world, and
consequently that Antichrist is not come, according to this Maxim.

And thus this subtilty of wit, is not a demonstration, but a dream, too
feeble to be opposed to this Divine truth, that assures us that Antichrist was
in the world in the Apostles time; and to experience, which so many Ages have
already had of his Tyranny.

The second mark: the total destruction of the Roman Empire.
Bell. de Romans Pon^^f^^^. 3.
The second mark and forerunner of Antichrist, is the total subversion of the
Roman Empire: That as Christ came into the world, Remond. de Antich. cap. 9
Viegas in Apo cap. 13. sect. 17.
when this Empire was at the per^ d of his greatness: So Antichrist should
come, when it should be utterly ruined, and at it is lowest ebb.

A^swere.
It is an idle fancy and imagination, that the ruin of the Roman Empire
should precede the coming of Antichrist, seeing that he was already in the
world in the time of the Apostles: as the Spirit of God speaking in holy
Scripture does assure us. Yet let us hear their grounds upon which they build
this Chimera.

The Prophet Daniel (say they) in the second Chapter of his Prophecy,
describes the succession of the principal kingdoms of the world, to the end
thereof, by a Statue whose head of Gold signified the kingdom of the
Assyrians, breast of Silver the Empire of the Persians, belly of Brass that of
the Greeks: and feet of Iron, the last Empire of the Romans: and by the ten
toes that are on the feet, are understood ten Kings, which should divide
amongst them all that which this great Empire had possessed. And in the seventh
Chapter, he represents the same, by the ten horns which issued out of the
head of the fourth Beast, which also was signified by those ten horns, that is
to say, ten Kings spoken of by S. John in his Revelation, Chapter 17.

This interpretation of the fourth Beast for the Roman Empire, is repugnant
both to the end, events, R.
and sequel of the Prophets words: who by this Beast understands the
Kingdom of the Seleucides, by the which the Jews had been grievously vexed,
after the reign of Alexander the Great, as Iunius most learnedly has declared
upon the second and seventh Chapters of Daniel. And it is also certain, that
Daniels Prophecy does not extend to the worlds end, but only to the coming of
Christ in the flesh: whose Kingdom was to be established eternally, as may be
gathered out of these words: And in the time of these Kings, Daniel. 2.44, 45.
the God of heaven shall raise up a Kingdom, which shall never be dissolved,
and this Kingdom shall not be transferred to another people: but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and shall be established
eternally. Insomuch, as thou have seen that a stone is cut out of a Mountain
without hands. Per^r cem. in Ioh. lib. 2.
And this the Jesuit Pererius is constrained to avow in expounding these
words, a stone cut out without hands, albeit otherwise he interprets by this
fourth Beast the Roman Empire. Neither is Bellarmine himself repugnant to
this interpretation, when he confesses, Bell de Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 2.
that the Prophet Daniel in his seventh Chapter speaks literally of Antiochus
Epiphanes, which is the little horn, that pulled up the three first horns of
the ten of the fourth Beast. As touching S. John, his words are so far from
proving that which they pretend, that they rather supply us with a strong
argument for the proof that Antichrist is come: Seeing that not only the
Roman Empire has been dismembered into many kingdoms, which are subsisting at
this day: But also these kingdoms have given their power and authority to the
Beast, and submitted themselves to the Pope, who assumeth to himself the power
to change and dispossess them at his pleasure. If any desire to see the
enumeration of these ten Kings, which received their power at the same time
with the Beast, he shall find them particularly designed in their writings,
who have at this time commented upon the Revelation.

What it is that withholdeth him, that he may be revealed in due time, for
already this mystery of iniquity is on foot, only he that holds let him hold
(...), donec e medio fiat, that is, until he be taken out of the way: and then
shall this wicked one be revealed. This passage is by most of the Ancient both
Greek and Latin Fathers, interpreted of the Roman Empire, and for the same
cause they used to pray unto God in his Church, for the preservation of this
Empire, because they knew; that when this Empire should be ruined, great
calamities were ready prepared, and like to fall upon the Church.

Resp.
This text does no ways prove, that the Roman Empire must be utterly
destroyed; whatsoever the Ancients has said to the contrary: for we are no
more bound to believe them in this point, then in that which they affirm
touching the kingdom of Christ upon earth, for a thousand years after the
resurrection: nor that this destruction must forerunne the coming of
Antichrist. On the contrary, it rather makes faith that Antichrist was in the
Apostles time. For as touching these words, (...), until he be taken out of
the way, they do not enforce an entire abolition of the Roman Empire, no more
then when the Apostle complains, that the Corinthians had not sorrowed, to
the end that the incestuous person might be taken out of the way, (...). 1.
Cor. 5. verse 2. Now he means not that he should be put to death, or utterly
destroyed: but only that he should be cast out of the Church. In like manner,
if we take these words: he which holds let him hold, till he be taken out of
the way, to be understood of the Roman Empire, (which notwithstanding all
admit not) yet who can let us from interpreting them thus; until such time
that he be taken out of the midst of Rome? That is to say, until the
Emperors translating the Imperial seat to some other place, and quitting
Rome, do by little and little give place to Antichrist, to establish there his
tyranny. For in truth, when the Emperors forsook Italy, they opened a wide
door for the Popes dominion: who afterward came to be revealed by his effects,
to be that man of Sin, spoken of by the Apostle to the Thessalonians. And if
we will give any credit to the Oracles of the Sybils, the Roman Empire should
have been destroyed before that time: for they describe the durance thereof, by
the number of years collected from the numerall letters of the City of Rome
in the Greek tongue, in these words.

(...)
(...)
(...). Sibill. Orac. l^b. 8.

That is in English: When thrice three hundred, forty years and eight
Thou shall fulfill: then lo the Destinies,
Thy utter ruin have decreed straight,
Accomplishing thy name: which thus implies.


For the number of the word Rome, is 948. taken in this sort according to the
value of the Greek letters.

^ 100 o 800 m 40 e 8 948

And in very deed, to speak properly the Roman Empire ended at the death of
the Emperor Decius, when Gallus his successor made it tributary to the
Goths, which it never was to any Nation before. Now this happened in the year
1003. since the foundation of Rome: which amount by five and fifty years,
only the term set down by the Sybill: who designed this time after this
manner, to place the end of the Roman Empire, at the beginning of that of the
Goths: by whom the City of Rome was at last taken, ruined, sacked, and burnt
in the 410. year of our Lord Jesus Christ, under the conduct of Alaricus their
King, and in the time of Honorius the Emperor: which was the true decline of
the Western Empire, and the way making to the kingdom of Antichrist. As also
plainly appeared soon after in the year 418. when was held a Council at
Carthage, wherein Pope Zozimus caused to be propounded by his Legates a Canon,
which they affirmed to have been agreed upon at the Council of Nice: whereby
it was decreed, that the Bishops of all Provinces might appeal to Rome, and
that the Bishop of Rome might either take knowledge of their causes himself,
or commit them to the decision of whom he pleased. But this pretended Canon was
found counterfeite, after that the original copy of that Council was fetched
of purpose from Constantinople, and looked into: so that the Bishop of Rome was
disappointed of his desire land it was decreed, that whosoever of the African
Clergy should appeal beyond the Sea, should be deposed: as is to be seen by
the Acts of the Council, and by the Epistles which were written thereof to
Pope Boniface, and his successor Celestine, which Celestine had received into
communion one Appiarius, excommunicated by the Church of Africa. So that this
was the first introduction which the Pope made into his sovereign Primacy,
until such time, that at length his tyranny was fully disclosed, and
authorized by the Emperor Phocas. Albeit otherwise we see by the 13. Chapter
of the Revelation, that both these Beasts, to wit, the Roman Empire, Apoc.
13.12.
and Antichrist, should subsist together. Seeing that the second Beast shall
exercise the power of the first in his presence, and shall cause the earth, and
them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast. In sum, the Apostle
says, that this Son of perdition was withheld or kept back: he was then
extant; for that cannot be with held which is not. He says, that the mystery
of iniquity did then work; he must then needs be: for what operation can there
be, by that which is not? He says, that he must be revealed in his time: he
was then, before he was revealed. And thus this pretended demonstration
vapoureth away into smoke, and cannot hinder, but that this remains as an
invincible truth, that Antichrist is come, and that it is he whose seat is,
where heretofore was the seat of the Roman Empire.

Third mark: the coming of Enoch and Elias.
The third mark which they give of Antichrists coming, is the return of
Elias and Enoch, Bell. de Romans Pont. Perer. in Dan. Remond. and Vieg. in Apoc.
who (say they) must come into the world, to oppose Antichrist, and to preserve
the Elect in the faith of Christ, and to convert the Jews, which fable they
labor to underprop by these ensuing testimonies of holy Scripture.

Behold I go to send unto you Elias the Prophet, before the coming of the
great and fearful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the
Fathers to their Children, and the heart of the Children to their Fathers,
least I come and smite the earth, as it were with an Interdict.

S. Jerome writing upon the fourth Chapter of Malachy, Resp.
answers for us, that the Jews, and Iudaizing Heretics, imagined that Elias
should come, before (...) suum; that is, the coming of their Messiah:
Whereupon it was, that this question was propounded to our Savior Christ in
the Gospel, Wherefore say the Pharisees, that Elias shall come? To whom he
answers, Indeed Elias shall come, and if you will believe me, he is already
come, understanding by Elias John Baptist. Thus S. Jerome. And in truth, our
Savior Mat. 11.14. says expr^ssely, that John Baptist was the Elias that was
to come: And Mat. 17.12. that Elias was come already, but that the Jews knew
him not. And to the end that no man should doubt of whom it was he spoke: The
Evangelist adds, that the disciples perceived, that he spoke unto them of
John Baptist: whereunto also aptly accord the words of the Angel to Zacharias,
Luke, 1.17. That John Baptist should go before the Lord in the spirit and
power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just men, that he might make ready a people
prepared for the Lord. But the Jesuits guided (as it seems) by a different
spirit from our Savior Christ, in the explication of Prophecies, thus reply.

Repl. 1. It is manifest that Malachy speaks of the last coming of our
Savior Christ, insomuch that he calls it, The great and terrible day of the
Lord: and after adds these words: least I come and smite the earth with an
Interdict: that is, least coming to judge the world, I condemn all the
Rebellious.

Resp. It is certain, that there is a double day of the Lord: one of his first
coming, by the which he calls the Elect to salvation: the other of his last
coming, by the which he gathers to himself those that are saved, and
brings them into his kingdom. Neither do we gainesay, but that both the one
and the other, may be understood in this place: to wit, that the Prophet having
promised the first coming of Christ, does threaten them with the last, which
should not be converted by the first. But howsoever it be, this is certain;
that the sending of Elias is referred by the Prophet, to the first coming of
Christ: and not to the second. 1. Because these words here, do answer to them,
Chap. 3. 1. Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall speedily enter into his Temple:
which can possibly be applied no otherwise then to the first coming of Christ.
2. Because it is said, That he shall convert the hearts of Fathers to their
Children, and of Children to their Fathers: which both the Angel and Zacharias
enspired with the spirit of Prophecy, Luke 1. refer to his first coming: and
the matter it self bears witness thereunto. 3. In brief, the same is
evident by that which the Prophet adds: Least I come and strike the earth
with anathema: which is as much as if he should say, least I be constrained to
hasten my second coming, and cause them to feel the rigor of my Judgment,
if they convert not unto me by the trial of my mercy in my first coming. For
as touching the word which is translated fearful or terrible, it signifies
also honorable, or venerable, as it is translated by Tremellius, and Iunius.
And albeit those words, fearful, or terrible, should be retained in the text,
yet this hinders not, but that this place may be well referred to the first
coming of our Savior Christ. For though this coming, be the desired time and
the day of salvation to the Elect; yet it is fearful and terrible to those
that in a blinded fury rejected him: according to that which old Simeon said to
the blessed Virgin, Luke. 2.34. That he is appointed for the fall and rising
again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.
Neither indeed can it be denied, but that this day was terrible to the Jews,
as well in regard of their blinding and hardening, as also by reason of the
great calamities which followed their rebellion. For was not their Land truly
smitten as it were by Interdict, when Jerusalem was destroyed, sacked, and
burnt, by Titus and Vespasian, and the whole Commonwealth of the Jews utterly
razed and destroyed? Hence it is, that Rupertus expounding this text, says,
That he dares not certainly define any thing concerning the coming of Elias
into the world: forasmuch as many hold, that he must come in his proper person:
and others, amongst whom S. Jerome, deny it.

Repl. 2. When our Savior Christ says: That John Baptist is Elias that should
come, he means that (according to their iudgememt) that John Baptist promised
by the Prophet Malachy, is Elias; but not literally, but allegorically, and
that the true Elias shall come at the end of the world.

Resp. This interpretation is so far from truth, that on the contrary, our
Savior plainly intends, that John Baptist, was truly he, according to the
letter, that was promised by the Prophet Malachy: but that by allegory he was
called Elias, because ^e came in the spirit and power of Elias, as the Angel
witnesses. And doubtless this manner of speaking cannot seem strange to
those, Bell. de Romans P^^ lo^. 3. c. 6.
that are never so little exercised in the reading of the holy Scripture,
Remond cap. 48. M^^llon. in Mat. 12.
no more then this promise which God makes to his people, Ier 30.9. Strangers
shall serve themselves no more of thee, but they shall serve the Lord their
God, and David their King, whom I shall raise up unto them. And Ezech. 34.23. I
will raise up a Shepherd over them, Riberus in Apoc c. 11 ^^rt. 12.
even my servant David: I will be their God, and my servant David shall be a
Prince among them. The same promise is repeated, Chap. 37. and in diverse other
places: and yet notwithstanding no man ever thought that David was to come in
his proper person.

Ecclesiasticus speaking of Elias, Chap. 48.9.10. says thus, Thou wast taken
up in a whirlewind of fire, and in a Chariot of fiery horses: thou art
appointed to pacify the wrath of the Lord, at the demonstrations of times,
togather the hearts of the Fathers unto the Children, and to restore the Tribes
of Jacob. Enoch (says the same Author) was pleasing to God, therefore was he
translated into Paradise, to bring repentance to the generations. Ecclus. 44.16.

B^^p.
The book of Ecclesiasticus being not of Canonical authority, cannot convince
us against the authority of Christ, who expressly ouerturneth this
interpretation of the Prophet Malachy, as Iansenius him elfe is constrained to
confess. This coming then of Elias, was an aged opinion among the Jews, as
may be gathered out of the Dialogues of Iustine Martyr, against Tryphon the
Jew: wherein Tryphon is bold to say, that he knew not whether the Messiah was
borne, or no: but admit he were, yet that he could have no power until Elias
were come, who should annoint him, and proclaim him to the people. And
therefore it is no marvel, if the Son of Syrac a Jew, were transported with
the same belief. But it is a great shame that Christians, instructed by the
mouth of Christ himself, should so lightly entertain these Jewish dotages,
only disguised with an other color. As touching the other passage of
Ecclesiasticus, they allege it falsely: the words in the Greek are these:
(...). That ^s word for word: Enoch pleased the Lord God, and was ^ranslated
for an example of repentance to the generations. Now how serves this to prove,
that Enoch shall come at the and of the world, because he was transported by
God, to be ^n example to men? And if we should retain these words, ^o the end
to give repentance to the Nations: yet this must be understood, to be done by
example only, and not by his personal ^omming.

Mat. 17.11. says, that certainly Elias must come and restore all things. Now
that this is to be understood of Elias in his own person, appears (say they)
by 3. reasons. First, because John Baptist was already come, and had finished
his course, and yet nevertheless Christ says, that Elias shall come.
Secondly, because the Apostles speak of the same Elias, whom they had seen in
the Mountain. And thirdly, because it is said, that he shall restore all
things, which neither John Baptist, nor any other did.

This is a wrong interpretation of our Saviors words: Resp.
for the sense is this. As our Savior Christ had forbidden his Apostles to
tell unto any man, the vision which they had seen in the Mount, until such
time as he should be risen from the dead: they presently received an opinion,
that Christ should shortly after dye, and rise again, and then enter into his
kingdom. But because this seemed to contradict the order established by God
himself, according to the Prophecy of Malachy, wherein it is foretold, that
Elias must precede his coming; therefore they propound their doubt to be
resolved of him: wherefore then say the Scribes, that Elias must come first: to
wit, before thou risest again, and entrest into thy kingdom? Now our Savior
Christ answers them, first by concession: of a truth Elias shall come first,
and restore all things: that is, as Maldonate expounds. It is true that Elias
must come: It must be that Elias come: the Scribes teach you this truly and
well. For we must note that our Savior Christ does not say, (...), Elias shall
come, to the end that they might expect his coming till some other time: But
(...), Elias comes, in the present tense. As when Herod enquired of the
Priests, (...), where is Christ borne? that is, where should he be borne? And
when the Jews said, we know well from whence this man is, but when Christ shall
come, no man knows from whence he is, (...), that is, no man must know
whence he is. Afterward he unfolds the true meaning of the Prophecy, showing
that it ought not to be understood of the person of Elias the Thisbite, but of
John Baptist, whom the Jews knew not to be Elias, but had done unto him what
they would; insomuch as they consented to the cruelty of Herod exercised
toward him: whence he concludes, that he himself also should be handled in
like manner by them, as John Baptist had. It does not therefore follow, that
though the Apostles had spoken of that Elias whom they saw in the
transfiguration of Christ, that his answer to them was of the same: but rather
he reuoketh them from their error, to the true understanding of Malachus
Prophecy, and declares, who was the true promised Elias, to wit, he that was
already come. As concerning those words, he shall r^store all things; they are
nothing but a Paraphrase of the words of the Prophet Malachy, saying: That he
shall it is ne the hearts of the Fathers to their Children and of the Children to
their Fathers; which was accomplished in John Baptist: for otherwise, it
properly appertains to none but to Christ, to restore all things: as being he,
by whom pleased the Father to reconcile all things unto himself, and to set
at peace through the blood of his cross, both the things in heaven, and things
in earth. Col. 1.20.

Apoc. 11.3. I will give power to my two witnesses, that they shall prophecy a
thousand, Bell ^e R^m. Pont l. 3. C. 3.
two hundred and threescore days, b^ing clothed in sackcloath. Which that it
is to be understood of Elias and Enoch, appears (say they) by that which S.
John says, that they must be slain by Antichrist, and that their corpse shall
lie in the streets of Jerusalem, without sepulture: and after three days and
an half shall rise again and mount up into heaven, the which never happened
yet to any man.

Saint John speaks not in this place either of Elias, Resp.
or of ^noch, or of Jerusalem: so that to prove that he speaks of ^noch and
Elias, because they must be killed by Antichrist, (...) to prove the question
by that which is in question. This ^hen is a prophecy, which must be understood
prophetically and spiritually, as says S. Jerome, and not literally, Hieron.
ep. ad Marcel. de q^inque qu. no ^t. tes^^e. R^po^t. Job. 6. in Apoc.
for the number of two. For as demands Rupertus; Sha^^ the Lord of the
Prophets, and the Author of prophesies have but two witnesses? Shall not all
the Apostles and Martyrs, not to speak of Confessors, be his witnesses?
Certainly this speech is great, very grave, and of imm^^surable weight in the
mouth of the Almighty: that though many, yea, i^^umerable witnesses, yet ^he
pronounces that there are but two, and contenteth himself with that number
which is sufficient by Law: for the sacred Law admits at least the number of
two Witnesses. And if there be no more it contenteth it self with so few. I
will give then (says he) to my two Witnesses, that they shall prophecy: Which
may be fitly thus understood; as if he had said, When thou shall have measured
the Temple of God, and the Altar: that is to say, when thou shall have
stretched forth and scattered abroad the limits of the Christian Faith, as it
is meet, with thy Reed, that is, with the authority of the Evangelical
scripture, I will not suffer that there shall be want of Witnesses, to
testify that thou have thus written for me. For albeit I have written, and
that truly, that many shall be called and few chosen; yet there shall never be
so few Elect, neither shall charity grow so cold by the ouerflowing of
iniquity, but that the truth of the Gospel shall find at the least two
Witnesses. By all which speeches, as also by the whole current of his
discourse, he shows us that this number must not be restrained to two alone:
but that the Spirit of God would give us to understand, that though the fury of
Antichrist labors to choke the truth, yet God will never suffer that there
shall be wanting so many witnesses as are necessary both to confirm the truth,
and condemn falsehood. S. Augustine, Aug. hom. 8. in Ap^c. Beda ^n Apoc.
and Beda understand by these two Witnesses, The two Testaments, the Old, and
the New. And indeed both their number, and their office, and all the
circumstances of the text do not unfitly accord thereunto. As amongst others
John Napeir makes known unto us in his revelation of the Secrets of the
Revelation.

R^b^ra the Jesuit in his Commentary upon the twelve small Prophets, writes
to this opinion of the coming of E^och and Elias, the vision of the two Olive
Trees mentioned in the prophecy of Zachary, Chap. 4.^. because in the Apocal^ps
they are called Olive Trees and Candlestick^. And Victorinus Martyr, and others
writing upon the Apocalys, declare that he two Olive trees in the Apolcalyps,
are the same that are spoken of in the Prophet Zachary.

Resp.
We confess that S. John has relation unto the words of the Prophet Zachary,
and consequently that the two Olive Trees may receive the same interpretation
in both places. But yet withal we affirm, that these two Olive Trees, or
these two sons of the Oil which stand before the Lord of all the Earth, as
the Angel speaks, are no other in true sense, then the perpetual and
ordinary instruments, by the which the Lord preserves to his Church, his
Grace, Peace. and Light: to wit, either the two Testaments according to Saint
Augustine, and venerable Bede, that like good Olive Trees furnish us
continually with spiritual Oil in our Lamps, to be ready prepared for the
coming of our Brigegroome: or all true Pastors of the Church, who being
instructed by these two Testaments stand before the Lord of the whole earth,
and convert men to his obedience by the preaching of the Gospel. As Ribera
himself is in conclusion compelled to expound it in general of the Preachers
of the Gospel in his Tropologie upon this Text.

Elias and Enoch shall come to sight against Antichrist.

Resp.
Admit this were so, yet we might answer in one word: that as we have learnt to
know Christ by the Scripture, so also do we learn to know Antichrist. All
that is alleged out, or beside Scripture (says S. Jerome) may as easily be
rejected, as it is alleged. But yet I say further that it is false, that there
is such a consent of the Ancients touching the coming of Enoch and Elias, as
they pretend: for we have already heard how S. Jerome remitteth this opinion
to Jews and Heretics: and if at any time he makes mention thereof, as upon
the seventeenth Chapter of Saint Matthew, it is not in his own name, but in the
name of another.

Lactantius names neither Antichrist, nor Elias, Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 7.
nor Enoch: but only makes mention of a certain great Prophet, which God
should send toward the end of the world, that should be put to death by a
certain King borne in Syria, who should cause himself to be called and adored
as God. Hippolitus Martyr contents not himself to make only Enoch and Elias
to rise up against Antichrist, but he associates unto them S. John the
Evangelist, who he supposes is not dead, but transported into the earthly
Paradise, there to abide with Enoch and Elias until the time of Antichrist.
Aretas writing upon the last words of the tenth Chapter of the Apocalypse: Thou
must prophecy again to many people, Nations, and tongues; says, that many in
regard of these words are of opinion, that Saint John is still living, and
shall come toward the end of the world with Elias and Enoch, and shall with
them be put to death by Antichrist. Perer. in Dan. lib. 15.
Pererius confuteth the conceit of Victorinus, who in stead of Enoch, puts
in Jeremy for a companion to Elias: as well as Abbot Ioachim who accompanies
him with Moses; as does also S. Hilary according to the report of Viegas.
Theodoret says, that Elias shall preach after Antichrists death. In sum, the
difference betwixt the Fathers touching this point, is no less, then is at
this day amongst the Romish Doctors about the same: for some say, that Elias
and Enoch shall come, which is the most common opinion. Maldon. in Mat. c. 17.
But Maldonate affirms, that S. John writes so evidently in the eleventh of
the Apocalypse, that Elias and Moses shall come. That no man can deny it not
only without rashness, but also without impudency: Viega in Apoc. cap 11.
with whom consent in opinion, Arboreus, and Gagneus, as Viegas relates.
Ambrosius Catharinus is reprehended by Pererius, because he adioyneth to Enoch
and Elias, John the Evangelist. In brief, every one speaks hereof according
to his own sense, as it ordinarily falls out to them that love rather to
grope in the dark, then to walk in the light of the holy Scriptures.

That seeing Enoch and Elias are yet alive, there can no other reason be given
thereof, but that they are preserved alive, to the end, Belde Romans Pont. lib.
3. c. 6. Peter. in Dan. lib. 9. Remond. de Antich. c. 46.
that a little before the consummation of the world, they should bear witness
of the truth of Christ against Antichrist: the which Remondus amplifieth with
pathetic^ exclamations, on this manner. For what other counsel (sa^ he) has
the Father of Nature reu^sed the order of Natu^ Wherefore has he in these two
so abridged the power of dea^ if not to preserve them alive for some great
enterprise? A^ what greater enterprise could there be, then to resist the
unsupportable impiety of Antichrist?

An idle consequence, Enoch and Elias live; therefore they shall come to fight
against Antichrist. As if God had not other reasons of his wonders, then that
which these fellows imagine in their feeble brain. The Fathers have searched
out other reasons of the transportation of Enoch and Elias then his imaginary
preservation to combat with Antichrist. Tertullian says, Tertul. l.
Resurrect. ^a^n. Ireneus lib. 5. cap. 5.
that they are examples of our future immortality. Ireneus, that they are
pledges of our rapting up before our Lord Jesus Christ, and that these bodies
wherewith we are weighed down in this earthly life, shall not hinder us from
ascending into heaven. But not to seek other reasons, it suffices us that God
has assumed them to himself after this manner, for the public edification
of the Church, and the making their preaching fruitful: for it is not unknown
how the world in the time of Enoch was corrupted and degenerated from it
ancient purity into all manner of impiety; which Enoch did most exactly reprove
by his prophecy, as appears by the Epistle of S. Jude. God therefore by this
extraordinary rauishment of his person, would as it were by a public seal,
confirm and approve the doctrine of his servant: to the end, to move men to
repentance, and to yield obedience to his preaching. Whence it is that Eccle^
(...) (...) and Elias were preserved a^^ue to come (...) ^e time of Antichrist,
is repugnant both to (...) and to reason. To holy Scripture, for it ab^ (...)
^ounceth, That Enoch was taken away that he (...) not see death, Heb. 11.5.
And to reason: because by this transportation they were changed, and this
change is an entire exemption from the power of death, as witnesses the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.52.53. 1. These 4.17.

4. Mark. The great p^rsecution of Antichrist.
Ordinarily ( says Remondus) The last evils are the extremest: they that are
in a Fever, Remond. lib. de Antich. cap. 43.
feel the last fit most violent. This poor Church which lies sick, consumed
in flesh and beauty, by reason of the violent fits which it endures; is not
yet in it Chrisis: (these are his own words.) The last fit which it shall
have, shall exceed all the rest before: New words fit for new Doctrine.
the rigor of the cold shall be more sharp, and the fierceness of the heat
more violent and burning, and the thick beating of the pulse redoubled. In the
end he concludes, That there shall be a greater persecution then ever was in
the Church. With whom are consenting all the others, Bell. de Romans Pont l. 3. c.
^. Peter. in D^^. lib. 15. V^^g ^n Apo^. 13. sect. 17.
that write of Antichrist. For Antichrist in such sort (say they) that there
shall not be any more any public service or ceremonies of Religion, or
Sacrifices: none of which we see arrived in our time; therefore Antichrist is
not yet come.

Answer.
^e^^ing to Physicians to judge whether the Aphorism of Remondas be
Hypocraticall: we simply deny, both that Antichrist must abolish all public
service and ceremonies of Religion, and also that he has not already abolished
the true service of God, so far forth as is fore-prophecied of him. For
seeing that he must sit in the Temple of God, and have two horn like unto the
Lamb: how can it be, that he should abolish all the ceremonies and service
of God? He shall indeed Interdict, and has already long ago interdicted as
much as in him lay, the true service of God, and the holy Ceremonies instituted
by Christ. Witness, that in the holy Supper, he has cut off the Cup against
the express commandment of our Savior, Drink ye all of this. And in stead
of the Sacrament which was instituted by Christ, for the confirmation of our
Faith by the commemoration of his death: has devised a sacrifice not only for
the quick and the dead, but that which is most abominable; for the diseases of
Men, of Horses, of Hogs, to auert tempests, and storms in the air, and
infertilitie of the earth, and in brief, for all other necessities of this
life. But let us see, how they prove that Antichrists persecution shall be the
most grievous that ever was, and that he shall abolish the whole service of
God.

Math. 24.21. it is said, That there shall be great persecution, such as has
not been the like since the beginning of the world, until this time, nor yet
shall be. Which words (says Remondus) are referred by all the Fathers of the
Church to the time of this persecution: and the abomination whereof the
Evangelist speaks, shall be the same Antichrist, as says Tertullian.

We have already heretofore declared, Resp.
that our Savior Christ's purpose in this place, is not to speak of
Antichrist, or of the end of the world. And in truth, if this persecution
whereof he here speaks, were immediately followed with the end of the world;
to what purpose should he say: That ^here has not been the like affliction
since the beginning of the world, nor shall be? For if the worlds end must
follow immediately after Antichrists destruction, it is so far, that there
should be any such like affliction afterward, that there can be no affliction
at all, of what sort soever. As for the abomination of desolation, it can no
more then the other, be referred unto Antichrist for the reasons fore
specified. Maldonats interpretation is much more agreeable to this passage, ^o
wit, that the abomination of desolation, is nothing else but the abominable
and horrible desolation of the City of Jerusalem: as is also expounded by S.
Luke in these words: When you shall see Jerusalem environed with armies, know
that then the desolution is near at hand, Luke. 21.20. To signify that the
desolation foretold by the Prophet Daniel should then truly be fulfilled: after
the which, they should ^ot expect any more restoration of the City, as it had
been after other precedent de olations.

Apoc. 20.28. it is said, that at that time Satan shall be ^et loose, Bell. de
Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 7. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 20. c. 8. and 9.
and consequently (says S. Augustine) this perse^ution of ^ntichrist shall be
so much more grievous, then ^^l that went before, because the cruelty of Satan
being vn^ound, is greater then when he was bound. Now we have had no experience
of any such cruelty, since the year six hundred or a thousand of our Savior
Christ. For what is that persecution, which they affirm to have been
exercised against such as have withdrawn themselves from the obedience of the
Pope, in comparison of the persecutions of Nero, Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian?
Seeing that Damasus writes in the life of Marcellus, that in one month under
the Emperor Dioclesian were slain seventeen thousand Christians? And
Eusebius, that the prisons were so stuffed with Martyrs, that there was no
room for Malefactors.

Resp.
It is true, that we read in the Apocalypse, that the Dragon should be bound a
thousand years, and at the end thereof be let loose. But it also true, that
whether we take the beginning of these thousand years from the birth of our
Savior Christ with Aretas, and S. Augustine: or from the destruction of
Jerusalem, with others: or whether we refer it to the time of the Emperor
Constantine, about the 300. year of Christ, when God began to give peace and
refreshment to his Church, after the former persecutions: always these
thousand years of Satan's imprisonment shall be accomplished, and this
grievous persecution of Antichrist shall begin, either in the time of Gregory
the seventh, about the year 1073. or of Boniface the eight, toward the year
1300. For since that time, what has been seen but horrible butcherries and
most cruel persecutions against the Saints of God? And to say that these
persecutions are not to be compared to those of Nero, Domitian, Decius,
Dioclesian is most true: for those were only corporal persecutions, but these
both spiritual and corporal: those were executed by fits and distinct
distances of time, and continued not, but for the space of certain months and
years: but these endured many Ages together. Those took away certain
thousands of Martyrs: but these, innumerable multitudes. And to the purpose,
Damasus numbreth up seventeen thousand Christians, Bell. de not. Eccles. cap.
vlt ^^no.
that were slain in one month under Dioclesian. And Bellarmine reckons
amongst the valiant acts of the Church of Rome, that an hundred thousand of the
Albigenses were slain in one day, under Pope Innocent the third. Not to
represent here the execrable Massacres executed for the cause of Religion, in
France and the Low Countries: So that, so far is it, that this Prophecy
should make us expect the coming of Antichrist, that it constrains us to
acknowledge that he is already come, and has exercised along time his tyranny;
not in secret, but in the open view of the world.

Daniel) and the abomination of desolation shall be set up, there shall be a
thousand two hundred and ninty days: signifying thereby, that the public
service and sacrifice of the Church, should utterly be abolished and cease, by
the persecution of Antichrist: as both Ireneus, S. Jerome, and others expound
the place. Whence they deduce three conclusions. First, that Antichrist is not
yet come. Secondly, that the Pope is not Antichrist, seeing he has not taken
away the daily sacrifice of the Church, but rather has adorned it with all
manner of honors. And thirdly, that they that oppose themselves against the
Pope, are the forerunners of Antichrist, seeing they hold nothing in so much
abomination, as they do this daily sacrifice.

The Prophecy speaks neither of Antichrist, Resp.
nor of the service and pretended sacrifice of the Christian Church: but of
Antiochus, and of the daily sacrifice of the Jewish Church: For from the time
of the profanation of the Temple, and setting up the abominable Idol of
desolation upon the Altar of the Lord, by the commandment of Antiochus
Epiphanes, until the purification and dedication of the said Temple by Judas
Machabeus, enterpassed a thousand two hundred and ninty days, Scalig. de Emen
dat. temper. lib. 6. page 547.
as Scaliger in his book of the Emendation of times has notably discovered. So
that the Allegorical expositious of this Prophecy, cannot make any thing for
the confirmation of this dream: especially seeing it has been before
manifested, that it is against reason, to make men believe, that Antichrist
must cause the service of God to cease. It is sufficient, if under the shadow
of Gods service, he shall bring in his abominations, and make semblance of
worshipping Christ, and honoring his Sacraments, shall deprive them of all
efficacy and saving profit: as may be observed more particularly in the Mass:
wherein under the pretext of offering a sacrifice to God, it hinders us from
receiving from him, that which he offers unto us: and by an imaginary
sacrifice, abolisheth the truth of the Sacrament instituted by Christ. In which
regard, we conclude three things directly opposite to those three conclusions
of Bellarmine: to wit, First, that Antichrist is not only come, but that he is
also revealed, seeing instead of a Sacrament he imposes upon the Church a
sacrifice. Secondly, that the Pope is this Antichrist, forasmuch as he
ordains this sacrifice, maintains it above all things, and graceth it with
all kinds of honor. Lastly, that it is so far, that we who detest with all
our hearts this sacrifice, are sore-runners of Antichrist; that rather we are
every one, according to the gift of Gods grace, the instruments of the mouth
of Christ, by whom he prepares the destruction of Antichrist: as on the other
side, they that employ their tongues and pens, for the maintenance of this
sacrifice, are the miserable instruments of Satan, that shall be consumed with
the sword of the mouth of the Son of God, Apoc. 19.21.
when the Beast and the false Prophet shall be cast into the Lake of fire and
brimstone.

Their fifth demonstration, is drawn from the durance of Antichrist, whereof I
shall speak afterward in due order: as also of the sixth, which is touching the
end of the world, immediately (as they say) following the destruction of
Antichrist after three years and an half, to the end I may not interrupt the
order of the proposed questions, according to the definition given of
Antichrist.

3. Question. Out of what Nation Antichrist shall grow, and of what Religion he
shall be.
Epist. Leonis 9. ad Michael. Episc. Constant. cap. 25.
There is a very remarkable discourse, in an Epistle of Pope Leo the ninth, to
Michael Bishop of Constantinople, where he says, that the report was, that
those of Constantinople, being accustomed to behold Eunuchs sitting in the
Patriarchall seat, at the last advanced thereunto a woman. A fine invention,
to make to vanish by this trick the memory of Pope Jove, by diuerting this
infamy upon Constantinople, where all know that never any such thing came to
pass. The like they do in this subject: for to the end that the true
Antichrist may not be known and acknowledged, they cast out a rumor, that he
shall be a Jew; that men in this vain expectation, may sleep under his
tyranny. The devil herein doing like a crafty Captain, who giving the assault
to one side of the City, makes a false alarm on another to amaze the
Inhabitants, and hinder them from repai^^g the breach. It is then a received
opinion in the Church ^f Rome, as a tradition from all antiquity: Perer. in
Dan. lib. 15. V^egan Apoc. cap. 13. sect: 3.
that Antichrist ^^all be borne in Babylon, of the Tribe of Dan, and the Nati^n
of the Hebrews: and that he shall be circumcised, and ^bserue the Sabbath;
their proofs are fetched either from ho^y Scripture, or from reason.

Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, and an Adder in the path. Perer. in Dan.
lib. 15.
The neighing of his horses (says Jeremy) was heard from Dan, and all the
Country was moved with the ^oyse of his horses. And in the seventh of the
Apocalypse, where the Angel marketh out the twelve thousand Elect of ^uery
Tribe of Israel, there is no mention of the Tribe of Dan; in hatred of
Antichrist (as they say) the which conceit ^hey fortify by the interpretation
of many of the Ancients upon this place.

These are not proofs, but conjectures, Resp.
without all weight ^or probability: whereupon Bellarmine is constrained to
say, that these passages can have no force in this respect; seeing ^he Prophecy
of Jacob speaks of Sampson, and that of Jeremy of Nabuchodonosor, not of the
Tribe of Dan, or of Antichrist, as S. Jerome has understood both the one and
the other. And as touching the Apocalypse, he says: That it is not well known
why the Tribe of Dan is omitted, seeing E^hraim is also, which was one of the
greatest Tribes of Israel. But he is deceived, in thinking that Ephraim is
omitted; seeing he is comprised under the Lynage of Joseph, Perer. in Dan. lib.
15.
as the Jesuit Pererius has well observed: howsoever, it is certain, that
the Tribe of Dan was not omitted in hatred of Antichrist, as some of the
Ancients have coniectured: but rather because this Tribe was of long time
revolted from the service of the true God: whence it is, that in the first
book of the Chronicles, where all the other Tribes are counted, there is no
enumeration made of this Tribe. And besides, if this pretended Antichrist, were
to be of the Tribe of Dan; how should he be received of the Jews for their
Messiah (as they would have it) seeing the Jews expect their Messiah, out of
the Tribe of Judah from the posterity of David? For this cause, Bellarmine
disclaimeth these allegations, and thinks to find more forcible
demonstrations, that Antichrist shall be a Jew, and be received of the Jews,
in these Texts that follow.

I am come in the name of my Father (says the Savior of the world) and you
receive me not, if another come in his own name, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 3. c.
12.
him you will receive, John. 5.43. And that which the Apostle speaking of
Antichrist, says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. That he shall come in all efficacy of
deceit in those that perish, Viegan Apoc. cap. 13. sect: 3.
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. Now
to whom does this agree better then to the Jews, who would not receive our
Lord Jesus Christ? And thus S. Jerome, Ireneus, Hippolitus, Theodoret,
Sulpitius Seuerus, and others expound.

Resp.
We have already before declared, that the text in S. John, does not aim at
Antichrist in particular: neither is that of the Apostle any more particular
touching the Jews, but enlarges it self to all those that shall not believe
the truth, whether they be Jews or Gentiles: as also the Apostle himself
seems to make clear, when he adds, To the end that all they may be damned
which have not believed the truth, but have taken pleasure in iniquity. Where
it is to be noted, that the Apostle does not use the preterperfect tense as
Bellarmine subtly disputes, to signify that he speaks of those only that
had not believed the preaching of Christ and his Apostles: but the indefinite
tense, which participateth the signification both of the time to come, and
past. For if he intended only those that had reiect^d the preaching of Christ,
how could they be punished in their persons, by the efficacy of Antichrist, if
he come not till toward the end of the world, as they imagine? As touching
the Fathers: wherefore should we be more enforced to receive their opinions,
then Bellarmine? Be^de Romans Pont. lib. 3^.12.
who in this very subject of the generation of Antichrist, refuteth S.
Augustine, or Raba^us (as he would have it) that affirms that Antichrist
shall be borne of a Virgin, by the operation of the devil: and Hippolitus
Martyr (...) says, that he shall be the devil himself, who of a ^lse and
counterfeit Virgin, shall receive false and coun^^rfeit flesh: And Origene,
that teaches that certain Angels ^aue been incarnate: And Sulpitius, or
rather S. Martine, ^^at holds, that he shall be Nero? In brief, it were an
appa^^nt injustice, to constrain us to admit as a divine truth, that which the
Fathers propounded only by way of conjecture, and that often against both the
truth and themselves. And (...) truth, if the Fathers had undoubtedly believed
that Anti^hrist ought to be a Jew, and reestablish Circumcision, the ^abbath,
and other Jewish ceremonies: how came it to ^asse, Aug. hom. 11. in Apoc.
that S. Augustine expounded this passage of the A^ocalyps after this manner:
The Beast had two horns like ^^to the Lamb, (that is to say) the two
testaments of the ^ambe, like unto the Church: and he spoke like the Dragon,
that is to say) presented himself under the name of Christia^ity like a Lamb,
to spread abroad secretly the venime of the Dragon. For to what purpose was the
new Testament, for ^^e redifying of the Temple of Jerusalem, and the
establish^^g the Jewish policy, and ceremonies of the Law, Circum^^sion, and
the Sabbath? I add further, to what end should Circumcision, the Sabbath, and
Legal ceremonies be; if An^^christ must abolish all the public service of
God, as these ^uen presuppose?

Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 12.
now ^one are so fitly disposed to receive him as the Jews, who ^xpect their
Messiah as a temporal King, which King shall be Antichrist: for the Turk has
his Elnabi arrived more then nine hundred years since. The Idolater, Infidel,
and Pagan, neither looks for, nor believes any such to come. Remond. lib. de
Antich. cap. 16.
The Christian, that calls himself reformed, is of the same mind: They
imagine that he is already come, and that it is he that warreth against them
every day. None expects him with horror and apprehension of danger, but the
Catho^ike, who trembles and quaketh at the fear of his coming, and the very
remembrance thereof. For (as Aristotle says) the certainty of a thing to come,
changes the nature thereof, and makes it of future, present. Conclude:
therefore Antichrist shall be a Jew.

Resp.
In many words, there is oftentimes, much leasing and vanity; we deny that
Antichrist shall be the Messiah which the poor deceived Jews expect as yet,
neither can the contrary ever be proved. Antichrist must sit in the Temple of
God. Chrysostom in Mat. hom. 49.
Not in the Temple of Jerusalem (says S. Chrysostom) but in the Temple of the
Church. In the Temple of God (says Aquinas) that is to say, in the Church:
forasmuch as many of the Church shall receive him. Aquin. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
Or as S. Aug^stine says: He shall sit in the Temple of God (that is) he shall
have principality and domination, as if he with his messengers were the Temple
of God: which indeed is fulfilled in them: for according to their own rule,
the Church recideth in the Pope and his Cardinals. They then that are in the
Temple of God, that is, in the Church, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, are
they that are more fitly disposed to receive Antichrist, then the Jews that
are out of the Church. And what fitter disposition I pray you could Antichrist
find, for his reception into the Church, then this doctrine, that sends over
his coming to the end of the world, against the express word of God? We do
not then any longer look for this Son of perdition as one to come, but we
are assured that he is come, and rejoice and give glory to God, that he has
begun to execute his justice upon the great Whore But they that yet crouch
under the yoke of the Papacy, are doubly miserable: for they are fettered in
the shackles of Antichrists tyranny, and yet they believe it not, but expect
his coming with horror and fear, in stead of laboring to come out of
Babylon, according to Gods commandem^nt. Bell. de Ro^. Pont. l. 3. c. 2.
It is vain therefore, and idle, that they say, that none of their Popes has
been a Jew, either by Nation or Profession: and that the Jews have not
received him for their Messiah, and therefore that he is not Antichrist: seeing
it is no better then a mere dotage, that Antichrist must be a Jew, and
accepted of the Jews.

1. Repl. They reply: That Antichrist shall deny Jesus to be Christ: who is a
liar, but he that denies Jesus to be the ^^rist? This is Antichrist, that
denies the Father and the ^^nne. But the Pope does not deny Jesus to be Christ.

R. Jesus may be denied to be Christ, either ouertly or ^^uertly, by mouth or
by deed: Thus the devil in many ^^aces of the Gospel, confesses that Jesus
was the Christ, ^^e holy one of God: and yet what is his h art more set vp^n,
then the ruin of this doctrine? In like manner, the Pope ^onfesseth with his
mouth that Jesus is the Christ, but he de^^^eth the same, when by necessary
consequences he destroy^^h the truth of his humane nature: as^ribing unto him
an ^^circumscribed body, which may be inuisibly in many pla^^s: a body
consequently, that is no body, according to this ^^xime of S. Augustine: Take
away the spaces from bodies, ^^d they shall be no where; and because no where,
therefore not (...) all existing. Or when he robs him of his office, and
de^^^oyes his benefit to us: His office, by assuming to himself ^^e title of
Head and husband to the Church, and communi^^ting his intercession with the
Saints: His benefit, in giving ^^rt of the glory of our salvation to our
merits, which we ^^^e entirely to the merit of him, That dyed for our sins,
and ^^^se again for our justification: and so the Pope is truly and ^roperly
the very true and proper Antichrist.

2. Repl. They reply secondly, that Antichrist shall name ^^mselfe God, and
cause himself to be worshipped as God: ^^d that in ^uch sort, that he shall
permit no other God to be ^orshipped, whether true or false, nor any Idols to
be re^ained: according to these words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. ^.4. That he
opposes and lifts up himself against all that (...) called God, or which is
worshipped, seating himself as God in ^^e Temple of God, and deporting
himself as if he were God. ^ut the Pope acknowledges one God; the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: calls himself the servant of God, and ^orshippeth (as
the reformed say) Idols. Therefore the Pope (...) not Antichrist.

Resp. S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom hom. 3. ^n 2 Thessalonians.
excellently expounds this passage ^f the Apostle: He says not (says he)
calling himself God, but laboring to show himself as God: for he shall do
magnificent works, Theop^il. in 2 Thessalonians 2. Athanas. sieve vulgar. in 2 Thessalonians.
2.
and perform admirable miracles. Theophilact, and whosoever was the Author of
those Commentaries attributed to S. Athanasius, affirm as much. He says not
(say they) calling himself God, but showing himself, that is, striving to
make himself acknowledged as God: for he shall perform both works and
wonders exceeding great, to deceive the world. So that the Apostle means not,
that he shall openly name himself God, but that by his works he shall
constrain himself to be so acknowledged, and shall usurp a divine power and
authority. Now, who can deny but that this accords fitly to the Pope; if he
consider that which we have proved in the second part of this Treatise, sect.
6? As touching Idols, the Pope indeed condemns them in word, but yet
establishes them under the name of Images. In sum, C^si^ut unite E^^ ss t
aetat. in G^ ss.
Restituit Papa solus, deponit et ipse,
Diuidit ac unit, eximit, atque probat:
Articulos soluit, synodumque facit generalem
Transfert, et mutat, appellat nullus ab illo.


That is to say, the Pope of his own sole authority, reestablisheth,
disposes, unites, divides, exempteth, and approves or rejects all
writings, yea even those that are divine. He breaks the Articles of faith, he
gives authority to a general Council, he translateth, and changes, and none
may appeal from his sentence. Could a man say more, and in fewer words, either
to prove that he calls himself God, or to declare himself to be Antichrist?
For it is to no purpose to say, that the Pope pronounces not these words, I am
God: seeing there is none of these particular heads of doctrine, which the
Glosser does not prove by the Papal Constitutions.

3. Repl. There remains one difficulty, touching the miracles, wherewith
Antichrist is to accompany his doctrine: for not to mention their strange
tales, like to the iuggling tricks of the old Romans, wherewith Remondus
puffs up ^^e 27. Chapter of his Antichrist; Bellarmine obiecteth, ^^at S.
John, Apoc. 13. gives v^ three sorts of miracles of ^ntichrist: 1. That he
shall cause fire to descend from heaven.

That he shall make the Image of the Beast to speak. And (...) that he shall
counterfeite himself to be dead and rise again: ^hence it follows (faith
he) that the Pope is not Anti^hrist; forasmuch as none of the Popes, ever
fained himself (...) be dead, and to rise again: none of them, nor of their
^inisters, made fire to descend from heaven, or the image ^f the Beast to
speak.

Resp. The two former sorts of miracles, are indeed attri^^ted to the second
Beast, that is, to Antichrist, Apoc. 13. ^^t as for the third, it is a dotage
or dream, whereof S. ^^hn makes no mention at all. He says indeed: That it
^^all be permitted to this second Beast, that is, to Antichrist; to ^^ue life
to the image of the Beast: which having received a ^^adly wound, does yet live.
But this Beast thus wounded is ^^e Roman Empire, at that time when it was
dismembered ^^to diverse Kingdoms, and in a manner wholly destroyed (...) diverse
Nations, that took up Arms against it: as may ^^sily be gathered out of Apoc.
17. The Pope therefore ^^en gave life, to the image of this Roman Empire, when
^e recovered it from it is ruin in Charlemaigne; giving unto ^im, the Name,
Title, and Authority, (as they themselves ^^ag) of the Roman Emperor. Whence
it is, that the ^opes require also of these new Emperors, the oath of
o^edience and fidelity, as unto their Lords and Superiors. ^o that it is easy
by consequence to understand, what it is, To make the mage of the Beast to
speak: to wit, to give au^hority to these new Caesar's, to command as
Emperors: which they have not, until such time as they be crowned and
consecrated by the Pope. As touching the fire which ^hey make to descend from
heaven, at least in show and ap^earance, although their Legends furnish us with
sufficient ^xamples thereof; and particularly of S. Anthony, one of ^he
expertest and nimblest of their Saints, for the managing of fire: nevertheless
it seems more fit, to refer it to a spiritual intelligence, to the fire of
excommunication, wherewith they have oftentimes enflamed the Empire, Kingdoms,
and Commonweals, and so terrified Kings and Princes, that they have been
forced to cast themselves at their feet, S^bell. Enead ^.
and to submit their necks under the yoke of their insolences: as were the
Emperor Frederick, and Franc^^ Dandalus Duke of Venice: who suffered himself
to be chained like a dog, and to eat his meat with the dogs under the table
of a Pope. Albeit, nevertheless it is a wonder, that Bellarmine should deny,
that either the Pope or his ministers, ever caused an Image to speak: seeing
this is one of the most ordinary miracles, that are found in their Legends Thus
we read, that the Images saluted the body of Pope Formosus, Platin. in vita
Se^gij. ^. Le^enda Beati Thoma.
being drawn out of Tyber by fisher men. Thus the Crucifix approved the third
part of Thom^^ his sum, and said unto him: Been scripsistide me Thoma: Thou
have written well of me Thomas. But hearken to an example which is worth the
reciting. Promptu^r D^^ itul^ie miracul. B. Mariae, exemp. 42.
A certain Gentleman called Theophil^, being fallen into great poverty, and
thereby brought into despair, gave himself to the devil, with abiuration of
his Baptism, of God, and of the Virgin Mary: which abiuration, he wrote with
his own blood, and it was sealed with the devils signet: but a while after,
this poor Theophilus, repenting himself of that he had done, prostrated
himself most devoutly before the image of the Virgin Mary, imploring her help
with tears and weeping: who as always merciful and gracious, took pity on
him, and pardoned him: but the image of Jesus Christ, which was in the arms of
the Virgin, as being offended would not hear, but turned his face backward:
which the image of the blessed Virgin perceiving, laid the image of her Son
upon the Altar, and went to find out the devil with Theophilus, whom she
restored into the favor of God again; and commanded the devil to render up
unto him the writing of his abiuration. Who then can deny, that the images of
the second Beast speak? Notwithstanding, Bellarmine is to be pardoned for ^s
fault, seeing peradventure he feared, least out of ^ords spoken by an image, to
Pope John the eight, Pa^^annes tu paries: Pope John thou shall bring forth a
(...): some should conclude against him, that the successor ^o the fourth, in
the Papal Sea, was a woman. In brief, (...) (...) praescience: We know not
what he has ordained therea^^^t, nor whether the vicious situation thereof at
that time shall ^^^schange it into another Jerusalem. And a little after, he
^^^dreth a reason of this speech: For although (says he) that (...) City be
the seat of the Church; yet nevertheless, it is not ^^^mpted from the strokes
of Fortune. It is composed and cymented of no other mold and metal, then was
Troy, Thebes, and Carthage, great Romes corriuall, whereof scarce the first
foundations are to be found. But yet for all this, he denies that Antichrist,
must either reside or preside in the Chair of ^. Peter, and in the Roman
Church: directly contrary to ^he opinion of S. Bernard, who in his 125. Epistle
thus speaks, The Beast of the Apocalypse, to whom is given a mouth ^ttering
blasphemies, and power to war against the Saints. ^ossesseth S. Peter's
Chair, as a Lion prepared for his prey. For albeit, he speaks not of Pope
Innocent the second, but of Peter de Luna, who by force had intended himself
into the Pontifical seat, yet he declares that whether it be by fraud or by
force, Antichrist may sit in S. Peter's Chair. Others perceiving how hard it is
to separate the City of Rome, from the Church of Rome, which is therefore
called Roman, because it appertains to Rome, and that in what place so ever
we const^tute the Pope, without possessing Rome, his Church cannot be the
Roman Church; find it more safe to say, that Jerusalem and not Rome, shall
be the seat of Antichrist, the Temple of Sal mon, and the Throne of David,
not the Temple of Saint Peter and Papal Chair, which they think to extort by
these Texts of holy Scripture.

John, Apocal 11.8. witnesses, that Elias and Enoch shall fight against
Antichrist in Jerusalem and there be put to death by him, Bell. de R^m. P^nt l.
3. c. 13.
and that their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, R^lera
i^ Apo ^^. 11. art. 20, and 21.
which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was crucified.
Thus A^etas (say they) and all others interpret this Text: neither can it be
denied. For what City is that, but Jerusalem, wherein our Lord was crucified?

Resp. Hiero^ ep. ad Martel^ Aug hom. 8. (...) Apoc. Beda in Apoc. Rupertus in
Apoc. 6. Lyra in A^^c. ^ert^^ or l b. 3. (...) Ap^c.
It is false, that all interpret this text of Jerusalem. Saint Jerome
interprets it of the world: S. Augustine says, In the place of the great
City, that is to say, in the midst of the Church. Beda expounds it, of the
Whose society of the wicked, called (says he) spiritually Sodom and Egypt,
that is, dumb and dark, is having neither the light of Faith, nor the voice
of Confession. Rupertus understands it after the same manner, ^or the City
or Communalty of all the w^ck^d, whereof Jerusalem was but a part. Lyra expounds
it, of the Congregation of the faithful, in the time of the Patriarch
Arth^m^us, infect^d with the Eutichian heresy. Berthorius the Monk thinks
that the world is thereby meant. In brief S. Jerome speaking of this Text
gives the advice: Touching Enoch and ^lias whom the Apocalypse says, must
return and die, th^s is no time to dispute thereof se^^^ all that book must
be understood spiritually as I suppose: or if we follow our carnal
interpretation, we must receive the Jewish Fables: That the Temple of
Jerusalem shall be built again, and so sacrifices offered in the Temple: and
that the spiritual service being put down, carnal Ceremonies shall succeed
in place thereof. Finally, as by the holy City in this very Chapter is not
meant one particular town, but the whole Church of Christ universally
scattered through the world: So through this City with the places thereof,
signifies principally Rome the seat of Antichrist, as she is painted out
under this name, Apoc. 17. yet it is also to be understood of all other
Cities, Lands, and places of the world, that submit themselves under
Antichrists yoke. And as the Poet has upon other purpose said, That other
Nations have their bounds and limits, Ovid.
but that Rome is only bounded by the whole world: So we say that this great
City is nothing else but the whole world that shall adhere unto Antichrist.
And in very deed, it is not found in holy Scripture, that Jerusalem is ever
called the great City.

And as touching these words, where our Lord was crucified, they must be taken
after the same manner, as Sodom and Egypt are, to wit, spiritually, as Saint
John speaks. For as Rome is Sodom for impurity, and Egypt for tyranny: So
our Savior Christ is herein crucified every day as well in his members, as by
the contempt of his Gospel and Grace. Forasmuch as they that re^ect the
Gospel preached unto them without repentance, do as far as in them lies,
crucify again the Son of God, and expose him to reproach, Heb. 6.6. Besides
the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which they brag to offer up every day, wherein
Christ must needs be respected as crucified: whereunto I might add, that he
was crucified under the Roman Empire, and by Pontius Pilate a Roman
Magistra^e.

Apocalypse it is said, that the ten Kings, that shall share amongst them the
Roman Empire, Bell. de R^m. Po^t. lib. 3. cap. 12.
and under whose reign Antichrist must come, shall hate the Whore clothed with
Scarlet, that is to say, Rome; and make her desolate and burn her with fire.
How can Rome then be the seat of ^ntichrist, if at that time it must be
desolated and destroyed?

Resp.
This Objection is compounded of many falsities. The first, when it sets
down as granted, that Antichrist shall come under the reign of these ten
Kings: for the Apostles tell us that he was already come in their time.
Another, when it affirms, that these ten Kings shall divide among themselves
alone the Roman Empire: whereas Saint John says, that the Beast, which is
Antichrist, shall partake with them in this division. They shall take (says
he) upon them power as Kings, Apoc 17.17.
at the same time with the Beast. Last, when it coniectureth that these ten
Kings shall destroy the Whore as soon as they shall enter upon their reign:
whereas S. John on the contrary shows us, that they shall first accord with
the Beast, I^^d Apoc. ^.15.
and shall have one Common Counsel with him, and give unto him their Power and
Authority, to fight against the Lamb: but at the last that they conceiving a
deadly hatred against the Whore, shall make her desolate, and burn her with
fire. So that out of such premises can be drawn no other then a false
conclusion. But let us return this supposed truth of his interpretation, and
that even against himself: for seeing this Whore which shall be destroyed by
the ten Kings which shall be in the time of Antichrist, is Rome: it cannot be
meant of Rome Pagan, as he would, Bell Ibid. c. 13.
but of Rome Christian. For Rome was not Pagan since the time of the Emperor
Constantine: and yet in their opinion Antichrist must not come till a little
before the end of the world. And certainly the Ancient Fathers plainly
declare, that they did not understand this, but of Rome Christian. Hieron. ad
Marcel. v^^^^.
I think (says S. Jerome speaking of Judea) that this place is more holy then
the rock of Tarpetus (that is to say Rome) which having been so often stricken
with Thunder from heaven, has manifested that it has displeased the Lord.
Read the Apocalypse of S. John, and consider that which he reports of the
woman clothed with Scarlet, of the blasphemy written in her forehead, of seven
Mountains, of many waters, and of the end of Babylon. Come out of her my
people (says the Lord) least ye partake of her plagues. Weigh also that which
is written in Jeremy: Fly from Babylon, and save every one his soul: for it is
fallen, great Babylon is fallen, and made a habi^^tion of devils, and a resort
of every unclean spirit. And to ^^e end that no man should think he speaks
of Rome Pa^^n, he adds: That in truth there is the holy Church, there ^^e
trophies of the Apostles and Martyrs, there was the says ^reached by the
Apostles, there the Christian name having ^^ampled Paganism under foot,
aduanceth it self aloft: But ^here is also the power and ambition, etc. And
what re^ained more I pray you? But that addressing his speech to Rome, he says
unto her with Petrarch: Thou ^^t in truth the very same whom the Evangelist saw
in spirit: the very same (...) say, and not another, who art set upon many
waters. Hi^ron. in pra^^^^ D ^ (...) de spirit. sanct^.
In another place the some Author speaks thus. When I conuersed in Babylon,
and was an Inhabitant of the purpled Whore; I ^urposed to discourse something
of the holy Spirit, and to dedicate the intended b^oke to the Bishop of that
City. But behold that Pot which is to be read of in Jeremy, after the staff
on the North side, began to be inflamed: and the Senate of Pharisees made an
outcry, neither was there one Scribe that counterfeited: but all the faction of
ignorance conspired against me, as if a combat of Doctrine had been
propounded. Therefore incontinently I returned to Jerusalem, and reuisited the
lodging of Mary, with the Den of our Savior, after the Cottage of Romulus, and
the Lupercalls of the Wolves. Where we see expressly, that he calls Rome;
even Rome Christian (for he speaks principally, of the Bishop and Clergy
thereof) both Babylon, and the Whore clothed with purple. If they reply, that
admit it be so: yet Rome Christian shall be destroyed by Antichrist, and
therefore is far from being his seat: We answer, that this supposition is
false, and contrary to that which S. John speaks, Apoc. 17.

These. 2.4. which are these: Even to be set in the Temple of God. For though
Anselme expounds the Temple of God for the souls of the faithful, then when
they are seduced by Antichrist: And S. Augustine understands that Antichrist
shall affirm himself to be the Temple of God, the true Church. And S.
Chrysostom takes it for Christian Churches, which Antichrist shall subdue to
himself. Nevertheless, the more common, more probable, and more literal
interpretation (says Bellarmine) is, that by the Temple of God, is ^eant the
Temple of Solomon.

(...).
S. Chrysostomes interpretation is true: and that of Bellarmine utterly
repugnant to the Prophecies of holy Scripture, which speak thus: That the
Temple of Jerusalem shall not be built again. Dan. 9.27. Mat. 24.2. which
Prophecies were long after verified, A^^ M^^ ^ll.
under the Emperor Julian; who g^ing about to reedifie Jerusalem, in favor of
the Jews, and in hatred of Christians, the foundations were turned vpside
down, by terrible fire bursting violently out of the earth. ^^^t. de A^^^^.
Cath^^. (...) lib. 5. Ap. 1^.
And Galatinus the Monk proves by the Ancient Thalmudists, that there shall
never be any building of a third Temple: Howbeit Bellarmine labors to prove
his interpretation by reasons, and thus he speaks.

Repl. First, Christian Churches (says he) are never called the Temple of God,
in the new Testament. Secondly, the most Ancient Fathers, both Greek and
Latin, did not call the pl^c^s of Christian assemblies, by the name of
Temples. Thirdly, this is the common exposition of the Fathers: as of Irenaeus,
Hippolitus Martyr, Cyrill, Hillary, Ambrose, Se^a^us, Damascene. Fourthly, they
that say that he shall sit in the Church, join nevertheless thereunto the
Temple of Jerusalem: as Chr^sostome, Theodoret, The^ph^lact. S. Augustine, S.
Jerome, Oecumenius alone, and ^e the l^test in time of all the rest, denies
that Antichrist shall have his seat at Jerusalem.

2. Cor. 1.1^.
R^^p. The first reason is manifestly false: for, What agreement (says the
Apostle) is there betwixt the Temple of God and Idols? For you are the Temple
of the living God: Now he speaks all this to the Christian Church at Corinth.
He that overcomes (says S. John) I will make a pillar in the Temple of my
God, Apoc. 3.12. that is to say, in the Church, as Beda expounds it. Beda in
Apoc. cap 3.
And in the 11. Chapter, a reed is given to S. John, to measure the Temple of
God, that is to say: intelligence to Prophecy of the estate of the Church of
God: (...) as S. Augustine says: Aug. hom. 8. in Apoc.
To number the Church and prepare (...) against the last day: for the Temple of
Jerusalem was not ^en in being. The second reason is foolish: for wherefore
should the Apostles and the Doctors, that imediately fol^owed them, give the
name of Temples to the places where Christians ass^mbled, seeing they had not
as yet any Tem^les as Bell^ m^ne avouches? The third reason binde^ us ^ot
against the Scriptures: and our Adversaries do often al^o reject the Fath^rs in
this argument. As for those Fath^rs, that join the Temple of the Jews, with
the Church of Christians; they speak figuratively, and meant thereby no other
thing, but that Antichrist should sit in the Christian Church, which is
collect^d and compounded of both Jews and Gentiles, as we also affirm. So
that Oecumenius does not contradict them at all, but only interprets their
meaning. And to purpose, what can be more clear, then that which Theodoret
writes upon this place of the Thessalonians? He calls (says he) the Temple
of God, the Churches wherein Antichrist shall ravish to himself the first
seat, to make himself a knowledged therein as God: For how could a man more
lively and punctually design, not only the Church in general, but also the
Church of Rome in particular; the Bishop whereof was ordinarily styled, The
Bishop of the first seat?

5. Question. Touching the continuance of Antichrist.
It was not without the singular providence of God, that the Ancient Doctors,
whose learned labors serve as yet to this day for the Churches behoof in the
understanding of the holy Scriptures, have nevertheless been so uncertain in
this matter of Antichrist, as has been noted before, that there is nothing
resolute in their writings. For hereby it must come to pass, that the mystery
of iniquity should advance it self, and yet be concealed, until the time of h
s revelation appointed in the Council of God. As therefore the Fathers were
deceived in the precedent questions, so are they also in this: for the most of
them hold, that the continuance of Antichrist, is limited to the compass of
three years and a half. and the Jesuits finding that this error serves
greatly t^ ^erswade simpl^ people, who with shut eyes use to rec ^^e the (...)
of Antiquity, that the Pope is not Antichristian (...), v^ry stiffely therein,
and strive to color the (...), with these ^easons that ens^^.

(...)
(...) be g^ther^d (say they) out of the seventh, and (...) Chapt^rs of Daniel:
and out of the twelfth of (...): (...)
that the continuanc^ of Antichrists reign, shall be th^^^ years and a half:
for these texts say, that he shall (...), a t^^^e, times, and half a time: by
one time, signi^y^ng a year; and by times, two years: and by a moy^ty of
(...) ^^ke a year: and ^o S. John explaineth it, when (...) that Antichrist sh
ll reign forty two months and (...) ^noch, sh ll preach 126^. d^ies; which
are pr^^^ y^^^ years and a half.

(...)
These places of the Prophecy of Daniel, speak not of Antichr st, as I have
proved before: neither can they be applied unto him, but by Allegories, which
are no demonstratiue proof in cas^ of controversy: neither is that Apoc.
12.14. a^y wh^^ mo^e to the purpose, for he speaks of the Dr^g^n, not of
Antichrist: of the Christian Church gathered ^^^ly (...) of the Jews, and not
of the Church of the Gentiles: and of the ^er^^cution of that time, not of that
which s^^ll b^ in the l^st times: as the wh^le co^rse of the text (...)
witness. For it is there related, that after the space of a time, times, and
half a time, the D^^gon cast out a flood of water against the wo^^n to take
(...) away: but that the e^rth hau ng swallowed up the flood, the Dragon
enrage^, went to make war against the other^, which are of the (...) of the
Church. So that he stirre^ up the first Beast, to whom he ga^e his power. Apoc.
1^.2. And finally, the second B^ast, which is Antichrist, Apoc. 13.11. which
makes it as clear as the Sun, that S. John speaks not of Antichrist in the
twelfth Chapter. The true intendment then of this Text is, that when the Dragon
had no power against the Church, bringing forth that male Child, whereof menti^
^^s made, in the precedent verses; our Savior Jesus ^rist, being gloriously
risen from the dead, and exalted up ^o heaven, then he set himself to make
war with the ^oman, which had brought forth this male Child, that is, ^e
Church of the Jewish Nation, out of the which our Sa^our Christ was borne
according to the flesh: and to the which the Evangelical grace being first
offered, was after ^spersed through all the Nations of the world, by the
prea^hing of the Apostles. But two wings of a great Eagle were ^iuen to the
Woman, to the end she might fly before the Serpent ^o her place: that is to
say, that this Christian Church of the ^ewish Nation, accompanied with virtue
from above, and divinely advertised, escaped from this first assault of Satan,
and was preserved from the common ruin of Jerusalem, by ^etiring her self
into the City Pella beyond Jordan, where God had prepared for her a place of
retreat, as in a Desert and separated Angle; as Eusebius reports the story in
his third book. For this is a similitude taken out of Deuteronomy. 32.11. where the
Lord says: That as the Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreads abroad her wings, gathers them, and bears them on her wings: so
the Lord does lea^^^. In that la^^ then was this Woman nourished; for a time,
times, and ^alfe a time: that is, for the space of three yeer^s a^^ ^n hal^e,
which are comprised from that fa^ous and las^ ^^olt of the Jews, which
happened in the twelfth year of N^ro, unto the full and absolute destruct^on
of the Ci ty, for so much time passed till the sacking of Jerusalem; as may be
gathered out of Josephus, Iose^h. lib. 7. cap. 12.
and other Authors, which plainly report, that before the revolt, there were
heard many divine presages and predictions: amongst which, that is very
memo^^ble, that during, the feast of Pentecost, there was not only heard a
great noise in the Temple, but also a voice understood by many, speaking out of
the Sanctuary, and saying: Let us depart from hence. This interpretation I
follow the more willingly, because it accords well with that manner of
speaking, which is used by the Prophet Daniel, Chapter 7. and it is understood
literally of three years and a half. As also those seven times which must
pass over Nabuchodonozor, whilst he should be out of his Kingdom, cannot
signify any other but seven years; besides that, it preuenteth a great number
of objections, which our Adu^rsaries are went to make against all other
expositions. As touching the 1260. days, or 42. months, they no ways
concern this time: for even for this cause it has pleased God to use diverse
sorts of numbers, to signify, that they are diverse Prophecies. So that 1260
days, are not three years and an half, but 1260. years: after the which,
God let loose the reins of Antichrist to sight more furiously against the
Saints, and to overcome them, as it is said, Apoc. 11.17. The which came to
pass about the time of Boniface the eight, and the years of our Lord 1300.
And this according to the ordinary custom of the Prophecies, where a day
signifies a year, as Numb. 14.34. According to the days wherein you spied
the Land, a year shall be counted for every day: and forty years you shall
bear the punishment of your iniquities And Ezech 4 6. Thou shall bear the
iniquity of the house of Judah forty years, I have given thee a day for a
year; I say one day for one year. A text by which the I^suite Ribera,
labors to prove, that these three days and an half, during the which the
dead bodies of the two Prophets mentioned Apoc. 11. ought to lie in the streets
of the great City, signify the pretended three years and an half of
Antichrists persecution. But what can be more express to prove this, then the
Prophecy of Daniels seventy weeks, which cannot be referred to the time of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Galat ^e Ar^^^ Cath^l, (...) 4.
unless we take days for years? as do also Galatinus, Pererius, and other
interpreters of Daniel.

John Apoc. 20. says, that the unloosing of the devil must be but for a short
time. Be^ de Po^^. R m. l^b. 3. cap. 8.
And our Savior Christ himself affirms: That if these days were not
shortened, no flesh should be saved. How can it be then that the kingdom of
Antichrist should last 1260. Remondus cap. 48.
years? Or how are these days cut short, if they endure above a thousand
years? In sum, Christ preached but three years and an half: it is not
^^^refore fit that Antichrist should continue longer.

All this is from the purpose. Resp.
For the continuance (...) Antichrist is one thing, and the continuance of
Anti^^rists persecution another. Antichrist began to be in the ^^e of the
Apostles, as has been often declared: but his ^ersecution began after a
thousand years; whereof is ^oken in the Apocalypse, and has been handled of
us before. This is therefore a bad conclusion: the persecution of ^ntichrist
shall last but a small time, (for this is the meaning ^f Saint John by the
loosing of Satan, Ribera in Apo^. c. 1. number. 54. 55. 56.
) therefore Anti^hrist himself shall continue but a small time. Besides, this
small time, must be understood figuratively, and in comparison to him, before
whom a thousand years are but as one day; as Saint Peter speaks, 2. Peter
3.8. Touching the words of our Savior Christ, That if these days should not
be shortened, no flesh should be saved: but for the Elects sake ^hey shall be
shortened: they make nothing to this matter in hand, as has been already
declared. Euthym. in Mat cap. 57.
He speaks (says Euthymius) of the days of the war and siege of
Jerusalem, saying, that if these were not abbreuiated by divine dispensation,
no flesh, no person, to wit, of the Jews, should be saved, that is, cl^ap^
death, and remain alive. For all had been dead both those that were within,
and those that were without: the one by Famine, the other by the Pestilence or
Sword, and all sorts of deaths. So greatly was the fury of the Romans incensed
against all the Jews: and that even against those which were dispersed through
the world. Now, he calls the faithful that were among the Jews, the Elect,
for whose sake the war ceased the sooner, to the end they might not perish
with the Infidels: but rather that some part of the Infidels might be s^ued by
them: that no man might say that this was sent of God for their cause which had
believed in Jesus Christ: But rather, that on the contrary, those that remained
alive seeing that all that believed in Christ were preserved from that
destruction, they might understand thereby the true cause, and know certainly,
that not only these perish not, as not partaking with the incredulity of those
that were dead, but also that in that they themselves were preseru^d, was for
their sakes. Which agrees very well with that which has been said before,
touching the preservation of the believing Jews in the Village of Pella The
phi^act expounds it after the same manner. Theophil. ^n Mat. cap 24.
There shall be (says he) an intolerable afflictions: for the Romans shall
command that none be pardoned. But Go^ for their sake, that should believe
among st the people, or that had already believed, does not suffer all of them
to be put to death, he short^ed therefore these af^lictions and this war: for
if the war had been reinforced and continued, all those that were in the
Village ha^ been fami^hed. And as if he meant quite to overthrow the opinion of
our Adversaries, he adds: Some (says he) understand these days of
Antichrist; but they are not so to be understood, but of the taking of
Jerusalem: for that that pertains to Antichrist begins at these words. If
any s^y unto you behold here is Christ, or he is there believe him not. What
could be spoken more directly for the confutation of th^^ Objection, and clear
demonstration who is the true Antichrist? Namely, he that affirms that
Christ, whom the Scripture assures us to be in heaven at the right hand of his
Father, is really and substantially a mo^sell of P^ste in a Cuboo^d, in a Bo^?
Touching the consequence from the time of our Savior Christ's first preaching,
to be applied to Antichrists continuance, it is too slender a conjecture to be
balanced in so weighty a matter, where we seek not after men's dreams, but
the truth of God testified in his word. And therefore this imaginary term of
three years and an half does not hinder, but that the Pope may be the true
Antichrist, and that the fifth demonstration whereby they labor to prove that
Antichrist is not come, is false and erroneous.

6. Question Of the battayles of Antichrist.
Although they of the Church of Rome that have written of Antichrist adi^yne
this question to the rest, rather to trouble and amaze simple people, with the
terror of I know not what uncouth and fearful words (as they term them,
Remend. cap. 17.18.
) (...) to make them to understand the truth, which they study (...) ^bscure
with their shadows: nevertheless, that I may not ^^^ue any thing of moment
behind vntouch^d; I will also ^^^fute that which herein shall ^e^ue to carry
any show of ^^^ficulty. They say therefore, that Antichrist after he has
^^^^uere^ the Kings of Aegipt, Libi^, and Eth^^pia, (...). ^e P^^t. R^m. l. ^.
^^
and pos^^^sed their kingdoms being become Monarch of the whole (...) shall
mak^ war against Christians throughout the ^hole world, with an innumerabl^
army which is called ^og, and Mag^g ^one of which t^ings agreeing to the Pope,
^hey conclude that he is not Antichrist. But because they know that men will
not believe them on their word, they endeavor to make om^ts passages of
Scripture to serve to their purpose.

Daniel in his seventh and eleventh Chap^^rs, auou heth that Antichrist shall
possess the Treasures (...) Egypt and pass through Libia and Ethiopia. Thus
Saint ^^rome, L^ctuntius, Ireneus, and others expound: insomuch (...) Saint
Chrysostom affirms, that Antichrist shall be the Monarch of the world, and
succeed the Romans in the Empire, as they succeeded the Grecians, and the
Grecians the Persians, and the Persians the Egyptians. Now the Pope ^^th not
sub^ued the kingdoms of Egypt, Libia, and Ethi^pia, nor calls himself King
or Monarch of the world: (...) therefore is not Antichrist.

These Texts speak of Antiochus Epiphanes, Resp.
as has been showed before, and is confessed by Bellarmine: And the contrary
exposition thereon by Ireneus and Lactantius, do not any more force us, then
that which they give touching the thou^and years of Christ's reign upon earth,
with the Chiliasts. As for that which Saint Chrysostom says, that the
^ingdome of the Romans shall be invaded by ntichrist, and that he shall be
Monarch of the world; need not seem ^^range, if we mo^e nearly consider,
what the Empero^r (...) at this day, and what the Pope. The (...) ^a Niem.
Theodoret of Niem an Historian represents them in these words. It is
suffi^^ently seen (says he) of what Magnificence the Empire of Rome in
Germany is: for there is found there one Archbishop or Bishop, that has twice
as much Revenue as the King of the Romans receives from all his Land: and some
secular Prince that p^ssesseth more Land^ then the Emperor does. And if we
(...) ^e unto Rome or Italy, it has been in truth in former time ^he seat of
the ancient Empire: But now the Emperor has nothing but the bare title
thereof: Spain, France, Hungary, Sic^ly and Italy, are subject to their
particular Princes, and not to the Emperor. And yet in these Countries is to
be seen the image of the ancient Empire: for there was in ancient time a
Governor of the Gauls who had many Diocesses under him So now there is also a
Primate of France, that has many Diocesses under his jurisdiction. And as in
former times the Governors that commanded in the Garrisons of Spire and
Worms, acknowledged him for their Superior that was at Mentz: So at this day
the Bishops of these Cities are subject to the Archbishop of Mentz. In brief,
as all the^e Governors acknowledged the Emperor, and performed unto him an
O^th of fidelity and allegiance; so all these Archbishops and Bishops do the
same to the Pope. But what say I? the Bishops, Blondus li^. 5 Romans 1 R^st 1^.
yea, Kings, and Emperors do him Homage. Non (says ^londus) the Princes of
the world ado^e and serve (...) perpetual Dictator, to wit, the Pope the
successor not of Caesar, but of the fisher S. Peter. Now all the world
reuerenceth i^ Rome, next to the ^ope, the Senate of Cardinals. Yea more, (...)
al Europe sends to Rome ^ear^ly tributes, either greater th^^ those of time
past, or at least equal unto them, when all Towns r^paire to the Pope to take
from him their sacerdot all benefices. Can any man desire more Authentic
titles of the Papal Monarchy? (...) ^^storal, de^e (...). in Clement et de
Ap^ll. 1.
He himself affirms that he has a Soueraignety over the Empire, and That
it being void, he su^ceedeth in his room. So that in right hereof, he
declares for a nullity whatsoever is done by the Princes without his advice.
He says, That the Christian Emperors ought to submit their excecutions to the
Prelates Ecclesiastic. C. (...) ^mpe^as D 96.
And that he is the owner of the Royal Crown and Dignity in all the West.
Antichrists great Scribe in his Antipapassae, discoursing of (...) Popes
Crown, which they call Regnum, C. Constantin. D. 96.
relates this ^^^sage out of Pope Innocent. The Bishop of Rome bears (...)
^rowne in sign of his Royalty, Remond in his Antipap. chap. 20.
and a Mitre in sign of his ^^ntisica^y: but more often the Mitre, because the
Pontifical ^^gnity is greater then the Imperial. And in another place: ^he
Church has bequeathed unto me a most precious and in^^^imable dowry, and has
endowed me with many spiritual, and ^^mporall graces: to signify, that first
she has given (...) a Mitre, and for the last a Crown: the Mitre for my
^relacy, and the Crown for my Kingdom: making me the Vi^^r of him who is the
King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. Did not Boniface the eight, Histor. of
France.
write thus Imperiously to a ^reach King? We would have thee to know, that thou
art sub^^ct unto us, as well in temp^rall as spiritual matters. Pope ^ius in
his second Epistle to Mahomet the Turkish Empe^our, promises that if he would
turn Christian, Pius 2. epist. 396. Bel^le transla. Imper. l. 1. c. 6.
and suc^our him in the necessities of the Church, in recompense of ^^is
benefit, he would make him Emperor of the Gre kes, and of all the East, as in
former time his predecessors had for the same reason, given the Western
Empire unto Charlemaigne. And was it not by v rtue of the same power, Bell. in
franc^s^ol^p. de Ge^era.
that Pope Alexander the sixth, give the East and West In^ies, to the Kings of
Spain and Portugal? And what I pray ^ou was Bellarmine, intent and aim, in
those books which ^e wrote about the translation of the Empire, when it was
transported first from the Greeks to the Frenchmen, and after from the French
to the Saxons, and that only by the authority of the Pope: but to demonstrate
the Popes Sovereign Monarchy over the world, by virtue whereof, he translateth
Empires and Kingdoms at his pleasure? To deny then, that the Pope does not
succeed in the Roman Empire, and is not Monarch of the world, and so
consequently the true Antichrist, is strongly to close our eyes against the
light of truth.

Apoc. 20. When the thousand years shall be accomplished, Satan shall be
loosed out of prison, and shall come forth to seduce the Nations, Be^^^^ Pon^.
^om (...). ^. c^^ ^7 R^^. ad cap. 1^. (...).
that shall be upon the four quarters of the earth, Geg and Magog, and shall
assemble them in battle, the number (...) wh^m, as l^ke the sand on the Sea
shore, etc. The like Prophecy is sound, Ez^ch. ^8. Now Gog signifies
Antichrist, and M^^^g his Army, to wit, the Scythians: none of which can agree
unto the Pope, and therefore he is not Antichrist.

(...)
The Prophecy of Ezechiel, by the testimony of Theod^ret, had it s
accomplishment, before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...)
in those persecutions which were stirred up against the Jews, by the
Sel^ue^des, that reigned in Asia M^^b, and in Syria: in that part whereof which
is called C^^^lyria, i^ situate the City called by the Greeks Hiera^^^, and
was builded by the Scythians, so much renowned, by reason of that prodigious
Atargati^, or ^erreto, which was there a ^ore^, and was called Mag^g by the
Syrians, as witness^th Pliny. (...) lib 5. cap. 23.
For after that Ezechiel in his thirty seventh Chapter had Prophec ed of the
deliverance of Gods people out of the Ca^tiuity of Babylon, by the figure of
the resurrection from the d^ad; and their full restoration at the coming of
the Messi^s: he comes afterward, by a kind of Anticipation, which ^s or ma^y
amongst the Prop^^ts ^s is app^^^t both in ^a^^^, and I^remy, to declare the
(...) which should b^fall the people of God, before the ^^mm^ng of the Messiah;
principally by the (...) y^^ng Nation (...) and the judgments of God against
all his en^^ies, which (...) comprehends under Gog and Magog. As touching the
^ee in the Apoc^lyps, it is di^esty ^^^preted: but assine^ly there is no
question, but that the spirit of God does therein represent unto us, how Satan
being after a thousand ye^res let loose, shall do all his uttermost ende^ours
^o hurt the Church of God, and arm against it all the Nations of the world,
even the most strange Nations; and amongst them Gog and Magog. But the greatest
difficulty is, what S. John understands by these names of Gog and Magog.
Almost all interpreters, both Ancient and Modern, agree in the interpretation
of Gog, and take it for Antichrist: but there is a difference in the
application of times and persons. For they of the Church of Romes side say,
that this Prophecy shall not have it is accomplishment but at the end of the
world: whither also they turn over the coming of Antichrist. Our men affirm
on the other side, that it has been accomplished ever since the time of
Bo^if^ce the eight, when those bloody wars were suited up betwixt the East
and the West, under pretext of recovering the holy Land. So that by Gog they
understand the Pope, as the secret enemy of the Church: and by Magog the
Turk, an enemy open and professed: Herein according well with the Romish
Doctors, that take Magog for the Scythian Nations, amongst whom are the Turks.
And in truth, if ever Satan seemed to be let loose to fill the world with
blood and slaughters, it was at that time: Bapt. Egnat.
and if ever he made a breach into the fields of the Saints upon the Church of
God, it was since that time that the Turks fleshed and enraged against
Christians, ravished out of their hands those two flourishing Empires,
Trebisonde and Constantinople, invaded twelve Kingdoms, took twelve hundr^d ^
i^ties, not to count Islands, that professed the Christian faith, and that
which he gains every day, in Hungary and else where. But howsoever this be
most certain true, ^^d s^^f^cient to show how much damage the Church of Christ
^a h^ received by this Roman Antichrist, who has b^ne the fire brand and
inciter of all these bloody wars: N^uerthelesse, I am of opinion that by Gog,
cannot be vnderst^o^ Antichr^st properly: For S. John says, That Satan shall
go forth to seduce the Nations that are upon the four corners of the earth:
Amongst the which ^he names Gog and Magog. N^w w^o will s y that Satan
comes forth to seduce Antichrist, that has been so long before seduced? And
least any should reply, that he shall come forth to seduce Antich is it, not s
mply, as if he were not already seduced; but to this end and respect, to c use
him to r^ise Armies and begin wars; the holy Ghost man f^stly distinguishes,
betwixt the Nations seduced, and Antichrist, when he says: And the devil
which shall seduce them: to wit, those Nations which are upon the four corners
of the earth, and by name, Gog and Magog, was cast into a Lake of fire and
brimstone, where is the Beast and the false Prophet: That is to say,
Antichrist, and the whole band of false Prophets. For this cause I had rath^r
understand simply by Gog and Magog, the Empire of the Turks, which being out
of the bounds of Christendom, warred against the Church, and tore it in pieces
every day, especially since the wars of Christians in Asia: and the rather
because the situation of those Mahometane Nations agrees well with the
Prophecy of Ezechiel: then to offer violence to the Text, to make it fall upon
the Pope, whom the Scripture does in other places sufficiently discover to be
the true and very Antichrist. So that in what sense soever this passage of S.
John be taken, it makes nothing for that which our Adversaries pretend.

7. Question. Touching the destruction of Antichrist.
As the Romish Doctors set forth the birth of Antichrist, with variety of
inventions: so do they also his death and destruction. Remondus cap. 50.
Remondus painteth him out after a marvelous fashion, falling backward at the
voice of Christ, descending from heaven with the same Cross in his hand,
whereupon he was crucified. And afterward, better aduising himself, he
attributes this discomfiture not to the voice of Christ, but to S. Michael.
cap. 51.
The eld^st of the Angels (says he) the chief Captain and Colonel of the
Armies of Jesus Christ, who shall serve under his name of Michael, as a
watchword in this battle against Antichrist, and shall slay him with his
hand, for which cause the Apostle says (these are Remonds own words) that God
shall slay him with the Spirit of his mouth: that is to say, according to the
opinion of our Masters, Jesus Christ shall truly slay Antichrist by authority:
But S. Michael shall kill him with his hand, as his Minister and Executioner.
Esaias. 11.4.
Esaias prophesied long ago hereof, when he says, That he shall smite the earth
with the rod of his mouth, and with the Spirit of his lips shall he slay the
wicked. But what an absurd consequence is this? Christ shall slay the wicked
with ^^e Spirit of his lips, Ergo, he shall slay him by his minister (...)
Michael. The contrary is rather true, he shall slay him ^ith the spirit of his
lips, therefore not by S. Michael. If ^ou understand not by S. Michael, him of
whom mention (...) made in Daniel, to wit, the Son of God himself, who ^s
indeed the true Michael: for who is there that can be named equal unto God,
but he alone? Who being in the ^orme of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
unto God, Phil. 2.6.

Bellarmine prosecuting his sext demonstration, Bell. de Pont. R^m. lib. 3. cap.
9.
wherein ^he labors to demonstrate that Antichrist is not yet come, induces
many passages of Scripture, to prove and verify, that the end of the world
shall follow incontinently after the destruction of Antichrist: wherein this is
most remarkable, that albeit he produces that speech of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians.
2.8. The Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth, and abolish him
with the brightness of his coming: nevertheless, he affirms that Christ
our Lord shall not come, till forty five days after the death of Antichrist:
with whom accords Pererius writing upon Daniel: Perer. in Dan. lib. 15.
for if Antichrist must be destroyed by the spirit of Christ's mouth at his
glorious coming; how can it be that he should dye forty five days before the
coming of Christ? In brief, not to stay longer upon this point, we grant unto
them, that Antichrist shall continue till the end of the world, though
effeebled and weakened day by day, by the preaching of the Gospel; and that his
utter destruction shall not only be a little before the end of the world, but
together with it. But we deny that his coming into the world, shall not
precede the end thereof, any more then three years and an half, as they would
persuade us against the authority of the Apostles, and the experience of so
many Ages.

As touching the place where Antichrist must be destroyed by the Son of God,
they say it shall be upon the Mount of Olyues, where he shall set up unto
himself an Altar in the highest top of the Mountain; and for proof thereof,
they allege this passage of the Prophet Daniel. He shall place his T^^e ancle
at A^adno, Remend cap. 49.
between the two Seas, on the glorious and holy Mountain, and shall ascend to
the top thereof. Which S. I^rome has interpreted of the Mount of Olyues,
Peter, in Dan. lib. 5.
and expounds this word Apadno his palace. So that the meaning is, that
Antichrist shall fix his Tabernacle and his Palace, or Throne, betwixt the two
Seas, to wit, the dead Sea, and the Me^iterranean, betwixt which two Seas
Jerusalem is situate Thus they But if we mark the speech of the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 11.45.
as it lies word for word according to the Hebrew truth, translated by Ari^s
Montanus, it will make nothing for this purpose; these be the words. He shall
plant the Tabernacle of his palace between the two Seas in the noble
Mountain. Now the Prophet speaks of Antiochus, who seeing himself assailed
on the East side, by the Parthian^, and on the North by the Romans, determined
to settle his Court in Judea, for the better taming of the Jews: by reason
whereof, he commits Antiochus his son to Lisias, with a moiety of his
forces and Elephants, to the end that he might address himself against Judea,
and destroy all the inhabitants thereof, and divide their Land by lot amongst
strangers: whilst in the mean while, he himself directed his course into
Persia, to receive the tributes of other Countries. But if any will needs
refer this Prophecy to Antichrist; where can a more express text be found
for the Pope, who has his seat in Rome, betwixt the Tythenian and Adriatic
Seas? Remond. cap. 49.
And so the discourse that Remondus makes, will not unfit the purpose, that
the Father of lies delights always to set up his Idolatries in mountains:
but yet he shall spend his oil, and lose his labor in vain, in the discourse
which he makes of oil, and of the Mount of Olyues, to build therein the
imaginary Tomb of this Antichrist.

Touching the name, and the number of the name of Antichrist.
I thought here to set a full period to this Treatise: but that I may not leave
it limping in any point, I will enlarge it with a short remonstrance of the
name of Antichrist, where^^ will content my self to represent barely, the most
pro^^le opinions of those that have written thereof, without (...) refuting the
Adversaries, who confess, that they have thing certain touching his matter.

S. John, Apoc. 1^. tells us, that the second Beast, that is, ^ntichrist as
all interpret, Caused that all, little and great ^^ch and poor, bond and
free, should receive a mark in their ^^ght hand, and to their forehead: and
that none should buy or ^^ll, if he had not this ma^ke, or the name of the
Beast, or the ^umber of his name: Here is wisdom, he that has vnder^^anding,
let him count the number of the Beast, for it is the ^^mber of a man, and his
number is six hundred, sixty, and (...).

Hence are sprung up diverse interpretations of this name ^^d number, as well
amongst Ancient as Modern writers. ^or some take the word name simply and
properly: others ^nderstand both this word, and the whole sentence,
figura^^uely. Amongst those that have taken this word in a simple and proper
signification, the most received opinion is of them that take the name (...),
for the name of Antichrist, being the number of 666. is precisely contained
therein, as may appear by this figure ensuing.

l 30 a 1 t 300 e 5 i 10 n 50 o 70 s 200 666.

For the Greeks dividing their Alphabet into three ^^nkes or classes, design
all sorts of numbers after this ^anner.

a 1 i 10 r 100 z 2 ch 20 s 200 g 3 l 30 t 300 d 4 m 40 u 400 e 5 n 50 d 500 6
x 60 ch 600 z 7 o 70 ps 700 e 8 ^ 80 o 800 u 9 ^ 90 ^ 900

In imitation of which Greek Alphabet, the Latins have devised the like in
Latin letters. A 1. B 2. C 3. D 4. E 5. F 6. G 7. H 8. I 9 K 10. L 20. M 30. N
40. O 5^. ^ 60. Q 70. R 80. S 90. T 100. V 200. X 300, Y 400. Z 500. Now as the
Greek brings forth the word (...) so the computation bring made by the Latin
Alphabet brings forth the title of this Treatise in French l'Antech Roman,
which also makes 666. which indeed is nothing but the explication of the name
(...), as may be seen i^ this table.

L 20 A 1 N 40 T 100 E 5 C 3 H 8 R 80 I 9 S 90 T 100 R 80 O 50 M 30 A 1 I 9 N 4
666.

Now they vn^erprop this interpretation of the number of Antechrists name, upon
Irenaeus a Martyr, who affirms, That by the witness of those that saw S.
John, and by the teaching of reason, the number of the name of the Beast,
according to the Greek computation, by the letters therein contained, shall be
six hundred sixty six. And albeit Irenaeus does not wholly ^^solue upon the
name (...), which notwithstanding he ^eth is very probable seeing the last
Empire was thus cal^^d; yet experience does at this day more strongly confirm
(...): for besides that, this name, is the name of a man, and that agrees not
only to the second Beast, but also to the first, (...) wit, the Roman or
Latin Empire: and that it has justly ^is number, of 666: The Pope whom I have
already pro^^^ed to be Antichrist, answers very fitly to this name, when ^e
ordains that all the services and mysteri^^ of his Chu^ h ^e performed in the
Latin tong^e, and enioyneth that all ^ersons of what quality soever make their
Prayers h^are their Masses, their Ve^pers, and their Matin^ in the language of
^he Latin Beast, whether they understand them or no. He ^lso holds for
suspect and corrupted, the Hebrew and Greek originals of the old and new
Testament, and will ^aue the Latin translation, though never so barbarous and
^^me, as only Authentic.

As touching those that take this name and the whole sen^ence figuratively:
some understand both by the name and ^umber, the time when the kingdom of
Antichrist began. For as the name, is a brief definition, or description of
some things by which it is known what it is: so this number 666. ^oth afford
us as much: for it leads us right to the time wherein Antichrist the son of
perdition openly discovered ^imselfe to be such. For whether we calculate this
number ^ince the pollution of the Temple of Jerusalem by Pompey the Great, to
the reign of the Emperor Phocas: or whether we reckon it from the nativity of
our Savior Christ, or from ^he Emperor Domitian, when S. John wrote the
Apoca^yps; we shall find that thereby is justly designed, the time when the
Pope began to establish his usurped seat: for in ^he time of Phocas, the Pope
began to style himself the Head of all Churches, or the universal Bishop. And
about ^he year 666. after the nativity of Christ, reigned C^nstan^^us the
Father of Constantine the Bearded, who freed the Pope from the power and
command of the ^mperour^ and as some b^^^e witness gave him al o the City of
Rome, or (...) the rights whereby he lays claim thereunto. and about the
y^are (...) 6. (...) Saint John had written the Apo^ (...) P^pe (...) second,
who was the first that (...) to be (...) upon men^ shoulders, and that (...) of
the Gre^^es to the ^r nch Nation, ^^d the Ki^^ (...) from the r^ce of the M
r^es to (...) re^^^pence whereof, he recei^^^ that which i^ (...) which ser^^d
^im as a Ladder (...) which he has obta^^ (...). (...)
Wh^r^unto ^gre^t^ very well that which Ire^^^^ (...) to ^^l^ing the means or
c^mming to the true kno^^^gde of thi^ number 666. For he s^^th, That the
faith^^^^ (...) the number 666. denounced by the holy Scripture to (...) and
certain, do first expect the division of the kingd me, ^that is to say of the
Roman Empire) unto ten Kings: and after th^se ten reigning and beginning to
advance then (...) and to enlarge their kingdom: he that shall come vn^^p^^^ed
and on a s^da^ne vsurp^ng the kingdom, and shall terri^y the f^rmer Ki^^s,
h^uing a name containing this foresai^ (...), this man dou^^lesse shall
manifest himself to be the (...) of desolation. Now to what time may this be
bette^ ^^ferred then to that when the Roman Empire being (...) pe^ces, and
dismembered in ^o many places, by the Goth^s Lomb^^d^ V^^da le^, and other
Nations, the Pope in the mean while enri^h^d himself with the spoils of this
E^pir^^ and vsur^ed in a manner all the power and auth^r^ty there of over these
other Nations by his spiritual tyranny*

O^ (...) that expound al^o this whole sentence figuratively (...) that by
these word^, the Mark, the name of the Beast, and (...) number of his Name are
to be understood the diverse degrees, by the which this Beast does captiuate
men unto his ^^^^ic^, to employ them in the traffic and negotiation of his
Indulgences, Dispensations, Excommunications, and other actions of his tyranny.
And so by the Mark, they understand the Clericall ordination and tonsure: by
the ^^me, the sacred O^ders, by the reception whereof they ^^^ticipate with the
name of the ^east: and by the Number (...) ^he ^east, the knowledge or the
Cannon Law, and Papal ^crees whereby they obtain, as it were in numb^r, all
the (...) wet. Faculties, and Mystery of the Beast; for in them (...) contained
the number of his Name. And this is that which ^. Io^n affirms, when he
faith, That here is wisdom: ^s if he should say, it is easy to have the
Mark, or the Name of the Beast: for this contingeth to the most igno^ant: but
in the Number of the Beast, is wisdom: none ^ut such as are wise, and have
vnderst n^ing, and are called ^llumined Doctors can attain unto it. For as
there are three sorts or degre^s of the knowledge of any thing: one common and
confused, which is gotten by some mark, that is, by some image or protraiture
of the thing: Another more part^cular, and more clear, arising from the name:
And the third most certain, when we understand the full estate of a thing, and
have as it were by number, all the faculties and means thereof: As when it
said, Esaias 40.26. Psalm. 147.4.
That God b^ingeth forth by number the army of the Creatures, and calls them
all by their names: and that he counts the number of the Stars, and calls
them all by their names: So the first kind of this knowledge belongs to them
that are rude and ignorant; the second, to those that are more advanced in
understanding; and the third, to them that are perfect: and as Saint John
speaks, that have ^isedome. So that this third enfoldeth the two other
d^grees, and the second, contains the first: but not on the contrary; and
therefore he that has the last has also the two other^, and he that the has
second, has the first. For this cause Saint John attributes this wise and
perfect man in Antichrists negotiation the number of 666. to signify three
degrees of one quality, by three degrees of one number: for the number of six
is a perfect number, and signifying perfection, the which either simple, or
multiplied by ten, or by an hundred, Always produces the fruit of one and the
same perfection: as witnesses Beda upon this place. Whence it was, that
Boniface the eight, vanteth the perfection of the work of his Decretals by the
number of six, in these words: We have ordained that this book which ought to
be joined to the other five, of the volume of the Decretals, be called the
^ixt, to the end that this same volume, this last being thereunto adjoined,
comprehending the number of six, which is a perfect number, may produce a
perfect form of practice, and a perfect discipline for manners. Which saying of
his, is nothing but an express Paraphrase of that which Saint John says, That
in this number consists wisdom and understanding. And so this
interpretation is the same with that of Venerable Bede upon this place, who
affirms, That the mark of the Beast is the mystery of iniquity which
hypocrites under the name of Christ, receive in their manners and profession.
And thus none may buy nor sell, if he have no^ the name of the Beast, or the
number of his name: that is, (says he) if he communicate not with him in his
fraud and d^ceit: only this exposion distinguishes more particularly, that
which he propounds in a more general and confused manner. Wherein this
interpretaion has this over and above, that it cannot be denied that the Beast
does not give, imprint, maintain, and cherish this mark, as the witness of
his most inward and affectionate Friends.

If any desire to have a more full sight of these things, he may carry his eyes
to others that have at large written thereof. It suffices us, that hereby we
have made the indagation of these things easy, and demonstrated, that in what
sort soever w^e take this name and number of the Beast, it agrees exceeding
well to the Pope, and that in this title he is truly Antichrist.

Summary recapitulation of all that has been said, concerning Antichrist.
I Have by Gods mercy, finished this Tractate touching the question so
necessary of Antichrist: ^eclared what the Sripture has defined thereupon::
shown how this agrees to the Pope, and confuteth that which is by ^he Doctors
of the Church of Rome alleged to the contrary. What remains more to make
known this Man of sin, this Son of perdition? What more visible marks can
be represented, then those which we produce out of the holy Scripture?

First, The spirit of God painteth out Antichrist as a man, wholly succ^ssion
shall continue in one seat. And is not the Pope such all one?

Secondly, That he shall in show make profession of the Christian faith: but
in effect shall destroy it. Is not the Pope seated in the Temple of God, where
he would have his Traditions to be received, in stead of Gods divine word?

Thirdly, That Satan shall be the Architect of Antichrists kingdom. And where
has Satan more strongly declared his efficacy, then in the Papacy, wherein so
many Monsters have been exalted to the highest dignity in the Church by his
ai^e?

Fourthly, That his seat shall be in the great City of Rome, situated upon
seven hills. Does not the Pope keep his residence in this Tarpeion rock?

Fifthly, That he shall exercise the power of the Roman Empire, and of the
false Prophet. And why does the Pope wear on his head a Crown, like a King,
and a Miter as a Bishop, if not to show that he has both the one and the
other, Spiritual and Temporal power in his hands?

Sixthly, That he shall carry himself in the Church of God as if he were God.
And does not the Pope say that he cannot be judged by men, forasmuch as God is
not judged of any?

Seventhly, That the coming of Antichrist shall be with signs and lying
wonders. Who can number by how many false revelations, counterfeit Miracles,
and fained apparitions of the dead, the Pope has insinuated into the Church
his false religion?

Eighthly, That Antichrist shall be an Idolater. Now the Papacy is a world of
Idolatries.

Ninthly, That he shall be ambitiou^. And is not he so that tumbleth down the
Crown of Emperors, and treads upon themselves with his feet?

Tenthly, That the great Whore shall make herself drunk with the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. And have we not seen Kingdoms and Countries
filled on every side with bloody Massacres, by the solicitation and mediation
of Popes?

Eleuenthly, That the seat of Antichrist must be a S^ (...) and a Babylon for
impurity. And does not Petrarch ca^ (...) at his time, the Fountain of
Dolours, and the S^ (...) Errors, the Temple of Heresy, Babylon, and the (...)
Frauds?

Twelfthly, That Antichrist must be revealed. (...) times. And who that is not
blind sees not in this (...) the Gospel, that the Pope is truly the Man?

Lastly, That Antichrist shall be wholly destroyed by (...) brightness of
Christ's coming. So albeit the Popes Kingdom day by day goes to ruin,
England, the greatest part of Germany, Denmark, and other Countries being
revolted from his obedience: and that at last Rome must be consumed with fire,
as is prophesied, Apoc. 17. nevertheless, his entire and full destruction is
reserved to him that shall destroy the whole Empire of Satan, and by his
glorious comm^ng shall right soon cast him with the false Prophets into a Lake
of fire.

But it may be, the Objections that are brought against this Assertion, do
eclipse this truth thereof: let us hear them therefore. First, Antichrist
(they say) must be one singular person. This is true: and so is the Pope; as
there is but one ^onarch in one Kingdom, who being dead gives place to (...)
successor. Secondly, Antichrist is not come. This is ^se, as has been
sufficiently proved before. Thirdly, The ^spell must be prea^hed through the
whole world, before the ^mming of Antichrist. This is a dream: and besides, is
not ^eir sound gone into the whole earth, and their words to the and of the
world, says the great Herald of the Gentiles, ^peaking of the Apostles?
Fourthly, The Roman Empire ^ust be wholly d^st^oyed before his coming. A
vain fancy: ^or Antichrist is now already in the world, says ^aint John of
^is time: and the second Beast shall exercise the power of ^he first, in his
presence (^aith he) in another place. Fifthly, At ^ast Enoch and Elias must
first come, and he put to death be^ ^^^ichrist. But our Savior christ said,
that Elias was (...): and the Apostle in the Epistle to the He^ (...) Enoch was
transported that he might not (...) The persecution under Antichrist must be
(...) service of God shall be abolished, and the (...) shall be nothing in
comparison thereof. (...) ^t fulfilled at this day, that the true ser^ (...)
^ned in every place where the Pope has (...) ^ion? And that in stead of a
Sacrament in^ (...), is substituted a Sacrifice which takes a^ (...) ^cacy of
Christ's Sacrament? And who can (...) ^e ancient persecutions, with this under
Anti^^^st? They were only corporal, this is both spiritual and ^orporall:
they of short continuance, this for many ages? Se^enthly (But Antichrist shall
be a Jew, both by Nation and Re^igion A mere sable: for he must sit in the
Temple of God, that is to say in the Church, says Saint Thomas. Eighthly,
Antichrist will deny that Jesus Christ is come in the fl sh And (...) not this
to deny him, to ascribe unto him, an vncircum^^ribed body, a body, and no body,
as the Pope does? Ninthly, Antichrist shall condemn Idols. So does the Pope ^y
word of mouth, but he establishes them indeed under ^^e name of Images.
Tenthly, Antichrist shall cause fire to descend from heaven. The Pope with his
thunder of excommunications sets on fire Empires, and Kingdoms. Eleuenthly,
Antichrist shall cause the image of the Beast to speak. The Pope boasts that
of his own only authority he gave the Empire to Charlemaigne, and in himself
makes the Beasts image to speak, when he gives Laws to Kings and Princes.
Besides under his Dominion they report, that sometime one Image has spoken,
another has sweat, another has moved, and all to authorize his Idolatry.
Twelfthly, Antichrist shall fix his seat in Jerusalem. A false tale: for he
shall ravish to himself the chief seat in the Church, to wit, the
Bishoppricke of Rome, there striving to make himself to be acknowledged as
God, says Theodoret. Thirteenthly, He shall reign but three years and an
half. A jest: for he was in the world in the time of the Apostles, and shall
be abolished by the brightness of Christ's last coming. Fourteenthly,
Antichrist shall make himself Monarch of the whole earth with an innumerable
army, called Gog and Magog. The Pope does more: for without an Army he subdueth
Kings, makes them to bow to his feet, by the terror only of Excommunication:
And as for Gog and Magog, they are to be referred to another purpose. Lastly,
Antichrist shall erect his Tabernacle betwixt the two Seas upon the Noble
Mountain. And does not the Pope place his Throne in Rome, situate upon seven
Mountains, betwixt the Tyrrhene and Adriatic Sea? What more? Both the name
and number of the name of Antichrist agrees most fitly unto the Pope.

What greater and clearer revelation can a man desire of the Son of perdition
then this is? And therefore you O Kings and Princes, how long will ye suffer
your selves to be made drunk with the Cup of his Fornication? Will you not
kiss the Son least he be angry, and so ye perish in this way, when his anger
is kindled but a little? You are they that have given your power and authority
to the Beast, to fight against the Lamb: but it is you also, that must hate
him and eat his flesh. And why do you delay the doing hereof? Has not the
light of the Gospel sufficiently discovered the frauds of this Man of sin?
Has not the spirit of Christ's ^outh which blows in so many places, already
discomfi^d him in the most eminent places of his kingdom? Do ^ou expect that
he shall be abolished by the brightness of the ^omming of him, who^e Trumpet
sounds already in our ^res, Behold I come quickly? And what more worthy
glory, can you join to the Laurels, then to purge the Temple ^f God, as did
good King Josias? And if this King of Kings, ^his great Protector of your
Scepters, do assist you in your affairs, what happiness may you look for,
where not your own cause, but the cause of the Omnipotent is in hand, who
calls all Men together with you, to render unto Babylon, as he has done, and
to pay her double according to her works? For albeit her thunder-clappes do
at this day astonish men: yet she must fall, and be made an habitation of
Devils, a resort for unclean spirits, and a receptacle of cursed birds: When
as they that shall obtain victory of the Beast, and of his mark and number of
his name, having the Harpes of God in their hands, shall sing prai^^ unto him
night and day, for everlasting.

Now the Father of lights open the eyes and the hearts of Kings, Magistrates,
and people, to the end that giving place to the word of God, they may know, and
acknowledge Antichrist, and detesting his yoke, may submit themselves to the
yoke of Christ: to whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be Glory, and
Empire eternally, Amen.

Finis. Deo laus.
ANTICHRIST the Pope of ROME: OR, The Roman Antichrist. The First Part.
CHAP. I. Of the name of Antichrist.
THe name Antichrist, is a Greek word, compounded of the preposition (...),
and (...); now (...) has three usual significations in Greek Authors: for
either it signifies contrariety and opposition, as in (...): or equality, as
(...), or substitution and vice gerency, as (...). In all which significations,
it properly agrees to the Pope, and to none else: for all Heretics are
enemies unto Christ, and so are Jews and Turks; and Mahomet made himself
equal unto Christ, or rather superior: for he acknowledged Jesus Christ to be
a Prophet sent from God, but himself a greater Prophet. But none of those
affirmed themselves to be Christ's Vicar general upon the earth, as the Pope
does: and therefore he is the true and proper Antichrist. For he is both a
secret enemy unto Christ, as is proved in this Treatise, and matcheth himself
in equal dignity of power with Christ, and also styles himself, Vicarius Dei
gen^ralis in terris.

2. The word Antichrist is used only in the Epistles of S. John, and in no
other place of holy Scripture, and it is taken in a twofold signification:
either general for all that are enemies unto Christ, or particular for that
great enemy, which S. Paul calls the man of sin. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. In the
first sense it is used by S. John. 1. John. 2.18. and 22. and in his second
Epistle verse seven: and in the second sense he uses it. 1. John. 4.1.

3. By which it is apparent, that all the enemies of Christ and his Church, are
in the general acceptance of the word, Antichrists. Now the enemies of Christ
and his Church, may be divided into two ranks, as they are by the holy Ghost
himself, Acts. 4.25.26. to wit, Jews and Gentiles. Touching the Jews, who
can express the rage and fury, wherewith they have banded themselves against
our Savior Christ and his Church? The Scripture declares with what malice
they persecuted Christ himself whilst he lived amongst them, even until they
had brought him to the most shameful and cruel death, crucifying him betwixt
two thieves, and preferring Barrabas a murderer before him, as if he had been
the greatest malefactor in all the world: and also how after his resurrection,
they persecuted his Apostles. But if we consult Ecclesiastical and Civil
Histories, we shall find, that they have not ceased ever since to show their
malice to the very name of Christ, in their murdering Christian children, and
especially Carpenters sons, in despite of Jesus the son of Joseph who was a
Carpenter: in poisoning Rivers and Springs, and raising seditions in Cities,
with many other horrible enormities. But as they have increased in malice
against Christ, so Gods vengeance has followed them unto this day: For after
that horrible desolation of their prime City and whole Nation, by Titus and
Vespasian, they again revolted and committed most fearful outrages upon
Christians, and all others in Lybia, Egypt, Cyrenia, Cyprus, and Palestina,
till they were again, first by the Emperor Traiane, and then by Adrian his
successor, so dispersed, destroyed, and torn in pieces, that till this day,
they durst never lift up their hands in public against the Church: yea by a
most severe edict of the Emperor Adrian, (which S. Jerome writing upon the
first Chapter of Zephaniah makes mention of) they were prohibited ever to
enter into their own Country; and so they are vagabonds and runnagates upon
the earth as Cain was, without Prince, Commonwealth, or Government. And since
me thinks I see in Cain a notable representation of this rebellious Nation:
for he slew Abel the just; so they, the just One, the Lord of life, the Son
of God: he was made a vagabond upon the earth, and so are they: but yet as he
had a mark set upon him by God, that none should slay him, so have they; for
God has so marked them by his secret providence, that though they be hated of
all men, yet they are not utterly destroyed, nor mixed with other Nations by
marriage, or any other civil or religious combination, as other straggling
Nations have been. And that for two causes as it may seem: one, that the
vengeance of God might be still visible upon them, for the confirmation of the
Christian faith: and the other, because God has appointed a time of their
conversion, and reception into mercy, as the Apostle plainly shows, Romans
11.26. These then are the first sort of Antichrists, as the Captains and
ringleaders of all the rest.

4. The second are the Gentiles, which may also be divided into two ranks:
first, such as are not of the Church, as were the persecuting Emperors and
Potentates in the Primitive Church, during the ten famous persecutions, by
which m^ll^^n^ of Ch^^st^^ns were cru^lly slaught^red, for the pro^^ssi^^ of
the Christian religion, prophesied of, Revel. 1^.1^. (...) 13 ^.2. A^^ the M^^
(...) ^^^tic^l^rly d^s^^^ (...) S. I^^^. A^^^ ^.14. (...) And s^co^^^^, ^a^h^^s
are (...), Hy^^^^^ite, and all (...) all (...) s^^t, ^et ex^^^^s (...)
T^^^u^^^^ calls (...) A^^^^^ ^^^eth t^^ Arria^ by the (...) an^ S. Au^u^^^ne
(...) 1. T^^^^ ^^^^tia (...) 3. (...). A^^ (...) 4.
(...). affirms. T^^t so m^^ (...) ^^^d ^^surers (...) m^^ A^t^chr^^t ^are
(...) ^^^au^^^h (...) w^^k^.

5. But prop^^ly and particularly, the name Ant^ (...) be appropriate^ to the
great Adversary of Christ, (...) by S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. and by S. John, in the
13. (...) the R^uel^tion, by the see ^n^ Be^^: and i^ the (...) Ch^pt^^ in the
(...). Of whom, all the (...) but (...), and in whom all (...), (...) the
former, w^^^ c^^^^^ the (...) (...), Ir^n^^^ (...)
(...) by (...) ty^^^n^^^ll M^^^r^h (...) vp^^ t^^ C^ri^^^ (...) (...) ^^ey,
a^^ (...) of C^^^ (...) ^^^selfe. O^ (...) at Anti^h^^^^ (...) that Anti^^^^
(...) the t i^gs (...) b^ ^^pli^d (...) was N^^^ (...) the (...) that all (...)
fulfil^^^ (...) p^oph^^ (...) S^ripture, (...) ^^^^able (...) ^ight (...)
represented, (...) the Prophet Z^c^^, Chap. (...) ^or^^, I w^^ar^^ up a ^p^^rd
in the Land, (...) that be ^ut o^^, ^^ber si^ali feel the young one, nor heal
that that is broken, nor feed that that stands still: but he shall eat the
flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces: woe to the Idol shepherd
that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm and upon his right
ere, his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened.

A notable Prophetical description of this great Antichrist, and is so applied
by S. Jerome, in his Commentary upon that place. And he is fitly called an
Idol shepherd, to signify that which S. Paul affirms, in the second to the
Thessa^^nians, that he should show himself in the Temple of God as God,
exalting himself as an Idol to be worshipped, (...) ^ored even by the Princes
of the earth: but that he (...) ^onsumed by the breath of the mouth of Christ,
(...) ^t sword of the Spirit, spoken of Ephesians. 6.17. (...) ^reat Antichrist,
quis esset, who it should be, is all (...) ^sie betwixt us and the Church of
Rome: they (...) he is yet to come; and we, that he is already (...) sits in
Babylon spiritually understood.

(...) ^oncerning this word Antichrist, thus properly (...), we are further to
observe, that it is sometimes (...) the whole body of the Antichristian
kingdom, and (...) times for the head of the body. In the first sense, it is
used by S. Paul, when he calls it an Apostasy or defection, and the Mystery
of iniquity. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. and is expressed by S. John, under the name of a
cruel Beast, and of Babylon, and many waters, Apoc. 12.11. and 18.2. and 17.1.
In the second sense it is taken by S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he is called the
Man of sin, the Son of perdition, and (...), the Adversary, and by S. John
(...) the Antichrist, (...) and (...), and (...), the destroyer.

7. The several periods of this Antichrist, are five. First, his birth, in the
time of the Apostles. 1. John. 4.1. Secondly, his growth, which was from the
Apostles times, till the reign of Phocas the Emperor, in the year 607.
Thirdly, his reign, which was from the time of Phocas, till about the year,
1517. wherein he commanded in the world as a King, and no man durst gainsay his
power. Fourthly, his reueaing, which beginning in the year 1517. proceeds by
degrees, and increases till the coming of Christ to judgment. Fifthly, his
destruction, which is begun by the preaching of the Gospel, and shall be
finished by the coming of Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

CHAP. 2. Of the number of his Name.
1. AS the manner of Traitors is, under pretense of the Kings name and
authority to raise forces, seize upon Cities and Castles, and send forth Edicts
and Proclamations, but all against the King himself, that they may deprive him
of his Throne, and set up whom they list in his room: So does Antichrist under
the name and authority of Christ, advance himself against Christ, and in
pretense that Christ is in body absent from his Church, draw unto himself by a
sacrilegious usurpation the government thereof. For this cause the Spirit of
God minding to arm the faithful against the subtilities of this hypocritical
enemy, propounds unto us a certain name comprised under the number, 666. by
which rightly understood, we might attain to the true knowledge of him.

2. The Text in the Apocalypse is this, That no man should buy or sell, b^t he
that has this Character, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name:
here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of the
Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is. 666. Where by the
character, the name of the Beast, and the number of his name, in all
probability is meant one and the same thing. So Haymo, Sixtus Senensis,
Alcazar, and others understand it: and thus the latter is still the exposition
of the former: as if a man would know what is meant by the character, S. John
says by way of exposition, Or the name of the Beast: and what by the name of
the Beast, he adds: Or the number of his name. And so the character of the
Beast seems to be nothing else, but the name of the Beast, containing the
number, 666.

3. By the Beast whose Character, name, and number, is here designed, is not to
be understood Antichrist himself, who is figured out by the second Beast,
Apoc. 13. but the first Beast, whose authority Antichrist does usurp, and
causes it to be adored, and erecteth an image unto it, and imposes the name
thereof upon all men: as is plain, Apoc. 13.12. that is, the Roman or Latin
State (for so the first Beast signifies) the last head wher^of, is Antichrist.

4. It is said to be the number of a man, either because a man by reason and
understanding may find out the mystery thereof: or because it is an obuious
and usual name amongst men: as Esaias. 8.1. The pen of a man: and Apoc. 21.17.
The measure of a man; that is, such a pen and measure as are in use by men: or
lastly, b cause the name of the Beast, containing this number, is also the
proper name of a man. Which way soever it be taken, it is all to one effect,
for the sense of the Text.

5. This number, 666. is diversely interpreted by expositors of the Text, and
that principally two ways; either mystically, or literally. The mystical
expositions are four. First, some understand it of the time wherein Antichrist
began to reign and reveal himself. Secondly, of the certain degrees, by
which this Beast does captiuate men to his ^eruice and homage; both these are
expressed by the Author and therefore I forbear to speak of them any
further. The third interpretation, is by a certain Lawyer called Caryon, in
his Anatomy of Antichrist, Chap. 21. who speaking of this subject, says; that
it is a fashion of speech taken from the Greeks and Latins, in the censuring
or numbering their Citizens: for there was says he) a twofold catalogue or
numeration of them: The first, census nominis, which every Citizen was bound to
give unto the Censour: the other, a declaration of the estate and revenue of
every Citizen, whereby they were ranked in their several degrees: and so that
S. John like a Censour sets down, first the name, and secondly the demeanes
of the Beast, which is 666. talents of gold yearly coming in. And this (says
he) is the number of the revenue of this mystery, arising from his damnable
traffic of souls, answering in greatness to that of rich Solomon, of whom
it is said, that there came in unto him every year, 666. talents of Gold;
which amounts to betwixt five and six millions, an Hebrew Talent auayling in
worth eight or nine thousand Crowns, or six score pounds of Gold, as both
Epiphanius, and Budaeus affirm. The fourth mystical interpretation, is that
of Anselme Bishop of Canterbury, in his Commentary upon the Apocalypse, Chap.
13. who says, by the number of six, which is the first perfect number, is
mean^ those, that in the state of Marriage, do after their measure fulfill the
Commandments of God, and so are in the lowest degree of perfection: and by 60.
which is formed of six and ten multiplied together, those which stand in the
middle degree of perfection by their excellent graces and virtues, who though
they come short of the third, yet do far exceed the former: but by the six
hundred he says, are to be understood, such as are in the highest degree of
perfection, as Monks that keep the integrity both of body and spirit. Now of
these three degrees, the first bring forth fruit six fold; the second, sixty
sold; and the third, an hundred fold: and that the Disciples of Antichrist
shall preach, that none can be saved, excep^ he bring forth one of these
measures of fruits.

6. Of all the^e mystical interpretations, not one comes any thing near to
S. John's intention: for touching the first, seeing S. John says expressly,
that it is the name of the number of the Beast, it can in no probability be
referred to the number of the time, either of the beginning, or of the
continuance of Antichrist. And for the other interpretations, besi^es many
difficulties that encounter them in the Text, this is one principal: that is,
there are diverse kinds of numbers, both amongst the Hebrews and Greeks, some
mystical and Evangelical, and others usual and ordinary, as Scaliger well
notes: so to put a difference betwixt these, the holy Scripture sets down
certain marks of distinction, whereby they may be discerned. And for this
cause S. John to show that this number is not to be taken mystically, or
cabalistically, but literally and usually, sets this note upon it, that it
is (...), that is, (...), a humane name, or a name ordinary amongst men: for it
is not (...) with the article, as if it were the name of a certain man, but
(...), without the article, by which signification, mystical and cabalisticall
interpret^tions are excluded.

7. The li^erall interpretation of this number is (as all agree) by some
certain name, the letters whereof, exactly contain 66^. by computation, and
neither more nor less. For as the Hebrews, so the Greeks in imitation of
them, in stead of figures use Alphabeticall letters for computation. Now this
number of the name of the Beast, some compute by the Hebrew, and some by the
Greek Characters: by the Hebrew, because the Revelation was made to S. John
being an Hebrew, and therefore most likely in the Hebrew tongue, as most
familiar unto him, and that he translated it out of the Hebrew into the Greek:
and this they say is apparent, both by the sundry Hebraismes commonly used in
this book, and by the Hebrew names therein yet contained, as Abaddon,
Harmageddon, Gog, and Magog: and by the so ordinary repetition of the number of
seven, all which savor of the Hebrew language. And they that will have it
expressed by Greek Characters, give this reason; because the Revelation was
written in Greek, and sent to the Greek Churches, which last opinion is most
probable.

8. In Hebrew we find three words containing this number and all of them
fitting the present state of Antichrist, as we take it. The first is (...)
Romiich, that is Romana, or Romanus, for Nounes collectiues with the Hebrews,
as Iunius observes, are taken promiscuously in both Genders: and if they were
not, yet the Faeminine termination agrees as well to the purpose, because this
number is not the proper name of Antichrist, but of the Roman state, which
afterward is described by the name of a woman, and an harlot, Apoc. 17. and 18.
The second is a Latin name written in Hebrew letters, because the Latins do
not use their letters for n^merall notes, as the Hebrews and Grecians do, and
this they say is (...), Romanus: the knowledge of which name, deuote and
learned M Fox, obtained (as he says) of God by earnest prayer. Both these
names do fitly agree to the Antichristian State, for the Empire is still
called the Roman Empire; and the Pope, the Roman high P^iest or Bishop, and
their Church the Roman Church; as if Roman and Catholic were all one, as
Baronius affi^meth, and the Popes subjects, Roman Catholics; all which things
show the agreement of these names, to the thing they are to express. The third
is (...) M^ssa, the Mass, wherein is couched together as it were in one
bundle, wel-nigh all the mysteries of Antichrists kingdom.

9. In Greek, there are found out many names that contain this number.
Irenaeus an Ancient Father and Scholar to Polycarpus, whom S. John ordained
the first Bishop of Smyrna, propounds three (...), of the first whereof he
affirms nothing: but the second (he says) is very likely and probable,
because it is the name of the great and last Kingdom, out of which Antichrist
was to sprout. But the third he rests most upon, vt maxima side dignum; as
most worthy of belief. But by Irenaeus his leave, we may rather resolve upon
the second (...), and that for two reasons specified by Irenaeus himself: one,
because it is the name of the first Beast; and the other, because Antichrist is
to impose that name upon all men. But any one of the three do fitly agree to
the Roman Antichrist. For first, touching the name Euanthas, it is as much in
signification, as happily flourishing: and what estate in the world is more
flourishing, in power, riches, and stately buildings, multitude of attendants,
delightful Gardens, and Meadows, delicacy of meats, and all other things,
that may serve either for pomp or pleasure, then the State of the Roman Pope?
There is not any thing in this world, either delightful to the eyes, or
desirous of the heart of man, which he and his Clergy enjoys not. Their
Palaces surpass in statelines the goodliest Mansions of Kings, and Princes,
and their Pomp is far greater then any of them. For this cause, Politian
observes in the se^ond Epistle of his first Book, that Rome in their ancient
Sacrifices was called by a secret name Anthusa, which is as much in effect, as
Euanthas, happily flourishing. Secondly, the name Titan, is one of the names of
the Sun, whom both the Grecians and Barbarians made an Idol, and worshipped,
and carries with it an ostentation of revenge. And is not the Pope such an
Idol? He is carried aloft upon men's shoulders, like the Goddess Pessenuntia,
with the Sacrament carried before him like the Persian fire: all sorts of men
fall down and worship him as a God upon earth, and kiss his feet. And that
he may not want the name of this Idol, he calls himself the greater light
that rules the day, to wit the Church; that is, Titan, or the Sun, and the
Emperor the lesser, to rule the night, to wit, the Layty. And as the Moon is
subject to the Sun, and not the Sun to the Moon, so Emperors and Kings are
subject to him, and not he to them: and as far as the Sun does exceed the
Moon in greatness, so far does the Papal power exceed the Imperial: and
as it is impossible for the Sun to depend upon the Moon, so it is for the
authority of the Pope to depend upon the Emperor: and as the Sun is the
Father and Lord of all the Planets, so is the Pope of all Temporal dignities:
and as all the Planets receive their light from the Sun, so do all Bishops
their power and authority from the Pope. And lastly, as the Sun receives his
light from the first mouer, and communicates the same to all the rest of the
Stars: so the Pope deriueth his power immediately from God, and dispenses
the same to all the members of the Catholic Church. And as for the vengeance
which this name Titan also imports, who can doubt but that it fitteth him in
this respect to an hair, that considers with what Gyant-like violence he
has assaulted Kings and Princes; sometimes with the thunderbolts of his
Excommunications, wherewith the greatest were wont to be terrified as with
lightning from heaven, sometimes with open and bloody Wars, and sometimes
with secret Massacres, and treacherous designements: thus making as it were the
earth to quake, and the stoutest and greatest hearts to tremble at his threats.
Most fitly then by these two names we have a most lively picture of this Man
of sin: and yet I confess they are not so grounded upon the holy Scripture,
as that we dare fully rest upon them.

10. The third name is (...), which is the most probable and likely of all the
rest, though Irenaeus holds it not so. For first, the letters of that name
exactly contain the number, 666. namely, if it be written with the Dipthong
(...), and and not with a single iota, as the Jesuits cavil it ought to be,
and so would infringe the credit of this name, because the letters do not
agree with the number. But Irenaeus that know the Greek tongue better then
they, and also wrote in Greek, writes it with the Dipthong, and not with a
single iota. And whereas speaking of (...), he qualifieth it thus; Si modo per
(...) scribatur, that is, if it may be written by the Dipthong (...) coming
to (...), he makes no qualification, but takes it for granted that it ought
to be so written. And this learned Scaliger observed in his Animaduersions upon
Eusebius Chron: that the Greeks used to turn the letter iota into the
Dipthong (...), when it went before a N, as (...) insomuch, that it was not
only not a fault so to write, but a fault not to write so. Secondly, it cannot
be doubted, but that by that Beast with seven heads and ten horns, Revel. 13.
and 17. is meant ^he state of the Empire and City of Rome: now the seventh head
which is Antichrist, is one of the heads of this Beast, and therefore must
needs have the same domination with it; that is, Latin or Roman, as the other
six were called, especially by the Greeks, who called it ordinarily by this
name, The Latin Empire and Emperor. Thirdly, it is also certain, that during
the time of the Latin or Roman Empire, Antichrist could not discover
himself: but that which was the obstacle of his coming being removed, then he
was to spring out of the ruins thereof, and so must needs succeed him in the
same place and authority: but the Empire of Rome is long ago taken out of the
way, there remaining nothing thereof now but a bare title without being. And
the Pope has usurped all the power and authority thereof into his hands, as
also the City it self, and therefore why should we doubt but that the name
Antichrist is (...); and so that the Pope is he without all question? Lastly,
that he may plainly declare that this name belongs properly unto him, and
none else, he imposes this name upon all that depend upon him: his Church is
called the Latin Church, so is the Apostolical Sea: the public Liturgy is
commanded to be Latin: so Prayers, Bulls, Indulgences, Masses, Vespers,
Mattens, Decrees, Pleas, all Latin; yea, the holy Scripture it self by the
Decree of the Counsel of Trent, is not authentical, but in Latin. And that
which is most obseruable, this public service in the Latin tongue, was (as
Wolphius shows) brought in and obtruded upon the whole Church, Recondit lect.
by Pope Vitalian precisely in the year, 666. which is the number of the name
of the Beast in the Apocalypse. Did not Irenaeus then aim near to the mark,
when he propounded (...), as very likely to be this name? Who if he had lived
at this day, and seen all these things before named, especially the division
of his Roman Empire, and the Papal usurpation, would not have given it out as
a probable conjecture, but as an assured and undoubted truth.

11 There are diverse other names found out, or rather devised by sundry
Authors, which in the Greek Characters make this number; as (...) of
Hippolitus, which is Nego in Latin; (...) of Arethas, that is, illustris,
famous; (...), Victor, a Conqueror; (...), prauus dux, a wicked Guide; (...),
vere nocens, truly hurtful; (...), olim inuidens, envying of long time; (...),
Agnus nocens, an hurtful Lamb; (...) of Primasius, that is, contrarius, an
Adversary; (...) the Italian Church; (...), I am a God upon earth: with diverse
other like; out of all which, Bellarmine concludes, that because the word
(...) in Greek, or (...) Romanus in Hebrew, do not only comprehend this
number, but many other names besides, therefore this cannot be the name
signified in the Apocalypse. But we are to understand; first, that some of
these names do not iumpe with the number, as (...), and (...); and secondly,
that some do properly appertain to the Pope, and to the Church of Rome; as
(...); yet thirdly, that none of them represent the name of the former beast
which (...) does, and therefore are in no sort to be accepted, as nothing
agreeing to the purpose of that Prophecy: for if any name would serve the
turn, an hundred such like were easy to be devised by the wit of man.

12. As for those names invented by the learned Papists, only of purpose to
disgrace our Religion, they favor so much of malice and ignorance, that they
deserve no other consutation, but derision and contempt: such are these
ensuing: Martin Lauter, for Martin Luther, if the Latin letters be accounted
for numbers after the Greek computation, this is Lindaas devise: but Genebrard
will have it to be Lulther for Luther being written with Hebrew characters.
Bellarmine has devised Dabid Chitreta, for David Chitraeus; and (...) for the
Country wherein Luther was borne: all which are ridiculous, and far
unbeseeming the gravity of such learned men, were not their eyes blinded with
malice. By as good reason we might conclude, that Paulus Quintus was
Antichrist, because the Anagiam of his name is thus, Quis tu? an Lupus? And his
title which he takes to himself, Vicarius Dei generalis in terris, contains
in the numerall Letters thereof just the number 666. as may appear by this
computation of them: or that every Pope since they took upon them the title of
the head of the Church and universal Bishop, is Antichrist: Otherwise as
Walter Brute diverse hundred years since affirms, these words, Dux Cleri,
make the same number of 666. but these Cabalisticall conceits, are rather
flashes of ouer-flowing wits, then sound traces of true judgment.

13 The name (...) then, is of all the most probable upon which we rest,
until it shall please God to reveal another unto us: for Antichrist must be
the head of the Roman state in general, but so far forth as it is Latin:
the Mother City whereof is seven hilled Rome. For this name Latin is that by
which the East and Western Romans were distinguished, the Western calling
themselves indeed Romans, yet by the Greeks were called always Latins for
distinction sake.

CHAP. 3. Of the Character or Mark of Antichrist.
1. A Character is a mark or symboll of difference by which one thing is
known from another; thus Merchants by certain Seals and Marks use to
distinguish their Wares, and Grasiers their Cattle and Sheep, and Captains
their Soldiers; as Ishmael the Persian Sophi distinguished all his followers
that held of Haly, whom they pretended to be the true successor of Mahomet,
from the Turks, that were of a contrary opinion, by a red Ribbon on their
Hats. The word is derived from (...) or (...), which signifies to imprint, or
ingraue a mark upon a thing: and so Character signifies a mark, or note
imprinted. And it is taken either literally, or metaphorically; literally as
before, and metaphorically as in Demosthenes, (...), that is, In the speech is
seen an image of the mind: more particulary for a form or peculiar fashion
of speaking, called of Tully. Forma dicendi: and so also Forma or Character
viuendi, A fashion or manner of living, consisting in outward Rites and
Ceremonies, as it is used, 2. Machab. 4. And lastly, it is used for the
description of a thing, whereby it is distinguished from another, as Tully
affirms in his Topics. These different acceptations of the word, show
plainly, that the Papists who restrain the word to some corporal and visible
mark to be imposed by Antichrist upon his followers, do manifest wrong unto
the holy Ghost, restraining that to one strict sense, which should be left at
large.

2. There be sundry opinions touching this Character of the Beast what it
should be. Bullinger thinks it to be Unction of Chrisme, wherewith all
Christians living under the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, are signed in the
forehead. Bullinger. ser. 61. in Apocal. Theodorus Bibliander in his Chronology
tab. 10. says, it is nothing else but the outward profession of the Roman
faith, without which the Papists affirm, that a man cannot be a true
Catholic. Chytreus would have it to be the Oath, which is imposed upon all for
their obedience to the Church of Rome. Others think it to be the Unction
sacerdotall, by which an indeleble character (as they say) is imprinted upon
all that take those sacred orders: and some again to be nothing else, but the
superstitious carriage of Popish ceremonies of the Romish Church, as
worshipping of Images, creeping to the Cross, adoring the Sacramental bread,
and such like. Hippolitus the Martyr (if he be not counterfeit) says, that
this Character is nothing else, but not to use the sign of the Cross, but
rather to detest and abolish it, which is a pri^atiue mark, and therefore no
mark at all: for a Character is a positive impression, Primasius, Beda and
R^p^^tus think, that the Character of Antichrist shall be certain letters,
wherewith the name of Antichrist shall be written: but this opinion Bellarmine
him self confuteth. Ribera in his Commentary upon Apoc. 13. (...). 1^. and
34.35. has two opinions concerning this Character, the one that it should be
a certain mark in Antichrists privy Signet, wherewith he should seal all
his Decrees, Edicts, and Letters after the manner of Kings and Princes, and
probably coniectureth, that this may be the picture of a Dragon, as the Roman
Emperors carried an Eagle in their Signet and Ensigns: but he little thought
that this conjecture would touch some of the Popes, and Paulus Quintus by name,
who bore Dragons in their Arms. But not resting upon this, his second
conjecture is, that it should be the name wherein Antichrist most glories,
abridged in a certain figure, and this he supposes out of one Aubertus, who
took it (as he says) from Primasius, might well be the name of Christ, or the
Messiah: which Antichrist should style himself by.
This figure is thus expressed by him, as is set down in the margent, which if
it be so yet fitly agrees to the Pope, who glories in the name of Christ's
Vicar, and uses, or rather abuses all kind of crosses to most horrible
Idolatry: and therefore Napiour upon the Apocalypse, says; that these very
crosses thus abused in the Church of Rome, are the true marks of the Beast.
Lastly, Bellarmine with more modesty then the rest, thinks, that Antichrist
shall have a positive visible mark which he will imprint upon all: but what
mark this shall be, cannot be known, till Antichrist himself be come.

3. Bellarmine proves out of the words of the Text, that this Character is but
one and not many, for the Scripture (says he) speaks always of it, and of
the name, and of the number of the name, in the singular number; and therefore
that they speak absurdly, that bring in a multiplicity of works: whereunto we
consent that the Character is but one: and yet it hinders not, but that which
is vnum specie, or numero, one in kind or number, may notwithstanding have
many parts and branches: As the body of a man is one, and yet has many
m^^^^ers: a tree is one, and yet has many branches: the Church is one, and yet
has many parts: so is this Character one, and yet may be divided into many
sections and parts which so that they proceed from one root, and tend to one
end, do no wai^s hinder the unity of this Character. And so though in
general, this Character o^ the Beast be common to all Antichrists followers,
yet some may be marked with one branch of it, and some with another, according
to their quality, being in effect all but one and the same. For as the
Character of Christians is but one, to wit, their subjection to Christ, and
their spiritual communion with him, as the only Head and Spouse of the
Catholic Church: yet this one has many parts, and is either inward or
outward: the inward Character of a Christian, is faith working through love,
with which they that are endued, are sealed unto salvation, and known only
unto God. The outward, is partly in the forehead by profession of this faith,
and partly in the right hand, by living according to the rules of that
profession, and partly in the participation of the Sacraments, to wit,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which are the badges of Christianity. So the
Character of Antichrists followers, though it be but one in specie, yet it is
partly inward, and partly outward: the inward may well be accounted that
implicit faith of the Papists, whereby they believe whatsoever the Pope and
the Church of Rome believes, or propounds to be believed, though they know
not what it is: and the outward, is either in their forehead, by open
profession of the Roman faith, or in the right hand, by living according to
the superstitious traditions of the Church; or lastly in both, by receiving the
Popish Sacraments, and putting more confidence in them for their salvation,
then in those Sacraments which Christ himself ordained. Aug. de ciui^. dei
lib. 20. cap. 9.
And thus Lyranus, S. Augustine, Primasius, Richardus De sancto Victore, Haymo,
and diverse others of their own side, expound the phrases of the forehead, and
right hand, In front per professionem, in manu per operationem.

4. This mark of the Beast then being one in specie, and yet divided into many
branches, may well be considered two ways: either as common to all that are
subject to Antichrist, or particular to such as buy and sell. This distinction
is plain in the Text, Revel. 13.16.17. And he causes all both small and
great, rich and poor, free and bound, to receive a mark in their right hand,
and in their fore-heades: this is the common mark, and then follows in the
Text: And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark: which is
the particular mark, plainly distinguished from the former, by the conjunction
copulative (and) whereby all Papists bind themselves in obedience and
subjection to the Pope, and the Church of Rome, without which it is not lawful
for any to make profession of the Christian faith, without the imputation of
Heresy, or Schism at least. And this mark seems to be imprinted four
several ways principally. First, by the Sacrament of Baptism according to
their use. Secondly, by their supposed Sacrament of Confirmation and Chrisme.
Thirdly, by solemn oath and attestation. And lastly, by customary
superstition, and practice of the Romish Ceremonies.

5. Concerning Bapti^me, they themselves teach and affirm, that therein is
contained a secret and implicit oath of obedience to the Pope, which is a
kind of hidden Character: thus Mathaeus Tortus, or rather Bellarmine page. 51.
and Augustinus Tryumphus. q. 22. art. 4. ad secundum. And this Character I
think to be imprinted according to their doctrine by the Popish Ceremonies,
wherewith that holy Sacrament is adulterated, Cream, Oil, Salt, Spittle, and
many other such apish trumperies, which Christ, and his Apostles, and the
Primitive Church never heard of, but are part of those counterfeit drugs, that
are fetched out of the Whore of Babylons box: and so whereas in holy Baptism,
we receive the Character of Jesus Christ, they are thereby marked as slaves
unto Antichrist, which is a most horrible profanation of that most Sacred
mystery. For should that which is the mark of our obedience to Christ, be made
a mark of our obedience to Antichrist? Are men therefore baptized into Christ,
that they should serve Antichrist? But thus it becomes Antichrist to do,
therefore we need not wonder at it.

6. In their supposed Sacrament of Confirmation, which they blasphemously
prefer before Baptism, for they teach, that a man is not a full and perfect
Christian, though he be baptized, till he be confirmed by the hands of the
Bishop, and that a man is not a Christian till then. I say in this Sacrament,
an apparent mark is printed on the forehead of the Confirmed by the Bishop,
with their hallowed Chrisme, in form of a Cross and this they say is so
necessary, that he cannot be a Christian, qui confirmatione episcopali non
fuerit chrismatus: that is, not marked with Episcopal Confirmation. Bellar.
catechism.
Yea Bellarmine directly affirms, that by confirmation, another mark is
imprinted upon the soul then by Baptism, by which a true Christian shall be
discerned from an Infidel apud inferos, that is, amongst the dead, or in the
gates of hell. This then is another way whereby men receive the mark of
Antichrist, when with such superstition, and an opinion of necessity, they use
this Popish Ceremony, of which I doubt not but there is and may be an holy use
in the Church of God; but so, that it be first purged from these superfluities.

7. The third is by protestation and oath, whereby all from the highest to the
lowest, Emperors, Princes, Bishops, Clerks, with all that take any degree in
schools, or undertake any public office in the Commonwealth, or that being
private persons, are suspected to disagree from (...) doctrine of the Romish
Church, are constrained to swe^ ^legiance and fidelity to the Pope, as to the
supream^ (...) the Church. And this Character is imprinted bot^ (...) foreheade
by solemn attestation, and in their righ^ (...) laying it on a book: and the
reason hereof is this, (...) they hold it of necessity to salvation, for every
creat^ (...) subject to the Bishop of Rome. And that we may see (...)
particular, the Emperor before he can be Crowne^ (...) confirmed by the Pope,
takes two solemn oaths, one (...) his entrance into the City of Rome, to
preserve the ancient and usual customs thereof, and the second in the
Chapel of the Virgin Mary, called S. Mary amidst the Towers, where he
swears himself a Liege-seruant to the Pope, and that he will prot^ct and
defend him, and the Church of Rome, in all the necessities and vtilities
thereof: then he must be covered with a surplesse, and received amongst the
Canons of S. Peter, as a Canon and Brother, as if he were not capable of the
Imperial dignity, unless he were enrolled into the orders of the Beast: then
one of the Cardinal Bishops, accompanied with two Deacons, leads him in to
the Altar of S. Maurice, where he is anointed on the right arm and shoulders
in form of a Cross, with the exorcised Oil of the Catechumes, and before his
Coronation, the Pope gives to the Emperor kneeling before him a Sword and an
Apple into his right hand, and a Scepter into his left. In fine, after his
Coronation, the Emperor waits upon the Pope at saying of Mass as a
subdeacon, and delivers unto him the Chalice, and a plate with Hosts, and
water to mix with the wine. This is the order of the Emperors Coronation:
wherein what does he else, but receive upon him the mark of the Beast, seeing
all these Ceremonies are both the inventions of the Pope, and serve to no other
end, but to tie him to his obedience? The like protestation of obedience to the
Pope and Church of Rome, is made by all such Princes as are subject to the
Papacy at their Coronation, as Histories (...) ^bundantly testify. The Oaths
that Bishops take at (...) ^f their consecration, is notorious and famous,
(...) ^entioning God, nor Jesus Christ, nor his word, (...) are that they will
be obedient to the Pope, (...) ^ll rights of S. Peter, entertain his Legates,
(...) ^gment the Rights, Honors, and Privileges (...) of Rome, and visit
either personally, or by (...), the Apostolic Sea, once in three or four
(...) ^er with many other particulars: which Oath (...) at large, in the
Pontifical, in the Chapter (...) ^ecration of Bishops: and who sees not, that
it is (...) oath of a Pastor of the Church, promising obedience to God and his
word, but of a vassal to the Pope, as to his feudall Lord, and Sovereign
Prince? In sum, the general Oath that all take, is set down in the Bull of
Pius Quintus, upon the form of Oath from the profession of their faith,
wherein is expressly contained, the new Romish Creed, consisting of twelve new
articles, equal to those twelve of the Apostles Creed, wherewith, as with a
manifest Character, all the Romanists are stamped, and that by the decree of
the Tridentine Council.

8. The last way of imprinting this Character, is by the superstitious practice
of the Popish Ceremonies, as namely, the celebrating of Festival days
ordained by the Pope, hearing of Mass, fasting in Lent, and other enjoined
times, abstaining from flesh on Fridaies, and Saturdaies, shriuing to a Priest
at Easter, partaking the Sacrament under one kind, creeping to the Cross,
falling down before an Image, putting ashes on their heads on Ashwedensday,
and whipping themselves on good Friday, with an hundred more such vain
trumperies, which were never commanded by God, and wherein notwithstanding they
place the perfection of a Christian life.

9. As touching the particular mark: that is proper to them that buy and sell
in the Church, as the words of the Text do plainly show: now if this buying
and selling be referred to outward and civil commerce betwixt man and man, as
some suppose, yet it fitly agrees to the Roman Bishop, who prohibiteth all
such commerce with those that are not subject to the Church of Rome. Bertold.
Constant. Append. ad Herman. Contract An. 1054.
Thus Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand, counseled William the Conqueror;
Ne aliquem in sua potestate aliquid emere aut vendere permitteret, quem
Apostolicae sedi inobedientem deprehenderet, that is, That he should perm^t
none to buy and sell in his Dominion, whom he found disobedient to the
Apostolic Sea. Alexander the third, in Synodo Turonensi, caused the very
Decree to be made, that no dwelling place or succor should be affoorded to
such as withdrew themselves from the ubiection of the Pope. Sed nec in
venditione et emptione al^qua cum ijs communio habeatur. So it was also decreed
in the Laterane Council, Guliel Neubrig. rum Angl. c. lib. 2. cap. 15 (...)
lib. ^. cap. 3.
against the Albigenses, Ne quis eos in domibus vel in terra sua tenere vel
fouere vel negotiationem cum ijs exercere presumat. The like is to be found in
the Bull of Martine the fifth, against the errors of Wicleffe, and Husse: and
in the Bull of Pa^lus the third, against King Henry the eight and his subjects,
Ne perm^^t intur contractus inn negotiationes et marchantias quoslibet
exercere, etc. And no marvel if they forbid to buy and sell those that have
not this mark, seeing they go so far, as to dissolve the bonds of nature
and humanity: as that an Heretic may lawfully be spoiled of all goods: a
Father may disinherite an Heretical son: and a son may likewise deny
obedience and maintenance to his Father: a Catholic wife, is not bound to
yield benevolence to an Heretical husband; subjects are not tied to obey their
Heretical Prince, but may ri e up against him and depose him. These are their
own proper doctrines, printed, maintained, and propugned by them. And who is
an Heretic with them, but he, be never so Orthodox, whose faith does not
conspire in every point, with the faith of the Pope, and the Church of Rome?
This Prophecy then in this literal signification of buying and selling, does
so fit the Pope and his Church, that it may seem rather to be an History, then
a Prophecy. Neither is Bellarmines exception any thing worth, that the Jews in
Rome under the Popes nose, are permitted to buy and sell: for this Prophecy is
plainly to be understood of Christians, and not of the Jews or Infidels.

10. But if we understand it spiritually, of the traffic of souls, then is
the case more clear: for is not Merchandise made of souls of men in the
Church of Rome, and do they not sell them at a very low rate? Witness their
Dispensations, Pardons, Masses, Trentals, Agnus deis, holy Grains, with a
number more such like fopperies, which they exchange with men for the price of
their souls. And who are the traders in this Mart? But only they, that have
received the mark of the Beast, who buy them for things of naught, and sell
them again to the devil for worse then naught. Of this traffic of souls,
S. Peter prophecieth, 2. Pet. 2.3. That there should arise up in the Church
false teachers, who thorough covetousness should with famed words make
merchandise of men's souls: that is, prostitute the people of God unto Satan,
and change the truth of God into gainefull fables. These Merchants are all the
Clergy of the Papacy, who in their Sacrament of order, receive the mark of
the Beast. This is most apparent, by consideration of the manner of the
ordination of their whole Clergy, from the least unto the greatest. The
smaller orders, are these four: Porters, Lectors, Exorcists, and Acoluths. The
Porters at their ordination, receive from the Bishop the keys of the Church
into their right hand: The Lector receives a book, as also does the Exorcist
with his right hand: and the Acolutha a Candlestick with the candle put out:
and by these several ceremonies, they receive the marks of their order, as is
plainly described in the Roman Pontifical, Fol. 6.7.8.9. etc. But before all
this, they receive their first tonsure, the Bishop cutting off the end of their
hair in four places: to wit, on the forehead, behind, and by the two ears.
The greater orders are three: Subdeacon, Deacon, and Priest. The Subdeacon
receives the Character of his order, by touching with his right hand the book
of the Epistles, as the Deacon does by touching the book of the Gospels. As
for the Priests, after that the Bishop, with some other Priests assisting, have
imposed their hands upon his head, which is an Evangelical custom; he then
annoynteth both his hands with sacred oil, and then presents unto him a
Chalice with wine and water, and a plate with an Host in it, which he
receives in his fingers, touching withal the plate and the edge of the
Chalice, and by this action (say they) is the mark of this order imprinted
upon him. The like may be observed in the higher dignities of the Clergy,
Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitanes, Cardinals, all which, after their solemn
oath of subjection to the Pope, as to their Leige-Lord, are really
characterized with many marks and ceremonies. As Bishops, at their
consecration with holy oil, put on the crowns of their heads, and upon their
hands a Crosier staff, a book, a ring, two torches, two loaves of bread, with
two vessels of wine, a Miter all besprinkled with holy water, and a pair of
hallowed gloves. All which ceremonies, as they are not to be found in the book
of God, so they can be counted nothing else but the Beasts marks. As for
Archbishops, Primates, and Patriarchs; though they be chosen and consecrated,
yet they may not execute their authority, till they have received from Rome a
Pall, Pallium, which Pallium, or Pall, is a little narrow cloak made of white
wool, hallowed by the sepulchers of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and after kept
by the Subdeacons till it be purchased of the Pope with a great sum of money.
And this is their mark, without which they can neither buy nor sell in this
Babylonish Fair. He that would see at large the foolery of this superstitious
ceremony, let him read Durand his Rational. Diuinis lib. 3. cap. 17. and the
book of Sacred Ceremonies. Lib. 1. sect. 10. cap 5. The character of the great
Cardinal, is a red Hat with long Tassels, by which they are known to be
pillars of the world, (as their name in their fond conceit imports,) and are
made not only the great Counselors of State to the Apostolical Chair, but
even parts and members of the great Bishop himself.

11. By all this that has been spoken it is clear, that all these diverse
orders of the Clergy, receive the mark of the Beast; both in the forehead by
an outward profession, and recognition of their subjection to the Pope; and in
their right hand, by actual obedience: neither have they only the mark, but
also the name, and number of the name: for as the name most likely is (...),
containing also the number; so all that are of these orders must be Latins,
that is, be skillful in the Latin tongue, without some knowledge wherein they
would be unfit for this negotiation, wherein all their trading is in Latin.
And therefore the Council of Trent does require, that the very first orders
are not to be conferred upon any, but such as have some skill in the Latin
tongue. I conclude then, that Saint John has set down nothing touching the
mark of the Beast, which does not fitly agree to the Pope and his Clergy.

CHAP. 4. Touching the seat of Antichrist in general.
1. THe seat of Antichrist (that is, the place where he shall reign and sit)
is to be considered two ways: First, at large, secondly, more peculiar and
proper. His Seat at large is described, 2. ^hess. 2.3.4. to be in the Temple
of God: and his proper and peculiar Seat is marked out, Revel. 17.18. to be
the great City with seven hills, which ruled then over the Kings of the earth.
And these two different considerations, do fall into each others: for
therefore he is said to sit in the Church of God, because he sits in the
City with seven hills, which takes upon her self the name of the Catholic
Church: and therefore in the City with seven hills, because in the Church.

2. By the Temple wherein Saint Paul says Antichrist shall fit, cannot be meant
the Temple at Jerusalem, as some of the Fathers have imagined, and the Papists
accuratly defend, as most fit for their Antichrist, which they suppose to arise
out of the nation of the Jews; and that for three reasons. First, because the
Temple of Jerusalem was a type and a figure of the Church of Christ, and
therefore as other types and figures did, so ought it to cease at the coming
of the body and the truth: and therefore when the Church was gathered out of
the Jews and Gentiles, that Temple was to have an end; they then that expect
the restoring of the Temple, with the same labor expect the restoration of
the Jewish Ceremonies. For as the Tabernacle which Moses erected, which was a
type of the Church Militant, ceased at the building of the first Temple; so
that Temple both in the first and second institution which was a type of the
Church triumphant, was to cease and yield to the spiritual Temple which is the
Church, wherein is represented both the Church Militant and Triumphant.
Secondly, it cannot be understood of the Temple of Jerusalem, because it was
foretold both by the Prophets and Christ himself, that the second Temple being
once laid waste, should never be ^ee ^ified again. Daniel says plainly, that
the abomination of desolation should continue to the end, Dan. 9.^7. that ^s,
to the consummation and end of the world, as both Saint Jerome, Theodoret, and
Origin expound the words. Esaias also according to Saint Ieromes interpretation
prophecyeth of the same utter and irrecouerable destruction. Chap. 25.12. And
so does Jeremiah, Chap. 19.8.11. where he says, I will break this people and
this City, as one breaks a Potters vessel that cannot be made whole again.
Which words, says S. Jerome cannot be meant of the Babylonian, but of the
Roman captivity: for after the captivity of Babylon the City was again
restored with the Temple; but after the destruction by Titus and Vespasian, it
was never to be restored. But Christ's prophecy is most pregnant of all the
rest, both Luke. 19.44. where he says, That one stone shall not be l^ft upon
another, that shall not be overthrown. And Chap. 21.24. That Jerusalem shall
be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles shall be
fulfilled: that is, till the end of the world, as Saint Chrysostom in his
second Oration against the Jews expounds it. Thirdly, the event in experience
shows the truth of all this: for the Temple has been oftentimes attempted
to be reedified: first by the counterfeit Messiah, Barchochebas under Hadrian
the Emperor: secondly, in the time of Constantine by the Jews: and thirdly, by
Julian the Apostate, who deputed unto that work Alipius of Antiochia, and
furnished him with all provision necessary for the accomplishing thereof. But
as Saint Chrysostom speaks, Chrysostom. orat. 2. contra Iudae^s.
They knew not that they went about an impossible thing, the Lord from heaven
by a fearful earthquake and revenging flames, with miraculous crosses fixed
in their garments disappointed their purpose, and made them will they nill they
to surcease from their work. Iulians scope with the rest of the Jews was to
convince Christ our Savior as a lying Prophet: but they themselves were
thereby convinced of horrible impiety, blasphemy, and apostasy, against the Son
of God. Add heereunto the consent of Chrysostom, Origin, Orig. tract. 29. in
Mat. Cyrill in Ruffin^ lib. 1. c. p. 37. Hieron ad Marcell^^. Sozom^n. lib. 5.
cap. vlt.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, and Jerome with others, that the opinion of restoring the
Temple is to be numbered amongst Jewish Fables.

3. Neither by the Temple of God can we understand any other material Temples
built of Lime and Stone, as if Antichrist should choose one of them to make his
seat in, and from thence to exercise his dominion over the rest. For God
dwells not in Temples built with hands: and these places are called Temples
and Churches, not for their structure and building, but by reason of the
assemblies of Gods people in them, to offer up spiritual sacrifices of Prayer
and praise unto God: so that wheresoever Gods people assemble together to pray
unto God, and to praise his name, and to hear his Word, and to receive the
Sacraments, there is the Church, though in the caves of the earth, or any other
private place, as was in times of persecution: nevertheless, if we understand
material Churches, Hilar lib. contra Arrian. e^ Auxen^.
yet we say with Saint Hilary, that even in these Antichrist shall sit,
Potestate regiminis, non actu presentiae corporalis, that is, By the power of
rule, and not by corporal presence.

4. But by the Temple of God is meant the Church militant, which Saint Peter
calls a Spiritual house, built of lively stones, that is Christian souls.
1. Peter. 2.5. this Saint Paul calls the House of God, 1. Tim. 3.15.
answerable to that of the Prophet concerning the Temple of Solomon; My house
shall be called an house of prayer to all Nations. It is a wonder that
Bellarmine should be either so ignorant, or impudent to affirm, that in the
Scripture of the New Testament, by the Temple of God is never understood the
Christian Church, but evermore the Temple of Jerusalem: whereas the contrary is
most apparently true, as 1. Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of
God? where he speaks to all those in the Church of Corinth, that call upon
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, as is plain in the first Chapter of the
same Epistle, and second verse. Again, 1. Cor. 3.17. The Temple of God is
holy, which are you, and 2. Cor. 6.16. You are the Temple of the living God:
and Ephesians. 2.20.21. And ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows to an holy Temple in the Lord. So Apoc.
3.12. He that shall overcome I will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God,
etc. With what face then can Bellarmine avouch, that never in the New
Testament, is meant the Church, but always the Temple of Jerusalem. And the
reason of this appellation is evident; that seeing the Temple of Solomon,
called the house of God, and house of prayer, was a type or figure of the
Church of Christ, therefore by an usual Metonymy in holy Scripture, the Church
of Christ is called the Temple of God, and the House of God, and that not only
in the New Testament, but also in the Old, as Zachar. 3.8. Esaias. 14.1. Ier.
23.8. and 3^.1^. And though some of the Fathers are against this
interpretation, as Irenaeus who sucked this error, as some others, from P^pias a
man coetane with some of the Apostles, yet too much given to superstitious
opinions which he broached in the Church as Apostolical traditions, as all
know; yet the most of them are for it; as Saint Jerome, ad Algas. q. 11. In
templo Dei vel Hierosolymis vt quidam putant, vel in ecclesia vt verius
arbitramur. Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei lib. 10 c^p 19 In templum Dei
sedet, tanquam ipse sit templum Dei quod ecclesia Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Sedebit in temp^o Dei, non Hierosolymitano, sed adeo in ipsis ecclesus. The
very same is affirmed by Oecumonius the follower of Saint Chrysostom in his
Commentary upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. and by Theodoret on the same place, and by
Primasius: Aquinas also enclines to the same opinion, and so does Zua ez, whose
plane censure is this: Hic sensus errorem non continet, sed potius probabilis
est.

5. The words in the Greek are (...), which may receive four several
interpretations. First, In templo; secondly, Supra templum: thirdly, Tanquam
templum: and lastly, Contra templum; every one of these has it Author and
Fautors; but which way soever they be taken, all fitly agree to the Pope. For
first, he sits in the Church, that is, in that which they falsely call the
Catholic Church, wherein without question there are hidden many true members
of the true Church. Secondly, he sits in it not as an ordina y member thereof,
but as the head thereof, and so exalts himself above it, as the head is above
the members; and this the word, Set, does emphatically declare: for to sit is
nothing else but to reign: and to show that none but the Pope is this
Antichrist, whereas Kings are said to reign and not to sit; Popes are said to
sit, and not to reign, as if they would verify this prophecy to the letter.
Thirdly, he sits in the Church, Tanquam templum, as the Church, according to S.
Augustine, for he alone sometimes, as when it is said, Papa est tota ecclesia
virtualiter; and sometimes jointly with his Clergy, usurp unto themselves the
name of the Catholic Church, excluding not only all others from that title
that hold not with the Pope, but even their own Laity also, as if they were
the only people and heritage of the Lord. Thus says Saint Augustine, Seeds in
amicum, signifies, velut amicus, As a Friend; and the Scripture says in like
manner: ^sto mihi in Deum protectorem and in locum refugij, that is, Be, O God,
as my protector and place of refuge. Lastly, he sits against the Church, though
he pretend never so much the title of the Church: For did ever Wolf so havoc
the flock of sheep, as the Pope does the souls of men by his damnable and
pernicious doctrines? So then, we need not seek Antichrist in the old walls of
Babylon, nor among the ruins of Jerusalem, nor amongst the Turks and such as
are strangers to Christianity: but we must seek him in the bosom of the
Church and amongst them that vant themselves the only Catholic Church of
Christ.

6. It is a most frivolous and absurd exception, that the Jesuits take against
this, namely, that if the Pope whom we auerre to be Antichrist do sit in the
Church, then the Church of Rome is the true Church, and we in separating our
selves from the communion thereof, Schi^matikes, and Heretics. For first, it
is certain that the Church of Rome was once the true Church of Christ, and
famous for her faith and godliness Secondly, that they still pretend themselves
to be the only Catholic Church. And thirdly, we confess, that they are
still a Church, though wonderfully corrupted and depraved, as a sick body that
has no soundness in it, but yet still holds life, for it has in it the
sound doctrine of the Trinity, and Christian Baptism, with all the Articles of
the Faith. But they have added heereunto many fearful Idolatries and gross
corruptions, and so are like a mass of metal wherein there is some Gold, but
more Tin, Copper, Brass, Lead, and Dross. The universality of the name of
the Church stretches it self to all that are dipped with the water of
Baptism, and any ways profess Christ: but of this body some parts are more
sound, other languish with diseases, and some again are surprised (though yet
breathing) with deadly Symtomes, and with death it self: of this latter kind
is the Church of Rome, which is possessed with a mortal sickness, even near
unto death, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot. Now are we
departed from the Church, because we renounce her corruptions? Do we forsake
the whole mass, because we abandon the dross, and other mixed metals, and
retain only the Gold? Does a man therefore forsake his Country, because he
flies from one City infected with the plague, into another wherein the air is
purer within the same dition and dominion? This is so absurd a conclusion, that
it needs no refutation. Fourthly, there is no doubt, but that in the midst of
this corrupt Church, there are many true members of the Church of Christ, who
hate the abominations of the Scarlet Whore, and though secretly, yet sincerely
worship God in spirit and truth. And lastly, after the same manner is the
Church, wherein Antichrist sits: as the Jews were the people of God, when
they had defiled themselves with most filthy Idolatries: neither are we more to
be accounted Schismatikes for our separation from this Synagogue of Satan,
then the godly were among the Jews, who obeying the admonitions of the
Prophets, separated themselves from the society of those wicked Idolaters.

7. Saint Augustine writing to this purpose, upon the first Epistle of Saint
John, tract. 3. approves this exposition; For (says he) all Heretics and
Schismatikes went out from amongst us; that is, went out of the Church: but
they could not go out if they were of us: and therefore before they went out,
they were not of us: and if before they went out they were not of us, then many
are within and not gone out, and yet are Antichrists. And Occumenius upon the
same Epistle of Saint John renders a reason why it is said, that the
Antichrists are sprung out of the Church, to wit, to the end (says he) that
they might be accounted worthy of credit with them whom they should seduce, as
coming from the Disciples, and preaching the word of God, according to the
intention of their Master. Which reason does so much the more agree unto the
great Antichrist, by how much that his seduction stretches it self to more,
and therefore has need of greater appearance to be Christ's Disciple, that the
poison of his deceit, might more powerfully work into the hearts of men. And
therefore seeing the Pope does more proudly vaunt himself of the name of
Christ and the Catholic Church, then any other Heretics have done: it cannot
be doubted, but that this mark of Antichrist does more properly agree unto him
then unto any other.

CHAP. 5. Touching the particular seat of Antichrist.
1. THe proper and peculiar seat of Antichrist, is not Jerusalem, as some
Papists contend, nor yet the City of the devil opposite to the City of God,
nor yet Rome Pagan, as it was before Constantine, as others; nor yet Rome
desolated and ruined at the end of the world, as a third sort auerre: but the
City of Rome whilst it bears the name of Christian, and pretends it self to
be the Mother of all Churches, and the place of Saint Peter's Chair^. Not
Jerusalem, because that City and Temple was so destroyed, that they are never
again to be restored, as has been proved: neither is it either probable or
possible, that Antichrist in the space of three years and an half, which is
the time assigned unto him for his reign, should build so famous a City and a
Temple to reside in. And therefore by that great City spoken of, Revel. 11.8.
in the streets whereof it is said, that the dead bodies of the two witnesses
should lie, cannot be meant Jerusalem, which is no where in the new Testament
called the great City, but Ciuitas Romana, the City of Rome, whose center being
at that time in Italy, spread it self by the circumference almost over all the
world: and is fitly called Sodom for the filthiness therein committed,
wherein that vnnameable sin of Sodom is not only practi^ed, but even
commended and approved, a Cardinal of theirs having written a book in praise
thereof: And Egypt, for the cruelty and idolatry: and in this City it is truly
said, that the Lord was crucified, not only in his members, but even in a
Province and kingdom thereof, which all Judea was at that time.

2. Not the City of the devil, and multitude of wicked men: for if the Whore
be so to be understood, then the water^ whereon she sits, which the Angel
interprets to be peoples, multitudes, and Nations, are not the City of the
devil, nor yet the Kings that committed fornication with her. For the same
cannot be both the place and person that sits on the place. If then the
Whore of Babylon sits, that is, reigns over the multitude of the wicked,
then she cannot signify the same multitude her self. Besides, if all the
inhabitants of the earth, whose names are not written in the book of life, be
the multitude of the wicked, Apoc. 13.8. and this multitude do follow and
adore the Beast. Apoc. 13.3. then if this multitude be the Beast it self, it
must needs follow that the Beast should follow and adore it self, which is
most absurd. Some of our Adversaries perceiving this contradiction do of
themselves reject this interpretation. Remond in his 26. Chapter de
Antichristo, says plainly, that by the Whore of Babylon is meant the City of
Rome, confirming the same by the authority of S. Augustine, Orosius, and S.
Jerome: Bellarmine condescendeth to the same opinion, and so also do Ribera,
and Viegas two other Jesuits.

3. Nor Rome Pagan under the heathen Emperors: For first, this distinction of
Rome Pagan and Christian, is merely Sophistical and absurd. For S. John in
the Apocalypse, speaks of one only Rome, and that from the period of his own
time, till the utter ruin and destruction thereof. Apoc. 17.16. Now what a
folly is it to dream of two Romes together, when as he speaks expressly but
of one? Secondly, the City of Rome was never but one and the same, wherein
first the Pagan Emperors reigned, which S. John represents by the first
Beast: and then after them, Antichrist, which is the second Beast, or at least
the seventh head thereof. In both which times, notwithstanding the persecutions
raised against them, there lived, and still do live, many godly Christians. And
therefore it is false which some of them affirm, that Rome is not the same
that it has been, being descended from the seven mountains, where all their
stately Palaces were erected, into the field of Mars: as if it were not situate
in the same place where Ancient Rome was, and therefore not the same City, with
that which is spoken of in the Apocalypse. For as Rome in the time of the
Emperor Claudius, under whom Mount Auentine was taken within the compass of
the walls, is not another different City from that which was in the times of
the Kings and Consuls, when the circuit was far less: So that Rome which is
at this day, is not another from that which was in the time of S. John, though
the compass of the walls be far less, by a thousand and two hundred paces,
as Onuphrius reports. Onuphr ^^mment. Reip^^b. Romans lib. 1.
And for the field of Mars, whither they say the City is descended; it was in
the reign of the Emperor Aurelian, that the plain was enclosed with in the
walls, and yet so enclosed, that none of the seven Mountains were left out;
though the buildings began to be more frequent in this plain. For after the
sacking of the City, by the Goths and Totilas, when the third part of the wal^
were overthrown, Bellisarius and Narses reedified them again, and well-neere
in the same place, and upon the same foundat ons, which after were enlarged by
Pope Leo the fourth, by taking in Mount Vaticane, Blondu^ R^m^ Instan. lib 1.
as Blondus affirms: So that it cannot be denied, but Rome is the same at
this day, which it was in the age of S. John, albeit in regard of the great
ruins thereof, it may be much changed in the buildings and edifices. All this
is confessed by the Jesuit Ribera, writing upon the 14. Chapter of the
Apocalypse, art. 43. For he acknowledges, that it is for situation one and the
same City still, which being soiled with so many foul impieties, must one day
be purged with fire: and that many in Rome at this day by their names and
Genealogies, do boast themselves to be descended from the Ancient Romans: and
though they be not so descended, yet by joining themselves unto them, and
making up but one joint body of a Commonwealth, and following their
foot-steeps of wickedness, they are to be reputed the same Citizens and
Children of those ungodly parents, though not by nature, yet by imitation, and
so are liable to the same plagues and punishments which were denounced against
them: thus Ribera. And therefore Bellarmines distinction of Rome Pagan, and
Rome Christian is frivolous; for Rome has ever been, and is, but one and the
same, wherein there ever were from the beginning of the preaching of the
Gospel to them, both Christians and Pagans; and this Rome as it might in some
sense be called the purpled Whore, under the dominion of the first Beast, so it
does much more continue to be, under the dominion of the second Beast. Neither
does it follow from hence, that Antichrist should therefore reign in the time
of Nero, and Domitian, and other persecuting Emperors, though his mystery
began then to work, according to S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. For Rome is not only
named the Whore of Babylon, in regard of the second Beast, which is Antichrist;
but also in regard of the first, the Roman Emperors. Thirdly, if Rome Pagan
be the seat of Antichrist, then Rome, and not Jerusalem, is his seat; and
then Antichrist is already come, under the Heathen Emperors, both which they
themselves most stiffely deny. Fourthly, if the whole state of the Roman
Empire, be figured out by the Beast with seven heads, whereof the sixth was the
Emperors, and the seventh Antichrist, as is confessed by most (though the name
of the whole Beast be also attributed to Antichrist, in the same Chapter by S.
John:) and if S. John describes the state of the whole Beast, not seuering one
part from the rest: then it must needs follow, that that City which was the
fear of the Emperors, must also be the seat of Antichrist. Fifthly, if S.
John had meant to represent under the type of mystical Babylon, Rome Pagan, he
would not have described it as it was to be under the eight King, namely
Antichrist, who is called the eight, and yet is said to be one of the seven,
but as it was under the sixth head, to wit, the Emperors: neither would he have
said, that it should ascend out of the bottomless pit, seeing that was already
ascended, and in a most flourishing estate. Sixthly, Rome is described by S.
John as it was to be a little before the last and final destruction thereof,
Apoc. 18.21.22.23. and as under the reign of Antichrist: but in the time of
the heathen Emperors, Antichrist was not come by their own confession,
neither has it been yet utterly destroyed, though it was grievously sacked,
spoiled, and defaced, by the Goths, yet it remains still a famous City. It
is impossible then, that S. John should represent Rome Pagan, wherein neither
of these were performed. Seventhly, S. John speaks of Rome in that estate
which it was in, after the desolation of the Empire, it being divided amongst
ten Kings, who were to receive their Kingdom together with the Beast, that is,
Antichrist which can no ways agree to Rome Pagan, for Rome ceased to be Pagan
before the dissolution of the Empire, and neither the Beast, nor the ten Kings
had then received their dominion. Eighthly, S. John prophesying of the Whore of
Babylon and her idolatry, with the persecution of the Saints, is rapt with
admiration, and calls it a mystery: but if he had meant Rome Pagan, what
Prophecy, what mystery, what matter of admiration had been therein? Could
either S. John, or the Saints, be ignorant of the Idolatry and cruelty of Rome
Ethnicke, when they beheld them with their eyes? Lastly, those things which are
spoken of the Whore of Babylon, do not agree at all to Rome Pagan, to wit,
that the Kings of the earth committed fornication with her, and that the
inhabitants of the earth should be made drunk with her wine. For ancient Rome
did not allure Lovers unto her by whorish enticements, but conquered them by
politic wisdom, and warlike valor: neither did she impose her religion upon
conquered Countries, but rather received their religions into her self, so
that (as their own Leo affirms) she was subject to the religions and errors
of all Nations, Leo de Petro et Paulo. ser. 1.
all which is truly verified of Rome Christian.

4. Nor lastly, Rome dissolved, ruined, and rel^psed (as some of them say it
shall be at the end of the world) but not whilst it professes it self to be
Christian: for who can tell that Rome shall revolt into Paganism? Where learnt
they this Prophecy? I am sure, that this conceit has no foundation in holy
Scripture, no footstep in the monuments of holy Fathers, no testimony of
Schoolmen, no consent of their own writers; and lastly, no moments of reason
to maintain it. Suarez, Alcasar, Iustinianus, disallow it, and Maluenda that
labou^eth as much in this question as any, detests it as altogether incredible,
and why should any then believe their vain and idle conjectures?

5. Seeing therefore that none of these is the seat of this Man of Sin, it
must needs follow, that Rome Christian and Papal, is his proper Seat and
Throne, which may be confirmed by this demonstratiue Syllogism: Mystical
Babylon is the seat of Antichrist: but Rome Papal is mystical Babylon:
therefore Rome Papal is the seat of Antichrist. To this Syllogism they can
give no sound nor solid answer, but are distracted into diverse opinions: Some
of them granti^g the proposition, deny the assumption: others confessing the
assumption, deny the proposition; but neither of them bring any probable reason
of their denial: and therefore seeing they have nothing to oppose reasonably
against the premises, they must needs admit the conclusion, as the English
Rhemists, in Apoc. 17.5. in a manner do. For as Nero and other Emperors, which
bore the figure of Antichrist, had their prime seat at Rome: so (say they) it
is most likely, that the great An^ichrist shall also sit at Rome. But that our
argument may be undeniable, it shall not be amiss to prove both the
propositions severally by themselves.

6. That mystical Babylon is the seat of Antichrist, may be proved by diverse
reasons: I say mystical Babylon, not the true Babylon in Chaeldea, properly so
called, where, Antiochus Epiphanes reigned, who was the type of Antichrist: for
the Woman in the Apocalypse, is said to have the name Mystery written in her
forehead, to wit, the great Babylon, the mother of fornications, and
abominations of the earth, Apoc. 17.5. plainly thereby showing, that that
Babylon whereof S. John speaks, must be mystical. First, because the
Chaldean Babylon was a type of this mystical, and therefore as that was the
seat of Antiochus the type: so this must needs be the seat of Antichrist
himself. Secondly, that which is the seat of the Beast, must needs be the
seat of Antichrist, for Antichrist is described to be the last head of the
Beast, Apoc. 17. and sometimes by a Synecdoche, is named the whole Beast; but
mystical Babylon is the seat of the Beast, therefore also of Antichrist.
Thirdly, because that which is the seat of the Whore, is also the seat of
Antichrist, for the Whore and Antichrist are one and the same thing, by the
confession of many learned Papists: but mystical Babylon is the s^ate of the
Whore, and therefore of Antichrist. Fourthly, the same that was the seat of
the six first heads of the Beast, must needs also be the seat of the seventh
and last; but mystical Babylon was the seat of the six first heads, to wit,
Kings, Consuls, Dictatours, Decemniti, Tr^bunes, and Emperors; therefore also
of the seventh and last, which is Antichrist. Lastly, that City which in the
time of Antichrist was to be the Metropolis of impiety, and mother of
fornications, and abominations of the earth, wherewith the Kings of the earth
should commit fornication, and the inhabitants be made drunk with her poisoned
cup, and which should be her self drunk with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus, is without doubt the seat of Antichrist: but S John
describes mystical Babylon to be such a City; and why should any doubt then,
but that it is the proper seat of Antichrist?

7. Concerning the assumption, that Rome Christian is mystical Babylon, may be
proved by many arguments and reasons, but all may be reduced to this one head,
namely, that seeing the description of Babylon made by S. John, Apoc. 17. does
exactly agree unto Rome in every point, therefore it cannot but be, that
Babylon is there intended. But not to stand upon every particular, there are
two notes in the d^scription, which so evidently mark out the City of Rome, as
there can be no place of doubting left: for they so properly agree unto Rome,
that they cannot be applied to any other City of the world. The first is, Apoc.
17.18. where the Angel tells John, that the Woman, to wit, the Whore of
B^bylon, is th great City, which has dominion over the Kings of the earth: now
what City had then, and long after, even in the Christian state thereof
dominion over the Kings of the earth, but Rome only? No man is so ignorant as
not to know this to be true, none so impudent as to deny it. The second note
is, that this Woman sits upon seven hills: and this is the situation of Rome
at this day, for the walls of the City enclose seven hills: to wit, Palatine,
Capitoline, Quirinall, Coelius, Esquilme, Vininall, and Auentine, and therefore
it is called in Greek, Roma (...), and in Latin Septicollis, and to that end
they held a Feast every year, as Plutarch reports, called Septimontum, in
honor of those seven hills. Propertius lib. 3. Eleg. 10. concludes both these
notes in one verse.

Septem vrbs alta iugis, toti quae praesidet Orbi. Now from hence I thus
conclude: that City which in the time of S. John, had dominion over the Kings
of the earth, and was situate upon seven hills, is mystical Babylon. But Rome
in S. John's time, had dominion over the Kings of the earth, and was situate
upon seven hills; therefore Rome is mystical Babylon. Hither I might add the
testimony of the Fathers, as of Tertullian aduersus Iudaeos et contra Marcion.
lib. 3. cap. 13. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 14. Hieron. in Esaiam. lib. 13. cap. 47.
et ad Algas. q. 11. Victorinus Martyr in Apocalypse. etc. But S. Augustines
witness shall serve for all the rest: he in his book de ciuitate Dei. lib.
18. cap. 1. 21. 27. et lib. 16. cap. 17. calls Rome the second Babylon,
another Babylon, and the Western Babylon. Yea many of the Popish Doctors
themselves, being overcome with the force of truth, confess the same. As
Baronius, Ann. 45. nu. 18. Pabera in Apocal. 14.11.27.28. Viegas in Apoc. 17.
com 1. sect. 3. Bellar. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 2. and lib. 3. ^ap. 13 etc.

8. The Rhemists in their Annotations upon the 17. of the Apocalypse,
distinguish betwixt the Roman Church, and the Roman Babylon. The Church (say
they) in Rome was one thing, and Babylon in Rome another thing. Peter sat in
Rome, and Nero sat in Rome; but Peter as in the Church of Rome, Nero as in the
Babylon of Rome; thus they. And thereupon they infer, that Rome Christian is
not mystical Babylon, and so not Antichrists seat, but Rome Pagan and
Heathen. But this is a most idle conceit: for though it be true, that the
Church of Rome was one thing, and Babylon in Rome another; yet they were both
in Rome, and so mixed together, that Nero lived in the midst of the Church,
though he was not of the Church, and Peter in the midst of Babylon, though he
was not of Babylon. For if the faithful were not in the midst of Babylon,
why does the voice from heaven cry, Come out of her my people, etc. Apoc. 18.4.
Howbeit in Antichrists time, which was ever since Boniface the th rd (for then
he first began to show himself) till this day, the Church of Rome is depraved
so, and corrupted, that there remains of it nothing but the bare carcass
without life, it being fallen from the faith of Christ, to the idolatry and
superstition of Antichrist. And therefore not the true Church of Rome, but Rome
corrupted and Apostated, yet vaunting it self to be the only true Church, is
this mystical Babylon, the mother of all abominations.

9. Yet the same Rhemists, in the place above named, with a fearful and
troubled breath confess, that it may not unfitly be deemed, that the great
Antichrist shall have his seat at Rome: this testimony was wrung from them by
the evidence of the truth: and it is strange that they should acknowledge so
much, seeing elsewhere they demonstratiuely conclude, that his seat should be
at Jerusalem. Thus they sup up their own vomit, and are driven to avouch the
same truth which elsewhere they impugned. But let them remember two things.
Auent. Annal. lib. 4.
First that which Auentine speaks concerning the gener ll opinion of the
Fathers of that Age, which was almost 700 years ago. They held that Rome then
possessed by the Pope was Babylon, and that for this reason, because it usurped
Divinity, equalled it self unto heaven, and boasted that it was eternal, and
never had, nor could err. Secondly, the prophecy of Sybill who describes
Antichrist to be a certain King, adorned with a white Miter, and bearing the
name of Pontus, with his seat near unto Tyber; in such plain terms, that
any man may easily know, that he is none else but Pontifex Romanus, the Roman
Bishop, whose chief seat of residence is at Rome, upon the bank of Tyber.

10. By the Beast in the Apoc. cap. 17. with seven heads, and ten horns, is
painted out by the holy Ghost the state of the Roman Empire under the reign
of the last head, who is the eight, and yet one of the seven, verse 11. Now
this eight, is no other but the Pope of Rome, from the time of Boniface the
third, until this day, and forward to the end of the world: for five heads of
this Empire, or five of the prophesied Kings were ceased before John's time. The
sixth head which was of the Emperors, was then in being: the seventh is to be
understood of the Roman Bishops and Patriarchs, which was not then extant:
(for though there were from the Apostles time always Bishops of Rome; yet they
were not heads of the Roman state, before the seat of the Empire was
translated from Rome to Byzantium. Now the Text says thus, this head must
endure but a short time, that is, from the time that the seat of the Empire was
translated into the East, until the utter decay, and ruin of it in the West:
from which time until the Papal kingdom was set up by Phocas, it might well
be said, that this h^^^ was, but is not, and yet is, verse 11. Was, that is,
usurped an extraordinary state of government in the Church for a time; Is not,
that is, ascended not to that height of pride which it after did: and Yet is,
that is, continued in the same name and succession, though with greater tyranny
and usurpation. For after Boniface the third had usurped the Monarchy of the
Church; and Gregory the second and third, had wrung from the Emperor the
Western portion of the Empire, and especially Gregory the seventh had ravished
into his hands the universal power of both Swords, styling himself the Pastor
of Pastors, and the King of Kings; then was this head the eight in number, and
yet one of the seven, because still the Bishop of Rome. And if they say that
the Pope is but the seventh head, and that the eight is yet to come, which is
Antichrist: they must remember that the seventh was to endure but a short time;
but the Popes kingdom is not short, having continued these many hundred
years: out of all which it necessarily follows, not only that Rome under
the Pope is Babylon, but also that the Pope himself is Antichrist, being the
eight head of the Beast, and yet one of the seven.

11. The ten horns, which by the Angels interpretation are ten Kings, that
shall divide the Roman Empire amongst them, and shall receive their power as
Kings at one hour with the Beast, do plainly intimate the same thing. For
whereas the Western Empire was dissolved, and the power thereof taken by the
Pope from the Constantinopolitan Emperor, then these ten Kings possessed the
Provinces, and the Pope the City of Rome at one time: and whereas it is said,
that first, with one consent they gave their power to the Beast, and fought
against the Lamb, but after being called out of Babylon, hated the Whore, and
made her desolate and naked; what can be more plainly spoken to show, that
which by experience at this day is verified, to wit, when those Kingdoms and
Kings which at the first were slaves and subjects to the Pope, are now the
greatest enemies unto him? which prophecy is already in part fulfilled, and
shall do doubt in short time be fully accomplished. Hence it is that
Bellarmine complains, Bell. de de Romans Pon. lib. 3. c. 21.
that the Pope since the preaching of the Gospel, has lost part of Germany,
Sueuia, Gothia, Noruegia, all Denmark, and a good part of England, France,
Heluetia, Polonia, Bohemia, and Panonia, he might have added Scotland and
Ireland. Now I demand whether the Roman Empire be not already dissolved, and
divided into ten Kingdoms at least, and whether it is likely that that relic
and shadow of the Roman Empire which is now in Germany, shall be ever divided
into ten Kingdoms? And therefore if those ten Kings have been long since in
the world, and do still reign, it must needs follow, that Antichrist is
already come, and that Rome subject to the Pope is the mystical Babylon spoken
of in the Revelation, and the seat of that Man of sin.

12. The description of the Whore does as fitly confirm this truth: for Rome
Papal may rightly be called a Whore: First, because she joins her self to
another Spouse then Christ, to wit, the Pope who styles himself Christ's
Vicar, and the Spouse of the Church. Secondly, because she is guilty of
Apostasy from Christ, and the Orthodoxall faith, whereby of Bethel she is
become Bethauen, and of a faithful City, an Harlot. Witness, besides a number
of other things, those two Apostaticall doctrines spoken of by S. Paul, 1. Tim.
4.^.3. to wit, the prohibition of marriage to certain men at al times, and of
meats to all men at certain times, which two the Apostle sets down as notes
of that Apostasy. But principally she is called the Whore of Babylon, by reason
of the horrible superstition and filthy Idolatry practiced in her (which is
nothing else but spiritual fornica^^on before God:) as namely, in the worship
of Angels, Saints, Images, Reliqus, the Cross, and the Eucharist, to all which
she prostituteth her self as an Harlot, in a most silthy manner. Neither only
is she thus defiled her self, but as the Mother of Fornications makes drunk
the inhabitants of the earth with the Golden Cup of her Fornications: for from
her teats has all the world sucked this poison, and she braggeth her self to
be the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches, which she has infected with
her witchcrafts.

13. Neither is it to be forgotten that Saint John wondered when he saw this
Whore, which he could never have done, if he had meant Rome Ethnicke. For what
wonder was it that Ethnicke Rome should worship Idols, and persecute the Saints
of God? but this made him to wonder, that Rome famous for Christianity and
Religion, should so degenerate from her ancient purity, that it should apostate
from Christ, and become the Mother of superstition, and the seat of
Antichrist: and to this may be applied the name that S. John says, should be
written in the Whores forehead, Mystery. Which very name the Pope for a long
time wore imprinted in his Miter, as the high Priest of the Jews wo^^^ in his
these words, Holiness to the Lord. Now wh^ (...) this but signify unto us,
that God would have the (...) know, that in him is accomplished the mystery
(...) that is, Antichristianisme spoken of by Saint Pa^ (...) Add hereunto for
a conclusion, that the prou^ (...) Whore, I sit as a Queen and am no widow,
a^ (...) sorrow. Apoc. 18.7. is taken up and vaunted a (...) the Church of Rome
with equal ostentation: so (...) claims to be the perpetual Spouse of the
Church, (...) Church of Rome to be the rock against which the g^ (...) hell
cannot prevail, and to be free from all possibility of e^ring, much more utter
falling from Christ.

14. For the conclusion of this subject, by the great City spoken of Revel. 11.
cannot be understood any other then the City of Rome; which is therefore
called spiritual Sodom and Egypt: Sodom both by reason of the corporal and
Sodomiticall uncleannesses there practiced by means of the prohibition of
marriage, as of the idolatry therein maintained and exercised, by which the
Scripture compares to Fornication: and Egypt, by reason of their tyranny used
against Gods Saints, wherein the Popes have far exceeded the heathen
Emperors. In regard whereof, Petrarch in one of his Epistles thus writes: All
that which is read either of the Assyrian or Egyptian Babylon, or of the
Labyrinths, or of the mud of Auernus, or of the infernal groves, is but a
fable in comparison of this hell. Here is the builder of Towers, and the
terrible Nimrod: here is Semiramis with her quiver, the inexorable Minos, and
Radamanthus; here is Cerberus devouring all, and Pasiphae prostituting her
self to a Bull, with a double formed race, the Minotaure, the Monument of an
execrable lust. In a word, thou shall see whatsoever has been hideous,
terrible, and confused, and to speak all at once, this (mea^ing Rome) is the
smoke of all wickedness and impurity. Now it is well called the great City:
for as the names of Sodom and Egypt properly taken, do not only signify
certain particular Cities, but whole and entire Kingdoms, consisting of many
Cities and Towns, as is most evident of (...) ^ot, which is a most ample
Kingdom, and of Sodom (...) ^ch was not the name of one City only, but of a
(...) ^ime, as is apparent, Genesis 14.2. so this great Ci^ (...) indeed
principally Rome, the proper seat of An^ (...) ^nagogically the whole society
of Romish pro^ (...) all Kingdoms and Cities that are subject to the (...) ^e.
In like manner as by the judgment of Ansel^ (...) ^bera, with diverse others, by
the holy City which (...) ^iles should trample under their feet, is meant the
v^ (...) all Church of Christ dispersed over the whole world: (...) in this
City it may well be said, that the Lord was crucified. For he suffered under
Pilate a Roman Magistrate, and in a Province of the Roman Empire, which was
then Judea: and besides, it is manifest, that Christ was crucified two ways,
one in his own person, another in his members: which destinction the Papists
cannot deny: for both Bellarmine and Baronius report, that when Saint Peter was
flying from Rome to save his life, Christ Jesus met him, and being demanded of
S. Peter whither he went; he answered, I come to Rome to be crucified again:
by which answer (say they) Peter understood that Christ would be again
crucified in his servant. Now according to this distinction we say, that
Christ in his person was crucified on Mount Golgotha, but in his members and
servants at Rome, as well in the person of Saint Peter (if that history be
true) as of many other Martyrs whose blood has been, and is daily there shed
for the testimony of the truth, and in other places by the Popes authority.
Add heereunto, that all such as reject or profane by their wicked lives the
Gospel, are said by the Apostle to crucify to them elues again the Son of
God, Hebrews 6.6. Neither indeed to speak properly, was Christ in person
crucified in Jerusalem, but without the City on Mount Caluary, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 13.12. and that to fulfill the figure, Leuit. 16.17. That the
bodies of those Beast, whose blood was offered by the High Priests for a
sinne-offering, were burned without the Camp.

CHAP. 6. More particular observations about the same subject.
1 The Doctors of the Church of Rome deriuing their opinion from Saint Jerome,
apply that prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 11.45. (He shall plant the tabernacle of
his Royal Palace between the seas) literally unto Antichrist. Now though we
know that this prophecy is literally to be understood of Antiochus, and of
Antichrist only Anagogically, of whom Antiochus was a type; yet it makes a
good argument against them, that Rome is most likely to be the seat of
Antichrist, because it is situate betwixt two Seas, the Tyrrhene and
Adriaticke, according to this prophecy.

2. In the seventeenth Chapter of the Apocalypse, there is mention made of the
great Whore, which name cannot more properly be applied to any thing then unto
the City of Rome: for the usual custom of the Prophets is, so to term Cities
corrupted in manners, and given to idolatry by the name of Whores. So Nineveh is
by the Prophet Michah, Chap. 1.7. and by the Prophet, Nahum. Chap. ^.4. and
Jerusalem by the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 1.21. How is the faithful City become an
harlot? And therefore the Prophet Jeremy represents the corruption of the
Tribes of Israel and of the realm Judah, by two debauched or whorish women,
Chap. 3.6. etc. and Ezekiel amplyfieth the same metaphor at large, Chap. 16.
Now this name agrees very fitly with the City of Rome, which was in ancient
times painted like a woman gorgeously attired, to whom other women,
representing the sundry Provinces of the Roman Empire, came to offer their
presents, as is to be seen in the book entitled, Notitia Imperij Romani. Thus
was Rome also painted, triumphing over the Dacians, and the picture thereof was
to be seen in Marble in the Gardens of Cardinal Frederick Caesius in the
year, 1549. Hubert Gol^zius l^erum Antiquar. c. 3.
Ataulphus King of the Goths having taken Rome, and desiring to eternize the
name of his Country, stamped a certain coin, wherein the City was figured
like a woman, to whom Victory presented a Laurel branch with this in^cription,
Memoriae Gothiae. But a more excellent picture then al these, we read of in the
time of the Emperor Vespasian, where Rome is protrayed in the similitude of a
woman, with an Helmet on her head, her arms naked, one half of her breast
open, her thighs almost uncovered, holding in her hand a Scepter, and feated
upon seven Mountains, with the river Tiber running on the one side, and a
Wolf the Nurse of Romulus and Rhemus standing on the other. In the bottom was
this inscription in great letters, Roma. Now this ordinary description of that
City, being not likely to be unknown unto S. John, and being directed by the
same Spirit by which the former Prophets spoke, it cannot be doubted but that
he followed the steps of the one, and alluded unto the other in calling Rome
the great Whore.

3. This woman is said to sit upon waters, Apoc 17.1. that is, to reign over
Kings, Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues, as the Angel himself
expounds it, verse. 15. and 18. Now as a seat is subject to him that sits
on it, and serves, vpholdeth, bears, and gives ease unto him; and as the
Majesty of a Throne procures authority to him that sits thereon, and
strikes a reverence into the beholders, in such sort that when it is void, men
give a certain ob^y^ance unto it: so al Kings, People, and Nations for a long
(...) ^^ued, sustained, and maintained by their greatness and (...) ^^y this
Papal seat, the name whereof being deriu^d from Saint Peter, stroke such a
terror into them, that they re^^^enced the pe^ ons for the seat sake, and so
this prophecy was mystically fulfilled. And if thereunto we shall add
literally the topography and situation of the place, we shall find, that the
City of Rome is situate vp^n many waters: for it is built upon the banks of
Tiber, into which River, excepting al Fountains, and petty rundlets, th^re
discharge themselves, as Pliny writes, 42. Rivers, besides the great number of
Bathes, Fountains, and Conduits, as are there to be found, serving not only
for necessity, but for pleasure, so that every way it is a City situate upon
many waters.

4. It is said further, Ap^cal. 17.2. That the Kings of the earth commit
fornication with the Whore, and the Inhabitants were made drunk with the wine
of her fornication. Now, was there ever any City of the world, to which this
might be so fitly applied, as to the City of Rome, whether ancient or new? For
touching ancient Rome, the abominable Idolatries both original in themselves,
and derived from conquered Nations pr^ctised therein, were innumerable. They
worshipped as Goddesses Clo^cria, (that is, the Iakes and ^ewer o filthiness)
Fear, Pastor, the Fever, etc. Worthy indeed for their impiety to have their
Gods always present with them, Acea Laurentia and Flora, two famous Harlots,
were reckoned amongst their adored Dei^ies: and their Templ^^ were no b^tter
then common Stews, as Minutius Felix reports. M^n (...)
The most of their Emperors with their wives were consecrated after their
death, and made Gods, having Temples, Priests, and Sacrifices, appointed for
them: as the Priests of L^uia, Drufilla the wife of Augustus, and of Domicilla
the sister of Titus and Domitian; and to make up the full heap of her
idolatry, Rome it self was worshipped of them as a divine Godhead, Dion in
Augusto.
as Dion reports: and had a Temple dedicated to her, as P. Victor, Onuphrius
ciuit. Roman.
and Onuphrius report. In the treasure of Antiquity, written by Hubert us
Sol^zus, we find these two inscriptions derived from ancient coins, one in
Greek, (...): the other in Latin, Dea R^m^, that is, Rome a Goddess, whence
are these excellent verses of Prudentius a Christian Poet: Delubrum Romae
colitur, nam sanguine et ipsa
More deae nomenque loci seu numen habetur,
Atque vrbis, venerisque pari se culmine tellunt
Templa, simul geminis adolentur thura deabus.


Which is thus in English, Rome like a Goddess is adored at Rome,
With Image, Altar, Sacrifice, and blood,
And by a change most wonderful, whilome
A City, is become a God of wood:
Venus, and she, their equal Temples share,
And to them both, men incense daily bare.


Where besides the deifying of the City, from the correspondence betwixt the
worship which the Romans performed to Venus and Rome, we may by good right
conclude, that she is truly named by S. John, The great Whore. But as co^^^^^g
new Rome, since the Papal seat exalted it self to the height of
Antichristianisme, the spiritual fornications and idolatries, are so evident
to the world, as no man can doubt thereof that has his eyes in his head. But
of them more particularly in other places.

5. The apparel of this great Whore, is said in the fourth verse, To be
purple and scarlet, beautified with gold, precious stones and pearls. Synesius
(...). Pliny lib. 22. cap. ^. Gratian did. 96. C. Constantinus. Durand
Rationale. lib. 3. cap. 19.
And were not the Roman Emperors so adorned? Synesius speaking to the
Emperor Arcadius, describes their attire at large, and so does Pliny, with
other writers more. But the Popes maruailously vaunt themselves in this color,
saying, that they received this privilege from great Constantine, to wear
royal Robes, as Gratian reports, and Durand gives reasons of their wearing
Scarlet: as namely: First, that they are ready to give their lives for their
sheep, and therefore are clad in red. And secondly, as Scarlet is twice dyed,
so their charity is exceeding great, both toward God and men. But if we desire
to behold this Man of Sin in his ruff, attired in all points like the Whore
of Babylon, observe him as he is described in the book of his own Ceremonies,
Sacrar. Ceremon. ar. ad. 1 cap. 2.
after this manner: He that is new Elect to the Papal dignity, is presently
disrobed of his old attire, and covered with a garment of white wool, with red
hose and sandals, adorned with a golden Cross, a red girdle with golden
claspes, a red cap, a red rochet, a long Albe, and Aumusse and a Stole behung
with Pearls: And after all these, they cast upon him a red cloak of costly
price, and a Mitre adorned with gold and precious stones. Could (I pray you)
the Whore of Babylon be more fitly represented in the person of the Pope? Their
Cardinals also wear red hatts, and seldom go forth, but clad in Scarlet. In a
word, there is no color ^o much in use and affected in the Court of Rome, as
this is; all the seats of the Cardinals in the great Hall of the Palace, are
painted with red, together with the Arms of the Pope: all which does not only
declare Rome to be the Whore of Babylon, but also does signify the blood that
this Whore has shed, and the shame that ought to possess their faces, for her
abominations. I conclude with that witty Epigram of learned Beza, touching
this matter: Semiuiros quicunque patres radiante galero
conspicis, et rubrae syrmata longa togae:
Creed mihi nullo saturatas murice vestes
diuite nec cocco pilea tincta vid^s.
Sed quae rubra vides, sanct number caede virorum
et mersa insonti tota cruore madent,
Aut memor istorum quae caele^ crimina vestri,
pro dominis iusto tacta pudore rubent.


In English thus.

When thou beholdst the hats and sacred weeds
Wherewith the Romish Cardinals adorned be:
Think not these garments died, with purple seeds,
Nor yet derived from old Antiquity.
The blood of Innocents, which by their hands is shed,
Does give unto their caps, this color red:
Or else the garments blush with open shame,
For those f^wle si^res, which do their Lords defame.
6. Again, she is said to be full of names of blasphemy, Revel. 17.3. which to
be apparently verified of Rome, may appear by the blasphemous titles which are
given both to the City it self, and also to the Emperors and Popes thereof.
To the City, they call it, vrbs sacra, the holy City: Vrbs aeterna, an
everlasting City: Inuicta Roma, invincible Rome: Inuicta Roma aeterna, Rome
invincible and eternal: Conseruatrix vrbis suae, the preserver of it self
(for they made her a Goddess as before.) In the time of Maxentius the
Emperor, they represented Rome in this figure; A Goddess sitting in her
Temple, holding in one hand a Lance, and in the other a Globe, as the Queen
and Lady of the whole world. And in the time of the Emperor Probus, she was
painted also sitting in a Temple, having in one hand the Goddess Victory,
crowning her with a Crown of Laurel, with this inscription: Romae aeternae,
that is, to eternal Rome: what greater blasphemy can be spoken then this? The
like titles they give to their Emperors, as to Julius Caesar, (...), Julius
Caesar a God, Deo Augusto, to the God Augustus: yea they were not ashamed to
affix the title of God, to most wicked and infamous persons, as Adrian did to
his Gan^mede Antinous. Neither do the Popes come behind the Heathen Emperors
in these blasphemous titles, as when the Canonists call him, a God on earth,
having fullness of power, an essence of the second intention, compounded of
God, and man: pertaking both the natures of Christ, as being not God alone, nor
man alone, but both. Neither do their flatterers only adorn them with these
brave titles, but the Popes themselves approve thereof, as is evident by that
triumphall verse made of Sixtus the fourth, at his entry into Rome, which he
well appr^^ed of.

Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.
Nay Paulus Quintus of late, and his Nephew the Cardinal Burghesius, caused
every piece of their plate to be marked with this inscription; Burghesiumae
aeternitati dicatum. But what do I stand upon these things, whereas he causes
himself to be worshipped as a God, with prostration of body, adoration,
bussing of feet, exaltation of men's shoulders? etc. as one of their own crew
shamed not to write touching Paulus Quintus: quem n^m^nis iustar vera colit
pietas: yea he takes upon him to be omnipotent like God, as not to err, to
have power to dispense with the Law of God; to be the first cause, and the
cause of causes, etc. These, and a number more such like horrible blasphemies,
are belched forth by them, against the God of heaven; and therefore Rome both
Pagan and Papal, may well be said to be full of names of blasphemy.

8. In the Whores forehead is written the name, Mystery, Apoc. 17.5. to
signify, not only that all that is spoken of her, ought to be understood
mystically and spiritually, but also that all abominations and idolatries,
were to be presented to the world as divine mysteries, and that this City has
gotten all her power and authority by the pretext of Religion, Minutius ^aelix
in Octau^s.
as Minutius Faelix affirmed, That superstition gave, founded, and increased
the Empire to the Romans. Hereunto may be added, Pliny lib. 3. cap. 5.
S^linus. Polyhist. ap^^.
that Rome had a certain other mystical name, which by their laws might not
be published and uttered abroad, and therefore Valerius Sorannus was condemned
to death, for presuming to divulge this mystical name of Rome against the Law.
And for this cause they had a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Angerona the
Goddess of Silence, to whom they sacrificed about the twelfth of the Calends
of February. This Goddess was painted with her mouth covered, to signify the
virtue of silence, not only in other things, but especially in this mystery:
but hence also the name of the God to whose protection Rome was committed, was
kept secret and hidden (as witnesses Pliny) for fear least being known,
Pliny lib. 28. cap. 1.
he should be called out of their City, and allured away by the prayers of
their enemies, as the Romans were accustomed to entice unto them by certain
charms and exorcismes the Gods of other Cities which they besieged, promising
them greater honors, and services at Rom^, then ever they had before: Howbeit
this name more fitly accords to this Whore under the Popes. For what is it,
that elevated them to that authority, which it once had over the whole world,
but the opinion of Religion, as i^ it had engraven in it forehead, all the
mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, to teach, give, and ell them at his
pleasure? yea, and to conceal them too, from the Lay People, whose salvation
(as they say) depended upon the faith of the Church, which they ignorantly
believed in all things, keeping them from searching the Scriptures, and meddling
with matters of faith, as mysteries only appertaining to the Church, that is,
the Romish Prelates. Besides that also, they had, and have still at this day,
certain secrets in their Religion, which in no case may be communicated to the
common people: To all which, if we shall adioyne the word, Myster^, reported to
have been usually imprinted in the Popes Miter, Ia^^^. ^rocard. (...) ^p^c. 17.
D ^arat. Trancijci M^nach^. in Eccles^^e v^nd ^ in Ian. 28. ^n. 1601. ^l ny
lib. 6. ^p. 2^.
as witness James Brocard, and Francis the Monk, who beheld it with their
own eyes; what can be mo^e clear and evident?

9. When S. John calls this City Babylon, he speaks not of Babylon in
Chaldea, which at that time was utterly d^serted, by reason of the
neighborhood of Se^e^cia, as Pliny who lived about S. John's age, reports:
nor of the Egyptian Babylon, to which the marks given unto it in this
Chapter, do no ways agree: but of a third; whereof the Ancient Ch^ldean
Babylon was a figure, that is, Rome, as all writers for the most part do
testify. ^u^. de ciuit. ^ei lib. 18. cap. 2. Ibid. cap. 12.
S. Augustine elegantly ^ ^^^th, Babylon the first Rome, and Rome the second
Babylon: an in another place he says, That Rome was built as a second Babylon,
and as it were the daughter of the first. And Orosius having treated of the
corre ponden^e and similitude betwixt Babylon and Rome, concludes thus:
Or^sius lib. 2. cap. 2. and 3.
Behold a like beginning of both Cities, like in power, like in greatness,
like ^ time, like in goods and evils, but yet not like in issue or e^^. For the
Empire of Babylon was then worn out, but that of Rome subsisted yet under the
gouernme t of Honorius. Thi^ opinion is also confirmed by Tertullian before
them both, Tertull. aduertus, Iuda^s. et contra Marcion lib. 3. Hieron in
prol^g. lib. 6 Didymi de sp ritu.
i^ these words: Thus Babylon in S. John does bear the figure of the City of
Rome, and consequently, both great, and proud in Empire, and the murderer of
Saints. And S. Jerome alluding to this passage of the Apocalypse says, When I
conuersed ^ Babylon, and was an inhabitant in the Harlot clad in purple, and
lived after the Roman rights, etc. The same is confessed by Bellarmine, Bell.
de Romans Pon. lib 20. 2. Baron. ad An. 45. R. b re in Apoc. cap. 14. Ludoui^.
Viues. in Aug. de ciuit. lib. 18. cap. 21.
Baronius, Ribera, the Rhemist, Ludo^ie^ Viues, and others. The words of this
last are worth marking: Though S. Jerome (says he) in his Epistle to Marcella,
calls Rome Babylon, yet now it is delivered from that odious name: For there
is no confusion in her, but all things are distinguished and reduced unto
certain Laws: so that though there be a sale of all, yet nothing is done
without law and process, and a most holy right. Thus merrily he taunts this
scarlet Strumpet, intimating in plain terms, that seeing there is no
confusion so great, as that which is established by Law, therefore Rome even in
this regard, deserves the rather to be styled with the name of Babylon, which
signifies confusion: and that worthily. For as Theophilus said of old Rome,
that it was (...), an abridgment of the supersttion of all Nations which ran
thither as into a common sewer: so may we truly say of new Rome, that there is
a confused medley of all superstitions and Heresies, and not only so, but of
all Nations and Cities also, as Athenaeus writes. In the heavenly City Rome,
are found enclosed all Cities: all Nations dwell there, Cappadocians,
Scythians, they of Pontus, and innumerable others, so that it may well be
named, the epiteme of the habitable world. So that as the name Babel, was given
to the old City in the plain of Shinar, by reason of the confusion of
languages which was there made; so worthily may it be given to this, wherein
there is as great a confusion as there was.

10. And of what City can it be truly said, that it is situate upon seven hills,
but of Rome only? For though they write the same of Constantinople; yet that
City was not in being in S. John's time, and he describes a City that was then
extant; and besides, Rome only of all the Cities in the world, was named
Cinitas septicolli^ in Latin, and (...) in Greek, by Ancient Poets and
Historians: and in this it fitly resembles ancient Babylon, which by the
Oracle is styled (...), a City of seven letters, because the name Babylon,
contains so many; which seven letters of Babylon, answer to the seven hills
of Rome: And because it is mystical Babylon, what number is fitter to
represent this mystery, then seven? The Greeks called the true God (...), that
is, whose name consisted of seven voices or vowels, and it is to be seen in
the book of ancient Oracles, collected by John Opsepeus: and that, either
because the name of God might be gathered out of the seven Greek vowels, or
because the name that God himself takes upon him to Moses, Exodus 3.14. is
composed of seven letters (...), (...), He that is, as Joseph Scaliger
observes. Scaliger de emendat tempore.
In Hebrew also the name (...) consists of four consonants, and three
vowels, which in Latin is written with seven entire letters: And indeed it
would be tedious to relate the mysteries that are by ancient Authors found in
this number. So that whether we take this number in a literal, or in a
mystical signification, it fitly sorteth with the City of Rome.

11. Remond, cap. 26. de Antichristo, speaking of Harmag^ddon the place where
the battle should be fought for the false Prophet, that is to say, Antichrist,
Apoc. 16.16. does strive to encounter the name of Geneua in those words: but
the Hebrew letters wherewith this word is written, do easily confute this
malicious dotage, and plainly show they care not what they say, so they may any
ways disgrace our Religion. Daneus gives us a more probable interpretation
thereof, when he fixes it upon Rome, because Armageddon signifies in Hebrew
(the word being read backward, after the Hebrew manner) The subversion of
highness; and what is Rome but haughtiness, if it be conceived in the Hebrew,
as S. Jerome witnesses: Hieron. adu^rsus ^^uinian. lib. 2.
And if in Greek, strength, well then may Rome be called Armageddon, The
subversion of highness, both for that she has a long time subverted many of
the great Kingdoms of the earth, by her temporal first, and secondly, by her
spiritual sword: and also for that she shall at last subvert her self by her
own greatness and pride. But yet to speak ingenuously, I take that the place
is otherwise understood, in a more simple and plain meaning, which in a word
is thus. Har in Hebrew signifies, a Mountain, and Mageddon, is the proper
name of a City, situate in the land of Canaan, as we read, 1. Kings. 9.15. from
the mountainous situation of which City, arises the name Harmageddon: and of
this ^ity, those waters take their denomination, which are mentioned, Judges.
5. near unto which, was that great Army of Iabin under the conduct of Sisera,
discomfited by an handful of the Isra^lites, under Debora and Barak. Now unto
this defeat does S. John seem to allude, as to a most excellent figure and
representation of those things which he intended to propound. For this King
Iabin with his nine hundred Chariots of iron, and innumerable multitudes of
soldiers, does he not lively represent the designs, leagues, and conspiracies
of Kings, and people, fighting against Christ, under the banner of Satan and
Antichrist? And what did Debora, a feeble and disarmed woman represent, but the
Church of Christ, standing valiantly in opposition against all these assaults?
And why is the Mountain of Mageddon assigned to be the place, wherein this
combat is to be fought, rather then any other? But to represent, that they
that fight against the true Church, small in strength and number, in comparison
of her enemies, shall have the same issue of their battles, as the Canaanites
had against the Israelites of the two Tribes of Zabulon and Nephtalim, near
unto the waters of Mageddoni where they were all slain even to one, as it is
evident, Judge. 4.16. and Judges. 5.19. This I take to be the most probable
interpretation of this Text: and the rather, because it is usual, to shadow
out the prophecies of the deliverances of Christ's Church in the New Testament,
by some famous deliverance of Gods people in the Old Testament: as our
redemption by Christ, by the redemption of the Israelites out of Egypt: the
conquering of our spiritual enem^es by Jesus Christ, by the overthrow of the
Madianites by G^d o^, Esaias. 9.3. the deliverance of the Church from her
enemies, under the name of the deliverance of Jerusalem, Zach 12.9.11. where is
also express mention of this Mageddon, where the Israelites wept for King
Josias. But enough of this: the conclusion of all is, that there is nothing in
the description of this Harlot, but fitly agrees unto Rome, not only ancient,
but modern, which is named by an excellency of speech (the City) without any
other addition, as Saint John styles it in plain terms (...), the City, the
great, the Articles repeated importing so much.

CHAP. 7. Of the growth and progress of Antichrist.
1. THe Apostle, 2. Tim 2.17. compares the doctrine of Heretics to the
Gangrene, the nature of which disease is to fret by little and little, till at
length it seize upon the vital parts, and so bring death to the body. So
heresy does not insinuate it self into the Church all at once, nor in a
moment possess the body thereof, but infecting the members by degrees, ere it
be perceived, disperseth it self through the whole body. This our Savior
Christ himself affirms, Mat. 1^.24. when he says, That the enemy whilst men
slept sowed his Tares, that is, in secret and unperceived, according to that of
Saint Peter, 2. Peter. 2.3. That false teachers should with famed words privily
bring in damnable heres^^s. And the Apostle speaking of Antichrist, confirms
as much when he says, That from that time the mystery of iniquity began to
work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. to show, that Antichrist should not come at one chop, so
that he might be descried, but should gain footing by little and little, till
at length he seated himself in the Temple of God, and exalted himself above
all that is called God: which may serve for an answer to them that require us
to design precisely the time when Antichrist first seated himself at Rome,
who was the first Pope that merited this title, what year he lived, and what
histories make proof thereof. For seeing this mystery of iniquity has like a
Canker or Gangrene, been a long time wearing it self into the Church; will it
follow that no such evil was, because the beginning thereof cannot be
determined? How many diseases are there in the body, and those even unto death,
the beginning and first causes whereof cannot be known? Now is a man therefore
sound, because he cannot tell when his disease took him? Nevertheless, that
our Adversaries may not take this as an excuse of ignorance, I will clearly
manifest ^he progress of this Man of perdition, and deduce in brief by
certain histories his growth and increase.

2. As therefore the holy Scripture describes Antichrist by the name of a man;
so it gives us just occasion to observe in him the like progresses and changes
as are found in the life of a man. As therefore the life of a man is divided
into seven principal periods or pieces, to wit, Birth, Infancy, Youth, Man's
estate, Declining age, Old age, and Death: so Antichrist has the same degrees
and stairs, from his first entrance into the world, until his final end and
dissolution. For it must needs fare with this Kingdom and Empire of
Antichrist, as it has done with all other Kingdoms and Empires of the world,
which have grown from small beginnings to a great height and strength, and
after by little and little decayed again, till they come to their final ruin.
This we may see clearly verified in the four great Monarchies of the world,
and all other great and mighty Kingdoms: yea, the mighty Ottoman Empire is not
now so great and powerful as it has been, but as it arose and sprang by
little and little, and spread it self at last over the greatest part of the
world; so we hope by the declinnig thereof, that it is death and ruin is not
far off. And concerning Antichrist, me thinks, Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
evidently discovers all his degrees of his standing, both in his growth and
fall. His Birth, when he says, that he was even then already come in his time,
as Saint John also affirms, 1. John. 4.3. His Infancy, when he says, that
the mystery of iniquity did already work. His Youth, when he says, that he
could not be revealed till that which withheld was taken out of the way. His
Man's estate, when he says, then shall this Man of sin be revealed, and
shall exalt himself above all that is called God. His Declining, when he
says, the Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth, that is, with
the preaching of the Gospel: and lastly, his Old age and death, when he
says, that after his consumption he shall be destroyed with the brightness
of Christ's coming. Of these degrees in order.

3. Antichrists birth was without doubt in the Apostles time, seeing Saint Paul
says, that the mystery of iniquity did then work; and Saint John, that
Antichrist was already come into the world. Now he could not come before
Christ, for how could he then be Antichrist? Therefore it is an undoubted
truth, that he was borne in the Apostles time: and yet no man can expressly
define in what year, month, or day he was borne; for his coming was into the
Church as a disease into the body unknown and secret: neither can the place of
his birth be determined, whether in Rome, or in any other City of the world.
And as for Rome, we are so far from affixing the title of Antichrist to
those holy Bishops that were first in Rome, that we confess that the Church of
Rome was then proposed to other Churches as a rare example of sanctity of life,
and purity of doctrine, and constancy in martyrdom: yet howsoever it is
impossible to determine either the time or place of his birth, notwithstanding
that he was borne in the Apostles time, is so evident a truth, that he that
will deny it, must withal deny the holy Scripture wherein it is plainly
affirmed.

4. His infancy may well be thought to have continued from the Apostles age
until the first Nicene Council: for if we consider the history of the Roman
Bishops during those three hundred years, we shall easily perceive that
presently after the Apostles, they began (doubtless beside their thought and
intention) to prepare the way for Antichrist, who was to establish his throne
in their seat, and that as well by offering a kind of primacy above other
Bishops, as by bringing in an intolerable number of traditions to darken the
simplicity and purity of the Gospel: which will plainly appear, if we
receive for truth, Decretall Epistles ascribed unto such Bishops of Rome as
lived in the first Age of the Church, to wit, Anacletus, Eraristus, Alexander,
Sixtus, H^ginus, Pius, Eleutherius, and others: for what do they all breath
but the spirit of Antichrist? What do they thunder out, but the primacy of the
Church of Rome? What do they beat upon, but prohibitions of offending Priests
in any sort whatsoever? And what do they speak of, but of appeals to the Sea
of Rome, and such like things? And all this at the time when prisons were full
of Christians, and the streets ran with their blood. But howsoever these
Epistles were counterfeit, as it is without doubt, yet certain it is, that
Pope Victor nourishe^ this infant, and made way for his further growth, when he
excommunicated all the Churches of Asia, and others, for not celebrating their
Easter upon Sunday, as did the Church of Rome: which d^ede of his, was sharply
reproved by many Bishops, and particularly by Saint Irenaeus, Eus^. histor.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
as Eusebius reports: so did other Bishops his successors, when they made no
scruple to take cognition of the causes of such as were condemned by other
Bishops, and arrogated the judgment thereof unto them. Cyprian. lib. 1. epist.
3.
Which ambition of theirs, Saint Cyp^ian in an Epistle to Cornelius the then
Bishop of Rome, repr^hendeth most soundly and gravely, and proves that every
one ought to be judged where his crime was committed, and where both his
witnesses and accusers might be present: and that to appeal to the Bishop of
Rome, was nothing else but to abrogate the authority of other Bishops. So also
did Pope Zepherine, when he the first of all others took upon him this title,
Pontifex Maximus, Episcopus Episcoporum, The chief Bishop, Baron. Annal. ad
An. 216.
and Bishop of Bishops as Baronius confesses. And thus did this wicked child
play in his infancy, and yet showing even then most certain presages of his
future behavior in the Church.

5. After the Nicene Council, when peace was given to the Church, Antichrist
came to the prime of his youth; and his pride and ambition grew to an higher
stature and strength, mixed with more boldness and cour^ge then before: for
fearing no more any persecution from the Pagans, whose religion began by little
and little to be abolished, the Bishops of Rome began to lay more strong
foundations of their proiected primacy, under pretense of defending the sound
doctrine of the Trinity. For, when as Athanasius, with Paul Patriarch of
Constantinople, an^ other Bishops were banished from their Churches by the
Arrians, and retired themselves to Julius then Bishop of Rome, he received
them, Epist. I^lij Papae. tom. 1. Council.
and wrote in their behalf, letters to the Eastern Bishops full of pride and
ambition: wherein he challenges the right of calling general Councils, the
judgment over other Bishops, and the appeals to the Church of Rome: which
arrogance of theirs, was greatly cherished and increased by a Decree of the
Council of Sard^ck, which rather by provision to remedy the troubles of that
time, in regard of the Arrian Heresy wherewith the whole East was infected,
then for a perpetual right, permitted appeals to the Bishop of Rome: if at
least this Decree of the Council of Sardick be not counterfeit: seeing Saint
Augustine acknowledges no Council of Sardick, but heretical. Aug contra
Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 34.
The same steps of pride were trodden in by all the whole rank of Roman
Bishops of that ^ge, insomuch that the Council of Meleuis was forced to give
stoppage thereunto, C^n il. ^^leuit. cap 22. tom. 1. Council.
by forbidding all appeals to be made beyond the Sea, under pain of being
excluded from the Communion of the Churches of Afric^: which caused Pope
Zozimus, for the maintenance of the authority of his Sea, to produce the Decree
of the pretended Council of Sardick, which was said to be the same with that
of Nice: b^^ it was convicted of falshoode by the Copies of the Council of
Nice fetched from Constantinople, and so his labor lost. This Council wrote
unto Pope Celestine the successor of Boniface about this falsification, and
advertised him not to bring into the Church (which ought to appear as a light
of simplicity) Fumosum typhum seculi, A smoky arrogance of the world. In like
manner the Council of Chalcedon went about to bridle this height of pride in
the Roman Bishops, when notwithstanding the contradictions of the Legates of
Pope Leo, it gave an equal place of primacy in the Church to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and equal privileges ^f honor, with absolute jurisdiction
over all the Metropolitanes of Asia, ^ontus and Thracia, and that by reason of
the Imperial seat which was then there planted, as the Bishop of Rome had
before time been exalted for the same cause. Hence forward the Patriarchs of
Constantinople went always in equipage with the Bishops of Rome, and retained
the title of Oecumenicall as well as they: and the Church of Constantinople,
was by the authority of the Emperors styled, Cap^ omnium aliarum ecclesiarum,
Head of all other Churches, as is evident by the writing of Justinian the
Emperor to Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Authemius, and Meminus,
and of the Emperor Leo, to Stephen Patriarch of the same place. So that in this
Age, the Bishops of Rome ambitiously desired, and in a youthful heat
audaciously attempted that, which yet by no means they could absolutely effect
and bring to pass. And though Gregory the great, whether by fained humility or
otherwise, seemed to abhor the title of Universal Bishop, or Patriarch,
which John of Constantinople assumed unto himself, calling him therefore the
forerunner of Antichrist, and saying, that none of the Bishops of Rome ever
usurped this title: yet notwithstanding (if we will believe Baronius) he
forbore not in effect to take the same title upon himself, Baron ad An. 595.
when he says in one of his Epistles, That the Roman seat served for a
Watch-tewer over the whole world, and sent out unto all, new Constitutions. But
I think this Epistle rather to be forged, then truly of Gregory's composing,
for it was dated, Indict. 11. Anno Christi. 593. which kind of datation the
Popes used not; Gregor. lib. 12. epist 32.
besides he brings in Theodoricke subscribing to this privilege, whereas at
this time he was scarce of age to speak, and in possession of the City of
Soissons which he never had. Now if we add heereunto the great pomp and riot
which the Romish Prelates and Clergy abandoned themselves unto in this Age, we
shall perceive more of the youthful disposition of this Man of sin. Ammian.
Marcell l. 27.
Ammianus Marcellinus a Pagan Historian, having related the schism and
contention betwixt Damasus and Vicisinus about the Papacy, wherein much humane
blood was shed and spilt, at last concludes after this manner: When I consider
the great pomp of the Roman Bishops, I cannot but confess that they which
aspire unto those honors, have reason to strive with all their might; seeing
when they have obtained them, they are assured to be enriched with the
oblations of Matrones, and to come forth in public in their Chariots
magnificently arrayed, and to make feasts with such excess, that their
banquets surpass the tables of Kings. And all this he appropriateth only to
the Bishop of Rome: for of other Bishops he thus writes in the same place,
That their frugality in meats, and drinks, parsimony in apparel, and
humility in carriage, commended them to God and to his servants, as pure and
modest persons. Thus Marcellinus. Now it cannot be said, Baron. ad An. 367.
that this Historian in a malicious humor reprehendeth the riot of the Romish
Bishops (as Baronius would have it) seeing he commends other Christian
Bishops for their modesty and temperance: And therefore, rather is Baronius
impudent, in daring to justify this their pomp and pride, saying, that Then
to the sovereign preisthood of Christ was joined a magnificent and regal
Majesty: Hier^n. epist 61.
whereby he gives cause of fit application of that which Saint Jerome
reports to have been spoken by one Praetextatus, a designed Consul, but a
sacrilegious wretch, who mocking at Pope Damasus, said, Make me Bis^op of
Rome, and I will presently turn Christian. In fine, the multitude of
traditions, ceremonies, and superstitious doctrines, brought into the Church by
the Bishops of Rome, in those first six hundred years, do show, that
Antichrist was grown to a good age and strength: as the mingling of water with
the Sacramental wine by Alexander the first, and of salt with water for
Benediction, agreeable to the Pagans: Lent fast for seven weeks by Tolespherus:
the celebrating of Easter on the Sunday, by Pius the first; the which one
Hermes is said to have received by revelation from an Angel in a shepherds
habit: the shauing of Priests crowns, by Amicetus, a custom derived from the
practice of Isis Priests, and condemned by diverse of the Fathers, as Clemens of
A^exandria, paedagog. lib. 3. cap. 11. and Octatus contra Parmen. lib. 2 and
Jerome on Ez kiel. 44. and the fourth Council of Toledo. cap. 40. the Fasts of
four times by Calixtus: Silver Cups into the celebration of the Lords Supper,
by Pope Vrbane: but no Gold as yet, because I think they follow Persius rule,
In satri q^id facit aurum? new Chrisme to be made every year, and the old to
be burnt at the Eucharist, by Pope Fabian: Divine service to be celebrated upon
the sepulchers of Martyrs, by Pope Faelix: blessing upon the Altar of the
fruits of the earth, as if they held them unclean with the Manichees, till
they were thus purified, by ^urich^^^us: as also the prohibition, that no
Martyr should be buried, but being clothed with a certain kind of Vestiment
called a Dalmatica, and a purple hood. Thus superstition began then to increase
and grow to some strength in the Church, and that not only in matters of
ceremony, but also of doctrine: for then began Temples to be dedicated to the
honor of the Virgin Mary, and Martyrs, to the great dishonor of God, to whom
as all divine worship is to be given, Aug. cont. Maxim. Ar^^an. lib. 1. tit. 11
Leo ser. 1. de matalib. Petri et Pat. l. Greg^r. epist. lib. 12. aepist 32.
so all Temples for the exercise of that worship, are to be erected, as
witnesses Saint Augustine. Then entered in the Invocation of Saints, with the
placing of hope and confidence in them, as may appear by the doctrine of the
Pope Leo, and Gregory the Great: then came in prayer for the dead, and
Purgatory: for the fabric whereof, they forced to forge an infinite number of
miracles, and apparitions of dead ghosts. The doctrine of justification by the
merit of works, began then also to take some footing, though not so deep as
afterward. So that now it is easy to conclude, that albeit the Bishops of
Rome, until the year 600. were not such as to whom might be properly applied
the title of Antichrist; yet it cannot be denied but that the mystery of him
wrought in them, and by them; and that it was grown to some strength and
stature in this ^ge

6. We have seen Antichrist in his youth, the mystery of iniquity working in
the Sea of Rome, through the simplicity of some Bishops, and ambition of
others, for these first six Ages, till Gregory the first; after whose death, he
came to his man's estate, that is, was revealed in the Church, and reigned in
the Roman Sea: and as the period of this Age of man is commonly of longer
continuance then the rest, so is the time of Antichrists reign, longer then of
his infancy or youth. It began presently after the death of Gregory the Great,
and continued well-neere the full space of 800. years, and arose to it height
by certai^^ ^egrees and stairs: for no mortal thing is perfect at the first,
b t grows by steps, as it also decays. The first degre^ o^ his reign,
which I term his man's estate, was in the time of the Emperor Phocas, who
having most treacherously and cruelly murdered his Master, Mauritius the
Emperor, together with his Wife and Children, to the end, that he might gain
the favor of the Romans, and keep Italy from reuolting; he caused the
primacy and superiority of the whole Church, to be adjudged to the Roman Sea,
and the Bishop of Rome to be declared the sovereign and universal Head of the
Church, and of all other Bishops; alleging for it this reason: That as the
City of Rome was the Mother and Princess of the Roman Empire, so it ought
also to have the primacy and sovereignty in religion. And from this time,
Boniface and his successors took upon them the title of universal Bishop* A
title, which in deed appertains to none but Christ, who is the only true
shepherd (as S. Peter calls him, 1. Pet. 5.4.) and consequently the only
universal Bishop and Head of the Church, Gregor epist. lib. 12. ep^st. 32.
as S. Gregory notably confirms in many places, as in an Epistle of his to
all Bishops, where he uses this superscription: To all the members of the holy
Church, most precious stones, shining in Christ's diadem, whose universal head
is Christ: he does not say, the Bishop of Rome, but Christ: yea he that takes
upon him this name, does not only rob Christ of his dignity, but also every
other particular Bishop of that power and part of the administration of the
Church, which is committed unto him by God. This S. Gregory most excellently,
and at large proves in diverse of his Epistles, as lib. 4. Epist. 34. and
Epist. 36. and Epist. 38. and all grounded upon this reason, because to be the
universal Bishop, is to be the only Bishop, and so all others to be but his
Substitutes, and Vicars, and therefore to have no power of themselves, but as
it is derived from him: and therefore that distinction of the word universal,
devised by the Jesuits, is both vain and frivolous, when they say, that it
either signifies singularity, and so to be universal, is to be the only
Bishop of the world: or preheminency, and so to be universal, is nothing else
but to be the chief of all Bishops. And that in the first signification, the
title is profane, sacrilegious, and proper unto Antichrist: but in the second,
it may be attributed to the Pope, according to S. Gregory's intention. This, I
say, is an idle conceit: for he that shall advisedly read S. Gregory in the
forenamed places, shall find, that he does not only condemn it in the first
sense, but in the second also, namely, that one should usurp that title to
himself, depriving all others of it, seeing it is apparent in the Ancient
Councils that all the Patriarchs in common, bear the title of oecumenicall or
universal Bishops, without derogating thereby one from the other. And
therefore if the Council of Chalcedon (as they pretend) or any other Council,
did at any time give the Bishop of Rome this title, it was in common as to a
Patriarch, and not in any singular manner: As the care of all the Churches was
committed to Peter, but not in private, but in common with the rest of the
Apostles; for else S. Paul had ouer-lashed, when he said, That he was troubled
with the care of all Churches. 2. Cor. 11.28. Hence it is, Theodoret hist. lib.
4. cap. 19. Nazianz. ser. de Cypriano.
that S. Basil was called (...) The great light of the world: and Gregory
Nazianzene speaking of S. Cyprian, says, that he not only pres^ded over
Carthage, but also over the whole West, yea the East, and the South, and the
North. In a word, these two titles, Bishop of the universal Church, and
universal Bishop of the Church, are far different, if not contrary: for the
first was a common name to all Bishops that made profession of true and sound
doctrine, whereby they were discerned from Heretics and Schismatikes, the
universal Church signifying nothing else but the Orthodox and Catholic
Church. But the second cannot properly agree to any, but to an infinite person,
to wit, Jesus Christ, and if it be ascribed to any, it is not in regard of
prehemiennce, that he should have above all others, but in regard of the vniuer
ality of care, he ought to show toward the whole Catholic or universal
Church.

7. This was the first degree of Antichrists reign or Kingdom. The second
was, when the Bishops of Rome shook off from their necks the yoke of
obedience and fealty, which they ought unto the Emperors: for, for a long
time, the Pope was chosen by the common voices of the Clergy, and people of
Rome, and this election was confirmed by the Emperor himself, or by his
Lieutenant, Platina. Baronius.
the Exarch of Rauenna, and was subject to him, as to his Lord and Master, to
be either established or deposed at his pleasure: as we may see particularly in
the example of Pope Martin the first, who was carried as a criminous person to
Constantinople before the Emperor, and by him banished into the Isle
Chersonesus, where he dyed: But afterward Pope Benedict the second, by his
hypocrisy, obtained of the Emperor Constantine the fourth, freedom of
election, without the authority of the Emperor, or his Exarch: and then
presently began this Man of Sin to ruffle in his pride, and never ceased,
what by seditions and excommunications, till he had chased the Emperors
authority wholly out of Italy. Then Pope Constantine, excommunicated the
Emperor Philippious (who indeed was a favorer of the Heresy of the
Monothelites,) and forbad the people of Rome, either to acknowledge him for
their Lord, or to obey any Mandate or Commandment that came out by his
authority. Then Gregory the second, resisted the decree of the Emperor Leo the
third, who in zeal to Gods glory, had commanded all Images in Churches to be
beaten down, and so maintained himself by the favor of Charles Martell
against him, that the Emperor durst not give assault upon him by Arms Then
Pope Stephen the second, by the aid of Pepin, then King of France, wrung out
of Arstulphus the King of the Lumbards hands, not only the rightes and
territories of S. Peter, but the whole Exarchate of Rauenna, with all the
dependances thereupon, and bestowed it upon the Bishop of Rome: And yet their
ambition was not satiate herewith, for they rested not till the Kingdom of the
Lumbards was utterly rooted out by Charles the successor of Pepin, who having
conquered Dedier their last King, added unto his Fathers gifts, all that lies
beyond Liguria, from the old ruins of the City Luna, unto the Alps, and much
else where: And this is that which is called S. Peter's Patrimony, which they
defrauding their true benefactours of that acknowledgement which is due unto
them, had rather ascribe to the donation of Constantine the Great. Here then we
may see two notable events. First, the Pope aspired unto two horns, to wit,
both spiritual and temporal authority, and so became a temporal Prince in
those great territories which were conferred upon him. And secondly, the
erection of the Image of the second Beast: when the first made P^pin the Father
a King, deposing Chilpericke as insufficient, and then translated the Western
Empire, from the Greeks to the French, conferring it upon Charles his son:
thus notoriously verifying the prophecy, Apoc. 13.14.15. That Antichrist should
command the inhabitants of the earth, to make an image of the first Beast, to
give him a spirit, and to cause him to be worshipped. This is so manifest a
token of Antichrist, that it cannot be doubted of, whether we respect the
erection and translation of this new Empire, which is a power only proper unto
God: or the bringing into the Church the adoration of Images, and the
canonization of Saints, which was a kind of giving life to the image of the
first Beast, with whom it was accustomed both to worship dumb Idols, of wood
and stone, and to consecrate and deifie mortal men, as they pleased. For this
cause, many learned men have fixed the number 666. upon this time, as the true
beginning of the revelation of Antichrists kingdom: for if we add to 97
years of Christ, which were run when the Apocalypse was written, 666. we
shall fall upon the year of 762. in which the Pope as an earthly Prince, poss
ssed the Exarchate of Rauenna, and those other territories, which he rece ued
by the gift of Pepin and Charlem^igne.

8. But for all this, the Whore of Babylon was not yet ascended to the top of
her abominations: for the Roman Sea was as yet held in some subjection to the
mperours; so that no Popes could be received, without their approbation and
confirmation, as is apparent by Stephen the fourth, and his two successors,
who were compelled to travail into France, to get the confirmation of their
election Also the guardance and soueraignity of their temporal lands given by
Pepin and his successors, remained in the hands of the Emperor, and of those
that held under him the command of Italy. Also Jews the second, making his
abode for the most part at Rome or thereabout, commanded with more absolute
power, then any of his predecessors had done. The Popes power then was by
these means somewhat bridled, so that he could not do as he list. But th^se
proud Prelates, disdaining to be thus curbed, soon broke the yoke, and s^t
themselves free from all obedience to mortal man. Pope Nicholas the first led
the ring: he amongst other his goodly constitutions, prohibited the Emperors
to be present at their Synodall assemblies; concluded that the Pope could not
be judged by any secular power; forbad the marriage of Priests, interdicted
Princes, and received appeals of Bishops and Priests that were Canonically
deposed: of which dealing, we find many complaints made by learned and godly
men living at that time, as of Hinemare Archbishop of Rhemes, and Lintpert,
Archbishop of Mentz, with others. After him succeeded other Popes, whose
continual labor was to strangle the power of Kings (as Claudius Fanchet
speaks) and that partly by occasion of their negligence in government,
Claudius Fanchet delinat. maison de Charlemaigne.
and partly of the ignorance of their own rights and ancient Canons, as may
appear in the answer of Theilgunt, and Gouthier, Bishops, recorded by Fanchet
and others: about which time, Pope Adrian the second, threatened to
excommunicate King Charles the Bald, if he did not render Lorraine to the
Emperor Jews. Neither did these effects of their power show themselves only
in France, but in England, Germany, Italy, and other Countries of Europe; as is
manifest in the stories of those times: deposing Kings, translating Kingdoms,
excommunicating all that any ways withstood their ambitious designs, and
interdicting whole Nations, as here England in the time of King John, which
stood in that state of interdiction for the space of six years: during all
which time, no bells were rung, no divine service publicly used, no bodies
buried in Christian sepulture, no Sacraments publicly administered, nor any
religious exercise else performed, but all carried the face of Paganism,
religion being utterly banished, or at least so smothered, that it could not
appear. At this time also it was, that after the declining of the house of
Charlemaigne, the Popes grew to that height, of not only pride, but also
impiety, that they were esteemed no better then monsters, Baron. ^d An. 912.
whom Baronius is constrained to call Apostaticks, and not Apostolicks. Then
did that famous harlot Theodora, with her two daughters, Marozi^ and Theodora,
make Popes at their pleasure, even adulterous russians, which are not registered
in the roll of the Popes of Rome, for any other cause (as Baronius confesses)
but to fill up the succession, and mark out the time. And these monsters
created Priests, and Deacons, and Cardinals, like to themselves: so that Baleus
had great reason to call the time of the sitting of these Popes, from John the
eight, till Siluester the second, the reign of the great Whore. And it may
seem, that the Author of the book of Antichrist, which is found in the ninth
Tome of S. Augustines works, aimed at the same, when he designeth the
revealing of Antichrist, to the time of the Empires translation from the French
unto the Germans. And after this also, when John the 1^. gave the Imperial
Crown, to Otho a King of Germany, and Prince of the Saxons, as it was before
given to Charlemaigne, by Leo the third. This Otho, took not only an oath of
allegiance to the Pope, but also of protection of him and his estates, against
all the world. The oath is recorded at large by Gratian, did. 63. (tibi
domine) by the tenor whereof, we may easily see, how the Emperor received at
that time, the Character or mark of the second Beast; and in stead thereof,
yielded unto them their power and authority, as it was foretold by S. John. So
that it cannot be doubted, but that in the Church of Rome at those times sat
the true Antichrist, in whom all the Prophecies were fulfilled, and the manners
of the great Whore practiced to the full: And therefore in a Council held at
Rhemes, not long after, the Fathers there assembled, were not afraid to affix
the title of Antichrist upon those Popes.

9. The last and highest period of Antichrists reign, is yet behind, which
began when John the 18. or 19. successor of Siluester the second, deprived the
people of Rome of all right of election of their Popes, which power they had
retained and exercised all that time. For he took it from them, and invested
therewith the Priests of Rome, which began then to be called by the name of
Cardinals; in which form of election, it continues till this day: and here
began the arm of his reign, which grew a little bigger under Benedict the
seventh, who by a Decree ordained, that none might be called Emperor, but whom
the Pope should choose, and to whom he should present the Imperial sign,
(which was an Apple of gold, beset about with precious stones, and a golden
Cross on the top) so that whereas before, the Pope was no Pope, except
confirmed by the Emperor, now topsie-turuy, the Emperor is no Emperor except
confirmed by the Pope. But the top and top-gallant of his reign, was under
Gregory the seventh, formerly called Hildebrand, who converted the whole
spiritual power of the Pap^ll Se^ouer Churches, into a politic Monarchy over
earthly Principalities.

10. Out of all which that has been said, I may commend unto the Reader, three
notable observations for the confirmation of this truth. First, that not only
our modern writers, but also such as were more ancient, living before the
reformation of the Church, refer to this Gregory the seventh, the highest
degree of Antichrists reign. For Lollard who wrote upon the Apocalypse, in the
year 1357. setleth the beginning of Antichrists reign (whom he peremptorily
affirms to be the Pope, upon the year 1033. and with him agrees ^b^rhard
the Bishop of Saltzbourg, in the time of the Emperor Frederick: who in an
Oration which he made in an assembly of the Princes and Bishops of Germany,
says; that Gregory the seventh laid the first foundation of the Kingdom of
Antichrist. Secondly, that at this time, the lives of the Popes were so filthy
and abominable, as it would yrke any Christian heart to read such things as
are written of them by their own writers. Cardinal Benno represents unto
our view, a map of such horrible monsters and incarnate devils, living at that
time in the Roman Sea, as the earth never bore the like. And of this time, the
Author of the book called, Fasciculus temporum, thus speaks. An effeminate
time, wherein the Christian faith began greatly to sail, and decline from it
masculine vigor: for then Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, were not
observed, but the people gave themselves to Southsayings, enchauntments, and
Necromancy: and as were the people, so were ^he Priests: Then Popes murdered
one another by poison, rent Christendom with Schisms, filled Churches with
abominations, and Kingdoms with wars, massacres, and blood. Thirdly and
lastly, that at this time the pride of the Roman Bishops was grown to such an
excessive height, as is almost incredible: for they constrained Emperors and
Kings to kiss their feet, to hold their stirrup when they got on horseback,
to minister water unto them for the washing of their hands when they went to
meat, to wait for access unto them at their gates, till it were their
pleasure to admit them to their presence; and finally, they were not ashamed to
trample upon their necks, as Alexander the third did to the Emperor Frederick
the first, and to set the Crown on their heads with one foot, and kick it off
again with the other, with infinite other most arrogant demeanors. All which
things laid together, do exactly conclude, that ever since Boniface the third,
the Pope has been the true and grand Antichrist, albeit his tyrrany and pride
increased by degrees till Gregory the seventh, when it was ascended to his
highest period.

11. Thus we have seen Antichrist in his man's estate, that is, in the top of
his strength and pride; but then he began to decline and decay, as a man uses
to do after he is fifty or threescore years of age. This declining estate of
the Man of sin began, when Martin Luther dispelling the mists of Popery,
preached the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ to the world, and especially
cleared the doctrine of Justification, which till then lay cloaked under the
veil of Scholasticall distinctions, and Monkish devotion. For albeit there
wanted not in all Ages some that opposed themselves against popish tyranny and
superstition, and discerned and avouched that the Pope was that Antichrist: yet
none of them gave him his deadly wound, till God stirred up Luther to be the
instrument of this mercy. For his doctrine and preaching was no sooner spread
abroad in the world, but it was entertained as finding it not new, but grounded
upon the antiquity of holy Scripture and ancient C uncills and Doctors. At this
time God also raised up such a number of bright Stars, learned men in the
Church, as no Age ever saw the like: these did not only refine from Monkish
barbarismes, humane learning, but also g^^ great light and propagation unto the
truth, which had (...) long time lain clouded under ignorance and superstition.
And to help forward this great work, not long before this time, the Famous
Art of Printing was by Gods providence found out, as it were of purpose to
divulge and spread abroad the most excellent writings of famous men then
living, which peradventure otherwise had never come to light. Now then all
these means of Gods providence working together, brought forth such an effect,
that not only millions of people in all places, but also whole States and
Kingdoms spying out the abominable errors of the Romish Harlot, fell away from
the obedience of the Pope, and embraced the truth of the Gospel, as is
apparent at this day in Germany, France, England, Denmark, Poland, and almost
all parts of Europe. And this is that very same which was prophesied of by
Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. in most plain terms, where it is said, That the
Lord should consume Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth: where by the word
(Consume) is meant a declining and languishing sickness that should fall upon
him, whereby his vital parts and powers should every day grow weaker and
weaker, as it is with such as are in a consumption: and by the spirit of
Christ's mouth, nothing else but the preaching of the Gospel, according to the
opinion of most Interpreters: and this is the reason why of all men living,
they most hate godly and painful Preachers, because they are the Trumpetters
to blow down the walls of their Jericho.

12. Thus has this Man of sin been in his wane and declination, ever since
Luthers time: but whether his old and decrepit age be yet come, is hard to
judge: as also of the time and hour of his death. These things we must leave
unto God, who only knows the secrets of times and seasons that are to come:
only we may thus far judge, that as when we see a man wax gray headed, and
declining, we are assured old age and death are not far off: so we may also
safely judge, considering the declining estate of this Man of sin, that he is
growing old and near to his destruction: which final destruction
notwithstanding, shall not be accomplished, till Christ himself come unto
judgment, when ^s the Apostle speaks, he shall destroy him by the
brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. How ought we then to wish and long
for that blessed day?

The Second Part.
CHAP. 1. Touching the Image of the Beast.
FIrst, Apocalypse 13.14. it is written by S. John, that the second beast should
make an Image of the first, which had the wound by a Sword and did live: and
that he should have power to give life unto this Image, and cause it both to
speak and to be worshipped. Which words may be understood either literally, or
morally, or mystically: but in which sense soever we take them, yet every way
they sit the Pope, and demonstrate him to be the true Antichrist, figured out
by this second Beast whereof Saint John speaks.

2. For if we understand it as many of the Popish writers do, literaly, that
this must be one of the miracles of Antichrist, that he shall give life and
speech to a dead Image, which because no Pope ever did, therefore he cannot
be Antichrist: I answer, that it is false, that never any did so: for else
what mean those frequent motions, noddings, sweats, and weeping of Images,
reported in their Legends, and Martyrologies? At that great controversy
betwixt the Monks and married Priests, at the Synod at Winchester under
Dustan, a Crucifix is said to have thus spoken in favor of the Monks, against
the Priests, Non fiet, non fiet, Iudicastis been, mutaretis non been; non been
s^^tiunt qui presbyteris fauent, that is, It shall not be, it shall not be,
you have judged well, you shall not do well to change; they think ill that
favor the Priests. It is written in the Roman Breuiary in the Feast of Saint
Thomas, that when he prayed very earnestly before a Crucifix at Naples, this
voice was heard from the Crucifix: Been scripsisti de me Thoma, qua^ ergo
mercedem accipies? Thou have written well of me Thomas, what reward therefore
will thou receive? Also in the life and acts of Hyacinthus, recorded by
Seuerinus, we read that an Image of the Virgin Mary thus spoke unto Hyacinthus
flying from the Tartars. O filt Hyacinthi, effugis man^^ Tartarorum, and me cum
filio meo dissecandam and conculc^^dam relinquis? Accipe me igitur tecum: that
is, O son Hyacinthus, do thou flee from the hands of the Tartars, and
leave me with my Son to be cut in pieces and trampled upon by them? Take me
therefore with thee: and when he answered that her Image was so big that he
could not carry it: it answered, Accipe, quia alleuiabit pondus filius meus,
Take me, for my Son will help to bear thy burden. We find also in
Cesarius, another Image of the blessed Virgin, that in the behalf of a
Renegate that had denied Christ, and humbled himself before her, craving
pardon for his sin, spoke thus unto her Son in her arms; Dulc^ssime fili
miserere istius hominis: Sweet Son have mercy of this w^^^ which when he
turning away his face denied to do, she laid him upon the Altar, and cast her
self at his feet, saying, Ego te precor mi fili, vt propter amorem mei huic
homini vel^ ignoscere, I pray thee O my Son, for the love of me, to take
pity of this man. Then the Son lifting up his Mother, said, Nihil ego tibi
possum denegare Matter mea, ecce ego omnia ei condono propter amorem tui. O my
Mother, I can deny thee nothing, behold, I forgive him all for thy sake. The
like examples we find of the Image of the blessed Virgin speaking to the
Porter of a Church, concerning Alexius; Fac i^troire hominem Dei. Let the man
of God enter in: and to Saint Bridget, in the Church of Saint Paul in Rome; and
to Pope Celestine in the Church of Saint Mary the Empress, with a number more.
Now if these reports be true, as why may not the devil that (according to
their opinion) caused the dead body of Samuel to speak, cause also a dead
Image to do the like? or if they be false and counte^feit, devised by
superstitious Priests; yet howsoever, they make a good argument against them,
that the Pope is Antichrist, who thus gives life and speech to dead Images. I
omit that they constrain all their Disciples to worship Images, and condemn
and persecute all them for Heretics that refuse this service. And albeit these
Images cannot be said to be portraitures of the Beast, to wit, the Roman
State, for this was to erect an ougly Image with seven heads and ten horns;
yet they may truly be called his Images, both because they are made in favor
of him, and he also possesses and causes them to be adored. As Laban Genesis
32. and Micah, Iud. 18. call the Images which Rahel and the Danites had stolen
f om them, their Gods; because they made, worshipped, and possessed them.

3. Thus literally may this prophecy rightly be applied to the Pope: and as
literally, so may it morally also. For as by the Beast is meant the Roman
Empire, so the Image of that beast is nothing else but the representation of
that Empire, and this is notably verified in the Western Empire erected by the
Popes, first in France, and after in Germany. For as Im ges retain the name,
and a certain outward similitude of the prototype, but are utterly void of the
Nature and essence thereof: so these new Emperors of the West, bore the name
and title of the ancient Roman Emperors, and were adorned with Imperial
Ornaments and prerogatives of honor, yet wanted the power and Majesty of the
ancient Empire, wherein its life consisted. For the ancient Emperors ruled over
Rome, and the Provinces subject thereunto: but these neither have dominion over
Rome, nor over any ancient Province of the Empire: but are a bare title and
name without the thing. Now the Pope has given a spirit unto this Image, that
is, an Imperial dignity and speech, that is, power to make Laws and Decrees.
So that seeing the Pope after the decay of the old Eastern Empire was the
erection of this new in the West, creating the first Emperor, and instituting a
College of Electors for the choice of new in their succession, and confirming
the choice by his authority; we may deservedly conclude, that he is the second
Beast, that is Antichrist, which made an Image, and gave life and speech to the
first Beast.

4. And so it is also morally fit and true: but if we take it in a mystical
sense, then the Image of the Beast is the Papacy it self, especially since it
usurped both the Spiritual and Temporal Monarchy of the world. For the ancient
Emperors held an absolute and universal power over the whole world; so does
the Pope challenge unto himself the like power and authority over all
Creatures, yea more then ever any Emperor did; over the Angels in heaven,
Souls i^ purgatory, and all men upon earth: in regard of which inpartite
Dominion, they assume unto themselves a Triple Crown. Neither need it seem
strange that the Papacy is made and animated by the Pope as the Image of the
first Beast, seeing he claims and usurps to himself both the Swords,
Spiritual, and Temporal, and is not only the Spiritual, but also the
Temporal Lord of the world. In which regard, Apoc. 17. Antichrist is said to
be both the seventh King, and the eight: in respect of his temporal power,
the eight, and so the image of the sixth, which was the Emperor: but the seventh
in respect of his Spiritual Monarchy, which gives life unto the Temporal,
and makes it (...) speak, and without the which, all his temporal power we^^
but a mute and brute Image. This truth, that the Papacy is the lively Image of
the Roman Empire, is confessed by the most part of the popish Rabbis
themselves. Steuchus i^ his book De donatione Constantini, says, As all
Nation once obeyed the Emperors, so now they do the Bishop of Rome. Blondus
Romans instanc. Lib. 3. nu. 86. calls him (...) perpetual Dictator, the
successor not of Caesar, but of the fisherman Peter, whom all the world adore
and worship, Henry Bullinger paralelleth them thus: Bullinger us Apoc. 13.
As many of the Emperors had fullness of power, and were worshipped as Gods, so
is the Pope as an earthly God invested with plenitude of power.

5. But all this will more clearly appear, if we shall a little compare the
pride, power, and behavior of Popes, with that of ancient Emperors. And to
begin with Augustus Caesar: he besides the Imperial dignity, usurped the
soueraignity in religion, and was therefore styled Pontifex Maximus: the same
name usurps the Pope, and not only so, but as Caligula proudly called
himself, Caesar Optimus maximus: so he himself, Pontifex optimus maximus, the
proper epithe^es of the Diety. Domitian would thus be styled, Dominus and Deus
noster, Our Lord God; the same title is attributed to the Pope, Dominus Deus
noster Papa, Our Lord God the Pope. Cal^gula his voice to his Grandmother
Antonia was this, Memento mihi omnia li ere, Remember that all things are
lawful unto me: and does not the Pope challenge the same power? Whatsoever he
lists is lawful, though in it self never so unlawful; his reason stands
for Law, and his Decrees all without examination are bound to obey. Nero
vaunted that the whole world was his, and that it was in him to give and take
away Kingdoms. And does not the Pope brag, that the world is his Diocese, and
that he has power over Nations, to plant or pull up Kingdoms at his
pleasure? Caligula and Maximinus the younger, caused their feet to be kissed of
their Saluters, and to that purpose Dioclesian decked his shoes with Gold and
Gems; the Pope in like pride or greater, causes not only the common people,
but even Kings and Emperors to kiss his feet. Claudius pardoned incestuous
marriages, and allowed the Uncle to marry with his Niece: and the Pope
likewise dispenses with incestuous Contracts condemned by the Law of God and
man. The Emperors ascribed into the title and society of Gods whom they listed;
as Adrian commanded Antinous his Ganimede to be worshipped as a God: And what
does the Pope else, when he takes upon him power to canonize dead Saints, and
to insert them into the Calender to be adored, together with their Images and
Relics? Caligula bragged, that nothing was law and equity, but that which came
out of his mouth: and does not the Pope say as much, when he affirms that his
Decrees are unquestionable, and that all Laws are sealed up in the closet of
his breast? Vespasian in love of filthy lucre raised a tribute out of Urine; and
does not the Pope the like out of the Stew^s? Nero, when he conferred an office
upon any man commanded him to wring out of men's purses, by the virtue of that
office, all that they could to enrich his Coffers, saying Scis quid mihi opus
sit, hoc agamus nequis quicquam habeat. The same mind and manner possesses the
Pope, he would have no man rich but himself, sucking in like hell, the
revenues of the world into his bottomless gulf, from whence there is no
redemption: Mat. Par^s in Henri^ c. 3.
whereupon Matthew Paris was bold thus to write, Romana Curia instar barathri
potestatem habet and consuetudinem omnium reditus absorbendi. It was ordinary
with the heathen Emperors, to sell civil honors for money: and as ordinary to
the Pope, to set to sale the dignities of the Church. Simonia (says the same
Matthew Paris) perinde regnat in Romana Curia as si nullum peccatum esset. The
Roman Emperors ascended often to the Imperial throne by murder and bloodshed:
and is not this the beaten path to the Papacy? Hildebrand (as testifies Benno)
poisoned six or seven Popes in order by the help of Brazutus his familiar
friend, that he might seat himself in the Papal Chair. Nero and Vespasian
caused those whom they saw to grow rich, either to be condemned to death upon
false crimes, or to be poisoned, or by some other violent course to be taken
out of the way, that they might enjoy their wealth. And thus dealt Alexander
the sixth with many wealthy Priests and Cardinals, as witnesses Onuphrius. In
fine, Caligula being offended with the Romans, Onuphrius in Alexand. 6.
wished them altogether to have but ^ne neck, that at one blow he might
dispatch them: and Martin the second being angry with the Germans, wished
that al Germany was but one great poole, that they might all be drowned at
once. What should I speak of the abominable incests, adulteries, Sodomitries,
and filthy luxuries, wherein the Beast and his Image the Papacy, do answer each
other? Do not the Christian, or rather Antichristian, Ziscusses, Intiusses,
John's, Bonifaces, and Paul's, imitate the Heathen Neroes, T^beriusses,
Caligulaes, and Heliogabalusses, in all their foul vices? It would be tedious
to prosecute all: these for instances may suffice, to teach us whither this
image of the Beast is to be referred, and that the Pope is the great
Antichrist, in whom all the lineaments of the old Roman Empire are lively
drawn, and the very face thereof expressed in lively colors.

6. For the clearing of this point, it is further to be observed, that S. John
says, that the second Beast should exercise the power of the first in his
presence, and cause the earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the first
Beast, whose deadly wound was healed, Apoc. 13.12. Which prophecy is so clearly
accomplished in the Pope of Rome, that no man that has but common reason can
doubt thereof. For what is the power of the first Beast, but the Majesty and
Authority of the Roman Empire, reduced into the hands of the Roman Bishop,
with such subtilty and craft, that the Emperou s were persuaded by them, that
they went about only to advance their dignity, when in the mean while they
wrought nothing but their destruction, leaving them a body without life, or
rather a shadow in stead of a body? So that if we regard the thing it self,
the Papacy and the Empire, is one and the same in effect. But if we consider
the outward fashion and appearance, the Pope to blind men's eyes, has changed
the name, and under pretense of his double power, usurped a Sovereign
authority over the whole world. The power then of the first Beast, which
Antichrist should exercise, is only this; that as the Roman Emperors
challenged a Sovereignty over all the Provinces and Kingdoms of the earth: So
the Popes in like pride, vaunt of the like power over all Kingdoms to
appertain unto them: which how fitly it may be called the Image of the Beast,
let all men judge. For proof of all this, let us hear one of their own
Advocates, Augustinus Stenchus, in his book de donat. Constantini. In one
place whereof he says, that the Majesty of the Roman Empire, was revived in
the Papacy, which though it was not attained to the same greatness, yet it
retained a certain form (or if you will image) thereof: and this he would
derive from the donation of Constantine, who (as he affirms) quitting Rome,
gave it and all the West, to a greater Prince then himself, the Pope. For the
Emperor of holy things, is greater then the Emperor of earthly. And in
another place, to show that this second Beast the Papacy, caused the first to
be worshipped and adored, he says that by this donation of Constantine, the
Empire was not impaired, but augmented and ennobled: for it revived the power
and language thereof, which were quite both defaced, and gave new life unto it,
when it was well-neere dead: yea whereas before it was only a temporal
dominion, now it invested it with both swords, and so the Papacy supported the
Empire, which was ready to fall, and made it again famous through the whole
world. And as touching the deadly wound of the first Beast, which S. John says
was healed: some are of opinion, that this Prophecy was then fulfilled, when as
the line of the Caesar's was cut off by the death of Nero, and the Empire
translated to another stock, which healed the wound thereof, and made the
estate more flourishing, then ever it had been before. But I think rather by
it to be meant, the banishing of the Emperors out of the West, which was the
wound, and erecting a new Empire in stead thereof, which was as it were the
healing of the wound: and all this brought to pass, by the power and means of
the Pope, whose estate is the second Beast, and bears the image of the first.

CHAP. 2. Observations upon the thirteenth Chapter of the Revelation of S.
John, verse eleventh.
1. SAint John, Apoc. 13.11. says, That he saw in the spirit another Beast,
coming up out of the earth, having two horns like a Lamb, but speaking as a
Dragon. In which words, the Spirit of God does reveal unto us by certain
circumstances, a notable description of Antichrist, who is intimated unto us by
this second Beast. For by those two Beasts mentioned in this Chapter, is
figured out the double Empire of the most cruel tyrants and persecutors of the
Church of Christ, sitting and reigning in one and the same City, spiritual
Babylon: as the four Monarchies represented by Daniel, reigned successively in
the Caldean Babylon, which was a type of this. So that as the first Beast,
represented the State and dominion of the Roman Emperors, so the second
without doubt, demonstrated the Papal Empire, wherein Antichrist was to
reign. This I say, will most evidently appear, if we shall advisedly consider
three notable circumstances of this Text.

2. The first circumstance is, of the time when this Beast appeared, to wit,
after a great confusion of the City of Rome by bloody wars: for in the tenth
verse. immediately going before, it is said, He that leads into captivity,
shall be led into captivity, and he that kills with the sword, must be killed
with the sword: and then presently S. John adds: I saw another Beast rising
out of the earth. By which it is plain, that when the City of Rome was reduced
into that misery, that there was nothing in it, but murder, bloodshed, and
confusion, then was the time of Antichrists appearance. Now there is no man so
ignorant in history, that knows not how the Empire and City of Rome, was
haressed and spoiled by the barbarous Goths and Vandals, and other Nations,
insomuch that it was almost brought to utter desolation, especially in the
West: and how presently after these broils, the City of Rome fell into the
hands of the Pope, the whole dignity of the Roman name, settling it self in
him. For though there is at this day a Prince that bears the name of the King
of the Romans, or Emperor of Rome; yet he has no command in Rome, it is the
Pope only that rules in that City.

3. Secondly, it is said, that this Beast arose out of the earth, that is, from
a base and low estate, and from small beginnings, and as it were out of the
dust, exalting it self by degrees unto that height: which circumstance also
fitteth the Pope to an hair. For at the first, the condition of the Bishops of
Rome, was humble and base, unlike in man's judgment ever to ascend to that
greatness, which it after came unto. They were poor men, living by the labor
of their hands, and eating their bread from the sweat of their brows S. Peter
himself, whom they falsely brag to have been Bishop of Rome, was a poor
fisherman, wanting money to pay the ordinary tribute to Caesar, till Christ
supplied it by a miracle: And Acts. 3.6. confesses of himself, Silver and
Gold he had none: And the first Bishops of Rome, till Constantines time, as
Mantuan under the person of Telesphorus, that lived. An. 142. reports, gave
themselves to ploughing the earth, planting of Orchards, making of Gardens,
digging and deriuing of Rivers, with many other such like manual exercises to
keep them from idleness. Mantuans verses are worth the reading, touching this
subject. But besides this, he that shall look but somewhat nearly into the
manners of the Popes, shall easily discern, that the Papal power is merely
earthly, little sauouring of heaven and heavenly things. For what erected the
Papacy, but the ambition of earthly men? The Ancient Councils declare, that the
true cause of the Papal primacy over other Bishops, was never the commandment
of Christ, nor the holiness of those Bishops, but only the prerogative of the
Imperial City wherein they sat. Hence they obtained the first degree of
honor and dignity amongst other Bishops; as afterward the Bishops of
Constantinople obtained the next or equal pre-eminence, by reason that that
City was made the seat of the Empire, being translated thither by Constantine.
This is ma^ifestly to be seen in the first Council of Constantinople, and ^n
the 28. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon: and is confessed by Cardinal
Cusarus, in his first book of the Catho^icke Concordance, Chap. 16. His words
are these, If the ^rimacy of seats might be demonstrated by the holiness of
him that first presided, or by the reverence of the place, doubtless Ie^usalem
should be the first, because there our great High Priest jesus Christ washed
his Church with his blood. Add hereunto, that presently after Antichrist began
to reign in the Roman seat, there came in a rabble of Bishops, borne of ^o
base parentage, and more vile in condition, that they deserved truly to be
called the sons of the earth: as John the eleventh, son to Pope Sergius,
and the Harlot Marozia: Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh, was the son of a
Carpenter: Vrbane the fourth, of a Cobbler in Campania: and so also, John the
22. or the 23. as Platina numbreth him: Bennet the eleventh, of a poor
Laundresse: Bennet the twelfth, of a Pasterer or Cook: Sixtus the first, of a
Swineheard, with diverse others, which are to be found in the Catalogue of the
Popes. And these, besides their base offspring, were infamous for bad
conditions, as Histories report of them: and that which is most strange, none
were equal to them in pride and arrogance, none so much elevated themselves
above Kings and Princes. Hildebrand deposed the Emperor Henry the fourth, and
thrust into his place (though with ill success) Rodulph of Sabandia. John the
23. excommunicated Jews of Bauaria, for taking upon him the name and title of
Emperor, before he was crowned of him, though lawfully elected: And Sixtus the
fifth, excommunicated the Prince of Conde, and the King of Navarre, declaring
them by his Bull utterly incapable for ever of the Kingdom of France. And
thus every way, this second Beast, may be said to rise out of the earth, if we
take the words not in a literal, but in a spiritual understanding, as they
ought to be.

4. The third circumstance is, That this Beast had (...) horns like unto a
Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon. That i^ in general thus: that Antichrist
shall be a Lamb in appearance, pretending humility, mildness, and courtesy;
b^ what show so ever he makes, yet his voice is like the Dragons, that gave
his power and throne to the first Beast: by which voice, notwithstanding his
dissembling, he discouere^^ himself to be the great enemy unto Christ. This
interpretation is entertained by the Jesuits, Ribera, and Vug^^, writing upon
this very Text of the Apocalypse. By these horns, says Ribera, are not meant
Kings or Kingly power, which shows it self openly, But a certain secret and
subtle power lurking in sweet words, sauouring of nothing but humility and
holiness, but by the which notwithstanding be produces wonderful and strange
effects: and to show that this is (...) violent power, therefore they are said
to be like to the horns of a Lamb, which are not straight and pointed, but
crooked (...) tender, unfit to des^ withal. Thus Ribera. But Viegas mou^
plainly, when he says: That this Beast shall have two bor^^ like unto a Lamb,
because he shall make show to be gentle (...) innocent: but because this
gentleness and innocence shall (...) true but counterfeit, therefore he is
said not to have the har^^^ of a Lamb, but like unto a Lamb: and he is said
to speak l^^^ the Dragon, because under his words, which seem to proce^^ from
zeal of the truth, is hidden the very poison of the Dragon. By which
interpretation the hypocrisy of Antichrist is notably set forth; which S. Paul
calls the mystery of iniquity, an^ the holy Ghost also says, that the word
Mystery, should b^ written in the Whore of Babylons forehead: All to signify,
the his proceedings should not be by open force, but by secr^^ and mystical
stratagems. Now this does so properl^ mark out the Pope of Rome, as that it so
agrees to him, that it cannot so fully be verified of any other. For does it
not under the title of, The servant of the servants of God, cover his power of
being Lord of Lords? He calls himself the successout of Simon Peter, and yet
in close covetousness, resembles Simon Magus: he braggeth of the Keys of
^eauen, and yet may draw with him (as themselves write) ^roopes of souls to
hell without controllment. He has nothing in his mouth, but the names of S.
Peter, and S. Paul, ^uen then when he trampleth Kings under his feet, and
trea^^eth on their necks: his temporal revenues are called S. Peter's
Patrimony; he exacteth homage of the Kings of the earth in the name of S.
Peter; he excommunicateth, proscribeth, and dethroneth them, all under this
venerable name: he fills his treasures, enricheth his Whores, and aduanceth
his Nephews and kindred, by S. Peter's pence: Indulgences, and pretense of
recovering the Holy Land, and of defending the lib^^ty of the Church: he
speaks scarce three words, but ^he repeates this sentence of the Gospel, Thou
art Peter, and to thee I give the Keys of the kingdom of heaven: and that
nothing may be wanting to procure himself reverence, he styles himself an
Apostle, and his Decrees Apostolical ordinances: Thus under specious titles
and names, he glideth into men's hearts the venom of the Dragon. He establishes
idolatry by the worshipping of images, and yet with his mouth detesteth Idols:
he Anathematizeth Heretics, as Marcion, Montanus, Pelagius, and yet decketh
his religion with the flowers of their heresies: he dares not utterly deny the
efficacy of Christ's blood, and yet he annihilates it, by conferring it upon
holy Grains, Crucifixes, Agnus Deis, holy water, whips, Monks Coules, etc. as
if he had power to infuse grace into men's souls by such fopperies. In a word,
he commands the Saints in heaven to be worshipped and inuocated as God
himself, giving to them the honor which is due unto Christ, in seeking
remission of sins, and the kingdom of heaven by their merit: and yet as if
all were well, their prayers must be finished with this conclusion, Per Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum: By our Lord Jesus Christ. So it were miserable
blindness, to seek any where else for the Beast, that has two horns like a
Lamb, and speaks as the Dragon, but in the Roman seat.

5. But there be some of the learned, that interpret this circumstance of the
two horns otherwise, to wit, for a double power, which this Man of Sin
should challenge vn^^ himself; Civil, and Spiritual: which interpretation,
as it agrees unto Antichrist in general, so does it also unto the Pope in
particular, to demonstrate, that he is that Antichrist here spoken of. To
Antichrist, for the name of the false Prophet, which imports a spiritual
dignity, is given unto him of S. John, Apoc. 15.13. and as this, so he is
represented, Apoc. 17.18. and 8.7. as a King armed with civil power and
authority. For the Whore is said to reign over the Kings of the earth, and
the second Beast to exercise the power of the first: and she her self in the
pride of her heart, vaunteth to sit like a Queen: So that as the Emperors of
Rome, were called not only Kings, but Highpriests: so Antichrist is described
as invested with both the titles. And it agrees to the Pope also: for he so
apparently usurps both these powers, that he both boasts of them in his
Decrees, and his Favorites also ascribe the same unto him. Bo^iface the eight,
in the extrauagant de maiorit. et obedient. C. vnam Sanctam; proves this to be
true in plain terms: for he says, That i^ this power (to wit of the Popes)
there are two swords, the spiritual, and the temporal: and we are instructed
herein (says he) by he words of the Gospel: for when the Apostles said,
Behold two swords, our Savior Christ does not answer, These are too much,
but, It is enough: and certainly be that denies that the ^emporall sword, is
not in the power of S. Peter, does not well consider the words of Christ,
saying, Put thy sword into thy sheath. C. fundamenta tu sexto de Electaet
Elect. potestate. Aquin. de Regimine princip. lib. 5. cap. 10. Bell. de Romans Po
t lib. 3. cap. 6. aet. 7.
Nicholas the third affirms, that the Pope rightfully possessed both
Monarchies; spiritual, and temporal. And the Author of the book entitled,
Of the government of Princes, amongst the opuscula of Aquinas, auerreth
directly, That the Pope is both King and Priest as our Lord Jesus Christ.
Bellarmine also that showed more modesty and discretion in this cause then his
fellows, though he affirms that the Pope has this Sovereign temporal
power, but indirectly in order to spiritual ends, yet he says, that he can
change kingdoms, by taking them from one, and giving them to another. And if
the Ancient Christians did not use this their authority against the persecuting
Emperors, it was, because they had not temporal forces to bring it to pass,
though they had right to do it. And thus both the Swords are usurped by the
Pope, represented, according to this interpretation, the two horns like unto
the Lamb.

6. But it is to be noted, that that novel opinion of these Antichristian
Prelates, was in ancienter times either never heard of, or utterly condemned
and confuted. Not to remember Saint Chrysostom, Saint Augustine, Saint
Ambrose, and Saint Gregory, with other of the Fathers, who were all against
this temporal Sword of Bishops; we find many holy men of later time most
earnest oppugners thereof: as first Petrus Damianus, a man famous in their
Church for his holiness, who lived about the year of Grace, 1050. as Baronius
confesses. This man, in an Epistle written against Pope Leo the ninth, who was
then in arms against the Normanes, thus writes in effect: The Terrene
kingdom and the priesthood are distinguished by proper offices: the King uses
secular arms, and the Priest is girt with a spiritual Sword, which is the
word of God: It is of the secular Prince that Saint Paul says, he bears not
the Sword in vain, and of the Priesthood, that the weapons of their warfare
are not carnal, but spiritual: and therefore, as when King Ozias usurped the
Priestly Office, he was covered with a leporosie, so when the Priest usurps
the office of the King, he cannot escape Gods vengeance: with much more to the
same purpose. For which cause, Baron. ad An. 1053. sect. 10.
Baronius for all his holiness, taxes him to have maintained a doctrine in
this point, contrary to the Catholic faith: and produces against him Saint
Bernard, Pope Gregory the ninth, and Boniface the eight: who all ascribe this
double power to the Pope upon the ground of those words of Christ, Put up thy
Sword into thy sheath: But by his leave, more credit is to be given to Damianus
then to himself, or any of those whom he alleges. For Damianus proves his
assertion by the divine testimony of holy Scripture; he only by the humane
testimony of Bernard, Gregory, and Boniface. For as for those passages of ^^e
Gospel, Behold two Swords, and It is enough, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 5. c.
5. Maldona. in Luc. c. 22.38.
and Put up thy sword into thy sheath, Bellarmin^ himself, and Maldonate,
confess that no such thing can be literally concluded. Listen to Saint
Ambrose, who says, that by the two Swords are meant the Old and New Testament,
with which we are guarded against the ambushes of Satan: and by (It is
enough) that he wants nothing that is furnished with the doctrine of both
the Testaments. Besides, Damianus was more ancient then either Saint Bernard or
the others opposed by Baronius, and according to Aristotle's rule, (...), well
seconded by Tertullian, Antiquissimum quodque verissimum, that which is more
ancient is more reverent and true. For Damianus wrote this Epistle in the year
1053. and Saint Bernard sent this Books of consideration to Pope Eugenius the
third, in the year 1152. that is, upon the point of an hundred years after:
and as for Gregory the ninth, and Boniface the eight, they were yet later; the
one elected in the year 1227. and the other in the year 1294. Add hereunto
the differences of their persons: Damianus was as famous for his holiness as
ever Saint Bernard was; and for the two Popes they are marked out for their
detestable ambition, the one against Frederick the second, and the other
against Phillip the Fair, King of France; and therefore such witnesses as
deserve no credit, especially in their own cause. Lastly, we may oppose Saint
Bernard to Saint Bernard, who more fully and plainly declares his mind in
another place of the same book, where he proves out of Saint Peter, 1. epist.
chap. 5. and of the Gospel of Luke, 22.25. that that Priest or Bishop which
takes upon him the power of the Temporal Sword, does there withal loose the
Spiritual it self: the place is remarkable and worth the noting. But was this
man alone for this defense? No, there succeeded him diverse others, who set
themselves as bulwarks against this usurpation: as the Author of the book
entitled De vnitate ecclesia conseruanda, attributed to Venericus of
Verselles, in the time of the Emperor Henry the fourth. Again, an Epistle of
the Clergy of Lieges written to Pope Paschall the second: Ott^ Frisingensis in
prologo. lib. 4. Chronicorum, about the year 1150. Dantes the Italian Poet,
Marsilius Pataninus, and others: all of whom conclude strongly against the
temporal power of Popes, saying, that as the Prince may not meddle with the
Spiritual Sword, so neither may the Priest with the Temporal: but that there
is a distinct order set by God betwixt these two great powers which must not be
confounded. Thus it is clear, that this ascription of a double power to the
Pope, which we say is the mark of Antichrist, was condemned, and rejected long
ago; and therefore that it is no novel doctrine now in these days, to set
our selves against it.

CHAP. 3. Touching the two witnesses that should rise up against Antichrist,
Apoc. 11.2.
1. BEllarmine and other of that crew produce this as a demonstration to prove
that Antichrist is not yet come, because Enoch and Elias have not yet appeared,
who should stand up to fight against him, not with corporal but with
spiritual weapons: which fable deserves to be entertained rather with scoffs
and hisses, then to be confuted by serious reasons. By how much the more I
wonder at their impudency or blindness, that should obtrude that for a
demonstration, which has not so much as the least probability of reason: for
as this dream has no ground in holy Scripture, as may easily appear by the
solid answers given by this Author to those arguments which are derived from
thence; so the opinions of the ancient Fathers are so discordant between
themselves, and so variable and enterfering with each other, that no man of
sound judgment will derive a demonstration from them. It is an opinion of
Irenaeus, that Antichrist should descend out of the tribe of Dan, which
notwithstanding Bellarmine rejects as erroneous, and why should he then
cleave to this deui^^ of Enoch and Elias, which has sure no greater, yea even
lesser reason in it then the former.

2. The ground of this conceit is out of, Apoc. 11.2. where it is said, that
the holy City should be trodden under foot by the Gentiles two and forty
months: at which time, Christ promises, that he will give power to his two
witnesses to prophecy, 1260. days. And that their testimony being ended, they
should be slain by the Beast, their dead bodies lying in the streets of the
great City, and that after three days and an half, the spirit of life should
enter into them again: and by that miracle, the Jews should be converted.
Hence was that fable framed, that the Jews under the conduct of Antichrist,
should possess the City of Jerusalem, and that those two witnesses which
should rise up against him, were Enoch and Elias, who were for this purpose
reserved alive in Paradise, to come again in the end of the world, to oppose
against Antichrist; and at last after their resurrection should overcome him in
Mount Oliuet, and then five and forty days interceding, should be the second
coming of Christ. This is the fable which hangs so ill together, as no man can
believe it without hazard of his wits. For first, how can it be that by these
two witnesses should be precisely understood two men, and no more, seeing it is
said in the ninth verse, That people, and kindreds, and tongues, and Gentiles
should see their corpses three days and an half, were of all Nations and
people of the world gathered together at Jerusalem to see this spectacle? And
again in the tenth verse it is said, That these two Prophets vexed them that
dwelt upon earth: and is it likely that two were enough to trouble the whole
world with their preaching, and to turn them into this rage and fury? Besides,
how could the report of their death be divulged in the world in three days and
an half, that it should rejoice at their destruction?

3. Secondly, suppose that by these two witnesses are meant two men precisely:
how will they prove by any reason, that Enoch and Elias should be these two?
The Scripture speaks nothing of them to this purpose, as is sufficiently
proved by the Author of this Treatise: nay, it is flat against it, for Heb.
11.5. it is said, that Enoch was translated that he might not see death, and
yet these fellows in a plain ^ontradiction, will have him to dye, and to rise
again: and so whereas the Scripture says, that he was translated that he
^ight not see death, they on the contrary affirm, that he was translated that
in the end of the world he might see ^eath. And though the Scripture does not
affirm the same of Elias, yet why should we not think the same condition to
^elong to him, seeing they are both see forth to us as types of Christ? and as
patterns of our immortality, one in the time of Nature, and the other in that
time of the Law? Neither can it with any reason be imagined that being thus
translated they retained still mortal bodies, but rather that they were
changed into immortality, as they shall be that survive ^t Chr^sts coming. As
touching the Fathers, they are so much distracte^ in this opinion, that it is
folly to ground upon their conjectures: some saying, that by these two
witnesses are meant the Old and New Testament, which is Saint Augustines
opinion, and i^ both godly and probable: some, the two Churches of the Law and
the Gospel, as Beda: some Elias and Elizeus: other Elias and Moses: others
Enoch and Jeremy; others add to these two, John the Evangelist, which both
Arethas and Theophilact affirm, was the opinion of many in their time: others
the Church and the Scripture, which are both double, the particular Church of
the Jews, and the Catholic of Jews and Gentiles, and the Scripture of the
Old and New Testament, and so the two Olives should represent the Scripture,
and the two Candlestickes the Church, which receives Oil of grace from these
Olives: others, two kind of Martyrs, one in habit, the other in act; or two
kind of witnesses, Confessors, and Martyrs, figured by Enoch and Elias; for
Enoch walked in peace with God, but Elias endured grievous persecution: or
lastly, two kinds of Preachers, Priests and Monks, which though they are
many, yet are said to be but two, in allusion to the practice of our Savior
Christ, who sent forth his Disciples to preach by two and two; with diverse
other mai^taine conjectures which I forbear to name. So that the Fathers are
neither for them in this point, as they audatiously boast, nor yet indeed for
the truth, which can be but one, and simple. With how much greater modesty do
other of the Fathers speak of this secret? Nazianz. de Theolog. ^^at. 2.
Gregory Naziazene speaking of Enoch, says, that it is not yet manifest
whether he already has comprehended the nature of God, or shall hereafter
comprehend it. Chrysostom. in Gen hom. 21.
Chrysostom holds it a manner beyond the capacity of mortal man, too
curiously to enquire whither Enoch was translated, and how he lives: that Enoch
was translated (says he) and that Elias was assumed up into heaven, we
believe, because the Scripture tells us so: but where they are, Oecumen. in
epist. a. Hebraos cap. 11.
and how they live, the Scripture is silent. So Oecumenius concerning Enoch,
says, that he was translated alive, but where, and how, it is uncertain. Of
the same opinion is Theophilact, Theophil. Ibid.
and diverse others: and therefore I conclude with Saint Augustine, where the
Scripture is silent, Cohibere se debet humana praesumptio, Man's presumption
must bridle it self. I might add besides all this, that this devise crosses
directly the speech of our Savior Christ; for he says, That no man knows
the day and hour of Christ's second coming, but that he shall come as a
thief in the night, and as a snare upon the Foul. But if this opinion be
true, then that day of his coming may be certainly known 45. days before:
then which, nothing can be more opposite to our Saviors words.

4. Touching Paradise wherein they say these holy men do live till the coming
of Antichrist; if they understand thereby that heavenly Paradise which is the
receptacle of blessed souls spoken of by our Savior, Luke. 23.43. and by
Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 12.4. we condescend that there these two just men enjoy
eternal beatitude: but then they would not return from thence to be slain
here on earth, because a mortal creature could not reside in that place of
immortality. But if they mean the earthly Paradise which Moses describes,
Genesis 2.8. we say, that this was utterly defaced by the flood, and so could be
no receptacle for Enoch at that ^ime, nor for Elias afterward: which to be
true, the descrip^ion of Paradise given by Moses does evidently demon^trate.
For he says, that God placed a Garden Eastward in Eden: where the word Eden is
not to be taken in it proper signification, for pleasure and delight, from
whence is derived the Greek word (...) pleasure, but for a Country called by
that name, as is plain, Ezekiel. 27.23. Haran, Conneh, and Heden, were thy
Merchants: and 2. Kings. 19.12. where Rabsakeh makes mention of the people of
Mesopotamia conquered by the King of the Assyrians, to wit, Haran and Rezeph,
and the children of Eden which were in Thelasar; which Thelasar was a Fortress
of the Babylonians, situate in the midst of Euphrates, to withstand the
Assyrians, and is otherwise called Tiluthan by Ammianus Marcellinus. So that
when it is said, that God planted this Garden in Eden, it cannot but be
understood of the Country wherein it was planted, and so if we can find out
where this Country of Eden was situate, we may also easily judge where Paradise
was, for it was planted in the East part of that Country. Now all auow that the
Country of Eden was in Mesopotamia or Babylon, and therefore there also was
this Garden or earthly Paradise. And to make the matter more plain, Ptolomey an
ancient Geographer calls this fruitful tract, by the name importing a
delicious Country Auramitides, or rather Audanitides, as Iunius has
iudiciously observed: and it is certain, there is not at this day a more
fruitful and pleasant Country in the world then this is: and that which is
most remarkable, it agrees in every particular with Moses his description. For
the River that ran out of Eden to water the Garden is Euphrates which divided
it self into four heads, that is, four currents or channels, named by Moses,
and known at this day to be there, and no where else. If Paradise then was in
Mesopotamia, as is manifest by this description, then it must needs follow,
that it was defaced by the flood, and so could not remain the habitation for
Enoch and Elias.

5. Hence appears how fond and improbable those opinions are which are taken
up by many both ancient an^ modern writers. Origin with others, translate the
whole literal sense of the history into allegories, affirming Paradise to be
no corporal, but a spiritual place. Josephus says, this Paradise was
distended over the whole earth, I sephus Antiqui lib 1.
and so Adam being cast out of Paradise, must by this interpretation be cast
out of the earth. Tostate, with Ariosto and others, place it in the top of an
high Mountain, in the third region of the air, near unto the circle of the
Moon, a place as Philosophy tells us unfit for man's abode, by reason of the
proximity of the Element of fire, and of the Planets. Some send it over beyond
the river Ganges into the East Indies, not considering that the situation of
the river Euphrates with the channels derived thereout, do plainly contradict
this conceit. In brief, the common opinion of the modern Papists is, that
this place is so far remote from the knowledge of man, that no man can tell
where it is situate, but yet that a remains entyre and sound notwithstanding
the flood: which opinion is more absurd then all the rest: for if it be remote
from all humane knowledge, to what end serves the description which Moses makes
of it so expressly? Why does he paint out the course of the river Euphrates with
it diverse currents, the bordering Countries, the things wherewith those
Countries are renowned, as Gold, Bdellium and the Onix stone of the land of
Havilah, all which are circumstances by which Geographers use to mark out the
Countries which they describe? And that this place could not consist entire
without being wasted by the flood, these reasons euince. Because Moses says,
Genesis 7.19. that the waters of the Deluge ascended higher then the highest
Mountains of the earth, fifteen cubits, and how then could Paradise be
exempted from this destruction? If they say that it was preserved miraculously
from this inundation, as the Israelites were preserved in the midst of the Red
Sea and of Jordan: I answer, that this being a dream having no ground in holy
Scripture, may be as easily rejected as it was rashly forged. And besides, it
is manifest that all Mesopotamia where doubtless this Garden was planted, was
anciently after the Flood, and is still at this day inhabited, without any
trace left of this delicious Garden. And further, to what purpose did God
command Noah to build the Arc for his preservation, with so great pain and
labor, if this Garden of Eden had been safe? And lastly, if Enoch was
preserved alive in that Garden, how is it true which S. Peter affirms, that
only eight persons were preserved in the Arc? 2. Pet. 2.5.

6. The Ie^uite Pererius, convinced with these reasons, has forsaken his
fellows, and devised a dream of his own brain: for he confesses, that the
Paradise spoken of by Moses, was defaced by the Flood: but because it is
certain that Enoch was not touched with that destruction, therefore he says;
First, that it may be, he was taken up miraculously by God into the air, and
there saved alive during the deluge. Secondly, that though S. Peter names but
eight persons preserved from drowning, yet Enoch is to be added unto them, and
that no mention is made of him, because he lived not in the society of men. And
thirdly, least he should cross the vulgar translation of Ecclesiasticus, where
mention is made of Paradise, though the word be not found in the original: he
imagines that there is another Paradise, situate in some secret and unknown
Country of the world. Thus he propounds his own fancies, as men do that
forsake the Scriptures: and gives us besides the heavenly Paradise spoken of
in the new Testament, and the earthly Paradise described by Moses, a third
never heard of before, situate either in the air, which the Scripture makes
the lodging place of the devils, or in a world unknown to all Geographers, or
at least in the Newfound Land of Eutopia, described by Sir Thomas More, or in
the land of Phonacia, which our English Mercury speaks of.

7. The plain truth then according to the Scripture is this, that Enoch and
Elias were taken up into heaven, into the place and seat of the blessed, where
having changed mortality into immortality, they live still, and can never taste
of death: for Genesis 5.23. it is said, that all the days of Enoch were 365.
years, And that he walked with God, and us not, for God took him: that is,
lived no longer amongst men, but was taken of God to himself, for so the word
imports. And Heb. 11.5. it is said, That he was translated, that he should
not see death: where the word (...) used by the Apostle, signifies properly to
be changed from one estate into another, and alludeth to that, 1. Cor. 15.
where it is said of those that are alive at Christ's coming, that they shall
not sleep, but shall be changed; how changed, but from mortality to
immortality, and where is the place of immortality but in heaven? But
concerning Elias, it is a more clear case: for the Text, 2. Kings. 2.11. says
plainly, That he ascended by a whirlwind into heaven: Now there is no doubt but
Enoch was transported into the same place whither Elias after was, that is,
into heavenly Paradise. I know that Heaven is taken in three significations in
holy Scripture. First, for that space which extends it self from the earth
to the circle of the Moon, where the birds fly, and rain, snow, and thunder
are framed. Secondly, it is taken for the celestial circles, wherein are the
Stars, Genesis 1.14. And thirdly, for the place of the blessed, whither Christ
visibly ascended, and of which the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 12. when he says,
That he was rapt up into the third heaven. But to say, that Enoch and Elias
were assumed up into the first heaven, that is, into a region of the air, full
of more tumultuous agitations and disquietnesse then the earth, is a thing
without all show of reason: And to imagine that they are amongst the
Celestial bodies of the firmament, either there to be rolled about the world
with the Spheres from the East to the West, or to be fixed in one of the
Poles, this is a profane imagination, Peter. in Sent. lib. 7 disput. de
translat. Enoch. q. 2 Hieron aduers. errores Ioh. Hieros^lymit ad Pammachium.
more proper to the Stoics, then to Christians. Therefore it remains, that
they were received into that heaven which is the resting place of the blessed,
and the desired Country of all the Saints. Neither is this a novel opinion,
for Pererius confesses, that Procopius Gazelus was of the same mind: And S.
Jerome also confirms the same in an Epistle of his: where to prove, that
after the resurrection, we shall have the same flesh, bones, and members, as we
now have, he first alleges the authority of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.53:
Secondly, the example of the transfiguration of Christ, which was not only in
his face, but in all his members: And thirdly, the example of Enoch and Elias,
translated in their bodies into the heavenly beatitude. Justin. Martyr resp.
quaest. orthodox. q. 85.
Iustine Martyr also affirms, that Enoch and Elias were gathered into the
same place, where the souls of the faithful rest till the resurrection. Of
the same opinion is Irenaeus, Irenaus aduers. here is. lib. 5. c. 5. Epiphan. in
An corat.
and to conclude, Epiphanius calls them, The two first borne of our
resurrection: thereby showing that they are already so beautified in soul and
body, as we shall be after our resurrection, and therefore to these two, he
opposes Dathan and Abiram, who as he says, both in soul and body descended
into hell.

8. All the difficulty of this interpretation lies in this, that it seems by
John. 3.13. and 1. Cor. 15.20. that no flesh ever ascended into heaven before
Christ, because he is said only to have ascended, that did descend, and that
he was the first fruits of them that sleep, and the first borne of the dead.
But if we understand these Texts aright, this difficulty will soon vanish. For
by ascending into heaven in S. John, is not meant any local, or corporal
ascension, because Christ himself was not then ascended, but either a
spiritual ascension in the knowledge of heavenly mysteries, as Beza, and
Maldonate, and others think: or more simply, Beza Annot. in no vum testam.
Maldon. in Ioh. 3.
as Tollet another Jesuit supposes, that Christ alone descended from heaven
by the assumption of our nature, to teach and instruct the people, and yet
still remained in heaven in his Deity: And whereas he is called the first
fruits of them that sleep, and the first borne of the dead; it does not
prove, that none went to heaven before his ascension: but only that the
resurrection of the other Saints to eternal life, and their reception into
heaven, depends upon the resurrection of Christ, as the true cause thereof: as
the blessing of the whole harvest depended upon the blessing of the first
fruits, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.16. and so all that ever ascended
into heaven, either in body and soul together, as Enoch and Elias did, or in
soul alone, as the rest of the Saints did, thi^ was by virtue of Christ's
resurrection and ascension, which extended it self unto all Ages, both before
his coming in the flesh, and after: and doubtless, if the souls of the
Saints had access into heaven before Christ's ascension, then might their
bodies also, for the same reason is of both: but their souls did, as may
appear by Lazarus his soul, which was translated into Abraham's bosom, which
bosom of Abraham, signifeth nothing else but the felicity, and joy, and rest
of the souls of Gods Saints after this life in heaven, as Christ himself
avouches, Mat. 8.11. Where he says, that many shall come from the East, and
from the West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven. And thus both Beda, and S. Ambrose, and Sulpitius Seuerus, Bed^ in Luc.
lib. 5. cap. 65. Ambrose in orat. de ob^tu. Valentiniani. Sulpit. Seuerus.
epist. ad Bass.
interpret the place. For as for Limbus Patrum, that is a doting dream without
all ground either in holy Scripture, or reason: and ^o also is this conceit
(as appears by that which has been said) to wit, that Enoch and Elias were
reserved alive in the earthly Paradise, to come against Antichrist in the end
of the world, and by him to be put to death.

9. These two witnesses then are not Enoch and Elias, neither are they any two
singular persons: for as Rupertus, one of the most learned men of his Age
says, R^pertus. in Apoc. lib. 6.
Is it likely that the Lord of the Prophets, and the Author of all Prophecy,
should have but two witnesses? Were not all the Apostles, the Martyrs and
confessors, his witnesses? Surely this is a great, grave, and weighty speech,
to wit, that though there be innumerable witnesses, yet he says that their
shall be but two. By which speech, as also by the rest of his discourse, he
signifies, that this number is not to be restrained to two alone, but that the
Spirit of God would notify unto us, that though the fury of Antichrist, does
labor to stifle the truth, yet God will not suffer it to want so many
witnesses, as shall suffice to confirm the same. And therefore the most
probably opinion is, that by these two witnesses are meant, all the con^ant
defenders of the truth against Antichrist, who though ^hey be many, yet are
said to be only two, for these reasons. first, because of the paucity of them,
in comparison of the ^nfinite number of false teachers, and Antichristian
Locusts. ^econdly, because all their whole doctrine is derived out of ^he Law
and the Gospel, the two Testaments which God ^ade with mankind. And thirdly,
because this number is ^ufficient by the Law of God to convince false-hood, For
by ^he mouth of two or three witnesses (says the Law) shall every ^atter be
established: to which Law it seems the holy Ghost has reference in this
place: and certainly the work ^f defending the truth against Antichrist, is so
great, that it ^equireth more workmen then two alone. And yet we ^inde, that
two men stirred up by God, to wit, John Husse, and Jerome of Prage, witnessed
the truth, and sought the re^ormation of the Church, against that great famous
Council of Constance, wherein the whole power of Antichrist was gathered
together. For the Emperor was there present in ^is own person, and the Pope,
four Patriarchs, 29. Cardi^als, 47. Archbishops, 170. Bishops, 564. Abbots,
with Doctors and learned men innumerable: and yet these two holy men, witnessed
the truth against them all, and willingly ^ayd down their lives in defense
thereof.

10. I speak not this in mind that the holy Ghost aimed at these two
particularly, and yet why not any two rather then Enoch and Elias? Must God
needs send them out of heaven, or else his truth could not be witnessed? And if
Enoch and Elias in their ascending up into heaven, were figures of Christ,
ascending and triumphing; to cause them to descend again to suffer death, is
it not in a sort to bring down Christ again from heaven to suffer on earth?
For it destroys the figure of his triumph. Besides, have we not an express
Text, Luke. 16.29. That we must not look for ^^y to come from heaven to
instruct us, but must hold to that which is written in the Law and the
Prophets? In a word, to what purpose should Enoch and Elias come? To dispute
against Antichrist, and convince him out of the word of God? W^^ what then
shall become of the Church of Rome, which they say cannot err, and against
which, the gates of hell ca^^ prevail, and that it is the hammer of all
Heresies, according to Baronius his devise: vicit haereses subegit gentes?
shall it be enclosed up in some cave with the seven sleepers, that Enoch and
Elias must needs leave the place of their repose, and come down to supply her
office? Is not this to ouerunne their own strong proposition, touching the
continuance of the Church of Rome?

11. But if by the two witnesses are meant the faithful ministers and people,
that shall maintain the truth against Antichrist; why do they not preach in
sackcloth, and why are not some of them raised from the death, after they have
been slain, and ascend up into heaven? for those things are attributed unto
these two witnesses. I answer, that by this sackcloth, we may well understand,
prisons, persecution, tortures, and all manner of afflictions wherewith the
Saint and ministers of Christ, are hauocked under the tyranny of this Man of
Sin: these are the garments wherewith these faithful witnesses are clothed,
without sacks or hairecloath on their backs: whereas a number of their Friars,
as the Capuchins by name, wear hair on their backs without affliction, being
puffed up with worldly glory, and esteemed and cherished of all men. Which then
are the likest witnesses of Christ, whether they that preach without sackcloath
being subject to all manner of opprobries and afflictions, or they that are
adored of the world, and yet wear sackcloath o^ their backs? And for their
rising again from death after three days and an half, I say it is truly
accomplished in these our witnesses, though not according to their gross
imaginations, yet according to the intention of the Spirit of God, speaking by
the mouth of S. John. For as all things else i^ this Prophetical book, so is
this resurrection of these two witnesses to be understood spiritually, not of
their bodies, but of their doctrine, order and profession, raised up and
increased by the succession of others in their room: As also ^y their
ascending into heaven, we may well understand a ^ollecting and gathering them
together by the divine calling, ^to the form of a Church, in spite of the
malice and fury of their Antichristian Adversaries: as we see at this day
verifi^d, in England, Scotland, Germany, Denmark, and other Countries. For as
the Congregation of the malignant ^s called in this Prophecy, The world, or The
earth; so is the Church of the elect and faithful in opposition thereunto,
cal^ed Heaven. And if we consider the state of the true Church ^ersecuted in
all Ages, we shall easily subscribe to this truth. For after the ten first
persecutions, wherein it was scattered and spoiled like a ship in a tempest,
did it not again revive and recover life, when Constantine gave peace unto it?
So afterward, in the time of the Arrian Heresy, wherewith it was long
tormented as with a burning fever; was it not again restored as it were to
life and safety, by the faithfulness of Christian Emperors, and diligence of
godly Bishops? In the time of Boniface the eight, how were the faithful
persecuted and tormented, till within three years and an half before his
death, when his persecutions ceased, and the Church took a little breath and
rest? But of all, this is most apparent after the Council of Constance, where
John Husse, and Jerome of Prague, were put to death: for immediately after that
Council, which lasted three years and an half, these two witnesses stood
again as it were on their feet, and the spirit of life entered into them, not
in their own persons, but in their doctrine, which being condemned by that
Popish Council, began to spread it self and to prevail, and to have more
followers and abetters, then ever it had before: and that not only in Bohemia,
but after an hundred years, in Germany, and other Countries, as the same holy
Martyr Husse had prophesied at the hour of his death. And indeed it is strange
to consider, what a number of excellent, learned, and holy men God stirred up
at that time, to enter combat with the Pope, and to batter down the walls of
Babylon: and thus this Prophecy is every way accomplished, if it be spiritually
and rightly understood.

12. Note one thing more, and so an end of this? they say, that these two
witnesses shall prophecy 1260. da^^^ which come to three years and an half,
and then they m^^^ be put to death by Antichrist. Now the continuance of
Antichrists reign is by their devise but three years and a^ half; so that he
must begin his reign the same day with the Prophecy of these pretended
witnesses, Enoch and Elias, and dye also the same day, which how ill hangs
together I need not stand to prove. And to shut up all in a short compass, I
affirm two things. First, that if it were true that Enoch and Elias, or any
two other men, should come into the world to oppugn Antichrist; yet it cannot
be concluded, that the Pope is not Antichrist, because these two are not yet
come, seeing they may yet come in due time: unless they can prove, that the
world shall have an end, within these four years, or 1335. days, which one
answer, is sufficient to overthrow their whole demonstration. Secondly, it is
most probable, that S. John speaks not of Antichrist in that ^hapter, Revel
11. because first it is aid there, that the holy City shall be delivered up
(...), To the Heathen, therefore not to the Jews or false Catholics, which
they make the followers of Antichrist: And secondly, because the Beast which is
said to fight against them, arising out of the bottomless pit, and having
seven heads, and ten horns, is not meant Antichrist, but the Roman State,
whose last head is only the representation of Antichrist.

CHAP. 4. Of Antichrists persecution.
1. THat the persecution under Antichrist shall be great, is no question: but
that it shall be greater then any ever was, or shall be besides, cannot be
proved by any sound testimony of Scripture, as this Author has most exactly
proved. But yet if this be granted, as we willingly condescend thereunto, I say
that the persecution of the true Church by the Popes, and of the faithful
Professors of the Gospel, has been, and is at this day, more cruel and
grievous, then ever any persecution was in former time, either by Antiochus
amongst the Jews, or the heathen Emperors amongst Christians. For first,
Antiochus persecuted the true Church that was only among the Jews, but the
Pope has extended his persecution to all Nations and Countries of
Christendom, the least of which Countries far exceeded in largnesse the
Jewish Nation. Secondly, Antiochus his persecution was but for a short time,
not much above three years, but the Popes persecution, has continued in full
strength and force, these eight hundred years and upward. And lastly, the
number of Christians that have been slain by Popes, does far exceed the
number of the Jews destroyed by Antiochus, so that there is no comparison
between them. The like may be said of the Roman heathen Emperors, the limits
of whose persecution was straighter, the time shorter, and the number fewer,
then that of Popes by many degrees, as the histories of the Church manifestly
prove unto us. So that this consideration above all others, proves the Pope to
be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome to be the Whore of Babylon, who is said
to be drunk with the blood of the Saints and of the Martyrs of Jesus, Revel.
17.6.

2. Seventeen thousand reported by Damasus to have been slain under
Dioclesian in one month, and Eusebius says, that then the prisons were so
stuffed with Martyrs, that there was no place left for Malefactors. This was I
confess a cruel and lamentable time, but yet the times of Popery since these
eight hundred years, have been more cruel and lamentable: for what kind of
torments and cruelties were practiced against Christians by the ancient heathen
Emperors, which the Pope and his slaves have not exercised against those that
have any ways opposed his superstition, Math. Paris in Henrico. 3.
even to the burying of men alive, as Matthew Paris reports? The blood of so
many thousands slain by reason of the excommunications and proscriptions of
the Emperors Henry's, and Fredericks, by the Pope, is a notable witness of the
Popish cruel, and more then Neronian persecutions. I omit the cruelties
exercised upon the Waldenses, Albinge^s^^, Leonists, Lollards, Patarines,
Petcobusians, Pighardes, Hussites, who under these names, albeit good and found
Christians, were so hauocked and spoiled, that Phalaris may seem gentle and
humane in comparison of the Roman tyrant. Bellar. de notis Eccles cap. 18.
Bellarmine himself confesses, that under Innocent the third, an hundred
thousand of them were slain at one expedition into France. And Matthew Paris
tells us, that in Germany an infinite number were put to death in one year: but
they say that they were Heretics, Ibidem.
and therefore deserved to be thus rooted out. Indeed, they are slandered by
our Adversaries and theirs, with most horrible heresies, and damnable ^^^^ons:
but if a man shall observe the repugnanci^ (...) ^dities contained in their
writings, he shall (...) confess those things were either taken (...) ports,
which are always soon spread (...) ground, or devised by their enemies of
(...) their reputation, and to hinder the cour^ (...) For he that does but
consider those holy (...) and frauds, (so they call them) used (...) Priests
against the true Professors of the Go^ (...) in the clear light of the
Gospel, cannot do^ (...) like deceitful calumnies might well be cast upon
(...) men in the thickest darkness of Antichrists kingdom. Look into the
books of the Jesuits, as that which is called the Credo of the Caluinists,
Becanus, Caluinian Aphorisms, and Giffords Caluino-Turcismus, and such like,
and we shall find such prodigious doctrines attributed unto us, as never so
much as dreaming came into our minds, much less issued out of our pens. Now
they that are thus bold and shameless toward us being alive, would they,
think you, spare them being dead, and not able to answer for themselves? I am
sure that Matthew Paris reports, that their doctrine condemned thus of heresy,
was approved by many Bishops of that Age, as Orthodox and sound. And that the
Albigenses were the same with the Waldenses, both Aeneas Siluius, and Stapleton
also, in a manner confess: now what the opinions of the Waldenses were,
appears both by their own Apology written unto the King of France, and to
Vladislaus the King of Hungary, and also by those things which Alphonsus de
Castro ascribes unto them as heresies, which notwithstanding are so agreeable
to the word of God, as that it is heresy to hold the contrary. It is manifest
then, that these good men suffered persecution for no other cause but for the
truth sake, and for opposing themselves to Popish tyranny.

3. What should I speak of their cruelty in Bohemia against the Hussites,
where infinite numbers perished, partly by war, and partly by secret
violence, and open executions, for following the doctrine of John Husse, and
Jerome of ^ague, which notwithstanding was the very truth of God, (...) ^h we
now profess? I mention not their grievous per^ (...) ^ns here in England,
Scotland, and in the Low-Coun^ (...) or their bloody and barbarous
inquisitions, whereby (...) ^rable Christians have been after diverse fushions
in a (...) manner made away, Sleidan. Come^ lib. 16.
as witnesses Vergerius who (...) well tell. Three histories I cannot forget
being fresh (...) ^emory: the first of those of Merindole and Cabriers, ^osta,
and Sanfalese: my heart trembles to relate the executions that were there made
of simple people, armed with nothing but prayers and tears: there was no
difference made of sex or age: women great with child were miserably murdered;
young infants Herod-like thrust through with spears, and swords: forty women
shut up in a Barn full of hay and straw, were consumed with fire: and when
they labored to get out at the windows, they were beaten back with spears
and staves: five and twenty men being fled into a Cave, were there stifled with
smoke and fire: 800. were slain outright in Cabriers, and a great multitude of
poor people beside massacred in all places: yea, in detestation of the men, or
rather their Religion, these Tigers cut down the Trees, not sparing the
fruitful according to the Law: burnt the houses, and ruined the Castles, and
so made the whole Country desert and desolate. The second is the tragical
Bartholomew day in France, under the color of a royal marriage, in the year,
1572. to which all the cruelties of Pagans are not to be compared, no not that
of Dioclesian, whereby, 17000. Christians were murdered in one month: for
here. (as some say) 40000. as others, that speak with the least, 30000. poor
Hugonites as they call them, that is, sound and good Christians were
slaughtered in less then a month. And of this Massacre the Pope would needs
have the glory, or rather the infamy: for in joy thereof, he caused a certain
coin to be stamped, wherein on the one side was the picture of Gregory the
thirteenth then Bishop of Rome, with this inscription, Gregor. 13. Anno. 10.
summi sui pontificatus, and on the other was represented an Angel, having a
Cross in one hand, and a Sword in the other, killing a multitude of men and
women with this inscription, Hugonotorum strages, that is, The massacre of the
Hugonotes. And not content heerewith, to the end that he might glut his eyes
with his own cruelty, he caused this massacre to be painted in three several
places in the great Hall, where he used to give audience to the Ambassadors of
Princes: this is an example of cruelty, not to be paralelled by any former
times, in any Age of the world. The third, is the horrible and unmatchable
Powder Treason here in England, which though it came not to that effect they
desired, (God in mercy discovering their hellish design the night before the
blow should have been given,) yet in their intention and purpose, which is the
life of all actions, it was the most cruel practice that ever the Sun beheld
like unto that of Caligula, that wished that all the Roman Senators and people
had but one head, that he might strike it off at one blow. I need not enlarge
the heinousness of their intentions in this plot, the thing it self cries
cruelty, and the latenes of the designement cannot but fix it fast in our
minds.

4. Hence derive three consequents. First, if the greatest persecution that
ever was, be a mark of Antichrist, then is the Pope Antichrist: for never was
there such a persecutor of the Church of Christ, as he is, and has been.
Secondly, that it is a most vile and palpable lie, which they fasten upon our
Religion and Church that it began with Luther, and is no elder then his age;
this they whisper every day into the ears of simple people, and divulge in
their Sermons and writings: but doubtless against their conscience: for there
are few leaves in their Annals and Church histories, which are not marked with
the blood of our Martyrs; and they themselves cannot deny, but that 400. years
before Luther was borne, their Fathers persecuted to death, and that by most
cruel torments, a number that professed the same Religion with us in
substance, though not so fully revealed unto them by reason of the thick
darkness of that Age. And thirdly, that ours, not theirs, is the persecuted
Church. For though here in England, and elsewhere the public exercise of
their Religion is forbidden, and men by mulct constrained either to communicate
with us in the service of God, and holy Sacraments of the Church, or to suffer,
and also diverse Priests and Jesuits have been executed by the edge of Law:
yet for their number it is not one to a thousand to those of our Religion that
have been put to death by them: and for this cause, ours is Religion merely,
theirs rebellion and transgression of politic Laws, against which they
willingly dash themselves by their voluntary thrusting themselves into the
kingdom, to seduce the people, and withdraw their hearts from their allegiance
to their Sovereign. This is so known a truth, that I need not stand further
to prove it.

5. To the cruelty of Antichrists persecution they ascribe as a principal
effect, the abolishing of the public service and sacrifice of the Church,
which they gather out of the twelfth of Daniel, and because the Mass is not
yet abolished which is their great unbloody sacrifice, therefore Antichrist is
not yet come, and so the Pope is not Antichrist: which objection is most
exactly confuted by the Author of this Treatise: but yet to clear the matter
further, I add a note or two. And first, it is obseruable, that the sacrifices
of Christians, are either private, or public: private Sacrifices, (...) first,
every man's own body which he must offer up (...) living, holy, and acceptable
Sacrifice unto God, Rom 12.1. which kind of Sacrifice is so far from being
abolished by any persecution, that it is thereby rather effected, when the
faithful willingly offer their bodies to death, and all manner of torments for
the truths sake. Secondly, the spiritual Sacrifices of Christians, are
Prayers, Thanksgiuings, Alms, and a contrite and humble heart, none of which
can be abolished by Antichrist except the Church of God should be utterly
destroyed, which is impossible: neither shall the public Sacrifices and
Ceremonies of the Church then cease, as Baptism, and an external profession
of Christianity. For Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, as Saint Paul
affirms, and shall have two horns like the Lamb, though he speak like the
Dragon, Remon. de Antichrist. c. 29. 5.
Apoc. 13.11. For this cause Remond is of opinion, contrary to the Tenet of
Bellarmine, that this persecution of Antichrist, shall not abolish the Mass
which they esteem to be the only true Sacrifice of a Christians: and
therefore that that prophecy of Daniel, is to be understood of the Sacrifices
of the Law interrupted by Antiochus Epiphanes, as witness both Saint
Chrysostom, and the Author of the book of the Machabees, and Josephus. True
it is, Iraeneus, Theodoret, I^sephus Antiqu^^. Iud iar. lib. 12. cap. 11.
and others of the Fathers alleged by Bellarmine, understand that Text of
Antichrist, but these are but the conjectures of those good men, which ought
not to preiudicate the truth confirmed by experience, and the event of things
foretold. Howbeit even thus also it may be fitly applied to the Pope: for he
has changed the whole service of God anciently practiced in the Church, and in
stead thereof brought in a number of vain observations, and impious
superstitions, as much different from that which was in ancient time, as Lead
is from Gold, or dirt from precious stone. For whereas the substance of
Christian Religion in regard of practice, consists in these three points; the
inuocating of Gods name, Preaching and hearing the word, and administration of
the Sacraments; he has foully depraved and corrupted all these. In stead of
inuocating the name of God, he has brought in Prayers in an unknown tongue,
invocation of Angels and Saints departed, yea the worship of Images, Crosses,
and Relikes, and of a piece of bread which they call their God: and oftentimes
the Saints which they adore, are such as never were living in the world, but
mere Chimeraes of their own brain: and that which is strange, even Pagan
Idols under their name: as in the Temple of the Vaticane in Rome, under the
title of Saint Peter, they adore Jupiter Capitolinus, as is evident by the
hair of the Image, which is curled and frizled: whereas Saint Peter is always
painted bald, only they have taken away the thunderbolt out of his hand, and
thrust in keys in stead thereof. And at Bourdeaux in Saint Andrews Church at
the entrance of the Quire, they make the image of Jupiter mounting up into
heaven upon an Eagles back, to represent the ascension of Christ. Touching the
preaching of the Gospel, is it not apparent that the greatest part of Gods
word is delivered to the people in an unknown tongue? And what do their new
vpstart Friars never heard of in the world till of late years, which are their
great and almost only Predicants? I say, what do they preach for the most
part, but the rotten traditions of the Church, and legendary fables to amaze
men's minds, and nuzzle them in superstition? And touching the Sacraments, it
is lamentable to see how they have changed, corrupted, mangled, and profaned
them: adding unto the blessed Sacrament of Baptism a number of vain, idle,
yea filthy superstitions, as Salt, Cream, Spettle, Oil, and such like: as if
Christ was not wise enough when he appointed water only without any other
mixture. And the holy Eucharist they mangle, pervert, and abuse, according to
their own fancies, taking away the one ha^fe from the people, to wit, the Cup,
the lively representation of Christ's blood, not breaking the bread as it ought
to be by institution; nor communicating with the people, but oftentimes alone,
contrary to the nature of a Communion: and that which is most strange, crossing
the Host: which they say is very Christ, to protect him from the devil: as if
Christ stood in fear of the devil, or that the Cross did sanctify him, and
not he the Cross. Thus the Pope has depraved, if not utterly abolished the
whole external service of God, and therefore even in this respect also we may
conclude, that he is the true Antichrist spoken of in the Scripture.

6. The Mass indeed continues under him, and is maintained with great pomp,
and the Fathers call it the sacrifice of the Church: but how? Not a true and
real sacrifice, as the Papists hold, but because by the Lords Supper is
continued in the Church a recordation, and memorial of the death and passion
of Christ. Aug. de doctrina. Christ lib. 3. cap. 16.
Thus Saint Augustine: We (at the Eucharist) partake of the passion of our
Lord, and with sweetness and profit retain in our memory that his flesh was
crucified for us. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Hebraos cap. 10. ser. 17.
And Chrysostom: That which we do in the Lords Supper is done in
commemoration of that which was done before: neither do we offer a sacrifice,
but the recordation of a sacrifice. And Theophilact: We offer every day, or
rather make a recordation of that oblation by which Christ offered himself.
Theophilact. ad. Heb. c. 10
In this sense principally do the Fathers call this Sacrament a sacrifice, and
therefore when these men contrary to their intention, affirm, Christ to be
truly and really sacrificed unto God in the Mass by a mortal Priest for
remission of sins, what do they but destroy the whole nature of the
Sacrament, which is a communion of the body and blood of Christ to the
faithful, and not a sacrificing of it to God? So that we confess, that the
Pope does not abolish the Mass, but rather maintain and uphold it as the
soul and strength of his kingdom. It is the Sacrament which he destroys by
the Mass, and not the Mass it self: and this his maintaining the Mass,
prove h him plainly to be that Antichrist figured by Antiochus, who took away
the daily sacrifice of the Synagogue, and suborned a false worship to Jupiter
Olympius in stead thereof, as these have done the worship of a piece of bread
in stead of the true and pure worship of Christ.

7. But that we may see that the Popish persecution is not less, but far
greater then that of the Heathen Emperors, it will appear, if we call to mind
the bloody executions by most exquisite torments, acted by their Inquisitors of
heretical prauity as they term them: For these kind of people, are most
ingenious in devising tortures for poor Christians; they think scorn that
they should be excelled of any Heathen Tyrant in this kind: nay Phalaris
himself, never went beyond them in cruelty, as all know that know their
Inquisition Court: neither is this cruelty proper only unto them, but the
whole Nation of Papists are infected with the same ferity: and that they may
know themselves to be the slaves of Antichrist, the more a man is addicted to
their religion, the more fierce and bloody minded he is. Our own Stories do
show, how they delight to glut their minds and eyes with beholding the
tortures of such as they esteem Heretics, making sport at their pains. And
albeit our Nation does naturally abhor all spectacles of cruelty; yet I know
not how, they that are abandoned to that religion, change this natural
clemency, into unnatural immanity. Was ever any cruelty more monstrous, then
to take a young infant delivered out of it Mothers womb, and crawling out of
the fire wherein the Mother was burning, and to cast it again into the flame,
there to perish with the Mother? This we have had experience of in this
Kingdom, as also of ransacking the graves of the dead, and burning their bones
as Heretics, as they did the bones of Bucer, and Paulus Fagius. Yea so foolish
is their impiety and rage, that they have come unto the grave of a dead
Christian and digging up the earth, taken away his winding sheet, and summoned
him to appear at their Courts, as if he had been alive: but they themselves
shall one day appear in the high Court of heaven, before the judgment seat
of Christ, and there receive the just guerdon of their cruelty May we not then
prefer the Pope to the fiercest Tyrant that ever lived? And thereupon, if
there were no other argument but their bloody cruelty against him, conclude,
that he is the very Antichrist spoken of in the Scripture, whose religion
breathes nothing but blood, and whose designements aim at nothing but
Massacres, and whose proiects plot nothing but the ruin and destruction of all
those that will not receive his mark on their foreheads, and become his slaves.

8. For conclusion of this point, touching Antichrists persecution, observe
these few things. First, that though there was to be under Antichrist, almost
an universal defection from the faith; yet his persecution is not to be
universal, but only in those places where the Gospel is entertained.
Secondly, that this persecution is not to continue in full strength till the
end, but as it grew up by little and little, so it is to decrease by degrees;
as that Man of Sin is more and more revealed, and his power weakened, by the
preaching of the Gospel. Thirdly, that the edge thereof is bent against none
but Protestants: for Jews, Turks, and Infidels, may live safely with them,
even in Rome under the Popes nose, and never be called into question for their
blasphemies: only the poor Protestants are sure to feel the dint of their
malice, of which no other reason can be given but this, because we set our
selves against their errors and pomp: and these are open enemies unto God, to
show that their own glory and credit is more dear unto them, then the glory
of God. Fourthly, that he persecutes not only us whom he calls his enemies,
but also his own friends and followers, hauocking their souls, as he does our
bodies, and leading them blindfolded by troops into hell, and yet no man may
dare to say unto him, why do thou so? Fifthly, that he exercises this
cruelty, not only by judicial censures, but by open wars, setting Kingdoms
and Princes together by the ears, and raising up subjects in rebellion against
their Sovereigns: and when Peter's keys will not serve the turn, to gird
himself with Paul's sword, turning the Priesthood, which should be the Oracle
and Sanctuary of peace, into Martial fury, and the sword of the Spirit, into a
sword of iron, the force whereof all Christian States have felt and feared not
many years since. Sixthly, that when by open violence he cannot prevail, then
he seeks by treason to effect his will, sending forth his damned Emissaries,
Priests, and Jesuits, and such like, to poison or stab all such as stand in
their light; not sparing Emperors, Kings, and Princes themselves, as Histories
do plentifully report unto us. And lastly, that his hatred is not so much
against men's persons, as against their religion and truth it self, which he
labors by all means to exterminate out of the world. But as Luther a little
before his death, comforting his friends said, so say I: Let us be of good
courage, though all the Potentates of the world be combined against the truth,
yet it shall prosper and prevail in despite of them: For, pro nobis magnus
quidam heroes stat, a great worthy stands on our side. And when his friends
doubted who this great man should be: He replied, Sleidan. Coment.
Is Jesus Christus est quem oportet vincere, It is Jesus Christ who must
overcome: who has already wasted this Man of Sin, by the breath of his
mouth, that is, the preaching of the Gospel, and shall at last utterly destroy
him by the brightness of his coming. Even so Amen, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

CHAP. 5. Touching the continuance of Antichrists reign.
1. ANtichrist is to be considered two ways: either in respect of his person,
or in respect of his reign. Touching his person, he was borne in the Apostles
time, and shall continue in the world, till the second coming of Christ,
though with many changes and alterations, as it happens to the life of man:
where we must take the word Person, not as it is ordinarily used in our
language, for one certain particular man, but as the best Latin Authors often
do, for a certain title, office, and quality, belonging to one at once, yet to
many by succession. And thus when we say the Pope is Antichrist, we make all
the Popes since Boniface the third, but one person, though they have been
diverse men in succession: and for this cause it is, that when mention is made
of Popes, the speech is in the singular number, though that thereby they intend
not any one in particular, but the whole order of them in general: as the Pope
is head of the Church, the Pope cannot be an Heretic, the Pope is Christ's
Vicar on earth, etc. Which speeches cannot be understood of any one singular
Pope, but of the seat and succession of the whole order. And thus also we
speak of Kings and Emperors, who at one time are but one in number, yet vary
by a personal representation, whether by election, or hereditary succession;
and so we say, that the King never dies, not the Pope, nor the Emperor, to
wit, so long as there is a succession and continuance in the Kingdom. Now in
this sense I say, that A^tichrists continuance in the world, has been from the
Age of the Apostles, and shall continue till the last day. But if we understand
it of Antichrists reign, then the time is of a shorter limitation: for as has
been already showed, that began in Boniface the third, and grew to the height
in Boniface the eight, and Gregory the seventh, and not long after, began to
fade and decline, as we see at this day.

2. The Papists affirm, that he shall reign just three years and an half,
and no more; which they strive to prove out of Daniel 7.25. and 12.7. and Apoc.
12.14. where mention is made of time, times, and half a time: understanding by
time, a year; by times, two years; and by half a time, half a year. But
this interpretation is sufficiently dispelled by the Author himself: only I
will show them how senseless a devise it is, and what difficulties they
thereby cast themselves into, which are not possible to be reconciled. For
first, to say that Antichrist shall reign but three years and an half, and
in that space to reduce the whole world into his obedience, is as impossible,
as if a man should undertake to travail ten thousand miles in three days: it
is beyond the compass of man's power to atchieue such a conquest in so short a
time, no not if we make him as fortunate as Timotheus the Athenian Captive,
whom they painted sleeping, and Fortune casting Cities and Countries into his
lap: and albeit he be armed with all the power of hell, yet the devil himself
is not able to bring the whole world under the subjection of one man in so
short a time. Secondly, they say, that he must reign over the Nation of the
Jews, at Jerusalem, and that they shall receive him for their Messiah. But how
can this be brought to pass within that space? The Nation of the Jews, is di
persed almost over the whole world: now what Posts or Pegasusses shall he
have, to admonish them so speedily of their Messiah his being, and reigning at
Jerusalem? Shall he get the Sun to be his trump^ter, and the Moon to carry
his letters, to summon this scattered people? But suppose the fame of him may
come to their ears; how shall they so speedily march out of those far
Countries wherein they inhabit, and assemble so suddenly at Jerusalem? or if
they could, and would; will those Nations wherein they live, suffer them to
pass thus suddenly from them, with bag, and baggage, and not rather retain
them by violence, as Pharaoh did their progenitors in Egypt? Besides, they
hold that Antichrist shall reedifie Salomons Temple, which is so demolished,
that one stone is not left upon another. But Solomon was seven years in
building it at the first, and that with an hundred and fifty thousand workmen:
and for the second restoration of it, we hear the Jews saying unto Christ,
six and forty years was this Temple in building, and will Antichrist in three
years space set it up anew? Where of such a sudaine, shall he find workmen,
timber, stone, and other materials, with instruments, and wages? Belike because
Christ said of his body, destroy this Temple, and I will build it again in
three days, therefore Antichrist shall build again the material Temple in
three days, taking a day for a year. Again, by their doctrine, after
Antichrist has obtained the Kingdom of the Jews, he must fight with three
mighty Kings, of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia, and possess their Kingdoms: Now
these Kingdoms are under the dominion of two great Emperors, to wit, the
Turk, and the Emperor of the Abassines; and is it probable that they can be
so soon conquered? Surely Caesar was never so speedy in his victories, when he
wrote to the Senate of Rome, Veni, vidi, vici: I came, I saw, I overcame. He
must al o subdue seven other great Kings, and so become the great Monarch of
the whole world, and cause all Nations to Apostate from Christ, and entertain
his religion The whole age of a man, is not sufficient to discover and veiw all
the Nations of the world, and yet this monster must quell and tame them in
three years, whereas the Romans scarce in seven hundred years could erect
their Empire, and that but over one part of the world. The Apostles of Christ,
endued with divine virtue, and power of miracles, and the gift of tongues,
could hardly in twenty years plant Churches in most part of the world, and
hardly in five hundred years was Heathenish Idolatry abolished; and shall he,
as more powerful then Christ, effect as great a work in three years and an
half? Further, when they say that he shall cause himself to be worshipped in
all places, I wonder what kind of Apostles and preachers he shall have, thus to
pervert the whole world in an instant. Shall men fly about the world on the
wings of the winds? and if they do, with what eloquence and Art, shall they
persuade both learned, and simple, to this defection? What shall become then of
the Pope, with his College of Cardinals, and whole Roman Clergy? Shall he
find them so light of faith, that they will renounce, not only their religion
(which is no great matter with them) but their State, Pomp, and Authority,
upon so slight a summons? These and a number such like dotages, are fitter to
be preached to stocks and stones, or as their Friar Franci^ did, to beasts,
and fou^es, rather then to men of understanding and judgment: and yet their
great learned Rabbis, are not ashamed to propound them to simple people as
Oracles of faith: but their repugnancy shows their vanity.

3. The Texts out of which they derive this fancy, are as full of contradiction
to their interpretation, as the fancy it self. For first, whereas it is
written, Dan. 7. They shall be delivered into his hand for a time, times, and
half a time, In the eight Chapter, it is said: That he shall trample down the
Sanctuary, 2300. days: both which Texts, are applied by them unto Antichrist.
But how can this agree, whereas in one place they find, three days and an
half, and in the other, above six years, for so 2300. days import. Secondly,
the time, times, and half a time, in the twelfth Chapter, are expounded in the
eleventh verse, by the number 1290. days, which Bellarmine confesses to
determine the durance of Antichrists reign: but 1290. days, make three
years, and seven months, which is a month more then three years and an
half: now if Antichrist must reign three years and an half, or 1260. days,
as they gather out of the Apocalypse, then he cannot reign 1290. days, or if
this, then not the former. Thirdly, they say, Antichrist must reign three
years and an half, and Enoch and Elias must preach against him 1260. days,
which make just three years and an half, and yet they add, that these two
Prophets must be slain by Antichrist, a month before his own destruction:
but how can th s hang together? If Antichrists reign, and Enoch and Elias
preaching, have one and the same space of time allotted unto them; how can it
then be true, that they shall be slain a month before his destruction? Or if
the last be true; th n the first must needs be false, that Antichrist shall
reign but three years and an half: for here by their own confession is a
full month after their slaughter given unto the life and reign of this
monster: which difference of time, though it be but small, yet it plainly
proves, that those numbers in Daniel, and the Apocalypse, cannot be assigned
for the precise term of three years and an half for Antichrists reign.

4. But says Remond, Remon de Antichrist c. 17.2.
following his counterfeit Hyppolitus, Antichrist shall send out his evil
spirits through the world, to signify and proclaim unto all men, that a great
King is borne in the world, and summon them to acknowledge and yield obedience
unto him. A strange dream doubtless, concerning the which, I would demand of
them three questions. First, what ground of Scripture they have for this
dream. S. Paul indeed, 2. Thessal. 2.9. says, that his coming shall be with
the efficacy of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with
all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness: but that he shall have at command the
infernal Spirits, and send them as his trumpeters through the world, to gather
his subjects together, is no where to be found in holy Scripture. Secondly, I
demand, whether these malign spirits, which he shall send a broad, shall be
visible with assumed bodies, or invisible as spirits? If they say invisible,
how then shall they found out this message to their cares, and how can it be
but that all men will suspect them for deceivers, seeing they know that the
devil was a liar from the beginning? Or if visible like men, how shall they be
able to persuade the whole world to Apostasy from Christ in so sudaine a
manner, when as Christ's own Apostles, furnished with the gifts of the holy
Ghost, could not convert the world in a far longer time? Besides, appearing
as men, they must needs be suspected of error and infirmity. Thirdly, I ask
what shall become at that time of their great Bishop, his Cardinals, and the
innumerable Armies of Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Priests, etc. will they all
bend their knee at one instant to this Idol, and renounce their Christianity:
yea their Pomp, Riches, triple Crown, red Hats, with all S. Peter's Patrimony,
for the maintenance of which things, they have so labored and striuen so many
hundred years? Is this the foundation upon which their Church is built? Is
this their faith, which they say the gates of hell cannot prevail against? Is
this S. Peter's chair, which they affirm cannot either err or fail? When
they have answered these questions, then we will believe this dream.

5. Yea but says Remondus, he shall be so stored and furnished with abundance
of treasures amassed together by the devil, that by them he shall be able to
draw after him infinite multitudes of people: for Quid non mortalia pectora
cogis auri sacra fames? What cannot Gold do? Indeed Gold can do much, but is
it possible that he should heap together so much Gold, as to corrupt the
whole world therewith? Must he not needs have a mass bigger then Mount Atlas
to bring this to pass? Besides, is it likely that all the people of the world
would be tempted with Gold to forsake their God, and their Faith, which is
more precious then Gold? How many of the very Heathen do we read of, that have
despised Gold, and preferred Virtue before it? And shall there be found no
Christians to be compared unto them in continency and virtue? Credat Iudaeus
Apella. Let the unbelieving Jew believe this fable, surely we cannot. But if
peradventure they speak this of themselves, and those that are of their own
profession: why then they must of necessity confess themselves to be
miserable slaves unto Gold, and to have s^leable consciences. Neither is it any
marvel if in this regard we affirm the Pope to be Antichrist, seeing by
riches and worldly honors and preferments he binds unto himself his
followers, especially his Clergy, whose worldly state and pomp is so great,
as scarce any Prince does go beyond them: Gold, Honors, and preferments being
the very sinews of the Popes kingdom.

6. But if they stand precisely for the term of three years and an half for
Antichrists reign, and because the Pope has reigned spiritually in the Church
fifteen hundred years, as Bellarmine affirms, that therefore he is not
Antichrist: I answer two things: First, that if they take Antichrist to be one
singular person, as they do, then some of their Popes might be Antichrist by
this computation of their reign: for it has fallen out by Gods providence to
them, as never to any other kingdom in the world, so far as I have read,
that they have reigned full three years and an half, according to this
prophecy. As St^phen the third or fourth, governed the Papacy three years,
five months, and twenty eight days, as Anastasius reports in the lives of the
Popes. Bennet the fourth sat three years six months and fifteen days, and
Leo the seventh, three years six months and ten days; so that one of these
might be Antichrist according to their own account. But because we must not
seek for this monster in any one particular man without relation to
succession; therefore I say secondly, that whosoever presumes to reign
spiritually in the Church besides Christ alone, the true and sole spiritual
King thereof, the same is Antichrist sitting in or over the Temple of God. But
the Pope by their own confession has done this; he therefore without doubt
is that Antichrist spoken of, usurping an unlawful tyranny in the Church of
God. For Saint Peter forbids all Pastors to behave themselves as Lords over
Gods heritage, 1. Peter. 5.3. and consequently to reign over them.

7. Out of all which I conclude, that those numbers in the Apocalypse of 1260
days, 41 months, and three years and an half, are not to be taken in a
literal, but in a mystical signification: and that they denote not any
certain or definite time in respect of humane understanding: but only this,
that God in his counsel has determined a set bound to the persecution of his
Church, which cannot be passed; which bound though it be certain unto him,
yet is uncertain unto us, because it is not for us to know the times and
seasons which the Father has placed in his own power. Acts. 1.7. And
therefore as after four hundred years complete, God brought the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, so he will after some hundreds of years, deliver his
Church from the cruel and bloody persecution of all the enemies thereof, and
give it a peaceable and quiet repose, as we see effected in the time of
Constantine the great: and to this end serves the diverse supputation of times
by years, months, and days, partly that the faithful might know, that the
least moments and minutes of time are determined by God, and partly that they
might be strengthened in their miseries and afflictions, with the consideration
of the shortness of them, intimated by such short limitations of time, as of a
few years, months, and days. And besides, in that all those several numbers
iumpe together in one sum of time; for 1260 days, 42 months, and three
years and an half, are all one in computation; it shows plainly, that they
must be spiritually conceived, otherwise to what end should that variation
serve?

8. But howsoever they be taken, yet it is clear, that they cannot be meant of
the reign or persecution of Antichrist, but either of the state of the
primitive Church under the heathen Emperors, or of the durance of the Roman
Empire figured by the first beast, Apoc. 13. The first of these opinions is
built upon this ground, because it is not the manner of holy Scripture to
premonstrate any certain periods of those intestine troubles which are raised
up in the Church by false Christians, but only of such as arise from foreign
enemies that professedly hate the truth: as we see the persecution of the
ancient Church, under the Egyptians, Babylonians, and Antiochus, defined by a
certain number of years by the Prophets: but not that which was inflicted by
Idolatrous Kings, as Manasses, Jeroboam, and the rest of the Kings of Israel:
and so these numbers in the Apocalypse are not to be referred to Antichrist who
was to be a domestical foe, but to the bloody cruelty of those heathen
Tyrants. And this is plainly euinced by the number of 42 months, which is all
one in effect with the other two: for Apoc. 11.2. it is said, that the Gentiles
shall tread under foot the holy City 42 months, which I see not how it can be
well understood but of the heathen Emperors. And Apoc. 13.5. it is said of the
first Beast, that power was given unto him to continue 42. months; now by the
first Beast is signified doubtless the Roman Empire, which is said to rise
out of Sea, that is, out of warlike tumults; and by the second which arises
out of the earth, that is, out of peace and quietness, in a fly and subtle
manner, the state of Antichrist. If then this be directly spoken of the Roman
Empire which is the first Beast, then it can no ways appertain to Antichrist
figured by the second; unless we will make these two Beasts signify but one
and the same thing, which is as much, as to make a thing both before and after
it self: and that which the holy Ghost calls another, yet not to be another:
and lastly, the image of a thing, to be the thing it self. The second opinion
touching the durance of the Roman Empire, seems also to have some
probability of truth: for the words in the original, Apoc. 13.5. do thus
sound, and Power was given unto him, (...), Facere, to do forty and two
months. Now this word Facere to do, being put absolutely, signifies in the
Scripture language, to command, reign, or execute whatsoever a man intends
without impeachment: as Daniel. 8.12. speaking of Antiochus, it is said, That
he cast down the truth to the ground, and did (Fecit) and prospered: and
verse 24. He shall destroy, prosper, and do. And so Saul says unto David, 1.
Sam. 26.25. Blessed be thou my Son David, thou shall do and prevail. The
words as they are translated Verbatim by Arias Montanus are these: Faciendo
facies, et valendo valebis, that is, thou shall come to the end of thy desire,
and reign in Israel as God has promised. So here when it is said, Power is
given to the Beast to do, 42. months, the meaning may seem to be to reign 42
months. So that Saint John in great likelihood seems here to define the
length of continuance of the Roman Empire by 42. prophetical months, which
make 1260, years, taking according to the use of prophecy, a day for a year:
which opinion is strengthened by the event. For from the first foundation of
Rome, till the utter ruin and sacking of it by Theodoricke the Goth, which was
in the time of the Emperor Anastasius, in the year of the world, 4456. and of
Grace, 507. passed so many years by precise computation: at which Antichrist
began to grow ripe, and to show himself more and more in the ruins of that
Empire. Hitherto may be annexed the account of Pagans themselves. Censorinus
de die not. 1 ^.
Censorinus reports out of Varro, in the eighteenth book of his Antiquities
that one Vectius a famous Augure affirmed, That seeing the Roman people had
passed in good estate six years, it should continue 1200. and then should be
an end both of the City and Empire: which account differs from that in the
Apocalypse but only 60. years. The like unto this is that heathenish prophecy
found in the Sybilline Oracles, where the term of Romes durance is defined by
the letters of the name in Greek (...), which being numbered, make 948. which
numbers though they differ from those in the Apocalypse, yet they evidently
prove this much, that the end of the Roman Empire was to be about that time,
and that it is no strange thing thus to conjecture.

9. Our learned and godly countriman M. Fox, has an opinion of his own,
different from all others touching these numbers, which he says, was after
long study and prayer cast suddenly into his mind, by some divine inspiration.
It is this, that those 42. months are to be referred to the persecution of the
Church under the Roman Emperors, counting from the time of John Baptist, that
was slain by Herod the Tetrarch, until peace was given to the Church by the
Emperor Constantine, after the death of Licinius, taking these 42. months for
weeks of years: so that forty two months make by this reckning 294. years,
to which if we add the 3^. years of our Savior Christ, when he was baptized
by John, we shall fall upon the 324. year of Christ, in which Constantine
embraced Christian Religion. Which interpretation of changing months into
weeks, though it seem not to accord with the ordinary current of the
Scripture, where days are put often for years, but never months for weeks:
Yet seeing the sanctity and holiness of the man is so famously known, and he
says, that he received it by divine revelation, and the event answers so
fitly thereunto; why should it be utterly rejected? Sure it is, that a month
by reason of the solemnity of the new Moon was religiously observed by the
Jews, and the number of seven, whether of days or years, was Gods own
ordinance and appointment. Now who can tell, whether in this regard, the Spirit
of God did translate the name of a month, to signify a week of years? The
seventh day was to them a cessation from all worldly businesses: the seventh
year was deputed for manumitting servants, releasing debts, and giving
refreshment to the tilling of the earth; seven times seventy year, was their
Iubilee, wherein liberty was restored to all bondage, a restoring of
inheritances, and as it were a renouation of the world: wherefore seeing this
Religion of Sabbaths depended in a manner upon the monthly course of the Moon,
why should it seem absurd to refer a month to a Sabbath of years? But
here I affirm nothing, but leave the opinion of this good man rather to be
charitably construed, then contumeliously disgraced, as it is by the Papists:
for it has in it more probability and reason, then a number of their idle
dreams and conceits.

CHAP. 6. Of the preaching of the Gospel through the whole world.
1. THat the Gospel should be preached through the whole world, is no
question, seeing the mouth of truth has spoken it, Man. 24. But whether that
prophecy be already fulfilled, or whether it be yet to come, is all the doubt.
The Papists hold, that it is not yet accomplished, and thereupon conclude, that
Antichrist is not yet come: but we on the contrary answer two things. First,
that though it be not yet accomplished, yet it does not therefore follow that
Antichrist is not come. For our Savior speaks not at all of Antichrist in
that whole Chapter, except in general under the name of false Prophets but of
the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the second coming of Christ, which were
the two questions propounded unto him by his Apostles, as he sat over against
the Temple. The first whereof, to wit, touching the destruction of Jerusalem
and the Temple, he resolves from the 4. verse to the 23. And the second from
the 23. to the 34. and then in the 34. and 35. verses, he designs a certain
time for the first, to wit, before that generation should pass, that is, the
age of the Apostles, but leaves the time of the second uncertain, and
therefore exhorts to vigilance and sobriety, to the end of the Chapter. And
that the 34. verse is to be understood of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
35. of the second coming of Christ to judgment, the Pronownes demonstratiues
there used plainly euince. For the Disciples had asked him thus, When shall
these things be, (that is, these things which thou spokest concerning
Jerusalem and the Temple) and what shall be the sign of thy coming? Now
Christ answers, hac, these things which I spoke of Jerusalem shall be
fulfilled before this generation pass: but concerning that day, to wit, of my
second coming, No man knows, etc. So then, if it be granted, that in the 24.
and 25. verses, there be an implicit prophecy of Antichrist as Chrysostom
supposes, yet it is apparent that the preaching of the Gospel through the
whole world, cannot be made a sign concerning his coming, but either of the
destruction of Jerusalem, or of the second coming of Christ, which were the
questions which the Disciples desired resolution in.

2. But more probably, we affirm, that this sign was effected before the
destruction of Jerusalem in the Age of the Apostles, and by their Ministry.
For first, Christ being ready to ascend into heaven, laid this charge upon his
Apostles that they should go out into the whole world, and preach the Gospel
to every Creature: now can we doubt but they performed what Christ had
enjoined? This was to accuse those holy Heraults of want of zeal and diligence
in their calling; yea, of manifest infidelity and contempt. Or shall we
imagine, that God reserved this work to be brought to pass by certain new
Apostles, the Disciples of a reformed soldier in this last Age of the world,
which were to make up that which was sailing in the others duty. Secondly, to
this end and purpose Christ furnished his Apostles with the guist of tongues,
whereby they were enabled to speak all languages without study, as is
apparent, Acts. 2. Now shall we think that this gift was given them in vain?
And in vain it had been doubtless if they had not preached to all Tongues,
Languages, and Nations: to what end had been the faculty of speaking he
Arabian, Scythian, Indian, tongues, if they had not preached the Gospel to
those people? Thirdly, the City of Jerusalem, with the Temple, were shadows
and types of the Catholic Church, which was to be dispersed over the whole
earth: now the type was not to cease till the body came in full place, and
therefore before euersion of that City and Temple, it was necessary, the
Gospel should be preached through the whole world. This i^ the collection of
venerable Bede, B edain Marc. 13. Oros. part. 1. lib. 2. 1.
thus writing. Diuin^tus procuratum est, etc. It was divinely procured, that
the grace of the Evangelical faith being manifested through the whole world,
that Temple sometimes so famous, with it ceremonies, should be taken out of the
way, least some being weak in the Faith, seeing those things to remain which
were instituted of God, should fall into admiration thereof, and so be
withdrawn from the sincerity of that Faith which is in Christ, to carnal
Iudaisme. Fourthly, our Savior does not only foretell that the Gospel should
be preached through the whole world, but does also determine the time that it
shall be, before the consummation or end come: which consummation or end, is
not to be intended as of the world, but of Jerusalem, for so Saint Luke
clears it, Chap. 21. where the same predictions that are in Saint Matthew,
stand applied and limited to the ruin of the City and Temple of Jerusalem:
and so most of the Fathers interpret that consummation or end. Tertullian de
Resurrectione carnis, cap. 22. Hilar. in Mathae. Can. 25. Chrysostom. in Math.
hom. 76. whose words for their plainness deserves to be set down, (...), that
is, And then shall be the end, not of the consummation of the world, but of
Jerusalem. Theophilact has it, (...): Not of the world, but of Jerusalem. Of
the same mind are Ignatius, epist. ad Philipp. Eusebius hist. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Jerome on Esaias. 11. and Daniel. 9. Ambrose on Romans 10.8. Theodoret, and Beda,
with many others. Lastly, there are diverse express Texts of Scriptures, which
affirm, that the Gospel was preached in the whole world in the Apostles time.
As Mark. 16.20. where it is said, that the Apostles Went forth and preached
every where, (...); which every where must needs incircle the whole habitable
world. Their sound (to wit, of the Apostles) went out (says Paul) into all the
earth, and their words unto the end of the world. The like he affirms, Col.
1.6. where he adds, that it did not only come into all the world, but also
brought forth fruit, and therefore it must needs be that it was not only
virtually (as Bellarmine cauilleth) but even actually in the whole world: for
how else could it bring forth fruit? Lastly (which is without all exception)
the same Apostle in the 23. verse of the same Chapter says, That the Gospel
was then preached to every creature under heaven. And surely reason shows the
same to be possible: Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 76.
for as Chrysostom well observes, If one Paul was able to plant the Gospel
in so many Countries, as from Jerusalem to Spain, imagine what the other
eleven might do, who were employed in this work, and divided the world betwixt
them.

3. When we say, that the Gospel was preached by the Apostles in all the
world, our meaning is not, that the Apostles preached in every particular
Region of the world, in their own persons; so that there was no Country,
Province, or City which they honored not with their presence: for this could
not possibly be in so short a time, as twenty, or thirty years, which was the
uttermost extent of their Legacy. Neither yet do we think the speech to be
merely Hyberbolicall, as if by all the world were meant some part of the
world. But we say confidently, that the Apostles themselves preached the
Gospel in the most famous and general Countries of the world, and whither
themselves could not penetrate, thither they either sent their Disciples in
their rooms, or some of those new converted Christians, in zeal to the faith
received, went of their own accords; or at least the fame and echo of the
Gospel spread it self without any set teachers, as S. Ambrose expressly
affirms. Ambros. in Romans cap. 20.
Where (says he) the presence of a preacher was wanting, there the report and
fame of the Gospel sounded, as the fame of the miracles in Egypt spread it
self to all Nations, as witnesses Rahab the Harlot. Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. cap.
3.
And thus (as Eusebius says) The saving doctrine of the Gospel, by the virtue
and working of God, like a glistering Sun-beame illuminated the world, and as
water being stricken with a stone, leaves not circling, till the circles come
to the banks, so neither was the sound of the Gospel staid, till it touched
the very ends of the world. Now this is most probable, because the Apostles by
mutual consent, or as some think, by lot, divided the world betwixt them:
some travailing into one Country, and some into another: As Andrew to the
Scythians, Thomas to the Indians, Bartholomew into Armenia, Matthew into
Aeth^opia, Simon Zelotes into Persia, and so of the rest, as we may see at
large described by Baronius, in the 44. year of Christ. And it is also to be
noted out of Chrysostom, in the Homily formerly alleged, that Christ does not
say, that all the world shall believe, and receive the Gospel, but only that
it shall be preached to all the world. So that it can be no good argument to
say, that such a Nation never heard of the Gospel, because they are not
Christians, but Pagans: for it might be preached unto them, and find no
entertainment; and if it did, yet it might be taken away again from them for
their ingratitude, and they themselves abandoned by Gods just judgment to
their former Idolatry: as is notorious at this day in many Countries now wholly
serving Mahomet, having been before famous for their Christian profession.

4. But if it be granted, that this universal promulgation of the Gospel, was
not effected before the destruction of Jerusalem, yet it does not follow
(supposing this as a necessary forerunner of Antichrists coming) that he is
not yet revealed. For it might be long ago accomplished, and so was, if we
give any credit to the testimony of Antiquity: For Irenaeus, Irenaeus aduersus
hares. lib. 1. cap. 3. Theodoret de curand. Grac^r. affect. lib. 9.
one of the most Ancient, commends the Churches in Germany, and the East, for
the integrity of their faith. Theodoret affirms, that not only the Romans,
and they that lived under the Roman Empire; but also the Scythians, and
Sauromatians, Indians, Ethiopians, Persians, Seres, Hircanians, Brytaines,
Cimerians, Germains, and in sum, all mankind, and all Nations, were converted
before his time, Tertul. contra. Indeos.
to the Evangelical Law. Tertullians witness is most pregnant, for he
peremptorily affirms, that in his age, The varieties of the Cetulians, the
many borders of the Moors, and coasts of Spain, the diverse Nations of the
Gauls, with the places of Britain inaccessible to the Romans, the Countries
of the Sarmatians, Dacians, Germans, and Scythians, with many other hidden and
unknown Nations, Provinces, and Islands, had received the faith of Christ.
Where it is to be noted, that when he names hidden, and unknown Nations,
Provinces, and Islands, he takes away clearly that exception of Bellarmine
touching the finding out of the new world: for that must needs fall within the
compass of those terms, which though it has been but of late discovered unto
us, yet might be known to the remotest Christian Provinces, by whose
neighborhood and traffic, they could not but receive some taste of the
Gospel. Nicephorus testifies, Nicephor. lib. 40. cap. 43.
that after S. Marie had planted a Church at Alexandria, he went and preached
to the Egyptians, Lybians, Barbarians, Cyrenians, and Pentopolitanes. Eusebius.
hist. lib. 6 cap. 1.
Eusebius writes of diverse Martyrs that were in Thebais, under Seuerus the
Emperor: and we read, that in one Council of Carthage, Council. Carthag. apud
Cyprian.
under S. Cyprian, were assembled together fourscore Bishops, out of A^^^ a
Numidia, and Mauritania, which plainly shows, that though in S. Augustines
time, the faith of Christ might be extinguished in some parts of Africa, yet
it formerly had received the sound, if not the faith of the Gospel: As
Ortellius speaks of the kingdom of Nubia, Ortellius in tabul. Africa.
which is a part of Africa, That it was in time past imbued with Christian
religion, and yet at this day, does scarce acknowledge any religion at all. So
then, all these testimonies of Antiquity do manifestly prove, that the Gospel
has been preached through the whole world: what^oeuer, only Origin, in a
singularity of opinion affirms to the contrary: and therefore that this does
not hinder, but that Antichrist may be come and revealed, and that the Bishop
of Rome is he.

5. Most frivolous then is that argument of Remond, in his eight book of
Antichrist, where he instanceth in Granada, a Country of Spain, which (says
he) cast it self at the foot of the cross, and quitted Mahometisme in the
time of our Fathers, under the Arms of King Ferdinand: conclude; therefore
they never heard of Christ before; for this is the question: Surely either too
gross ignorance, especially in a learned Lawyer, whose knowledge in matter of
history should be more then vulgar, or too too palpable malice, if he knew it
and concealed it: For who knows not, that this kingdom being before
replenished with Christians, was invaded by the Sarazens, in the time of King
Rodericke, about the year, 713. or 714. as Baronius confesses? The History of
which invasion is particularly recited by Gueuara, Baron. ad An. 713.
in one of his golden Epistles: where he says, that the Sarazens gained in
eight months, that which was not regained by Christians in almost 800. years:
for so much time passed from the first loosing of Spain, till the recovery of
Granada. And if this were not, yet the religion of Mahomet, whereof he says
the Granadans made profession before they were subdued by King Ferdinand, might
have taught him that they had heard report of Christ before, seeing Mahomet
himself makes mention of him in his Alchoran. The like folly he shows in
speaking of the Kingdom of China, when he says, That the great Kingdom of
Sanglai, which we call China, never heard of Jesus Christ, but since the year,
1577. A bold assertion, and contradicted by the Spaniards themselves, in their
reports of that Country. For Mendoza affirms, that the inhabitants of China,
made great reckoning of the books of the Armenians, wherein it is found
written, that S. Thomas travailing toward the Indians, passed by China, and
there preached the Gospel, though with little fruit, by reason of the brute
of war at that time; but yet nevertheless that some of the Chinans were
baptized, and received the doctrine of the Apostles, with commandment to
publish and disperse the same. To which report, agrees that which is written
by the Jesuit Maffeus, Maffeus hist. Indica. lib. 2.
in the second book of his Indian Histories, where he says; that in the
division of the habitable world amongst the Apostles, India falling to the lot
of S. Thomas, it is held by tradition, that he arrived first in Socotora, an
Isle of the Arabian Sea, and having there made many Christians, that he passed
to Cranganor; where also after he had begotten many Children to Christ, he came
to Colan, and having not sown the seed of the Gospel there in vain, he
passed into the East parts, overthwart the Mountains, with great toil; where
having also happily advanced Christian Religion in many places, especially in
the Kingdom of Coromandell, he came at length to the famous Kingdom of China,
and in this field sowed the seed of the Gospel with no small fruit, and built
Temples for the worship of Christ, and after returned to Coromandell, to
reuisite and confirm his new apprentises in the says. Remond therefore should
either have been better advised, or else held his peace in this subject.

6. But if Christian religion had been ever planted in those Newfound
Countries, there would have remained (says Bellarmine) some tracts and
footsteeps thereof: for it could not be so utterly blotted out, that no
memorial thereof should survive. To which I answer two things. First, that it
does not follow, for peradventure only the same and echo of Christ came unto
their ears, without any settled preaching; or if it were preached, yet
peradventure they did not entertain his doctrine, nor submit themselves unto
him: either of which might be, and the prophecy fulfilled, that the Gospel
should be preached through the whole world as I have showed. Secondly, I say
that in most of those Countries there have been found, manifest traces of the
Christian faith, as may appear, not only by those examples set down by this
Author, but by diverse others recorded by other writers. Maffeus in his
fore-alleadged book, Maffeus hist. Indica. lib. 2.
tells us of diverse Images and pictures in China, which lively (as he thinks)
represented the Christian faith, as that Image of a Woman with a Child in her
arms, which they say was the daughter of a great King, who for all her Child
borne of her own body, remained still a Virgin: and that other of a body with
three heads, representing the Trinity, and that more expressly (if it were
lawful to picture the Godhead) then any of the Popish Images do. Again, they
have a picture of twelve men, signifying as it may seem the twelve Apostles of
Christ, who the natives say, were Philosophers excelling in miraculous virtues,
and at last translated amongst the Angels. Likewise amongst the East Indians,
have been seen diverse monuments of Christianity: for their Brachmanes, that
is, their Priests, whom they hold in great honor, acknowledge but one
Sovereign God, and they use to carry three Suns upon their right shoulder,
to signify the Trinity in one Divine essence, as some write. Maffeus says,
that by these three Suns, they honor a certain Parabramma, whom they
esteem as the most ancient of all the Gods. They believe that upon a certain
time, God came into the world in an humane shape, to redeem the world from
eternal death. The learned of them observe religiously the Lords day, and
therein often repeat this prayer: I worship thee, O God, by thy grace and act
for ever. They have in their writings, the ten commandments of the Law, and
tell of a certain Prophecy, which foretells that one day they shall all be
brought under the obedience of one Law. Nichol. Pimentales. in epist. ad Claud
Aquauiu.
Melchior Cotigin a Jesuit affirms of the Brachmanes in the great City of
Ciandegri, that they had books called Samestretan, which answered in some sort
to our books of holy Scripture, and that a certain Brachman told him, that
God created man by his only thought, whom they called Adam, and that they
worshipped one God only, and gave no part of his honor to any other. This
relike of knowledge the Jesuit referres to the dispersion of the twelve Tribes
of Israel, rather then to the preaching of S. Thomas, who as they themselves
confess, preached in those Countries, and was slain in the City of Meliapor,
now called S. Thomas upon this occasion: Yea they also acknowledge, that there
in were many Christians, before ever the Portugals set foot amongst them.
Maffeus. Ibid. lib. 2. In histor. ^elat. de India orient. ex e^ist. E^an
Cumalij anno 1599. ex Malacu. Histor ^elat. de regno Moges ex vtrijs epist.
anno 1582. 90. b. 95.
Xauier another Jesuit, reports of the great Kingdom of Xatui, that he was
certified by a certain Merchant who had travailed that way, that they were
Christians, and had many Churches of great beauty and bigness, and that he had
seen their King go to Church, for he was a Christian. And in another relation
of the Jesuits, touching the great Kingdom of Magor, they say, that there
have been Christian Kings in the Land of Industhan, but that they were
vanquished by the Parthians, and that their last King was called David, whom
they held to be of the posterity of S. Bartholomew.

7. Equal testimonies and monuments of Christian religion, are found in the
West Indies, the late Newfound world, called America; for Osorius reports,
Osor. histor.
that in many Islands thereof which are now wholly Pagan, were found by the
Spaniards, diverse monuments of the Christian faith buried in the earth. And
Peter Martyr avouches, Pet. Martyr de Insu. nuper Invent.
that in Western Cuba, now called Ferdinandina, circumcision was in use: and
that in Mexico, the Priests baptize all infants, both male and female, when
they are a year old, with religious Ceremonies. Benzo also relates, Benzo h
st. no^t orbis lib. 1. cap. 16.
how amongst other Ceremonies, they offer in their Temples bread; which the
Priests taking and blessing, distribute to the people after the manner of the
ancient Christians. Nichol. Pimenta ad Aq ausuam.
The inhabitants of Peru believe, that there was upon a certain time long ago,
a great deluge of waters, whereby all mankind perished except some few that hid
themselves in a cave, the mouth whereof was rammed up, that no water could
enter unto them, with provision of victuals; and that they discovered the
abatement of the waters on the earth, Urban Calueto com. in Benzo lib. 3. cap.
20.
by two dogs sent forth of their hole. Also they believe, that there shall be
an end of the world, but not before such a great drought and heat come, that
the very Sun and Moon shall be consumed: and this is the reason why at the
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, both here, and in the East Indies, they so
lament and cry, supposing that the Dragon of the firmament then gnaweth and
deuoureth the Sun. They believe also (says Benzo) the immortality of the
soul, and the resurrection of the body: and therefore when the Spaniards razed
and searched men's graves for gold, they desired them not to disperse their
bones, to the end they might rise the more easily. The like also does John Leri
report of the Brasilians, in the story of his Navigations.

8. All these things are testimonies of the light of the Gospel, sometimes
presented to these Nations, and rejected again by them by their folly and
ingratitude; the devil abusing the simplicity of this people, that wanted
faithful teaching, and changing the Christian doctrines which they had
received, Pet. Martyr ocean^s. Decad. s^cund. lib. 6.
into gross Idolatries. Peter Martyr gives us a notable example hereof
concerning one of the Cariques Roitelets of Cuba, who having received from a
Popish Mariner an Image of the Virgin Mary, placed it amongst his Idols called
Zemes, and presented unto it meat and drink, as unto his other Idols: which
Image notwithstanding ceased not to work miracles amiddest the other Idols,
the devil finding it no less fit to delude this ignorant people, then any
other Idol is. So then it is clear, that there is scarce a Country to be
found in the world, whither the Gospel has not penetrated, and therefore that
the prophecy of Christ, That the Gospel should be preached through the world,
being fulfilled, there is no doubt by their own account, but that Antichrist
was long ago come into the world. For as touching the Lands yet undiscovered
and unknown, which lie (as R^mond dreameth) in palpable darkness, without any
light of truth: I say, if those Countries be yet undiscovered, why does he
speak of their religion, which must needs be as much undiscovered as
themselves: if of discovered Countries, he is plainly confuted by that which
has been related out of the Indian Histories, and might further be enlarged if
need were. Howsoever, let all this be taken only in a probable discourse: for
though the Gospel has not yet shined in all Countries, yet Antichrist may
become for all that: seeing this is not set forth as a sign of Antichrists
coming, but either of the destruction of Jerusalem, or of the second coming
of Christ to judgment.

CHAP. 7. Of the revolt, or falling away, foretold by Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
how it is fufilled in the Papacy.
1. THe revolt or falling away mentioned by Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.5. which
should be in the world before the coming of Christ, is not a revolt from the
Roman Empire, as some have thought, albeit that be also long ago effected:
nor yet a defection in manners, though that also be employed in the former; nor
by it can be understood Antichrist himself, though Saint Augustine and some
other of the Fathers have so called him. For how can a man be said to be an
Apostasy in the abstract, except by it they understand that he was to be the
principal and prime Apostate of the world, and as it were the Apostasy it
self, because he was the cause thereof; which doubtless was the meaning of
those Fathers. But by this Apostasy, revolt, or falling away, the Apostle
understands a famous, and as it were, a universal and general defection from
the Faith, and from true Religion, which should be in Antichrists time; and
whereof he should be the head and Captain: for so the word (...), is
properly and usually taken both in holy Scripture and all holy writers, for a
defection from God, and from the Faith, as the Jesuit Suarez confesses.
Suarez lib. 5. cap. 10.16.
But to make the point clear, Saint Paul in another place thus expounds
himself, 1. Tim. 4.1. The Spirit speaks plainly, that in the latter times
some shall Apostate from the Faith, meaning the some Apostasy (says
Espensaeus) which is mentioned 2. Espens. in 1. Tim^t. 4 1. Anselme. in ^. Tim.
4 1^ Thessalonians. 2.3. And Anselme thus expounds the same words, The Spirit of God does
manifestly in me, and by me say, that in the last times, that is, during the
reign of Antichrist, or before, some shall depart from the Faith, by reason of
which departure it is said, 2 Thessalonians. 2. unless there come a falling away
first. Now this is called the Apostasy, (...), by a speciality or excellency of
speech; because though there have been many defections from Christ caused by
the persecutions of Heretics or Tyrants, yet that which is to be under
Antichrist is by an Antonomasie of speech, called the Apostasy: because it is
to be far greater and more general then all the rest. Whence we may
pertinently by the way note five things. First, how idle and vain a question
it is which the Papists demand of us usually: Where was your Church before
Luther? As if then it took the first beginning and root in the world. For
though it be easy to prove, and has been often by the Champions of our
Religion, that in all Ages, even in the darkest times of Popery, there has
been a continual succession of witnesses to the truth which we profess: yet
it is no marvel that there was then no visible form of a reformed Church,
seeing this Apostasy did prevail and ouer-flow the world for a long time:
which is a sufficient answer to that vain objection. Secondly, I gather
hence, that the Church of Rome does err grossly, in holding that the Church of
Rome cannot err, meening the visible Church: for if there must be by their
own confession an universal Apostasy under Antichrist, then the visible
Roman Church must needs be subject unto it, or else it is not universal. But
as touching the invisible Church which is the Congregation of the Elect, known
only unto God, neither can it wholly, nor any one member thereof be seduced
by Antichrist, as is apparent by our Savior Christ's own speech, Aug. de
ciuit. de^. lib. 20. c. 8.
Mat. 24.24. which is also confirmed by S. Augustine in these words; Nunquam a
diabolo ecclesia siducetur praedestinata and electa ante mundi constitutionem,
that is, The Church predestined and elected before the beginning of the world,
shall never be seduced by the Devil. Thirdly, note that if this Apostasy be
of Antichrist, and those that belong to the body of Antichrist: then Antichrist
cannot possibly be a Jew by nation and profession, nor his chief adherents
the Jews receive him for their Messiah. For they that never made profession of
Christian Religion, cannot be said to Apostate from the Faith. Fourthly, note
that seeing the mystery of Antichristianisme, which is this Apostasy here
spoken of, began to work in the Apostles time; therefore it may well be
concluded, that all those opinions and traditions which are maintained in the
Church of Rome to descend from antiquity, having no ground nor warrant in holy
Scripture, are parcels, fragments, and symptoms of this Apostasy. Lastly,
seeing the Antichristian Apostasy here spoken of, was to continue a long time,
and not to be for a few years and days only, as those mystical numbers,
time, times, and half a time, 1260. days, and 42. months declare: then
Antichrist cannot be one singular person, as the Papists dream, but a
succession of persons in one seat, as is by this Author unanswerably proved.

2. But the Papists affirm, that the Protestants are guilty of this Apostasy,
and not they, seeing it is manifest that they have fallen away, a Sede Romana
(they be Bellarmines words) The Roman Sea, and that it cannot be proved that
they ever fell away from any Church. But I answer three things; First, that it
is false that we are fallen away from the Roman Sea: we confess that we are
fallen off from that Sea, but not fallen away: for we hold still with it, what
it holds with the truth, as the doctrine of the Trinity, the twelve Articles
of the Apostles Creed, with the Baptism of Christians, in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Secondly, we distinguish betwixt Papacy,
and Christianity in the Papacy, that is betwixt Curiam and ecclesiam, the Court
of Rome, and the Church of Rome; or if you will betwixt Fidem Romanam, and
Fidem Christianam, the Roman faith, and the Christian faith, which is hidden in
the Roman as a little Gold in a mass of Tin. Now I confess that we are
fallen away from the Papacy, that is, the Court and superstitious doctrines of
that Church, but not from the Church, Christianity, and Faith thereof. Thirdly,
I say that we are commanded by the holy Ghost to come out of Babylon, Apoc.
18.4. but Rome is Babylon, as both many of the Fathers acknowledge, and they
themselves confess: to depart then from Rome is not to depart from Jerusalem
the Church of Christ, but from Babylon, which is the Synagogue and kingdom of
Antichrist. May a man for the safety of his body fly out of an house infected
with the plague, and may not we for the safety of our souls fly out of the
Church of Rome infested with most pestilent errors? We were indeed once joined
in fellowship with this Church, until God enlightening our eyes by his holy
Spirit, we perceived in what danger we stood, and therefore finding that it
was departed from the Gospel of Christ, and had framed to it self a new Faith
and Religion out of its own brain, and in stead of Christ had entertained
Antichrist, we durst not be so senseless and perverse, as to pull the eyes out
of our heads, and still embrace that Religion, which we were assured would
bring us to damnation. And what if out forefathers were drowned in that
superstition, and lived and dyed in the same, should we follow their examples?
And not rather with leaving them to the mercy of God, who might take pity upon
their ignorance, say with the Prophet Jeremy, Chap 16.19. Surely our Fathers
have inherited lies and vanity wherein there is no profit, which is a prophecy
of the Gentiles converted to the faith of Christ, both from heathenish Idolatry
at the first, and from Antichristian superstition at the last. So that though
we are departed from communion with the Church of Rome, yet we can in no
reason be called Apostates from the faith, seeing we retain the ancient
Religion taught by Christ and his Apostles, and professed in the primitive and
purer times of the Church, and revealed in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament. But if we turn our eyes upon them, we may easily perceive where
this Apostasy rests; for they are they that are apparently revolted from the
faith: I say, from the Faith. First, of Christ, and his Apostles. Secondly, of
their own Church as it was in ancient time. And thirdly, into those errors
which are called by the Apostle, Doctrines of devils, and are set down as
marks of this Apostasy.

3. That they are revolted from the says of Christ and his Apostles, the
manifold heretical doctrines taught and maintained in their Church do
clearly euince; for as it was of old time said of Rome, that it was Orbis in
vrbe, a confluence of all Nations; so may it be truly said of the Romish
Religion, that it is a confluence and sink of all heresies, which to be so
will appear, if we take a view of the whole body of their Religion compared
with the heresies of former Ages, and that in order of time, as they sprung up
in the Church. To begin therefore, Saint Augustine fixes upon the Capernaits
as the first Heretics in the Church, Aug. in Psalm. 54.
which heresy though it was unfruitful in that time, yet has been received
in the Papacy by their opinion of the carnal eating of the body of Christ in
the Sacrament, which at this day they so violently defend; for though the error
of the Capernaites was more gross in the circumstance of eating, yet it was
all one in substance with that which the Papists hold. From Simon the Magician,
Irenaeus lib. 3. in praesat.
whom Irenaeus calls The Father of all Heretics, they have sucked that
pestilent infection of setting spiritual things to sale for money, which is so
ordinary a practice in the Church of Rome, that their own writers cry shame
upon it with open mouth; and whereas it is a question whether Peter were ever
at Rome or no, it is out of doubt that Simon was there, as is in that elegant
Epig^amme: An Petrus Romae fuerit, sub Iudice lis est:
Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat.


From him also and his followers they have taken their exorcismes, as may seem
by the resemblance which is betwixt the one and the other. The Sicconians,
Sethians, Archontiques, Basilidians, Valentinians, and almost all other
Heretics had their traditions which they opposed as often as they were pressed
with holy Scripture, as if the Scripture were not perfect, and that Christ
taught many things in particular to be conuayed from hand to hand, which were
not written. And is not this the very practice of the Papists in their
disputations, and their constant tenet, that the Scripture is not sufficient
without traditions; and that the word of God is of two kinds, one written,
another unwritten? Nay, so impudent are they in this blasphemy, that Turrian a
Jesuit writing against Sadeel, is not afraid to say, that if Christ had left
in his Church the Scripture only for the total rule of faith, it had no
better then a Dolphian sword to be ruled by. The Gnostics had their Images of
Christ as they said, which they used to worship: and do not the Papists the
same? Their extreme Unction they have borrowed of the Valentinians and
Heracloonites, who used it, as both Irenaeus and Epiphanius testify: Irenaeus
lib. 1. cap. 24. Idem. lib. 1. cap. 18. Epiphan. haeres. 36. Irenaeus. lib. 3.
cap 3.
and also Exorcismes and Charms, with strange and unknown words, now also
frequently practiced in the Church of Rome. Marcion whom Polycarpus called the
eldest son of the devil, affirmed, that Christ had only a fantastical and
imaginary body: and do not the Papists say the same, when they teach and
believe that Christ's body is really and substantially contained under the form
of bread in the Eucharist, without either quantity or quality of a true body,
that is, without its true dimensions and properties? He also magnified for
merit, single life before marriage, as also did the Eucratites of old and new,
the Papists in our time. Idem. lib. 1. cap. 36.
He enjoined the Saturday fast, permitted women to baptize, contrary to the
practice of the ancient Church: all which things notwithstanding, are received,
practiced, and maintained in the Church of Rome. From whence come the set Fasts
in the Papacy, but from the grand heretic Montanus, who was the first that
prescribed laws for fasting, Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. Epiphan. har. 53.
as Apollonius in Eusebius witnesses? The Elceseans worshipped certain women,
and kept the dust of their feet, and their spittle, as matters of reverence.
And do not the Papists the like in their adoration of women, and many
ridiculous relikes, as the foreskin of Christ the breath of Joseph, the
breeches of S. Francis, and hairs of Saint Peter's beard, with a thousand such
like trash? The Nonatians gloried in their own merits, and called themselves
Catharists, that is pure persons: the which pride is imitated by the Papists,
when they vaunt of their ability to fulfill the Law of God, and of such
perfection of works as can merit heaven. The Manichees have contributed much to
the building of this mystery of iniquity. As first, their opinion of two
beginnings, to which well accords the dream of Augustinus Steuchus, Aug.
Steuchus. in cymopaia.
to wit, that the Imperial heaven was coeternall with God: and if coeternall
with God, what other thing but another God? Secondly, their practice of
ministering the Sacrament under one kind, to wit, the bread, as witnesses Pope
Gelasius. Thirdly, their prohibiting marriage to their elect, that is, to their
Priests, Did. 2. C. Relatum est. C. compertmus.
and tolerating it in their Lay Auditors. Fourthly, their abstinence from flesh
on their fasting days, not forbearing in the mean while to glut themselves
with all manner of delicate fish and iunkets. Fifthly, their inhibiting their
elect from eating flesh at any time, De consecrat ^ist. 5. C. carnem.
which was in like manner enjoined by Pope Gregory to all Monks, but it is in
practice only amongst the Charterhouse Monks at this day. Sixthly, their
swearing by the creatures, as S. Augustine obiecteth to Faustus the Manichee,
Aug. contra F^^st. Manich. Job. 19. c. 22.
for these swear by the Saints and their relikes. Lastly, the principal
reason why the Manichees constitute two beginnings, one the Author of good, and
the other of evil, was for fear least they should make God the Creator of
evil. But the Papists in this exceed the Manichees, Bell. de great. Adam. lib.
7.
for they fear not to teach, that the rebellion of the flesh against the
spirit, had been in man by the condition of his nature, if he had never fallen:
which opinion, directly makes God the Creator and Author of evil. Again,
their vow of celebacy and voluntary poverty, Aug. de haeres. cap. 4^.
was derived from the Heretics called Apostolikes, who received none into
their society that was ever married or possessed any goods in propriety. From
the Messalians they have borrowed the idle life of their Monks, pretending that
they ought to give themselves wholly to prayer, and to abstain from all
labor, as an impediment thereunto. Thus did those Heretics, Idem ibid. cap.
57.
as S. Augustine declares, and the same is the religion of the Popish Monks.
The same Heretics taught, that Baptism was effectual only to wash away
sins going before, comparing it to a razor that shaueth away the hair that
is grown out, but not that which is within the skin; which very opinion is
taken up by the Papists, and therefore for such as sin after baptism, they
have ordained the Sacrament of Penance for the obtaining of remission. From
whence comes that strict silence of certain Monks, especially the
Chartrians, who being saluted or spoken unto, may not answer a word by the
rules of their order, but from the Pattalorinchi^es? who as S. Augustine
witnesses, Ibid. cap. 63.
in such sort professed and observed silence, that always in company they
stopped their mouths and nosthrils with their fingers, for fear least any
voice should steal out of them: a superstition agreeing better with the
school of Pythagoras, then with the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and
which changes men into brute beasts, from whom we are distinguished by two
excellent differences, ratione, et oratione, reason, and speech. S. Augustine
recites amongst the number of Heretics, Ibid. cap. 68.
certain people that in a kind of superstition, went barefoote, the which is
imitated by the Capuchins and other Friars, as if any worship of God consisted
in covering or baring the feet. The same Father in his 48. Epistle to
Vincentius, mocketh at the Donatists, for gathering out of that text of the
Canticles, Chap. 1.7. Tell me where thou feedest at noone: that the true Church
remained only in Africa, so tying it to one place: and do not the Papists in
like manner, tie the Catholic Church, whose bounds stretches to all places
and times, to Rome? Calling it Romish Catholic: which is as much to say, as
particular universal. The Pelagians, whose heresy was the very bane of
Christianity, and the canker of our Redemption, are revived in the Papacy, and
that in such sort, that a man may see them as it were living in their persons,
and their heresies in their doctrines. For they taught, first, that Adam had
dyed by the condition of his nature, though he had not sinned: which very
opinion is avouched by Augustinus Steuchus writing upon Genesis, Aug. de
haeres. cap. 88.
without any disapprobation, or condemnation of the Church of Rome: for he
says, that infants dye though they be without sin. Secondly, they taught,
that infants are borne without original sin, and in the same estate wherein
Adam stood before his fall, and that sin is not borne with a man by nature,
but received into man by will, etc: as S. Augustine at large declares in his
books written of that subject. Aug. de peccato originis cont Pelag. et Celest
lib. 2. c. 1, 6, 13
And does not Pighius maintain the same opinions in his books of
controversies dedicated to Pope Paul the third, where he also directly
confuteth S. Augustine? his Pelagianisme in this point will be evident to him
that will Pighius cont. 1. de peccat. orig.
take the pains to read his town book: neither was this doctrine of his
condemned, but rather approved by the Council of Trent, as both their deep
silence of it, and also their own purging Indexes set forth by the authority
of the said Council, do bear sufficient witness: Indices Expo^g Hispan. f.
124. and 126.
for thereby they were authorized to raze out of their own Writers, all such
sentences as seem to oppugn this heretical Doctrine. As for example: these
out of Ferus writings upon Mat. 12.33. Christ here pronounces plainly, that
we are all by nature evil Trees. And upon John 1.12. By this speech, Christ
condemns our old nativity, and consequently all the powers of Nature that are
transfused into us by natural generation. And also those words which he adds
touching spiritual regeneration; to wit, that it proceeds neither from the
holiness, nor from humane reason, nor from the wisdom of the flesh, but
solely from the will, purpose, and election of God, with infinite other
sentences of like nature both in him, and other Authors. Besides that, Aug.
cont. Julian.
they teach, that the Virgin Mary was conceived without original sin, who
notwithstanding cannot be denied, but that she was the daughter of Adam.
Thirdly, they hold, that Concupiscence, especially that which remains after
B^ptisme, is no sin: which same opinion is maintained by the Council of
Trent. Fourthly, Council. Trident Sess. 5.
from these same Heretics: they have derived their doctrine of Free Will, to
wit, that a man has power in himself, to desire and effect his own
conversion, only by an external coadiution of Grace, which he may admit or
resist at his pleasure. Thus the Pelagians, and thus the Papists, Aug. epist.
89. and lib. de great.
as is to be seen in their writings. Lastly, the same doctrines which were
taught by the Pelagians, touching the merit of Works, Justification, and
Predestination, are retained to the full in the Church of Rome at this day.

The Eutychians hold, that the humanity of Christ was in every place: and is
not this the opinion of the Church of Rome, when they affirm, that Christ's
body may be locally in two places at one instant, to wit, in heaven and in
earth? for if it can be in two places at once, by the same reason, it may be in
infinite places. Aug. de haeres. cap. 39.
The Heretics called Angelici, adored the Angels; so also by their example do
the Papists. The Collyridians whose heresy is described and confuted by
Epiphanius, Epip. haeres. 79 Osorius concio in festo assump bea^^ Maria.
laid the foundation of that Idolatry which is committed in Popery toward
the blessed Virgin, which is so gross, that they make no difficulty to equal
her with God, Clarus Bonarseius altas Carol. Scriban. Iesuita.
and her milk with Christ's blood: They shame not to say, that she is as good
a Mother, as God is a Father; and that she and her Son redeemed the world
with one heart, as Adam and Eve lost it with one Apple. And as the Collyridians
offered Cakes unto her, so they offer Prayers, Incense, Wax candles, with many
other gifts. Lastly, the Gnosimaches, certain Heretics of whom Damascent
makes mention, condemned all manner of study and learning in Christians, and
gave the same rule to a certain order of Friars in Popery called Ignorantes,
whose profession is ignorance, as also to that doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, and that to know least, is best of
all.

4 Thus we see, that Popery is no better then a hotchpotch of Heresies, and
therefore in that regard of their falling from the pure doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles into these foul Heresies which ouerth ow the Faith, they are
guilty of this Apostasy spoken of by S. Paul. I confess, they charge us, and
our Religion, with many of the same Heresies; but how maliciously and falsely,
we may easily judge by these few examples. Bell. de notis Eccles. cap. 9.
Bellarmine and Saunders, with others affirm, that we hold the wicked Heresy
of Simon Magus, who said, That a man was saved by grace, and not by just
works: but the same Bellarmine gives him elfe the Lie in the same place: for
he says, that the Simonians referred not salvation to the grace of the true
God, apprehended by faith in Christ as we do, but to the grace of the Magitian
Simon, who vaunted himself for God: answerable to that of Irenaeus, that by
their opinion men were saved by the grace of Simon, Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 20.
and not by just works. And yet the Jesuit Feuardentius writing upon that
passage of Irenaeus, is not ashamed (so seared is their conscience) to enroll
us under this Heresy, as if the grace of God, were the grace of Simon Magus,
and there were no difference betwixt the Son of God the Redeemer of the
world, and a notorious Sorcerer and Impostor. But hereby they show, how
hateful and odious the Doctrine of the free grace of Christ, is to these
sworn servants of Antichrist. Again, Bellar. de notis Eccles. cap. 9.
how impudently do they fasten upon us the blasphemy of Marcion and Florinus,
to wit, that with them we should make God the Author of sin? But our
Doctrine shows, how much we detest this horrible blasphemy: for though with
the holy Scripture, and ancient Doctors of the Church, we acknowledge that God
orders and disposes to his own glory the sins of men; yet far be it
from us, as it is, to accuse him for the Author of sin, either directly, or
by any true consequence. For sin is to be considered two ways; either
absolutely in it self, or in relation to some other thing: Now we expressly
teach, that sin absolutely comes from the efficient cause, which is man the
true author of sin; but relatiuely, it is not simply directed by it efficient
cause, but by the providence of God, which wisely orders both evil and good
to his own ends: Aug. de genesis ad lit. imperfect cap. 5.
which is the express opinion of S. Augustine, who says; There are some
things which God both makes and orders, and others which he orders only;
he makes the just and orders them too; but sinners as they are sinners, he
makes not, but only orders. Thus Augustine with us, and with him and us
conspire all the Fathers, and most of their own Doctors, as is plentifully
proved by our writers. Vid. Morton in Apol. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Again, they accuse us of Nouatianisme, and why? Because we deny Penance to
be a Sacrament: not considering, that there is great difference betwixt this
and the opinion of the Neu^tians, Bellar. Ibid.
which denied remission of sins to those that sinned after Bapti^me, though
they repented never so much. Again, they link us with the Manichees for
denying Freewill; and yet who knows not, that the Manichees denied it to our
nature, when it was first created and pure, and we only to nature corrupted:
they took away all liberty of doing any manner of good whatsoever, and we
only in doing spiritual good. Further, they lay also Donatisme to our charge,
as if we held with them, that the Church only consisted of just men: whereas
we plainly teach, that though to the invisible Church belong only the elect,
yet in the visible (of which Donatus means) good and bad are mingled
together, as Chafe and Wheat in the Barn stoore: and so there is as much
difference betwixt their opinion and ours, as betwixt visible and invisible. To
omit all the rest of their imputations of Heresy unto us, by these few
examples we may judge, how in hatred to our Religion, they make no conscience
to slander it and us, though never so palpably falsely, according to the old
Prouerbiall precept, Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit.

5. Secondly, as the Church of Rome is thus revolted from Christ, so is it from
it self; that is, new Rome under Antichrist, from ancient Rome under the first
Bishops; and the Church that now is, from the Church that then was, and from
the faith that was then professed: so that there is no more likeness betwixt
them, then is betwixt light and darkness. Let us take a little view of this
change: and first, consider but that excellent Epistle written by S. Paul to
the Romans, wherein is comprised the whole faith of the ancient Church of
Rome. Where is there any the least mention either of the Popes primacy, or of
Indulgences, or of the invocation of Saints, or adoration of Images, or virtue
of Relics, or Monkish sanctity, or Purgatory, or Transubstantiation, or the
sacrifice of the Mass, or Auricular confession, with other such like
Doctrines, wherein the pyth and substance of their Religion consists? Is it
likely, that if these were Doctrines received into that Church, the Apostle
writing unto it, would not have so much as spoken one word of them? Nay, do
they not directly cross and contradict the Apostle by many of their Tenets? as
by their doctrine of Justification, by inherent justice contrary to Romans 1.17.
and 4.6. and invocation of Saints, contrary to Romans 10.13. and satisfactions
and merits of condignity, contrary to Romans 8.18? Insomuch, that the Rhemists
are constrained to admonish their Reader, that if any thing in Paul's Epistles
seem to sound contrary to the faith of the Catholic (that is, in their
presumption, the Roman) Church, he ought to persuade himself, that he
swarueth from the true sense of the place. As if the Apostle should speak one
thing, and mean another; or avouch one thing in word, and condemn the same in
sense: an imputation which none but blasphemy could lay upon him. So that
whether we respect the Apostles omission of their superstitions, or their
contradicting of his Doctrines, it cannot be denied, but that the face and
substance of their Religion is changed from that it was at that time. Secondly,
if we compare the Doctrine of the ancient Bishops of Rome, with the decisions
of the modern Popes, and of the Council of Trent, this will appear more
clear. For example: Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, Eleuther. epist. ad Lucium
Reg. Britan.
being consulted by Lucius the King of Britain newly converted, by what rules
or laws he should govern the Church, answered; That he had in his Kingdom
both the Testaments (vtramque paginam) and that he ought by his Council to
take his direction from them, for he was Gods Vicar in his Kingdom. But the
Pope now stiling himself Christ's only Vicar on earth, denies that any such
power appertains to secular Kings, to dispose of any matters of the Church,
and calls them intruders that take any such power upon them. It is a Decree
of Anacletus, and after him of Calixtus, Did. 96. si Imperato. Did. 1.
Episcop. and 2 peracta. Council Trident sess. 6. can. 8.
That the consecration being finished, all ought to participate of the
Sacrament, unless they w^ll be excluded from the Church assemblies. But the
Roman Church that now is, has decreed it lawful for the Priests to
communicate alone, the people standing by, and looking on; as if that which is
done by the Priest, were sufficient for them.

Julius the Bishop of Rome, De consecrat. ^ist. 2 (...) o^^re.
disallowed the dipping of the bread into the wine, as contrary to the Gospel,
where the bread and wine are distinguished and set apart from each other in
express words: but the modern Church of Rome allows the Priest to dippe the
third part of the Host in the cup, Breuiar. in Canon missae. Gelas. cont.
Eutich. and Nestor
and prays, that this mixture may be auayleable to salvation. It was the
opinion of Gelasius a Bishop of Rome, that an image and similitude of the
body and blood of Christ is celebrated in the Sacrament, and that the substance
and nature of Bread and wine does not cease; at which sentence, Cardinal
Contarenus was astonished in the conference at Ratisbone, Chem Exam. Con^^l
^rident. de transub^t.
as witnesses Chemnitius: but now, the Pope counts this an Heresy, and them
Heretics that hold the substance of the Bread and Wine to remain after
consecration, and not to be changed into the very body and blood of Christ.
Pelagius the first, ordained a married man Bishop in Syracusa, D st. 28 de
S^rac^^.
with this caution only, that he should not transfer the goods of the
Church to his wife and children: but now the Church of Rome cannot in any case
endure married Bishops, Bell. (...) Clericis, lib. 1. cap. 19.
not least the goods of the Church should be embezeled, (for this is an
ordinary practi^e with the Popes themselves, to prostitute the Church goods to
their Bastards, Nephews and Kindred;) but for the impuritie and pollution of
marriage estate, which (they say) cannot agree with the holiness of the
sacerdotall order. De consecr. ^^st. 2 comperimus.
Gelasius again forbad the superstition of receiving one part of the Sacrament
without the other, saying; That either the whole must be received of all, or
not received at all: and that a division of one and the same mystery could not
be made without great sacrilege; Council. Trident Sess. 5. Can. 2.
but the Church of Rome now is so far from condemning such division as
sacrilege, that they pretend many causes and reasons why it ought to be so;
and pronounces Anathema to all that condemn the Church of erring herein. Leo
the first speaking of Martyrs, Leo, Ep^st 81.
says; That they received, and not gave crowns: and that from their
constancy arose examples of Patience, and not gifts of Justice, and that
their deaths were peculiar to themselves, not satisfactorie for others; seeing
amongst all the sons of men, only our Lord Jesus Christ was, in whom all are
crucified, all dead, all buried, and all risen again. Bell de Indulg. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
But the modern Church of Rome, clean contrary avouch the super-abounding
passions and satisfactions of the Saints, to supply the necessity and want of
others, and to merit for them the relaxation and remission of their debt. The
same Leo professed his obedience to the Emperors Edicts, and the like did
Agatho after him, to Constantine. Leo, Epist. 16. Constantinop. syn. 6 act 4.
in Epist. Agathor.
But now the Pope challenges obedience from the Emperor, calls him his Man,
and exacteth of him an Oath of fidelity. In brief, Gregory the Great denied
all merit of works, Greg. Mag. moral, lib. 9. cap. 1 and 14.
^aying, That our justice if it were districtly judged, would be convinced as
unjust. Again he said, That the holy Communion, was called Missa, a Mass,
Idem, E^ist. lib. 6. Epist. 30. and lib. 4 Ep st. 32.36, 38.
because they that did communicate were by the Deacon sent out of doors; and
that except this were performed, the Mass was not rightly celebrated. And
lastly, he affirmed him to be the forerunner of Antichrist, that styled
himself universal Bishop. All which things are directly contradicted by the
Pope, Corc. Trident. sess. 6. cap. ^6.
and the Church of Rome: for they ascribe unto their own works and justice a
merit of condiguity, and a perfection proportionable to the Law: they celebrate
the Eucharist by the Priest alone, and yet dismiss not the people: and lastly,
the Pope styleth himself Universal Bishop, and says; Rhemens. in 2. Tim. 4.8.
That it is of the necessity of salvation for every soul to be subject unto
him. All which great change considered, Extrac. de mayor and obed. C. vnam
Sancta^.
who can but confess, that the modern Roman Church, is not the same with
that which was of old, but is revolted from it; and that if those ancient
Pastors of that Church were the true Bishops and servants of Christ, then must
they that have thus departed from their faith and holiness, needs be the true
Antichrist in solid, that is, contrary to Christ and his truth?

6. Thirdly, that we may more fully understand that this Apostacy whereof we
accuse the Papacy, is a just imputation; we must consider how those Doctrines
which are set down in holy Scripture as express marks thereof, do properly
and fitly agree unto the Church of Rome. For albeit this Antichristian revolt
does in general spread it self over the whole body of Christian Religion, yet
the Spirit of God has marked out certain particular Doctrines, which are most
notorious in that mystery of iniquity, and whereby we may judge of the rest.
These Doctrines are in number three; two whereof are expressed by Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3. to wit, the prohibition of marriage, and the abstayning from
certain meats, which he calls Doctrines of devils: And the third is
mentioned by S. John, 1 John 4.3. the denying of Jesus Christ to be come in the
flesh: all which, if they be found in the Church of Rome, it cannot be denied,
but that they are guilty of this Apostasy.

7. Touching the first, to wit, the prohibition of marriage, where can we find
this mark more apparent then in the Church of Rome, wherein by express Laws
and decrees it is prohibited and forbidden? For as Theodoret well observes,
Theodor. in 1. Tim. 4.
The Apostle blames not single life or continency, but condemns them that by
public Law constrain men to follow this course of life. And where is this
decree but in the Papacy? as the Law of Pope Calixtus inserted into the
Decretalles does evidently declare. So that they are not content with
Montanus, Did. 26. cat. presbyter^^.
to condemn second marriages, but they also bar their Clergy by a
constrained Vow, from the first also. Which Decree of theirs, is both contrary
to the Scripture, and to the continued practice of the Church, till Antichrist
began to reign therein. For the Scripture commends marriage as Gods
ordinance, and as an holy and undefiled estate, and permits it equal to all
men, so that they marry in the Lord. And for examples, were Abraham, who is
called the friend of God, and father of the faithful: Moses then whom no man
was more faithful in Gods house, Esaias the miracle of Prophets, Ezekiell, the
High Priest a type of Christ, Zachary and Elizabeth, just persons before God,
Peter, Paul, Phillip, with thousands more of godly Bishops and Priests, Be
(...) de Cler. lib. 1 cap. 9. D^cres. Greg. de Cler. conuig cap. quod ad te.
Campian rat. 4
that suffered martyrdom for Christ, were they, I say, less holy, because
they were married, or more unfit for sacred Functions? This is to condemn the
generation of the just, and to give the flat lie unto the holy Ghost: a fit
practice for Antichrist and his servants, who call it a sacrilege, an
impuritie, and an abominable act, and incompatible with holy orders. But how
contrary do they speak and decree to the ancient Church? The great Council
of Nice consented with Paphnutius, that the familiarity betwixt a Priest and
his own wife was chastity, Socrat. histor. lib. 2. cap. 8. Council. Gangrens.
can. 4. Chrysostom. in tot. hom. 2.
as Socrates reports: and the Council of Gangrene struck him with Anathema
that held that a married Priest ought not to offer. S. Chrysostom thought
marriage so honorable an estate, that a man with it might ascend to the sacred
Episcopal Chair. And Ignatius before all these affirms, Ignat. epist. ad
Philadelph.
That if any m n call the lawful society of man and wise, corruption and
pollution, he has the Apostate Dracon for his companion. But that which me
thinks is most strange of all is this, that the Council of Trent speaking of
the Mass, says; That it is so pure a sacrifice, that no unworthiness nor
wickedness of the offerers can defile it; and therefore, let a Priest be
never so wicked a Fornicator, an incestuous person, a Sodomite, a perjured
wretch, yet none of these foul crimes do make him unfit to serve at the
Altar, or any ways impair the virtue of the Sacrifice: only marriage
ordained of God makes them unfit, and the service unprofitable: and so
sacerdotall purity shall not be polluted by the works of the devil, but shall
be by the ordinance of God. Can any spirit but Antichrists breath out this
impiety? Peccata interdixit Deus, non matrimonia (says Saluianus:) that is,
God has forbidden sins, not marriages: but these men allow that which God
forbids, sins; and forbid that which God allows, marriage. I know their
scape-hole here is, that they do not condemn marriage simply as evil, which
Tatian, Marcion, and Manichee did; and which is it that the Apostle speaks
against, but only respectively unto holy Orders. To which I answer five
things: First, that it is impiety to forbid marriage in any sort whatsoever,
whether absolutely, or in some respect, seeing that it depends not upon any
ordinance of man, but is the gift and vocation of God. Secondly, that S. Paul
speaks generally against those that prohibit marriage without any such
distinction: and therefore to restrain his speech, is to wrest the Scripture,
and to limit the sense thereof to our own understanding, which is an
intolerable injury to the Spirit of God himself, especially there being no
other place of Scripture, whereby that distinction may be justified. Thirdly,
that their distinction being admitted, yet they are not thereby cleared from
this imputation: for with those forenamed Heretics, they absolutely condemn
marriage as an impure and unclean thing. Bellar. de Clericis, lib. 1. c. 19
Bellarmine delivers this Doctrine in direct words, when he says, That in
the conjugal act there is mixed a certain impurity and pollution, yea in the
very Saints themselves: and therefore Pope Siricius, and after him Pope
Innocent, to prove the unlawfulness of Priests marriages allege these texts
of Scripture. Did. ^2. cap. propos^^^sti.
Titus 1.15. To them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but
even their mind and conscience is defiled. And again, that they that are in
the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8. So that though they prohibit marriage
only to some sort of people, to wit, the Clergy; yet their reason why they do
so, is, because it is in it self an unclean act. Fourthly, the Manichees did
not condemn marriage in all, but only in those whom they called their elect;
as the Papists also do only to their Priests. Lastly, the horrible fruits not
only of Adulteries and Fornications, but also of Sodomiticall abominations and
murders that have sprung from this root of Celebacy (which he that desires
to take notice of, may read elsewhere at large discovered) do manifestly
euince, that it is indeed a Doctrine of devils, as S. Paul calls it, and an
evident mark of the Apostacy of the Church of Rome from the truth.

8 The second mark of this Apostacy, is, the prohibition of meats, which God
has created to be received with Thanksgiving: which mark is most express
and notorious in the Church of Rome. For it has forbidden by Law, that which
God by Law ordained; to wit, the free use of the creatures, restraining it by
certain times and differences at their pleasure, and forbidding some at all
times, and all at some times, to abstain from some kind of meats. Their
shift to avoid this mark, is; That they do not command abstinence from meats
as if they were unclean of their own nature, which was the opinion of the
Marcionites, Eucratites, and Manichees, but only in respect of religion and
devotion, which by such abstinence is much furthered and increased. To which I
answer, that though they never so much abhor the Heresy of these forenamed
Heretics; yet they fall into that of Montanus and Eustathius, who held the
same opinion of Fasting, that themselves now do; and were therefore condemned
by the whole Church, Eus. hist. lib. 5. cap. 16.
as Eusebius witnesses. For Popish Fastes are prescribed by public authority
and law, and so they are no more arbitrarie, but necessary. And Montanus Fasts
are of the same nature, for he was the first that prescribed laws of Fasting,
for which he was condemned of the ancient Church, as witness both Eusebius,
Idem, lib. 5. cap. 15.
Socrates, S. Augustine, Theodoret, with diverse others. Socrates his words are
these, Socrat. hist. lib. 6. cap. 21.
after he had largely discoursed of the varieties of the Lent fast in several
Churches, he thus concludes: It is manifest that the Apostles permitted free
liberty of Fasting to every man's mind and choice, that every man might do
that which is good, without impulsion by fear or necessity. But S. Augustine
is more plain, when he says, Aug. epist. 86. and cont Faustum. Theodor. hist.
sanct. patrum cap. 3.
That he found in Scripture that we ought to Fast, but that it was defined by
no precept of the Lord or his Apostles, what days we ought, and what we ought
not to Fast. Secondly, the Papists auow, that meats of themselves are not
unclean: the same did the Montanists, Tertul. de ieiunio. Cester Euchir. cap.
16. Tertul. de ieiunio, cap. 15. Bellar. de bon oper. in part. lib. 2. cap. 8.
as may appear out of Tertullian Montanizing in his book of Fasting. Thirdly,
the Church of Rome does not absolutely prohibit any meat, but only suspendeth
the use of some for a time. So likewise says Tertullian in the name of all the
Montanists: We abstain from meats, we do not reject them, but differ them.
Fourthly, the Church of Rome prescribes fasting, and the choice of meats, as a
service of God, and a part of his worship. So also said Montanus: Our Fastings
are services of God, and ought to be performed to God alone. Lastly, the
Papists teach, that by their Fastings they appease God, satisfy for their
sins, obtain relief in distresses, and merit heaven: And does not Montanus
his paraclete say the same? when he affirms, That Fasting can do much with
God, and that God is satisfied by it, and original sin abolished, and our
salvation re-kindled, which is extinguished by fullness, yea, that the
prerogative of it is so great, that it makes God cohabite with man, as like
with like. By all which, it is easy to conclude, that the Romish Fasts are
derived from Montanus, and that he laid the foundation, and these have reared
up the building of that superstition. And therefore seeing the ancient Church
condemned the error of Montanus in this point, and the Montanists defended it
by the same argument which the Papists now do; their opinion and practice being
all one in effect, I see not how they can clear themselves from the same
censure and guilt. Nay, I peremptorily affirm, that they far exceed the
Montanistes in this superstition, and that in two respects. First, because
Montanus though he prescribed laws of Fasting, yet the penalty of them was
only this; that they accounted the violaters of those laws not Heretics and
Apostates from the Faith, but only less holy, and Psychici, that is, carnal
men: whereas amongst the Papists, he is esteemed unclean and an Heretic, and
worse then any Jew, that eats flesh on a Fasting day; wherein, they shake
hands with Manichees. Secondly, the Montanists undertook this exercise of
Fasting, Aug. con. Faust Manich. lib. 30. cap. 5.
edomandi corporis causa, for the taming of fleshly lusts, as S. Augustine
confesses; and therefore they abstained not only from flesh, but from Wine,
Fruits, many kinds of Fish, and all delightful meats, that might any way
pamper or please the body: but the Popish Fasts permit all delicate viands and
iunkets, that either Sea or Land can afford, flesh only excepted, as infected
with an unclean spirit. They glut themselves with the most exquisite and rich
Wines, with the most rare and delicate Fishes of all sorts, with sawces of
rarest Cookery, with Fruits, Spices, Preserues, Confections, and Broaths, as
excellent as the Art of the Apothecary, or of the Kitchen, can afford. So that
one did not without cause merrily say, That he had rather be a guest at their
fasts, then at the most plentiful feasts of other men. And thus (forsooth)
they seek to tame their flesh by their Fasting, and to quench the lusts
thereof by such prouocations as Nature cannot afford better and stronger:
insomuch, that Plutarch calls Gluttons by the name of Fish-eaters. Plutarch
Symposiac. lib. 4. q. 4.
And thus is Montanus left behind the Papists, as a Nouice in comparison of
themselves, who in this last point rather resemble the damned Manichees then
the Montanists, as we may read at large in S. Augustine, Aug. de morib. Manich.
lib. 2. cap. 13.
in his book concerning the manners of those Heretics. And so I leave the
Church of Rome branded also with this second mark of the Apostasy.

9. The third mark of this revolt is out of S. John's Epistle, chap. 4.3. and
that is, to deny Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh; which though it has
been literally verified in diverse Popes that were rank Atheists, and
mocke-Gods, as in Pope Leo by name, who called the Gospel of Jesus Christ, a
Fable, to Cardinal Bembus; and in a number of their Prelates and Priests,
which have ordinarily belched out the like Blasphemies: As of one for example,
that having preached of the passion of Christ, so passionately, that he made
his Auditors to weep; presently comforted them with this exhortation: Oh weep
not, for peradventure this is not true. Yet let that be granted unto them which
they challenge, to wit, that in word they do confess Jesus Christ to be come
in the flesh; and then what is that to the clearing of them from this mark?
For, as S. Augustine notes, Aug. tract. 6. in epist. Iohannis.
all the grand Heretics that ever were in the Church, would confess as much;
and so does Mahomet in his Alcharon, whom diverse Doctrines of the Church of
Rome design for the great Antichrist: and yet who knows not, but that by
consequence and in effect they deny him, albeit in word they confess him? So
likewise does the Church of Rome by consequent, deny the coming of Jesus
Christ in the flesh, because they deny the virtue and efficacy of his coming,
and the end for which he came: for to take away the end of a thing, is to take
away the thing it self, and to make it idle and vain, which is all one as if
it were not. Thus the Apostle reasons when he says, Gal. 2.21. If
righteousness be by the Law, Christ is dead in vain, that is, by consequent,
not dead at all, for he could not dye in vain. And Gal. 5.4. Christ is made of
none effect in regard of you that will be justified by the Law. How of none
effect? but because the end for which he came, is annihilated. Now, what is the
end of the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh, but to be Savior
of the world, as the name Jesus imports, and to be the King, Priest, and
Prophet of the Church, as is intimated by the name Christ, which is Nomen
officij, a name importing his office? Now both these ends are denied in the
Papacy, and therefore they must needs be guilty of denying Christ to be come in
the flesh.

10. Touching the first end, which is to be the Savior of the world; do they
not destroy that, when they make so many Saviors besides Christ, as the Virgin
Mary, and the Saints, to whom in express words they ascribe this title of
Savior, as is to be seen in many of their prayers unto them found in their
Breuiaries? and not only so, but also make themselves half Saviors of
themselves, by mixing their own merits with the merits of Christ, and their
own satisfactions with his, making both together the joint cause of our
salvation, which is the precise doctrine of the Church of Rome, as their books
witness: as also when they teach, that we are justified by our own inherent
righteousness, wrought in us partly by Gods grace, and partly by our own free
will, which they say, is able either to admit or exclude the grace of God
coming to convert us. Is not this to deny Christ to be Jesus? For if he be not
a Jesus alone, he is no Jesus at all. And for the second end, they deny him
also to be Christ: For they make the Pope the head of the Church, and attribute
unto him an infinite and an unlimited power to rule over men's consciences, to
prescribe Laws to the Church, to dispense with the Law of God, to be free from
error, and to do what he list: And thus they rob Christ of his Kingly Office,
and give it to the Pope. And for his Priesthood, do they not also take that
from him, by ordaining a new Priesthood of Popish shauelings, that have power
to make their Maker, and to offer him up unto God, and a new sacrifice in the
Mass for the remission of sins, both of the quick and the dead, and that
without shedding of blood, without which the Scripture says plainly, that
there is no remission? And do they not intrude the Saints into his Office of
Mediation, and every particular man into his Office of Satisfaction; and dead
creatures, as holy Water, holy Lambs, holy Beads, etc. into his Office of
purification of sins? And lastly, touching his Prophetical Office, that they
also deprive him of, by adding to the holy Scripture their own traditions,
which they make of equal dignity and authority with the word of God, by
teaching the Scripture to be an imperfect rule of it self, and of no credit
without the authority of the Church, yea no better then a nose of wax, or a
rule of lead; by detracting from the Scripture some parts thereof, and
appropriating to the Pope the only key of interpretation. Thus they deny the
ends why Christ came in the flesh, and consequently deny him to be come.

11. But that they may be left without excuse, will you see the height of their
impiety in this kind? It is in the blasphemous and abominable questions which
their Schoolmen make about Christ's incarnation. Bonauent. in 3. Sent. did. 4.
Bonauenture moves this question, Whether the Virgin Mary merited to conceive
Christ in her womb, or whether her conception was only the gift of divine
Grace? and answers thereunto, that she merited by congruity, in regard of
her super-excellent humility, purity, and goodness, to be the mother of
Christ before his Incarnation; but after her Annunciation, that she merited by
condignity, to be ouer-shadowed and engrossed by the virtue of the holy Ghost.
I omit the unchaste discourses that they make of her conception, least in
reporting them I should both dishonor my Savior, and give just offense to
Christian ears.

Another of the same stamp and rank, thus discourses: Baralet. ser. s^l.
229. col. 4.
The Fathers (says he) of the first Age, to wit, Adam, Enoch, Noah, etc.
longing for the coming of Christ in the Flesh, earnestly desired of God the
accomplishment of his promise; and when they could not obtain it by their own
prayers, they sent unto him their Ambassadors the Prophets, as Moses, David,
Esaias, with the rest, who all requested this favor at Gods hand; but these
being also denied, they then sent their wives with supplication for their
suite, as Madame Eve, Madame Sarah, Madame Rebecca, Madame Judith, Madame
Ester, which all received their answer with reproach; one, of causing her
husband to sin, another of infidelity, the third of partiality to her
children, the fourth of murder, and the fifth of vanity; and therefore were
rejected as unworthy to obtain their suite. At last, was sent a young maid of
fourteen years old, who full of humility and shame fastness, kneeled down
and said: Oh that my beloved would come into this Garden, and eat of the
fruit thereof: [This Garden was the Virgins womb:] now the Son of God
hearing these words, said unto his Father; My Father, I have loved this Maid
from my youth, and have sought means to have her my spouse. Whereat God the
Father presently called the Angel Gabriel, and sent him to Nazareth unto Mary,
with Letters of credit, and a message from the Father, that he had chosen her
to be his Wife; and from the Son, that he had chosen her to be his Mother,
and from the holy Ghost, that he had chosen her to be his habitation; and with
these letters and messages, Gabriel descends unto her, and says as it is in
the Gospel, Aue Maria, etc. Now Mary hearing these words of the Angel, was
troubled, and calling her three maids that she had attending upon her, to wit,
Prudence, Virginity, and Humility, asked their opinions what she should do; to
whom Prudence answered, that she must not be light of belief; and Virginity,
that she must know of the Angel, whether this must be effected by the seed of
a man: and Humility said, that it might be a delusion, seeing that no woman
that ever lived, was worthy of such a grace. Then the Angel said, Fear not
Mary, for thou have found favor with God, neither shall thou fear the carnal
knowledge of man, for the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall ouershadow thee, and therefore that holy thing that shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Then Mary was resolved and
said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word:
thus he. And what is this, I pray you, but to make a jest of the greatest
mystery of our redemption, to wit, Christ's Incarnation, and to turn it into a
mere fable and interlude? With the like profaneness they discourse upon his
passion, resurrection, and sending of the holy Ghost. For concerning his
passion, they say, that rather then Christ should not have been crucified, the
Virgin Mary would have crucified him with her own hands so great was her
desire of the salvation of mankind. And touching his resurrection, they tell us
this pretty tale: That there was a strife in heaven who should go to declare
unto his mother his resurrection: Adam said, that it belonged unto him, because
as he was the cause of evil to the world, so he might be the messenger of
their redemption: but Christ answered, nay, it may be thou will be stayed by
the way with eating Figs: Abel said that it pertained to him; but Christ said,
nay, for Cain may meet thee by the way and kill thee: then Noah presented
himself, but Christ said, nay, thou may not, for thou love wine too well,
and so may forget my message. John Baptist said, I will go, but Christ said
nay, for thy garment is but of hair: the thief of the cross said, Let me
have this office, but Christ said, no in no case, for thy legs be broke, and
thou may not travail so long a journey. At last an Angel was sent who began
to sing, Regina cali laetare, Alleluya, resurrexit sicut dixit, Alleluya. The
like or more profane tal, they have devised touching the mission of the holy
Ghost, which is this; That the Apostles came to the Virgin Mary, and complained
that Jesus Christ her Son had not kept promise in sending the holy Spirit: to
whom the Virgin answered, that this could not be performed before the fiftith
day after his resurrection, as on the fiftith day after the deliverance of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, the Lord appeared in Mount Horeb in flaming
fire: then there went to prayer Peter, with others on the one side: Lazarus
with the 72. Desciples on another, Mary Magdalen with other women on a third,
and the Virgin Mary in the midst: whereupon there grew a dissension in heaven
betwixt God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The Son said, O
Father, I promised to send to my Apostles the Comforter, and now the time is
come to fulfill my promise: the Father answered, I am content, tell the holy
Ghost: but the holy Ghost replied, tell me how they handled thee when thou wast
among them? Then the Son showed him his side, hands, and feet, pierced and
wounded, saying; this have I suffered for the love of mankind; then said the
holy Ghost, alas for me, but I will go unto them in such a shape, that they
shall not dare to touch me, and immediately he descended with a great sound
from heaven, like the rushing of a mighty wind in the similitude of fiery
tongues. All these profane fables are found in Barlet, a famous preacher of
theirs, whose books being authorized by the Church of Rome, and not any ways
purged or condemned, must needs be imputed unto it, as a doctrine received and
approved.

12 But to return to the point of Christ's coming in the flesh. Lombard lib. 3
Did. 12.
The master of Sentences, their famous Doctor, propounds this question,
whether Christ might not have taken humane nature in the feminine sex: and
answers, that some were of opinion, that he might have done it in either sex
if he had pleased, but that it was more honorable and fit that it should be in
the masculine sex. Bonauent. in 3. Sentent Did. 12.
Bonauenture goes a degree further, and asks whether it were fit for Christ
to take flesh from a man and woman together, or from a woman alone: he
answers, that doubtless he might have taken flesh from man and woman
together, or from man alone: which is such a blasphemy as over throws all the
prophecies of Christ's Incarnation, and indeed his Incarnation it self, in
denying an absolute necessity of being borne of a Virgin. But above all in
impiety, is that execrable question of the same Author in the same place, and
of other Schoolmen his followers, to wit; whether it was possible that the man
Christ could sin, and so not be God: For if he could sin (say they) he
might also be damned; and if he might be damned he might also not be God. To
this they answer, that the humane soul of Christ is to be considered, either
as united to the Word, or as separated and not united: Now it is without
question (say they) that this same soul if it were not united might sin,
which being united could not sin: As if (profane wretches as they are) the
soul of our Lord Jesus Christ, could be not united in any consideration
whatsoever, or that it is not blasphemy to have such a thought: nay, the same
Author concludes peremptorily, that if we regard the power of free will in
Christ in this sense, as the power by which a man sins, Christ might have
sinned, and so might be damned, and not be God. O blasphemies intolerable! my
heart quaketh to think of them, and my hand and pen to write them: neither
would I in reverence to my Savior Christ dare to mention them, were it not to
discover the abominations of the Whore of Babylon, and to show that howsoever
in word they confess Christ, yet in effect and truth they deny him, by calling
the efficacy of his coming into doubt by such profane questions.

13. To conclude, he that divides Christ, does also deny him, and is as S.
John says, the spirit of Antichrist, for so their vulgar translation,
according also to S. Augustine, reads that Text. 1. John. 4.3. Omnis spiritus
qui soluit Iesum, ex Deo non est, et hic est Antichristus: out of which ground
of their own, I conclude that the Papists dividing Christ, do also thereby in
effect deny him to be come in the flesh. Bellar. de. Christo. lib. 5. c. 1. et.
3. et sequent.
For they teach, that Christ performed the office of the mediatorship in his
humane nature alone, without any help or occurrence of his divinity: which is
both pure Nestorianisme, in making Christ's humanity a person alone, for actions
are of a person, and also against common reason because Christ as he was
Mediator, produced operations that were not only humane, but also divine; as
when he raised the dead, discovered men's thoughts, conquered the devil, and
rose again from death, all which were wrought by his divine power: now it is
impossible that a mere humane nature should be the occasion of divine
operations. Add hereunto, that it is the common opinion of all their Doctors,
that Christ from the very first moment of his conception, was a Comprehender,
that is, in the state of that blessedness which is future to us after this
life: but by their own doctrine, a Comprehender is not in the state of
meriting, and so it will follow, that Christ by his coming in the flesh has
merited nothing, and consequently that his coming was in vain, and so indeed
as if it were not. And thus every way the Church of Rome stands guilty of the
Apostasy foretold by S. Paul, whether we respect their falling from Christ into
heresy: or from their own ancient Church and religion; or the three
Apostaticall doctrines which they are fallen into, which are left as brands
thereof.

CHAP. 8. Touching the title of the Vicar of Christ.
1. THe title of Christ's Vicar upon earth, agrees well unto the name and
nature of Antichrist: for the name Antichrist, signifies not only an
opposite, but also a substitute unto Christ, as has been declared before: to
signify that Antichrist should be in name and pretense a friend unto Christ,
but indeed an enemy, and therefore an hypocrite, having horns like a Lamb,
but speaking like the Dragon. And it must needs be so: for first, where mention
is made in holy Scripture of the Antichristian Apostasy, there is also
remembered the hypocrisy of the Apostates, as 1. Tim. 4.1.2. where the Authors
of the Apostasy are said to speak lies through hypocrisy: So 2. Tim. 3.5. and
2. Pet. 2.1.2.3. and S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.7. calls Antichristianisme not
only an Apostasy, but also a mystery of iniquity: which he would never have
done, if Antichrist should have been a professed enemy unto Christ. Secondly, to
oppugn Christ by open force, and to seek to root out the Christian name, is
directly contrary to all those conditions whereby Antichrist is described by
the holy Ghost: as that he should be a teacher of lies through hypocrisy, and
that he should sit in the Temple of God, that is, the Church, that his impiety
is mystical, that is, palliated with the name of piety, as their own gloss
speaks on 2 Thessalonians. 2. and that the cup wherewith the Whore of Babylon does
make drunk the inhabitants of the earth, is of gold, fair and specious to
sight, and the liquor in it wine, which is pleasant to taste; but under both,
lies and is mixed most deadly poison: all which does plainly show that
Antichrist cannot be an open Adversary. And lastly, seeing his very drift and
aim is, to seduce and deceive the world, for which cause he is said to come
with the efficacy of deceit; it is not likely that he should be so simple as
to profess himself Christ's enemy in plain words, for who would not then
beware of him? So that as it is usual with a Traitor to pretend the name and
authority of the King to draw the subjects to his part: so does Antichrist,
under pretense of Christ's name and authority, draw the world into manifest
rebellion against Christ. Now the Pope does manifestly declare himself to be
Antichrist, as by other marks and qualities, so especially by this, in that he
assumeth to himself the title of the Vicar of Christ, and under that color
secretly opposes Christ and his Church. For, I pray you, what means this
title but one of these two things, to wit, either that Christ has discharged
himself of his office, and committed it to another; or that he has need of a
Vicar to supply his room, himself being insufficient thereunto? And if they
say that it is neither through negligence, nor impotency, but rather as a
means which he has ordained by his providence to govern his Church on earth:
I would then ask them, where is this commission, and when was this authority
given unto him? Sure it cannot be, being a matter of so great a moment, but it
must be expressed in wortis: especially seeing the Spirit of God is the great
and general Vicar of Christ on earth, and the Ministers are appointed as the
means to bring men to heaven, and Kings and Princes are in their dominions his
Vicegerents and Lieutenants, for the outward government of the Church. And
indeed if we consider a little nearly the Offices of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
wit, his Prophecy, Priesthood, and Regality, we shall find, that this usurping
Vicar has ravished them all into his hands, and deprived Christ thereof, as
shall appear in the discourse following.

2. The Prophetical Office of Christ, is taken from him by the Pope many
ways, especially by these doctrines that follow: Namely, that the holy
Scripture is insufficient and imperfect of it self, and that this imperfection
must be supplied by the help of traditions: for the Pope scorning to be
enclosed within the bands of holy Scripture, has taken unto himself authority
to add thereunto what he pleases, to cut off what he lifts, to change it
into what fashion he will, and to interpret it at his pleasure. In such sort,
that whatsoever he either forbids, Benedict de Benedict. praeat an Antith.
ont. Whitak.
or commands, he cannot be accused of error, or contradiction to the holy
Scripture; seeing he has the interpretation and exposition thereof in his own
breast, as being a man divinely chosen, to discern truth from falsehood, to
decide the controversies of the Church, to resolve doubtful questions, to
determine articles not determined, and to ordain a Symbol of the faith, as
speaks one of their own side. Now what do all these things else import, but
a derogation from Christ's prophetical Office, Mat. 23.^. John. 17.8. Mat. 17.5.
who is our only Master and Doctor, who has given unto us the word, which
the Father gave unto him, and concerning whom, the Father speaks from heaven,
Hear him. But their opposition unto this Office of Christ, is more gross, in
that they prefer their vulgar edition of the Bible, before the Hebrew and the
Greek, which was the immediate dialects of the holy Ghost. For the Council of
Trent ordained, Council. Trident Sess. 4.
that this ancient Latin version, should be held Authentical in all public
Lectures, Disputations, Sermons, and Expositions, and that none should dare to
reject it upon any pretense whatsoever. Praefat. Sixti. 5. prafix biblis suis.
And yet Pope Sixtus the fifth, causing it to be reimprinted in the Vaticane,
and corrected, enforces it upon the Church as the only Authentical
translation ordained by the Council: as if a thing corrected might be the same
as it was before the correction: Yea Bellarmine with the rest of the crew,
accuse the Greek and Hebrew of many corruptions, which they say are not found
in the vulgar Latin: whereas notwithstanding, for one corruption which they
would feign fasten upon them, there are to be found twenty in this, and that by
confession of many learned of their own side. And that which is worse, Lyndan
de optim^gen. Iuterpret. lib. 3.
so impudent is one of their Bishops, that setting forth the Bible in diverse
languages he places the vulgar Latin, betwixt the Hebrew and the Greek, As
Christ betwixt two thieves, as blasphemously he speaks. Now it is to be
noted, that notwithstanding the decree of the Council, and the ordinance of
Pope Sixtus; yet Clement the ninth in the year 1592. in the first of his
Pontificy, caused the same to be reprinted again in the Vaticane after
another edition, giving unto it the same authority, which Sixtus had done unto
his: where we may behold a Pope opposed to a Pope, a Pope that cannot err, to
a Pope that cannot err: and yet they contradict and enterferre with each other
after a strange manner: for that which Sixtus affirms, Clement denies; that
which Clement affirms, Sixtus denies; the one breaths hot, the other cold;
the one the truth, the other falsehood; the one diminishes, the other
augmenteth; and in a word, display to the world a spectacle of gross and
ridiculous contradictions of Roman Popes. A full view whereof, he that is
desirous to take, let him read an entire book of our Countryman Doctor James,
about this subject. Now judge, Bellum papale. Tho. James.
what assurance a faithful preacher or expositor of the word of God can have,
by resting himself upon this version so Authentical by the Council of Trent,
considering the discordance that is in the editions of these two Popes. For if
the one could judge that the other had erred in many places, why might he not
also err in many others unobserved? And if this might happen to one Pope, why
may it not be suspected of another? If to Sixtus, why not to Clement? If (as
they say) Pope Sixtus wrought his work after dinner, who can assure us that
Pope Clement might not also slumber before dinner? But to pass from this, and
omit many other doctrines of theirs, which are flat opposite to the
Prophetical Office of Christ; I conclude with a most audacious and
presumptuous practice tending to the same, and namely, a peremptory decree,
that all the ordinances of the Apostolic (that is Roman) Sea, must be
received as if they were confirmed by the divine voice of S. Peter himself,
Did. 19. cap. sic omnes.
and that what Kings, or Bishops, or Potentates soever, shall violate or suffer
to be violated, the decrees of the Roman Bishops, shall incur the execreable
Anathema, as a preuaricator of the Catholic faith. And yet the Pope himself
must not be subject to these thrice sacred Canons, as Gratian most
philosophically discovers. Causa. 25. q. 2. c^deo perm.
For as Christ (says he) who was the Lawgiver, accomplished the same in his
flesh, being Circumcised the eight day, and presented in the Temple the
fortieth with Sacrifices according to the prescript of the Law; yet afterward
to show that he was the Lord of the Law, he healed a Leper by his touch,
contrary to the letter of the Law. So the Bishops of the Sovereign seat, give
reverence to the Canons, made either by themselves, or by others under their
authority, and in humility observe them for example sake unto others: yet
nevertheless sometimes, either by commanding, or decreeing, abrogating, or
altering, they show themselves, Lords of the Decrees and Canons: thus he. By
which we may see, how the Pope usurps the very authority and power of Christ
himself, to wit, not to be subject to his own Laws, but to be the only
absolute Prophet, Master, and Teacher of the world: to teach all, and not to be
taught of any; to give Laws to all, and not to take Laws from any; to judge
all, and not to be judged of any; and lastly, not to err, as all others may
do besides himself.

3. Touching his Kingly Office, do they not in like manner ravish that from
him, when they assume to themselves those very titles, and that same power
which appertains unto Christ? It is a Decree of a Council held at Rome under
Gregory the seventh, in the year 1057. That there is but one name in the
world, to wit, of the Pope, and that this name ought only to be named in the
Churches. What is this but to rob Christ of that honor which the Scripture
ascribes and appropriateth only to his name, Acts. 4.12? Again, the Pope
intitleth himself the Head and Husband of the Church, both which are the
proper titles of our Savior Christ by their own confession: what then? will
they make the Church a monster with two heads, and an adulteress with two
husbands? For Christ must be one head and husband and the Pope will be another,
and so there must be two of each: which howsoever it may be borne withal in
the title [Head,] yet it cannot be in endured the title [Husband:] for
jealousy will not suffer an husband to admit of a Vicar or substitute in his
office of an husband; it cannot abide that the wives love should be wooed, much
more drawn away by another: and therefore it is most absurd to dream of a
ministerial husband, as they do of a ministerial head. The Pope can in no
sense be the husband of the Church, but in that he wooeth the Church, which is
Christ's spouse, from her own husband to himself, must needs be an Adulterer
and not a husband. As for the title [Head,] I confess that one may be said to
have diverse heads in different respects, but not of the same order and kind:
for beside the the natural head which every man has, he has also a
spiritual head which is God, and a politic head which is the sovereign
Magistrate: but there is nothing in the world that can have two heads of the
same respect and rank, but is a monster; and so is the Church, if it have both
Christ and the Pope: for their headship is of one and the same kind, to wit,
spiritual as cannot be denied. I know their evasion, which is, that Christ is
the principal head of the Church, and the Pope only the ministerial: but
this is an idle and vain distinction: for besides that, it has no foundation
in holy Scripture, I demand, in what respect is the Pope the ministerial head?
Sure it must needs be either in respect of Christ, or of the Church: but in
respect of the Church it cannot be, because to be the ministerial head in
respect of the Church, is to serve the Church, now to serve and yet to be the
head, are things so opposite, that they can no more agree together, then in the
body to be a member, and to be the head: for the prerogative of a head is not
to serve and minister, but to command and govern: so that if the Pope be the
head of the Church, he cannot be the minister of the Church, and if he be the
minister, he cannot be the head. Neither can he be so called in respect of
Christ, because then it would follow, that holding the room and place of
Christ, he should be a head of the same kind and order, and consequently the
Church should have two heads, and so be a monster. As therefore he that should
challenge himself to be a ministerial husband to another man's wife, is no
better then an Adulterer: so the Pope challenging to be the ministerial head
of the Church, is no better then an usurper. And that we may be fully resolved
in this point, observe lastly how they attribute to the Pope, and the Pope to
himself, all that ever appertains to the Kingdom of Christ. Thus John the
22. says in his Extrauagant, Extrau. n^ sede vacant, c Si fratrem.
that God had committed unto him the rights both of the Celestial and
Terrestrial Empire. Antonius Puccius in his Oration which he made at the ninth
Session of the Council of Laterane, Council. Lateran. sess 9.
says; that that prophecy in the 72. Psalm, was fulfilled in Pope Leo the
tenth, All the Kings of the earth shall worship him, and all Nations shall
serve him; and a little after, the same flatterer cries thus out, All
Christian Princes know, that to thee alone is given by the Lord, all power both
in heaven and earth. And in the tenth Session of the same Council, an
Archbishop thus secondeth him: Take therefore unto thee the two edged sword,
sharpened by the power of God, and bid, command, enjoin, and bind Kings with
the cords of the great Kings greatness, and Nobles with the iron fetters of
censures, for to thee is given all power, etc. And in the Oration he says,
Ibid. sess. 10.
that All power above all powers as well of heaven, Sess. 6.
as of earth, is given to thee. So that it is no marvel that if in another
Oration of the same Council of Laterane, the forenamed Pope Leo the tenth is
called, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, the savior and
deliverer. So we read in the books of the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome,
Lib. 1. Ceremon. sect. 7.
that the sword which the Pope halloweth upon the night of Christ's nativity,
denotes the sovereign power of the Papacy, according as it is written, All
power is given unto me in heaven and earth, and elsewhere; and he shall reign
from Sea to Sea, and from the flood to the ends of the earth. But most
notorious is that adulatory Encomium of a certain Bishop to Pope Paul the
second, where he thus mounteth: What may we think of the Sovereign Bishop
who holds the place of the true God on earth, Roderick. Zomorens Episan
specul. vitae human lib. 2. cap. 1.
and is elevated to the fullness of state, to the throne Apostolic, and to the
top of all dignities? From whom as from a spring, issue all rivers, as branches
from a tree: who is not only established for humane principality but also for
divine; not only to command over mortal men, but also over the Angels; and to
judge not only the living, but even the dead; and not only upon earth, but
also in heaven, and to preside not only over Christians, but also over
Infidels; and to make short, who is ordained of God in his own place, dignity,
jurisdiction, and universal power and principality over the world. And to this
purpose he applies many texts of holy Scriptures, as spoken of him, which
belong only unto God: and in conclusion, he prefers him to stammering Moses
(as impudently he calls him) and to Aaron, yea to Jesus Christ himself. And
yet this man for all his blasphemies was in great credit with the Pope, and his
book of great authority in the Church of Rome. In fine, Bell de Romans Pon^,
lib. 4. cap. 15. and 16.
they attribute unto him a power to make new Laws that bind men's consciences
as well as the Laws of God, and of Christ. So that we may justly conclude,
that the Pope pulls Christ from his Royal throne to mount himself
thereinto: for if he be the only one to be named in the Church, where is then
the name of Jesus Christ? If he be the Churches Bridegroom, how is Christ the
same? If he be the head of the Church, how is Christ the head? If he have all
the power in heaven and earth, has Christ any left for him? If he be the judge
of the quick and the dead, what shall Christ do? And if he can make Laws to
bind our consciences, what need have we of the Laws of Jesus Christ? And thus
the Papal Monarchy is erected in the Church to overthrow the Monarchy of
Christ.

4. The Priesthood of Christ remains, which is after the order of
Melchizedek, and has two parts, to wit, the expiation of our sins by an
offering of himself on the Cross once for ever, whereby he satisfied the
divine justice for the sins of all the Elect: and his Intercession, whereby
we being delivered from our sins by his satisfaction, are made partakers of
eternal salvation: which two acts as they are inseparably joined together,
and have mutual dependancy upon each other; so they are uncommunicable to any
Creature, and inimitable by any. Howbeit this sacred Office with both the parts
thereof is taken from Christ in the Papacy, and imparted to other things: As
first, when they devise another Priesthood, Altar, and Sacrifice, different
from those of Jesus Christ, making the world believe, that Christ is offered
every day, and in all places, in the Mass, for obtaining of remission of
sins, for the living and the dead, contrary to the express Text of the holy
Ghost, Heb. 9.26. and 10.10.11.12. and that oftentimes by the hands of a
mortal man soyled with abominable vices: and in stead of Christ, offering a
piece of bread, to the which they render Divine honors, as if it were Christ
himself, by an execrable Idolatry: and instead of the Cross, substituting an
Altar of stone after a Jewish and heathenish manner: as if Melchizedek was not
a type of Christ's Priesthood, who notwithstanding represented Christ in these
particulars. First, in that he was both a Priest and King together. Secondly,
without Father, Mother, or descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end
of life. And thirdly, in that his Priesthood was (...) that is, (as the word
signifies) impassable to any other successor or Vicar whatsoever. For we must
note, that as Melchizedek is brought in by Moses as a man fallen from heaven,
not declaring either his Father, Mother, or race, not succeeding in office to
any that went before, not resigning the same to any successor or Vicar; so our
Lord Jesus Christ as he had no predecessor in the office of his Priesthood, so
he cannot have any successor or Vicar: but as he alone was designed by the
Father to this office, so he alone without any helper, exercised the same here
on earth, and still exercises it in heaven by his intercession for sinners,
always living, to the end that by the virtue and force of his Priesthood and
sacrifice, he might to the full, or to the uttermost, save such as come unto
God by him, as is at large discoursed in the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. Nevertheless, quite contrary the doctrine of the Church of Rome
is, that the Pope with all his Bishops and Priests, are Sacrificers after the
order of Melchizedek: which if it be true, how is Christ's Priesthood (...) or
vntransitiue, or impassable? And how is Christ only a Priest after the order
of Melchizedek, if he have for his companions in office so many thousand of
Popish shauelings? And if the oblation made once by Christ on the Cross be
reiterated every day in the Mass, how can it be, but that Christ's sacrifice
was imperfect, seeing it stood in need of iteration, as the Apostle concludes
of the legal sacrifices in this regard, Heb. 7.27? But not content herewith,
they join also the sufferings of the Saints, with this sacrifice of Christ,
for the satisfaction and expiation of our sins. For they say, that the
Apostles, Martyrs, and other Saints, have for the love they bare to God, done
more good and suffered more evil, then was needful for the expiation of their
own sins before God, and for the meriting of eternal life: So that of their
superabounding merits and sufferings, joined with those of Christ, is composed
that supposed treasure of the Church, which the Pope dispenses to the world by
his Indulgences: yea, they proceed so far, as to make every Christian a
satisfier for himself and his own sins, by the merit of his good works, as
Fasting, Alms, and other works of Penance. And that which is yet more, they
attribute unto dead things, as Agnus d^is, Holy grains, and other trash, a
power of taking away of sin, which belongs only to Christ's blood. For so
one of their Popes, Vrbane the fifth commends his holy Lamb which he sent to
the Emper or of Greece, that it has power to break and vex sin as Christ's
blood: Peccatum frangit (says he) vt Christ's sanguis, and angit: and what was
this but the picture of a Lamb composed of Balsame, pure Wax, and holy Water,
as it is described by the same Pope in this Disticke?

Balsamus, et munda cera, cum chrismatis vnda
Conficiunt agnum: quod munus do tibi magnum.
Lib. 1. sa^ra. Ceremon. sect. 7.
But the prayers used at the consecration of this Agnus, are most blasphemous
and horrible: for they pray, that by the power of it crimes may be dissolved,
and spots of sins cleansed away, and that pardon and grace may be conferred,
and eternal life gained: they compare it with the Paschall Lamb of the Jews,
by the sprinkling of whose blood they were delivered in Egypt from the
destroying Angel; and to the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world, even the Son of God that was offered on the Cross, and ascribe unto
it all the virtues and effects of either of these, as to deliver from all
manner of danger both body and soul, to protect from the devil and his
subtleties, and to deface and abolish sin. If this be not to reject the blood
of Christ, and the virtue of his sacrifice, what can be, seeing a little piece
of Wax is made to have equal virtue and efficacy to them, against sin and
the devil? And thus they rob Christ of the first part of his Priesthood; and
do they leave him the second to wit, his Intercession? No verily he is not so
much beholding unto them; but they make the blessed Virgin with the rest of the
Saints and Angels, their intercessors unto God as well as Christ, as if he
alone were not our sufficient Mediator, without their assistance: What say I,
as well as Christ? Nay, more then Christ: for their Prayers, and Temples, and
Devotions, are ten times more in honor of the Saints, then of Christ, as
experience shows, and as has been declared before.

5. I know that all their Prayers to the Saints are covered and colored with
the name of Christ, and concluded ever with these words, By Jesus Christ our
Lord: and that all the virtue and power which the Saints have, comes from
Christ. But who knows not also, that the Idolatrous Jews cloaked their
Idolatries under the name of Jehovah, and thought themselves unreprovable when
they put his name upon their Idols, and in that pretense offered sacrifice unto
them? So the Mother of Michah said unto him, I have wholy dedicated the
silver to the Lord of my hand for my Son, to make a graven and molten Image:
and so this miserable Michah having consecrated his Idol, and appointed it a
Leuite for a Priest, said: Now do I know that the Lord will do me good,
seeing I have a Leuite to my Priest. In like manner the Papists excuse all
their Idolatry, which they commit toward the Saints, and the injury which they
do unto Christ, with this pretense, that all the virtue which is in them is by
some secret influence derived from Christ: as if it were lawful for men to
add in matter of Religion whatsoever they think good, whether Paganish
Idolatry, or Jewish Ceremonies, under color, that they draw their effi^acy and
virtue from Christ: Or that they apply unto us the efficacy of Christ's
redemption: of which transmission of virtue and application the Scripture has
not a word, but refers us unto Faith, as the only means of applying Christ
to our souls, and the redemption wrought by his blood. And thus under the
title of the Vicar of Christ lyoth hid the very poison of Antichrist.

CHAP. 9. Touching four other doctrines proper unto Antichrist by the Papists
confession.
MIlenzius an Italian Monk writing against Marcilius in defense of Cardinal
Baronius his advice to Pope Paul the fifth, about excommunication of the
Venetians, has a pretty conceit upon the names of Baronius and Bellarmine; for
he frames out of the first syllables of them both Ba, and Bell the name Babel,
and surely not impertinently: for these two Authors have as it were comprised
in their writings all that apportioneth to the building of Babel, one in the
question of right, the other in that of fact, and indeed are the very pillars
of Popery. I speak this only by the way, because we often speak of them in
this Treatis^. Bellarmine therefore to divert men's eyes from the true Articles
of the Antichristian Apostasy, Bell de Romans Pont. l^b. 3. c 4.
proposes four other doctrines, which he says Antichrist must hold, which
because the Pope does not hold, therefore he is not Antichrist.

2. The first of these four doctrines is, That Antichrist shall deny Jesus to
be Christ, and consequently abolish the Sacraments of Christ, and bring in
again the Jewish Sabbath and Ceremonies. For (says he) Antichrist must be a
Jew by Nation and Religion, and received of the Jews for their Messiah, and
therefore must openly oppose himself unto Christ. And besides Saint John
says, that he that denies Jesus to be Christ, is the spirit of Antichrist.
To which I answer, that first he sets down that for certain, which is in
question. For we peremptorily deny, that Antichrist shall be a Jew, either by
Nation, or Religion, or received of the Jews for their Messiah, as is
evidently proved by the Author of this Treatise, where he answers all the
Arguments that are brought to the contrary. Secondly we confess, that
Antichrist shall deny Jesus to be Christ, and so does the Pope. For though he
acknowledge the name of Christ in appearance, yet he takes from it all the
virtue and efficacy thereof, as has been proved before, and professes Christ
by word, but denies him in effect: for it is certain, that Christ may be
denied two ways; either ouertly, or covertly, that is, either in word, or in
effect: thus the devil in many places of the Gospel, confesses that Jesus is
the Christ, and the holy one of God; and yet does he not by might and maine
oppugn this doctrine, and in effect deny it? S John therefore well expresses
what Antichrist shall do, but he does not express the manner how he shall do
it: and therefore this is a sophistical conclusion, to argue from the
substance of a thing, to the manner of doing it. For things may be denied,
either directly or indirectly, either by express maxims, or by necessary
consequences; and this latter is therefore more dangerous, because it is more
deceitful. We do not read that Epicurus denied this proposition, There is a
God: but when he framed to himself such a God that had no care nor providence
over the world, did he not indirectly deny there was a God? For God cannot be
without a providence. So the Pope does not in direct words deny this
proposition, Jesus is Christ: yet when he gives unto him a fantastical body
by his doctrine of transubstantiation, robs him of all his offices, and
joins others with him in the work of Redemption, what does he but by
consequent deny him to be Christ? Yea but (says he) all Heretics thus deny
Christ, therefore Antichrist must deny him after another sort; to wit, simply
and absolutely. But say I, the clean contrary does rather from hence follow:
For S. John does manifestly affirm, that the spirit of Antichrist, is the same
with that of former Heretics, when he says; Such is the spirit of
Antichrist, of which ye have heard say, that he shall come, and now is already
in the world. Now if Antichrist must speak by the same spirit that Heretics
did, then he must also deny Jesus Christ after the same manner, to wit, not by
denying his name, but by destroying his faith; and thus this first doctrine
agrees fitly to the Pope, if we understand S. John as he ought to be
understood.

3. Their second doctrine of Antichrist is, that he shall name himself not the
Vicar or servant of Christ, but Christ himself, and this, because it is said,
John. 5.43. If another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. Where
it seems (says Bellarmine) that Christ expressly uses these words: In
nomine suo, In his own name, Bell. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 14.
foreseeing that the Lutherans, and Caluinists would say, that Antichrist
should not come in his own name, but in the name of Christ, as his Vicar. But
what a vain interpretation this is, may appear by two reasons out of their
own Maldonate. Maldon in Ioh. 5.43.
First, that Christ speaks not here in particular of Antichrist, but in
general of all false Prophets, by the word, another; not defining one
particular person, but designing any one whatsoever, that shall come in his
own name. Secondly, that by, In his own name, he means not, that he shall
take upon him the name of Christ, but that he shall come of his own private
authority, without being sent of God. For albeit diverse amongst the Jews, both
about Christ's time, and after, took upon them falsely the name of the Messiah,
of whom Christ foretells, Mat. 24.3.33. Many shall come in my name, saying, I
am Christ, and shall deceive many: nevertheless he here prophecieth of many
that shall come in their own name, that is, not being sent of God, as the
Prophet Jeremy speaks: Ier, 23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets, says the Lord, and yet they ran: I have not
spoken to them, and yet they prophesied. So that to come in a man's own name,
is nothing else, but to come without mission or commission from God. Howbeit we
deny not, but that Antichrist shall seat himself in the place of Christ, and
in some sort entitle himself by the name of Christ, and assume unto himself
all the honor and reverence which is due unto Christ; all which seeing it is
apparent that the Pope does, we may therefore in this regard also conclude him
to be Antichrist. For first, all the passages of holy Scripture which are
directly intended of Christ, he refers to himself, as has been
sufficiently proved. Secondly, he assumeth also the proper titles of Christ, as
to be the Head and Husband of the Church, the High Priest of the new Covenant,
the Sovereign Bishop of the world, the great and universal Shepherd of the
Flock, and in a word the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and the root of David,
with other such like. Thirdly and lastly, he forbeareth not to style himself
by the very name Christ, as Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand does, both in
an Epistle to Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, and also in a Council held
at Rome, against Henry the Emperor. In both which, he applies to himself
that speech of the Prophet, Psalm. 2.2. The Kings of the earth are banded,
Baron. An. 1080. 8.
and the Princes assembled against the Lord, and against his Christ, which S.
Peter, Acts. 4.26. interprets as spoken directly of Christ and none other. In
the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the holy Ghost applies unto
Christ, these words of the eight Psalm: Thou have made him a little inferior
to the Angels, to wit, in regard of his passion, Heb. 2.9. and yet this very
same is the device or motto of Pope Paul the fifth of late memory, in all the
pictures and pourtraicts that were made of him. What should I speak of their
blasphemous application of the rest of that Psalm? as where it is said, Thou
have put all things under his feet, that is to say, the Popes feet: Sheep,
that is, the souls of the faithful Christians: Oxen, that is, Jews under the
yoke of the Law: Beasts of the field, that is, Pagans wandering in the broad
way to hell: Fowls of the air, that is, Saints departed and in bliss: and
lastly, Fishes of the Sea, that is, souls tormented in Purgatory. The Pope is
made Lord of all these, and what can Christ have more? Nay, Bell. de Romans Pont.
lib. 2. cap. 16.
Bellarmine highly commends S. Bernard, for giving these high titles to Pope
Eugenius: Thou art the great Priest, the Sovereign Bishop, the Prince of
Bishops, the Heir of the Apostles, thou art Abel in Primacy, in Government
Noah, in Patriarchacy Abraham, in Order Melchizedek, in Dignity Aaron, in
Authority Moses, in Judgment Samuel, in Power Peter, and in Unction Christ.
Here the very name Christ is given by S. Bernard to Pope Eugenius, accepted of
him as his own, and allowed of Bellarmine as due unto him: and what can
Antichrist do more? But that we may see the very height of their blasphemy in
this kind, I cannot pass over in silence one example more: It is this. After
the Sicilian Vespers, wherein so many hundred Frenchmen were massacred at once,
in the year 1282. those of Palerma sent Ambassadors to Pope Martin the
fourth, for absolution from that bloody act: who casting themselves at his
feet, and saluting him as if he were Christ, made this supplication unto him:
Thou that take away the sins of the world have mercy on us: and again,
Thou that take away the sins of the world have pity on us: and the third
time, Thou that take away the sins of the world, give us thy peace: which
the Pope was so far from rejecting as blasphemous, that he contented himself
only thus to answer, that the Palermans imitated those that smote Christ,
saluting him by the name of the King of the Jews, and yet in effect being
enemies unto him, and seeking his blood. Now then, if their own maxim be
true, the Pope is without all doubt Antichrist; for he both styles himself,
and suffers himself to be called of others by the name of Christ.

4. The third doctrine, which Bellarmine ascribes as proper unto Antichrist,
is, that he shall usurp the name and title of God, and not only his power and
authority, and so shall call himself God, and be worshipped as God: and this
he groundeth upon 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. where it is said, That he shall sit in the
Temple of God, as if he were God. But by his leave, S. Paul does not say that
he shall call himself God, but that he shall carry himself as God in the
Temple, that is, in the Church of God: and what is that, but to usurp the
power and authority of God? This is therefore an absurd conclusion, grounded
upon a false interpretation of S. Paul's words. It is sufficient then, to prove
the Pope to be Antichrist by this mark, if I show that he usurps the power
and authority of God in the Church, and puts on the divine properties. And
this he does many ways: as first, it is an essential property belonging unto
God, and his peculiar privilege, not to be subject to error: for though the
Prophets and Apostles in their Sermons and writings, did not err, because they
were immediately inspired and directed by the Spirit of truth; yet seeing that
immediate inspiration is not now to be found in the Church, unless by the
Enthusianisme of the Anabaptists, therefore no man living can challenge to
himself such a power. But the Pope does this, and thereby demonstrateth
himself evidently to be the Antichrist: and yet this maxim, That the Pope
cannot err, is one of the principal engines which Satan has devised to
uphold the kingdom of error. I know what they answer when we object unto
them the examples of many Popes that have erred; namely, by strange
distinctions, as, that he may err as a particular person and Doctor, but not
as Pope: or thus, Not when he determines ex Cathedra, out of his Chair, for
the instruction of the whole world, but only when he propounds and delivers
his private opinions by word or writing. But who sees not the absurdity and
contra^^^tion of this distinction? For the Pope is always a public person and
Doctor of the Church, and not a particu^a^; so that these are contradictory
propositions, to be Pope, and yet to be a particular Doctor; as to be a
Sovereign King, and a private person. And therefore if Catharinus had reason
to mock at Caietane, who writing of Herod's sadness, for the demand of John
Baptists head, distinguished betwixt the King and Herod, as if it was the King
that was sad, and not Herod: for (says Catharine) if the King was sad, and
Herod was the King, then by my Logic, I must confess, that Herod was also
sad; and if Herod would slay John, then the King would slay him; and if the
King seemed unwilling to have it done, then Herod did the like. And have not we
reason to reduce to the rules of the same Logic, those that say, that Clement
may err, as Clement; that is, as a private man: but not as Pope, that is, a
public person? For as Herod is King, so is Clement Pope. This is as if a man
should say, that Aristotle was ignorant as a man, but wise as a Philosopher;
and so he should be called a wise Philosopher, and an ignorant man. But let
this absurd distinction be allowed, yet it will help them nothing; for many
Popes have erred as Popes, out of their Chair in their public Decrees and
Doctrines. For Clement the first, in a decretall Epistle, which Turrian the
Jesuit maintainteh not to be counterfeit but true, delivers two gross
heresies, one of the Anabaptists, Cause. 12 q. cap. dilectissimis.
touching the community of goods; and another of the Nicolaitanes, touching the
community of women: which opinion Surius held so heretical, that in the Colen
edition, he cut out these words: In omnibus autem sunt fine dubie et coniuges.
Tertul. aduersus Praxeam. c. 1.
Tertullian tells us, that a Bishop of Rome in his time (some think
Zepherinus, others Eleutherius) approved by his public censure, the prophecies
of Montanus, Prisca, and Maximillo. Pope Marcellinus, in a public Act as Pope,
sacrificed to Idols, confessed by Bellarmine, though thus qualified; that he
did it for fear of death, albeit that the Council of Sinuessa says, that he
did it being corrupted with gold. Liberius was infected with the Arrian
heresy; and so was Felix his successor, by the testimony of most ancient
writers: as Athanasius, S. Jerome, Damasus, Hilarious, Martinus Polonus, Cusan,
Platina, Alphonsus de Castro, with others: neither does Bellarmine deny it
concerning Liberius, Aug. aduersus Julian. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2.
but attributes his fact unto fear, as he did that of Marcellinus. In a word
(to omit many particulars in this kind) did not Innocent the first teach and
define, that inf^nts which had not received the Eucharist, could not be saved,
contradicted by a direct Canon of the Council of Trent? Council. Trid. Sess.
21. Can. 4.
Did not Vigilius deny, that there were two natures in Christ? Did not
Celestine the third err, in the doctrine of marriage of the faithful, when
one party was fallen into heresy? Did not John the 22. Liberat Abridg. cap 22.
deny the vision of God unto souls departed, before the resurrection, which
error he was constrained to recant by the Divines of Paris, Alphons. de
Castro. here is. lib. 1. cap. 4. Eras in praesat. ad quintum lib. Irena^
in the presence of Phillip King of France, with the sound of trumpets? And
lastly, did not John the 2^. say, affirm, teach, and maintain, (they be the
very words of the Council of Constance) that there was no life eternal after
this life, and that the soul of man dyed together with his body after the
manner of beasts, and that there should be no resurrection? All these then
erred, not only as private persons, but as Popes governing and instructing the
Church.

5. But to leave this, a second privilege belonging to God, is to depose
Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms. Dan. 2.21. and 4.32. and 5.24. Job. 12.18. Now
the Pope challenges also to himself this absolute power, as is evident in the
insolency of Celestine the third, at the Coronation of the Emperor Henry the
sixth, when he crowned and decrowned him with his feet, in sign, that it was
in his power, both to give and to take away the Empire. And in the Epistle of
Pius the second, to Mahomet the Turkish Emperor, where he promises him that
if he would receive the Christian faith, and aid the necessities of the
Church; he in recompense of this benefit, would create him Emperor of the
Greeks, and of the East, as his predecessors had for the same reason, given
the Western Empire unto Charlemaigne. In pretense of which usurped power,
Julius the second interdicted the Kingdom of Navarre, which by that color was
then invaded, and still at this day possessed by the King of Spain. The like
he did to the Kingdom of France, but not with like success, as witnesses
Onuphrius; Onuphrius in Iudio. 1.
and to the Kingdom of England in King John's time. And to make the case more
manifest, there is to be seen at Rome, an Image of Pope Paul the fifth of late
time, whereunto as there are adjoined many proud insculptures and devices, so
these especially are most remarkable: under the picture are these words
written. Vultu portendebat imperium, above it these: Paulo quinto vice Deo
Christianae reipub. Monarchae inuictissimo et Pontificiae omnipotentiae
conseruatori acerrimo. At the right hand a flying Angel bears this
inscription: Gen^ et regnum quod non seruierit illi, in gladio, in fame, et in
peste, visitabo super Gentem illam ait dominus, Ier. 27. and at the left hand
another Angel speaking thus: Et dedit ei Dominus potestatem et regnum, et
omnes populi ipsi seruient, potest as eius, potestas aeterna quae non
anferetur, et regnum eius quod non corrumpetur, Dan. 7. by which we see, that
though the Pope at this day be much weakened in his power, a great part of
Christendom being departed from his obedience; yet he is nothing at all abated
in his pride, but takes upon him as much as any of his predecessors have done:
and therefore it is no marvel, that Alexander the sixth, gave unto Ferdinand
King of Arragon, all the Isles and firm Lands, which were discovered in the
West and South, from the pole Artick, unto the Antarticke, as may more fully
appear in his Bull to the said King.

6. A third privilege belonging to God, is, not to be subject to any Law or
judgment of any creature: and does not the Pope incroach also upon this? Thus
they plainly write of him. Extrau^ de conc^ss prebendae. Sede^. Apostolica.
The Pope is not subject to any humane Law the has all Laws inshrined in his
own breast: He may not be judged, either of the Emperor, or Kings, or
Clergy, or people: but his judgment is to be preferred before the judgment
of the whole world: nay he can do all that God can do; prescribe, ordain, D^st
^ ^ quoniam.
forbid, dispense, absolve, restrain, confirm, disanull, derogate, reserve,
and what not? Yea make new articles of faith, and give authority to the word of
God, as if without him it were of no force.

7. Another privilege of God, is, that he alone is above Emperors, Optat.
cont. Parmen. lib. 3.
Kings, and Princes, and is the only Lord of the Angels. Optatus says
plainly, That none but God is above the Emperor; and does not the Pope usurp
a super-eminency above both these? Above Emperors and Kings, as has at large
been showed before; when he calls them his vassals and servants, makes them
his Lacquaies to hold his stirrup, lead his horse by the bridle, minister water
for his hands, help to carry him in his Chair upon their shoulders, and
kiss his feet, ^^b sa^^ ^^remon ^. sect. 5. and lib. 5. sect. 12.
and adore him like a God. And above the Angels in four things as the
Canonists affirm; to wit, in Jurisdiction, Administration, Knowledge, and
Reward. Hence it is, that they take upon them to command the Angels, as Clement
the fifth did, when he commanded them to take souls out of Purgatory, Fe^^ ^n
cap. Canon stat. de constitut. Cornel. Agrippa ac vanit scient. fol. 138.
and to carry them into Paradise. And Clement the sixth, who commanded the
Angels to convey the souls of such as died in their Pilgramage to Rome in the
year of Iubile, directly into Paradise, being wholly absolved from the pains
of Purgatory. And therefore Baronius is not ashamed to call the Popes throne,
Baron in paranes ad Remp Venet.
A throne divinely established, exalted above the heavens, applying thereunto
that sentence of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. Do you not know that you shall judge
the Angels? And in declaiming against the Venetians, says; He that is reuered
of the Angels, shall he not be so of Princes? Further, it is Gods prerogative
only to be adored with Divine worship, and yet the Pope assumeth this also to
himself. For the salutation which is given unto him by Princes, Cardinals, and
Ambassadors, Antomia. hist. ^om. 3.
is called adoration: and the Ambassadors of Florence, tell Pius the second,
that their City Sanctitatem illius Hyperdulia adorat, that is, Bell. de Sanct.
beatit. lib. 1. cap. 12.
worshipped his holiness with Hyperdulia, which is a kind of worship due
only to the humanity of Christ, and to the Virgin his Mother. Lastly, to
pardon sin, to adopt and regenerate a sinful man, to be not only holy but
even holiness it self in the abstract, and to be judge of the whole world,
are all Divine prerogatives, which notwithstanding are all attributed to the
Pope by his flatterers, and not denied, nor rejected by himself. For first,
he takes upon him power to pardon sin, even the guilt and eternal
punishment thereof; (as some of them have written,) but certainly the
temporal punishment both of living and dead here, and in Purgatory. Now to
free from punishment, is to forgive, as not to forgive is to bind over to
punishment; and so that saying of Christ, He that sins against the holy
Ghost shall never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come,
is to be understood, to wit, shall be punished both in this world, and in the
world to come. Secondly, Sixth. Senens. in praefat. bib^oth. Sancta.
a great learned Rabbi in the Papacy, speaking to Pope Pius the fifth, as unto
God, says; That he (to wit, the Pope) had adopted him for his Son, and
regenerated him by his spirit; a blasphemy which a Christian man's ears are not
able to brook. Thirdly* the ordinary title of the Pope is, his Holiness, a if
he were as God, of a simple nature without all composition: and had his
holiness not by participation, but of himself. Of the like quality is that
title, The cause of causes, which the Canonists give unto him, by which
Aristotle and all the best of the Philosophers, defined God to be Causa
causarum; Natura naturans, and Eus entium: but I forbear to soil my paper any
further with these blasphemies. Lastly, Baron. Ibid.
Baronius styles him Vniuersorum Iudicem, the Judge of all, and not to be
judged of any: which to do, what is it else but to place him in Gods throne,
or rather to demonstrate him to be the true Antichrist, who as Paul says,
must sit in Temple of God as if he were God? And that which is most strange of
all the rest, they ascribe these preheminences unto him, though he be never so
wicked a wretch, and vile a monster. For the seat of Peter gives him
holiness, Melchior Canus. locor. lib. 6. cap. 8.
though he has none of his own, and Saint Peter has transmitted to his
successors a perpetual dowry of merits, with an heritage of Innocence, Did.
40. C^non not.
as one of their Popes speaks: so that if their own merits fail, the
predecessors are sufficient: for either excellent men are advanced to this
honor, or they are made excellent that are advanced; Baron. An. 34.27.
thus he. And Baronius allegorizing upon the shadow of Peter, affirms the
same, saying; that such virtues and abundance of graces were conferred on
Peter, that his very shadow, (by which he typically means his successors)
were partakers thereof: so that as their gloss speaks, D^st. 40. C^non in
glossa.
it is sacrilege to dispute of the Popes fact; and to accuse him, is the sin
against the holy Ghost.

8. And thus it is manifest, that the Pope inuesteth himself with the
Dignities, Privileges, and Prerogatives, that appertain properly to God, and
so makes himself no less then God upon earth; which doubtless is enough to
prove him to be Antichrist: howbeit if he also call himself by the very name
of God, then they cannot deny but by their own doctrine he must needs be so.
Did. 96. ^. satis evident.
And did not Pope Nicholas auow this title, as given unto his Predecessors, and
him, by great Constantine? Aug. Steuchus. de donat. Constant. Extrau. Ioh. 22
in glossa.
And Augustine Steuchus confirms the same as truth? Besides, the Canonists
and other Doctors of the Church of Rome, do ordinarily style the Pope, Our
Lord God the Pope. And the Popes admit of this title, neither are their books
purged of it; and Stapleton calls Gregory the thirteenth, Staplet princip.
fi^. Doctrine. praefat. ad Gregor. 13.
Supremum, plane supremum in terris numen, The highest, even the highest
Godhead in earth: and Paul the fifth named himself Vicedeus, a Vice-god, that
is, one in the room and place of God. I confess, that Kings and Princes, are
named Gods in holy Scripture, but in a far different sense then the Pope: for
they are not so named, as if any divine properties did pertain unto them, but
because they represented in their authority, majesty and government, the very
Image of God in their own Dominions: but the Pope is so dignified for that the
very properties of God, and omnipotent power are attributed unto him, and
usurped by him over all the world.

9. The fourth and last doctrine, which they say is proper unto Antichrist, is,
That he shall not suffer any God to be worshipped, neither true, not false,
nor any Idols, but shall exalt himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped, which because the Pope does not, that therefore he is not
Antichrist. Thus Bellarmine reasons. De Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Whereunto I answer two things. First, that the Pope exalts himself
apparently above, not only all that is called God, that is, to whom the name
of God is communicated, but even God himself, not openly and in word, (for
what followers and Disciples could he then have in such a foul and gross
ostentation?) but indeed and fact, like Judas that kissed Christ with his
mouth, but betrayed him by his practice to the Jews. Now that the Pope does
thus exalt himself, is so apparent, that none that has any relike of
understanding can doubt thereof. For how he aduanceth himself above the
Angels, who are called Gods, Psalm. 8.6. has been declared before; and for
Magistrates who are also named Gods, Psalm. 82.2. the case is as manifest; for
when as they constrain the supreme Magistrate of the world, to wit, the
Emperor, to kiss the Popes feet, and to hold his stirrup, when they deprive
them of their Crowns, and settle others in their thrones, when they interdict
their Kingdoms, as they did England in the reign of King John, and France
under Phillip Augustus, so that all their public acts were thus dated at that
time, Regnante Christo, in stead of Regnante Philippo, when they make Princes
to hold their Crowns in Fee of the Pope, paying him yearly tribute, as has
been seen well-nigh in all Kingdoms of Christendom, but especially here in
England, which Pope Innocent the fourth, calls his Garden of delight, and a
bottomless Spring, and others, the Popes Ass to bear all burdens: And
lastly, Math. P^rt^ in He^. 3.
when they trample upon their necks, cause them to wait at their gates,
Crown them with their feet, and burn their Letters and Embassi^s in contempt,
as Pope Nicholas the first did the Letters of Michael the Emperor of
Constantinople, which were distasteful unto him: when they excommunicate them,
absolve them, whip them, suspend them, and call them their Vessals and
Liege-men: all which particulars might be exemplified with a multitude of
examples if need were: When I say, he does all things, does he not apparently
exalt him else above all Magistrates? Again, the Papists adore and worship the
Saints, as their tutelar Gods, and does not the Pope exalt himself above them,
when he canonizeth whom he pleases, and blotteth out of the Calender those
that please him not? So that let him be never so holy, yet he is no Saint to
the Church, except the Pope will: and be he never so wicked, yet if he will, he
must be worshipped as a Saint. Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
And so as Tertullian says in another case to the ancient Romans, Apud vos de
humano arbitratu diuinitas pensitatur, nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non
erit, we may affirm of the modern Romanists, Sanctity is weighed by the Popes
judgment, except a man please him, he shall be no Saint, and if he please him
he shall be one, be he never so wicked. Images also which are their (...),
that is, objects of their worship are dominered over by the Pope: for he
authorized their worship in the second Council of Nice, it being a matter, if
not unlawful, yet in different before that time, this consecration makes them
capeable of public adoration: and his Indulgences ascribe more to one Image
then to another. Again, do they not adore their consecrated Host, which they
say is the very body of Christ, as Christ? and yet they make it march after the
Pope in his iourneyes of pleasure amongst the baggage and rabble of his Court,
being carried on the back of a little Nagge, having a bell hanging at his
neck, whilst he himself is carried in pomp upon men's shoulders, or rides
in Majesty upon a fair Palfrey.

10. And thus in fine, there is nothing that is worshipped as God, which he
does not exalt himself above: nay he does it even above the true God himself:
as when he makes all Religion and worship to depend upon the Oracle of his
mouth, saying; that nothing ought to be received by the Church, though
ordained by general Councills, that is not confirmed by his authority: when he
subiecteth the holy Scripture to his interpretation, to be wrested into what
sense he pleases: when he releaseth men of their Vows and Oaths which they
have made to God or Men, which is not only avouched by their Canonists, Can non
est v^^^de v^^o p^^^ the C. quanta de iure iurando.
but confirmed by experience. ^s when Alexander the sixth discharged his Son
Caesar Bargi^ from his vow of Priesthood, that he might marry and become a
Temporal Duke. And when Hildebrand released Rodulph of Sabaudia from his Oath
to his lawful Sovereign Henry the fourth, and created him Emperor. But the
vengeance of God followed Rodulph for his perjury, his right hand wherewith he
had sworn fidelity to the Emperor, being cut off in a battle against him.
And lastly, Felin. l. quae in eccles. de constitut.
when he takes upon him power to dispense cum iure Diuino, with divine right,
by limitation or restriction, and with the express Law of God, to wit, the
fifth Commandment, by freeing Children from obedience to their Parents under
pretense of Monastical Obligation; and the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not
kill, by their places of Sanctuary, whereout a Murderer (by their Canons) may
not be fetched, what blood soever he has shed; Polyder. Virgil. d^ Inuen: lib.
3. cap. 12.
against which abuse Polidore Virgill, a man of their own bitterly inueigheth.
And the seventh Commandment, by their public and authorized Stews: and so in
like manner, with all the rest of the Commandments. Yea, not only with the
Law, but also with the Gospel, and with the Apostle, as their Canonists
speak; for whereas Christ in the Go pell ordained but two Sacraments in the
Church, he adds hereunto five other, C proposuie, de conces. prebend. Causa.
25. q 1. sunt quidem. in gl ss^. D st. 5 decensec^ at de hi^.
and prefers in dignity his Confirmation before Christ's Baptism, because
that can be performed by a Bishop only, this by every Priest, and in case of
necessity by a Laick, or a woman: yea, they are so impudent as to say, that the
Pope can change the form of words in Baptism; Mathei Terti. Auiso all^ subdit
del^dem. vene^. Fe^^n C quae in eccles^ie co ^st. tut. Council. Trid. Sess. 22.
^n fine
and in stead of the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, put in,
In the name of the Trinity. And for the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper
they take away the Cup from Laics; which when it was required by many Princes
and States to be restored again in the Council of Trent, the Council
referred them herein to the discretion of the Pope, thereby attributing unto
him full power over the divine Sacraments. In brief, to cut short, do we not
see by experience, that the Pope and his instruments do more severely punish
such as transgress his Decrees, and Traditions, then those that trample under
their feet the Commandments of God? For, to eat flesh in Lent, is with them a
greater sin, then to steal, or commit adultery: and who knows not, that a
Priest shall be more rigorously handled, if he join himself to one only
woman in holy marriage, then if he keep openly many Concubines and Harlots, or
defile other men's wives, or haunt the Stews? And thus the Pope exalts
himself above all that is called God, yea above God himself.

11. Secondly, I answer, that it is no where found in Scripture, that
Antichrist shall suffer no God to be worshipped, whether true or false, nor any
Idols; nay rather his Idolatry does prove him to be Antichrist. For his City
and Seat is called the great Whore, with whom the Kings of the earth committed
spiritual fornication: and who knows not, but that by spiritual
fornication, is always in holy Scripture understood Idolatry? as Ezekiel 16.
Isaiah. 1.21. And therefore when some of the Fathers affirm, that Antichrist
shall be no Idolater, but a hater of Idols, we must conceive, that either they
misunderstood the prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 11.38. whereupon this opinion is
grounded, or that they meant only the Paganish Idolatry, in the worship of
Jupiter, Apollo, Mercury, etc. Which indeed our Antichrist has declared
himself to detest and hate, but nevertheless, does not cease to exercise an
Idolatry altogether as profane and abominable in his worship of Saints,
Images, Relikes, Crosses, and a piece of Paste, which they say, is Christ. As
for that text of Daniel which they thus translate, He shall not care for any
God, but shall rise up against all: I say first, that the Prophet speaks not
here literally of Antichrist, but of Antiochus, as has been showed before.
Secondly, that according to the Hebrew verity, the Text must be thus
translated, as Tremellius and Iunius have proved. And as for the God of forces,
he (to wit Antiochus) shall in his seat worship with Gold, Silver, Precious
stones, and things desirable, a God which his Fathers knew not. Now who is the
God of Forces, but the true God of Israel, whose Temple Antiochus profaned
with horrible Idolatry, and placed therein the Idol of Jupiter Olympi^s, as
we may see in the sixth Chapter of the second book of Machabees? which
prophecy, I confess Anagogically agrees to the Pope. For he having abolished
both all the worship of heathen Gods, and in a manner also of the true God
himself, the Omnipotent God of Forces; has set up a new God in the Church,
namely, a piece of bread in the Mass, which none of the Fathers, or Apostles
of Jesus Christ ever knew. And to their breaden God they ascribe power to
forgive sins, to defend from evils both men and beasts, and to bring to
heaven: and therefore willingly dedicate unto it whatsoever is dear and
precious unto them, as Gold, Silver, Jewels, and what not? as the Children of
Israel did for the making of their Golden Calfe. And that with such reverence
and devotion, that the least contempt unto it in word, or deed, is revenged
with Gibets, fire, and all manner of torments, when as in the mean while most
horrible blasphemies against Christ himself are tolerated and slighted over.

12. Bellarmine is here strangely puzzled, and cannnot tell where to rest. For
first, he says, that by the God Maozim, or God of Forces, is signified
Antichrist himself; which if it be true, then according to their own
authentical vulgar translation he shall worship himself: for it reads it
thus, Deum autem Maozim in loco suo venerabitur: that is, He shall worship in
his place the God Maozim. Now was it ever heard that any man ever worshipped
himself? For though Alexander the Great took upon him the name of Jupiter
Amon, and Caligul^, with others, assume^ a Deity to themselves, yet this was in
regard of the people: for touching themselves they could not but know that they
were no better then mortal men. But to make the matter more evident, their
translation adds, that he shall fortify M^^zim with a strange God whom he
knew not: how then can this Maozim be himself? Did he not know himself? And
how can he be but an Idolater, seeing Idols in holy Scripture are called
strange Gods? Therefore Bellarmine not daring to rely upon this Interpretation,
adds a second, to wit, that Antichrist shall be a Magitian, and shall
worship the devil in secret, by whose aid he shall effect wonderful things.
An opinion which destroys it self, and his own position, that Antichrist
shall be no Idolater: for is it no Idolatry to worship the devil? Is he, the
old Dragon, a new unknown Idol? And do Magitians use to offer Gold and
Silver unto him, and not rather receive such gifts from him? Howbeit they that
shall view the lives of the Popes, shall not find this strange, Baron. An. ^
63. sect. 17. Be^no^ v^ta Hildebrand.
that Antichrist shall worship the devil. For if we will believe their own
Histories, many Popes have been M^gitians and given themselves to the devil.
As John the twelfth, who inuocated Jupiter, Venus, and other Demons, being at
dice, and drunk a carouse in honor of the devil. And Bennet the ninth, wh^
sacrificed to devils in Forests and Mountains: to omit others of the same
rank which might be named. Lastly, Bellarmine more changeable then the
Camelion, falls upon this, that by Maozim was not meant a God, but some
Castle or Fortress, wherein Antichrist should repose his Treasures, thinking
it may be upon the Castle Saint Angelo, where the Treasures of the Pope are
laid up. Thus he knows not what to fix upon, and yet it must be grounded upon
this text, that Antichrist is no Idolater: and because the Pope is an Idolater,
therefore he is not Antichrist: for one of the two they must of necessity
confess, either that he is Antichrist, if no Idolater: or an Idolater, if not
Antichrist. So then, we clearly see that all those doctrines which t^^y say
are proper unto Antichrist, are plainly taught and maintained by the Pope.

The Third Part.
CHAP. I. Touching Antichrists delusion of the world, and first by supposed
Miracles.
FIrst, S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.10.11. tells us, that Antichrists coming,
shall be after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders; and in all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: and
that for this cause, God should send them strong delusion to believe a lie. In
which words, we may observe five things. First, that Antichrist shall come,
armed with the power of Satan. Secondly, that by his power he shall deceive
the world. Thirdly, that the reason why the world shall be deceived by him, is,
because God shall send upon them strong delusion, even so strong, as to believe
a lie. Fourthly, that the chief means whereby he shall deceive, is by lying
signs and wonders. And lastly, that they only shall be deceived by him, that
are ordained to perish, who received not the love of the truth that they might
be saved? Now that this Sathanicall delusion of the world is evidently verified
in the Papacy, is so manifest, that none that has but the least spark of
reason can doubt thereof: and also that this delusion is effected, as by one
special means, by lying signs and wonders. For all the whole rabble of their
writers, boast of their miracles, as an essential mark of their Church, which
they call Catholic. There is no Temple of any note in the Papacy, wherein
there is not some Statue or Image celebrated for miracles, whereunto they go in
Pilgrimage for devotion; nor any ^uthor of any sort of Monks or religious
place, which are not made famous by this mark. Their Monasteries, their
Cloisters, their Chapels, their Altars, proclaim every where this delusion:
The Legends of their Saints and such like books, whereunto most men heretofore
gave as much credit as to the word of God it self, are so prodigiously stuffed
with this trash, that the very reading of them would astonish any in whose
heart there is but the least taste of piety. Read the conformities of S.
Francis, the History of the Archbishop Antoninus, the flowers of S. Francis,
the Golden Legend of James De Voragine, the book of the miracles of the Virgin
Mary, the Dialogues of Cesarius, the Annals of Baronius, the History of our
Lady of Halls written by Lipsius, the Sermons of Dormi secure, with a number
other such like; and you shall find neither bancke nor bottom of this
foppery: neither moderation, measure, nor end, of miracles: Yea, how Satan
has bewitched their hearts, to believe that which is incredible, and to
imagine they see that which they see not, nor can be seen. And by this mark
(forsooth) they would prove the true Church to be with them, and no where else;
and challenge us to prove our religion and mission by miracles; which because
we cannot do, they therefore triumph over us as Heretics and Schismatikes from
the true Church: whereas indeed their vaunt of miracles, does prove them rather
to be the Synagogue of Antichrist, and our want of them, does clearly deliver
us from that suspicion.

2. For we are to observe here three things in general, before we come to the
particular consideration of this point. First, that miracles were ordained of
God for the ignorant, and such as had not received the faith of Christ, and
that in the prime days of the Church, when the new and strange doctrine of the
Gospel began first to be preached, to the end that they which by reason of the
seeming contrariety of Christian religion, to the principles of humane reason,
would not be persuaded with words, might by beholding strange works, exceeding
the power of nature, wrought by the Apostles, be inclined to the entertainment
of their doctrine: and so there was a necessary use of miracles, in the infancy
of the Church; that thereby unbelievers might be converted to the faith. But
after the world had received the doctrine of the Gospel, and professed the
faith which was before so strongly confirmed, there was no further use of
miracles in the Church: but if any controversies did arise in religion, men
were not to seek the decision of them by new miracles, but by the holy
Scriptures, which were given of God to be the rule of faith, and touchstone of
truth and falsehood, and the supreme judge of controversies. Thus says
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. 2. hom. 6.
Miracles were then profitably wrought, and are profitably now not wrought: for
now we confirm our doctrine by divine Scriptures, and by those miracles which
were wrought before. Aug. de vera. Relig. cap. 5.
So S. Augustine, Our Fathers followed visible miracles, whereby it is come to
pass, that they are not necessary for their posterity. Miracles (says
Gregory) were necessary in the beginning of the Church, that faith being
nourished thereby, might increase, Gregor. in Euangel. hom. 29.
as we when we plant trees, do water them till they be settled in earth, but
not afterward. Espencaeus also faith plainly, Espens. in 2. Tim. 3.
That where there are no infidels, there is no necessity of miracles: as long
as there was a vocation from infidelity to faith, miracles were wrought by
Christ's ministers: but this vocation ceasing, and seduction from faith to
infidelity coming in place thereof, the power of doing miracles, was to be
given up to it, as an help thereunto. But Stella above the rest, Stella in
Luke 11.
discourses most excellently upon this matter. For he shows, first, that
miracles are not now necessary in the Church, being grown and confirmed, as
they were in the first planting thereof. Secondly, that he which believes not
for the miracles already done, will much less believe if new ones be
propounded unto him. And thirdly, that miracles now are rather hurtful then
profitable: as a child when he begins first to go, is supported with a
little chariot, which would be an hinde^ance unto him when he is grown to
strength: or as ladders and scaffoldes are necessary in the building of an
house, but when the house is finished, they are impediments to the passengers:
So if now miracles should be wrought, men would say that their faith was not
sufficiently confirmed and proved, seeing it stood in need of more miracles to
do the same. Thus Stella, a man of their own sect and religion: And therefore
to conclude again with S. Augustine: Whosoever yet seeks for wonders that he
may believe, he himself is the greatest wonder, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22.
c. 8.
who, the world beleeeuing, believes not. Answerable to all which, is that of
S. Paul. 1. Cor. 14.22. Tongues are a sign not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not. So that their vaunt of miracles, is nothing else but an
Antichristian brauado.

3. Secondly, observe that miracles are not the touchstone to try the truth of
doctrine by, but the truth of doctrine the touchstone of miracles, whether they
be true or false: and so of Doctors and Preachers, they are neither to be
proved or disproued by their miracles, but are to be tried by their doctrine.
This proposition is evidently proved by two express Texts of Scripture: the
one, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. etc. and the second, Mat. 7.22. For albeit, such wonders
as are wrought by false Prophets for the confirmation of an untruth, are for
the most part no true miracles, but counterfeit and fained; nevertheless admit
they were true, (as oftentimes God does cooperate with false teachers, for the
punishment of men's impenitency) yet whether they be true or false, doctrine is
not to be tried by them, but they by it. Tertul de prascript. c. 44.
Therefore Tertullian speaking of Heretics says, That they confirm the faith
of their doctrine, by ostentation of Miracles, as that they had raised the
dead, cured diseases, and foretold things to come, to the end, they might be
counted true Apostles, as if it were not written, that many false Christ's, and
false Prophets should arise, that shall show great signs and wonders to
dece^ue, if it were possible, the very elect. Mat. 24.24. and all to fortify
us against heretical preaching: thus he. By which speech he forewarneth to
take heed, that we be not deceived by the vaunt of miracles, seeing they may be
common, as well to Heretics, as true believers. S. Augustine is more direct in
this point, whose words in his book of the unity of the Church, are worthy to
be remembered: they are these: Let none say it is therefore true, because
Donatus, or Pont^us or some other, have wrought great maruailes, or because men
praying at the sepulchers of the Saints are heard, and obtain their suits:
these are but either the fictions of lying men, or the wonders of deceiving
spirits: for either they were not true, or if any wonders be wrought by
Heretics, we ought the more to beware of them. And as for the impetration of
men's prayers at the sepulchers of the Saints, he says: that the Jews were
often heard of God in the high places, which notwithstanding were abominable
unto him: and for visions and apparitions, he says; that the devil can
transform himself into an Angel of light, and deceive by this means: nay he
says, that the very Pagan, and Jews, are often heard in their supplications,
and relieved, either by seducing spirits, which can do nothing but that which
God permits: or by God himself, either for the punishment of wickedness,
or for the comfort of misery: or as a means to make men seek for eternal
life: thus he. Where he shows, what little moment miracles are of, seeing
both Pagans, Jews, and Heretics, are permitted to work them, that wicked men
might thereby be more hardened in their malice, and made more obstinate to
their destruction: which very thing the Apostle avouches, concerning the
miracles of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. And therefore the same Father writing
against Petilian the Donatist, Aug. contra. Pet^l an. lib. 2. cap. 55.
who objected against the Cathol^ks their miracles as marks of the true
Church, thus answers in brief: Seeing many do not such things, which yet
notwithstanding belong unto the kingdom of God; and many again do them, which
yet do not belong thereunto: therefore no man ought to boast of miracles as
marks of the true Church, but seek for it rather in his word that purchased
it with his blood. S. Chrysostom is yet more plain, Chrysost^m Mat. hom. 49.
and affirms, that Christ foretold that false Prophets, and Antichrist,
should pretend great signs and wonders to deceive the world, to the end (says
he) that Christ's true ministers might not be tried by their working of
miracles, though never so good; but by this, that they work no miracles at
all. So then, when they say, that theirs is the true Church, and their
Ministers the true Ministers of Christ, because it is illustrated with
miracles; and our Church and ministerial mission false, because we have no
miracles: The answer is, first, that if this were a good argument, then the
Pagans and Donatists were the true Church as well as they, who bragged of their
miracles as much as they: and Antichrist himself should have his mission from
God, because his coming is with great signs and wonders, as the Apostle
speaks. And secondly, that our want of miracles, is so far from proving us
to be none of Christ's Church, that it proves us rather to be his Church,
according both to S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostomes opinions.

4. Thirdly, observe that miracles are not so frequent and common in their
Church, as they were in former times: for whereas heretofore they were so
usual, that scarce a day passed without some new miracle; and scarce an Image
or Saint, that were not renowned therewith: now we shall hardly hear of one in
many yeeeres, and that in some few notorious places, as at Lauretto, Hals, and
Sichem, and such like. Now I demand, where are their miracles that they so much
brag of? And if they tell us of those that were wrought in former times I
ask again, where is that power now become? Is it flowne into the Indies to be
practiced there by the Jesuits for the conversion of those unbelieving Pagans?
So indeed they say. Acosta de salute Indor. lib. 6. cap. 4. et cap 12. et c. 17
But their own Acosta an eyewitness does give the lie to this fiction, for
thus he writes: What is our preaching? And what is our confidence? Certainly
we work no miracles to confirm our doctrine, neither is there any need of
them: so to shine in holiness before men, that they seeing our good works,
may glorify our Father which is in heaven, this is the greatest persuading
miracle that can be. Therefore Melchior Canus thus censureth those fabulous
books, Melchior Canus. loc. lib. 11. cap. 6.
that were written of this subject: There are of late (says he) certain
fables come forth, the Author whereof, and the place where they were acted, are
so far off, that it is not possible to discover their falsehood: but yet the
whole body of the narration is so contrived, that the Spanish proverb may
easily appear to be verified in them: Des lueng as vias, luengas meniras, that
is, From far Countries, long lies. And such are their Indian miracles. But
what need they travail so far for miracles, if they be necessary marks of
their Church? And why are they not still wrought, at the sepulchers and relikes
of their Saints, as they pretend they were in time past? Marry the reason is,
because the devil fears to play his tricks in the day, least he should be
discovered, but loves the darkness, as becomes the Prince of darkness.
Nicephor. hist. lib. 2. cap. 17.
As at the rising of the Sun, Owls and Bats, and all night birds, hide
themselves in their holes: so did these superstitious fables, at the breaking
out of the Sunshine of the Gospel. And as at the coming of Christ, the
Oracles ceased, and the great God Pan died; so at the preaching of the Gospel,
Plutarch de defectis craculorum. Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. lib. 5. cap. 9.
miracles in a manner vanished, and all those superstitions were ashamed to
show their faces. And this indeed is the greatest miracle of this Age, that the
falsehood of miracles is thus discovered.

5. But to leave the general, and to come to more particular discovery of
Popish miracles, and to show that they are no better then lying signs and
wonders, such as are ascribed to Antichrist by S. Paul: They may well be
distinguished into three ranks. For some are altogether false and counterfeit,
yea many so ridiculous, that they carry with them no likelihood of truth. A
second sort are true, but are not miracles, having nothing in them that is
prodigious or supernatural. And a third sort there are, which to our senses
seem miraculous, forasmuch as they surpass our understanding; but are wrought
by the operation of Satan, and by the deceit of unclean spirits. And to this
distinction of Antichristian miracles, Bellar. de Romans Pont lib. 3. cap. 15.
does well agree that of Bellarmine, where he says, that they are lying in
respect of all the causes: the Efficient, the Matter, the Form, and the End.
The efficient, because they are wrought by the power of the father of lies, who
can effect no true miracles; as the Apostle says, that his coming is after
the working of Satan. The matter, because they are not true miracles, but
fabulous and counterfeit, Th^odor. in 2 Thessalonians 2.
such as Iuglers use to work, says Theodoret, dazeling men's eyes, and as it
were robbing them of their sight, says Aretas. Form, because howsoever they
may seem strange, Aretas in Apoc. 13.
yet they have their hidden causes, not exceeding the power of nature, as true
miracles do. And lastly, in regard of the end, which is the principal, because
they lead unto lies, Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. c.
19.
as Chrysostom observes: and so are well termed lying wonders, though in
regard of matter and form they be never so true, as S. Augustine notes.

6. But to follow our first division, which is in effect all one with this. In
the first rank we may place an infinite number of Visions, Revelations,
Apparitions of souls out of Purgatory, Melchior Can. lib. 11. cap. 6.
and Legendary wonders. For Melchior Canus a great man of theirs, and a Spanish
Bishop, affirms, that the lives of the Philosophers were more gravely and
truly written by Diogenes Laertius, then the lives of the Saints by Christians:
and that Suetonius had more faithfully reported the acts of the Emperors, then
Christians had the acts of Martyrs, Virgins, and Confessors: and that he was
ashamed of many things written, tending not to the profit, but to the hurt of
the Church; the writers rather aiming to please themselves in their fictions,
then to edify others; and presenting unto us such Saints, which if they could
be such, yet would not be such as they make them. For who would believe (says
he) that S. Francis having caught a Flea, would not kill it, but put it fairly
again upon him; as if (forsooth) he delighted not only in poverty, but in
sluttery and filthiness? And how ridiculous also (says he) is that which is
written of S. Dominicke, that he caused the devil that came to annoy him, to
hold a candle in his hand till it was spent, and so burnt his fingers with
great pain and anguish? Thus Canus writes, affirming withal, that the number
of such idle fictions is not to be numbered. But I will add some few to his
beginnings, which nevertheless shall be but as the gleaning after the harvest.
That it may appear, how pitifully the devil has blinded men's eyes under the
kingdom of Antichrist. And here to omit, how S. Anthony of Padna caused his
horse to kneel down and worship the holy Host: how a certain woman to make
her Bees fruitful, put a consecrated Host into the Hyue, where the Bees built
a Chapel with an Altar, and windows and doors, and a Steeple, with Bells,
and sung their Canonical hours, and kept watch like Monks in their
Cloisters: how Saint Dusta^e pulled the devil by the nose or by the lips, (as
some others say) with a pair of Pincers: how a Parrat being like to be
surprised by an Hawke, flying over the shrine of Saint Thomas of Canterbury,
cried Saint Thomas help me, when presently the Hawke fell down dead, and the
Parrat escaped: how another being falsely accused for stealing his Masters
Hawke, and ready to be executed, desired in his heart help of the Lady of
Lawretto, when instantly the Hawke came flying in the air jingling her Bells
and lighting upon the gallows, and freed the poor man from the halter: how
Saint Aidus in compassion giving eight Lambs to eight hungry Wolves,
afterward by prayer drew them again alive out of the Wolves bellies: How
Saint Patricke drove with his staff all the venomous beasts out of Ireland,
and caused a stolen sheep to bleate in the belly of him that had eaten it:
how Saint Lupe or Low shut up the devil in a tankard all night, and made him
howl and bray most hideously, before he could get out: how Saint Barbara
turned the sheep of a certain shepherd that had discovered her to her
Father, into Locusts: how a certain Kinght being long learning his Aue Maria,
and not able to come unto Gratia plena, had a flower sprung out of his mouth in
his gr^^e, in every leaf whereof was written in Golden letters, Aue Maria: how
Saint Margaret was swallowed up of the devil in the figure of a Dragon, and
making the sign of the Cross in the Dragons belly, the Dragon burst, and
Saint Margaret came out safe and sound: how Saint Gooderick with the sign of
the Cross tamed Wolves and Serpents in such sort, that they lay with him by
the fire side without offering any hurt: how Saint Christophers staff being
stuck into the ground; began presently to bear leaves, and to burnish,
whereupon 8000. men were converted to the Faith of Christ. And how Saint
Nicholas when he was an Infant, fasted every Wednesday and Friday from sucking
his Mothers teate. How Saint Denis the Areopagitan, carried his head in his
hands after it was stricken off, two miles: How Saint Bernac turned oak leaves
into loaves, stones into fishes, and water into wine: how a Bishop called Trian
having killed his Cow and his Calfe to entertain Saint Patrick, found them the
next morning both feeding in his Meadow: how Saint Dominicks books lying three
days in a River, were taken up as dry as a feather: how Saint Romual spoke
Divinity as soon as he was borne, and preached as soon as he was baptized:
how Saint Christina spoke when her tongue was cut out: how Saint Ambright Earl
of Venice when he could not take the Sacrament at his mouth, laid it on his
side, which opened then to receive it, and then shut again: how Christ took
from Saint Katherine at her request her old heart, and gave her a new in room
thereof: How Saint Margaret catching the devil by the hair, trampled him
under her feet: how Saint Iuliana bound the devil, and whipped him, and dragged
him along the streets for a laughing stock to boys, and at last cast him into
a Iakes: how Saint Zene saw a company of devils sleeping on the skirts of a
woman's gown, and on a sudaine tumbling into the dirt, whereat he and the
other devils that followed on foot laughed heartily: and lastly how the devils
for seeing of holy water ran so fast out of the sick man's Chamber, that they
trod one on another heels for have. I say, to omit all these, with a
numberless number more of the same kind, I will insist in some only which
are not commonly known, and yet are as famous in foolery and falsehood as these
are.

7. And to begin with Francis their so much admired Saint; if we search the
books that are written of his acts, we shall find many so strange and
ridiculous wonders, Flores S. Francisci. cap. 15 and cap. 20. Lib. conf rmit.
S. Francise^ Chronic.
that they deserve rather laughter then credit. As that he commanded the
Swallows to hold their peace while he was preaching, and they obeyed him: and
that one day seeing a great flock of Birds together, he said unto his
Fellows that were with him in company, Mark me how I mean to preach to these
Birds my Sisters: and whilst he was preaching, how the Birds sat very
attentive, and did not depart thence till he had finished his Sermon, and given
them his benediction, which they received with show of great reverence, in
opening their eyes and beakes, and stretching forth their heads and necks.
That he converted a Wolf in the territory of Augubium which devoured both men
and beasts, and finding him said unto him: Come hither brother Wolf, I command
thee in the name of God, that thou hurt no person any more. Whereupon the Wolf
cast himself at his feet, and lifting up his paw, put it into Saint Francis
his hand, promising to do no more hurt, and so followed him up and down as
his brother, so that the very dogs would not bark at him. And again, that
upon a certain time being pursued by the devil, he fled to a rock, where
finding no place to hide him in, he thrust his face close to the rock, which
softning like Wax, received the impression, and hid him a long time from the
devil. This is a new trick of escaping the devil by nimblenesse of foot, and
absconsion in a rock: but they are as senseless as rocks that will give any
credit thereunto. It was as familiar with him and his Disciples, to raise up
the dead, as to drink a cup of Wine. At a time in a brauado, he slew a man's
Son, to the end that he might restore him again to life, as he did, if all
that is written be true. It is reported also of him in the famous book of his
Conformities with Christ, that finding at the Mass a Spider in the Chalice,
he would not put it out for shedding some drops of the blood, but drank it
with the blood and all, and that by and by, his thigh itching, the Spider
issued whole there-out, he having no hurt at all, nor yet the Spider, being
both preserved by the merit of the imagined blood. But the palp^blest Lie of
all the rest is this, that God upon a time determining utterly to destroy the
world for the contempt of the Gospel, his Son Christ to appease his anger,
promised to renew his life and passion in Saint Francis, and to imprint upon
him his five wounds; by the virtue whereof, men should be reclaymed from their
sins, and so saved. All which he did to pacify his Fathers wrath, and also
promised, to draw many thousand women out of the hand of the devil, by the
virginity of our Lady his Mother, renewed in the body of Saint Clare: both
which being effected, God changed his opinion, and pardoned the world: as if
the false wonders of Francis, and the hypocrisy of Clare, were of as great
merit and power with God, as the blood of Christ. The like we read of the
Iacobius of the Order of ^aint Bennet, who to countenance their opinion against
the Cordeliers, about the sinnelesse conception of the Virgin Mary, suborned a
nouice of their Covent to counterfeit Saint Francis, and to suffer with great
torment, five wounds to be seared into his body, with a number more such like
impostures; and to declare unto the people how all this was done unto him by
the revelation of the blessed Virgin. The whole story is at large related by
Paulus Langius a Monk of the same Order: declaring withal, that the
Magistrates of B^rne where the Tragedy was acted, Pa^l (...) C^ron. C^^zens^.
^n. 12. 6
finding out their knavery both by diverse evident suspicions, and also by the
confession of the counterfeit himse^fe, seized upon the Authors thereof, and
after degradation, committed them to the fire to be purged of their villainy.
If the marks of Saint Francis had been as well examined, as these were of this
poor Nouice, I doubt not, but they would have been proved to be of the same
nature and stamp.

8. But to leave their Francis, and to come to Dominicke another grand Saint of
theirs, and some of the rest of their Saints. This Saint Dominicke having a man
presented unto him, that was possessed with devils, took his Stole, and first
putting it on his own neck, after enclosed with it the neck of the
Demoniack, and commanded the devils to torment the man no more, at which
command they themselves were tormented within the man, and desired of him leave
to depart: but he would not, except they would give a pledge that they would no
more return unto him, and the pledge must be the holy Martyrs whose bodies
lay buried in that Church: Which after the devils had (with much ado) obtained
of the Martyrs to be their pledge, and proved it to be so by the turning of
their bodies in their graves, their heads being removed to the place where
their feet should be, he set them free to seek their fortune in the broad
world. This fine Fable is accompanied with another of the same mettell. As
Saint Dominicke was once preaching in a place, Henr. Stephan pr^p^sad Apolog.
pro Herod.
after the Sermon, certain Ladies which had been seduced by heresies came and
kneeled at his feet, and said unto him: O thou servant of God, help us: if it
be true which thou have preached, the spirit of Error has hitherto blinded our
thoughts. Then he said unto them, be still and wait a little, and you shall
see what Lord it is that you have served. And by and by they saw leaping into
the midst of them a great black Cat, with broad flaming eyes, and a bloody
huge tongue hanging down to his nauill, a wreathed tail turned up to his
back, showing: his filthy part behind, out of which came an horrible stink,
and when he had encompassed round about the Ladies on each side, at last he
mounted into the steeple by a Bellrope, and left a filthy savor behind him.
Then the Ladies gave God thanks, and returned to the Catholic Faith, Au^
mentiuntur poetae. I omit how Saint Dominicke forced the devil that came to
tempt him, to hold him the candle till it burnt his fingers, and made him yell
and howl; because this is already touched before by Ca^us. But to leave these
two, and to come to some other of their Saints.

And first of Augustine the Monk, our pretended English Conuerter: this man
having a holy staff in his hand which he usually walked withal, on a sudden
(says his Legend) it flew out of his hand, and pitched three furlongs off,
where it founded a plenteous Well, which was never seen before. Again he
tells, that he cursing the people of Kent for mocking him, their children
were presently borne with song tails in token of Gods vengeance upon them for
abusing so holy a man. And that which is yet more strangely ridiculous, it
relates that he raised up at a Mass two Ghosts out of the graves, one of a
Layman that died excommunicate for not paying his tithes and had lain in hell
150 years, and the other of the Priest that accursed him, who at his request
absolved this poor Ghost, and so they returned both to their grave in peace.
Full of like wondrous lies is that Legend which I forbear to mention. Next I
come to Saint Juniper who was accounted of Saint Francis for a most holy man,
of whom in the foresaid book of Conformities we find these two stories. The
first is, that on a certain time he being purposed to play the Cook, set on a
kettle with Pullets, without pulling, drawing, or washing them, together with
other fl sh and roots in like manner: and having made these boil together
upon a great fire, brought this brave dish to his compainions, who found no
distaste nor sluttery in it, but all as fine and neat as might be. This tale
calls to my mind another of the same nature, but of a contrary effect, to wit
of a Pilgrim, that coming to demand justice for the murder of his Son of a
Magistrate, who being then at dinner, was unwilling to hear him: he caused
the Capon that was on the table ready d^est and hot, to start upon the feet,
and to be covered with feathers and fly away, to the end he might thereby
iust^fie the truth and equity of his complaint. The second story of Friar
Juniper is, that being lodged at a certain time by a friend, in a fair bed
and white sheets, he left behind him in the bed his filthy Excrements for
payment, without bidding his Host so much as fare well: now these two honest
stories are recited in that book, to show the humility of this holy Friar: but
this is humility with a witness, except he was moved to such an act by
revelation, or that the thing he left behind him in the bed, was a
memphiticall perfume, and not a stinking excrement, and then he was a great
deal more holy then another Friar called Ruffin, who made the devil to flee
away with this threat, that h^e would do a thing in his throat. I could add
to these beastly tales, another of. S Genoule, who when his wife chanced to
say, that he could work miracles as well as her back side could sing; laid
this punishment upon her, that all the rest of her life, she never opened her
mouth to speak, but a crack with an evil savor came out behind. But to
return to S. Juniper, it is no marvel that he was so humble to beguild his
bed, seeing (as it is in the book of Conformities from whence these brave
stories are fetched) one Friar John de Vallees affirmed, that he smelt the
savor of the said Juniper 12. leagues off, so odoriferous was his sanctified
body. We read in the Legend of Saint Machary, that he did penance seven years,
amongst thorns and bushes, for that unadvisedly he killed a Flea that bit
him; neither can I forget another act of Saint Dominicke, recited toward the
end of his Legend, an act to make good companions laugh, and gear at: it is
this. There was a certain Nun called Mary, that was diseased in her thigh for
the space of five months, with great pain and hazard of her life: at last she
thought with her self that she was unworthy to pray unto God, and to be
heard; Vide Hen. Stephan. prapar. in Apol. pro Herod.
and therefore prayed Saint Dominicke to pray for her, that she might recover
her health: after whose prayer she fell asleep, and in her sleep saw S.
Dominicke standing by, who drew out from under his Cope an ointment of pleasant
savor, and therewith anointed her thigh: and when she demanded the name of the
ointment, Saint Dominicke answered that it was the ointment of Love: this is
the tale, and I leave the interpretation thereof to the Reader, without saying
what I think: only a merry man may imagine, that it was neither better nor
worse, then the priuacy of Saint Francis with Saint Clare, a holy Virgin, and
with Friar Mass a beautiful young man related in the book of his Conformities.

9. But not to trouble the Reader with more of these idle Fables, I pass over
Saint German, who preaching in Britain, because the King did not entertain
him in his house, therefore the next day possessed him of his Crown, and
placed a Neat-heard in his room, that had entertained him: and Saint Cosme and
Damicen, who cured a devout worshipper of them, of a Gangrene in his thigh, by
cutting it off whilst he slept, and fetching a Blackemores thigh that was
lately buried, and fastening it in the place thereof. And Friar Bennet of
Arezze, who being a devout worshipper of Saint Daniel, whose Sepulcher is in
Babylon, was carried thither upon the tail of a Dragon, and cut off his finger
for a Relike, and was brought again by the same means he went; and how he
being in a tempest cast into the Sea, was like a second Jonas, enclosed with a
cloud, and transported into Paradise; where being asked of Enoch and Elias what
he was; he answered, I am a brother of S. Francis: which Enoch and Elias no
sooner heard, but they danced for joy, and led him up and down to view that
pleasant place: from whence, he was presently after taken by a little cloud,
and carried again into the Sea, which men seeing, were wonderfully astonished.
I omit (I say) these, with a number more, and end with their tales of the
blessed Virgin, and our Savior Christ. For as their own Melchior Canus
affirms, they have even dared to abuse them with their Lies, as they have
done other Saints. For their fabulous tales and miracles concerning Christ, I
refer the Reader to those Apochrypha books which are written of the life of
Christ, where they shall find a whole thraue of them. As for the blessed
Virgin, they attribute to her such strange miracles, as do rather deserve
contempt then credit. As that she changed her self into the form and habit
of one Beatrix a Nun, and served in her room fifteen years, whilst she
played the Harlot abroad, and that at length Beatrix being oppressed with
poverty, came to the Nunnery gate in a secular habit, and asked the Porter
whether he knew Beatrix or no, Caesar. Ill^st. miracul. lib. 7. cap. 35.
who was sometime Guardianesse of that College. He answered, I know her well,
she is a good and holy Dame, and has lived long without reproach in this house:
which speeches she wondering at, and departing, the blessed Virgin appeared unto
her, and told her how she had supplied her place in her habit, and bad her now
return, for none living knew her fault. A tale devised by filthy Monks, to
encourage their devout sisters to play the harlots freely, in hope that the
Virgin Mary would cover their faults: and thus they make a Virgin, a patroness
of whoredom; as may appear also by another tale. A certain Abbess being
with child, Miracoli, della gloriesa Virg. Mar. imprima millian, Anno. 1547.
the Virgin Mary to hide her fault, presented her self in her shape to the
Bishop to be examined, and showed by proof that she was not with child, and so
cleared her from the imputation. But they do not only make her a patroness of
whoredom, but of theft also, as this tale witnesses. A certain woman having
robbed her husband, ran away with a Priest that had also robbed the Vestery,
and being pursued and taken, the Virgin Mary commanded the devil that had
tempted them to this sin, to deliver them again and restore them to their
owner; who presently freed them of their prisonment, and put the woman in bed
with her husband, and the Priest in his own house, bringing back again also
the things they had stolen into both places, and instead of them, left two
devils in prison in their shapes: and so they denying the fact, and the devils
being found in the prison who manifested what they were, and vanished; the
parties were acquit both of their punishment, and reproach. What shall I relate
how another woman took the Virgin Mary's Son out of her arms, and vowed to
keep him from her, as she did, till she had freed her son which was in
prison? And how they bring her in sometimes kissing an armed man, or a Monk,
sometimes giving suck with her teates, and sometimes giving a man a box on the
ear, with a number such like unbeseeming acts: or how to save the credit of an
Abbess who was with child, she commanded two Angels to play the midwiues, and
to carry the child in her name, to a certain Hermit, to be kept for her till
it was seven years old: Alanus, and was so familiar with him, that she not
only espoused him to her husband, but also kissed him, and opened to him her
paps, and poured great plenty of her own milk into his mouth. These are
sufficient if not too many, to show, not only the falsity, but also the
ridiculousnesse, of most of their miracles which they so brag of; and how
fitly they answer those which S. Paul and S. John ascribe unto Antichrist.

10. To the second sort of Popish miracles, appertain those things that to the
outward ense seem miraculous, but indeed have nothing of a miracle in them,
nor of a supernatural effect. Caesar. lib. 10. cap. 27.28.
As that which Caesarius reports for a miracle, that upon the Eve of S.
Mathias, a thunderbolt fell upon S. Andrews tower in Collen: For how often is
it heard to thunder, not only at the end of February, but also in the month
of January, and December? And that in the year 1222. thunder falling upon a
Theater, twenty men were stricken dead, and only one Priest ascaped, flying
when he saw the others burning. In brief, if any one by any means were
cured of some grievous disease, or were delivered out of prison, or his ship
after a tempest were arrived at a good Haven, or escaped ship-wracke, or any
such like thing; if the party called upon any of their Saints, presently they
cry, A miracle, as if some extraordinary matter was happened; when it is merely
the providence and goodness of God, that causes the Sun to shine upon the
just and unjust that has done it: and surely in such things if any thing be
miraculous, it is the ingratitude of men, who having felt the succor so
present of the divine Majesty in their necessities, in stead of offering up
unto him the cup of thanksgiving, they give the glory of their deliverances to
Idols, and dead creatures, and so rob him of the homage which is due unto
him. Like unto Jeroboam, who said of his Calves which he had newly fashioned,
1. King. 12.28.
Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt:
Dan. 5^ 3.
or to Beltassar the King of Babylon, who is reproved by Daniel, for magnifying
his Gods of Gold, Silver, Iron, Brass, and Wood; that neither saw, nor heard,
nor understood; and not praising the God of heaven, in whose hand was his
breath and all his ways: or to the Emperor Mark Aurelius, who having by the
prayer of his Christian soldiers, obtained a memorable and miraculous victory
against the Marcomans, in stead of giving the glory thereof to the true God,
attributed his victory to Jupiter, causing it to be engraven in a pillar in
honor of that Idol, as Baronius reports.

11. To this kind, I may refer all such counterfeit miracles, as have
appeared strange to the ignorant persons, as have been contrived by the secret
Iuglings and fraud of men: as that of Ioane the holy Maid of Kent, who was long
time held for a Prophetess, by the subtle invention of the Gray Friars: For
they said that she was descended from heaven, and that she did neither eat nor
drink, though in secret, she banqueted and reuelled with her holy Fathers.
Amongst other things, they persuade the silly people, that she knew the sins
of all persons; and indeed she would tell them that came unto her, the sins
that they had committed; but it was by this means: the Friars ^uffered none to
come unto her, but such as had first confessed themselves to their Ghostly
Father; and she had a place fitted of purpose, where this holy Hypocrite might
hear their confessions, being herself unseen: But her cosonage being at
length discovered, she with her holy Fathers, the deuisers of this miracle, was
executed to death, as our Chronicles witness. Again, a certain Pardon peddler
of S. Anthony, used this trick of legerdemaine to gain credit to his Saint
and himself: he st^owed gunpowder in the nest of a Pie, that was near unto
the place where he was to preach, and then tied unto the nest a little cord,
setting fire on the other end thereof. Now as he was divulging his pardons in
his Sermon, the Pie senting the powder, made a great noise, whereat he
expecting the same, and knowing that the fire was crept near unto the nest,
cried out: Thou wicked beast, that hinderest this holy preaching, S. Anthony
will burn thee with fire: and by and by, the fire being got to the nest by the
cord, burned it with the young ones that were therein: and so a miracle was
cried, to the great gain of this pardon monger. Ioh. Menard. lib. declar. la
regle and estat. de. Cor. Achers.
The same Author reports another miracle of the same impression: to wit, that
these Priests of S. Anthony, used to make hot their little crosses or images of
brass, whilst the good wife went into her garner or cellar to fetch them their
alms: and when she had offered her gift, they caused her to kiss the said
cross or Image; which being found hot, they persuaded the good woman, that S.
Anthony was angry, as not being content with her gift; and then in have she
returned again to augment the same, and finding the image grown cold, it was
a sign (as they persuaded her) that S. Anthony was well pacified. He relates
another also, acted by the masters of the same faculty, to wit, how a gallant
of this trade, being offended that nothing was given unto him at a poor
husbandmans hou e, set fire on the stable where his Kine were, which burned not
only the stable, but the rest of his house, and all his goods: and this went
current for a miracle of S. Anthony, till the villainy was discovered. He adds
also another story of the same subject, how another of S. Anthonies Priests,
cozened a poor butcher and his wife of a piece of linen cloth, by persuading
his wife, first that her two Swine which she had, would shortly turn up their
heels, unless they were cured by some holy blessing of S. Anthony. For which,
she must give him that piece of linen cloth which was in her house, which she
did: and then by deluding her husband that pursued him for the cloth, with
putting some fire into it, which made it to burn and smoke, so that the poor
man astonished, gave back the cloth to the Priest, and cried the miracle, and
went about the Country with him to publish the same. Again, in the Country of
Berry in France, Vide Henric. Stephan. in praesat. ad Apol. pro Herod.
there was a Chambermaid of a Priest (to speak in reverence to their shaven
order) that received a swines blood into a Tin platter, the Bosse whereof was
fashioned with the picture of S. Peter, the which plate the Priest used for the
receiving of his offerings of the people: now it happened that some drops of
the blood entered into the Bosse, and there congealed, which afterward being
thawed, appeared in the face of S. Peter, and then lo the bells rung, and the
people assembled together, to see this great miracle; and so was it believed,
till by another Priest that envied his fellow, the cause was discovered, and
the miracle dismiracled. A like tale the same Author reports to have happened
at a Castle without Bourges, it was thus: It chanced that a Pigion bleeding
with a blow which it had received, light upon the head of an image of our Lady,
where it came to pass, that the blood ran down upon her face: presently a
miracle was proclaimed with a loud outcry; but the Kings Lieutenant causing the
head to be searched, found both the feathers of the foul, and blood in the
holes thereof; and then the miracle which had been cried so loud, was fair and
soft vncryed again.

12. It is no news, nor strange thing, to hear of infinite numbers of blind,
lame, and diseased persons, that have been cured by such a Saint, or such a
Crucifix, or such an Image; and especially by the Images of our Lady at
Lawretto, Halls, and Sichem, and other places. But it is to be noted, that
though some such cures might be wrought by the power of Satan, to further
superstition; yet most of them were merely counterfeit: for it has been an
ordinary practice of Popish Priests, to have men to feign themselves blind, or
lame, or otherwise ill affected with some dangerous disease, and then to
return as if they were sound and healed. There be many examples of this kind
of imposture: But I will relate only three, out of Henry Stephanus Apology.
The first is of S. Renand at Paris, in the suburbs of our Lady of the
fields, which Saint, the Monks of that place would make men believe, was the
most holy and greatest worker of miracles, that was within fifty miles round
about. And to this effect, they suborned certain lame, and blind, and other
counterfeites, who knew their watchword, when they should cry, I am cured: But
it happened, that one amongst the rest, that said he was borne blind, and
making the same outcry, I can see: a certain man desirous to discover the
abuse, bad him if he could see, to tell him what color the lining of his
cloak was of; the counterfeit presently to prove that he could see, told him
directly the color: which being heard of many, their knavery was revealed; for
how could a man borne blind judge of colors? The second example is, of those
that feign themselves sick of the falling sickness, which is called S. John's
evil, and therefore they use to pray unto him for remedy thereof. Some such
went upon S. John's Festival day, to entreat his help, who after they had
fomed and cried a long time, John, John, John, about his shrine or image, made
show to be healed: wherein is an apparent impudent falsehood, for they that fall
of that evil, can neither speak, nor move, as all know. The third example, is
of a certain Monk of Venice, called Fra. Mathio, to who^e sepulcher there
resorted multitudes of people, that seemed either blind, or lame, or impotent
in some member, or distressed with some evil or other, and these persons
lodged at the best Innes, for they were well waged for their pains: but ere
they had stayed any while there, they be came all sound and well as they
re^orted: howbeit this iugling trick was easily spied and dis^ouered by all
men of understanding, and therefore the Priests being ashamed of it, laid it
soon aside; and so this holy Monk was not so soon canonized, but he was
decanonize^ as soon. And this in truth was, and is an ordinary practice of
Romish Monks and Priests, deluding poor people, and blinding their eyes with a
mist of supposed miracles; when indeed there was no such matter, but all
hypocrisy and dissimulation.

13. And to conclude, what should I speak of the speaking, weeping, nodding,
stretching forth the hand, and such like actions of their images? are they not
all forged in the same shop? The Image of the blessed Virgin is said to have
spoken to S. Bernard, bidding him good morrow, and to S. Hyacynth, entreating
him to take her and her Son with him, when he fled from the Tartarians: and
to Alexius, who staying long in the Church Porch, the image of our Lady bad the
Sexton let him in. And the crucifix to Thomas Aquinas, Thou have written well
of me Thomas, what reward will thou have? And to the Council of Winchester
gathered together about the question of Priests marriages, Take Dunstanes ways
unto you, for they are the best: as has been declared before. Concerning all
which, I may give the same censure, that Polydore Virgil, otherwise a strong
Papist, does of the last; that they were nothing but the contriuings of subtle
Priests, who hiding themselves, either behind or in the hollow of the image,
uttered these voices: witness these few examples. A certain Florentine, a
devout worshipper of S. John Baptist, was at a time inquisitiue of the image of
this Saint, whether his wife had ever played false with him or no: which request
being ouer-heard of some bon compagnion, he placed himself so closely behind
the image, that the next day when the devout jealous fool came again, he
spoke unto him, and bad him come again the next day, and he should be resolved
of his doubt: he supposing it to be the voice of the Saint, came at the time
appointed, and then the other not failing to lurk in his old place, told him
that his wife had played false, and that he was a cuckold: at which the poor
man, being first abashed, at length grew into choler, and said to the image:
Cursed be thou of God, thou have always been an evil tongued Saint, and
therefore Herod cut off thy head: and so with other reproachful speeches he
departed in discontent. This story is to be seen in an Italian book entitled
Piaccuoleze del piouano Arlotto: Vide Hen. Stephan. prapar. ad Apol. pro Herod.
and does not only show how images speak, but also how sawcily they handle
their Saints, when they anger them in any thing. To which purpose, the same
Author reports another story, which I will not forbear to set down by the
way, that we may the better judge of their devotion: It is this. A Cook of
Florence, that v ed with great devotion to worship an image of a young Jesus
Christ, to wit, of that age which he was of when his mother found him in the
Temple disputing with the Doctors, had but one Son, who with a tyle falling
on his head, was so wounded, that he was like hardly to escape. Then the Father
runs in have to his little image, and instead of a candle which he used to
offer unto it, brought a good rod to terrify it, praying it since he had
served him so long, and had never received any boon from him, now to grant him
the life of his child, that was all his comfort and hope: but his Son dyed,
and he in a rage returned to his little Jesus, and without either kneeling or
reverence said unto him: Thou boy, I renounce thee, and will never serve thee
more: would thou not grant me this one request, for all the service I have
done thee? If I had prayed to this great crucifix which is hard by thee, I know
I should have been heard, but this it is to deal with boys, I promise thee
for thy sake I will never have to do with boys again. What sottish ignorance,
what profane superstition is here? Ignorance, in distinguishing betwixt a
great Jesus and a little one, an old and a young: and profaneness, in defying
him whom he had worshipped as his God. But to return to my purpose of speaking
images. There was one that prayed to the image of our Lady, and hearing an
answer that pleased him not, made by some iugling Priest behind the image, he
judged by the manner of the voice, that it was not the mother that spoke, but
the child, and therefore said unto him, Hold thy peace thou little wagge,
suffer thy mother to speak, who is elder then thou. By this hand full of
flower, we may judge of the whole batch of talking images: And that the
Weeping, Sweating, Nodding, and Moving of images, is a loaf baked in the same
oven, as diverse examples do testify: for their tears and sweat might easily
be procured, by distilling by night into some concauity of the image, either
water or oil: or by annoynting their faces without, and heating them within,
with a chafing dish of coals. As old men in the Country stick not to tell of
an image at Berry, near the Abbey of Ramsey, which used to sweat; and that
sweat was held a sovereign remedy against all aches, and weakness in the
back; and therefore happy was he that could get any of it in his
handkercheife. So there was a crucifix at Maret, Houeden.
near unto Toulouse, down whose cheeks tears used to distill ordinarily;
but deceitfully, as my Author affirms to have been proved by search. The like
may we think of that Roode of P^yteirs, which when William Longshamp Bishop
of Ely lay a dying, let tears fall abundantly out of his eyes, as if it had
been a flood of water: but no marvel, for they say it was the use of that
Rood always to mourn when a Bishop departed. Concerning moving of the hand,
the Image of Saint Nicholas at Westchester, may serve to discover the trick of
all the rest: for at the burning of it in the market place of the City, it was
found that the Image was made with such a devise, that if one standing behind
did pull a certain string which was in the back part thereof, it would move
the hand as if it blessed the people. This is known to be true by many of the
inhabitants yet living. But this was a blessing Image: the next I speak of,
was hurting and malicious. For when as a certain Peasant of Burgundy, near
unto a Town called Chascule, was praying to a Crucifix for the soul of one
newly deceased, and for whom the Bells rang, the Crucifix in stead of making
only a sign to him by nodding his head, by the weight of him that was behind
it, fell down right upon him, and so crushing the poor man, that the ringers
were feign to leave the Bells, and carry him to his house half dead; where he
lay sick a long time, after which sickness returning to the Church, and
seeing a fair young Crucifix with a smiling countenance in place of the old,
which had broken it neck in the fall, he could not forbear but say thus unto
it: What good countenance soever thou cast upon me, yet I will never trust
thee: for if thou live to the age of a man, thou will be as wicked as thy
Father that thought to kill me. I could enlarge this point with many more such
like examples; but these I think are sufficient to declare, that a great part
of their pretended miracles, are nothing but things either effected by natural
causes, or devised by subtle Priests for their own gain. And they themselves
when they call Piae frandes, Agrippa d^ v^ritat. scient. cap. 97.
holy deceites, do plainly intimate as much: and Caietane a Cardinal and a
great learned Divine faith, that the credit of their miracles depends upon
the report of men, who because they are men, may both deceive others, and
deceive themselves.

14. As touching the third sort of their miracles, they are such as are indeed
things admirable to the eyes and opinion of men, but yet are not true miracles,
which cannot be effected but by a Divine power: whereas these are merely the
works and effects of evil spirits, as were the wonders of Pharaohs Magicians,
the devil herein ayding his servants, and enabling them to work meruailes
for the advancement of his own kingdom. As for example, cannot the devil
willingly quit a possessed Demoniack, making show to be forced thereunto by
Exorcismes? Cannot he disturb the humors in a body, and so cause some sudaine
sickness, which shall cease as soon as he withdraws his working? They
heal truly, when they cease to hurt. He that desires examples of these
wonderments, shall find a full armefull of them, in the book of Saint Francis
Conformities with Christ. For whereas it relates so many healings of the sick
and diseased, so many raisings of the dead, and other strange things done by
him and his disciples, that it might seem they had all miracles at command,
and that it was as easy and ordinary for them to work a miracle as for to
eat and drink: what should we imagine, but that either they are lying Fables,
or if true, feats of Satan to delude men's souls? For is it likely that they
should exceed Christ and his Apostles, in the power of working miracles? And to
whom but Satan can we ascribe it, if it be true that Saint Francis Cowle
should be so miraclificous, as to give sight to three blind persons, a man and
two women? and that his Breeches had that virtue in them, to make women
conceive with Child that were naturally barren? with a number such like. But
they brag of no miracles so much as of those that have accompained their
Mass: and yet can they not produce a stranger wonder in this kind, then that
which Irenaeus reports to have been acted by a certain heretical Impostor,
Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 9.
called Mark. For in celebrating this Sacrament, he so changed the color of
the wine, that it appeared to be very blood, and caused a little wine so to
puff up and swell, that it filled the whole Cup, and ran over, yea and another
greater vessel also without any addition or augmentation of the liquor. This
must needs be a Sathanicall illusion, and so it is censured by Irenaeus. In
like manner in the Church of Rome, Alex. Hales. in 4. sent. q. 13.
one of their own Schoolmen confesses, that there appeared sometimes in the
Sacrament the very substance of flesh, either by the legerdemaine of men, or by
the operation of the devil. And ^^ell upon the Canon of the Mass affirms,
that sometimes miracles are wrought at Images by the working of devils, to
deceive such as addict themselves to those mi ordered services, God so
permitting, and their infidelity requiring. They tell how Saint Dominick, and
S. Francis, were ravished up into the air, which is a strange thing if true
but yet such as might be effected by the devil. For Eunapius in the l^fe of
the Philosophers says, that Iamblicus whilst he was praying, was hoisted up
ten cubits from the earth: and themselves write, that Simon Magus used to fly
in the air, till Saint Peter brought him down headlong to his confusion.
Caesarius a Monk, reports likewise, Casar. lib. 8. cap. 19.
how a certain Knight called Gerrard of Hollenbach, going a Pilgrimage to
Saint Thomas in the Indies, and promising his wife to return within five
years, or else that she should have liberty to marry, dividing a Ring
betwixt them in pledge of this agreement, upon the very day of the expiration
of these five years when she was married to another, was transported by a
devil from the Indies to his own house before the new married were got to
bed, and being known of his wife by the half Ring dispossessed the other of
his prize. When therefore we read such examples of Monks and others,
transported from place to place, why should we not conclude, that the devil
furnished them with Horse, Chariot, and Coachmen, as he does often to Coniurers
and Witches, and not that they were transported by a fiery Chariot from heaven,
as Elias was? So that when we hear of moving Images, of Saints going through
the fire without burning, of entering Churches and other places the doors being
shut, of plagues falling upon those that despised their Saints, and such like
things; we ought to remember that Simon Magus did by the power of the devil
as much, or more. Baron. An. ^8.2^.
He (says Baronius) made Images to walk, rolled himself in fire without
burning, flew in the air, turned stones into bread, opened barred doors,
broke chains of iron, caused many shadows to walk before him, which he said
were the souls of men: and lastly, if any durst repute him for an Impostor, he
either afflicted with diseases, or tormented him with evil spirits.

15. And indeed what miracles can the Church of Rome brag of, which are not
equalled by the heathen through the operation of the devil? It is written of
Apollonius Tyaneus, that he raised to life a young Maid laid in her Coffin;
that he banished the pestilence out of Ephesus, for which cause the Ephesians
erected a Statue unto him in their City, and offered sacrifices unto him, as
unto a God: he being at Ephesus declared to the Citizens the death of the
Emperor Domitian, at the same hour that he was slain at Rome: and that which
is most strange, that he did not only work wonders in his life, but also
after his death, at the Monument which was set up unto him. So Seleucus, whilst
he was sacrificing, the wood that was above the Altar, turned it self toward
the Image of Jupiter, and was fired no man knowing how. A Roman Virgin carried
water in a Syue: another drew with her girdle a ship that was drowned in the
sand, into the Haven, which by the strength of Men and Oxen could not be
moved. In the second Punick-warre, an Ox spoke, and said; Cave tibi Roma,
Beware to thee Rome. The Emperor Vespasian (if Cornelius Tacitus may be
believed) opened the eyes to one that was blind in Alexandria, at the
advertisement of the Oracle of Serapis, and cured one that was lame. And in
like manner did the Emperor Adrian, to one that was borne blind, as Spartianus
reports. But that which Lipsius writes of a certain Tablet taken out of the
Temple of Aesculapius, Baron. An. 139. ^.
confirmed also by Baronius in his Annals, is not only strange, but even a
perfect picture of Romish miracles; for he affirms that in this Tablet it was
recorded, that one Caius a blind man worshipping at the Altar, was restored to
sight by touching the Altar with his fingers, and after putting them into his
eyes: and how one Lucius desperately sick of a Plurisie, was cured with the
ashes of the Altar, mixed with wine and applied unto his side; and how one
Julian was cured of an extreme vomiting of blood, by taking a few grains of a
Pineapple from the Altar, and eating them three days being mixed with honey:
and how one Valerius Aper a blind Soldier, recovered his sight by anointing
his eyes with the blood of a white Cock mixed with honey. Now it is to be
noted, that all these things were done by the advertisement of the Oracle; and
that those that were thus cured, returned and gave thanks unto the Idol, or
rather the devil for their deliverance. ^f these reports were false, as some
think, then we may judge the same of Popish miracles; and if true, then we
see that if such wonders might be done under the first Beast, for the upholding
of their heathnish Idolatries, why not under the second, for the maintenance of
Antichristian superstitions? And that we may see that these two Beasts are not
unlike, I will conclude with two notable examples. The first under Pope Adrian
the sixth, Remond de Antich cap 17 Paul^ ^u^us. hist. lib. 21.
when the City of Rome was greatly afflicted with the pestilence; A certain
Greek named D^metrio Spertauo, took a Bull and cut off a part of his right
horn, and whispering some charm in his right care, made him instantly so
tame, that he led him with a thread tied to his left horn, to a pillar where
he sacrificed him, whereupon the contagion presently ceased. This abominable
sacrifice was tolerated at Rome under the Popes nose, and at that time when
Popery was in the ruff, and when it was no less then death to preach the pure
doctrine of the Gospel. The second is more horrible, acted by Priests at the
siege of Mount Dragon in Naples: the story is this. The Castle being ready to
yield for want of water, certain people of the City deceiving the Watch and
Sentinells of the enemies camp in the night, drew to the Sea bank an Image of
a Crucifix, Adrian. Pont^^. de bello Neapol. lib. 5.
and cast it into the Sea with execrations and imprecations, and in the mean
while, the Priests set an Ass at the Temple gate, and sung him a funeral
Hymn as to one about to dye, and then put a consecrated Host into his mouth,
and burned him alive at the gate of the Temple, which deuillish sacrifice was
no sooner performed, but the heaven was covered with clouds, a storm arose,
and with thunder and lightning, a great abundance of rain fell, and so the
besieged were delivered from their danger. Is not this an horrible miracle of
Romish Priests, and can any but the devil be author thereof? For Christ
crucified was drowned by them in his Image, and surely God could not be present
at such an abomination. These be their miracles then that they vaunt so much
of, either ridiculous Fables, or men's delusions, or satan impostures. And it
is Gods mercy that they brag of them, seeing else we should want one maine
Argument to prove the Pope to be Antichrist, whose coming must be with lying
signs and wonders, and with the efficacy of Satan to deceive, if it were
possible, the very Elect.

CHAP. 2. Delusions by Purgatory.
1. ANtichrist like Morpheus transformes himself into many shapes, sometimes
into the shape of a Lamb with Servus seruorum Dei: sometimes into a Lion by
his Excommunications and thundering threats: sometimes into a Wolf by
devouring not only men's goods, but their bodies and souls by false doctrines:
sometimes into a Tiger, by cruel massacres and bloody persecuting the Saints:
and sometimes into a Fox, by subtle tricks and crafty delusions. And as the
Fox has many shifts, and windings, and turnings to deceive withal; so has he
many devices to delude the world. One I have discovered, which is by false
miracles. And now I propound a second, which shall be from the false opinon
they have of the Saints: not that I purpose to derogate any thing from the true
Saints of God, who are blessed in heaven, and to be honored on earth; but to
show how they are abused by the Papal Antichristian Church, and how thereby
they have deluded the world, and gained great riches to themselves; for this is
the chief aim of all their designs in this kind, and therefore whatsoever
brings water to this Mill, be it never so foolish, and against reason, they
maintain with might and maine, and what so is or can be spoken in opposition
thereunto, is so much labor lost, because it is spoken against the belly which
has no ears. The old proverb is verified by them. The smell of gain is good
out of any thing. And when they are vpbraided with their covetousness, they
laugh in their sleeue with that auaricious Athenian, -- Populus me sibilat, at
mihi plaudo
Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.


Whereupon I remember the answer of a Monk of Blois, to one that mocked him
and his Order; Henry Stephen quo supra.
It shall be long (says he) ere you of the Laytie, shall so mock us of the
Clergy, as we have many years mocked you: which he spoke having regard to
the delusions wherewith they had entertained the world a long time, and led
them by the nose as a Bear to the stake. I confess he spoke not so
blasphemously, as Pope Leo the tenth, who answered Cardinal Bembo, alleging
unto him a text of Scripture, What riches has this fable of Jesus Christ
brought unto v^? Though as concerning riches this wretch lied not, and had
spoken truly if he had said thus; What riches have we gotten in abusing the
name of Jesus Christ? For it is incredible how great the Treasures of the
Church and Churchmen have been. Baptista Full. gos. de hom. lux^. atque
delicijs l. 6. cap. 1.
Baptista Fulgosius a great favorer of the Roman Church, reports of one
Peter Riary a Friar Minor that was made Gardinall by Pope Sixtus the fourth,
who contented not himself only to wear in his private house garments of cloth
of Gold, and to use Couerlets for his bed of the same stuff, but even the
tickes for his beds were cloth of Gold for the most part, and the rest silk.
He relates also how at Rome he made a Feast to Ellenor of Arragon, who went to
marry with Hercules d'Este Duke of Ferrara, wherein he furnished her service
with ^uch variety of dishes, and abundance of exquisite cates, that th banquet
lasted seven hours: during which time (least they should be weary of eating)
he intermixed diverse sports and enterludes: and to ostent his high
Magnificence, at every service his servants changed their habits, and came in
new attire. And yet all this is nothing, in comparison of that which he
expended upon his Harlot ^^r^sia: for he entertained her in that sumptuositie
and pomp, that her very shoes were covered with precious stones. This
Fulgosius reports out of his own knowledge and view. But to return to Pop^
L^^ that wondered at the great rich^s which this Fable (as he called it) had
procured unto them: (...) did he augment the same by one only Cro^sad^? (...)
F^iar of Millan called S^mson, out of the money (...) had gained by this means
offered an hundre^ (...) tho^sand Ducates for the Papal seat: and (...) much,
what may we think that he had gai^ (...) ^bou^? For it is not likely, but
that he would (...) self a good sum against all events. Now (...) ^eruants
was so great, what may we judge of (...) their Masters? And to show evidently
that they (...) the ol^ proverb before named the booty and (...) which they
receive from common Harlots does manife^^ (...) same. For is it not abominable,
that the successors of Saint Peter (as they brag themselves to be) should
receive a good part of their revenue from those that got their living by the
miserable sweat of their bodies, and that so filthy again should be
consecrated to their holiness? True it is, that in the time of Pope Paul the
third, the number of such detestable Creatures was much diminished, for he had
in his register recorded but five and forty thousand, a thing greatly lamented
by them, that the devils kingdom was no greater, though for all that it be a
good and ^ound number. And it is certain that the name Courtizane (which is
the honestest title of a Whore) arose from the Court of Rome, as being such as
were night and day entertained by the great Cardinalis, Prelates, and
Courtiers. In a word Barelet one of their great preachers, gives us a true
proverb that ran current in his time: That Priests, M^rkes, and the S ^, are
three vnsati^b e things. experience showing the same to be true, when as they
did not only suck profit from the quick and the dead, but also pilled and
polled their children from g^neration to g neration.

2. One means amongst the rest, whereby they have thus abuse^ the world and
scraped together so great wealth, is a fall e persuasion wrought into men's
hearts of the dead, whether such as are canonized and rest in heaven as they
say; or such as remain without canonization, are either simply in Paradise, or
tormented in Purgatory: These be the ^^o sorts of dead, which they raise their
profit from. And to (...) in with the last first: who knows not, that the
chief (...) a ^ce of simple Priests and Monks, was, and is drawn (...) ^^eir
Req^^e^? as heir common manner of speech wit^ (...) ^^t us go d ^^k^ upon the
first skin that comes to (...) ^et: witness also that Priest that thus
complained to (...) ^ishioners: What wo^ld you have me to do my p^rishio^ (...)
^ou give me no offerings, and if you dye not, See Henry Stephens Praeface to
his Apolo^y where these things are at large set down.
wherewith (...) I live? Now all this traffic is grounded upon the ter^^or of
Purgatory, from which men hoped to be delivered by their large gifts to
Priests, who should sing Mass for them. But if after they had sung their
Requiem, their reward was not such, as that they might chaunt Gau eamu^; then
was the devil there presently, then the souls of them for whom so lean a
Requiem was sung, returned to be revenged of their Children, or Parents, or
Friends, that had not so well rewarded the Priests, that they might by their
powerful Dirges be, if not wholly released from Purgatory, yet at least eased
of some part of their torments. This is so common a trick in the Papacy, to
bring water to their Mill, and to drayne men's purses; as it will be but lost
labor to stand much upon it. Therefore to pass over examples which are
frequent in this kind of delusion: I say only, that it was, and is, an
ordinary custom and practice of the Romish Priests, when they confessed such
persons as lay at the point of death, to cause them to make S. Francis, or S.
Dominick, or some other Saint, the Patron of their Religion, their heir, or
else they could not be saved: by which means, they drew from some half, from
others two third parts, and from others the whole sum of their substance;
which should have been to maintain their wife and children: for sometimes if
the children refused to turn Monks, they seized upon all as their own
inheritance. There be extant at this day many Testaments and Wills, that give
faith to this report. But that which is worse then all, is, that ofttimes they
do not stay till men be near their end, but make them put off their clothes
ere they be willing to go to bed, as the proverb speaks. Their Croysado is a
notable trick to this purpose; for never did any thief so injuriously take a
travelers purse by the high way, as the Croysado ministers do secretly rob
and spoil infinite numbers of people; and that not only the rich, but even
the poor also; making them to borrow, beg, or steal, to give to this holy
use; or else neitheir themselves, nor their children, can be saved. By which
means it is no doubt, but that many of these poor people, in stead of
redeeming their souls from the devil, as they supposed, have even sold them
into his hands. It is no new nor soft cry of theirs, that Paradise is to be
bought for money, as the old Latin verses found in S. Stephens Church at
Bourges, engraven in a Table of stone bear witness. The first whereof is
this, Hic des deuote, coelestibus associo te: but never were men constrained to
buy Paradise till this trick of the Croysado was invented: for the
authorization and confirmation whereof, the Preach^rs of those times alleged
many strange tales and reports, as this one among the rest; that when the
living gave money to the Priests for the dead, the souls that were in
Purgatory, hearing the sound of the money ting in the basin, fell a laughing
for joy of their deliverance.

3. Thus was the world deluded in those times, by these panick fears of that
supposed fire of Purgatory, which men stood in more awe of, then of hell it
self. But yet some were wiser then others, and easily smelt out this religious
fraud: of which sort I will propound some few examples. Pope Clement the eight,
being besieged in the Castle of S. Angelo, together with certain Prelates his
friends, a Gentleman of Rome was bold thus to say, Hitherto I have believed
that the Pope could deliver souls out of Purgatory: but now seeing that he
cannot free himself out of this earthly prison, I am constrained to believe,
that much less can be deliver souls out of that infernal prison. Another
jest was acted at Florence, of the same metal with the former: A certain
Florentine being importuned by some Friars, to cause Mass to be sung, to
deliver the soul of his Son lately deceased out of Purgatory; he consented,
and promised them a crown for their pains, when they had delivered his Sons
soul: whereupon the Friars having sung their Masses, forgot not to demand
their crown. But the Florentine made them this answer: If you make it appear
unto me, that you have delivered him out of Purgatory, you shall have your
crown, but not before that be done. The Friars, after long contestation,
complained to the Duke, and desired justice against the party; who called the
man before him, and demanded why he did not pay them according to his promise?
to whom he answered, that his promise was upon condition, that they should
deliver his sons soul out of Purgatory; which if it might appear that they
had done, he would presently pay them. The Duke hearing this, told the Friars
that the man had reason; and therefore cause either the soul that you have
delivered to come before me in person, and testify his deliverance, or let him
send two other souls to witness the same, or at least let him send a letter
signed with the hand of Jesus Christ, and then you shall be sure to receive
your crown. Thus was Purgatory derided, at Florence in Italy, under the Popes
nose, and that in the time of their greatest blindness. Another like mockage
was committed in France; for when as the Priests demanded their pay of a
certain man for delivering a soul out of Purgatory by their Masses, he asked
them; If a soul that was once come out of that prison were in any danger to
return thither again? Who an wered, No: why then (quoth he) there is no need
that I should give you money for this soul that is already delivered and in
safety; I will rather keep it for the deliverance of one that is still there
detained. An Italian also at Venice, in as merry a mood, and with as good a
grace, told the Popes Legate; that if his Holiness had been well advised, he
would not have said that he could deliver souls out of Purgatory, but out of
Hell. For concerning Purgatory, there were two things to prove: First, that
there is a Purgatory: and secondly, that he can deliver souls out of it:
whereas every one believes that there is a hell, and so there remained nothing
but to prove, that he could deliver souls out of it.

4. He that does but well consider the reasons which they allege for
Purgatory, will say that there never was a greater delusion in the world: for
to omit the Texts of Scripture, which they wrest and wring till they bleed
again, against all sense for the proof thereof: they use besides in their
preaching, many pretty tales, to amaze and delude the vulgar sort. A certain
preacher at Paris, in the reign of Henry the second, speaking against the
Lutherans that would not believe there was a Purgatory, said, he would tell his
Auditors a story to confute these fellows; which was this, and thus: I rode
(says he) late one evening to my fathers house at S. Anthonies bridge, and as
I was riding with my man before me on a very good horse that carried my
cloak-bag, his horse stayed on a sudden contrary to his custom, and began to
puff and short: I bad my man to spur him: so I do said he, but he will not
go forward; for a certain I know he sees something: Then I remembering what my
mother had told me long before, that in that very place she had seen some
apparition; I fell to my Pater noster, and Aue, and bad my man again to spur
his horse forward, which he did, but the horse having gone two or three steps,
stopped again, and began a fresh to puff and blow; my man then told me
again, that doubtless there was some spirit in the way; and then I said my De
profundis, which was no sooner done, but the horse went forward, and by and by
stopped the third time; I had no sooner said, Auete omnes animae et Requiem
aeternam, but he passed freely without any more stopping. Therefore seeing
these wicked Lutherans say there is no Purgatory, and that we ought not to pray
for the dead; I send them to my man's cloak-bagge horse, even to my man's horse,
to learn their lesson. This Asse-like reason you see is taken from an horse,
and indeed fitter for a horse to believe then a man. Another preacher, a gray
Friar, called Bardotti, being demanded why the good thief went right into
Paradise, and tasted not of Purgatory, seeing he had not done any penance here
on earth; answered, that the reason (as he found it related in a certain
Gospel) was, for that when Christ being an infant, was carried into Egypt,
this thief hindered his companions from robbing him, and those that were with
him, and also that he then said to Christ; I pray you bear in memory the good
turn that I do you; which was promised by Christ, and this promise was then
performed, when they were crucified together: for in recompense of his good
turn, he freed him from Purgatory, and led him directly into Paradise. But I
wonder in what Gospel he found this. Sure I am, neither in Matthew, Mark,
Luke, nor John, but in some Apocrypha Gospel, if rather it were not alye
forged in his own brain. Take with you two or three stories more, and then I
shall leave this Popish fire to be quenched, or kindled at their pleasures. The
Cordeliers or gray Friars, and the Iacobins, envying each others gain and
thriuing, and laboring to get custom in their trades, thus encountered
together. A gray Friar preaching to the people in a town of Sicily, made his
Auditors believe, that S. Francis every year upon his Feast day, descended
into Purgatory, and delivered from thence, all the souls of such as had been
bountiful to his brethren. The Iacobins perceiving that by this tale the
Cordeliers had gained much custom, and profit, and so hindered their trading,
began to preach, that the Virgin Mary, as having more charity and authority
then S. Francis, did not leave as he did, her devout followers and benefactors
a whole year in Purgatory, but seven days, only at the longest: for every
Saturday (which day is dedicated unto her) she descended into Purgatory, to
redeem thence all those that had given alms to her brethren: which device of
theirs being believed, brought them again into more credit and trading then
ever they were before. The other tale is out of S. Brandons Legend, where to
persuade silly people, that their prayers and Masses are able to deliver souls
out of Purgatory; they tell how Judas is permitted to come out of hell every
Saturday at Even song time, and to rest himself on a certain rock in the Sea,
until all the Sunday service be performed: concluding strongly, that if the
prayers of the Church can ease for a time the pains of hell to the damned,
much more are they of force to free the souls of the Saints out of Purgatory,
and send them directly into heaven. A third is in the life of S. Thomas of
Canterbury: at the day of whose death (says the Legend) there died in the
whole world, three thousand thirty and three: of whom the three thousand went
directly into hell, thirty into Purgatory, and three only into Paradise,
whereof S. Thomas was one. And this (says it) was revealed by one of them that
went to heaven, to a friend of his upon earth: Sum praedicant. tit. mors. By
these and a thousand such like fictions and fables, touching this purging fire,
they kept the world in awe; and deluded them after a miserable manner for their
own gain: it being no marvel, that seeing Purgatory maintains them, and
their pomp, and pride, they also maintain it, and stoutly stand in the
defense thereof: for what with counterfeit apparitions of dead ghosts, and such
terrible tales of tormented souls, the poor people were so scarred, that they
spared for no cost to prevent this pain: when in the mean while, for want of
true faith and repentance, they cast themselves into hell and destruction.

CHAP. 3. Delusions by the Invocation of Saints.
1. THe second sort of their Saints, are such as are either actually canonized
by the Pope, or opiniatiuely in the minds of men, and being freed from
Purgatory, keep their perpetual residence in heaven. From these flow three
kinds of delusions: The first by their invocation: the second by their
Relikes: and the third by their Images. Concerning their Invocation, it is
first to be observed, how almost the whole Leiturgie of their Church in respect
of their Saints, is borrowed from the Pagans, both for matter and form. There
is so great a conformity betwixt the Pagan Gods and Goddesses, and the Popish
Saints and Saintesses, as it is hard to distinguish betwixt them: not a
conformity in regard of the true Saints (least I should be mistaken) but in
regard of their worshippers, who in all things imitate them, save in their
manner of sacrificing. For the Pagans worshipped dead men, whom they supposed
to be placed in the number of the Gods, and attributed unto them diverse
offices, and charges over humane affairs; the which very same is practiced in
the Church of Rome, as experience shows. Aruob. contra. Gentes. lib. 3.
And as Arucbius long ago reproched the Pagans for forging unto themselves
Gods, whereof some were Carpenters, some Clothiers, some Mariners, some
Musitions, some Huntsmen, and some Heardsmen: one was a Piper, another a
Midwife, another a Diuiner, another a Physician: one was the God of Eloquence,
another of War, another a Smith, etc. The Babylonians had Bell for their
tutelar God, The Egyptians, Isis and Osyris: The Rhodians, the Sun: The
Delphians, Apollo: Rome, a God that might not be named: The Athenians, Minerua:
The Ephesians, Diana, etc. So in like manner have the Papists their Saints
answerable to them in all respects: For do not S. Cosme, and S. Damian, succeed
Apollo, and Aesculapius, in Physic and Surgery? For these are the Saints
they pray unto in these cases. Among the Pagans, Jupiter was the God of the
fire, Juno of air, Tellus of the earth, and Neptune of the sea: In stead of
whom, the Papists have for the fire S. Agathe, for the Sea S. Nicholas. For
wine recommended to Bacchus, by the Pagans, and corn to Ceres; they have S.
Iosse, and S. Vrbayne: In stead of Apollo, and Pan, the overseers and guarders
of their cattle, these have found out S. Vandoline, or Wendeline for their
sheep: S. Eulogius for their horses: S. Pelagius for their oxen and kine; and
S. Anthony for their hogs. Among the Pagans, Apollo, Minerua, and the Muses,
were patrones of learning, Vulcane the God of the Forge and of Smithes,
Aesculapius of Physic, Mars of War, Diana of Hunting, Venus and Flora, of
Harlots and Courtizans: In place of whom, the Papists have for learning S.
Catherine and S. Gregory; for Painters, S. Luke; for Physicians, S, Cosme and
S. Damian; for Smiths, S. Eloi; for Hunters, S. Eustachius and S. Hubert; for
Harlots, S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Aphre. The Pagans had their Physicians for
several diseases: as Apollo for the pestilence, Hercules for the falling
sickness, Lucina for the pains of childbirth, etc. The Papists in their
room, have Sebastian and S. Roche, for the pestilence; S. Petronella for the
fever; S. John or S. Valentine, for the falling sickness; and S. Margaret, for
women in travail: Yea so far grew this superstition, that they ascribe to
several Saints, the government of the several members of the body, which the
Astrologians assign to the twelve signs of the Zodiac. For S. Ottilius
gouernes the head, S. Catherine guardeth the tongue, S. Apollonia cures the
teeth, S. Blase has the neck in tuition, S. Lawrence the back, backbone and
shoulders, S. Erasmus the belly and the entrals, S. Apollinarius or S. Brice
the privy parts, and so of the rest: Yea instead of their filthy Priapus,
Mutunus, Persica, Pertunda, these have substituted S. Guerlichon, and some
others; that in nothing they might seem short of them in abominable
superstition. Neither want these like them their Patrones for sundry Countries:
as S. Denis, and S. Michael for France, S. James for Spain, S. George for
Germany and England, Saint Peter and Saint Paul for Rome, Saint Mark for
Venice, and so forth. Albeit that all these Countries are (as they say) under
the special protection of the Virgin Mary, to wit; Spain by reason of the
promise made that the blessed Virgin made to Saint James; Italy, by the choice
that she made of her residence there, transporting her Chamber to Lawretto;
Germany, by reason of the multitude of Temples dedicated there unto her; and
France, because the chief Cities of that Country are consecrated to her
honors. Thus the Papists make by their superstition, their Saints near a kin
to the heathen Gods, excepting only, that whereas they esteemed those things
that were written of their Gods but Fables, those things that are written of
their Saints are believed, and accounted as true Histories; as it is a Fable
that Perseus slew Medusa, but a true history in their account that Saint George
slew the Dragon. One thing they cannot deny, that Boniface the fourth turned
the Pantheon, a Temple dedicated unto all their Gods, into a Church consecrated
to all Saints, and placed the blessed Virgin the Mother of Jesus Christ in
room of Cybels the Mother of the Gods. I will add yet another thing more
notorious for impiety, to wit; that albeit in this resemblance, I excepted
sacrificing, yet we find that abomination also in some places. As for example,
when in ^ourraine they used to offer a Cock to Saint Christopher, for a
certain sore in the top of the fingers: and to enlarge their superstition, it
must be a white Cock, otherways they should rather provoke the Saint to
anger, then make him propitious unto them. I will not speak of their sacrifice
in the Mass, wherein the greatest part of the Ceremonies are derived from the
Pagans; nor of Purgatory, whereof the Pagan Poets were the first Authors.

2. Secondly, if we consider a little the several Offices and Trades,
together with the strange names ascribed to these their Saints, we shall more
easily and clearly apprehend their gross abuse of the world in this kind of
delusion. For touching their names, many of them are so fitted to their
Occupations, that a man cannot imagine, but that either they were of purpose
baptized with them for the credit of their offices, or that their offices were
assigned unto them in resemblance of their names. For why else should they call
their sweet smelling Saint, Saint Juniper: their Saint for the diseases of the
hand, Saint Maine, as if it were Saint Hand, and he which was for the Gowt
which is commonly in the knee, Saint Genon, that is Saint Knee: for stinking
dung and excrements Saint Fiacre, as we cry fie when our noses encounter such a
savor: their Shoomakers Saint, Saint Crepin, as if it were Saint Pantofle:
their Shrouetide or Guttide Saints, Saint Mangeard, Saint Creuard, Saint
Pansard: their Saint Protrectrisse of Harlots Saint Aphre, as the heathen
called Venus Aphrodit, as issuing out of froth, or Saint Magdalen, because she
her self was once such an one: Saint Susanna for slanders, and Saint Job for
scabs, with a number more of the like nature. What do these names I pray you
import, but the mere gulling and deluding of the world? For why should their
names and offices thus iumpe together, if it were not by fraudulent and
imposturous devises of crafty and covetous Priests? Besides that, we may see
how they exceed the Pagans in their prophanenes: for though the Pagans had a
large number of Gods, of the greater, middle, and lesser size, as these have of
Sa^nts; yet always they carried a more reverent respect, and devotion to their
great Jupiter, then to all the rest, Plantus.
as he in the Poet said, Dummodo Jupiter mihi propitius sit, flocci facio
minores Deos. But the Papists without all conscience employ their Saints in all
their affairs both great and small, passing by God as an idle Idea, seldom
praying unto him, in comparison of the frequent prayers that are made to the
Virgin Mary, and the other Saints. Their Beads show this to be true, where
for one Pater noster, they drop nine Aues: and their Temples and Altars, which
are more ten to one dedicated to Saints, then to the blessed Trinity. And did
ever the Pagans debase their Jupiter so much, as to picture him like an old man
with a staff in his hand, as these do God the Father in their Churches? Or
did they ever in contempt cast their Gods into the fire or dirt, as Pope
Boniface did his breaden Christ; and another Priest threatened to do to the
same God of Paste, if he could not assuage a tempest which was raised (as he
supposed) by the devil? And to conclude this point, albeit the Pagans imagined
Pan to be the God of shepheardes and sheep; yet they never put any of their
baser sort of Gods to the keeping of Geese and Swine, as these do their
Saints. Upon which occasion I remember a story in Stephens Apology for
Herodotus, which I will not forbear to relate for the solace of the Reader. It
is, how a certain young Gentlewoman being in a dangerous sickness, and having
confessed her self to her Priest and received absolution, said unto him that
she feared least when she should come into Paradise, the charge of such filthy
Beasts should be committed unto her, and therefore it would be a great
contentment to her mind if she might be made the Protectresse of little
dogs, whereunto she had been formerly accustomed: but whether the Priest
granted her suite, or no, I cannot conjecture: only this I gather out of her
request, that the Pagans did not so vilify their Idol Gods, as the Papists do
their Saints in their blind superstition.

3. What should I speak of the great difference which is in the opinion of
their best Legenders, touching the qualities and offices of their Saints? some
ascribing the same office to one Saint, which others do unto another. This is
at large discovered by the forenamed Author Henry Stephen in his Apology for
Herodo^us, and therefore I here but touch upon this string: only me thinks
it soundes in touching this plain song, that all these superstitious
inuocations of Saints, are no better then devices of men, whereby they sought
both to enrich themselves, and to impouerish the world. And is there any so
sottishly blind, that will be thus deluded by them? For when the question is,
whether Saint Feriol, or Saint Andoche, or Saint Gallicut is the keeper of
their Geese: or whether Saint Wendeline has the care of sheep, or Saint
Loupe: or whether Saint Genon be for the Gowt, or Saint Maure: or whether Saint
Roche be Physician for scabbed hands, or Saint Maine: whether the eyes be
committed to the charge of Saint Ottilia or Saint Clare, and of the teeth to
Saint Apollonia, or to Saint Christopher: because of his great tooth kept as a
relike in a certain Abbey in France which is of that bigness, that in
proportion the mouth wherein it stood, must needs be as great as the mouth of
the greatest Furnace betwixt London and York. I say when as this question
rests undetermined, until the Pope and his Cardinals either decide it in their
Consistory, or call a Council for that purpose, how can the poor people in
these their necessities, either believe they shall be heard in their prayers,
or not rather fear, that if they pray unto a Saint that has no interest in
their cause, he will be offended for troubling him with matters that concern
him not, and the other that has, will be angry for being neglected?

4. But the highest strain of impiety and Idolatry in their Inuocating of
Saints is this, that there is no disease belonging to man either in regard of
body or mind, the cure whereof they do not attribute to some one Saint or
other. As for the body, the very itch in the hands to Saint Maine, and scald in
the head to Saint Tignan, and cough in the lungs, to Saint Quintin; and the
very French pox, to Saint Job: And for the mind, the Frenzy (they say) is
cured by Saint Acarius: and Jealousy by Saint Auertine: but what should we
doubt of this, when sterility and barrenness in a woman is remedied by the
filthy dust scraped off from a part of the Image of Saint Guerlichon, which
shame and honesty forbids to name: or by striding over Saint Rumbaulis
breeches, which if a barren woman do, she shall be sure to have a child within
a twelue-moneth, as they make poor people believe at this day? and so they
make some of their Saints as filthy and abominable as the heathens did their
Priapus. And that which is yet more abusiue and absurd, they affirm, that the
same diseases which they suppose these Saints can cure, they can also send if
they be displeased and so they must of necessity invoke them not only in
the hope of good, but for fear of hurt; as that good wife after she had
offered a candle to Saint Michael, offered another also to the devil that
stood by him, (for these two always are painted together) that ^he one might
help her, and the other not hurt her. And as the Indians acknowledge one
Sovereign God, but yet sacrifice to the devil, because (as they say) God is
good, and will not hurt; but the devil is malicious and need to be appeased.
Lactant.
Or as the Romans had their Vae Jove's as well as their Jove's, and worshipped
as Gods the Fever and the Gowt, with other diseases, for fear they should ^a^
upon them: so there is no doubt but the Popish Saints were and are adored and
worshipped rather for fear of some evil they might do them, then for hope of
any good from them. Hence it was, that if the Saint which they inuocated did
not relieve them in their miseries, then in anger they used to renounce him,
and choose unto themselves another Saint in his room, at whose hands they
hoped to find more favor. This is an ordinary practice in the Church of Rome,
and whereof daily experience affoordeth many examples: to wit, of such as have
forsaken Christ because he did not help them in their need, and fled to the
Virgin his Mother, as more merciful and indulgent^ and so from one Crucifix to
another, from an old to a young, and from Saint John to Saint Peter, and from
the Lady at Lawretto to the Lady at Sichem, etc. And this worse then the
heathen Romans, who though they in all reverence transported the tutelar Gods
of those Cities and Countries which they conquered into their Pantheon, having
first inuocated and coniured them to forsake their old habitations; yet they
did neither renounce, nor with less devotion worship their own Gods which
they had before. But that which is most strange of all, hence it must needs
come to pass, that when the Clients of diverse Saints are at odds and strife,
then the Saints whom they have chosen to be their Patrones must also of
necessity either be at odds for their Clients, or forsake them, or at least one
be ouer-ruled by the other. And so in like manner when one kingdom is at war
with another, as suppose England with France, then also S. Michael standing for
the defense of France, Saint George for the defense of England, must be at
war in heaven, or else how are they their protectors, if they quit them in
their greatest need? As the heathen Poets made Vulcane and Pallas to stand
against Troy, and Apollo and Venus for it: the verse is well known, Mulciber
in Trotam, pro Troia stabat Apollo, Aequa Venus Teueris, Pallas iniqua fuit. If
these seem to any strange conclusions, I answer with the proverb, Like
lips, like Lettite; from such rotten practices, what else can flow, but
rotten conclusions?

5. To conclude, though their impiety and Idolatry be in all these respects
most gross and palpable; yet all is nothing to their abominable blasphemy in
preferring their Saints before Christ, or at least in equalling them unto him:
and this will plainly appear by two practices of theirs. First, in that they
rely more upon the mediation and intercession of Saints, then upon the
mediation of Christ, and therefore direct more prayers, and build more Altars
unto them, then unto him. And secondly, in that after any great benefit
received or deliverance obtained, they ascribe all the honor rather unto them,
then unto Christ, as if they were the only authors and bequeathers thereof.
Many and memorious are the examples of this blasphemy, and so ordinary in all
places, as with no forehead can be denied. I will in this purpose relate only
two famous examples, the first whereof is this. After the great battle at
Lepanto, wherein Don John of Austria being General, the Turk received such an
overthrow, as the like he never had by Christians before; presently solemn
thanksgiuings and processions were made by Sea and Land to the Virgin Mary, as
to the Goddess of victory; with little or no remembrance of Christ Jesus, who
was the only protector of them in that dangerous expedition. This story is
recorded at large in the book entitled the general history of Spain. The
second example is of the Spanish attempt for the conquest of England in the
year, 1588. at which time, when the whole Armado was gathered together and
ready to set forward, the Generals and great Commanders assembled in a Church
of our Lady, gave her a solemn thanks for the victory, which they made
themselves as sure of, as if it had been already achieved: but when they saw
themselves discomfited, and their Navy overthrown, those that remained, went
to the same our Ladies Church, and there not only expostulated with her, but
vpbrayded and reviled her to her face for her neglect of them. Neither is this
any wonder, seeing they set her up as the Commandresse of her Son, equal her
milk to his blood, and offer up more sacrifices of devotion to her then to
him. Howbeit they may seem to have some reason for the blessed Virgin, because
she was Christ's Mother; but what reason have they for S. Francis and Saint
Dominicke, whom they not only equal unto Christ, but in some things prefer
them before him? For touching Saint Francis, mark what they write of him in
the book of his Conformities: Christ made Saint Francis like and conformable
to himself in all things. Again, in the Mount of Aluerna, Friar Francis was
made one Spirit with God the Father, and his Son Christ Jesus. Again,
blessed Saint Francis had the title of Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews
given unto him. Again, he observed the Law of God literally, and the whole
Gospel to a title. Again, that prophecy of the Revelation, I saw another
Angel, which had the seal of the living God, was literally fulfilled in Saint
Francis. Again, as Christ on the day of his death descended once into Limbo,
and by the virtue of his passion released all the souls that were found there;
so Saint Francis every year on his birth day went into Purgatory, and carried
from thence into Paradise all the souls of three Orders, to wit; Minorites,
the Sisters of Saint Clare, and the Continentes. Again, whosoever dyed in his
habit, could not be damned, and that it was as forcible for remission of
sins, as the Sacrament of Baptism. Again, that in Saint Francis were
renewed the wounds and passion of Christ for the Redemption of mankind: that
he was given for a light to the Gentiles, that Abraham saw his day and
rejoiced: that he came out of the wound of Christ's side, with the banner of
the Cross in his hand displayed, that as Christ was foretold by the Prophets,
so was Saint Francis; as Christ had his forerunner, so had S. Francis; as
Christ had his Apostles whose sound went out into all the world, so had Saint
Francis: as Christ had his Magdalene to wash his feet, so had Saint Francis:
and as Christ had his Judas to betray him, so had Saint Francis. Lastly, to
omit a number more of such like impieties, as Christ was transfigured in the
Mount, so was Saint Francis, but with more glory; for unto Christ appeared
only Moses and Elias, but unto Saint Francis appeared Christ, the blessed
Virgin, John Baptist, and John the Evangelist, with a great multitude of
Angels. And thus blasphemously they advance their Saint Francis, in an equal,
if not superior dignity unto Christ.

6. Neither is this their blasphemy any whit inferior in their Dominicke. For
when as these two Orders of Franciscanes and Dominicanes envied one another
greatness, and S. Dominicke though first in time, yet was behind in credit to
Saint Francis; Antoninus a great Archbishop, and a Dominicane by sect, start
up, and labors to exalt his Founder, not only above Saint Francis, but even
above Christ himself: and to that end, thus he writes of him; Christ (says
he) raised but three dead persons, but S. Dominicke forty: Christ being
immortal entered twice in unto his Disciples the gates being shut, but Saint
Dominicke being yet mortal (which is more wonderful) entered into the Church
when the doors were shut, without noise, that he might not waken the Friars;
and so he runs over all Christ's miracles, and still preferres Saint
Dominicke. Further the same power was given to S. Dominicke that was unto
Christ; for the Angels ministered unto him, the Elements obeyed him, as when the
book containing his doctrine was thrown into fire, it came out thrice unhurt,
and the devils trembled at his beck, and refused not his command. He was
called Dominicus (says he) quasi totus domini, so that Christ is Lord
absolutely and authoritatiuely, but Saint Dominick principally and
possessiuely: Christ said, I am the light of the world: and of S. Dominicke the
Church sings; Thou art the light of the world. All the Prophets prophesied of
Christ, so did they of S. Dominicke: Christ was borne naked, but laid in a
Manger by his mother, that the cold might not hurt him: but S. Dominicke being
an Infant, went out of his bed, and as if he had hated all delights of the
flesh, lay often naked upon the bare earth. When Christ was borne, a Star
appeared in the sky, which led the Wisemen unto him, and foreshewed that he
should enlighten the world: but when S. Dominicke being borne, and was to be
Baptized, his mother saw a Star in his forehead, foretelling, that there was
a new light come into the world. Christ's prayer was always heard of his
Father, save once in the Garden, when praying according to his sensuality, he
would not be heard according to his reason: but S. Dominicke was never denied
any thing that he prayed for, and consequently, never prayed according to
sensuality. Christ loved us, and washed us from our sins by his blood, which
was shed by others: but S. Dominicke let out his blood daily with his own
hand, with a three corded chain; one for his own sins, which were few; a
second, for those that are in Purgatory; and the third, for such as live in the
world. And lastly, Christ being to depart out of this world, promised his
Disciples the comforter his Spirit: and S. Dominicke, when he lay upon his
deathbed, said to his Disciples, Weep not for my corporal departure, for I
shall be more profitable for you in that place whither I go, then I have been
here; for there I shall be a more powerful Advocate for you to God, then I
could be in this world. Thus he prosecutes the comparison, through all the
parts of the life of Christ. But thus much I suppose is sufficient to
demonstrate the horrible blasphemy of the Church of Rome, in their invocation
of Saints. And that no man may think these be the conceits of private men the
book of S. Francis conformities; was approved by the general consent of: the
Minorite Friars in their Chapter house, and printed at Beno^ia by authority ^n
the year 1389. and after reprinted at M^llen in the year 1510. by Gotardus
Ponticus, and entitled Liber Aureus, A Golden book: Yea three Popes, Gregory
the ninth, Alexander the fifth, and Nicholas the third, commanded all men to
believe S. Francis five marks or wounds, upon pain of heresy: And Bennet the
twelft ordained a Feast to be observed to their honor. And for S. Dominicke,
Gregory the ninth, in the year, 122^. assumed him into the number of Saints,
allowed him a Festival day, approved his rule, and guarded it with many
privileges: In a word, these books were never condemned by the Church of
Rome, nor decreed to be purged by any of their Indices; and therefore stand in
their Calendar of books as Authentical witnesses of their impiety.

7. Out of all this discourse, I may howsoever infer these three important
Maxims. First, that the Cymerian or Egyptian darkness was never so great, as
was this general darkness, or rather blindness in Popery; or as is still at
this day, where that religion reigns in full sway. Secondly, that their
Priests and Friars, were in those days, and are still, men without all
conscience and fear of God; who for the increase of their own gain and
credit, obtruded these gross abuses upon the common people, as divine
Mysteries and Oracles not to be spoken against, but received with undoubted
belief. And thirdly, that the prophecy of S. Paul, being thus verified in
them, concerning strong delusions, this must needs be the time of Antichrists
reign, and of the height and top of his power and pride: though now (God be
thanked) his Kingdom is in the wane, and has all the symptoms of a deadly
consumption.

CHAP. 4. Delusions by Relikes.
1 THe second delusion which arises from their canonized Saints, is by their
relikes, by means whereof it is strange, both how miserably they have abused
the world for a long time, and what wealth they have amassed to themselves. I
might be infinite in this kind, but I will contract my discourse into as short
and narrow room as I can: And therefore to omit their infinite number of false
relikes, suborned by crafty Priests for their own gain; yea such as were not
of Saints in heaven, but of the d^mned in bell, as an Ancient Doctor testifies
when he says: Multorum corpora adorantur in terris, quorum aminae cruciantur
in inferis: that is, The bodies of many are adored in earth, whose souls are
tormented in hell. And as it is confirmed by the Legend of S. Martin, where we
read, of one worshipped with great devotion, who was known to have been a
notorious wicked man: In which tanke, we may justly place our Canterbury Saint
Thomas Beck^t, at whose shrine so many devotions were made. For forty eight
years after his death, it was disputed among the Doctors of Paris, whether he
were damned or saved, as a French History reports: and one Roger a Norman,
maintained, that he had justly deserved death, for rebelling against his
Sovereign, the minister of God. Again, to omit the multiplicity of relikes of
the same kind, belonging to one and the same Saint; as half a dozen of heads,
two or three dozen of ears, as many of hands, and of arms, and of legs; this
imposture being sufficiently discovered by many writers. And lastly, to omit
their secret foisting in of new relikes in stead of the old, which either were
stolen away, or lost, or could not be preserved from rottenness; and these
the members, sometimes of a man hanged or buried, and sometimes of an Ass or
Dog, or some other beast: as at Geneua, that which a long time was worshipped
for an arm of S. Anthony, was found to be no other then the haunch of a Dear:
I say, to omit all these impostures which are most frequent in the Church of
Rome, and whereof plenty of examples might be brought, I will insist only in
such deceites as are more rare, and admit no exception nor cavil.

2. At S. Mary mayor in Rome, they show the Cratch or Crib wherein our Lord
Jesus Christ was laid at his Nativity, which some of them say was made of
earth, alleging to that purpose the opinion of S. Chrysostom misinterpreted,
Chrysostom. hom. 2 in Lu^.
but others of wood, as Baronius affirms: And so they themselves agreeing not
what it was, why should we believe that there is any such thing at all?
Sigonius reports, that at the taking of Caesarea in Syria by Baldwin the
first King of Jerusalem, Sigon. de regno ^ed^c. lib. 9.
the Genuans had in their share a cup made of an Emraud which Christ used at
his last Supper, and caused it to be kept and worshipped as an holy relike.
Baron. An 54. 63.
But Baronius gives this fiction (it may be unwillingly) the lie, for he
alleges the authority of Bid, that the Cup wherein Christ celebrated his
last Supper was of silver, with two ears, and was kept at Jerusalem: both
which opinions cannot be true, and therefore the one thus discrediting the
other, makes them both two to be suspected as false. Again, at S. John
Laterane in Rome, is to be seen and adored, the Sponge wherewith they
presented unto Christ on the Cross vinegar and gall, Idem An. 34.116.
which Baronius affirms, retains still a certain ruddy color, as if it
had been dipped in blood. But the French Annals affirm, Nich^l. G^ll^s. Annal.
that S. Lewis the French King redeemed this Sponge of the Ven^tians, to whom
it was pawned by the Emperor of Constantinople, together with the true stumpe
of the true Cross, and the iron of the Spear wherewith Longis pierced our
Saviors side: and those were received as holy relikes in a Chapel at Paris,
and yet they brag of the same at Rome, and in other places. By virtue of the
same Chimicall multiplication, whereby Christ's Coat without seame is found at
Argentined in France, and at Triers in Germany: and S. John Baptists finger
wherewith he pointed unto Christ, at Vezentium, at Toulouse, at Lions, at
Florence, and else where. But I promised to pass by these things, having
handled them at large in my Retractatiue from the Romish Religion. M^t. 7. page
20^. My aim is here to show how they discover their own fraud, by their
contradictions; and to that purpose, the Smock of the blessed Virgin may serve
for another example, which they say is wouen of fine linen and silk; two
Else and a quarter long, and an Elle two quarters and an half large: a costly
smock without doubt, especially in those times, when the use of silk was not
so frequent as it is now; for a pound of silk as Flauius Vopisius witnesses,
was in the time of Aurelian the Emperor worth a pound of gold: And is it
credible (think you) that the Virgin Mary should have a smock of half silk,
when her poverty and Joseph's was so great, that they had not means to buy a
Lamb to offer at her purification, as she was commanded by the Law if she had
been able, but two turkle Doves, or two young Pigeons, which was the offering of
the poorer sort, as all interpreters of the second Chapter of S. Lukes Gospel,
with Maldonate a Jesuit himself affirms? In like manner, there was a great
suite in Law betwixt the Chapter of our Lady in Paris, and the Covent of S.
Denis, about the body of S. Denis; whereof the Chapter said they had the head,
and the Covent the whole entire body, head and all: the matter came to trial,
and it was adjudged by the whole Parliament, that the relike in the Chapter,
was the head of S. Denis of Corinth, and not of Denis of Athens, which they
adjudged to be in the Covent. But this creates a new doubt, for it is not read
in any History, that the Corinthian Denis was ever in France, and how then
could his head come to Paris? And for the Athenian Denis, Baron. An. 1062. 10.
Pope Leo the ninth, as Baronius confesses, decreed by an absolute sentence,
that his true body was at Ratisbone in Bauaria, and no where else: whence I
gather, that if the Pope erred in his sentence, as he must needs do, if the
Parisians were in the right; then the Ratisbonians were Idolaters, in
worshipping a counterfeit Saint; if he erred not, then were the Parisians
Idolaters, especially seeing it was prohibited by the Council of Laterane,
that no relike should be received publicly, without the authority of the Pope.

3. But to proceed with this abuse: They are not content to prostitute the
bodies and members of their Saints to adoration only, but they also propose as
relikes to be adored, See more for this in Stephens Apology for He^^d^^^s
their very garments, and wh^tsoeuer did any ways appertain unto them. As at
Tr^ers, in the Abbey of S. Simon, Joseph's Pantofles were a long time in
request: And at Aix in Germany, they brag of his Breeches, together with the
Virgin Mary's Smock before mentioned: the one being so little as they would
fit a child, the other so great as they might be worn by a Giant. In some
places are reserved their pots, and dishes; yea to the very tail of the Ass
which carried Christ, which is to be seen at Genues; and to the purpose of
this Ass, the holy Hay which was in the Manger where Christ was laid being newborn, is a relike of great same in Lorraine. But what shall we say to that
strange dotage of theirs, that cause the stones wherewith S. Stephen was stoned
to be worshipped: as at Arles, at Vigand in Languedoc, and at Florence, And
the arrows wherewith S. Sebastian was shot to death? Sure if the stones
deserved to be worshipped, much more did the stoners; and if the arrows, much
more they that shot them. And that the Reader may not be too much astonished at
this their sottishnes, let him but mark this story following, and he shall
easily perceive how the poor world at that time, had neither eyes in their
head, nor understanding in their brains, but were led like blind men to the
ditch, and fools to the stocks, without once saying, Whither go I? The story
is this (for let me do them that favor so to call it:) when Nicodemus took
down the body of Christ from the Cross, he gathered some of his blood into
the finger of his glove (for there is no doubt but that gloves were then in use
as well as they are now) and with this blood wrought many miracles: by reason
whereof, being persecuted by the Jews, he took a parchment and wrote therein
all the miracles he had done and ^he mysteries of this blood, which he closing
up together with the blood, tied it to the beak of a great Bird which he had
found, and threw the beak into the Sea, This tale is more at large in Stephens
Apology for Herodotus.
recommending it unto God. This holy beak about a thousand years after,
having travailed up and down all the Seas, from the East to the West, at last
arrived in Normandy, in the same place where at this day stands the Abbey of
the beak: This holy beak lying there among the bushes, it chanced that a good
Duke of Normandy hunting a Heart in those quarters, the Heart and Dogs were on a
sudden all so silent, that none knew what was become of them: till at last,
they were all found on their knees, and praying their Canonical hours as some
think: with which sight the Dukes devotion was so stirred up, that he caused
the bushes to be grubbed up, and found there this holy beak, with that which
was within it safe and sound; whereupon, as being admonished of God, he
erected the foresaid Abbey, and called it by the name of the Beak, where this
holy relike is still to be seen. Now who does not see, that if one beak
feeds so many idle bellies as are in that Abbey; and not only feeds, but
also enricheth them with great possessions; how great must needs be the riches
that accrue from so grear a number of relikes, as cannot be brought within the
compass of an Inuentory? If there were no other thing to prove this, the very
caskets or shrine ^herein they put their relikes are a sufficient demonstration
hereof; for they are commonly of that price, being embossed with gold and
precious stones, that few men's estates are able to counteruaile their worth.

4. But besides those solemn relikes kept thus in pomp, in their Churches and
religious houses, there are others of lesser esteem, which are carried up and
down from one place to another, and shown to the common people, to draine
their purses withal. Now these were oftentimes discovered by the Churchmen
which lived in those places where these Pedlets came with their wares; and this
partly through envy, least their own trading in this kind should be hindered,
and partly through fear, least the simple people perceiving their gross abuse
and cozenage, should thereby be moved to suspect all the rest. For these
relike-mongers did many times so evidently and impudently delude the poor
people with their counterfeit trash, that if they had not been curbed and
restrained, they would have discredited the whole pack: For they contented not
themselves in setting forth their wares like Mountebankes, to say and
proclaim, behold in this Vial the blood of Jesus Christ gathered up under the
Cross by the Virgin Mary: and in this the tears that fell from Christ's eyes,
when he wept for Lazarus: and behold the bands wherewith the Virgin swathed
Christ in Egypt: and behold the Milk, and the Hair, and the Comb, the
Coyfe, the Veil, the Girdle, the Pantofles, the Glove, the Ring, the
Handkerchiefe, etc. of the Virgin Mary: But they were some of them so
shameless as to say, behold in this box (but they must not open the box) the
breath of Jesus Christ, kept carefully by his mother ever since he was an
Infant. And amongst those that were grown to this impudency, we read of a
Priest at Genues, who returning from the East, boasted to have brought with him
from Bethleem the foresaid breath of Jesus Christ, and from Mount Sinai, the
horns that Moses had on, when he descended down from that hill: and when he
was accused for deluding the people with this forged stuff; his answer was
nothing but this, that if they would not believe that he had the true breath o^
Christ in the Violl, and the horns of Moses; no more would he believe, that
the Milk which they showed publicly and solemnly at Genues, was the very
milk of the Virgin Mary, seeing there was an equal ground of credibility for
them both: and therefore that either his relikes deserved as much credit as
theirs, or at least, theirs no more then his. A reason me thinks unanswerable,
considering that the credit of all their relikes, depends merely upon the
opinion and report of men, who are subject, both to deceive, and to be deceived.

5. But no marvel, if such relikes as these were disauowed by the warier
sort, seeing they cross both common sense and reason; and imply, not only an
improbability, but also an impossibility: For touching the breath of Christ,
what wit of man can give a reason, how it could be enclosed in a box, and kept
so long a time? And for Moses his horns, it is apparent that there was no such
thing; it arose from a gross error of their own translation, whereas the
Text says only, that the skin of his face did shine, when he descended
down from the holy Mountain. Exodus 34.29. And Saint Paul alluding thereunto;
2. Cor. 3.7. confirms the same: for he says, that he carried a veil over
his fade, because the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the same,
for the glory of his countenance; but for horns, not a syllable in holy
Scripture is to be found; and yet they picture him with a pair of horns on
his forehead, and ostent the same horns for relikes in their Churches. Neither
need these seem strange, seeing they want not many others, that are both more
senseless and absurd: as Saint Michaels Sword and Buckler, wherewith he
overcame the devil, as if the devil that is a spirit, would be conquered with
such weapons: the sound of the bells which hung in Solomon's Temple, which a
certain Monk made the world believe he brought from the East; certain
hairs which fell from the Seraphim, when he came to imprint the five wounds
of Christ in Saint Francis body: yea, some of them are not ashamed to show the
Pilgrims that go to Jerusalem a three cornerd stone, which they bear them in
hand, is that very stone whereof David speaks in the 118. Psalm. The stone
which the builders refused is the head of the corner. And that Joseph the
reputed Father of Christ might not come behind his Son, at Courtheuerin near
unto Blois, is kept for a Monument his breath also, which he breathed when he
claue wood being a Carpenter: and at Burges in Spain is shown a Crucifix
whose nails and beard are cut every month they grow so fast, and in these
excrements they say is great virtue. In Galicia (as Pilgrims report) are
preserved some of the Feathers of certain Chickens, which are of the race of
that Cock which crowed when Peter denied his Master. And at Saint Denis is to
be seen, the Lantern which Judas carried in his hand when he came to betray
his Master. Can any man believe these that is in his right wits? And yet they
obtrude these relikes, with an infinite number more of the like strain and
stamp, upon the common people, as matters of faith and devotion.

6. But let me conclude this whole discourse of Relikes, with two most famous
examples. The first whereof is of Saint Peter's chains, the one of which (as
they say) being the chain wherewith he was bound at Jerusalem and brought
unto Rome, and laid near unto the other wherewith he was bound at Rome; these
two chains rejoicing to see one another as two friends, so leaped and skipped,
that they ceased not until they embraced each other, and became united
together, as they remain at this day in a famous Church at Rome, called upon
this occasion Saint Peter ad Vincula. Another is of the linen cloth of Saint
Veronica, wherein Christ had imprinted the picture of his face; this was
carried by Volusian an Ambassador from Tiberius to Rome, and cured him of his
sickness which the Physicians were in despair of: and ever since is reserved
at Rome for an holy Relike, though a certain City in Spain does challenge the
same also, and in both places it is devoutly worshipped, and therefore either
the one, or the other, must needs be guilty of Idolatry.

7. To search to the bottom of this gulf of superstition, would beget both a
great labor to my self, and weariness to the Reader, I end therefore this
discourse about Relikes with two Mementoes. The first whereof is, that this
must of necessity be the kingdom of Antichrist, when the whole world in a
manner should be deluded with such gross and palpable Lies. And the second,
that seeing these Relikes were worshipped with such great devotion, that they
even put their whole hope and confidence in them for the obtaining of
blessings, either temporal, spiritual, or eternal; they were therefore
guilty of as gross Idolatry, as ever the Pagans were in worshipping their
Idol gods, or rather devils, as Saint Paul terms them, 1. Cor. 10.20.

CHAP. 5. Delusions by Images.
1. THe third kind of Delusion from their Saints Canonized, is by their
Images; which because it has been partly touched already in the point of
miracles, where their moving, nodding, speaking, and healing, is discovered as
counterfeit and false; I will here insist only upon such things as concern
their very essence and being, that their Antichristian superstition may be
apparent to the whole world. And to begin with their conformity with the
Pagans. The Pagans say, that some of their Images were fallen from heaven, as
the Image of Pallas, and some made by men's hands. In like manner the Papists
brag of some of their Images, that they came from heaven, as that of our Lady
of Gladness, which they say was brought down by the Virgin Mary her self
from heaven, accompanied with a band of Angels, and delivered to three Friars
prisoners at Caire, and by them transported into France. And another of our
Lady of Montserrat, which they say was found in an hollow cave of a Mountain,
by the direction of an heavenly light, and the melodious singing of Angels that
worshipped it before men ever knew thereof: for these people are not content to
be Idolaters themselves only, but they would feign make the Angels both
Fautors and partakers in the same Idolatry. To this kind may be referred such
as they affirm, were miraculously made, and which they hold in as great
esteem as if they were fallen from heaven. Amongst which, that is most famous,
which they say Christ Jesus imprinted on a linen cloth of S. Veronica, of
which I made mention before, and which is kept at Rome in Saint Peter's Church,
which because it is a renowned Image, behold the whole Legend thereof, Feriol
Locrius. mar. Aug. lib. 5. cap. 4.
as it is reported by Friol de Locres in the words of Matthew of Westminster.
Tyberius the Emperor (says he) being afflicted in his body with the disease
of the Leprosy, it was told him that there was a Physician in Jerusalem that
healed all diseases with his word, not knowing that the Jews and Pilate had
put him to death. He gives therefore in charge to one Volusian his Friend, to
go presently to Jerusalem, and to command Pilate to send this Physician unto
him: but Pilate having received the commandment of the Emperor, and being
terrified therewith, desires fourteen days respite: during the which time,
Volusian asking a certain Matron that he heard had been familiar with Jesus
called Veronica, where he might find this Physician: she answered, alas this
was my Lord and my God, whom Pilate has condemned, and caused to be crucified
through the envy of his own Nation the Jews. Then Volusian in great grief
said, I am heartily sorry therefore, seeing I see I cannot accomplish my
Masters commandment. But Veronica answered, when my Lord went up and down
preaching, and I was deprived of his company, I was desirous to get his picture
drawn; to the end, that when I should be deprived of his presence, I might
solace my self with the sight of his Image: and as I was carrying a linen
cloth to a Painter to have his picture drawn therein, my Lord met me, and
asked me whither I was a going? To whom I having declared the cause of my
voyage, he asked of me the cloth, and wiping his face therewith, left therein
the impression of his venerable countenance. If therefore thy Master look but
devoutly upon this picture, he shall presently recover his health. Volusian
answered, Can such a picture be bought for Gold or Silver? No says Veronica,
but with an earnest affection of devotion: and therefore I will go with thee,
and carry to the Emperor the Image to look upon, and then return to mine own
Country. Volusian upon the credit of this report, returned to Rome with
Veronica, and said to the Emperor Tiberius, Pilate and the Jews have put this
Physician to death whom thou desiredst to be brought unto thee: but a certain
Matron is come with me, which brings with her his picture, which if thou
look upon devoutly, thou shall be cured of thy disease. Then the Emperor
causing it to be presented unto him, and looking upon it with great devotion
was forthwith restored to his former health. This is the tale, which if it
seem to any to be but of a tub as the Proverb speaks, that Author forenamed
confesses as much, when he desires to be believed in it, but confesses it to
be cozen German to a dream, and yet the ignorant people believe it to be as
true as the Gospel, and Pope John the two and twentieth allows ten thousands
days of pardon to each one that shall say this prayer following to this
picture of Veronica.

Salve sancta facies nostri Redemptoris,
In qua ^^itet species diuini spendoris,
Impressa panniculo niuei candoris
Dataque Veronica signum ob amoris, etc.
Wherein they address their speech by a most palpable Idolatry not to Christ,
but to his picture only, and to such a picture as is the mere device of man,
whereof none of the Evangelists make any mention, who remembering matters of
lesser moment, would never have forgotten such a miraculous impression of the
face of Christ, if there had been any such thing: but let the credit of this
tale depend upon their Legend, which is as full of Lies as a stable of dung, as
one of their own Bishops confesses.

2. Concerning Images made by the Art of man, we have diverse pregnant examples
of notorious delusion; as when they make Nicodemus (he that is spoken of in the
third Chapter of Saint John's Gospel) a Painter, and to have drawn an Image of
Christ on the Cross, which the Jews in scorn crucified again, to despite
Christ. This story is referred by Bellarmine to Athanasius, Bellar. de Imag.
lib. 12. cap. 10.
in a book entitled The passion of the Image of our Lord. Chap 4. but he
doubts whether Athanasius was the Author of that book or no, and yet he is
alleged in the seventh Synod, act. 4. as an authentical writer. But
Baronius gives the flat lie both to Bellarmine and to this sacred Synod, when
he says, that this miracle happened in the time of Constantine and Irene, under
whom was held that pretended seventh universal Synod, and therefore could not
derive its authority from Athanasius. Sigebert also in his Chronicle recites
it as done in the year of our Lord, 765. And to make the matter clear, Lucius
Marineu. Historiographer to the Emperor Charles the fifth says, that he
worshipped the same Image at Burges in Spain in a Temple of the Augustines,
whereas Syria is held to be the seat thereof. Saint Luke also is made a
painter of an Evangelist, out of whose shop (if we will believe their tales)
have been sent forth more Images of Christ, and the blessed Virgin his Mother,
then out of any Painters shop of the world beside. For at Rome only, we find
in the Laterane Chur^^, an Image of our Savior of twelve years old embossed
with Gold and precious stones, begun (as they say) by Saint Luke, and after
finished by an Angel, which Image every year on the fourteenth day of August,
is by the ordinance of Pope Leo the fourth, carried in triumph upon the
shoulders of the most honorable Citizens of Rome all about, from thence to
Saint Maria mayor, and the next morning after Mass said, it is carried with
like pomp into it own place: and upon this day are set free fourteen
prisoners worthy of death, in honor of this Image. At Saint Mary of the people,
is a Tablet of the Virgin Mary painted (as they say) by the hand of Saint Luke.
At Saint Mary in the broad way, is to be seen a Chapel, where Saint Luke
wrote the Acts of the Apostles, and painted a Tablet of the Virgin Mary, which
is in the same Chapel, and was the first (say they) that he painted, after
he had first seen her, and therefore represents her with a Ring on her
finger. At Saint Augustine also they ostent another Image of the Virgin Mary
painted by Saint Luke. At Saint Mary called Ara caeli, is another Image of the
Virgin Mary of Saint Lukes workmanship, in such quality as she was in, when she
stood by the Cross of her Son: before the quire of which Church is also a
round stone latticed about with iron, wherein the impressions of the feet of an
Angel are to be seen, fixed there when Pope Gregory consecrated the said
Church. At Saint Mary the new, in a Marble Chapel is a Tablet made by the
hand of Saint Luke, which was brought from Troas to Rome, and was not hurt by
fire, when the Church wherein it stood was all burnt to ashes. Likewise in the
Chapel of Saint Mary of grace, there is another Tablet of Saint Lukes
painting; and another in the Church of Saint Sixtus, with a number more, and
all at Rome: by which we may guess what a multitude of his pictures are to be
found in other places, when one City does so abound with them. I speak not of
vulgar and common Images, the abuse whereof is no less then of these; but I
remember only such as no man of sound sense can apprehend with probability or
appearance of truth, considering what the holy Scripture reports of Saint
Luke, and what the more found antiquity witnesses of him.

3. Moreover, Arn^b. aduersus G^nte^. l. 6.
as Arnobius long ago derided the Pagans for the diverse figures which they
assigned to their Gods, as when they pictured Jupiter Hamon, with two horns
like a Ram, Saturn with a Sickle, Mercury as a Messenger equipaged for a
voyage, Venus all naked, as a woman ready to prostitute her body to whoredom,
Vulcan with a Hammer and other instruments of the Forge, Apollo with a Harp
like a Musician, and Neptune with a three forked Mace: So he might well deride
the Papists if he were now living, who represent their Saints in like fashion,
as Moses with two horns, Saint John with a Challice, Saint James with a
Pilgrims staff, Saint Paul with a Sword, Saint Peter with two Keys, Saint
Genist with a Violl, S. Anthony with a Hog, and such like. For as he
speaks of the heathen Gods, so we may truly affirm of these Popish Saints,
that if we take from them their ensigns, one of them could not be differenced
from the other, no more then Actors in a play without their habits, for what
can we term this but merely an interlude of superstition? Add hereunto, that
as the Pagans worshipped their Gods under the Image and prourtraicture of
certain men, yea, of infamous Harlots as we read, that Phidias drew the Image
of Jupiter Olympian by the visage of his Minion Pantarces, and Prapiteles the
Image of Venus by the famous Harlot Phryne: So the Papists have their Images
drawn after the same model, as of our Lady, Saint Mary Magdalen, and other
she Saints, by the feature and favor of such delicate Dames as were presented
to their view: yea, this gross superstition is grown to that height of
impudency, that if the picture of any notorious Harlot be but placed in a
Church or Chapel, or some other place of public or private devotion, they
spare not to kneel unto it, and to adore before it, Gueuara ^olden epist. lib.
1.
as if it were a most undoubted Saint. Of which horrible abuse Anthony Gueuara
Bishop of Mondonedo, Preacher and Chronicler to Charles the fifth, gives us a
sufficient witness; for he in one of his Golden Epistles affirms, that a
certain Great man of note called Henry Henriques, had in his Oratory three
Tablets of three very beautiful women curiously drawn, with these
inscriptions over them, Saint Lamia, Saint Flora, Saint Lais, the names of
three ancient and famous Harlots among the Pagans, which notwithstanding this
Lord prayed every day unto, and said his Aue Maria, and Pa^er nosters. Neither
is this only in private devotion, but it is notoriously known by experience,
that on their Feast day of Corpus Christ's, at which time Altars are addressed
in the midst of the streets with great ostentation, they use to present to
the people to worship the most wanton and lascivious pictures that they can
find out in any private houses, with a more then heathenish profanation.

4. But the quintessence of delusion lurketh in the Images and worship of the
blessed Virgin, against whom far be it from me to conceive the least thought
of irreuerence and dishonor, I sp^ake only against their superstition which
she her self abhors. It is therefore to be noted, that they have a whole
legion of our Ladies pictures, from wh^nce springs the greatest revenues of
their Clergy. Some take their names from the places, Cities, or Towns, where
they are, as our Lady of Lawretto, our Lady of Sichem, our Lady of Halls, our
Lady of Walsingham, our Lady of Aix, our Lady of Nantueil, our Lady of
Francucile, with a number more. Others give names to the places where they are;
as our Lady of the Vale, which is therefore called our Ladies Vale, our Lady of
the Mount, our Lady of the Wood, our Lady of the Field, our Lady of the Well,
our Lady of the Fountain, our Lady of the Cave, our Lady of the Snow, because
in the hottest time of summer the place where this Image stands, is always
full of Snow, as they report: some again take their names from the supposed
effects, which they are thought to work: as our Lady of Recovery, our Lady of
Comfort, our Lady of Gladness, our Lady of Joy, our Lady of Pity, our Lady of
Virtue, our Lady of good News, our Lady of good Desire, our Lady of Aids,
with an infinite number of the like kind: So that we may justly say of these
Papists, as the Lord himself says of the Jews by the mouth of the Prophet
Jeremy, Chap. 11.13. O Judah according to the number of thy Cities were thy
Gods, and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem, have ye set up
Altars to that shameful thing, even Altars to burn incense unto Baal. A
prophecy verified in the Popish Church, where they have a several Saint for
every City, and the Virgin Mary a common protectrix of them all.

5. But this is not all: the differences that are betwixt these our Ladies are
very great, as well in other things, as in their names; and that both in their
age, and in their feature, and in their beauty, and their countenance; as Henry
Stephen in his Apology for Herodotus, has at large described: but in this
lurkes the maine poison (says the same Author) that for the most part they are
acoutred and garnished both in countenance and vesture, like notorious Harlots;
as they used to paint S. Mary Magdalen, to wit, naked in some parts, as also
the Egyptian Mary. And to this purpose I remember (says he) what I have read
of our Lady of all beauties at Tours, so termed because she used to be painted
after the same manner that Venus was wont to be among the Pagans: For all the
daintiest Wenches of Tours were brought before the Painter; and from one he
borrowed her high forehead, from another her sparkling eyes, from a third her
pretty long nose, from a fourth her smiling mouth, from others a dimpled chin,
and other parts of the body: now whether the object of so beautiful an our
Lady, enkindleth our devotion or no, or rather what other flame it stirs up,
I leave to them that are competent judges in this kind. This I am assured of,
out of his Author, which is one John Menard, a great preacher in those times,
that there are in their books of devotion, to be seen most lascivious
pictures, fitter to incen^ lust, then to stir up devotion. But whether those
pictures were of such as they had at command, or of such as they would have at
command, I know not: only it is likely they were of such creatures, as to whom
they bore great affection, and least they should forget them, would contemplate
their pictures in their prayers.

6. Now I would ask them in this subject but one question, to wit, Whether all
these our Ladies which I have named, are one and the same in substance, or
diverse and many? If they say, One and the same, I ask then why they disguise
her after so many fashions? If they say that they are diverse, I would feign
know of them, which is the true Virgin Mary the mother of Jesus Christ? This
question which way soever they answer, casts them into most foul and gross
absurdities, and therefore I leave it to their wisdoms to resolve: only let
me remember them of the opinion of a good woman of Mount Riuard in France, who
said, that our Lady of Nautueil, and our Lady of Francucil were Sisters, and
surely she had reason, seeing their habits and countenances were somewhat alike.

7. But this abuse is not only in the habits of our Ladies, but also of the
other Saints, which to decipher to the full, would ask a longer discourse then
I intend; and for which, I refer the Reader to the former Author, Henry
Stephen. Indeed the differences betwixt them, is both infinite, and incredible;
not only in these things, but in many others; and therefore it is a great
wonder how they being so different between themselves, should have so perfect
an harmony in the kitchins of their holy Church, which they all with one accord
maintain in such sort, that they hardly give place to the kitchins of Kings
and Emperors. Much reuenew comes to them from the bodies of their Saints
departed, in regard of their relikes, as has been declared before, but it is
nothing to that wealth which they gain by their souls: which that we may
believe to be true, let the Reader take but the pains to view these Latin
verses, which I will set down verbatim, as they were a long time written in
Gothic letters in a Tablet of stone, fastened to a picture of the Church of S.
Stephen at Bourges, near unto the Altar, where used to be sung their Cardinal
Mass: for they contain in them the very quintessence of most impudent and
abominable impiety, and is so Authentical a president, as cannot be denied,
without denying their own hand and scale. The verses are these.

Hic des denote, coelestibus associote:
Mentes aegrotae per munera sunt ibi lotae:
Ergo venitote gentes a sorde remota:
Qui dat is estote certi de diuite d^^e:
Te precor accelera, spargas hic dum potes era:
Et sic reuera secure coelica spera.
O si tu scires, quantum data prosit ibires,
Tu iuxta vires, donares quod dare quires.
Te miser a paena dum tempus habet aliena
Huc dare te paena, v^niae fit aperta crumena,
Consors coelestis fabricae, qui p^rrigit, est is:
Ex hoc sum testis, hic vos mundare potestis.
Fratres haurite de trunco pocula vitae
Hic aliquid sinite, very velut Israelitae
Creed mihi creed, coeli dominaberis oede
Nam pro mercede Christo dices mihi cede.
Hic datur exponi paradisus venditioni,
Current ergo boni, rapientes calminathroni
Vis retinere forum, mihi tradas pauca bonorum
Pro summa quorum, reserabitur aula polorum.
Hic si large des, in coelo fit tua seeds:
Qui serit hic parce, parce comprendit in arce
Cur tardas tantum? nummi mihi des aliquantum,
Pro solo nummo gandebis in aethere summo, etc.
I forbear to interpret these verses in English, because their greatest grace
lies in the Latin rimes; only the meaning in few words is this: That he which
gives to an Image, goes directly into Paradise, and the more he gives the
better place he shall find there; yea, that Christ himself shall yield his
place up to such an one. Now is it possible that men that are reasonable
creatures, should be thus deluded and blinded? But this is the efficacy of
Antichristian delusion inflicted by Gods judgment upon men for their sins,
and wrought by the subtlety and malice of Satan, upon their souls.

CHAP. 6. Delusions by Popish Excommunications and Pardons.
1. BEsides all these forenamed delusions, the world has been no less
inueigled and deceived by their use, or rather abuse of the Keys, which the
Pope challenges, to have authority to dispose in the Church, and sublegateth
the same to Bishops and Priests. This power is exercised two ways: either by
shutting whom they list out of the Kingdom of heaven, by excommunication: or
by setting open the door to whom they list, by Pardons, Indulgences, and
Absolution. Now their Excommunication is twofold, the lesser and the greater:
the lesser is nothing else but an exclusion from the Sacraments of the Church:
and the greater called Anathema, an utter abscission from the body of Christ.
And in like manner their Indulgences are of two kinds: one Sacramental after
the Sacrament of Confession and Penance, which is an absolution from sins:
and the other Iuridicall, which is an act of jurisdiction and Ecclesiastical
authority, giving absolution from the censures of the Church: now how both
these are abused, and the world deluded by them, is the point I am to manifest
in this discourse following.

2. And first, I say that this power left to the Church by Christ, is in many
things so aviled by the Church of Rome, and in others so exalted above measure,
that there remains little in it of the institution of the Son of God. This
is a formal abuse, and one of the festered ulcers of the Church of Rome, which
requires a fuller Treatise to lanch the sore thereof, then my intent will
allow: I will only search it a little, though not to the bottom. And to
begin, observe first, how the Council of Trent, in the 15. Session, and
Chapter 3. of the reformation, seems willing to put it hand to the correction
of the abuses of Ecclesiastical censures: but all that those holy Fathers do,
is nothing else but to exalt the authority of Bishops, and to abase that of
Priests, and to clip the wings of the secular Magistrate. Secondly, the form
of their Sacramental absolution, which is in the Priests power to give, is
utterly full of blasphemy; for they do not only absolve in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which is agreeable to Christ's
institution, but also in the name and merits of the Virgin Mary, Eman Sa Jesus
^^h^^^sn. in principio.
and all the Saints, and their own satisfactions, which is a manifest
corruption of the doctrine of salvation. Thirdly, this absolution is given upon
condition, that the sinner shall endure some satisfactory pains imposed upon
him by the Priest, as some Fasts, some certain Pilgrimages, some certain
number of Prayers; which last seems to me a gross abuse, to put prayers
amongst pains, seeing good works cannot be called pains or punishments, it
being a greater punishment to be forbidden them, then commanded. Fourthly,
(which is yet worse) if a man being enjoined this penance have no humor to
fast and pray, or go on pilgrimage, he may redeem all with a little money, and
permute this affliction of his body, into the affliction of his purse. Can
presbiter D st. 82.
This their own Canon affirms expressly. And the gloss upon it says, that
if a man may redeem his fast by giving a penny, much more may one be freed by
another fast, and therefore it is an ordinary practice amongst them to give
money to some religious persons, to fast and pray and make satisfaction for
them, and in their steades. But I should fear that if I did my penance by a
Proctor, I should also be saved by a Proctor ^astly, that which is worst of
all, these fellows under the color of spiritual satisfaction, usurp to
themselves a temporal dominion over the bodies and goods of men: their bodies,
by causing them to be whipped and scourged, Tollet de instruct Sacerd. lib. 1.
cap. 14.
as Cardinal Tollet witnesses. Absoluatur (says he) cum Psalmo et oratione
deminica et verberibus: and as we have two famous examples in two great Kings,
Henry the second of England, to whom Pope Alexander the third caused the whip
to be given by a multitude of Monks, whereof some gave him five blows, others
three, and so forth as their humors led them, as it is recorded by Matthew
Paris in his History. The second example is in Henry the fourth of France, who
received in the person of his Ambassador the Bishop of Eureux, being
prostitute at the feet of his Holiness Clement the eight, diverse strokes with
a wand, before the King could be received into the bosom of the Church of
Rome. And how they encroached upon men's goods by this means, their continual
sale of Indulgences, for a certain rate of money, which gave Luther the first
occasion of breach with the Roman Church, does sufficiently show: for by this
trick they drayned men's purses, and amassed infinite treasure into their own
coffers.

3. And because I have mentioned their Indulgences, which are an extrauagant
kind of exercise of the Keys, neither merely sacramental, nor iuridicall,
but of a mixed nature partaking of both: let us in few words observe their abuse
of the world by them; and that so gross and palpable, as is almost incredible,
were it not fore-prophecied of them by the Apostle, that God should send upon
them strong delusion to believe lies. This power the Pope challenges to
himself alone: for he (say they) being Christ's Vicar here or earth, has the
keys of the Churches treasury tied to his girdle, which treasury is filled
with the merits of the Saints, to wit, their works of supererogation, which
they have more then they need for their own salvation, mixed with the merits
of Christ, and all these to be dispensed and disposed at the Popes pleasure. By
this power the Pope can at an instant, deliver all the souls that are in
Purgatory, and send them into Paradise: which if it be true, then it follows,
that if he can do this and will not, he is an unmerciful Tyrant, in suffering
so many millions of souls to lie frying in that furnace, when it is in his
power to give them ease: if he will and cannot, then he is a notorious liar to
vaunt of this power. By this same power, he takes upon him to give pardons to
those that are alive, and to exempt them from the punishment of their sins by
plenary remission: but it is with this condition, Si non ponatur obex, If there
be not a bar in the receiver; which bar is want of Faith and Repentance:
but this is a most intolerable abuse, for if a man have faith and repentance,
he is sure to be saved, whether he have the Popes pardon or no: and if he want
faith and repentance, they themselves confess that the Popes pardon can do
him no good. By this power, they promise plenary remission of sins, to all
that come to Rome on Pilgrimage, and chance to dye by the way, and to them
that live and visit the holy places there, especially the seven privileged
Churches. They promise to some 50. to some an 100. to some 3000. years of
pardon: yea Boniface the eight granted out of his bountiful liberality 82000.
years pardon, to every one that should say a prayer of S. Augustine, printed
in a Table at Venice, and that toties quoties. And John the 22. granted 20.
years pardon to every one that does but bow his head at the naming of Jesus:
by which account, a man may provide in one day for millions of Ages, and, that
which is remarkable, beyond the worlds continuance; whereas Purgatory lasts
according to their opinion, but till the day of judgment. By this power, the
Pope uses to consecrate and hallow an infinite number of Crucifixes, Medailes,
and Agnus Deis, holy Grains, or Beads, and such like trash, and to send them
abroad into the world, that whosoever wears one of them about him, if he be
at the point of death, and say but in his heart the name Jesus, shall have an
absolute forgiveness of all his sins, though he cannot be partaker of the
other Sacraments of their Church ^y this power, least Rome should be too far
to fetch these pardons, the Pope has appointed many petty Markets and Faires
of them in every Country, and the Pedlers that carry about this trash, are the
Priests and Jesuits. L^o the tenth, sent one Terelius about with these
Pardons, offering to every one for the payment of ten shillings, and not a penny
under, to set at liberty the soul of any one which they should name in
Purgatory. Out of this power issues their odious merchandise and setting to
sale of all manner of sin called, Taxae poenitentiaria Apostolica: whereby
impunity is granted, be the sin never so grievous, so the party pay according
to the rate for his absolution: as for adultery or incest, four Turons: for
both together, six Turons: for wilful murder being in holy orders, twelve
Turons: and so in proportion for other offenses; so that there is no sin so
heinous, for which pardon may not be purchased for a small sum of money. Now
then is it not too too manifest, how grossly the world has been deluded by
this impious practice? For hereby not only notorious sinners, as Whores,
Thieves, Adulterers, Murderers, etc. are made secure and careless in their
sins, seeing a pardon is so easily to be obtained, but they are also
enboldened to continue in their sinful courses; forasmuch as they use to
pardon a sin before it be committed: as it is said of Doctor Party, that he
brought with him his pardon in his pocket, for murdering our late Queen of
happy memory, intended by him: and a certain Germane, having obtained a pardon
for the next sin he should commit, robbed presently the Popes Pardoner, and
so could not be accused thereof, because he had his pardon to show. And that
this delusion, though it ran current amongst the ignorant people, was
resente^ by some of the wi^er sort, even in these times of darkness, may be
proved by diverse testimonies: as of one Oliver Maillard, a great preacher of
their own, and a Friar, who speaking of these pardon-Pedlers, whom he calls
Bullatores, amongst other has these words: An credit is quod vnus magnus
vsurarius plenus vitijs, qui habebit mill millia peccata, dando sex albos
trunco habeat remissionem omnium pecatorum suorum? Certe durum est mihi
credere, et durius praedicare. In like manner the Author of the book entiled
Onus Ecclesiae, thus speaks: Is It, indulgentiarum Buccinatores omnimodam
promittunt securitatem, quae parit negligentiam, et negligentia offensam Dei:
that is, These publishers of Pardons promise all manner of security which
breeds negligence, and negligence the offense of God. But most pregnant is
the complaint of the German Nation in the book of their Centum grauamina,
exhibited to the Popes Legate at Norimberge, An. 1522. for there they thus
complain. By the sale and Merchandise of this ware, (namely Pardons) not only
Germany is spoiled of money, but Christian godliness is extinguished: for from
hence Whoredom, Incest, Adultery, Perjury, Murder, Theft, Robbery, Usury, and
a whole heap of mischiefs have preceeded, no man being afraid to commit any
sin in respect of conscience, when he was persuaded that a pardon might be
purchased at so easy a price.

4. But enough of this trash, wherein peradventure I have stayed too long: I
come now to their Excommunications, which contain in it so many abuses as is
hard to count them. For whereas the Ecclesiastical censures were admitted to
humble sinners, and so to bring them to repentance, the Church of Rome turns
them quite to another end: For they make them serve for the finding out of
things lost, and the payment of desperate debts, and for terrifying from sins
not yet committed, so laying a plaster where there is no wound. For the first:
if a man have an Horse stolen from him, or any other thing, he may procure an
Excommunication against the party that had stole him though unknown, to be of
force if he bring him not again, and so the Thief must either gallop away to
hell, or return to the Gallows, let him choose which: and so oftentimes it
falls out, that by this means, a Father has unwittingly excommunicated his
own Son, and for the body of an Horse, Tollet de Instruct. Sacord. lib. 1. cap
8. Council. Trident. sess. 25.
sent his Sons soul to the devil. Cardinal Tolet approves of this kind
of Excommunication, and so does the Council of Trent. In like manner, the same
Cardinal allows, that an Excommunication may be publicly denounced against
all such, as shall rob such a Lords Orchard, or steal his Kine, this is for a
fault committed. And if a Creditor be desirous to be speedily paid his debt,
he may by their rules excommunicate the Debtor before hand, if he come not to
give satisfaction within a prefixed time. And this is the use they make of the
power of the Keys, given by our Savior Christ to his Apostles for the
salvation and humiliation of sinners.

5. But most pernicious is their common rule that a man excommunicate, is
suspended from the charge and office he bears whatsoever it be, and can
exercise no act of jurisdiction which is not void in Law: for this is to
subject under the power of the Pope and his Bishops, all civil Magistrates,
all the offices of the Crown, all the Lords of the Council, yea the very
Crowns of Kings themselves, who after once an Excommunication is darted
against them, be it wrong or right, are deprived of all authority, and all
their Edicts, Ordinances, and Decrees, made utterly void and anulled. And yet
their interdict of a whole Kingdom for an offense conceived against the King
only, is a matter of greater horror and detestation: for then no Bell is
suffered to be rung in the whole Land, all Divine service cease, he that
would hear a Mass must go out of the Land, all the Sacraments of the Church
are suspended, except Baptism, auricular confession and extreme Unction: the
bodies of the dead are buried in the fields, and all Church-yardes shut up. In
this miserable case was our England under King John for the space of six
years, during all which time, how many souls were sent into hell (if we
believe the Pope) as men dying out of the communion of the Church of Rome? And
all this for pecuniary quarrels, and certain temporal rights, which the King
denied to the Pope, the people being not the cause thereof. But yet it is most
abominable of all, that remission of sins is given as the wages of iniquity,
and absolution to a sinner upon condition that he give his House, or his Land,
or his Kingdom to the Pope, for the wages of iniquity: as when having
excommunicated one Prince, he gives his Dominion to another upon condition he
should invade and sack the others Country, and dispossess him thereof. This
is a common practice of the Pope against Emperors and Kings, as the stories of
the Emperor Frederick the second, and his son Conrade, with diverse of our
English Kings sufficiently witness. And in France during the last league, were
there not pardons set up in all the principal Cities of the Kingdom, wherein
nine years remission was granted to every one that should rebel against the
King? as if he should say, because thou art wicked, therefore thou shall be
saved: because thou art a Traitor, therefore thou shall have remission of thy
sins, and the kingdom of heaven. And as touching the rauishing of men's goods
by this means, the case is so clear by manifold experience, that it admits no
deny all; for during the 300. years wherein the Pope quarrelled with the
Emperors of Germany, (for so long that quarrel continued) did not the power of
the Pope increase, and that of the Emperor decrease every day? Every Pope by
the terror of his Excommunication drawing from the Emperor excommunicate,
Gifts, Privileges, Possessions and temporal rights, before he could be
absolved. He gave absolution to King John of England, upon condition that he
should give him his Kingdom, and become his Vassal and Liege-man, paying him
a thousand Marks a year, as to his chief Lord.

6. And sure a man would hardly believe, how enormous and profane the abuse is
in their absolutions from the censure of excommunication. The Jesuit Sa, Eman.
Sa. Aphorism. in verb^ Excommunicat, Tollet. de Instruct. Sacerd. cap. 14.
Azor. lib. 1. cap. ^. q. 2.
in his Aphorisms says, that an absolution made upon a false ground is
available: and Tollet, that an unjust absolution stands in force: and if a
Bishop absolve without satisfaction, his absolution holds. As if a Bishop
absolve a thief without binding him to restore the theft. Besides, that which
is worse: in the Church of Rome as they absolve by a Commissary, so a man may
be absolved by his Proctor; and that which is yet worse, a man may be absolved
without his knowledge, and against his will, which is as much as to say, thou
shall be saved whether thou will or no. Tollet de Instruct. Sacerd. lib. cap.
14. Idem. cap. 15.
They teach also that an Heretic or Schismatike may absolve an excommunicate
person at the point of death: and so an excommunicate may give communion, that
is, that which he has not: yea, that a man may be absolved from his
excommunication after his death. But it is pretty which Bellarmine, Sa, and
Navarre affirm, that he which gives Indulgences to others, may also give
them to himself, and so there can be no want of pardon, when a man may pardon
himself: and yet Mass is said for the Pope departed, presupposing that he is
in Purgatory, and that he cannot pardon himself. But above all, is the Bull of
Caena Domini remarkable, by which the Pope every year upon Maundy Thursday,
being mounted on a Scaffold, having two Peacocks tails at his two ears in
imitation of the heathen Emperors, (as is reported by Dion in the life of
Seueru^) thundereth out along Excommunication, and ratifieth it by casting
down from aloft a burning candle wherein are excommunicated, first, all
Heretics and Schismatikes, with all others that are disobedient to the Pope.
Secondly, all that appeal from the Pope to a future Council, together with
their Counselors, ayders and favorers. Thirdly, all Pirates and Robbers, that
ramage the Popes coasts, from Mount Argentario to Terracina, as if the Pirates
upon the coasts of England, and France, and Spain, were not as guilty as
these. Fourthly, all Princes that impose any new Taxes, Subsidies, or
impositions upon their people without the permission of the Pope: which clause,
touches all Kings and Princes to the quick, who are constrained by necessity
of their affairs, and authorized by the word of God to raise such Taxes on a
sudaine for their present occasions. Fifthly, all falsifiers of the Apostolical
Letters, all that convey Arms to Heretics, all that stop provision of
victuals coming to the Popes Court, all that hinder the voyage of such as go
to Rome on pilgrimage, and all that kill, hurt, strike, or rob a Cardinal, or
any other Prelate. Lastly, all that receive tithes of the Clergy, or usurp
any ways their rights, or take knowledge of causes Ecclesiastical being
Laymen, which clause enwrappeth not only inferior officers of state, but
even Emperors, Kings, and Dukes in their Dominions, and is indeed directly
aimed against them. Here is a roaring Bull indeed, able to terrify the whole
world with his bellowing: but God be thanked, men that are not altogether
blinded with superstition, have learnt out of the word of God, that it is but
Brutum fulmen, which hurts none but those Cowards, which a panicke fear can as
soon strike down dead as the stroke of a Gun. And I hope we have thousands
that are of the same mind with a Parisian Priest, who having received an
Excommunication against the Emperor Frederick the second, which was to be
published with sound of Bells, and Candles lighted, and after extinct, thus
answered: I am commanded to excommunicate the Emperor Frederick, and not
knowing the cause, yet knowing that there are great quarrels and an
irreconciliable hatred betwixt the Pope and him, and I know that one does wrong
to the other, but which it is I know not: therefore as far as my power
extends, I excommunicate him that does the wrong, whethersoeuer he be, and
absolve him that it is done unto.

7. Yea so infinitely outrageous were they in this censure of Excommunication,
that thereby they brought the necks of Emperors and Kings under their feet. It
is a story notoriously known, how Pope Alexander trampled upon the neck of
the Emperor Frederick, when he came unto him to be absolved from his
Excommunication. And how the Emperor Henry the fourth danced attendance
barefooted in cold weather diverse days before the Popes gate, ere he could be
admitted to his presence: and how for fear of this thunder clap, Kings have
waited like Lackeys on the Popes Horses, and one held his bridle, another his
stirrup: and how Francis Dandalus the Venetians Ambassador, crept on his hands
and feet, with a chain about his neck like a dog all along the Popes great
Hall, ere he could obtain an absolution for the State of Venice from the Popes
Excommunication. And how the King of France, and the King of England, attended
on the same Pope like Lackeys in the City of Bagence. And how Adrian the
fourth, caused the forenamed Emperor Frederick to hold his stirrup when he
dismounted from his Horse, and frumped him for his labor, in holding the right
for the left. And how arrogantly Boniface the eight entreated Phillip the
Fair, King of France, bragging that for his contumacy the Kingdom of France
was fallen to the Church of Rome. And Albert of Austria, in refusing to give
him the Imperial Crown being lawfully chosen, and vaunting that he himself
was Emperor and Lord of the whole world. These stories being at large set down
by others, I do but breefely touch, and as it were by the way.

8. Machiauell upon the occasion of the dealing of Pope Alexander the third
with the Emperor Frederick, has this notable saying; that the Popes were
grown great by three things, by Excommunications, by Pardons, and by Arms:
for by Pardons they made themselves to be adored, by Excommunications to be
redoubted, and by Arms to be obeyed, but by all three they raked together
infinite Treasures, and so made themselves great. For touching Pardons, it has
been sufficiently declared before: and for Excommunications, their ordinary
practice was to excommunicate, to the end, that an absolution might be
purchased with money, See these things more fully discoursed of by Mornay in
his papatus. Abbot and Downam de Antichristo. and Hen. Stephen in his Apology
for Herod.
as the forenamed Frederick bought his absolution of Pope Gregory the ninth,
for an 100000. ounces of Gold. Boniface the eight in the highest degree of
impiety, was not content to excommunicate the French King Phillip after the
ordinary manner, but together with him, all his, to the fourth generation. Is
not this a manifest trampling upon the neck of Kings, and abusing of the
blindness of the world? For what appearance is there that any mortal man has
power to excommunicate a man and all his posterity to the fourth generation?
The same Pope in despite of the forenamed French King, disanulled all the
Indulgences given by his Predecessors to Frenchmen: a most strange and absurd
act: for if these Indulgences were of that virtue as they pretend, they must
have redeemed out of Purgatory millions of souls; and if they were by this
Decree nullified, then it must needs follow, that these poor souls must
return back again out of Paradise into Purgatory: this conclusion is an
Amphisboena which stingeth both ways. And for Arms, the only use of them
was, when their spiritual censures were either rejected or contemned.

9. To conclude, with this thunder and lightning from the Popes seat (for so
it is named by themselves) men were so terrified, that they were driven into
courses of extremity and desperation: for they were persuaded that they were
hereby given over to the power of Satan, and utterly deprived of the
protection of God, and his holy Angels, and of the kingdom of heaven. Menot.
Concien. fol. 143. Col. 4.
And therefore one of their own Friars says, that it is not fit that this
dart should be put into the hands of every foolish Prelate, which
notwithstanding is ordinarily done in the Church of Rome, the Pope lending to
Bishops and Priests this thunderbolt, as often as occasion requires. And this
is the more remarkable, seeing such as are excommunicate are deprived not
only of the communion of Saints for the present, but of the very prayers of
the Church for the future. For on Good Friday when they pray for Jews, Turks,
and Pagans, yet they pray not for these. Howbeit since the light of the Gospel
began to shine in the firmament of the Church, the world is grown a little
wiser, and these thunderclaps are as much now contemned, as they were before
reuered: yea, many of their own Religion have cast off the terror of them, and
sot them at naught. Take for example the Emperor Charles the fifth, who was not
only a favorer, but a protector of the Church of Rome: this man being menaced
with an Excommunication by Pope Paul the third, if he did not deliver up the
City Plaisance into his hands, gave him to know by his Ambassador, that if he
thundered and lightened with his Excommunications, he would answer him with the
thunder and lightning of his Artillery. Their devilish policy therefore being
thus discovered, they fell to other more violent courses, as the fire and
faggots, the bloody Inquisition, the burning chamber, open wars, secret
treasons, sword, gunpowder, dagge, pistol, and poison, massacres, murders,
with all manner of more then Nero-like cruelty, and all too little to maintain
their abominable pomp and superstition. These are now the engines of their
policy, the old spiritual censures being almost out of date, and by these they
labor both to uphold their Babel, and to ouerturne the truth. But our Lord
Jesus Christ has given to the cinders of his blessed Martyrs, the virtue which
is said to be in the ashes of the Phoenix, and that with more abundance: for
the ashes of a Phoenix bring forth but one Phoenix; but the ashes of one
faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, has engendered an infinite number of the
same kind, who notwithstanding all their cruelties and bloody executions, do,
and will stand for the defense of the truth, and more and more discover the
abominations of that purple Whore.

CHAP. 7. Delusions by Monastical Vows, and the Sacraments of the Romish
Church.
1. THeir Monastical Vows and Sacraments lie so in my way, that I cannot draw
toward my conclusion, until I a little discover how the world has been
deluded by those means. And touching their Vows, they are of three sorts.
First, the Vow of voluntary poverty. Secondly, of celibacy or single life. And
thirdly, of blind and regular obedience: all which are professed by their
Monks and Friars in their Cloisters, to the great abusing of the world by
these tricks of Antichristian policy.

2. Concerning their voluntary poverty which they vow and profess, who sees
not how by this trick they have made themselves rich and mighty upon earth?
they profess to have nothing, and thereby gain all things that their hearts
can desire, and that in such plenty and abundance, that the very fat of the
earth is their portion. Look into all Countries of Christendom, and you shall
find the Abbeyes, Monasteries, and other Religious houses, seated for the most
part in the most fertile and pleasant places of all Kingdoms, and enriched
with so infinite possessions, Pet Ferariens. ^n forma libell quo agitur ^ex
substit. eu su^ corpore.
that here in England the Law of Mortmaine was feign to be made to restrain
men from giving too lauishly to those idle bellies. Monasteries (says one of
their own writers) were founded in time past for Devotion, though now they are
abused to rapine and covetousness: for they have at this day destroyed the
world, and brought to nothing the state of the Empire and of all Laymen:
wherefore all such places as are, or shall be erected, may worthily be called
nets framed to catch Laymens goods. In this small land of England, the
revenues of the Religious houses which were dissolved, did arise according to
the old rents, to the sum of an hundred thirty four thousand six hundred and
three pounds two shillings four pence half penny: which sum what it would
amount unto in the true value according to the esteem of these times, I leave
to them to calculate that are better seen in wordly matters then my self: my
opinion is, that it is not the tenth of the true value. The Votaries of Saint
Francis Order, of all other, professed poverty in the highest degree: according
to the rule of their Order they might not so much as touch any Gold or Silver,
neither had they any right, title, or interest in any thing to be their own:
their good Founder Francis having laid it down, that without any
construction, gloss, or interpretation, they should have nothing of their
own. And yet these Hypocrites will take as much Gold or Silver as is given them
with their Gloves on their hands, and live possessed of great revenues, and
fare plentifully in their Cloisters: like unto that melancholy Athenian that
imagined all the ships and goods in the Port P^raeum to be his own, when he
had none: so these professing they have nothing, yet possess all things their
hearts can wish. But I would feign know how they can excuse themselves by this
rule from being thieves. For (as Hospinian says) what is he but a thief,
Hospinian. de orig. Monach. lib. 6. cap. 16.
that eats and drinks, and clotheth himself with that that is none of his
own, nor can be by any right? other thieves eat and drink their own when
by gift it becomes theirs, but no gift could give them a propriety to any
thing: this thing (says the same Author) troubled the Friars exceedingly,
because it proved them manifestly to be thieves, and they could not devise how
to shift it off. And to this agrees Ferus in his exposition of the eight
Commandment, Ferus. in Exposit. Dec^lig.
where he places in the rank of thieves, all those which under the habit of
Religion, devoured widows houses, and ravished to themselves the riches of the
world by Lies and deceites: what is then this vow of poverty, but a mere
trick to gull and rob Laymen of their wealth, and to enrich ^hemselues with
their spoils? And yet forsooth they pretend hereby a state of perfection and
holiness, above the Law, and grounded upon an Evangelical counsel, If thou will be perfect, go sell all thou have and give it to the poor. Mat. 19. As
if it were likely, that our Savior would at the first dash give a counsel of
perfection to one that was not yet converted to the faith of Christ, but was
merely of the Jewish Religion: or if he did, yet that these fellows are
ascended to this degree of perfection, when by their giving away all (as they
say) they gain more then all, more case, plenty, belly-cheare, wealth, and
contentment, then they could have if they had kept their own in their hands.

3. Their vow of celebacy or single life is of like quality and nature: for
under the pretext of holiness and purity, the Clergy of Rome practiced all
manner of filthiness and impurity. So grossly was the world deluded by this
their counterfeit sanctity, that if a Priest was found in bed with another man's
wife, yet he was not to be suspected of any unclean act, but to be thought
only to counsel and advise her for her souls health: and yet the horrible
adulteries, and Sodomiticall abominations which have sprung from this root of
celibacy, are vncountable. I might call to witness Saint Bernard in his book
de conuers. ad Clericos. cap. 29. and upon the Canticles ser. 66. and also
Huldericke Bishop of Augusta in his Epistle to Pope Nicholas the first: and
Robert Holkot Robert. Holcot.
an English Dominican Friar, in his 173. Lecture upon the book of Wisdom:
and Panormitane Panormitan.
a man of great same in the Council of Basil. part. 3. de cleric. coning.
cap. cum olim. And John Gerson Io. Gerson.
Chancellor of Paris, who complained that in his time some Cloisters of Nuns
were become Stews of Strumpets and Whores. And Mantuane Mantuan.
a Carmelite Italian Friar, with Polidore Virgill, Polid. Virgill.
and many more, who have in their writings largely discovered the abominable
fruits of this filthy vow: but I will fix only upon such as touch this point
of delusion. Auentine Auentine.
thus writes concerning those times. The Decree of Celebacy (says he) was
acceptable to Whoremongers, to whom now it was lawful in stead of one wise to
have the fellowship of six hundred Harlots. Hence many false prophets took
occasion by fables and miracles to cast mists over the truth: and by drawing
places of Scripture to their purpose to deceive the people. In a word, when as
very few did truly make war with lust, and some did feign continency for
gain sake under the honest name of chastity, they committed Whoredoms,
Incests, Adulteries, every where, without punishment. Thus he. Mat. Paris in
Gulie^^o. primo.
Matthew Paris is altogether as plain and down right to this purpose, his
words are these. He (speaking of Gregory the seventh) forbad all Divine service
by married Priests, and Lay People to hear their Masses, by a new example, and
as most think, an inconsiderate judgment, contrary to the opinion of the holy
Fathers. From whence arose such a scandal, that the Church was never so
distracted by any Schism or Heresy: some contending for justice, others
against justice, and in the mean while few keeping themselves continent,
though some made great ostentation thereof for their own gain: many joined to
their incontinency perjury by reason of their adulteries, and yet who were in
greater estimation with the people then these hypocrites? Sigebert. Anno. 1074.
Sigebort another Historiographer of theirs, thus writes. By this occasion
(says he) many false Doctors springing up in the Church turned the people from
Ecclesiastical discipline by profane novelties. Nicholas Clemangis thus
bitterly inueigheth against these fellows: Nichol. Clemang. lib. de ruina and
re^aras. E^cles.
These Votaries (says he) who by how much according to the vows of their
Religion they should be more perfect, and chaste, etc. then others, by so much
are they more wicked and obsc^ene; Monks in habit, but monsters in conscience,
and conversation. And in the same book concerning Nuns he says, That they
were not assemblies of Virgins dedicated unto God, but brothel-houses of Whores
and Strumpets, Stews of Venus, and receptacles of lascivious and unchaste
wantons to glut their lusts. But to leave testimonies, and to come to examples.
Mat. Paris. in Henrico. primo.
Did not that Cardinal called Johannes Cremensis, that came into England as
Legate from the Pope, in the reign of Henry the first, foully abuse the people
and the Clergy? when the next night after he had in a Council at London
vehemently inueighed against Priests marriages, and exhorted unto chastity, and
enacted a Law in that behalf, he was found in bed with an Harlot to the shame
of the Order of Priesthood, and real confutation of his own Decree? Stephan
Apol. for Herod.
Or that filthy Friar, named Johannes de Cornibus that dyed of the Pox, yet
left such an opinion of holiness behind him, that when after his death the
red buttons of that disease appeared in his face, the people presently believed
that he was turned into a Seraphim? Or that great Saint of theirs Saint
Dustane, who for the disallowing of Priests marriages, wrought by the Art of
Necromancy, wherein he was very expert, diverse great miracles, as to make an
Image to speak to the Council assembled at Winchester, and his Harp hanging
upon the wall, to sound of it self an holy hymn, Gaudete in coelo, etc. with
sweet melody, and to hold the devil by the nose with a pair of Tongs or
Pincers when he came to tempt him unto incontinency. If these stories were
true, as they are related, then doubtless the devil was there the chief
Actor: if false, then what shameless beasts were they, that reported them to
the world? But howsoever it were, still it remains that hereby the poor
people were miserably deluded. It is written of Saint Godericke, who being
mightily tempted with the lusts of the flesh, that to abate the heat thereof,
he used diverse remedies, as to wear a hair shirt next his skin, Bale Acts of
English Votaries.
and sometimes a coat of Maile, and to stand in the night when he was most
tempted, in a Well of water up to the chinne. One time (as they say) there
appeared unto him a great old devil, accompanied with a number of young ones
like black boys with shaven crowns, which turned up his bare buttocks unto
him in defiance of his chastity: and if any man that had a barren wife
complained to this holy Saint, he made them fruitful by tying his girdle about
them. This and much more of such stuff is found in his Legend, which was read
in the Church on his festival day with great devotion, and certainly believed
by the blinded multitude. And no marvel if they were so deluded to believe
this, when as they gave credit to far more abominable and filthy relations,
as to that obscoene tale of the miraculous conception and birth of Saint
Wolstone Bishop of Winchester, which is this: Idem.
that his Father desirous to lie with his Mother upon a good Friday, and she
refusing in honor of the day, was forced to leave his Sperma upon a stone,
which she finding and lamenting the loss thereof, wrapped it up in a lock of
wool, and nourished it up under her arme-hole till it was a perfect Child: and
hereupon they say, he was called Wolstone, a man famous in those days for many
things but especially for this his miraculous (I might say Sodomiticall)
begetting. I will end with a merry story related by Malsmbury and others,
Guliel. Malmesbur. lib. 11.
of a Nun that was Sister to the Emperor Henry the second, whom he so entirely
loved, that he would often have her to lie within his Palace very nigh to his
own Chamber. Vincen^. specul. h^stor. lib. 25. cap. 18.
This Nun was secretly beloved of the Emperors Chaplain, and with him had
diverse amorous meetings in the night: now one morning he being about to depart
from her Chamber to his own, least his footing should be seen in the snow
which was newly fallen that night, she took him on her back and carried him
over to his own Chamber: at which time, the Emperor being by chance risen to
do some work of nature, and looking out of his window, beheld the whole
pageant: shortly after fell a Bishopric which the Priest gaped after, and a
Nunnery which his Sister desired: then the Emperor first called the Priest, and
said to him, I give thee this Benefice upon condition, you saddle no more the
Nun: And after calling her said, I give you the Nunnery upon condition you
horse no more the Priest. Were not these couple like to be excellent
governors of the spiritualty, think you? But all was chaste Religion so long
as marriage was absent. And because I have mentioned a Nun, let me give you two
or three examples more of them to accompany the Friars. One is of Editha the
Abbess of Wilton, who was Saint Dunstanes holy Minion. M^lmsbury. Ranulph. ^n
Polichro. lib. 6 cap. 9. Antonin. part. 2. tit. 16. c. 18.
Her that holy man beheld on a time, as she was crossing and blessing her
forehead with her thumb; which he presently taking into his hand said, Never
may this thumb perish, and so it fell out (says the story) for after her
death, all her body was found resolved into ashes, except that thumb, and
another secret part which in all likelihood he had blessed also. It is written
by the same Authors, that Elgina the wife of Canutus King of England having no
children, and being therefore disliked of the King her husband, went to an holy
Nunnery to those religious chaste women, hoping to find there some release for
her malady, as in deed she did: for finding there an holy Sister with child,
she bargained to have the child brought unto her in secret, which she,
counterfeiting her self also in the mean time to be great bellied, made show
to be her own, and so contented her husband: this Child was called Sweno, and
the year before Canutus dyed, was crowned King of Norway. But above all these,
two Nuns following were famous for their cozenage: one a Nun of Watton in
Yorkshire, who being engrossed by a young Monk of the Cisternian Order, when
she was to be delivered, feigned that Henry Murdach Archbishop of York
deceased, who had been her bringer up in her infancy, sent two midwiues from
heaven, and discharged her of her child without pain, and took it away with
them, so that it was never seen after. Another, the Nun called Beatrice (of
whom I have spoken before) that is reported to have been so favored of the
Virgin Mary, that she in her habit and feature kept her place for many years,
whilst she played the Strumpet abroad. I conclude with that chaste Sister, that
having had three bastards, which afterward grew famous in the Church for their
learning, to wit, Lombard, Gratian, and Comester, gloryed in her villainy, and
said, that it was an happy fault that had brought forth three such worthy men.
And thus we see, how the simple world has been deluded and abused by this
vow of celibacy.

4. Their third Vow is of regular obedience, whereby they so religiously tie
themselves to the rules of their Order, as in outward semblance, they seem to
the world to be most holy Saints, when in the mean while in secret they
break those rules at their pleasure, and make no conscience of observing the
Commandments of God. So great is their hypocrisy in this kind, that some of
them would not forsooth die, till their superiors had given them leave. But I
cannot better decipher the hypocrisy of this generation, then in the words of
Cornelius Agrippa, Cornel. Agrippa de vani^. scient. cap. 6.
who at large describes them after this manner. There are (says he) in the
Church diverse sects, Monks, Friars, Anchorites, etc. which both the old Law,
and the purer times of the Church were ignorant of. These at this day,
challenge to themselves the only name of religious persons, professing
difficult rules of life, and most holy duties, under the names of the worthy
Fathers, as Saint Basil, Saint Benedict, Saint Bernard, Saint Augustine, Saint
Francis, etc. but at this day few of them are good, whereas of evil there is a
great multitude. For hither resort as to a Sanctuary for wickedness, such as
are terrified in conscience for their misdeeds, or that by reason of the
vengeance of the Law can be safe no where else, or which have cast themselves
into poverty by Harlots, Dice, and Luxury: or whom the hope of ease, and the
impatient desperation of defrauded lust, the inconsideratnes of youth, the
malice of an unjust stepmother, and greedy Tutors, have enclosed within these
walls. All which troop are combined together by a pretended show of sanctity,
under a hooded habit, and a strong vow of poverty. In that great Sea of
superstition, wherein swim and rauin the great Leuiathan, and Behemoth, with
other strange fishes, and creeping things innumerable: out of this gulf issue
forth so many Stoicall Apes, so many insolent money-wormes, so many palliated
beggars, so many hooded monsters, some wearing long beards, some cords, some
ropes, some sackcloth, clubfooted, wood-shanked, bare-legged, black, dusky,
grisely; attyred some in white, others in diverse colors, others in linen,
others with nets, others with short clokes scarce reaching to their buttocks
others with long clokes to their heels, others clad like Mourners, others like
Soldiers: some breecht, some vnbreecht, some girt, some loose, with a number
more of such like Stage Players. These for their habit sake usurp the only
sacred name of Religion, and boast themselves as companions to Christ and his
Apostles: when as their life for the most part is notoriously wicked, and yet
unpunishable through the pretext of Religion. For they are guarded with the
privileges of the Roman Church, and exempted from the jurisdiction of all
other Churches: and therefore though they may call others in question in any
Court of Justice, they if they have done wrong cannot be met withal but at
Rome, or Jerusalem. Foxes they are in sheep skins, so dissembling their Art
of fraud, that they seem to profess nothing but counterfeit hypocrisy, and
pure gain, under the color of piety: whilst with a pale countenance they
feign to fast, and draw deep sighs from their breast, with tears at command
and murmr continual prayers with moving lips, and by a composed gesture,
sober gate, dejected eyes, seem most humble and meek, when in truth if they
be looked into, no sink is more filthy and corrupt: and yet they overcome all
with the title of Religion, and defend themselves with their hood, as with a
buckler against all the darts of Fortune, and so being secure from worldly
troubles and dangers, eat the bread of idleness, and sleep in deep
security; and account this Evangelical poverty, to eat the fruit of others
men's labors, and live by the sweat of other men's brows: and whereas by their
base habit they profess deep humility, walking barefooted like poor
pesants, disguised like Comedians, bound with cords like thieves, shaven
crowns like Fools, with hoods, earelaps and little bells like Iesters, and
other such marks of deiection, and reproach for Christ's and religion sake: in
the mean while are transported with ambition, and direct the whole course of
their order, to gain to themselves titles of honor, no kind of people being
more greedy of high places in the world then these are. This and much more to
the same purpose writes Agrippa, touching the hypocrisy of these Romish
Votaries. And so we see how the world has been a long time deluded by these
Monastical vows.

5. And now I come to their Sacraments, which are engines of no less delusion
then the former. But to omit the two Sacraments instituted by Christ, which
notwithstanding they have most horribly corrupted, I insist in their own five
which are proper unto them. And first to begin with their Sacrament of Penance,
whereof there are three parts: Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. For
Contrition, though their constant doctrine is, that paenitens si vel pus^llus
dolor sit, absoluitur aculpa, as Roffensis; Roffens. Art. 5. Maldonat in Summa
q. 16. Art. 1. Acosta de salut ^ndorum. lib. 5. cap. 11. Tollet de Instruct.
Sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 5. Suarez tom. 4. disput. 4. sect. 4. ^u. 9.
though the penitents grief be small, yet he is absolved from his fault:
Tennis dolor sufficit, a little grief suffices, as Maldonate: Contritio
imperfecta, an imperfect contrition, as Acosta: Quocunque gradu remissa, in the
lowest degree, as Suarez, and Tollet: yet it may wipe away the greatest sin.
Though I say, they teach this in their books, notwithstanding they terrify
the people in their Sermons, that they must be greatly humbled, and rend their
hearts by contrition, if they will be saved (for it is to be noted, that Popery
is one thing in their books, and another in their common practice and speech:)
and that which is most absurd of all, they need not to be contrite at all, if
they will give a little money for a Pardon, and yet go to heaven too. Touching
Confession, what is it but a meet device of policy to drayne men's purses, and
to diue into their purposes? Hereby they search into the Counsels of Princes,
and mysteries of State, and intentions and practices of the common sort of
people; and so frame and proportion their plots accordingly, and that many
times for the ruin and destruction of whole States. For if they find any
mischieuously minded against Heretical Princes, as they term all that
protest against the corruption of their religion; they not only give them
absolution from their intended crime before it be committed, but even animate
them unto it with promise of Paradise, and commendation of an act, not only
meritorious, but Heroical. Thus Father Garnet confessed our Powder Traitors;
and a Jesuit, Rauillac, that murdered Henry the fourth the French King: and
yet forsooth the seal of secrecy solemnly sworn, but daily broken for
advantage, does cast a vizard of holiness upon their practice. Besides it is a
known case, how most of that shorn generation, make their confession an
ordinary bawd of uncleanness. This is affirmed by diverse of their own
writers: one thus. Aluar Pelag. de planctu eccles. lib. 1. Art. 27.
It is an ordinary practice (says he) for Priests to commit execrable villainy
with women at shrift, rauishing wives, and deflowring maids in the Church, and
committing Sodomy with young men, etc. Cornelius Agrippa calls in plain
terms Auricular confession, Agrippa de vanit. cap. 64.
genus quoddam lenocinij, and proves the same partly by a story out of the
tripartite History, where it is recorded, how a noble woman was ravished by a
Deacon in the time of shrift, for which cause Nectarius the Bishop of
Constantinople banished this secret confession out of his Church, as also all
the Bishops of the East, did the like in theirs: and partly by their own
knowledge and experience in these words: I need not seek far (says he) for
examples, for I could relate many, fresh and well known if I would; for
Priests, Friars, and Monks, have under pretense of religion, free and secret
access to all sorts of women, in show to visit, comfort, or confess them for
their souls health: but in stead thereof, they to whom it is a sin to touch
money by the rule of their order, account it no sin, contrary to the rule of
religion. 1. Cor. 7.1. to touch women with unchaste hands, and to defile holy
Virgins, Widows, and Wives; yea oftentimes like the Troiane adulterer and
thief, to convey them from their husbands, and according to Platoes law, to
prostitute them to their fellows: and so whose souls they should gain unto
God, their bodies they sacrifice to the devil. Upon this same ground Acosta, a
famous Jesuit, says, Acosta de procurand. Iuder salut. lib. 6. cap. 16.
that it was a good provision if the obligation of secret confessions were
utterly taken away, for the preuentions of most abominable sacriledges and
filthy acts, in likelihood to be committed by such as were forbidden the use of
marriage. What is this but under a pretense of holiness, to open a gap to all
wickedness and uncleanness? As for their satisfaction, which is the last part
of their Sacrament of Penance, that is clearly nothing else but a Pageant of
hypocrisy, and a mere mockery: For first, whatsoever pain is enjoined them
by their Confessor in recompense (as they say) for their sin, is for the
most part so slight and easiy (to wit, saying so many Creeds, or Auces, going
in Pilgrimage to such or such a Saint, giving themselves a few stripes on the
back with a whip, fasting a certain number of days, etc.) as a wicked man
would hardly exchange his long pleasure in sin, for so small and short a
punishment. And secondly, let the Penance enjoined be never so sharp and
great, yet a pardon may release it, and that may be obtained by a little money;
or if money be wanting, for visiting one of the seven Churches in Rome, or
saying a short prayer in the Primer, or devoutly worshipping the Cross,
Nails, Whip, Lance, Heart, or Hands, of Christ painted on a wall. Yea
thirdly, if we are not able or willing to perform our penance our selves, we
may hire another to do it for us, and in our stead, which is the plain
doctrine of Tollet, as has been showed before. And what is all this, but a
May Game of sport, and a mere mocking of the world? by which notwithstanding
they both keep the people, yea and Princes too, in awe and subjection, and
heap up great treasures into their coffers.

6. From their Sacrament of Penance, I descend to the other four. And first of
Confirmation, which as it is abused in the Church of Rome, is nothing else but
a device to gain reverence and respect to their Bishops above other Priests.
For hence it is, that they prefer it before Baptism, which they say every
ordinary Priest may confer, but this only be performed by a Bishop, and that
a man has not his full Christendom, till he be Chrysmatus, that is, thus
comfirmed; and the Bishops blessing is so donatiue of saving grace ex opere
oper^ to, that if a man dye before he has committed any mortal sin after
it, he must of necessity go to heaven. Hence it was, that young and old flocked
unto them by troops on every side, kneeling on their knees as to some Saint
come from heaven, and craving their benediction with most earnest devotion, and
yet in conclusion all was not worth a rush, but they returned home as empty of
grace as they went thither. I know that this Ceremony is of great Antiquity,
and has an holy and commendable use in the Church of God: but that it should
be a Sacrament conferring grace, and that a man is not a perfect Christian
without it, is a most abominable delusion.

Marriage is the next, which they call a Sacrament, ascribing unto it the very
efficacy of saving grace, as to the rest, and yet deny the use of it to their
Priests: before a vow (say they) it is Sacramentum, a Sacrament; after a vow
Sacrilegium, sacrilege. Now if it be a Sacrament, why is it not common to all?
Why may any man vow against it? Why do they bar their Priests of it, who of
all other have a right unto the Sacraments? Will they deny them the means of
their salvation, and so make them ungracious as they are? But I mean not to
dispute the question any further, save only to show how these fellows have
deceived the world with a pretense of piety, in calling this ordinance of God a
Sacrament of grace, and yet deny it to their Clergy as a sin of the flesh,
and preferring concubinage, adultery, and whoredom, before it, as lesser evils.

I will put in the next place, their extreme Unction, though it be last in
order, and say only thus much of it, that if it be true which the Council of
Trent decreed, Council. Trident. sess. 14. cap. 2.
that this Sacrament wipeth clean away all such sins as remain unpurged or
unsatisfied for: and which the Council of Florence judged; that the effect of
this Sacrament is, Sauati^ animae, The healing of the soul: and which
Bellarmine affirms, that therefore the five sense, are anointed, Bellar. de
extrem. vnct. lib. 1. cap. 8.
because they are as it were the five doors by which sin enters into the
soul: to wit, that there might be a general purgation of all sins which
remain: I say, if all this be true, then has the world been grossly deluded by
them. For Purgatory, say they, is ordained to purge away the relikes of sin
which in our life time we have not satisfied for: Idem de Purgat. lib. 1. c. 1.
et lib. 2. c. 1
thus Bellarmine defines Purgatory, To be a place, wherein as it were in a
prison, those souls are purged which were not sufficiently purged in this
life, to the end that being so purged, they may be admitted into heaven. Now if
all the relikes of sin be wiped away by this extreme unction, then what use
is there of Purgatory? And if the relikes of sin be to be purged in
Purgatory, then what use of this Sacrament? Either therefore the one, or the
other, is a mere delusion, or rather both, seeing there is no purgation of
sin, but by the blood and Spirit of Christ alone, by which as many as believe
in him are washed, and cleansed from the very dregs of corruption, 1. John.
1.7. 1. Cor. 6.11. Add hereunto, that this unction was not used by the
Apostles, and in the primitive Church, as a medicine to purge the soul from
sin, but as a miraculous means of curing some dangerous disease of the body.
Thus says Cassander, Cassander. Consult. Art. 2.
setting down the form of words which were then used at the annoynting of
sick persons: I an^oynt thee with holy oil, in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost; praying that by means of this holy unction, and our
supplication, Sanitatem re^^peres per Dominum nostrum: wherefore (says he)
this unction was not then applied to such as were at point of death, Feu^rden^.
com. in Iac^b 5.
and whose life was desperate. The Jesuit Penardi^tiu^ confesses as much,
when he says, That the effect of this oil of old, was that (...) be cured
from the d^seases of the body: And therefore S. Cl^^ent Bishop of Rome, amongst
the sacred constitutions, sees down this form of benediction of this holy
oil: O God the Creator, sanctify by Christ this oil, and give it virtue to
cure and drive away diseases. How are they then beguiled and deluded, that are
made believe, that this last unction by a Priest, is auailable for remission of
their sins, and a powerful pasport to convey them into Paradise?

7. I will end, though out of order, with their Sacrament of Orders, wherein
the whole institution of Christ is so disordered, and put out of frame, that
little remains entire and found in this sacred function. For the charge laid
upon Priests by the Spirit of God in holy Scripture, is, to labor in the word,
1. Tim. 5.17. and to feed the Flock of Christ with wholesome doctrine, Acts.
20.27, 28. and to administer the Sacraments to the people, and pray for them,
Acts. 2.24. But in the ordination of Priests in the Church of Rome, there is no
mention of any of these things. The formality used is only this: The Bishop
annoynteth with oil in form of a cross, the fingers of him that is to be
Priested, which are to touch the Host, and putting into his hand, betwixt his
fingers, a Chalice and a little Dish with these words, Receive power to offer
sacrifice to God; and to celebrate Mass, Gulie^. Malmsbur.
both for the quick and the dead. And by these words he establishes him a
sacrificer of the body of Christ, and gives him a power that surpasses the
power of all creatures in heaven or earth, whether Emperors, or Kings, or
Angels, or the Virgin Mary her self: whence Pope Vrbane the second inferred,
That it was an abominable thing, that the hands of them that create their
Creator, should be bound to serve them whose hands are daily polluted with
filthy touchings. And by this reason he maintained, that Emperors and Kings
ought not to give Inuestitures. Another great Doctor, that was Almoner to the
Prince of Conde, in the first book of his Royal Priesthood, Chap. 3. thus
magnifieth this function upon the same ground. Joshua (says he) stayde but the
Sun in the place where it was before: but these (to wit Priests) stay Jesus
Christ being in heaven, on the midst of an Altar, where he was not before:
the creature obeyed him, but the Creator these: the Sun hi^^, but God these,
as often as they pronounce the words of consecration. And again, The
Priesthood and the Divinity have some thing in common betwixt them, and are
almost of equal greatness, because they are of equal power: And therefore
(says he) seeing the Priest marches cheek by iolle with the Divinity, and
that all Priests are Gods, it follows that the Priesthood excels the
Royalty, and that Priests are greater then Kings. Neither is their practice
different from their doctrine: For at the Papal Mass, if an Emperor or King
assist in person, he performs the office of a Subdeacon or a Deacon at most,
and Deacons we all know are but Priests servants. And Baronius commends S.
Martin, because at a Feast he presented the cup to a Priest to drink of next
himself, rather then to any of the Princes, that were set with him at table.
And this is the first piece of his ordination Next unto which follows the
second, that the Bishop then imposes his hands upon his head, and uses these
words, Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins thou shall remit, they are remitted
unto them, and whose sins thou shall retain, they are retained. By which
words is committed unto them a power to remit, and retain sins as we see,
and yet not all sins neither: for some pass the power of simple Priests, and
are reserved for Bishops and Penitentiaries, from whom also there are some
causes reserved to the Pope himself, and therefore they cunningly alter the
words of the Gospel, and in stead of, Whosoeuers sins, say only, Whose
sins. And these be the two parts of their ordination, wherein the chief
piece is clean forgotten, to wit, authority and power to preach the Gospel:
and not only forgotten in their Orders, but also in their practice; for few
there are of infinite multitudes, that labor to instruct the people by
preaching, either for want of ability, or of conscience: whereas every ignorant
Idiot sacrifices daily, and gives absolution to every one that will demand it
for a price. And yet who are in greater esteem then these? Who dares controlle
them? Or what Laws can take hold of them? They are wholly exempt from all
civil command and authority, and endowed with such privileges and liberties,
as no man dare say unto them be they never so wicked, Black is thy nail, for
fear of incurring the censures of the Church. And thus it is apparent, how
strongly the world has been deluded by this their Sacrament also, as well as by
the rest.

CHAP. 8. A rabble of other Romish Delusions, arising principally from the
ignorance and abuse of holy Scripture.
1. TO avoyde tediousness in this subject which is infinite, I will bind up
in one bundle a few more of their delusions, whereby the Popish Priests have
abused the world, and those principally which arise, either from the ignorance,
or from the malicious abusing of holy Scripture, or from both together as joint
causes. The ignorance and sottishness of the Romish Clergy in former times,
is so notorious and famous, that it is almost a needless thing to report that
which is written of them. Their own rule, that Ignorance is the mother of
devotion, though directed to the Laity, yet possessed their Clergy also: by
which they were encouraged to lay aside all study of holy Scripture, and to
addict themselves to blind and superstitious devotion, the true daughter of
their blind mother Ignorance. S. Bernard says, that ignorance has two
daughters, dubiety or doubting, and falsity or error: their devotion then must
either be full of doubts, as proceeding from unknown grounds, or of error
proceeding from authorized ignorance of holy Scripture. There is one Ancient
Law in our Kingdom, hatched in the blindness of Popery, that plainly euinceth
the ignorance of the Clergy in those times, and their want of learned men: It
is this, that in many criminal offenses, he that could but read the Psalm
Miserere, or some other, though he understood never a word thereof, should be
exempted from the secular power, as being fit to make a Clerk, which plainly
argued that which I named before, the gross ignorance of the greatest part of
the Clergy in those days. I confess that this Law is still continued, but it
is not with opinion that such persons are fit to be made Priests, but only for
mitigating of the rigor of the Law in petty offenses, which otherwise would be
inflicted on them as upon the greatest. If we desire particular examples of
this sottishness in Popish Priests, I could refer the Reader to other
Authors that have written thereof, and especially to Stephens Apology for
Herodotus, where is a whole thraue of them: but that he may have also here
some satisfaction, I will not forbear to relate some of them, partly out of
that book, and partly out of other writers. Their own Canon Law tells us of
a Priest, that in the Sacrament of Baptism used these words, Bapizote in
nomine patria, et filia, et spiritua sancta, which notwithstanding Pope Zachary
writing to one Boniface a Bishop in whose Diocese this absurdity was
committed, Decret. 3. p. de consecrat. Did. 4. can. ^4. L^mbard. lib. 4.
Sentent. Did. 6.
resolves to be true Baptism, though the rules of Grammar were broken; and so
does also Peter Lumbard. Another, in the consecration of the Eucharist said,
Hoc est corpu^^ meum, which by the same rule must be a good consecration,
albeit notwithstanding their Religion will never allow it, seeing the
consecrating virtue lurketh in Christ's own words, Hoc est corpus meum, and
those truly pronounced. Another, read in Luke 19.8. Euertit domum, in stead of
Euerrit domum, ouerturned the house, in stead of swept the house, which was a
mistake that every Schoolboy could have corrected: but it seems this Priest
had read Euertit in his books, but never Euerrit in all his life before.
Another read Demissus per portam, let down by the gate, in stead of Demissus
per sportam, let down by a basket. Acts. 9.25. Another to prove that an
Heretic ought to be put to death, alleged that text of Saint Paul, Titus.
3.10. Haereticum denita, avoid an Heretic, as if it were de vita, supple,
toll, that is, take away an Heretic. But most famous was he that being asked
whether the Virgin Mari^s name could be found in the Old Testament, answered
yes, in the first of Genesis verse. 10. where it is written, Et congregationem
aquarum vocauit Maria; and he also that would find the Mass in the first
Chapter of Saint John in these words: Inueninus Messiam, we have found the
Mass: and he also who being in contention with his Parishioners, about pauing
the Church, brought in the Prophet Jeremy for his Advocate, Chap. 17. in these
words, Paueant illi et non paueam ego, let them paue, but I will not paue. I
will not remember that Popish Priest in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, who reading the first Chapter of Saint Mathewes Gospel in the Church,
Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, etc. when he came to the hard
names of Aminadab and Naasson, etc. brake off on a sudaine, not being able to
read any further, with this conclusion, And so they begat one another to the
end of the Chapter. Neither will I speak of him a Popish Priest also
ministrified in that time; that read, Mat. 17.27. in stead of cast an Angle
into the Sea, cast an Angel into the Sea: nor him that being by his Ordinary
bidden to construe this Article of the Creed, Passus est sub Pontio Pilato to
try his sufficiency, answered thus, Passus est, he passed, sub Pontio Pilato,
over the bridge Pilatum: which the Bishop finding fault withal, saying, that
Sub signified under, not over, he replied; but if he had gone under he had
been drowned. But to pass further, if their ignorance in the Latin was so
great, what shall we think of their knowledge in the Hebrew and Greek? One of
them being held for a learned Rabbi, Stella. Clericorum.
has this deriuation of the word praesbiter, either praebens iter, or more
subtily, quasi prae alijs bibens ter: and of the word Diabolus, of dia which
signifies duo two, and bolus which signifies morcellus a morsel, because he
makes but two bits of a man, one of his body, and another of his soul. Lib.
Confor^^it. S. Francisci.
The blessed name Jesus is thus abused by them: for they say that the two
syllables whereon the word Jesus stands, signify the two natures in Christ,
and the three vowels the Trinity, and the two consonants the two substances in
Christ's Humanity, to wit, his body and soul. So the word Cephas, which is a
Syriacke word signifying a stone, some of them derive from the Greek word
(...) an head; cutting off the two last letters. Some again from the French or
English word Chef or Chief, and others from the Latin word Caput, which comes
from Capio, whose preterperfect tence is Copi: and all this doltish stir is
to uphold the Popes supremacy that he should be head of the Church. But it is
no marvel if they thus dealt with those three holy Languages, sanctified by
the Cross of Christ, seeing in their opinion the knowledge of them was a
manifest introduction into Lutheranisme, which they call heresy, but in truth
is a means to discover their errors, and lay them open to the world. Neither
was this ignorance found only in ordinary Priests, but even in Bishops and
Popes: as witnesses Alphonsus de Castro. lib. 1. cap. 4. ad haeres. when he
says; Constat plures little adeo illiteratos esse, vt Gramaticam penitus
ignorant. It is well known, that many of them are so unlearned, that they know
not their Grammar rules: for example, a Bishop examining one that was to be
made Deacon, in stead of asking Quot sunt Sacramenta, demanded quot suni 7
Sacramenta: how many are the seven Sacraments? To whom the Deacon answering,
Tres: the Bishop replied In quibus, what call you them? And it is reported of
Pope Iunius the second, that signing a Warrant, in stead of fiat he wrote
fiatur. If any should here step up and say, that we have also amongst us many
ignorant Ministers, that have been as absurd in their preachings and
demeanors: I answer, that there never was Church better furnished with able,
learned, and godly Preachers, then ours is (the Lords name be praised for it:)
howbeit I deny not, but that there are amongst us many wandering stars, lewd,
and unlearned. Ministers, who in their preachings and sayings may peradventure
abuse their calling, and afford matter of laughter to profane and
superstitious persons: but notwithstanding I avouch, first, that the number of
them is but small, in comparison of the huge troops of ignorant Priests and
Friars which swarm in all the places of Popery like Locusts in Summer. And
secondly, that our Church is sick of them, and seeks to ease her stomach of
such unsavory morsels by little and little, not countenancing them and their
ignorance, as they do in the Romish Synagogue. And thirdly, that such abuses
in some of our Clergy are matters merely taken up by report, and often
devised by Popish and irreligious persons, in malice to our Religion, without
any ground of truth: whereas those things which are related of them, are either
authentically registered in their own books, or divulged by men of their own
faction and Religion. And therefore I may truly make use of the saying of the
Poet against them: Et si not dignisumus hac contumelia maxim, indigni illi qui
dicant tamen. Howsoever, the whole world will confess, that the times of
Popery were times of blindness and ignorance, both in Clergy and Layty, and
that when the Gospel began again to shine forth in the world, Learning also
began to show it self in all places, which before had lain hid as it were in a
dungeon.

2. Thus they abused the world by their ignorance: but their horrible
profanation of holy Scripture is much more abominable; as first, in depriving
the people of all liberty to read the same, as if it were the only root and
spring of Heresy. This prohibition was so strictly urged, that it was more
danger to be found reading in a Bible, then forging false money, or
counterfeiting the Kings coin, and he was peremptorily judged an Heretic,
Beres. de tradit. page 44. Thyrraus de damoniacis. c. 21. These. 257. H^sius de
expresso verbo. Dei.
that was found with a Bible in his house, though he held in opinion no
doctrine contrary to the Church of Rome: yea, one of them affirms, that it
was the devils invention to permit the people to read the Bible: and another,
that he knew certain men possessed, because being but husbandmen, they used
to discourse of the Scriptures: another, that Laymen are no better then hogs
and dogs, and therefore that these precious pearls are not to be committed
unto them: and that the Scripture to a Layman, is as a Sword in a mad man's, or
a knife in a child's hand. But what marvel if Laymen were forbidden by
Priests, when even Priests forbad themselves to read the Scripture? For their
whole study was either the Canon Law, or some Postill, or at least some book
of worse report: as for the Bible, they did little acquaint their eyes with
that object, least it should induce them into Heresy. In so much as an old
Priest hearing a young man allege Scripture out of the New Testament, wondered,
and swore that he had been a Priest fifty years, and yet never knew what the
New Testament was. Espensaeus in his Commentary upon Titus, Espensaeus in Tit.
cap. 1. and 2 page 105.
gives us a full justification of this report: for there he thus writes, I
remember (says he) that a Noble Italian Bishop was wont to tell me, that his
Countrymen were terrified from the study of Divinity with fear of being made
Heretics, as if heresy sprung from the study, and not rather from the
ignorance of the Scripture. What Art do your Countrymen profess? said I: of
both Laws (quoth he) but especially of the Canon Law, for this is the shortest
cut to all the high dignities of the Church. I confess that for very shame,
within these forty years they have translated the Bible into diverse vulgar
languages, as the French and English: howbeit it is so corrupted in
translating, and so counterguarded with false glosses and annotations that in
stead of the wholesome juice of saving knowledge, the Reader sucks out nothing
but poison and venom to his soul. And these editions were permitted to be
read only of those, that had attained a dispensation therefore from their
Ordinary, or that could dispend a certain s^mme of money by their yearly
revenue: as if heresy builded her nest rather in the breast of the poor man,
then of the rich: or as if the rich were less carnal then the poor. And thus
that general name which Epiphanim gives to all Heretics, ^ucifugae, agrees
well to this generations, who cannot abide the light of the Scriptures, but
fly from them as Owls and Bats from the light.

3. Another gross profanation of ^oly. Scripture whereby they deluded the
world, is, by their ^h^^^^esse additions, and idle paraphrases, and
interp^e^^^^m. For ^ouching additions, what can be more palpable, then when
they patch up the Canon of the Scripture, with those books which were hel^ both
by the Iew^^ and most of the anci^^ (...) for Apocrypha? And which of
themsel^^^ (...) evidence that they proceeded no^ from the Spirit (...) shines
in the Canonical writings. Besides, do they not make their unwritten
traditions, I say not one, but the principal part of Gods word? Without which
in their judgment, the book of God is an imperfect rule of faith, a dead
letter, an incky divinity, and no better then a leaden rule, or a nose of wax,
flexible to every humor. In this rank I may place diverse counterfeit books,
disguised under the name of some of the Apostles, or their Disciples, full of
fables, blasphemies, and contrarieties, and yet commended to the world as
parcels of the written word of God, and believed in as holy Scripture it self.
As, the Gospels of Saint Nicodemus, of Saint Thomas, of Saint Bartholomew, of
the Nazarites, of Saint Anne, the book called Pastor, and that which is called
Orthodoxographa Theologiae sacrosanctae: with diverse others. But above all,
that book ascribed to Saint James, called Protevangelion, sieve de natalibus
Jesus Christi, et ipsius Matris virginis Mariae, bears the bell for impiety.
In this is recorded a long story of Saint Annes barrenness, and how by prayer
she obtained a child of God which was the Virgin Mary, and how she was
dedicated by her Mother to the Lord, and brought up in the Temple like an holy
Nun, and after by lot fell to Joseph, and being with child by the holy Ghost,
after much trouble and stir, was delivered in a Cave of her child, by help
of a midwife miraculously found out by Joseph, with a number more such idle
circumstances, which any Christian heart would blush to read, though they were
not ashamed to write, and commend to the deluded world as Articles of Faith.
There they tell likewise of many miracles wrought by our Savior Christ when he
was a child: as that when he was carried an infant into Egypt, and being
assaulted by thieves, one of the thieves would not suffer his fellows to lay
hands upon Joseph and his company, but departing, desired the infant Jesus to
remember this good turn: and this was the good thief whom Christ remembered
upon the Cross. Again, that Christ being a Lad, and working with his Father
Joseph in the Trade, had been on a time corrected by him, for miscutting a
piece of timber too short for his work, had he not miraculously with his hands
pulled it out to the full length. And thus the doltish Friars and Priests
stuffed all their Sermons, discourses, and writings, partly with Legendary
tales, and partly with fables out of such Apocrypha books, leaving in the
mean while, the holy Scripture untouched, wherewith they had small or no
acquaintance.

4. Besides, what do they by their strange paraphrases of the text, but turn
it into a plain interlude or play? The Sermons and Postils of their Friars,
are stuffed with such idle stuff, which sauoureth merely of a profane wit, and
tends to no other end, but to the deluding of ignorant people. For instance,
take the example of that sinful woman called Mary, Luke. 7. who washed our
Saviors feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her-head: this
they turn into a pleasant Comedy, wherein are these Dramata or Actors. First,
Mary a wanton Wench, given to pleasure and fleshly dalliance, like another
Thais: then her Sister Martha a devout young woman reproving her for her wicked
life, and persuading her to repentance: next Jesus Christ, an holy and
Religious Preacher working upon her conscience by wholesome and heavenly
admonitions. Then Simon the Pharisee preparing a dinner for Christ in his
house, and entertaining all his Friends that came with him: besides, certain
gallant yongsters making love to Mary, and laboring to keep her in her old
course of wantonness. And lastly, the Virgin Mary entertaining her after her
conversion into her friendship and familiarity. There was never Comedy better
acted, and more to the life, then this Friar-like relation was, by that Friar
Menot by name, which we will confess if we read the discourse it self, as it
is written by him at large. In like Comicall manner they handle the perable of
the prodigal child, which being breefely recounted by the Evangelist, is so
enriched and disguised with a number of idle circumstances, as cannot but move
laughter in reading of them: for the true discourse whereof, as also of the
story of the Officers that were sent to apprehend Christ, John. 7. and of the
two women that contended about the living child before King Solomon, 1. Kings.
3. with a number such like. I refer the Reader to their own books, and
especially to the Sermons of Friar Menot, Dormi secure, and Stella Clericorum.

5. As for their false interpretations and misallegations of texts of
Scripture, they are so frequent in all their books, that it may seem lost
labor to stand about them: therefore for a taste only take these examples
following, wherein they apply the Scripture directly intended of our Savior
Christ, to their Saints and Saintesses. The book of the Conformities of Saint
Francis affoordes many examples of this kind of profanation, but the
conclusion of that book is worth the noting, which is this, Multa quidem and
alia signa fecit Franciscus, qua non sunt scripta in libro hoc: so affirming
the same words of him, which were written by the Evangelist of Christ himself.
Thus a Friar of Saint Dominicks Order applied unto his Patron Saint Dominicke
that prophecy of Zachary, Chap. 6.1, 2, 3. touching the four Chariots, which
being drawn with four kind of Horses of diverse colors, signify four kind
of Friars of that Order, Minors, Heremites, Carmelites, and Predicants. To
Saint Augustine they apply that of Ezekiel. 28.12. It Is signaculum plenitudinis
Dei plenus sapientiae: and to Saint Agnes, that text in the Canticles, 7.6 Quam
pulchra es and decora char^ssima in delicijs; and to Saint Lucie, that of Saint
John, Chap. 1.5. Lux in tenebris bucet, and tenebrae came non comprehenderunt.
These brave applications are in the Sermons entitled Dormi secure: but these
are nothing to them that follow for blasphemy and impiety. The two great lights
spoken of, Genesis 1.16. signify (say they) the two dignities in the firmament of
the Catholic Church, to wit, Pontifical, and Regal; the one to rule the day
of the Spiritualty, and the other to rule the night of the Layty, and is less
then the other by 57. degrees, as says the Glosser upon that place. That first
and famous promise of the Messiah, Genesis 3.15. is taken off from Christ, and put
on the Virgin his Mother, by reading Ipsa conteret, etc. in stead of ipse or
ipsum, according to the Hebrew original Text, and the Septuagint translation.
Again, that Prophetical promise made principally unto Christ, and secondarily
to the Elect, Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and Cockatrice, etc.
was applied by Pope Alexander the third to himself, and the Emperor
Frederick; and that not in bare words, but in a real action, by trampling upon
the Emperors neck. Esaias. 49.23. it is written, They shall worship toward the
face of the earth, and li^ke the dust of thy feet: and Esaias. 28.16. Behold I
will lay in Sion a tried flo^^, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: and
Hosea. 1.11. The Children of Judah and Israel shall be gathered together, and
appoint themselves one head: and Cantic. 7.5. Thy head is like the Mount
Carmell: and Mat. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth: and
Psalm. 8.7. Thou have put all things under his feet, the Fowls of the air,
that is (say they) the Angels in heaven: Beasts of the field, that is, the
godly in this life: and Fishes of the Sea, that is, the souls in Purgatory.
All these Texts they apply unto the Pope with a number more, making him equal
unto Christ, and inuesting him with his titles of dignity: as of the Churches
Head, the gr^^^ Shepherd of the Flock, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the
Bridegroom, etc. I might enlarge my self in this field: but for breuity sake
take only these three or four examples more, and so an end with this piece of
delusion. Pope Boniface the eight, challenged to himself the power of both
swords, Temporal, and Spiritual; because Christ said, that two swords were
sufficient, and bad Peter not cast away one of them, but put it up into the
s^eath. So likewise they expound that Text, Mat. 17.24. S^lus proce et me, P^y
for thee and me: to signify that Christ's family has two heads, to wit, Christ
and Peter; because they (...) only pride, and that Peter was a chief over the
rest of the Apostles, because none of the rest payd^; as if paying of Tribute
was a sign of pre-eminence, and not maker of ^u^^^ction. In like m^^ner,
Baronius alleges that of Acts. ^0.1^ Arise, ^^ron. kill, ^^de^^^^: to prove
the P^pes p^^^^^ (...) the Venetians: Kill, that is, excommunicate: And eat,
that is, bring them to the obedience of the Church of Rome. In fine, I cannot
omit that their famous interpretation of a Parable recorded by S. Mark, Chap.
13.34. where it is said, That a certain man going into a strange Country,
leans his house, and gives authority to his servants, and commands the
porter to watch. This man (say they) going into a strange Country, is the soul
which by death departs out of this world: his leaving authority with his
servants, signifies, that he charge his Executours to procure with his
goods, the prayers and suffrages of the Church, whereby he may be freed from
Purgatory: he commands the Porter to watch, that is, he gives part of his
goods to his Pastor, that he may diligently sacrifice for him, by saying
Mass. Who sees not the impiety and profaneness of these interpretations?
And yet these are nothing, either in number or quality, to those that are
ordinarily found in their books.

6. What should I speak of their intrica^^^ questions, curious distinctions,
subtle speculations, and rond allusions, where with they have so perplexed all
divinity, that little of the true sense and meaning thereof can be understood?
Take a short view of them, and thereby judge of the whole lump. Touching
questions: whether God could sin if he would? Whether he can yet do as much
as he has done? Whether he could assume the nature of man in the Female kind?
Or whether the holy Ghost could produce the Messiah out of another creature
then a woman? Whether the good Angels are of one accord? Whether God serves
himself with all of them? Whether they are grieved at the damnation of them
whom they guard and keep? How many orders and degrees there are amongst them?
With many more of the like nature. Again, about the Sacrament, how Christ is
present, and at what moment of the consecration the elements are changed?
Whether if a Rat eat the Host, he be thereby sanctified, and made an holy
Rat, and so of Mice and Dogs? How the Spider swallowed up by S. Francis came
out whole and sound at his thigh, whether of it own motion, or by Divine
revelation, and whether it partooke of the merits of Christ's blood, and so was
translated into heaven. These and a thousand more such like questions are to
be seen in their books, full of blasphemy and impiety.

7. Touching their subtle speculations and inferences, who can but say unto
them, Wit, whither will thou, if he read but these ensuing instances? One
proves, that Peter had no skill at his weapon, because when he should have
stroke off Malchus head, he did but slice off his care, Another, that the
royal Majesty is subject to the Priesthood, because the servant whose ear was
stroke off, was called Malchus, which signifies a King. A third, that
Ecclesiastical dignities are not to be conferred in regard of kindred, but of
desert; because the keys were given by Christ to Peter, and not to John,
though his best beloved, because he was his cozen. They tell likewise, both the
color and fashion of Christ's coat, how it was made by the hands of his
blessed mother, and grew up with him, as he grow: And how his flesh was so
tender being made of the purest blood of the blessed Virgins body, that if he
had but dashed his foot against a stone, it pained him as much, as if another
had been wounded in his eye. Yea, they blush not to preach, how many scourges
Christ had given him on his book, and how many wounds he had in his body, and
how many tho^nes there were in his crown, and what he wrote on the ground when
he absolved the woman ^^ke^ adultery: and what was the woman name that cried,
Blessed in the womb that bare thee, to wit, S. Marcilla, Martha^s*
Chambermaide: and the soldiers name also that pierced his side, to wit, S.
Longine. Nay, they can discover what speeches passed in Paradise betwixt God
the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, about the incarnation of
Christ, and (...) the message to be sent to the Virgin Mary, touching his
resurrection. These metaphysicall speculations savor more of ^^oth of wit,
then of any fruit of Religion.

8. Their distinctions are no less delusiue then the former: for thereby they
labor, if not to extinguish, yet at the least so to obscure and darken the
truth, that it can hardly be discerned of the quickest sight. For example: to
excuse the^^ Idolatry in worshipping of Saints, they make a threefold kind of
religious worship: Dulia, belonging to the Saints in general: Hyperdulia,
appropriated only to the humanity of Christ, and the blessed Virgin his
mother: and La^^ia, due only unto God. Again, to maintain their doctrine of
merit, they distinguish works into three degrees: some proceeding from nature
only before grace: others from faith and grace, but not from a man fully
justified: and some from a person fully justified: and these last (say they)
are meritorious of everlasting glory and happiness. Besides, they distinguish
their merits, into congruity, and condignity: the sacrifice of Christ, into
bloody and unbloody; the one on the Cross, the other in the Mass. And whereas
in the first institution of the Sacrament, our Savior says, Drink ye all of
this, they distinguish of the word All, and say, (...) by it are meant, not all
Christians, but All the Apostles only. And likewise in their Sacrament of
Marriage, whereas the Apostle says, Marriage is honorable among shall men,
they distinguish again of the word All, in like sense as they did before in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, viz. no^ A^^ in general, b^t All that are
not bound with avow to the contrary. And thus when we say out of the
Scripture, that Christ is the only true foundation of the Church; they
distinguish of foundations; and say, that Christ indeed is the p^^ne and
principal foundation, but that the secondary foundation is Peter, and so the
Pope, upon whom all the rest are buil^. Again they say, that all the Apostles
were equal in respect of the people; but not between themselves as if Peter,
that neither ordained his fellow Apostles, nor instructed them, nor governed
them, could be their spiritual Pastor. So when the Scripture plainly
affirms, that Christ is the only Mediato^^r betwixt God and us; they answer
by distinction, that he is the only Mediator of Redemption, but nor of
intercession. Again, that he is the only Mediator in regard both of Nature and
Office, but that the Saints are our Mediators in regard of Office, though not
of Nature. So for satisfactions, Christ's satisfaction (they say) is in virtue
sufficient but not in act efficient, except it be applied by our satisfaction.
So when the Gospel says. That when we have done all that we can, we are yet
unprofitable servants, they elude it by a distinction, saying; we are
unprofitable indeed to God, but not to our selves. And when we give instances
of many Popes that have erred and been Heretics, they answer that the Pope may
err, quatenus hom^, but not quatenus Papa. In fine, there is no truth in
religion, nor point of faith, which is not mangled and obscured by such curious
distinctions, and the world thereby most grievously deluded.

9. Lastly, touching their fond allusions, to decipher them to the full, would
ask more ink and paper, then I would willingly employ upon such idle stuff:
I will instance in three examples only, The first whereof shall be of their
Episcopal ornaments. The two horns of a Bishops Miter (say they) signifies
his knowledge in the old and new Testament: his white Gloves, the sincere
administration of the holy Sacraments: his clean Surplissa, the simplicity and
innocence of his life: his Crosier St^^fe, the drawing of Christ's sheep to the
pasture of Gods word: and his Cross and book, the affections and afflictions
which he is subject unto. Are not these brave contemplations befitting an
Heroical invention? Bu^ I come in my second example to their Mass, where the
Priest at one instant personates many parts: to wit, of Christ, of the Virgin
Mary, of the twelve Apostles, and principally of Judas, of the Thief on the
Cross, of the Centurion, of the Publicane, and a number others. When he
crosses the Host (say they) he represents the person of Christ: and when the
Cup, the person of Judas: by three other crosses which he makes before, he
personates the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: and by three after, three
estates of men; one in heaven, another in Purgatory, and a third upon earth: by
five crosses which he makes after all these, he represents either the five
days betw^^t Palm sunday and Good Friday, or the five wounds of Christ: by
burning candle (say they) figureth either Christ, who enlighteneth every one
that comes into the world, or the light of says and ardour of charity, which
is in every Christian soul: and the Glorin in excelsis, pronounced with a low
voice, represents Chirst crying in his cradle when he was an infant: and
pronounced with an high strain, his terrible voice at the day of judgment.
Did ever Mountebanke or Iuggler so cozen the world with counterfeit shows and
wares, as these Impostours have done by these their hypocritical devices? The
third example is, touching their Lent diet, wherein they find such an infinite
number of sottish mysteries, as would be tedious to repeat. There is not a
Fig, nor a Raysin, nor Prune, nor Egg, nor Egge-shell, nor Kernel, but has
a mystical and spiritu^ll allusion: their very Sallet composed of diverse kind
of Herbs, must signify the word of God of diverse senses; and the Vinegar and
Oil which are equally mixed in it, the Mercy and Justice of God, the Orange
charity, and the Kernel secret alms. But for this matter I refer the Reader
to a book called, Quadragosimale Spirituale, printed at Paris, Ano. 1565. and
corrected and allowed by two Doctors. Therein we shall find no manner of
thing which is eaten of them in Lent, but applied to a spiritual sense. But I
leave the further amplification of this dotage to others, that shall search
more narrowly into the bottomless gulf of their idle speculations.

10. I could add here a multitude of Apish tricks and inventions, used by
Popish Priests, to make their Auditors laugh, or weep at their pleasure: with
a catalogue of their ridiculous discourses both in their books and pulpit. As
of him, that upon a wager made one half of the people in the Church to laugh,
and the other to weep at one instant, and that of purpose by a passionate
discourse of the passion of Christ to those that sat before, and laying open
his bare backside to them that stood behind. And of him that cried in the
pulpit before the Pope and his Cardinals, Fie S. Peter, Fie S. Paul etc. Or of
him that to terrify his Auditors, presented unto them a man like a devil,
with flaming eyes, a great hooked nose, bloody teeth, and long crooked nails,
braying out an hideous voice. Or of him that to show the people the ouglinesse
of hell, laid open to their view the filthy backside of the Sexton, with whom
he had compacted for the acting of this play. Or of him that preached always
by dumb gestures and shows. Or of him that was discoursing upon mortality and
death, caused on a sudaine a dead man's skull, with a candle burning within it,
to be raised up on the top of a pole, to the terror of the people. Or of him
that would prove a Lutherane to be worse then the devil, because the devil
would flee away at the making of the sign of the cross, but a Lutherane was
not afraid of it. or of him that having let fall his note of the names of
persons to be excommunicate, said, that be excommunicated all that were in
that hole, except the Bishop and Official, whose names were also there
written. Or of him that compared the Grace of God, to sheep tri^les: and
another, the Sacrament to a Venison Pasty, which is called Venison though
nothing be seen but the crust. Or of him that compared soldiers to Jesus
Christ in all things save in one; namely, that he having descended into hell,
returned back again, which they should never do. I could (I say) add these
with a number more such like examples, but that they are at large set forth by
other Authors, and especially by the forenamed Henry Stephen in his Apology,
and also because the whole rabble of Popish shauelings may think themselves
already sufficiently graced in thus magnifying their witty inventions. But
howsoever they think, the world I am su^e may clearly hereby perceive, how it
has been a long time deluded by them, and how S. Paul's Prophecy is fully
verified in the Papal Church and religion: God shall send upon them strong
delusions to believe lies.

CHAP. 9. A conclusion of the whole Treatise.
1. I Had here cast Anchor, and stroke sail, had not two shelues lain in my
way, which seemed to hinder my ^anding: I mean two doubts or scruples which
are to be removed. The first whereof is, How it was possible, seeing these
abuses are so palpable, that the world should be deluded by them. And the
second, Whether there were none in those blind times that smelt out their
delusions, but all in general were carried away with the stream thereof:
which two things being resolved, it cannot but be manifest, that the Pope is
that man of sin, that son of perdition, and that great Antichrist fore
prophesied in the Scripture, and that the Church of Rome is that Whore of
Babylon which should inebriate the world with her enchaunting cup of
Fornications.

2. Touching therefore the first: I say, that it need not seem strange, that
the world should be thus deluded by them, if we consider: first, the just
judgment of God, who gave them up to the efficacy of deceit, because they had
rejected the love of the truth, as the Apostle speaks, 2. These. 2.9. For
where there is not the love of the truth, there must needs be a love of lies,
error and superstition. Secondly, if we consider the powerful enchauntments
of the Babylonish Whore, who like a hellish Sorceresse so bewitched the world
with the vain name of the Catholic Church, and S. Peter's Chair, and a brave
ostentation of pompous Ceremonies, together with the whole frame of their
religion, agreeable to man's corrupt nature, that few (most being besotted with
their brave shows) could either conceive in their heart, or discern with
their eyes in what state they stood, but were carried in the crowd like sheep
to the shambles to manifest destruction. Thirdly, if we consider how the word
of God, out of which they might draw saving knowledge, and by light whereof
might discover their errors, was locked up from them in an unknown tongue, and
not permitted to be read of any, save such as had a special privilege and
license thereunto: for when light is taken away, darkness must of necessity
follow in place thereof, and the only light of heavenly truth is to be found
in the holy Scripture as David confesses, Psalm. 119.105. Lastly, if we
consider the reverend opinion they had of their holy Mother the Church, and
also of their Prelates and Priests, whose doctrines they were forbidden to
examine or dispute, upon pain of heresy, but swallow all that came to hand,
under the pretense of an implicit faith, which they were taught was of it
self sufficient to salvation, without any more ado. From these fountains
sprung all that strange blindness and stupidity of those times. For in truth,
could any man that was not stricken with the spirit of giddiness and slumber,
ever frame his heart to believe these monstrous doctrines, that Saints departed
ought to be worshipped and inuocated with trust and confidence as God himself?
that the Pope can canonize them to this worship at his pleasure? that Images
are to be adored with the same degree of honor as is due unto their patterns,
contrary to an express precept of the Law? that the Pope though never so
wicked a wretch, is as a God upon earth, cannot ere in his definitions, but
has the keys of Paradise at his girdle, to let in, or shut out, whom he list?
that it is a less sin to commit Fornication or Adultery, then for a Priest
to marry, or for a Layman to eat flesh on a Friday? that every Mass mumbled
up in a corner, and bought with money, can deliver a soul out of Purgatory?
that an ignorant Priest having pronounced certain Sacramental words over all
the loaves in the market, with an intention to consecrat, they should be
presently turned into so many Gods? that a man can eat his God; and carry him
up and down in a box to be adored? that a man can perform works of
supererogation, that is, do more good works then are needful for his own
salvation and put the rest into the treasury of the Church to be bestowed upon
others that want? that Emperors and Kings are subjects unto Popes, not only in
Spiritual things, but also in Temporal In ordine ad spiritualia? that it is
an heroical act to kill an heretical King, namely, such an one as in all
things does not accord with the Church of Rome? Lastly, (to omit many more
doctrines of the like nature) that pardon of sins here in this life, and
deliverance out of Purgatory in the life to come may be bought for money, and
where no money there no remission? I say, can any man that is not extremely
stupefied with sottish ignorance believe these doctrines, which are so palpably
false, and so contrary to natural reason, as nothing can be more? Yea, so
gross was their stupidity, that when any thing happened, that might give them
occasion to misdoubt they were not right, they were so far from the
apprehension thereof, or of laying it to heart, that it reflected upon them to
their further hardening. As when they saw the Sacramental Bread and Wine to
poison the receivers, as the one did an Archbishop of York in the time of Pope
Anastasius the fourth: and the other, the Emperor Henry the seventh: or to be
devoured of Rats and Mice, and dogs, or to putrify and corrupt in the
vessels wherein they were reserved. These occurrents might open their eyes in
all wise judgment, but in stead thereof it darkened them more, even to this,
to esteem those base Creatures sanctified by their greedy theft, and no less
then holy Saints in their account. And to shut up the point, were they not
utterly blinded, and deprived of all light of reason and understanding, they
would never ascribe such an holy virtue to the very habit of a Friar of the
Order of Saint Francis, that they should think if they were wrapped in it at
the hour of their death, their souls must needs fly immediately to heaven:
and that the only means for the devil to be saved, was to take upon him the
habit of Saint Francis. I will not speak of their equalling or rather
preferring the Virgin Mary's milk to the blood of Christ: there is a whole
Poem of that subject extant, written in Latin by Clarus Bonarscius, alias
Carolus Scribanius a Jesuit: nor of their curing all diseased horses with holy
water sprinkled upon them by a Priest on Saint Loyes day, at a Church in France
dedicated to his honor: nor of a thousand more such like fopperies which might
be produced. This little I think enough to clear the first doubt, to wit,
that this blindness came upon the world by the just judgment of God, and that
it is neither strange nor incredible.

3. Touching the second objection, I say, that though this blindness was
great, yet it was not so general, but there were some in the midst of those
dark times which spyed out, and discovered their abuses. Witness Saint
Bernard, Petrus Damianus, Guiliemus de sancto Amore, Nicolau. Gallicus
Narbonensis, Sauanarela a Florentine, Arnolphus Bishop of Orleance, Hildebert
Archbishop of Tours, Matthew Paris, Marsilius of Padoua, Vrspergensis,
Clemangis, with a number more of later time: as Petrorch, Mantuan, Platina, not
to mention John Wickleffe, John Husse, Jerome of Prage, etc. all which learned
persons did mightily inueigh against the abuses and corruptions of the Church
of Rome in those days, and that with such vehemence of spirit, that the sound
of their words could not but ring in all ears. Take two or three examples in
stead of all the rest. Baronius brings in Peter Damian thus crying out
against the prauities of the Sea of Rome: O the Apostolic Sea, heretofore the
glory of the world, but now alas thou art become the shop of Simon, the hammers
there beat upon the Anuile, and their money comes from hell: whereunto
Baronius himself adds these words: for then all flesh had corrupted their
way. Baron. An. 1033. sect. 8. et 1049 sect. 10. 15.
So that it seemed a deluge was not sufficient to wash away the filthy ordures,
but they required the fire of Gomorrha to purge them: and therefore (says he)
Peter Damian then an Heremite of Mount Auellan in Vmbria, wrote unto Pope Leo a
book entitled Gomorrhaeus, wherein he discovers the hidden vices of the
Clergy, and desires reformation. Hildebert Archbishop of Tours, is as plain
and direct, as may appear in the Ecclesiastical history of Nicolas Vignier,
where his complaint is set down at length. Matthew Paris reports, Mat. Paris in
Hen. 3. page 792.
that when Pope Innocent the fourth was to depart from the Council of Lions,
the Cardinal Hugues, who was appointed to give the farewell Sermon to the
City, after the elegant passages of complement which he used to them, at last
added these words: My Friends, since our coming hither, we have done much
profit to this City; for when we arrived, we found three or four Stews in
it, but now departing we leave but one: but it is true, that one stretches
from the East gate of the City, and continues all along to the West. But it is
most strange, that in the list of the Orders and persons that were at the
Council of Constance, is placed as a chief part of that sacred assembly, the
number of the professed Whores that were there found: P ^ralei^om. V^sp rgensis.
and Vspergensis says, that there were of them at the least 450: so that it is
no marvel if such a holy Synod adjudged to the fire John Husse and Jerome of
Prage. Marsilius of Padoua, Marsil. Pata^. l^b. Desens pacis p. chap. 24.
compares the Papal Church, and Court, to Nebuchadnezzars Statue, whose head
was of Gold, arms and breast of Silver, belly and thighs of Brass, legs of
Iron, and feet one part of iron, the other of earth: by all which is
represented (says he) the arrogance, luxury, symony, carnallity, stupidity,
and auaritious greediness of the Popish Clergy: adding in the end, a
prophetical prediction of the ruin of this Babylonish Strumpet. It is worth
the labor to read this whole discourse at full, a breuiate whereof I only
here offer to your view. Nicel Clemangis. epist. ad Ioh. Gerson.
But above all, let us hear the fearful complaint of Clemangis. This Age
(says he) is an Age of Gold, not in manners (as the Poets fained under
Saturn) but in the enraged and insatiable desire and extortion of that
metal: for Sacraments, Orders, Dignities, Relaxations, Dispensations,
Offices, Benefices, yea sin it self, is now set to sale for Gold: Idiots,
and unlearned persons, that can scarce spell, much less read with
understanding, and that understand Latin no better then Arabicke, and when
they pray or sing, know not whether they bless or curse their maker, are
admitted into the Priesthood. Here you may see men without discipline, without
rest, without order: gluttons, drunkardes, idle praters, vbiquitaries, unchaste
and lascivious persons, and to say all in one word, idle bellies without
learning and common honesty. Thus he complains, and much more to this
effect, which he that will may find in the forequoted place. Petrarch also,
though living under the Popes nose, wrote as bitterly against the impieties of
the Antichristian Synagogue: he called Rome Babylon, and said, that Christ was
thence banished, and that Antichrist ruled in his place: that Beelzebub was
there Judge, and that under the standard of Christ they made war against
Christ: that greater injury was there done unto Christ, then ever was by the
Scribes and Pharisees when he lived amongst them: that the hope of eternal
life was held of them for a fable: that the more wicked a man was, the more he
was prized and honored. And in a word, that in this Church heaven gate was
opened, and Christ bought and sold for Gold, and if Judas should bring hither
his thirty pence (the price of Christ's blood) he should be received: and that
truth was held for folly, and error and lying for the cheifest wisdom. Thus
wrote he, thus peremptorily, and thus piercingly, and yet (which is a wonder)
escaped the fire, but then the sacred inquisition was not on foot, as it is at
this day. A multitude of such like sayings of learned men I could heap
together: but let these suffice for a fay of the whole, that I be not
ouer-burdensome to the Reader.

4. Besides, the common Proverbs and Verses used in those times, do evidently
prove, that their filthy abominations lay not vndescryed: for what else do
these Proverbs import? As confident as a Pope, as proud as a Prelate, as fat as
a Monk, and as crafty as a Friar, the Table of an Abbat, more unlearned then a
Monk, Vinum Theologale for the most excellent Wine? Hespin. de orig. m^nachat.
lib. 6. cap. 18.
In Germany they have this Proverb: In medio consistit virtus, Spricht der
Teuffel, dha er schwischem tzwo monichem sa^, that is, Spoke the devil when
he sat between two Friars? And in France this, A Friar is a Creature that
loves to have the fire at his back, and the table at his belly. And this also:
Three things are insatiable, Priests, Monks, and the Sea, in respect of their
avarice, as the former was in respect of their luxury. These things were in
every ordinary mouth, in so much as the ignorant people stuck not to scoff at
many of their gross absurdities, as he that being reproved for not uncovering
his head when he was sprinkled with holy water, answered; that if that sacred
water could pass as far as Purgatory, it might most easily pass through his
Bonnet. Or he that affirmed, that crossing and holy water might peradventure
scarre a way young devils that were but young nouices in their trade: but an old
devil would not be affrighted with such bug-beares. The like scoffs were
ordinarily cast out in that blind Age against Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
and Images, as has been showed before. Nay, many of the very Popes themselves
have made a mock and scoff of their own Religon: as Leo the tenth called it
a Fable, and said; that he could not open the door of Paradise to himself,
because he had sold the keys thereof unto others. And Julius the second, that
threw Saint Peter's Keys into Tyber, and took in his hand Saint Paul's Sword;
saying, that seeing Saint Peter's Keys could do him no good, he would now try
what Paul's Sword would do. And Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand, who
when he saw the Host would not answer a demand that he made unto it, in a
rage threw it into the fire, in the presence of many Cardinals that thought to
hinder the same. And if Popes Holinesses were thus Atheistically profane, why
should we wonder at inferior Priests? As at him that meeting his Enemy in the
street, who threatened to beat him but for reverence to his God of Paste, laid
his God on the ground, saying; the devil take him if he take part with either
of us. Or at him, that threatened to throw his God into the fire if he did not
appease the present tempest of thunder and lightning, and so show himself
stronger then the devil: or at him, who having received a box on the ear by a
Captain, bidding him also to turn the other ear to receive another,
according to Christ's rule, as he also did, fell hastily upon the Captain, and
buffetted him soundly, with this Memento, that Christ also commanded us to do
as we would be done unto; and withal, desired the standers by to let them
alone, for they did nothing but expound Scripture: or at him that being about
to go to Mass, and having a box full of Wafers, shook them together and said,
ye rogues, ye rogues, which of you shall be made a God to day? Or at him that
said, that they dealt with their God in the Mass, as a Cat does with a Mouse,
which after they have made sport withal a while, they ear at last. But to
leave these Proverbs and scoffs, and to come to the verses that were written in
those days of the impiety and impurity of the Romish Clergy. In this subject
I might be infinite, but I will omit such as are ordinary in every book, and
propound a few more rare, and which are not obuious to every view: Pasquin is
famous in this kind, as in this Epigramme of five Popes, with many more of the
like stamp.

Sixtum Lenones, Iulium rexere cyuaedi,
Imperium vani scurra Leonis habes.
Clementem furiae vexant, and auara cupido,
Quae spes est regni Paul futura tui?
In English thus.

Bawdes ruled Sixtus, Julius Ganimedes,
A ruffian swayd of Leos power the raynes;
Fury and avarice Clement possedes,
What hope then of thy rule, O Paul, remaynes?
Another Poet in those times thus writes of the Monks of Saint Anthonies
family.

Diceris Antoni porcos pauisse subulcus
Viuus, adhuc Monachos lumine cassus alis:
Par stupor ingenij est, ventrisque abdomen vtrisque:
Sorde pari gaudent, ingluuieque pari:
Nec minus hoc brutum genus est mutumue suillo,
Nec minus insipidum, nec minus illepidum:
Caetera convenient, sed non leuis error in vno est,
Debuerat Monachie glans cibus esse tuis.
In English thus.

O Anthony, thou hog art said to feed
Alive, now dead, Monks are thy charge indeed:
Like doltish wit, like greedy paunch in both,
Alike they are in filthiness and sloth:
Monks no less brutish, no less dumb then swine,
As stinking as unsavory are thine:
The rest agree, yet one thing is amiss,
That Monks on Acornes do not feed I wisse.
Gualter Mapes, an English Divine that flourished about the year 1197.
describes this generation after another strain, in a style consonant to that
Age.

Est nullum Monacho magis daemonium,
Nihil auarius, nihil magis is varium,
Cui siquid datur est possessor omnium,
Si quidquam petitur, nil habet proprium,
Si prandit, competit vt loquinesciat,
Ne lingua dentium opus impediat,
Si bibit, expedit vt sedens hauriat,
Ne pes sub pondere ventris deficiat,
Die deuotius adorat dolia,
Nocte cum bipede laborat bestia
Tali discrimine, tali modestia,
Meretur vir Dei regna caelestia.
In English thus.

The devil is not so wicked as a Friar,
Nothing so covetous, so various here:
If ought be given, he takes it as his own,
If ought be asked, he nothing has that is known:
When dine he does, he must abstain from speaking,
Least that his tongue should let his teeth from eating.
And when he drinks he must not stand but sit,
For fear his feet should falter, and his wit:
All day devout he Bacchus does adore,
All night a beast two footed is his store:
This danger great, and modest exercise,
Conducts this man of God to Paradise.
Of the same kind of people another Poet writ this Disticke.

Credibile est Circen mutasse potentibus herbis,
In Monachosque sues, inquesues Monachos.
In English thus.

I think some Witch has changed of late by pells,
Monks into Swine, Swine into Monks in cells.
Another thus describes them.

Maxima pars turbae raso quae vertice oberrat
I am nunc consueuit viuere more suo:
Gratior est lepus, exiguusue cumiculus illis,
Quam sunt Iohannis mystica scripta libri,
Plu^is vel minimam partem salmonis habentes,
Quam Salomonis habent prouida dicta simul.
In English thus.

The greatest part of crowne-shauen Priests are such,
As use to live as list themselves each one:
A Hare or Cony is more pleasing much
To them, then are the sacred books of John.
They more esteem a piece of dainty Salmon,
Then all the grauest words of wise Solomon.
Another Poet thus.

Dorsum asini, cor onis, rostrum suis, osque columba,
Fulcra bouis monacho sint, et honestus erit.
In English thus.

Give to a Monk an Asses back to bow,
A sheep round heart, the nosthrils of a Sow,
A Doves wide mouth, an Oxes legs in store,
And then will he be honest, not before.
Another Poet thus.

Fercula, vina, venus, modo sunt semperque fuere,
Verticibus rasi sola ruina gregis.
In English thus.

Good cheer, good wine, and wanton Venus game,
Have been, and are, of fhauen-crownd Priests the bane.
I cannot pass over the elegant Epigramme written by John Pannonia^, a Poet of
their own, touching the hollow Chair, wherewith they used to examine the
virilities of their Popes before they were installed: (...) Lincoln: Bennet
the ninth, was strangled by the devil in a wood, Baron. An. 1054.
of whose damnation Baronius affirms, there was a manifest vision presented
to one Vaclus. John the 21. was crushed to death with the fall of an Hall,
which he had built in the Castle of Viterb^^m. Celestine the fifth, dyed in
prison, wherein he was enlosed by Boniface the eight: neither did that wicked
Boniface escape the vengeance of God; for being imprisoned in the Castle S.
Angelo, by the procurement of Phillip the Fair King of France, he dyed stark
mad most lamentably, having first gnawne off and eaten the flesh off his own
hands: and at the hour of his death, there was heard such terrible thundering
in the Castle, as if all the devils in hell had been present. Clement the first
dyed with fear. Vrbane the sixth poisoned himself. Paul the second dyed
drunk of an Apoplexy. Alexander the sixth was poisoned by a drink, which he
himself had prepared for certain Cardinals, through the mistake of his
Cup Bearer. And Julius the third, fayning himself sick, and abstaining from
food, fell sick indeed, and dyed, and so his jest was turned into earnest. I
might relate the fearful ends of a number more, but that I hasten to my
conclusion. Neither do I speak of those that were purposely poisoned, the
Catalogue of which would be too great, it being an ordinary practice in that
Sea, seeing in the space of 13. years, six Popes were thus brought to their
ends by Brazutus the familiar friend of Bennet the ninth, whose names are
recorded by Cardinal Benno, in the life of Hildebrand. Who now can doubt, but
that that title, The Son of perdition, ascribed first by our Savior Christ
unto Judas that betrayed his master, and hung himself: and secondly, by S.
Paul to Antichrist, does fitly appertain to the Popes of Rome; who as they
have been apparent hauockers and destroyers of millions of souls and bodies of
other men, so they for the most part, have been destroyed themselves, after a
violent and horrible manner? And so we have a plain real testimony of the
villainy and impiety of the Romish Clergy in those times; for the head being
thus distempered, how could the body be but unsound and depraved.

6. And now, Quid nisi vota supersunt? That God in mercy would enlighten the
understanding of all Popish seduced souls, that they may see their errors,
and the dang^rous estate wherein they stand under the kingdom of Antichrist:
and give us wisdom more and more to discern their abominable delusions, and
constancy to stand against them to the end: we have not yet resisted unto
blood, and in all likelihood the fiery trial is not far off. For never did
that man of sin rage more then at this day, both by open war, and secret
policies. Friar Dominickes shoulders are now too weak to vpbeare the Laterane
roof, and therefore Loyola with his Jesuitical brood, have put under theirs.
This Macciauillian rowte, professing poverty, and yet possessing more goods and
lands then many Princes, and interessing themselves in all matters of State,
are crept into all Kingdoms, and like the Cockatrice poison with their very
breath and aspect: these are the Popes enginers and stratagematizers, whereby
he seeks to subvert the true Church of Christ, and to fortify the walls of his
own Babylon. But Christ Jesus the great King of heaven and earth, stands
armed with power, for the defense of his Children; and therefore maugre all
their fury and malice, we doubt not but that truth shall prevail against
error, and true religion flourish more and more; and that in fullness of time,
that Prophecy shall be accomplished, Apoc. 18.2. Babylon that great City is
fallen, is fallen, and become the habitation of deuil^, and the hold of every
foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Even so be it,
Amen,

Amen.
Finis. Laus Deo.
END

