THE PRAISE of Solitariness, Set down in the form of a Dialogue, Wherein is
contained, a Discourse Philosophical, of the life Active, and Contemplative.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Francis Coldocke and Henry Bynneman. 1577.

Qui nihil sperat Nihil desprat.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful my approved friend, Mr. Edward Dyer, increase of
estimation according to his virtue.
SIR, though neither my experience, nor skill, may yield me any hope to
cou^teruaile your worthiness, by any work, or labor of mine, considering in
your self, your own art and ability of writing: yet partly my affection,
partly yo^^ courtesy, and partly the love you bear unto knowledge, have
together by degrees prevailed to persuade me, to commend unto you the willing
proffer, of this my small and simple present. The rather, for that
indifferently debating with my self of the matter, and conferring mine opinion
with the nature of the time, wherein each thing does covet to grow to
perfection: I find the same so ple^tifully stored, with such virtuous precepts
and well tempered rules, both of public and private behavior, that of it
self it may liberally deserve, to be embraced of all men: but especially of
those, that delighting in the study and knowledge of good letters, are desirous
in the end, to reap the due fruit and benefit of their labor: And wherein,
you chiefly above the rest, may plainly also as in a glass behold, a
pleasant remembrance of your contempl^iue delights: together, with those
things set down for precepts unto others, that are but matters, of daily
practice with your self. All which, though for the private use of your own
understanding, knowing right well, how generally you are seen and acquainted
in the languages, I might with less labor have delivered to your hands, under
those very words that the Author himself has set down the same: yet
therewithal considering the nature of Virtue, which has alwais been accounted
to carry this property, that is, to covet to have each thing to be like unto it
self: I thought it therefore more agreeable to your liking, to see the matter
set plainly down, under such our ordinary and usual phrase, as the vulgar
sort that have affection to learn, might thereby also gather some profit.
Who, if indifferentlye as they have cause, they ponder the advantage of that
which is proffered, may well perceive, that what by example of your self and
such like, and what by the precepts herein contained, they may the rather
learn, how first to avoid, the usual haunte of such idle company, as
brings in the end, no profit but repentance: and after, how and in what
sort to employ their time at home, in the exercise of such knowledge, as
brings with it a contented world both of pleasure and delight: and such also
as adorneth the mind, with the true disposition and habit of Virtue, which
as the Philosophers affirm, is double, the one Intellectual, the other
Moral, whereof the first is to be gotten by reading, the latter by practice,
and they both, leading the way to that eternal felicity, which of al me^ is
so generally desired. Finally, if by this occasion it may so come to pas, that
Knowledge the mother of Goodness, may the rather be embraced, and that Idleness
the nurse of Mischief, may be aught the more avoided: the estimation thereof as
it belongs to your self, in respect of whom regarding your deserte, I was
only moved to undertake this attempt: so, if otherwise I may seem by this
means to deserve, in the judgment of those that are curiously disposed,
either blame or misliking: I likewise crave your friendly assistance, by the
help of your protection, to countenance my procedings. In lieu whereof, I am
able to yield you no other recompense, than that which was due unto you
before, that is, the unfeigned affection of him, that wholly remains at your
devotion.

ROGER BAYNES.

To the Reader.
SINCE for the most part it comes so to pass, that each man either is, or
may be thought parciall in his own affairs, and that it is a fault very
easily committed, to (...) ween of our selves: to the end, I may avoid the
one, and discharge me of the other as a thing without cause: I will therefore,
neither seem to advise thee, nor determine to entreat thee, to deem any
better of this my labor, than thy affection will suffer to give thee leave:
but as one well persuaded of thine indifferency, will freely allow thee the
liberty of thy conscience, to like or mislyke thereof at thy pleasure. For
diverse and variable are the ha^dy works of nature, and several the opinions,
that are severally nourished, in bodies divided: In one she planteth such a
spirit of temperaunce, that no indifferent dealing may move him to offense: in
another she frames such contrary motions, that each thing mislikes him that
falls not in his humor: thus, how one special matter may be equally piled to
the plesing of all men, I can gather no reason. Let each man therefore bear the
burden of his fortune, and let no man seem offended with that, which he cannot
amend: for this is certain, that many among the rest are of condition so
froward, that the more they are entreated, the more intractable they are
found. Whose vain reports touching matters of knowledge, as for the most
part they rather proceed, from the weakness of their own natures, than
from any certain or just occasion, so small is the care that ought in my
judgment to be taken of the same: Only this of all writers ought chiefly to
be regarded, to satisfye the good opinion of those, that either for love to the
Aucthour, or favor to the matter, are contented to conster each thing to the
best. Of which number, deeming thee to be one, I betake thee my friend to the
favor of thy fortune, and me thy welwiller, to the adventure of thy courtesy

VALE.
Qui nihil sperat, Nihil desperate.
The praise of Solitariness, set down in the form of a Dialoge, wherein
is contained a discourse Philosophical, of the life Active, and Contemplative.
The Speakers. LYSIPPVS, EVDOXVS. TALES.
THE ARGUMENT.
First, what Virtue is, and whether a wise man that desires to live
virtuously, ought rather to make choice of Solitariness or Society.

LYSIPPVS. Well met Eudoxus, The place of meeting is to be supposed at Venice.
whence come you?


EVDOXVS I come from a place wherein I have always taken great pleasure: but
whether walk you?


LYSIPPVS. I came forth my friend, for none other ocasion, but only to look
thee: for thou art not ignorant, how ill I may endure the want of thy company
whom for the greatness of thy virtue, and the singular sweetness, of thy
pleasant behauior, I have always dearly loved.


EVDOX. And I, suspecting no less than that which is happened, made have the
sooner to come abroad, fearing that full hardly, thou would else have
found me, in the place where I was. But now, since thus by good fortune we
are so well met together, determine I pray thee, with thy best advice, what
way we shall take, to walk for our pleasure, that in conference abroad we may
debate of some matter, according to our accustomed manner.


LYSIP. Abide a while Eudoxus, see, this is good luck.


EVDOX. What is that?


LYSIPPVS. Behold, where our old friend Tales posteth hytherwardes apace,
therefore, let us stay for him a while, and according as he shall direct our
journey, so we will determine to pass on together, unto some such place, as
most convenient shall seem unto him for this purpose.


EVD. I like this motion well, he is now at hand, use the matter therefore, I
pray thee, in such sort, y^ he may be willing for company to accept of the
same.


LYS. Hem, Tales, whether walk you? I would have thee my friend to understand,
that we have purposely here expected thy coming, for this occasion only, that
to what place thou art appointed to walk, we may bear thee company.


TALES. Certesse my friends, I deem my self very far unworthy of this
pre-eminence, but that I see it proceeds from the wonted favor you have
always borne me. Therefore, without more add, to the end we may a little
recreate our minds, which we are taught to solace with intermission of
study, thereby the rather, that after some rest, they may become again more
pregnant than before: I think it best (if so it please you) to enter this
Gundu^o, and in the same to behold all these places of pleasure, Gundulo is a
little boat, which is used at Venice, to row about the City for (...).
which as beautiful suburbs, are bordering about this noble City: wherein,
we may familiarly talk and confer, of what matter we list at our pleasure.


EVDO. It likes me well.


LYSIP. Let us then determine, to lose no more time, but let us presentlye
all agree to take boat.


TALES. Holla, waterman, bring hither thy Vessel, and devise I pray thee, to
row us conveniently here abroad for our pleasure.


LYSIPPVS. Now I desire Eudoxus to know, from what place thou wast then
coming, when seeking for thee, thou sooner by chance did meet me on the
way, than I looked for.


EVD. Verily, I came at y^ instant (my friend) from the I Will of S. George the
great, This Island stands on the side of Venice.
the which, as well for the pleasantness of the place (whose sea still
moisting the soil, does wash the same about) as also, for the stately building
thereof, is undoubtedly among the rest of al these Isles here adioining,
esteemed the fairest. Where, when from the care of my worldly affairs I find
any leisure, withdrawing me wholly from the common concourse and multitude of
the people, both often and many times I bestow my self* to think upon the
rules and precepts of Philosophy. For Solitariness is doubtless, a special
friend of mine, as a Nurse, that does cherish and mainteyne all commendable
studyes: yelding to such as do embrace her, both ease and quietness. Besides,
she cures the weakness of the mind, all idle carfulness she drives away,
she auoydeth lust, and banisheth fear. The which, since by daily experience it
comes so to pass, you shall hardly (I presume) find one amongst a number,
that has earnestly affected and favored Philosophy, but that he has rather
delighted with few, than with many to be conversant: In such sort, that
diverse utterly forsaking the daily society both of Towns and Cities, have
wholly in the end betaken themselves to the sweet delighte and recreation of
Solitariness: Which plainly may appear by the saying of Flaccus, a Poet
most excellent.

To me no simple care it is, how I the sacred springs may meet:
From whence I long the sap to suck, of happy life the precepts sweet.
Which thing, we also understand that the Emperor Augustus did greatly
desire, who writing to the Senate said: that so long as he considered with
himself of the quiet repose of Solitariness, he found his mind delighted
with a great and singular pleasure. Besides; how many other, both grave and
wise me^ may we remember, that have wished the same to have fallen to their
haps: who restrained thereof, either by the care of their peculiar affairs, or
by the public causes of ye common wealth, could never attain to try by
proof, what happiness was contained in ye bosom of Solitariness. LY. I know
(my friend) y^ place you speak of, to be no less by nature tha^ by art, so
rarely polished, y^ among. diverse ye beutiful ornaments of this most excellent
flourishing City, it may lawfully in my opinion be compared with the best. But
since the occasion is already proffered, of the disputation of Solitariness, I
deem it best (if so it please you) to touch this matter ear we leave it, more
fully.


EVDO. Nothing for my part may content me more, than to hear some discourse
and debatement thereof: neither will Tales, I know, disagree from the same.
Wherefore, I dare boldly presume, that to each of us you shall do (my
friend) a singular pleasure, if so you will endeavor to set down your
opinion concerning this matter, not only, what you esteem thereof your self,
but also what precepts concerning the same, you think it needful to afoorde
unto us.


LYSIP. Since by this I understand it is then your pleasure, to spend some
time in the disputation of this question, that I may fully, and that at few
words discharge the duty and due regard of a friend, I will presently declare
unto you my mind what I think of ye same. And to be plain, I do not a little
Eudoxus disagree, from this opinon of ye^res: for whether you intend
Solitariness to consist in that, that a man withdrawing himself from company,
seeks rather to live in the void and desolate places of ye earth, and there,
playing the Philosopher in the open wilderness, does seem alone to content
himself: or that you deem, the substance thereof to remain in the common
society of man, notwithstanding, to be conuersaunt but with few: I truly
esteem it, no way to pertayne to the duty of a wise man, to whom it chiefly
belongs in all his actions, to have special regard to his end. For, it is
not to be thought that the high and sovereign God, did first create man to
the end to live wholly to himself, neither was he borne for himself only,
but that of his birth, part his Country as Plato says, and part his friends
are to challenge. Besides, if so it were necessary for man to live alone, then
were it but needelesse for him to have a wife, but otherwise it appears, that
God knowing better our necessity than we our selves, thought marriage a thing
very needful to be provided. Wherefore, assure your self you shall commonly
find, either few or none of those that are accounted wise, that will rather
seem, to prefer Solitariness before society. But of ye other side many,
that have utterly condemned that uncivil kind of life, which ignorant people
in the beginning of the world did brutishly lead, much after the manner of
unreasonable beasts. Among whom, there was neither society nor friendship
maynteyned, no man living in the bounds of lawful matrimony, no man certain
of his own children, nor any law to distinguish the good from the evil
mainteyned among them. What should I say? each man then did carelessly raunge,
and wander abroad in the desolate Wilderness, having neither dwelling nor
place of abode. But when reason had after taught them to associate themselves
together, and that Moses that mighty Captain of the Jews was also borne, by
whom the eternal God gave first the law to the line of his inheritance: from
thence I say, the law makers and Philosophers, first taking their instruction,
began to set down both manners and institutions of living: And after, as
Towns and Cities were daily erected, so the people began to esteem of
Humanity and to reverence Religion, whereby in short space it came after to
pass, that diverse addicted themselves to the favor of Faith, and to the
exercise of Justice, and diverse other to submit themselves to the yoke of
obedience: so as by this time, each man did esteem it a thing belonging to his
duty, not only to employ the best of his labor, but also to adventure the
loss of his life, for the better maintenance of the common Wealth. From thence
likewise both Solon and Lycurgus took first their light, from which
foundation of theyrs, ye renowned Graecians became so famous, for the due
establishment of their equal laws. From whom, the Romans also did after
derive, their penal constitutions contained in their tables, by the which, they
brought the people in all their actions, from thenceforth to become both
profitable and honest: who though at first by the strangeness thereof, they
began to murmr and repine at such bondage, yet after, being better
contented with reason to hear and understand the same, from wild and untamed
creatures they brought them at last, to show themselves both gentle and meek.
From hence the majesty of their Empire, from hence the greatness of their
dominions, from hence the multitude of their Magistrates, took first their
beginning. But, that I may not too perticularly run over these matters, if
with diligence you search, you shall find no goodness to remain among the
people, y^ has not happened to spring from this fountain of Society. Yea,
the sacred knot of frie^dship it self, tha^ the which we have nothing received
more pleasant from the Gods, nor of greater reverence and estimation on the
earth, took also her original foundation from the ^ame. But what think you of
this, above the rest O Tales?


TALES. I am not ignorant my friends, yt this question may sufficiently be
debated on both sides, notwithstanding, since you demand my opinion, I will
endeavor my self to declare you my mind what I think of the matter. It seems
therefore unto me, that if a wise man, should only respect his private
commodity, or that he were specially addicted to his own security, he ought
doubtless in y^ behalf, to choose to live rather to himself tha^ to others.
But, if so he be persuaded, that nothing may be counted more honest, nothing
for a mighty and noble personage more worthy, than to benefit as many as
possible he may: he must utterly the^ decline from Solitariness, and must
earnestly seek to be co^uersant abroad, chiefly so long, as the necessity of
others shall so require ye same. And according to the saying of Socrates, some
with sweetness of oration, and some with example of pure and perfect life, he
must labor to enduce to ye reverence of Virtue: knowing right well, y^ she
has need of an instructor, to acquaint her to y^ world, and that nothing does
more allure the minds of the people to esteem of honesty, tha^ the daily
custom and example of good me^.


EVDO. Will you grant, my friends (ere we proceed any further) y^ it may be
possible for a little quantity of gal, to make bitter a great deal of honey: or
y^ one infected kernel, may be able to corrupt (...) whole cluster of Grapes.


TAL. Why not Eudoxus?


EVD. Then wherefore I pray you do you suppose, that a wise man being placed
amids ye infection of so many vices dispersed abroad both far and wide, may
possible preserve himself unpolluted: and are not rather persuaded, y^ good
men (the number of whom is but small) may be rather carried away by the
greater number, and so become infected of the multitude. For among diverse ye
causes of our evil demeanure, this is one, that for ye most part we live after
the example of others, and are not governed by reason, so y^ the better sort
are sooner drawn out of the way, by ye custom of y^ which is evil, tha^ y^
the multitude (leaving their error and false opinion, which leads them
headlo^g daily unto vice) by example of their honesty may at al be brought to
the due estimation and reverence of virtue: the which is therefore of al men the
rather neglected, The strength of the mind and of natures is double.
because the strength of the mind and of nature is double. The one consisting
in desire, which draws a man both hither and thither, whereunto nature is
always most enclining: The other consisting in reason, which teaches and
explaneth what ought to be done, and what to be avoided. But few there are (I
may say) y^ willingly seek to follow the footesteps of Virtue, with this gift
of reason: for that, when they determine with the^ selves to tread her path,
they find the same more tedious than they looked, wanting both counsel,
Wisdom, labor, and diligence, as it may plainly be seen by the shape and
figure of Pithagoras This letter Y. is called Pythagoras letter, as it is more
plainly set down in Vergile, his Epigra^^es the eight.
letter. By occasion whereof they retire themselves back, refusing the pain
and industry wherwithall noble minds are nourished, and so, remain wauing (as
it were) between the counterfeit of Virtue and the love of profit, among whom,
Falshoode for the most part does hold the place and estimation of Troth,
chiefly so long as it is generally so accepted and received of al men.


LYSIP. Well said Eudoxus, now verily I the^ perceive, it will be thought
needeful (as the case requires) that we first define what virtue is: And after
(if so it please you) we will further consider, whether Solitariness or
society may seem more convenient for ye obteining thereof.


EVD. Why so Lysip. Will this whole day suffice, as you take, it to perform ye
same? Doubtless I dare hereof be bold to assure you, that look how many there
are, that have severally defined of Virtue, so many in a manner are their
several opinions concerning the same.


LYSIP. It shall suffice Eudoxus in this behalf, if of those diverse
definitions of theirs, we repeat some two or three of the most approved. Let
Tales therefore, take in hand the dealyng of this matter for us both.


EVDO. Thereof would I be very glad, wherefore at this our earnest request, I
pray thee O Tales to accept of the same.


TALES. I am afraid my friends, least you heap on me a greater charge, than
either in my power remains to perform, or may agree with my desire,
considering how little I have bin trained as yet, in the grounded knowledge of
the liberal Sciences: so that in a matter of importance so great, it behooves
me rather to hold my peace than to speak. For, what learning at all do you
perceive in me? or what wit? that I may worthily seem on the suddayne to
deal in a case so difficulte and of such weight, as requires of it self, no
small skill and practice to be looked for in him that should meddle with the
same. Verily my friends, of all those causes that are handled in Philosophy,
there is no one thing more gravely uttered, or with a greater majesty.
Wherefore, this ought rather (if I may judge) to be your charge and duty,
who in the study of Philosophy, and of all other knowledge, have profit ably
spente the greatest part of your age.


LYSIPPVS. Go to Tales, and despair not with thy self of thy own ability,
either to defyne or to dispute of Virtue, for as much, as the ornaments thereof
by the judgment of all men, do greatly appear in thee: In ^uche sort, as if
the Gods had pleased to appoint thee to have bin borne in the time when
Socrates and Plato did live, there would have appeared unto them no other
Phaedrus or Alcibiades than they self, in respect of thy great and singular
towardness given thee by nature. Wherefore, persuade thy self my friend,
that for thy knowledge, thou art able to debate, and that exactly, of the
worthiness thereof, since by the gift of God, thou have obtained to have her,
the ruler and directer, of thy flourishing life.


EVD. I can for my part Tales no otherwise think, of the perfection of thy
wit, nor of the estimation of thy behauioure, than as Lisippus has already
thought: and in troth, the most part of those that know thee besides, are of
the same opinion. Wherefore, to each of us thou shall do (my friend) a singular
pleasure, if as in other things thou were heretofore wont, so thou will now
at this our request, set down unto us some approved rules and precepts of
Virtue, both what it is by the opinion of others, and also what thou esteemest
thereof thy self.


TALES. Thus it is to offer violence, neither does it ought avail by what
reason you persuade me, since plainly you compel me: for, to gainesay the
earnest request of my friends, (chiefly in a matter of honesty) as it may
seem a thing ungrateful, so is it unreasonable. Diverse therefore debating of
Virtue, being diverse of opinion among themselves, have diversely spoken. But
Plato in his Book entitled Menon, where questioning of many things (as his
manner was) he has expressed in order the several opinions of diverse
writers, and with excellent reasons has confuted them all, The first
definition of VERTVE.
seems verily to define, That Virtue is nothing else than goodness it self.
But what that goodness is, and where it does remain, there have bin
heretofore, and are still, depending many controversies among the
Philosophers. The Stoickes did suppose the same, to remain in Virtue. The
Epicures did esteem it, to consist in Pleasure, as those y^ thought it
impossible to separate Pleasure from Virtue, nor any man to live honestly that
lived not pleasauntly, and again, no man to live pleasauntly that lived not
honestly. The Peripatetikes were of opinion, that there were three kinds of
goodness, that is to say, of the Mind, of the Body, and of Fortune. The
goods of the mind they thought to be those things that remain in advice, and
in the excellency of wit, as Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Modesty. Of
the body, those things which nature has given profitable to the body, as
Swiftness, Force, Personage, and Health. Of Fortune, those things which by
lotte or happy chance do prosperously befall, as Birth, Education, Riches,
Authority, Possessions, Friends, and such like. But, for honesties sake we
will in this place omit the opinion of the Cinicke sect, as those that lived
no less like Dogs than they spoke, and will again return to the triple
destinction of Goodness: wherein, whatsouer shall be said of Goodness, the
same you must also intend to be spok^ of Virtue. For, if Virtue may rightly be
termed goodness, no less may goodness as rightely also be called Virtue:
since by the rule of Logike, the definition, and the thing defyned, may
lawfully be converted. Now therefore, let us farther consider what these
former Philosophers did properly accounte this goodness to be, or in what
actions they placed y^ same? Wherein, I do many times with Cicero call in
question the wisdom of those learned me^, who thought, the weak and
chaungeable gifts of the body, That goodness does not consist in the gifts of
the body, nor of Fortune.
and also of Fortune, worthy only in speech ye name of goodness, when in very
deed, they were themselves far otherwise of opinion, concerning the intent
and meaning of the same: In somuche as Epicurus himself, who referred all
goodness unto pleasure, when he was vexed and disturbed with his greatest
grief, behaved himself both stoutely and boldly: Saying, when the stopping of
his urine, and the incredible grief of his belly exulcerated, did pitifully
torment him, O, how happily do I endure this last, The proof of the first part
of this argument.
and ending day of mine. For as diverse and sundry times we may see, a great and
mighty personage take his beginning from base and low parentage, so may we
also as often behold a stout and valiant mind shrouded under a body, both
weak, deformed, and vnhealthful: And therefore, since nature can daily make
proof unto us, that a noble and virtuous mind may possible lie hid under each
kind of form, the deformity of the body ought not to embase y^ estimation of
ye mind, but the beauty of the mind ought rather to adorn the feature of the
body. Neither is it to be thought, y^ old men, because the strength of their
bodies is decayed, are therefore to be worse esteemed tha^ young men, since it is
manifest yt the greatest exploites are not always brought to pass, by
strength, swiftness, or agilitie of body, but rather by counsel, authority,
and judgment, wherein old men are most experienced. The which, if any man by
contention will seem to deny, what other thing (I pray you) may there follow
thereof, but that Bulls, Lions, Elepha^ts, and such other beasts may also be
said to be better tha^ me^, because they are stronger: which no man I think
dare venture to affirm, unless some such as desires to be taken and
accounted for a fool. For albeit, I confess that nature has made man
unarmed, yet notwithstanding, she has given him two things especially above y^
rest, wherewith to defend his body from the harm of such as are stronger tha^
himself, that is to say, Reason and Society. But let us leave to speak of
beasts, and let us return to men themselves, who of body have bin passing
strong. What then I pray you shall we say of ^iphaeus, Briareus, and diverse
other Giants? What of Milo? who is said to have passed the whole race of
Olimpia, with a live Ox on his shoulders, never taking his breath by the way.
What of Antheus and Hercules? shall we say y^ such men are therefore better tha^
those, who by force of their wit, or by any other means, have likewise
performed diverse notable exploites. Let us for the purpose consider, what thing
has profited most ye Roman Empire in the time of their danger: whether the
great foresight of Marcus Tullius, by the which he found out the dissension of
the people, and so preserved the liberty of his country, from the secret
harm of rebellious Citizens: or ye notable triumphs of C. Marius and Furius
Camillus, with the famous and victorious prises, which by force of arms they
brought from foreign Countries. What would it (I pray you) have profited that
noble Empire, to have subdued ye whole circuit of the world, if the like
dissension had befalne them at home, which Horace lamenteth in his time to
have happened, saying: By civil war, now to decay, another age is led:
And Rome her ruin, has by such, as she hirselfe has bred.
Whom neither might their neighbors nere, the Martians so subdue:
Nor fierce Porsenaes Trurian band, such cause of grief renew.
No Capua spite, no servile host, of Spartacus assail:
No Switser with his vile mishap, in new attemptes prevail.


The common wealth being therefore by him thus preserved from danger, full
worthyly in my opinion was he accounted (as by the mouth of all men he was
called) the father of his Country, wherevpo^, taking great comfort at that
time in him self, he uttered this saying.

Let war give place to Wisdoms will, and Laurel yield to Rhethorickes
skill. This was the cause, why Agamemnon that mighty Captain of the Grecians,
did never wish to have had in his company, ten the like of A^x but of
Nestors notwithstanding he wished so many, from whose tongue as Homer says,
there proceeded speech more sweet than any honey: which if it might have
happened, he would not have doubted but that Troy should sone have been
destroyed. Whereby it appears, that those ancient warriors had always more
affiance in the valor of the mind, than of the body, and not unworthily (as I
take it) since oftentimes it has happened, y^ they them selves with a very few
soldiers, have utterly overthrown a great and mighty army, yea rather, by the
singular knowledge and policy of the mind, than by force of arms, or sway of
men: whereby, they have not only kept their Countries free from the danger of
their enemies, but thereunto have annexed both Kingdoms and Empyres. And that
it is so, Leonides King of the Spartanes may very well testify, who, when he
made to his Souldyers that singular oration, by the which he did encourage
them boldly to give the onset on that great and mighty army of Xerxes,
saying: My Soldiers and companyons, let us fully determine to make such a
dinner this day in the field, as though we should suppe together this night,
in the very lap and intrayles of the earth: he (I say) with four thousand
Souldyers at that time and no more, did victoriously vanquishe that innumerable
host of the Persians, with whose navy the whole sea was clean covered over at
their arrival into Greece. But, what also shall we say of those two famous
Souldyers, C. and P. Scipio? who esteeming it a thing both honorable and manly,
to die in the defense of their Country, did think it necessary to stop the
coming of the Carthaginians, with the apparaunt danger of their own bodies.
What of Horatius Cocles, who alone did defend the entrance of a narrow bridge,
which lay upon the river of Tiber, commanding the while, the hinder part
thereof to be taken away, that his enemies might have no passage on the same?
What of Gedion, who with three hundredth Soldiers, being armed only with
heavenly power, did miraculously overcome many thousand Philistians? What of
David himself* who being vnarnmed, with a sting only and a stone, did manfully
overthrow the great Golias, who both, for armor and strength, was there well
appointed as a Champion to fight, and proude^y did challenge the people of
God? Shall we rather say, that all these have thus deserved their immortal
fame and estimation in the world, for the greatenesse of their strength, or for
the singularity of their Virtue?


LISIP. What of that Tales? Do you therefore think, that the strength of the
body is not good?


TALES. Yea truly.


LISIP. Is it then to be deemed evil?


TALES. Not so neither. LISIP. If you deem that strength be neither good nor
evil, what is it then?


TALES. We call (my friend) all such like ornaments, whether they be gifts of
Nature, or of Fortune, indifferent things, which are thought to be common not
only unto men, but also unto beasts: and that which may be counted common,
as well unto them as unto us, may verily unto us be no way deemed good. For if
so it were good, neither might beasts obtain the same, nor evil men have the
use thereof: or if they had, yet could they by no means use it to their own
harm: but by course it would follow, that look how far forth they were
furnished with such like qualities, so much the more they would thereby become
much better than others, since goodness it self is of this nature, that it
makes the possessor thereof far much the better. But since otherwise it
happens, that those which for the most part are accounted strongest, are
therwithall most commonly more hurtefull than others, what may we thereof
think? May goodness be noisome to any man? or as with Cicero we may say, May
any man in the abundance of his goodness be deemed evil himself? nay verily,
we see that often all such like things, both lewd and wicked persons possess
them, and therwithall are offensive unto those that are good. In my opinion
therefore (as I have said before) that which either may hurt us, or that
which is common to evil persons and wild beasts together with us, may not
any way possibly be deemed good unto us.


EVD. Thou say my friend both well and truly in this behalf, but since by
this reason it appears, y^ good men ought only to be reverenced for their
goodness, there is yet another error, The proof of the second part of the
argument before.
but from whence it proceeds I know not, y^ rich me^ are in all places
honored, notwithstanding they be evil me^, and pore men despised although they
be good men. And yet it is not unknown unto us that it is given to all men to
be for the most part of a better judgment in adversity than in prosperity:
And therefore it is daily seen, that miserable and wretched people are always
more forward to serve and worship God, than those y^ are happy: For
prosperity is a thing, that withdrawes us from goodness.


TAL. Thou art ignorant it seems Eudoxus, that for the most part we value
each thing according to opinion, and not unto nature: we first believe before we
give judgment. Neither for any other occasion are we rather thought to be
confirmed in our naughtiness, than for because, he y^ flatters us in our evil
doings, and is a party to the same, is thereby a prouoker of al such things in
the which we offend. And commonly to our evil demeanure, this also is annexed,
y^ when we offend, it suffiseth us not to offend, to y^ only destruction of
one, but that it greatly delights us, to impart our naughtiness with many,
if so by any means, we may heap the same upon the heds of our neighbors. And
hereupon it rises, that ^ur eyes being dazeled with the brightness of gold,
we often times repete from the botome of our hearts, this saying of Euripides,
So rich I may be thought, how ill, no care at all I take:
If rich he be, men ask, if good, no men inquiry make.
Not whence, nor wherefore, asked is, but what he has to lend:
Each man esteemed is no more, than as he may dispende.
What were unfit for us to have, do ask? nothing at all:
In wealth I wish to live, if not, for present death I call.
Who so does dye, he well does dye, that makes a welthy end:
This money is the greatest good, that God to man may send.
Than which, ne may thy mothers love, so much thy mind delight:
Ne love of father, nor of child, is half ^o dear in sight.
No not the love, of comely shape, that in thy face does stay:
Of men beneath, and Gods above, she bears the only sway.


So therefore (I say) it delights us to live, as between us and beasts
there may be found no difference, but only that of speech we enjoy the
liberty which wholly they want. To whom if like liberty were also
granted, if of them thou would then demand, what thing above the rest they
chiefly desire, what other answer at all would they make, but only to enjoy
that which best delights their appetites, which brings most pleasure and
delectation to their senses, and all this for no other reason, than for because
they account the pleasure of the body their chiefest felicity. Therefore, let
it be farthest off from your opinion my friends, that Riches are to be deemed
good, the rather, since Democritus, Crates, and diverse other heretofore have
forsaken their wealth, to the end, that being both bare and without
encombance, they might so follow Virtue the better, who of her self is both
single and bare, and consists not in the uncertainty of riches, made subject
to foreign invasion, but is otherwise established, in perfect firmness and
stabilitie, which Lucilius considering, says: That is not thine, which Fortune
thine, by chance has made to be:
What wishing brings, may well betide another, as to thee.


What riches then is there I pray you, upon the which there does not casually
depend, Need, Hunger, and Beggerie, the rather, since God has so ordered the
state of human causes to be such, yt the best good things of this world are
always held with greatest care, and that no man may so greatly be deceived, by
reposing his trust in any state or degree of Fortune, as upon that which in the
judgment of the world is accounted greatest. For this occasion we think it
always needeful of one felicity to maintain another, because each thing that
happens by chance is unstable, and that which rises most high, is apwed
test still to fall. But that, which best above all things is allowed unto man,
may neither be given nor taken away by any man, for that it lies without the
power of man to disanull the same. The which since so it fares, it is
doubtless therefore the greatest madness that may be, to follow the desire
of that brittle substance, chiefly with all our study, care and diligence,
which is subject still to the invasion of others: The property whereof is also
so variable, that if at this day it be, to morrow it may hap to be found in no
place. This verily was the cause, why Stilbon when he had already lost both his
wealth and dignity, being asked of Demetrius who held from him the possession
of his City, what he had lost, made answer, nothing, For all, that is mine
does remain with me still. And that B^as did also ^he like, Cicero does
likewise testify, who when his enemies had taken from him his Country
Pryenna, and that diverse did fly from thence, taking with them great part of
their treasure, being admonished by a friend of his to do y^ like, made
answer, Suerlie so I do, for I have always about me as much as is mine.
Whereby it seems y^ these contented persons did thus contemn and despise
their wealth, for that they esteemed nothing to be good, unless it were honest:
so as, of these vanities of Fortune which we call riches, they made no
reconing, knowing, that it was to the^ the greatest felicity, not to want
felicity, and fully persuading them selves, yt the whole world was allowed
unto the^ by nature for their patrimonye, accounting also that wealth by the
law of nature was esteemed poverty, and that nothing could seem unto them
more foolish and filthy, than to frame the goodness of a reasonable mind out of
unreasonable things.


LISIP. Truly Tales, thou have herein played the Philosopher most excellently:
But I pray thee tell me, do thou take Wisdom for a Virtue or no?


TA. No verily.


LISIP. What reason I pray thee persuades thee so?


TALES. For that, if wisdom were a Virtue, this thereof would follow, that
Virtue were not abiding within us, but should come outwardly unto us, which
absurdity were great, since Virtue is a thing, that may neither be given nor
taken away by any man, as before we have declared: But Wisdom we find, may
conveniently pass over from one to another, and therefore, it must consequently
ensue; that of it self it is no Virtue: y^ which may be also proved another
way. For if Wisdom were a Virtue, it should also be good, and if so it were
good, it should likewise make them to be good which are counted wise. But since
otherwise it appears, y^ diverse before this time have become Philosophers, to
the only end to know what were good and what were evil, rather, than for that
they desire to become any thing y^ better by the knowledge of the same: It is
therefore to be doubted of no man, but that we have rightly termed Wisdom, y^
is to say Knowledge, to be no Virtue. For if Knowledge were a Virtue, the
doctrine thereof might doubtless be taught, which if it were possible, then
would there be found both teachers and learners of Virtue, as of other
sciences. But for as much as they are no where found, it thereby appears,
that neither Knowledge, nor any other thing concerning the Mind, may be
called Virtue, as Plato himself does plainly affirm.


LISIPPVS. What then of Justice I pray you, may that be counted a Virtue or
not?


TALES. If we deny Wisdom to be a Virtue, we less yield Justice, less
Fortitude, or Modesty of themselves to be Virtues: since all these things (
Wisdom taken away) are not only worth nothing, but also do rather more
hurt than good. For Justice without the gouernemente of Wisdom, what else
may it seem than wilful liberty? Fortitude what else, than inconsiderate
rashness? Modesty what else, than slothful and dissolute negligence? By this
it therefore appears that Wisdom, that is to say, the Knowledge of good and
evil, is one thing, and Virtue another: For there may be Knowledge without
Virtue, as plainly it appeared by diverse of the Philosophers, who in deed did
only usurp the name of Virtue, when in effect, what the same did rightly
import, they were altogether ignorant. Yet Knowledge, as to some men it
seems, is so conjoined with Virtue, that Knowledge goes before and Virtue
follows: For little does Knowledge profit, unless y^ action do also ensue.
And therefore it may rightly be concluded, that no kind of goodness, that the
Peripatetickes did in their time allow of, may be simply deemed good: For
Virtue it self is an other thing in deed than they did think off, and from
thence (as I take it) all goodnosse does proceed: the rest doubtless, they
are one day good and another day evil.


LISIPPVS. Thou haste herein Tales full truly spoken, but so much the rather
by this it appears, that Epicurus of all men was farthest wide from the
knowledge of this doctrine, as one that referred all Goodness unto Pleasure,
and labored still to speak as near as he might to the pleasing of each man,
which seems far differing from the true disposition and habit of Virtue:
For this in effect was the manner of his doctrine. The slouthful man he
discharges from the knowledge of good letters. The covetous man he acquitteth
from the expense of his money. The idle man he forbids from the dealings of
the common wealth: The lasie man to be exercised: or the coward to be a
soldier he will not suffer: To him that has evil children he commends the
want of children: Against ungodly fathers, he says, there is no bond of
nature: To him that is impatient and nice, he affirms that grief is the
greatest evil: who that seeks for Glory and power, to him he gives
commandment to follow the Court: and who that can abide no trouble, him he
persuades to forsake the Court: For this he generally affirms, That a wise
man ought always to do each thing for himself.


TALES. What marueyle thereof my friend, when a guilefull f^lowe will not
stick for advantage to play upon all hands, desiring nothing more
earnestly, than for the time to please each man, and to be commended and
allowed of al men. Hereupon it rose, that his discipline was more honored than
the discipline of others, not for that he came nearest to the knowledge of that
perfect Goodness, but for because* he did entice the people to the popular
name of pleasure. For there is no man living, that is not pro^e unto vice. But
that which above the rest was most pernicious, unto those y^ were Ungodly, he
denied the help of Divine providence. Notwithstanding, by the very same
reason by which he was moved to say that the Gods did care for nothing, for
that he daiely saw, diverse calamities to fall upon good men, as Poverty,
Toil, bannishment, with the loss of their friends: and evil men on the
other ^ide to become very happy, to increase in power, and to be loaded with
honor: he saw likewise, Innocence less assured, wickedness committed
unpunished, and death to encroch without respect of manners, without order, or
difference of years, coming to some in their old age, to some again in
their infantie, to whom nothing had yet happened but only hope of life: taking
some away in the midst of their strength, other some also in the flower of
their youth, suffering diverse and those of the better sort to perish in the
wars, likewise vexing and persecuting me^ if religion with diverse grievous
afflictions, and unto those that either despise God, or refuse to do him
worship, offering either little or no grief at all: By the same reason (I
say) he was fully confuted, and did thereby confess, that in God our creator
there is providence divine, and that it is necessary to believe there is also a
life to come, in which evil men for their offenses shall be punished, and good
men for their Virtue rewarded. For if true it were that there remained in God
no Providence divine, how should the world be so duly disposed? how should
the rain fall, fruit spring, or trees wax leaued? But, it is (as I take it)
no marvel at al, though for his part he were so infected with that leude
opinion, who was toward god a very vile and unrighteous creature himself, and
the first perswader and procurer of filthy pleasure, for the fruition whereof
he thought man to be chiefly borne; notwithstanding, it is in troth so far
differing (my friends) from all good doctrine, to think pleasure to be good,
that Plato himself that Philosopher profound, affirms the same to be the
bayte of all evil, because that me^ are therewithal daily taken as fish with
a hook. For Ambition first, with the singular sweetness and desire of honor
(which is likened to the enticing song of Mermaydes) draws them headlong one
way unto her. Covetousness an other way, allureth them as fast with the gain
of money: and Wantonness provoke them, with enticements of lust: so as,
there is nothing more true than the saying of Seneca, That no evil remains
without pretense of warrantie, and that al vice does solicit us with hope of
reward. The which that great and excellent man Architas of Tarente very wisely
considering, said, that there is no greater, nor more pernicious a pestilence
given to man by nature, than the pleasure of the body, of which our flesh
being marvelous greedy, we are furthwith pricked on with desire to obtain
it. From hence the betraying of countries, from hence the overthrow of commonweals, from hence the secret conference with foreign enemies, is said to
proceed. Besides, there is also no mischief nor no foul offense pretended,
that this desire of displeasure does not enforce to be committed: All
whordomes and adulteries, and all offenses whatsoever, are chiefly procured by
no other occasion that only bey pleasure. And whereas nothing is given unto
man, either by God or Nature more excellent than the mind: There is none so
great an enemy to this divine gift of his, as this filthy pleasure. For where
Lust does reign, Temperance has there no place, nor within the dominion of
Pleasure, may Virtue endure to abide. The which to the end it might the
better be perceived, he wills a man to suppose in his mind, himself to be
provoked with as great desire of bodilye pleasure as may possibly be
conceived: thinking thereby, that no man would then stand in doubt, but that
so long as he were there withal delighted, he could nothing profitte in mind,
nothing in reason, nor any thing in thought. Wherefore he fully concludes,
that there is nothing more detestable, nothing more noisome nor pistiferous
unto mankind, than this desire of pleasure: The which, how much the more it
does increase and wax big, so much the more it darkneth and consumes the
light of the mind. See therefore then I pray you, how miserable the service of
Virtue should be made, being appointed as Epicurus would have her, a servant
unto Pleasure. For, it is not possible y^ Virtue may be obtained by pleasure,
but rather diminished and lost by the same: since al these things are contrary
to the one, that are thought necessary for the obtaining of ye other, that is
to say, Incessant labor, hardiness, and resistance against evil, whereof this
life is very full. For, by what means else are men made Modest, Gentle, chaste,
godly, patient, and lovers of wisdom, but only, by fearefulnessr of poverty,
dread of shame, and the bitter sharpness of continual grief? It is therefore
to be thought, that by the providence of God it was ordained from the first,
that Virtue should labor here in the trouble and vexation of the world:
whereby it happens that al those, whom either wilfulness or pleasure has
headlong overthrown, are still disdaineful of such as are followers of the
same, impatiently taking it, that any other should enjoy that, which they
want themselves. So that good men, because they daily tread this difficult and
painful passage unto Virtue, are had in contempt of all those, which
pleasauntlye walk in the plain and apparent way to vice, waxing foolishly
fond of each flourishing flower and delectable fruit that they happen to
see, only seeking to obtain that, chiefly with all their study and care,
which among the mortal creatures of this world is accounted good, that is to
say, Honor, Riches, Quietness, Pleasure, and all other such enticements as
wholly tend to the ease and delight of the body:


EVD. What then Tales, do you therefore think that there ought to be taken no
care of the body?


TAL. That likewise on the other side were repugnant unto nature, who to all
creatures has given from the beginning of their creation, a special care to
defend themselves, their lives and their bodies, and to avoid, not only
those things which thereto seem hurtful, but also to search and travail to
get al such things as are needeful for the maintenance of the same. Therefore,
let the diligent labor and care of mankind be so employed, as when Reason,
Honor, or Faith, shall require it, he may boldly adventure the punishment both
of fire, and of all other torments whatsoever, for the preservation thereof.
The which we read, that Marcus Regulus did honorably perform, who endeavored
himself to keep his appointment, made to his utter enemies, although he was
sure before, that if he returned to the^ again, according to his promise, he
should presently endure the most bitter torments of death. But such
notwithstanding was the greatness of his mind as byding in the midst of his
extreme punishment, neither his Honor, his Faith, his Constancy, nor any other
Virtue of his did forsake him. Neither could the excellency of his mind be
ought at al tormented, which with so many rare and notable gifts was defended,
and with the fellowship of so many virtues enclosed: who although his body were
taken by y^ hands of his enemies, yet doubtless that noble and invincible mind
of his, could possibly be taken by no means. What shall we say of this (my
friends,) shall we think his hap to be unfortunate and miserable?


EVD. Nay, verily, but rather many opinion, of all men most happy: For
happiness of life is not that as I take it, which is performed to the appetite
of pleasure, but to the agreement of Nature.


TAL. Therefore then, by the very same reason we may boldly judge the same, of
that feigned goodness of Epicurus, that diverse of our profession have judged
heretofore, that is, that his sect was rather a procurour of vice, than a
perswader of Virtue or of any goodness.


LISIP. Doubtless my friend so may we in deed, but do you likewise confess,
our happiness of life to be that which is performed to the agreement of
Nature, as Eudoxus very lately did seem to affirm? For if this be true, that
those men which live according unto nature, should therefore be good, there
might happily then come some one unto us, that might decerne of our children in
the time of their infancy, which of them would be good by nature: By whose
judgment choosing them forth, we might do well to lodge them in Towers, and
with diligence to preserve them much rather than Gold, least any man should
corrupt them to the end, that when they wa^e of convenient years, they might
then become both grave and profitable members for the common wealth.


TALES. Thou seek a knot (according to the Proverb) Lysippus in a Bull
rushe. For, I am not ignorant my friend but full well thou know, that each
thing is named by his most worthy part, which was the cause why Eudoxus
(remembering himself thereof) did so boldly affirm our happiness of life, to
be that, which is led agreeable unto Nature, that is to say, agreeable to
that faculty and goodness of the mind, which pertaketh of Reason, and which
is said to be only peculiar unto man. This therefore being known, who is it
would doubt, but that if man should live to the contrary, that is to say,
according to the lustful part of the mind, he should therein at all nothing
differ in effect from the behavior of beasts. For Pythagoras and Plato have
both divided the mind of (...) into two parts, the (...) partaking of
reason, the other void of reason, placing Tranquillity, that is to say, fixed
and quiet security, in that part of the mind which partaketh of reason: and
in the other part such troublesome motions both of Wrath and desire, as are
enemies to the same. Therefore, that man I pray you, which by the government
of his reason, is made abstinent, constant without fear, without perturbatio^,
and without lust, is he not happy? For this is certain, that each thing
depends upon his own goodness, and y^ in each thing is termed to be good,
to the which it was chiefly created, neither is there any other good thing
peculiar unto man, but only reason: Whereupon I conclude, that ^ul blessed is
that man, and happy, that lives always agreeable unto the same, and reaches
therewith, to attain to the end and course of his nature.


EVD. Verily Tales, thou have herein defended most excellently my cause,
decerning with the eyes of thy judgment, the very secrets of my mind, the
true meaning whereof thou have plainly expressed. Notwithstanding, this also
under correction may seem to be added to that which is spoken, that is to say,
the mean and occasion, by the which we may reach, to this desired end and
course of our nature: which is this as I take it, if truth be first made
thoroughly perfect, if in ye doing of things there be observed order, measure,
and comeliness, and that harmless will be made benign and attentive unto
reason, never swaruing nor declyning from the same. By this very way, the end
thereof may undoubtedly be attained, from the which, we must unfeignedly
confess, that happiness of life, conjoined with safety and perpetual
tranquillity, does only proceed.


LIS. I cannot a little marueyle Eudoxus, since there is nothing among us here
that may be termed happy, how and in what sort it may so come to pass, y^
possible in this world we may come to enjoy, y^ happiness of life which you
speak off.


EVDO. What need you thereof to marvel at all, if willingly you will allow but
so much unto man, as Plotinus thought good to impart unto beasts.


LISIP. If that should be so, that a Man may be happy, having no more allowed
him than is allowed unto beasts, then have we in my opinion, a great deal
more cause of marvel than before.


EVDOXVS. His very words my friend if thou do mark, shall give thee thereof
to understand as he spoke them. Thus therefore, in the books which he wrote
of the happiness of life, he does say: Since well to live and to be happy
are accounted as one, then whether do we also allow the same unto beasts?
if so it be given to them by Nature, to pass their lives without impedimente,
according to the law in which they were created, what then should let them
also to live well, that is to say, happyly? For whether we account this
living well to consiste, in the well behauing of your selves, or in the due
performing of our natural duty, we must also be contented, to imparte the
same unto beasts: To who^, it is both as possible to behave themselves well,
and also to perform that special work of nature, as it is unto us. For
example, let us first consider of musical birds: Wherein it cannot I think
be denied, but that they among the rest do behave themselves well, for as
naturally, they are taught, so duly they sing, and thereby it seems they
may rightly be said, to follow a wished and well behaved kind of life. But
if farther it be said, that there is also required a happy end to be made,
which ought to consist in the last closing up and conclusion of nature: By the
same very way, we must likewise confess they may be counted happy. For when,
by course of kind they draw to their end, the ordinarye motion of Nature
does cease in them, whereby she ends that harmless life of theirs, which
from the first beginning to the departure of the same, she throughlye
performed. And therefore, if either in the natural endyng of their lives, or
in the due performaunce of the duty whereunto they were created, there remain
any happiness: The^ doubtless may beasts be said, to be both happy and
blessed. All which, if it be true Lisippus, according as Plotinus has set
down the same, what then should hinder man, who has all his affections,
subject unto reason, and has chosen her to guide him in his actions, that he
also, should not here enjoy that happiness of life. For, when the mind of man shall firmelye despise, all the casual adventures of this transitory
estate, and shall have brought, all her familiar causes to depend upon her
self, supposing also all worldly affairs to be inferior unto Virtue,
duelye searching for that, than the which there may nothing be wished for
better, that is to say Goodness, perfectness, and Justice: It is necessary
then that it be void of perturbation, feeling in it self the fruit of
tranquillity, and also of quietness, by mean whereof it becomes happy:
Notwithstanding it be still abiding, within that frail and mortal body.


LISIPPVS. I think it altogether, inconueniente for me, to answer at this
time to the saying of Plotinus, since the matter he held is in effect so
absurd, that there is scarce any one to be found, that will together assente
with him in the like. For verilye for my own part, I am yet to learn, in what
causes he would have well behavior to be placed: But let us suppose that
beasts for the purpose, do behave them selves well according to his saying,
yet how may they by this reason be accounted happy, who do not only not
know, the goodness of their felicytie, but also are ignorant of their own
estate: Or if they do understand it, yet do they (as the Philosophers
affirm) but grosely, imperfectly, and obscurely understand the same. For
although, it be common to them together with us, to love, to hate, to desire,
to fear, to sorrow, and other such like: yet to foresee (which nature has
only given unto man) to discourse, to find out, or to remember any thing they
possibly can not: Only that which soon passes over, has nature allowed
them, that is to say, the imagination of things present: But for things that
are paste, she has given them a memory altogether confused, which never
calls any thing again to remembrance, except by the view of things y^ are
present: So also for things that are to come, she has likewise allowed the^ no
knowledge at al. By what means then (if I may ask) may they be counted
happy, whose case is such that they know not their own estate, neither yet
are able to make any difference between good and evil? But now on the other
side, as touching the state and condition of man, who lives (I pray you) so
orderly, that at no time feels any trouble of mind? what man so perfect
that never yields to his passion? who so singular, but if he avoid pride,
covetousness possesses his heart? If he shun covetousness, anger
disquieteth his patience? if he suppress anger, gluttony delights his taste?
if he eschew gluttony, envy consumes his carcas? if he repulse envy,
slouthfulnes ouerwhelmeth both soul and body. Whereby it comes still to
pass, that no man may be utterly found deuoide of fault, for as the Poet
says: Each man that is by nature fed, is by his private pleasure led.

Which since it is so, I see not my friends, how any man in this life may be
accounted happy, unless perhaps we should reckon happiness, to consist in
words that are wisely uttered, under honest and eloque^t terms. The which if
so it were, it would then come to pass, that such as have most learnedly
discoursed of Virtue, should therefore be accounted more happy than others.
But that this is not so, not only experience, but also Cicero himself in his
Tusculans questions, avouches. How many Philosophers ca^ you show me (says
he) so honest in manners, so stayed in judgment, and order of life, as reason
requires. Who is he y^ obeys his own rules, or puts his own precepts in
practice? Some of them shall you ^ee, so full of boasting and vaunting, y^ it
had been better for them, to have never learned the name of a letter: other
covetous of money, other desirous of glory, and others made subject to their
own lust, so as, their living and teaching are commonly contrary, which
thing in my judgment is most intolerable. For as he that professes himself
a Gramarian, if he speak barberously, or he, that challenges the name of a
Musician, if he sing vntunably, is the more to be reproved, because he
offends in that very thing, wherein he would seem most skillful unto others:
So likewise the Philosopher offe^ding in the order of his life, is the more to
be condemned, because he erreth in that part of duty, wherein his knowledge
does principally consist, and is faulty himself in that, in which he
undertakes to be a teacher of others. For, when true it is, yt the substance
of Philosophy does consist, not in terms but in matter, it is a great shame
for a man of knowledge, to have it objected unto him, yt he is a Philosopher,
not in works but in words. And therefore, it comes verily to pass, that
such men are not in deed, the true instructers of Virtue, because they are
thereof destitute themselves. For if Philosophy be the study of Wisdom, as
the learned have defined, and that Wisdom be nothing except it be put in
practice, thereby to show forth her operation: It follows then, that the
doctrine of such teachers, is altogether barren and fruitelesse, because it
works not y^ in the^, which it is wont to do in the most part of those, of
whom it is possessed. For Cicero names Philosophy, the manuring of the wit,
which pulls up all vice by the root, and makes apt the mind to receive,
the fruiteful seed of Virtue, and as we may term it, planteth in us such
pleasant fruit, as yields in time a plentiful increase. Wherefore, by this
it appears that the property of Philosophy, is rather to make her lovers to
live well in public conversation, tha^ to speak and teach well in private
schools: Which thing, when by experience it frames not accordingly, it
thereby declares such superficial Philosophers, to have rather studied this
noble science, to the end to show forth the smoothness of their tongs, whereby
to win the praise of the people, than for any good cause or consideration of
living to be showed in themselves. Of whom, thus writes Seneca, in his
exhortations: Many Philosophers are eloquent (says he) to their own reproof,
whom, i^ so it were your chance, to hear them declame, either against
Covetousness, incontinencye, ambition, or any other such like, you would
verily suppose, that they sat in judgment of their own behauiours, so
notoriouslye the reproaches they seem to utter against the doings of others, do
recoyle again to their own disgrace: Of whom, we ought to make none other
account, than of common Apoticaries, upon whose boxes are outwardlye they
written the names of restoratiues, when inwardlye they are full of poison. Some
of them besides are so stronglye impudent, that no shamefastness may prevail
to withdraw them from their wickedness, but that by shifting they rather
seek, how cunninglye to excuse and to defend their uncleanness, that so at
the least wise they may seem to offend with some color of honesty.
Aristippus sometime Master of a sect of Philosophers named Cirenaicie, used
for his pleasure to haunte the company of one Lays, a famous strumpet of
Greece, which gross fault of his that great Doctor of Philosophye did in
this sort defend: Saying, that between him and the other of her lovers there
was this difference, that where they were possessed by Lays, Lays was possessed
by him. O, notable Wisdom, and Philosopher well worthy whom all men
should follow: It were doubtless, a thing very necessary, to commit our
children to such an instructour, that thereby they might learn, how at
least wise to entertayne a Curtisan. This learned wanton persuaded himself,
that between him and the rest of her lovers, there was a marvelous odds, for
that he, as he thought, without trouble or cost obtained his pleasure, when
they on the other side, with labor and expense, did purchase repentance. In
which very point (notwythstandyng this difference) that subtle Harlot went
somewhat beyond him, who in effect, made that counterfayte Philosopher her
colorable bawd: that so by the daily example of so licencious a patron, all
the youthful gentlemen of Greece, might thencefoorth the rather frequent her
company, and boldly adventure to follow their pleasure, without any regard
either of shamefastness or modesty. Therefore these kind of instruct^rs (as
I said before) sought not the way by the study of Philosophy, that leads
unto Virtue, but only the way that leads to Delight: which thing, Cicero
himself does also testify. Verily, albeit (says he) that the whole
disputation of Philosophy, contain in it self a most abundant fountain of
Virtue and knowledge, yet being compared with the doing and living of the
Philosophers themselves, I doubt me, it has rather brought unto them a vain
delectation to their idle pleasures, than either profit or commodity to their
honest affairs. But now let us farther consider, since occasion is
proffered, how this famous enricher of the Roman language, behaved him self
in his own adversity. He verily following the discipline of Panetius the
Stoike, set down in writing the duty of each manne exceedingly well, all
which he comprehended under three Books. But how valiauntlye he himself did
bear, either the death of his daughter, his own banishmente, or the Monarchy
of Caesar oppressing the public liberty, Titus Liuius does brieflye declare:
Of all his evil happes and adversities (says he) he behaved himself like a
man in none, save only in his death. To what purpose then I pray you,
professed he the knowledge of Philosophy? Why thought he it necessary, to
play the Philosopher at all times, and in all places, according to the opinion
of Neoptolemus, as it is recorded in Ennius, if in his mind, he perceived no
profit to arise by the same? for those that teach only, and do not
accordinglye, discredit their own teaching: Neither will any man obey him,
who by his doings does testifye, that he is not worthy to be obeyed. Yet is it
I confess a thing to be praised, in him y^ gives such precept^ of honesty,
but unless the party perform the same in his own life, he proves himself
in effect but a lier: in whom it may be thought far unfit for his calling,
to have honesty placed not in his heart, but in his lips, which contrariewise
ought rather to consist, not in speech and tongue but in life and manners. For,
if true it were that the Virtue of Philosophy, did at al consist in the
substance of words: who might them (I pray you) have been accounted more
happy, than the man himself of whom we speak, from whom all the glory of
Roman eloquence had her only perfection? But that ye force of Philosophy
remains no where else than in a mind well disposed, himself also in his
Tusculan disputatio^s does plainly witness, where wholly directing his talk to
Philosophy, thus he writes. O noble Philosophy, the guide of our life, the
searcher out of Virtue and the expeller of vice, what were we, or what were the
life of man, without thy aid and assistance? Thou (I say) were the first
inuenter of all good laws, the only teacher of learning, of manners, and of
all good nurture. Wherein, if but accordingly we could put in practice all that
we call honesty, so easyly as we may talk and discourse of the same, should
not then (I pray you) both we our selves, and al other that have usurped ye
name of Philosophers, be judged happy? But the case in very deed standing
thus, that Philosophy of it self requires both living and doing well (which
is hard to be achieved) rather tha^ saying and speaking well, which may easily
be attained: from hence, I say, it proceeds, that many men have been
contented with the only name and title of Virtue, when of the true intent and
meaning thereof, they were altogether ignorant. Notwithstanding, in the true
judgment of al men, he only is to be taken and accounted for wise, who in
word and deed, both when thou see him, and when thou hear him, is
always one and the same without alteration. But the fool on the other side
(as Solomon says) is changed like the Moon, now this in words, now that in
action, declaring thereby the contrariety of his mind.


EVDO. Where a little before we reasoned (friend Lisippus) of the property of
Virtue, and of that happiness which she bestows upon those, that guyding
themselves by her wary order, live an honest and virtuous life: we were not (I
remember) so far forth gone, as to affirm, that any man could live
deuoyde of fault (for this we know was the only and peculiar privilege of
Christ our savior) neither went we about to prove, that all men embraced
Virtue: But this only we said, that if beasts, when they performed their
natural operations, might be accounted happy, according to the former opinion
of Plotinus, much more ought we then to judge the same of man, especially, if
Reason have that preemine^ce in him as it ought, and that al his affections be
subject still to her government. But, if to that which is spoken I may be
lawfully suffered, upon better aduisemente to add one thing more, then thus I
proceed. Albeit at some time, certain fond affections contrary to reason,
do appear in us, yet so long as they prevail not, nor get the upper hand of
reason, a man is not therefore to be esteemed either evil or unhappy: For
without faults no man lives, and he is best that is troubled with fewest. If
this rule may but thus be granted, as in troth it is evident, then without
question, we shall be able to find out diverse notable good men: For in all ages
there have flourished many, who by their holy and just living, by their
manifold and notable virtues (for diverse are the gifts which the Sovereign
God powers down upon his people) have deserved great honor and estimation in
the world. Of which number it shall not, I think be amiss, if I repete in
this place some few. And first, what say we of Socrates? who so manly demeaned
himself in all his actions, that at no time, either in adversity or
prosperity, his countenance was found to be altered: Neywas it at all in him
to be marvelled, since so lightly he esteemed the very terror of death, that
when opportunity was conveniently offered him to have escaped the same, he
utterly refused the advantage thereof: knowing right well, that death was
only dreadful unto those, with whose mortal life all glory, all honor, and
all estimation did utterly perish, and not unto those, whose Virtue and renown
was always lasting and could never decay: for he, according unto Reason
applied his doctrine to the bettering of his life, accompting the substance of
Philosophy to consist, in the equal choice between good and evil: besides,
in this one point be showed himself more wise than the rest, in that, he
withdrewe the course of his disputation, from the searching out of celestial
and supernatural causes, wherein many have heretofore spent, both their wit
and their time to no purpose at all. What of Pithagoras? who showed himself as
a spectacle to the world, both of learning and Virtue, and who among other his
manyfolde gifts was of modestye so great, that being demanded by what surname
of honor he would be called, refused the title which others his inferiors had
taken upon them, and that, which in those days was common to al such as were
learned, choosing rather to be called, not Sophos but Philosophos, not wise,
but a searcher and lover of Wisdom. What of Plato? who though he were
accounted of all the wisest, and also attained to so wonderful perfection of
learning and eloquence, as if Jupiter himself would have descended from the
heavens, he could never have used a more copious style: yet notwithstanding,
he refused the title of his own glory whereunto he had right, and ascribed the
honor of all his works unto Socrates his Master, showing thereby himself no
less commendable for demeanor, than honorable for his knowledge. What of
Cato the elder? who in the judgment of all men was accounted, the very image
of Virtue, the honor of the Romans, and the stay of the whole Empire: he I
mean, whose name and Virtue was after supported by Cato the younger, that noble
and princely son of his. What of Seneca? who was of stomach so stout, that
with patience he mastered the very terror of death, when by the commandment
of Nero the tirant, he was thereunto enforced. What of Fabricius the Roman? a
man so sincere and upright of mind, that not with the vehement temptation of
gold it self, he was able to be corrupted: who first (as the story
affirms) refused the large and mighty proffers of Pirrhus, esteeming it more
worthy and more worth than a kingdom, to neglect and contemn the brybes of a
King: And after, when the proffer was made him for the secret dispatche of that
Roman enemy, he would not only not suffer the same to be done, but gave him
warning himself of the treason pretended, adding thereunto these words that
follow. Enjoy thy longer life, by this my means (O Pirrhus) and be now glad
of that which thou haste heretofore lamented, that is, that Fabricius thy
enemy would not be corrupted. To conclude, many other there have been, who
albeit they have crred in some points like men, yet wholye in their minds
they still embraced Virtue, by whose means their lives were both Blessed and
Happy: at all times so behauing themselves, that of their sayings and doyngs,
there still remains to the world, a perpetual remembrance. So then on the
other side, though many there have been besides, who have not so sufficiently
been able, to perform the same in action, whereof, they have so gloriouslye
talked: yet notwythstandyng, it can not therefore I think be denied, but that
these men did also great good in the world, while disputing of Virtue, they
opened the way by their wholesome precepts, how other might more easily
attain to the same. For, if the life of learned men were aunswerable in all
points to the manner of their doctrine, who were to be accounted so happy as
they? but, we must remember, that they entreat of Virtue and not of
themselves: they reason not how they dee live, but how they and all other
ought generallye to live, setting also the mark before our eyes whereat we
must ^ouell: the success whereof, though at all times it prove not
accordingly, by reason of the frayltie and weakness of our flesh, yet the
honest intent and purpose of good men, has been always accounted praise
worthy of the wise. Wherein, this certaynely sounds very greatly (...)
praise, that by the gouernemente of Reason, they have at least wise found
out for the benefytte of man, what is best to be done, and what to be avoided,
seeking further, and that with all their might, how to perform the same in
their own behavior, and according to their powers to live well themselves.
LISIP. You dispute Eudoxus very earnestly, seeking to withdraw me from mine
opinion, by many good and pithie reasons, wherein, although you have
diligently labored, you have not yet brought me to be of your judgment. For
this is to me an assured ground, that nothing in this world may make a man
Happy, considering, that the ordinary course of our life is but short, and
that we are al made thral unto misery: Where on the other side, Hppinesse it
self is wholly made perfect, having nothing that may trouble or diminishe the
same. So as, not any thing in my opinion may be accounted Happy, that is not
void of Corruption, and there is nothing Incorruptible that is not Immortal,
whereby I conclude, that no mortal creature may here attain to this
blissfulness of life, as you would have it, but rather, so long as he abides
on the earth, I think him most miserable: neither, do I only not take him to
be Blessed, but that he cannot be accounted so much as Happy, chiefly, so long
as he remains within this troublesome body, the which, to the end it may be
dissolved, it is necessary first that it be corrupted: but then only shall he
inioye this Felicity, when his soul being free from the trouble of the flesh,
shall live wholly in Spirit. Yet this I deny not, but that God, who recompenceth
our well doing with an incomparable reward, has so ordained, yt they which
here in the daily miseries and adversities of this world behave themselves
well, and eschewing the enticing baytes of pleasure, give themselves wholly with all their endeavor to the exercise of Virtue, paynefully wading throughout all
the dangers and troubles of adversity to attain to the same: that they I
say, even here in this life shall receive at his hands, a certain pledge of
their blissfulness to come, whereby their travails may seem unto them less
grievous and heavy. Which pledge I mean, to be the confidence and hope that in
them remains, joyfully to attain to that eternal glory which by his word he
has promised: whereof evil men on the otherside, by occasion of their
naughtiness, see themselves to be deprived, so as, by the terror of their
wickendnesse which they have wilfulfullye committed, they live always in
fear, which fear of theirs, so troubles and disquieteth their guilty
minds, that they always stand in dread of the vengeance of God: Whereupon it
follows, that they suspecte every thing, they stand in fear of every thing,
and that Death is to them so hateful an enemy, that if it were possible, they
would never so much as think of the same: the remembrance whereof, if by
chance or occasion it fall into their minds, forthwith they tremble and become
so fearful, that they are therewithal bereaved of al their quietness: So
very far differing has God divided, the state of good men and evil men
asunder.


TALES. By this reason it seems then, that we may lawfully confute ye opinion
of those, who say that Virtue is the greatest Good, or Felicity it self. For
Virtue as I take it, is not in deed that sole and sovereign Good, but rather
a worker and procurer of the same, forasmuch as thereto we cannot attain,
without the help and assistaunce of Virtue. For, as Vice it self although it
be evil, yet is not that extreme and most pestiferous Evil, so Virtue, although
it be Good, yet is it not that sole and Self good which we call Felicity,
since Self good is that, which needs not the assistaunce of any other
superior Good: but Virtue we find, that it craves ye help of a further
Good, and therefore it may not (as I have said) be termed Felicity: but rather
a step or degree, whereby we ascend unto the majesty of God, who is in deed,
that undoubted, y^ most excellent, and most sovereign Good, to the which, by
the way of Virtue (as the Philosophers term it) we are gloriously advanced.
Therefore to conclude, that inferior Good which we call Virtue, ought not to
be called that sole and sovereign Good, since by the same we only ascend, to
a far superior and more celestial Good than it self, that is, to Felicity.
Notwithstanding, these ancient Philosophers being altogether ignorant of the
true effect and office of Virtue, and whereto it tends, finding nothing
besides, whereof to account and to esteem more precious, ^ontented themselves
with the only title and reputation of the same, which they said, was to be
sought and desired, without any hope, of advantage or profit to be gained
thereby: and so, made that thelt chief and principal Good, because they knew
no other more celestial or superior Good, whereupon to repose the hope of
their Felicity. But doubtless, Where^n Virtue does chief by consiste.
the true benefit and estimation of Virtue, consysteth wholye, In the patient
suffering of adversity, as poverty, imprisonmente, grief, banishmente, loss
of friends, and such like: and then only is it most absolute and perfect,
when after these calamyties the mind is made contented, voluntaryly to suffer
the sharpeste punyshmente of Death, chieflye, if either Reputation or Reason
shall so require the same: showing thereby, a contempt of Life which others
embrace, and a love of Death which most men do fear. And therefore, since
otherwise it can not be, but that in lieu of this labor great guerdon must
be hoped (for that pains undertaken unto Death, can not pass without
reward) and that no reward sufficyente to counteruayle the same may be
found upon the Earth, for that, such resolute demeanoure dispiseth all
frail and transytorie toys: What then remains, but that from contempt of
these Earthlye matters, taking regard of more heavenly affairs, we aspyre
unto the hope of some celestial recompense, which is nothing else then
Immortality, wherein, that sovereign Good, which we call Felicity, is only
to be found, the which is therefore accounted Blessed, because, it can
neither Perish nor be corrupted. So that, if a man may be Virtuous, (which
can not be denied) then may he be Blessed, (for it cannot be, that he may
possibly be accounted Unhappy, that is endued with Virtue) and if he may be
Blessed, he may be also Immortal, from whence this Blessedness does only
spryng: but the same we can not enjoy, so long as we live in this transitory
world, which is full of change and alteration, for that our life and our
works are both subject to decay. And therefore Lisippus, I truly for my
part am also of opinion, that you have rightlye judged of the Blessed and
Happy life: For the Philosophers themselves when they talk of a Wise man,
they describe him to be such as is not to be found, in the ordinary course
and practyse of our life, but rather they feign him to represente such a one,
as were to be imagyned or wished for: As for example when they say, A wise man
is troubled with no kind of passion: and again, He that has Virtue, wants
nothing requisite, to a blessed and happy life: So likewise, to live blessedyle
and happilye, is nothing else, than to live honestlye and vertuouslye: by these
and such other their sayings, they note unto us, such a a special and precise
kind of Wisdom, as no mortal creature has ever achieved. LISIPPVS. True
it is Tales that you have spoken, for if any manne might reach that perfect
Wisdom, he should thereby also become Blessed, but because no man has
hitherto attained to the same, this Felicity is therefore of right reserved,
for those divine and celestial souls of good men, who being set free from
the bondage of their bodies, are by God, advanced for their Good and Virtuous
living, into the fellowshippe of Angels, where by reason of the glorious
sight of his divine presence, they have the fruition of that eternal
Blissfulness, whereof, we have hitherto spoken. But for this our transitory
life, it may conuenientlye be called a Theater, wherein trial is made, by God
the creator of all things, of the good and evil demeanor of all men, who
promises a just and merciful reward unto each man, according to his
deserte.


TALES. Now therefore to proceed, let us next (if so it like you) set down a
more perfect definition of Virtue. A brief repe^. cion of that, which is
already spoken.
We have first declared how these ancient Philosophers, who were of all other
then living accounted the wysest, myssed the true effect and knowledge
thereof: We have after noted, wherein it seems principally to consist, that
is, in the patient suffering of adversity: And lastly, we have likewise
expressed what is the true and perfect end thereof, and that it can not be our
chief and sovereign Good, for that our chiefest Good, is the final
recompense and reward of Virtue. It remains therefore necessary, y^ we now
set down a more proper definition thereof: which thing, although it would have
rather been performed before, eue^ in y^ first beginning of our talk, yet ye
manner of this our disputation, caused us somewhat to alter the common course
and accustomed order. It is therefore, my friends, to be consequently noted,
The second definition of (...).
that Virtue is always one and the self same thing, notwithstanding, that
according to the diversity of matters wherein it is handeled, it takes
diverse names: As the Virtue of a man is to be able to manedge al manner his
affairs, of a woman to govern and dispose the house, of a soldier to be
valiant and forward in battle, of a husbandman to know the nature of his
ground, and how to manure the same: In like manner, the Virtue of a young man,
of an old man, of a freeman, and a bond man, are different no less in
condition, for as Plato says, according to the difference of their actions
and ages, so diverse are the Virtues that are found in them. LISIPPVS. Verily
Tales, then have we in my opinion been greatly fortunate, in this our brief
disputation, for where we sought but for one only Virtue, we have now found
out a whole world of Virtues to be resiaunt among men. TA. This opinion of
yours Lisippus, can not be true, for as there is but one kind of Health,
wherewyth all men are made Healthful, and one kind of Greatness, whereby all
men are made Great, and one kind of Strength whereby al men are made strong:
So al men are made Virtuous by one kind of Virtue, and are al made Good by one
kind of Goodness, for yt in all things whatsoever, there is in troth, but one
only substance of Virtue, notwithstanding, that it may severally possess
diverse variable names, agreeable to the matters wherein it is conversant. For,
as all kind of Sickness in ye truth of Nature is in effect but one, although,
when it is in the hands we call it Chiragra, Chiragra, Po dagra, and
Cephalea, are three several names of the Gout.
when in the legs Podagra, and when in the head Cephalea, whereby according
to the diversity of our members diseased, it is diversely called: So also of
Virtue, although when it searches out the truth of each matter, and warely
makes choice between profitable and unprofitable, and between good and
evil, we call it by the name of Prudence: when it labors about the
mayntayning of humayne Societye, and yields to every man that which is due,
using uprightness in sales and bargains, we call it by the name of Justice:
when it consists in the courage and valor of an invincible heart, we call it
by the name of Fortitude: when likewise it pertains to the orderly
disposition of our sayings and doings, we call it by ye name of Modesty: yet,
are al these in truth, but one only Virtue. Therefore, to deliver you my mind
more plainly, what manner of thing it is, thus as I take it, it may best be
defined: That Virtue is nothing else, than a good constitution of the soul and
mind. The third definition of Virtue.
For the obtaining whereof this is to be noted, that it is not to be gotten by
Greatness of strength, which shortly decays: nor by Beautiful looks, which
will soon fade away: nor by abundance of wealth, whereof we have no assurance:
nor by Sharpness of wit, for that, by how much the more crafty and
subtle a man is, so much the more suspected and hateful is his life, if
therewithal he want the estimation of honesty: nor finally by Sweet and
amorous pleasures, which being the professed enemies of Virtue, do wholye
wythdrawe our minds from the same: But, it is doubtless poured down upon us
from above, Virtue, is only given us by God.
by the liberal beneficence of the heavenly powers. In comparison whereof,
since nothing in this world may be found so beautiful, what follows then
(I pray you) but as Vice on the one side for the deformitye thereof is to be
abhorred and avoided, so Virtue on the other side for the dygnitye thereof,
ought the rather to be desired: by the assystaunce whereof, we must
earnestlye labor to obtain that, than the which, nothing may be desired
more excellent: that is to say, a mind both good, noble, and rightly disposed,
which being so qualified, is not otherwise to be esteemed, than as a very God,
laboring and travailing in the body of a Man. Touching who^, as an evil
person turns all things to the worst, so he on the contrary uses all things
to the best, as Riches, Strength, Wit, and whatsoever he has besides, either
of himself or of Fortune. For all these, are nothing else than instruments of
force, serving the Wicked to the ruin of themselves, and also of others, and
the Good, not only to their own advantage, but to the general profit and
commodity of al men. So that the manner of the doing thereof, teaches us by
what name the act is to be called: for that which is well done is termed
Honest, and that which is evil done is termed Dishonest. As for example:
Eloquence when it is well used, there is nothing more praise worthy, nothing
more commendable, nor nothing more fit, either to stir up admiration in those
that shall hear us, to confirm the hope of those that shall need us, or to
win the favor and good will of those that shall be defended by us: but when
it is abused, nothing is then more hurtful than the same, whereof, this writes
Cicero, in the preface of his books de inuentione: I have often times mused
with my self (says he) whether Eloquence have been occasion, of more good or
harm to the state of m^n, and to the maintenance of commonweals: for when on
the one side I call unto my remembrance, the diverse calamities of the Roman
Empire, and the lamentable subversion of many flourishing estates, I the^
perceive a great part of such distress, to have only proceeded from men of
great eloquence: when after on the other side I call to mind again, by the
record of ancient monuments, things done long since, far beyond the age and
remembrance of man, I find, that many Cities have been founded, many wars
ceased, many leagues concluded, and many friendshippes joined, partly by Wit
and Policy, but chiefly by Eloquence. By long debating whereof, in fine I am
thus resolved, That wisdom without eloquence may but smally advantage, and
that eloquence without wisdom, may many times harm, but seldom profit.
Wherefore, if any man neglecting ye study of Philosophy, whereby Duty is to be
learned and Wisdom increased, will wholly spend his time in ye exercise of
Oratorie, what other benefit may thereof arise, but y^ thereby he shall become,
an unprofitable friend to himself, and a dangerous member to the common Wealth.
But he, that furnishes himself with Eloquence, to the entente to bend the
force thereof, not to assault, but to defend and maintain the wealth of his
country, he I say (in my judgment) seems a member very profitable, both
privately for his friends, and generally for the whole estate. Wherefore, the
Mind of man ought first to be well instructed, for from thence our reasons,
from thence our words, and from thence the conformity of our body, Al our
dispositions are governed by the mind.
both for countenance and behavior do proceed: And certain it is, that the
whole disposition of our life, is tempered and proportioned only by our Mind,
and by it is wholye governed. For, if the Mind be well and in good plight, our
talk, our manners, and all the rest of our demeanor, shall be fitting and
convenient, for the credit of an honest man: But, if the Mind be weak and
evil disposed, then all things come presentlye to ruin and decay. For the
avoiding whereof, it is necessary first that we flee to the succor of the
Liberal sciences, and after, to the comfortable admonition of Divine knowledge,
since the Mind is not otherwise strengthened, than by good letters, and by the
consideration of things natural: For, y^ goodness of the Mind which we call
Virtue (the which, as before we have declared, falls down from above) is
toubtlesse maintained and increased by Study. Whereunto, that thereby the
rather we should employe our selves with pleasure and delight, it is ordained
from the first, that all men by a special instinct of Nature are desirously
given to learn, and are drawn on by Kind to a singular love and desire of
knowledge: wherein, as to pass al others they account it a thing of great
estimation, so on the other side, to slide, to err, to be ignorant, or to be
deceived, they reckon it as a matter of great disgrace. For this occasion Nature
has the rather given us a curious and searching wit, who being privy to her
own Art and excellency, has purposely appointed us y^ only beholders, of al
such her miraculous works, as appears in the world: to this intent (as it
seems) that by the regard of such rare and wonderful sights both in heaven
and on earth, we might yield unto God such honor in the same, that the
excellency of his works made subject to our knowledge, might not covertly
pass away without some testimony of his Glory: All which he created to none
other end it appears, than y^ by the view of such visible things, we might
intellectually ascend to y^ farther consideration of things invisible: who
although he has made and subjected to our use all ye inferior creatures of ye
earth, yet is not this ye cause of our gretest wonder: But, it is rather a thing
far surpassing ye rest, that by the knowledge thereof he leads us on, to a
farther understanding of things more Divine: with the rare opinion and
imagination whereof, we are moved to search into farther causes, tha^ are usually
subject to ye view of ye eye: whereby ye rather we are brought by degrees, into
a greater admiration of the handyworks of God, and from thence at last, unto ye
reverence and worship of his holy name: for he knows best how to do him
worship, y^ has most understanding of his omnipotent power, since perfectly
and wholly, it is impossible he may be comprehended of any man, as the scripture
affirms. The study therefore of Divine letters, is wont in such sort to
dispose ye Reason and understanding of our Senses, y^ if y^ mind of a good man
were possible to be seen, we should doubtless find a like perfection in the
same, as remains in those bodies that are above the Moon, where al things are
both clear and bright, without either tempest or trouble. For albeit he live
here, among the manifold miseries and calamities of this world, yet as the
Sun, whose beams though they shine upon diverse s^uttish and uncleanly
places, do gather notwithstanding no corruption from the same: so he, assisted
always with the help of God, notwithstanding he daily remain among the
contagious allureme^ts of Vice, preserves himself still perfect and clean. Yet
this I would not have you to look for at his hands, y^ if for the maintenance
of any quarrel, yea touching the honor of god himself, he were cruelly
enclosed, within y^ scorching bull of Phaleris the tirant, he should arroga^tly
say together with Epicurus, y^ it were sweet and pleasant. For many there be y^
are rather endued with an hardness of heart, than with any noble or manful courage,
who will not stick to affirm, y^ a wiseman has no feeling of grief: But such
men seem never to have tasted thereof themselves, or otherwise experience would
have removed the^ in time, from that their fond and arrogant opinion, and no
less enforced the^, though sore against their wills, to have confessed ye
truth. For as to have a sense and feeling of grief, is incidente to the nature
of all men, so to endure the same with stoutnes of courage, is ye property only
of him y^ is valiant. This (I say) is he, yt will patiently suffer any
punishments whatsoever: and yet not so, but that he must still confess, to
have a natural motion and feeling thereof. And therefore (my friends) such as in
this sort do rightly know how to seek after Virtue, and having thereto attained
how to order the same, seem verily in my mind men worthy for God: in whom, to
the example of others he may apparently make proof, how much the nature of man
is able to suffer, for the maintenance of Virtue and Honesty. For doubtless
a good man is inferior but a little, to those heavenly spirits that are
above, and is only said, to be the true disciple and assured offspring of God
himself: Whom that magnificent Father, as one, that exactly requires the
good life of his children, brings vpto goodness and discipline, according to
the manner of such as are accounted both wise and severe parents. But let
us for the purpose admit that some of those that are very well learned, do
wylfullye abuse that their skill and knowledge, as well in matters of
Humanity, as also Philosophy, from whence there may (as we have already
declared) so many commodities to good purpose proceed: yet the sciences
themselves, ought not as I take it to be therefore disproued, though ignoraunte
people do discommend the same, unadvisedly speaking according to their
knowledge, and that in matters of greater importance, than are any way
subject to their barbarous capacity: who never more notably do publish their
folly, then when most they would seem to be cunning in all things. For
nothing truly, may appear more gross and absurd to be granted, than
because at sometime through our own abuse they hurt us, therefore to condemn
the singular gifts and ornaments of Nature: which if it were tolerable,
what thing (I pray you) so evidently ^ending to the benefit of man may there
be found, but that the misdemeanour of evil persons, may peruersely apply to
the contrary. For, if so we shall wey the gifts of nature, by the behavior of
those upon whom they are bestowed, it will then appear, that we have received
nothing from her at all, but that which tends to the hurt and hinderaunce
of our selves. For example, who by this means may account it a commodity to
see, or to speak? to whom shall not life it self (than the which, we hold
nothing more dear) be thought a very torment full of misery? But it is in
truth so far beyond reason, thus to reprove either the benefits of Nature, or
of Arts, or of Sciences, or of any kind of Knowledge, and that for no other
occasion, than for the misbehauiour only of those, that peruersly use them to
their wicked intentes: as if we should condemn the Art of Oratorie, for the
faulty life of some licentious Orator. For albeit these good Arts, do not of
themselves adorn our minds, with the present possession of Virtue, yet do
they prepare us, and make us apt, as we have saydbefore, to receive the same:
Neither, could God have given us any other thing, more fit and convenient to
lay the foundation, for so great a benefit. Thus much at this time I have
thought it convenient to speak of Virtue, and you (my friends) I do farther
exhort, that nothing than the same you esteem more dear, and that withal you
prefer no worldly benefit before her: Than the which, though nothing more
grave, nothing more divine, nor nothing more plentyfull, may be found to be
spoken of, yet I doubt not, but many things I have ouerslipped, that might
well have been remembered, because you suddenly enforced me (being altogether
unprovided) to discourse upon a cause of so great importance.


EVD. Therefore Tales, since on the sudden you have so learnedly disputed upon
so difficulte a question, we may easily coniceture what farther success, by
longer continuance is to be hoped for at your hands: such truly as not without
cause, the most reverent Potentates of this our common wealth, do greatly
regard. For as in all other things you are sufficientlye provided, so by this
your orderly and well piled communication, you have greatly satisfied and
persuaded my fancy, and no less as I take it, the lyking of Lisippus, but for
my self I assure you, you have fully brought me, to be of your opinion: and
verily I believe that all those, that rightly deem of Virtue as they ought,
cannot but yield unto you the same. LISIP. And I for my part Tales, do the
rather agree with you in opinion concerning Virtue, for that Aristotle himself,
and also diverse other well learned Philosophers, have so in effect defined of
the same: saying, that Virtue is a good quality of the mind, gotten by use
and exercise. The last definition of Virtue
For as the professors of other arts, so soon as they begin to learn their
principles, are not forthwith entitled by ye names of those sciences, wherein
they seem to have a little proceeded, but after, when by continuance they
appear to have very well profited, the^ at the last they borrow to themselves,
the surnames and titles of those learned maisteryes, wherein they have made some
proof of their skill, and are therewithal beautified with such other
ornaments, as seem of right to belong unto the same: so they that endeavor
themselves to the getting of Virtue, if perchance they perform some two or
three notable and singular exploytes, are not therefore straight ways to be
accounted Good, or to be called Honest, but then only are they to receive the
recompense of that reward, when both by continuance and long experience, they
have thoroughly attained to such singular perfection, that in each kind of
Fortune either prosperous or adverse, they can patientlye carry one always
and the same undisturbed mind, observing that in their manner, which in Horace
is there spoken to Quintus Delius.

O Delius thou, to dreadful death, that subject art each day:
In adverse chance, of Fortunes froune, thy mind see that thou stay.
And eke no less, in prosperous hap, so temper thine estate:
That out of rule, and measure thou, ne joy above thy rate.
Wherein, for as much also as all our power, appears to be placed either in
Mind or Body, if therefore using rather y^ authority of the Mind, than the
service of the Body, we remember with our selves y^ the one of these twain we
have common with beasts, the other with God, understanding y^ Virtue is also in
our reach and power to obtain, and that, when by occasion thereof we shall have
thoroughly brought all our fleshly desires and earthly vanities, in us to be
perfectly oppressed, our victorious souls shall joyfully then return unto
God, that is to the first original, from whence they proceeded. For which
occasion, Man only, among al other creatures, has his countenance vpwardes
toward heaven, thereby to put us in mind, that our chiefest good comes
down from above. Therefore to conclude, when thus by diligence they have won
unto themselves, an assured quality of a well disposed mind, then I say upon
good occasion, they may well be called Honorable, Valiant, and Wise, and not
before. But for as much, as the praise of Virtue consists in Action, I see
not my masters, how a man that lives in these Solitary places, may have any
practice thereof at all. And therefore it were now time (if so you please) that
we return again unto our principal question, Thus far concerning Virtue, and
now of Solitarines and Society.
that is, to the farther consideration of Solitariness. What say you Eudoxus,
how like you this motion?


EVDO. It likes me my friend very well, for as you say, it were necessary in
deed, after this our long discourse upon Virtue, that we reduce our talk
again unto that, which was the only occasion of all our controversy. And to
be short, I will first declare unto you my opinion, what I think of the
matter: touching which though many things I confess may on both sides be
spoken, yet for my own part I am fully persuaded, that more may be alleged,
in the commendation of Solitariness, than of Society. In playner proof and
declaration whereof, you doubt not I am sure, but that ye name of Solitariness
is naturally derived, from this word Sole, or alone: which manner of living
seems not of it self so much to be praised, as in respect of the freeness
and liberty of our mind, which is more when we live alone than with company.
And yet my meaning is not to have ittaught, that by Nature we are made so rude,
as wholly with out cause to avoid Society: for by this occasion, both the
bond of Nature, and the commandment of God, which binds us in friendship
to love one an other, may seem to be losed. But when indifferently I wey with
my self, the common condition of humayne Society, I see among men, that
generally to be accounted for Honest, which is falsely supposed to be
Profitable, and that all men for the most part, by separating Profit from
Honesty, endeavor thereby to overthrow the platform and ground work of
Nature, than which there is nothing that may be compted more hurtful. For
with y^ vain estimation and love of riches, are the manners of men maruellously
corrupted, that nothing may be found so vile but they dare to adventure, if
thereby they may hope to attain unto that, which so earnestly they desire. By
occasion whereof, these miserable creatures driven on in this sort by the
force of evil custom, having willingly unloosed the bridle of Reason, are
plunged at the last in the depth of all wickedness: whose unshamefastness is
such, that boldly and impude^tly they daily commit great offense against God,
against themselves, and against their neighbors: so as, it is impossible for
any man, (although in eloquence he were comparable to Demosthenes) to discribe
al their vices and madness. All which, if god should daily punish according
to desert, what chains, what prisons, what whippes, or what torments would
be able to suffice for the same. Besides, another thing there is, but whether it
rather deserve to be laughed at or lamented I know not, I mean, that small
and petite robberies are severally punished, when great and horrible offenses
are praised and commended: which was very well noted by a notable pirate, who
falling to the hands of Alexander the great, made answer to him in his own
defense, that the greater rouer and pirate of them both was Alexander himself,
for that where the one did offend for trifles, the other daily robbed and
spoiled whole countries. These worldlings being therefore carried diuersely
away, some with greediness of Pleasure, some with love of Riches, and some
with desire of Honor, having banished from their hearts, al these wholesome rules
and admonitions of Reason, by the which, they ought chiefly to be governed, and
making at all no account of Innoce^cie, seem most I say to esteem of those
things, which are wont among fools to be accounted for good. So as to al those
of this our time that live in such sort, this saying of Ovid may rightly be
applied.

For when of this our wicked age, Translated by Arthure G^lding gentleman in
the first book of the Metamorphosis.
once opened was the vain,
Then, then, al mischief rushed forth, then faith and truth were feign,
And honest shame to hide their heads: for whom stepped stoutly in,
Craft, treason, violence, envy, pride, and wicked lust to win.
So now for riches began they dig, in places near to hell,
The spurs and stirrers unto vice, and foes to doing well.
Then hurtful iron came abroad, then came forth yellow gold,
More hurtful than the iron far, then came forth battle bold,
That fights with both, and shakes his sword, with cruel bloody hand.
Men live by rauine and by stelth, the wandering guest does stand,
In danger of his host: the host, in danger of his guest:
And fathers of their sons in law: yea seldom times do rest,
Between borne brothers such accord, and love as ought to be.
The goodman seeks the goodwifes death, and his again seeks she.
The stepdames fell, their husbands sons with poison do assail,
To see their fathers live so long, the children do bewail.
Al godliness lies underfoot, and Lady Justice last,
Of heavenly Virtues from this earth, in slaughter drowned, past.
Now, the case standing thus, what Happiness I pray you may we imagine, to
remain on the earth? the Poet you see does apparently witness, that all
Goodness being put to flight, is already ascended unto heaven. The which, if
god would so please to command again to descend unto the earth: where
think you then would she choose her abiding, but in some Solitary
wilderness? For there, living in continual meditation, she might conveniently
declare to all such, as would so desire to understand the same, both what were
Good and what were Evil: she might also teach us, that Vice for the
lothsomnesse thereof were to be abhorred, and Virtue for her dignity to be
embraced: she might likewise admonish us to love and worship God, wherein she
might either threate^ us, with the terrible fear of his everlasting torments,
or allure us, with the omnipote^t excellency of his divine Majesty, or win
us, with the singular love of his merciful charity, or entreat us, with the
pleasant remembrance of his infinite benefits, or finallye, she might fully
persuade us, that he created the world for none other intent, but only that
thereby he might make us pertakers, of his glorious Felicity. For proof
whereof, (leaving in this place to meddle with Divinity) we will only consider,
what the ancient Philosophers have said of the same, and first of Seneca. Do
you demand (says he) what was the cause why God made the world? I answer,
his goodness: which thing he farther avouches, from the opinion of Plato,
where thus he disputes. What caused god to make the world? he is good, he
makes good things, and enuieth not good men, to have part of that good
wherewith he is stored. Furthermore, whereas he charge us, to exercise pity
toward our parents, our friends, our country, and generally unto al men,
where also he wills us, to deal no worse with others, than we would be delte
withal our selves: yet principally and chiefly he moves us, to have a
continual regard to the due preservation of our just and honest minds: in
the maintenance whereof he advises us farther boldly to adventure, and
commit our bodies to the greatest terror and torment of Death, both when and
as often, as Reason shall seem needful to require the same. Otherwise he
wylleth us as carefully to take heed, that we endaunger not our selves without
occasion, than the which, there may be nothing accounted more desperate and
foolish. For dangers ought only to be undertaken for one of these causes,
either for the mayntenance of our ^stimation in the World, or for the
preservation of our Faith unspotted toward God. After this sort therefore I
mean, that in these desarte and Solitary places, honest manners, right
judgment, and all other good Virtues may conveniently be learned. Where on the
other side, when by Desire we are carried away to dwell abroad, in the common
Society and fellowship of the world, all the contrary occasions of Vice, to us
are daily proffered. For the common concourse of the multitude, naught else to
us commends, but Covetousness, Pleasure, and desire of honor, whereto all men
for the most part are enthralled as servant. Which opinion of theirs, if
happlie we shall but seem to disalowe, forthwith they become our most hateful
enemies: whereupon, they presently begin to slander and to revile us, ^s
fools condemned to be void of all wit: and to increase our displeasure, they
dispitefully point at us (as we may term it) with their fingers. Upon which
occasion, a certain wise man misliking of their madness, said thus of
himself, that he never desired at al to please the variable liking and
fantasy of ye people: For quoth he, What I know to be good that they esteem
not, and what they commend, thereof I like not, because, the opinion of the
people is gained for the most part, by some evil desert: to whom of necessity
if thou haunte their company, thou must make thy self like, for that the
favor of such dishonest persons, is not otherwise to be obtained, than by
dishonest means* But, let us now go somewhat more plainly to work, and
let us as well set down the trade of his life, that lives alone in his
solitary Muses, as of him that lives in the fellowship of many, and is
co^uersant daily among his worldly affairs. He therefore that is a dealer in the
world, so soon as ye day begins to apere, has his gates beset either with
friends or foes: He is saluted, he is called for, he is drawn away, he is
thrust upon, and he is torn as it were in many pieces. The Solitary person,
his doors the while are not so troubled, he has free choice, either to stay
at home, to walk abroad, or at liberty to go whersoeuer he lusts. That man
goes forth to the place of pleading, with a sad and louring countenance, full
of complaints, full of business, yea full of trouble, and so begins the day
with strife and debate. This man goes out with a cheerful heart, directing
his course into some pleasant wood, full of security, full of rest, and full
of quietness, where with joy and gladness, he co^sumeth the morning. The one,
so soon as he co^mmeth to the stately palace of some noble person, or to the
dreadful seat of judgment (mingling truth and falshode together,) either
oppresses the just and rightful cause of the giltlesse or vpholdeth the
wicked and dishonest pretense of him that is guilty, or at the least wise
works somewhat, tending either to the discredit of himself, or to the harm of
some other: the remorse of whose conscience as many times it biteth him, so the
fear of his folly likewise interrupteth him, whereby it comes many times to
pass, y^ he tells lies for true tales, and one thing for another, at one
time blushing for fear, at an other time after as pale again for anger, yea
blaming himself in the midst of this passion, that he had not rather followed
the private penury of his contemplative liberty, than the public estimation
of his toilesom authority, and therwithal wishes (as then advised) yt he had
rathe bin made a miserable Plowman, than a pontifical Pleader: who as one out
of countenance and conceit with his practice, leaves then on a sudden all his
causes imperfect, and shamfully withdraws him unto his desolate lodging,
where shuttyng him up into some private corner, he shroudeth secretly from the
sight of all his clientes. The other again, as a man without trouble or care
of the world, fynding out some Green and Solitary bank, amidde some calm
and pleasant down, there rests and reposeth himself at his pleasure, who so
soon as the Sun spreads forth his beams, begins devoutly to give thanks
unto God not only for the same, but also for all other his merciful benefits,
bestowed upon man: the which he performs with a far more sweet and pleasant
delight, if therwithal there hap among the rocks to run down some gushing
silver stream, or if the small and harmless birds, do but yield him the help
of their tunable notes, to aid him in the comfort of his contemplative
devotion: wherein, he principally craves at y^ hands of God, Synceritie and
Innoce^cie, together with one thing more, the which (as says the Satirical
Poet,) may safely be required without danger of offense, that is, A wholesome
mind in a helthfull body. This done, knowing after that the study of
Philosophy, brings with it great knowledge and excellency, he diligently
applies his mind to the same, and labors chiefly to make himself perfect
in that part of Virtue, which wholly concerns the well fynding out and
followyng of Truth, desiring nothing so much, as that in the sight of God he
may always appear, both honest and blameless, and that he may delight himself
in the exercise of Virtue, which only yields a perpetual comfort and
safety to his conscience, knowing well that the same, is the only ground
work and foundation of Goodness, and that it were wholly in vain, to repose
his trust in any worldly trifle, since he only may well be thought, to have
attained perfection, that certainly knows wherein he ought chiefly to take
pleasure and delight, and whose Felicity consists not in the power of
others. For this is certain, that all men by Nature, are prone unto Pleasure,
but where our best assured Pleasure may rightlye be found, thereof for the
most part we are altogether ignoraunte. A wise man therefore that knows in
this sort, how to behave himself in his Solitary places, is undoubtedly
replenished with continual gladness, and lives therein, both merrily and
pleasauntly, and as it may be said, is felowlike in a kind with God
himself: to whom, he prays not only for the safety of himself and his own
estate alone, but for the general aid and prosperity of all men. Now
therefore I pray you, which of these twain, may be thought in your
judgment, to live most happily?


LISIP. Of all that you have spoken, I think there is no man my friend that
doubts, since in troth they are clearer in sight than the Sun: For every
man knows that the number is infinite, of such as are ruled rather by their
Appetite than by Reason. But since our talk, concerns at this time the state
of a wise man, who for as much, as one man is borne for the benefit of an
other, and y^ it is the property of Virtue to suffer Adversity, as before we
have declared, ought therefore to do each thing, with no less regard of his
Profit and Honesty, than his Praise and Estimation, here re^^steth (I say)
the question: Whether it were more convenient for this man to lurk in some
Solitary corner, or otherwise to be conuersaunt in the affairs of the world.
Wherein, if I shall say my mind what I think of the matter, I am for my own
part of a contrary opinion to that which is spoken, especially, since the
fruit of our Wit, our Virtue, our Learning, and every other good quality of
ours, is then said to be chiefly commended, when it is employed to the
benefit of our neighbous: And that God him self has appointed his creatures,
to live together in the world as one very body, to the only end, that one
man might thereby have the help of another, when either infirmity or other
necessity should so require. To this intent it is likewise reported, y^
Menenius Agrippa by a fable of Esope, did cunningly reconcile the people of
Rome, to the favor of the Senate: putting them likewise in mind of the common
proverb, That one man lives by the help of another. For this is most certain,
that no man was ever created so general, that he could thoroughly supplye the
want of the thing, that was requisite and needful for himself: the which as
we may gather, was so from the first, provided of purpose, that one man in this
sort needing help of another, with charity therefore might cherish and love
one another the rather. And for this occasion we may likewise say, that every
Country was also ordained, to bring forth his several commodities thereby the
rather that mutual acquaintance, by the conueya^^ thereof from one to an
other, might so be maintained among the people. By these and like reasons, it
therefore appears that the duty of a wise man, is to seek to profit every
man as farforth as he may, tha^ the which, there is nothing more noble, nothing
more worthy, nor nothing more agreeable to the estimation of his Manhood. To
this only purpose he should persuade himself to be sent into the world, that
thereby (following the example of his Creator) he might both benefit his
neighbors, and profit his Country: For, the safegarde whereof, he ought to
shun no sharpness of danger, but y^ in defense of the common wealth, he ought
patiently to endure al trouble what soever, yea though the same do apparently
tend, to the manifest hazard and decay of his life. For how much the more,
honest laws and good ordinances are daily broken, by the misdemeanor of
fools and disorderly persons, so much the more ought their boldness to be
resisted, and the public estate by wisdom preserved: since according to the
saying of Plato, that Kingdom, that Empire, or y^ City, may then be counted
most of al happy, when it is governed and ruled by the authority of wiseman.
If then this wisemen of whom we entreat, will have a desire to perform the
duty, whereunto he was purposely created, though daily he behold a thousand
offenses, wilfully committed no less against god, than against his neighbor,
yea although to his great grief and sorrow, he see Virtue it self of most men
oppressed and trodden under foot: yet by no means ought he therefore to withdraw
him unto Solitariness, but the rather ought he then to stay in y^ City, and
there to endeavor as well as he may to do that which is good: neither ought
there any peril to be so great, which he, in the mayntenance of Truth ought
not boldly to adventure, saying, with Attalus the Stoike: I rather had in
warlike tents, of Fortune for to dwell:
Than in her wanton palace, where, in pleasure to excel.
I torments bear, but force them not, each grief his end will find:
My death the falling axe does threate, yet naught appalles my mind.


And in this point also, he ought to follow the judgment of Cicero: It is
(says he) more agreeble unto Nature, and more for the safegarde and aid of
al nations, to bring up their people in continual travail and hardness of
labor, following therein the steps of Hercules, whom popular report, mindful
of his deserts, has placed among the Gods: than to suffer the^ ydlely to
live in solitariness, not only without exercise or trouble of body, but
nourished withal in Tenderness and Pleasure, to the end that thereby they may
excel all others, in the only shadow and show of their beauty. Wherefore I
conclude, that all such as find in themselves, the force of any noble or
valyant disposition, ought rather to mislyke of Solitariness, than of
society.


EV DOXVS. This truly Lisippus I may not deny, but that he, in the judgment
of all men is to be accounted most worthy, who remaining amidde such
infection of vice, preserves himself not only from that, which is thought to
be evil, but shows also the way unto others, how from the wicked behauior
of the multitude, they may wythdrawe themselves unto that which is good.
Besides, I am likewise persuaded, that it is the part of a noble mind, to
seek to profit as many as he may, and that not slenderly, but effectually:
earnestly aduising them, to find out the mean and measure of every thing,
wherein Virtue, according to the saying of the Poet, does hold her abiding.

Middewaye tweene Vice, does Virtue rest,
Found out by him, that seeks her best.
Which thing, by the judgment of Seneca, is also approved: Al virtue (says
he) stands in a mean, and this mean is a certain measure. And lastly I
consider, that if this wyseman, of whom you speak, laboring to withdraw us
from those false opinions wherewith we are infected, happen by chance to
light upon one that is covetous of Money, he may well persuade him, that
there is nothing more commendable in him that is poor, than to contemn
riches, nor in him that is rich, than to be liberal of his wealth, and that
if he live to content Nature, he shall never be poor, if to content his
fantasy, he shall never be rich. For in this point ought the measure of our
riches to consist, First to have that which is necessary, and lastly no more
than is needful. All which may be had without any trouble, since that which
is sufficient may be alwais at hand: whereby it apereth that our greatest labor,
is alwais bestowed in superfluities. But the true desire of riches, is always
to be measured by a mind well disposed, according as Cicero in some sort
prescribes: If a man (says he) have a daughter, he has need of money to
marry her, if so he have two, he has need of the more, if farther he have
three or four daughters, his necessity still increases, but if he have
fifty, as the report is of Danaus, so many daughters, require a great mass
to their dowry: so as, to the needefulnesse of each man, is the measure of his
riches to be referred. Wherein, our Poet Horace seems likewise, to have very
well spoken, saying: Who so that much, desires to obtain:
With want of much, must be content again.
He well whom God, in money, rent, or land:
Allows enough, though with a sparing hand.


For want of due consideration whereof, it comes so to pass, that the
covetous man stands still in need, as well of that which he has, as of that
which he wants, and he always wa^teth least, that coueteth least. Epicurus
therefore writing to Idomeneus, is reported to persuade him, that if he would
enriche his friend Pitoclea, he should not add to his wealth, but rather
abate, from his ambitious desire. But now on the other side, if so he happen
to light upon some other, that thirsts after honor, he may likewise
allege, that the desire of government, although it appear more honest than
of money, yet is it in deed, a very hard, a tickle, and disdainefull
mistress: for hope of soueraintie, refuses no condition, of what service
soever. Yet he whom Fortune, will needs enforce to become a governor, shall
then most rightly deserve the honor and estimation of his name, when first in
himself (as Cicero says) he shall bridle lust, contemn pleasure, suppress
anger, avoid covetousness, and finally remove from out his breaste, all
enormities of the mind: since he only knows best, how to rule and govern
others, that has the power and skill to gou^rne himself. For this is
certain, that neither meat nor drink, nor watch, nor sleep, all which are
necessary for the body, are at all times wholesome, except they be used with
measure and discretion. So likewise, the gifts and casualties of Fortune, are
then accounted both profitable and pleasant, when we temper and use them
with such advised moderation, that they rather depend upon us, than we upon
them. The nature whereof is such, that if we covet them without measure, we
shall no more be able to satisfy, that insatiable desire of the mind, than his
droughte may be quenched, whose desire to drink proceeds not of thirste,
but rather of some burning inflammation of his entrayles, for that is properly
no natural thirste, but an unnatural disease. To conclude, if this wise man
(I say) by these and like reasons, can heal in this sort the affections of
the multitude, and bring them in the end to that temperate mean, wherein
Virtue, is said to abide: So that moderatly they may learn, to desire riches
without covetousness, Honor without ambition, Pleasure without
Licentiousness, (if so it be lawful such, things may be desired) such
one I confess, is to be reverenced of all men, as an excellent member for a
Commonwealth. But, to come to that, which I have hitherto pretended, who is he
(I pray you) that can thus bring to pass these notable effects, since for the
most part we are all so nousled in lewdness, and the substance of our
bodies so compounded of iniquity, that the one may not possibly be separated
from the other: For no sooner are we borne and brought into the world, but we
are foorthewith infected with all kind of wickedness, so as we may seem to
have sucked this error, with the milk of our nurses. Now, when hereunto is
annexed also, the evil example of our Elders, and the licentious disposition
of the multitude, a great and forcible instructor of lewdness, and that the
whole world, is generally made subject unto vice: From hence I say it
proceeds, that our minds are so perverted with such variety of opinions, and
so far removed from the goodness of nature, that presently we seem to envy
in our selves her good inclination, and are therewithal so blinded that fondly
we esteem, nothing more worthy, nothing more commendable, nor nothing more
necessary to be sought for on the earth, than wealth, than honor, yea than the
vayn commendation of the people. And therefore, though some perchance do listen
to the truth, and seem to consent a while to the same, yet afterward,
perceiving the multitude to be of an other opinion, than they are of
themselves, forthwith their reason is carried away with affection, as with a
violent stream, and so they choose rather with many to err, than with few to
judge aright. Thus by this means we are daily rooted and governors, as
bestow their offices and titles of honor, not upon the virtuous and well
disposed, as of right they ought, but rather upon flatterers, and such as are
content, to humble and submit themselves unto their flauery: to the manifest
hindra^ce and decay of such other, as are rarely endued with most towardly
wits, who with honor might be norished, and with glory enflamed, to the
delighte of honor, riches, or what else soever, they seem unto the world
most of all to neglect: yea and that, which not long before they condemned in
others, to the end that thereby, they might seem less careful thereof
themselves. But forasmuch as all fained and counterfaite things, do soon fade
away, the Truth, which these men go about by cunning to oppress, could not so
long have bin concealed from them, if diligently they would have bestowed any
time at all, to have sought for the same. Who so long, as they may be held up
with a little Prosperity, the credit of their estimation does shadow for a
while, all their evil demeanor. But if any misaduenture, which thereby
discovers and detecteth their hipocresie, do chance to betyde them,
forthwith it then appears, how great deceyte there lay secretly hid, under
that their pretended show of honesty. For true glory takes deep root, and
spreads hirself very mightily abroad: where things that are counterfeyt can
take no continuance, because they are daily subject to decay. And therefore
Socrates very notably declared, that he that is desirous to find out the
nearest and gainest way to glory, ought first to endeavor to be the same in
deed, that he would be accounted. But, through ignorance of the Truth, and
default of those that seek after Virtue without discretion, we are I say so
hardened in our naughtiness, that by the rude and uncivil behavior of such
counterfeat teachers, we are brought in contempt of that which is good: Which
thing, is far contrary to the advice of Seneca, who counsels a wiseman, that
he trouble not himself with variety of fashions, nor seek, to make the
people to wonder, at his strange kind of living: but rather, to behave
himself so, that all men may learn to follow him in his goodness, or at the
least wise, that he avoid the company of such, who though they know nothing,
yet think they know all things, and had rather seem to be teachers of
others, though rawly they perform it, than to be learners themselves, though
greatly they need it: Which kind of people, while arrogantlye they strive to
be accounted most wise, they prove themselves thereby most ignorant fools.
For in this behalf, we read that Socrates by the Oracle of Apollo, was
adjudged the wysest, because, he acknowledged himself to be sure of this on
thing, that he surely knew nothing. But to proceed, and then most of al, when
least we deserve it. In which kind of madness we are so far euergrowen, that
we account him for envious that flattereth but a little: Whereby it happens,
that there is nothing so strong, that flatterye may not utterly corrupt and
overthrow. From hence the multitude of prating Parasites, that daily abuse the
pliant wits, and gentle natures of well disposed persons, do take their
beginning: by which name we call them al, that speak and do each thing to the
contentation of those, by whom they do live, reproving them in nothing, for the
love of their belly chere, from whence their name out of Greek is derived. From
hence also, that saying of Terence may well be taken, That Flattery gains
friends, where plainness reapes reproach. For Truth is grievous, because,
thereof ryseth hatred, which is the poison of friendship, but Flattery of the
twain, ought rather to be more grievous, which giving liberty unto vice,
suffers a friend to run headlong into Folly. Wherein, the greatest fault
undoubtedly proceeds, from the party himself, who despising the Truth, will
suffer his ears to be abused by Flattery. And herevppon I remember, the saying
of Demetrius to a very rich libertine, that the end of his honesty was the
beginning of his wealth, meaning, that when he fell into Flattery, he began
to wax rich. Yet Cicero seems to be of opinion, that Flattery is not
dangerous, although it be hateful, because it can procure, the hurt of no
man but of him, that is content to seem delighted therewith: which commonly
happens to none but to fools, for that they of al others are soonest
overtaken, with the immoderat affection, and love of themselves. Whereupon,
being blinded with ignorance, they neither know when they offend, nor take any
care to amend their offenses, because they esteem no less of their vices,
tha^ as though they were virtues. neither is it at all as I take it any
marvel, for whatsoever is in Love is blind (says Plato) in respect of y^
which it loves. Notwithstanding, suppose as you would have it, that we be
friendly admonished to entertain into your company, some so wise and so
faithful a friend, as may both perceive our faults* and also give remedy to
the same: yet who I beseech you, is there to be found, that takes any care to
accept of this profer, or if by chance he hap to meet with such an
acquaintance, who I pray you; does favorably hear him tell plainly the
troth, that in short space after becomes not his enemy? Since therefore it
comes so to pass, that among the creatures of this troublesome world, there
is daily to be found such variety of manners, what then should a wiseman do?
Would you wish him to spend his time in talking to deaf men? or is it not
more reason, considering, he can but little benefit the common wealth, nor do
good unto such, as will neither take warning, nor can away to be controlled:
that in this case I say, he withdraw him from the company of such lewd
disposed persons, retiring from thence into some solitary corner, that so,
being out of the danger of that infectiue company, he may yet at the leastwise
live honestly himself? For what avails it a man, to have purged himself of
his own offenses, if notwithstanding he be always abiding, (...) the savor
and infection of others? But let us admit for the purpose, that a wise man with
all his might, do dailye endeavor himself to correct, y^ uncivil behavior of
such wilful offenders: yet what benefit I pray you may thereof arise, when
not only, all goodness and honesty is generally contemned, but also al love,
and affection to hear and understand the same, is from out our hearts most
utterly banished: in stead whereof, naught else I may say does there abide,
but the inordinate love of wickedness and vice. The difference whereof may
partly appear, by those two kinds of Venus, which Plato there feigneth, in
his Dialogue named Simposium* Of which, the first was more ancient, brought
forth by the heavens, whom virtuous men do follow: the second much younger,
begotten between Jupiter and Dione, whom wicked men d^e serve. A wise man
therefore as I mean it, shall rather covet to make choice of a place, very
pleasant and wholesome, not only for his body, but also for his mind. For,
whereas (...) is always (...) lining unto evil, and wi^h each allurement is
draw^ unto Folly, and where also the pleasure and delectation of our senses,
is always ready to set the matter forward: for this occasion me thinks it
were greatly needful, that he depart from the multitude, as one desirous to
live (...) there in peace, tha^ in war. Remembering also, that the rage of the
people so vexed Socrates, (...) and ^^lius, that therewith they were brought in
manner beside themselves: of whom, he that labored most to bring into frame,
the manners of such as were altogether amiss, could scarcely have the power to
resist the temptation of their manifold vices, when jointly in a heap they
came ^^ro^ging so together. For many times it happens, that a Physician
himself may die of the disease, of the which he has cured many others before.
This wiseman therefore shall patiently suffer, all adversities and mischau^ces
that shall ha^ to betide him, but he shall neither seek for them, nor willingly
put forward him self among them: Besides, as near as he may he shall cast off
al troubles, a^^lettes and hindrances, that thereby he may the rather enjoy a
well settled mind, which no man here may possibly attain, so long as he is
vexed and occupied in the world. For this is agreed upon, that no one thing
may be well performed by him, that is troubled with many things: Wherein, we
read of Democritus that he pulled out his own eyes, least that a beholding
the vanities of the world, he should thereby become more unable to behold, the
most excellent light of eternal verity. And Cicero himself, after he had
well compared these matters together, although, for the benefit of the commonwealth, ^e preferred the life active to be more commodious and available for
man: yet therewithal he confesses, that the contemplat^^^ life, is more safe
and easy, both for the soul and body, less ^urthe^^us to our selves, and
less grievous unto others. The which he seems after to have greatly desired,
when so ^ore he was appalled with the death of his daughter: whereof writing to
^^^icus his friend, he says. Now I refuse (...) of al things, neither, does
any thing content me better than solitariness, and setting thy self aside,
nothing on the earth deliteth me so much: for thereby I have leisure, to use
the advantage of this my unwonted liberty, in the only conference and
exercise of learning. Whereby you may plainly see, how far this great and
daily haunter of the City, of the senate, and of all other the most frequented
places of the people, did after wax loathsome of that, which before he so
greatly liked, and now esteemed solitariness to be the only pleasure and
delectation of the world.


LYSIPP. This verily Eudoxus seems contrary unto nature, for that it
banisheth from the world all humanity and friendship, without the which, the
life of man (as I account it) is utterly maimed, considering, that there is
nothing more convenient and necessary for mankind, either in adversity or
prosperity, than the mutual familiarity and good will of a friend: who by
partaking of our felicity does increase our happiness, and by supporting of
our misery, does (...) our adversity, not sufferyng our minds to be
daun^ed with sorrow. For the avoiding whereof, as there is nothing more helping
than the comfortable love, that from such friendship does unfeignedly
proceed: so what thing in this world, than the fruition thereof, may be
wisshed for better: From the which, since your solitary life will utterly
deprive us, I think nothing on the earth (my friend) to be more hurtful. For
(as Cicero says) they seem to ^ake the Sun from the world, that seek to
bereave us of this comfortable friendship, for that there is nothing by the
favor of the Gods, bestowed upon us more necessary than the same. Take this
away, and what I pray you shall become of the sick, whom nothing comfort so
much, as the hearty love and affection of a friend? What recreation for the
healthful? What living for them that lack? and finally what difference
between us and beasts? Truly, if herein we regard but the ordinary course and
handie works of nature, we shall thereby find, that she has framed each
peculiar person, to live to the aid of the whole multitude, and the whole
multitude, to (...) to the aid of each peculiar person. If then, for each
misaduenture and trifling discommoditie, that daily may happen in the affairs
of the world, this wiseman shall fly into his solitary corners, I see not in
this sort, what trial at all there may be made of his Virtue. For this is much
like as if a bragging soldier, would be gladly accounted a courageous
champion, and yet will seek to flee, each proffered occasion and challenge of
warfare, wherein he might have cause to show forth his manlynesse. Demetrius
therefore was wont to say, that he thought no man more imperfect, than he that
in his life time, had never tasted of adversity: For that the man, to whom al
things has happened to his own desire, could never have cause to make trial
of himself. The which also that it is true, I have experience on my side to
approve the same: For how could the faythfulnesse of Marcus Regulus, the
abstinence of Caius Fabritius, or the patience of Quintus Mutius, so well have
been known, if their calamities, had not given occasion to the publishing of
their virtues? Surcease, therefore I pray you, to set forth any further your
solitary living, wherewith in my opinion you are over far in love: for this
is certain, that nature has not only allotted the same as peculiar unto
beasts, but on the contrary, has delighted mankind with the building of
Cities for their abode upon the earth, that thereby the people in all kind of
matters as well Civil as Divine, might be brought by degrees to a perfect
unanimity and agreement among themselves, and finally to join in one perfect
love and affection together. But if this notwithstanding, you think it still
more safe and convenient, both for avoiding the infection of the multitude, and
for better contentment of our discontented minds, that we live abroad in the
desolate wilderness among untamed beasts: yet consider again, that it is
far more famous and glorious to abide in the civil company and fellowship of
men, and there, by persuasion of our words, and example of our works, to
benefit (if not all) yet as many as we may. And remember withal, that Attalus
the Stoicke was wont to compare, a careless life unto a dead sea, which except
it be spent in study or prayer, it induces us directly to the way of all
mischief. The condition of solitarines.
For solitariness is said to be of this property, that it is either endued
with singular Virtue if it be well used, or else it is infected with most
detestable vice, if it be ill applied. Which opinion is also confirmed by
Seneca, who says, that naughty counsels are there intended, wicked desires
kindled, boldness set forward, lust provoked, and wrath inflamed, and
therefore as a pernicious evil, it ought with all our power to be utterly
eschewed, and our bodies to be kept in exercise of labor, that thereby we may
so drive away the humor of slothfulness, which is only nourished and
maintained by solitariness: by occasion whereof, we are made so tender and
delicate of body, that we may possibly endure no hardness of travail. And
therefore they that first established the Common wealths of Greece, well
understanding that by labor and diligence, men were only to be made
courageous and hardy, so provided by their laws, that the bodies of their
subjects should be hardened in the same. Among whom, the Lacedaemonians
especially above the rest, brought up their youth in continual travail, as in
hunting, running, hunger, thirst, cold, and heat: to the which they also
enjoined their women, that where in other Cities they kept them at home, in
their costly apparel, both out of the heat and danger of the Sun, in this
noble City it was nothing so, but while they were young, they were accustomed
to labor, to run, and to be conversant in war, without respect, either of
heat or of dust to hinder their beauties, rather than to live so deliciously
at home, as was the manner and guise of other laborous nations. By this
occasion, the race of the Amazones became so famous: To this intent, the
Romans also brought up their people in the usual exercise of warfare,
learning, and husbandry: For nothing is there more certain, than that the
faults of this idle solitariness, are to be avoided by labor. Wherein, if I
were disposed to utter, the diverse examples of many notable men, what a number
might I recite, of those that have rather made choice to live, not in the
wilderness, but in most famous and flourishing Cities, that so they might
thereby employ their time, to the benefit first of the Common wealth, next of
their parents, and lastly of their friends and country: thinking this, to be
far more commendable and prayseworthie to the world, than beast like to
live, in the secret and unfrequented places of the earth, to the only pleasure
and contentation of themselves. Which thing, we first and principally do read
of Pythagoras, who by his presence and doctrine (the estimation whereof being
diversely spread abroad) is said to be the first that gave light unto Italy.
The like we read also of Socrates for Greece, who as he was a painful and
diligent learner, so was he a bountiful and liberal teacher, practicing that
in y^ trade of his life, which he professed in his doctrine, and persuading
himself, that no man was rightly to be reckned wise, that sought not to
imprint that in his heart, which he learned in his books. Him succeeded Plato
and Aristotle, well known to be men of most excellent learning, who making
chiefly their abode in Athens, beautified that City with civil behavior,
honest laws, and reverent institutions of divine knowledge. What shall I
need to name, either Minos, who made the laws for the people of Creta? or
Philolaus the Corinthian, who framed the common wealth of the (...) or Solon
and Lycurgus, of whom the first gave laws to the Athenians, the second to
the Lacedaemonians? or the like done by the Gymnosophistes to the Indians, or
the Magi to the Persians? All these I pray you, did they not live among me^,
and by so living, did they not end ^^ur to amend, the untamed natures and
dispositions of the people, by their good and politic Institutions? Either
why should I relate, the infinite number of Orators, Poets, and Philosophers,
who altogyther refusing this Solitary living, made wholly their abode for the
most part in Cities, thereby the rather to kindle among men, either by
persuasion of their Eloquence, or by allurement of their verses, or by their
arguments and sillogismes of reason, a perfect love and affection unto
Virtue: as the two noble Catos, are reported among the Romans, who were so
honored for their gra^itie at home, and so renoumed for their virtues abroad,
that well near all the world stood in admiration of their excellency. The
example of whom, many notable men of Rome, but especially Tully, that great
Prince of Eloquence, did after imitate: who although at sometimes he seemed to
commend the Solitary life, and also used the same himself, yet did not that
humor of his proceade from his voluntary liking, but rather from necessity,
for that with others he was the^ enforced to forsake the City, which he
esteemed more precious than any gold, and to remain for a while in
banishement, because in private conference, he rather preferred the cause of
Deiotarius, than of Julius Caesar: who therein writes of himself as
follows. Being put by force, and by occasion of the war, from all my dealings
in the commonwealth, I now have here great store of leisure, and therefore I
walk and take my pleasure of the Country, and am many times alone. Or to what
end should I repeat, the manyfolde examples of Emperors, Kings and
Captains, who while they lived sought nothing more, than to defend their
Countries, and to enlarge their dominions, by their valyaunte enterprises and
noble deeds of arms? As of Alexander the great, of whom we read, that he
subdued the greatest part of the world, that he enlarged his Empire as far as
the Occean sea, and that by his valor he purchased to himself such estimation
and renown, as the remembrance of his name will always endure? Or if Antiochus
the great king of Syria, of whom it is also reported, that he added to his
ancient dominions, both Babylon, Aegipt, and I^rie. Or of Hanniball, who
joined so many battles, and obtained so many victories against the Romans? Or
of Mithridates* who so greatly augmented the Parthian Empire? Or of Epaminondas
Prince of the Thebans? Or of Pyrrhus the good king of Epirus? Or of diverse
others, who pressing down their grise^ed hears, with their warrelike helmets,
put their enemies to flight in sundry famous battles? As for the purpose of
Scipio surnamed Affricanus, who made Carthage tributarie unto Rome? Or of
Scipio Emilianus, who ouerthrewe Numantia, and utterly raced up the foundations
of Carthage? Or finally of Caius Marius* who led ^^gurth as a captive in his
triumph, vanquished the people called Cimbri in France, the Germans in
^talie, and solemnelye triumphed upon them both? What may we think of these?
may we imagine they thought any other thing, worthy in this life to be esteemed
of, save only that which was good and laudable? But if to the authority of
these you will not yet seem to yield, consider then I beseech you, in what
places, the body of Christ our savior was commonly remaining, whom we know,
came down into the world for none other occasion, than that in living among
us here, he might by his secret power heal all our infirmities, and so again
reconcile us to the favor of our heavenly father. And weigh with your self,
whether his holy Apostles gave us any example to lurk in such solitary
corners, those I say, that being inspired with the holy ghost, and filled with
virtue from above, trauayled throughout the greatest part of the earth,
bringing so many barbarous and heathen nations, under the yoke and obeisance of
Christ Among whom, remember only that chosen vessel S. Paul, where he I say
bestowed his time, he that in countries so far distant a (...) planted the
Gospel, and he that for the safegarde of his brethren, wished himself to be
cursed before the face of God. And forget not I pray you, where the manifold
numbers of Martyrs and Bishop that are already dead, did spend their days,
those that cared for nothing but to convert the people to the holy faith, those
that only sought to increase the flock of Christ, and those that when
occasion was offered, refused not to surrender up their own lives, for the
safegarde of others. All which being so, be no whit now ashamed to yield, if
not to the reasons and examples profane of those that went before, yet at least
wise, to the undoubted authority of those that came after, and disdame not my
friend, after such plain and so manifest proofs, to make (as we term it) a
recantation of your error.


EVD. All this notwythstandyng I can not confess Lysippus, that either by
these reasons or these aucthorities, I am yet subdued: forasmuch, as the
contrary proofs that make for Solitariness are both the stronger, and y^
store of examples to prove the same, by many degrees the greter, whereby to
fortify if need should so require, by y^ authority of most approved persons
a matter so apparent, as otherwise of it self is clear enough. And therefore
to proceed, where first you allege the Solitary life, to be both odious and
contrary unto nature, for this occasion chiefly, that it seems utterly to
abolish al friendship, which you say, is principally to be preferred, before
all other earthly commodities: my meaning is to make you understand, that your
opinion in this behalf does greatly deceive you. For, if thoroughly you
consider whereon consists, the very life and nature of friendship, you shall
then perceive, that as all things else, so also this holy knot of ours, is by
Solitariness augmented rather than decreased. For if virtue, according to the
true disposition of love, be a thing that procures the favor of all men, and
draws their affections to join friendship with him in whom she abides:
How then may it possibly happen, that he that shunneth the co^course of the
people, to the end he may avoid all occasion of vice, and thereby the rather
follow Virtue more earnestly, should not friendely love and favor those,
that bear like affection unto virtue as himself. And the rather when he
knows, that the true foundation of love and friendship, is Honesty, whervppon
also all other things depend, and is not ignorant, that if the uniting of good
will were taken from the world, neither men, nor houses, nor Cities would
endure, but that tillage, and all thing else, would shortly run to ruin and
decay: since there is no house so well established, nor City so well
fortified, but that by hatred and discord it may soon be destroyed. So that a
wiseman, ought by no means to banyshe this comfortable friendship from his
Solitary dwelling, neither may he if he would, for friendship creeps I know
not by what mean, into the secret dealings of all kind of people, and
suffers no trade of living to be void of her comfort: for, though some man
may be found of nature so savage, that he abhors all company, as at Athens
one Timon was so reported, yet can he not endure to be still alone, but that,
either one or another he must needly have, to whom he may utter the
crookedness of his nature. A wiseman therefore be he never so Solitary, will
for his recreation (I say find out) some such honest and faithful friend, as
both in manners and nature may resemble himself, such one, as is pleasant,
learned, faithful, eloquent, not tedious, not complaining, not grudging, not
envious, nor crafty, and such one as he may love and may love him again, not
for profit, but for virtue, which only breeds and continues true
friendship. For such friends as are chosen but for profit only, do no longer
content us than they are profitable unto us: which as Seneca reports is the
cause, why those that are found to be very wealthy, are usually haunted for
the most part with company, and why such as are needy, are left to live pining
in their misery alone. And though it may peradventure be said, that a
wiseman has no need of acquaintance, for that he may seem sufficiently
contented with his own company, yet of necessitye he must seek to procure
himself friends, although for no other occasion, than that thereby he may
have some one, upon whom he may practice his friendship, least otherwise so
rare and excellent a virtue, should wholly lie hid in him, and his hap so
hard, that he should not have one so specially beloved, as for whom at the
least he might be willing to endure the loss of his liberty, for whom to
suffer banishment, and for the safegarde of whose life, he might readily
adventure the loss of his own life. For the mutual love of these and such
like, this wiseman therefore without cause of offense, may use the pleasure of
moderat feasting, allowing in this behalf the saying of Epicurus, that to eat
without company, is to live like a wolf. Wherein, though many times it may
happen, that by the vrge^t occasion of his peculiar affairs, he may not still
be abiding in the presence of his friend, yet this in his abse^ce he shall not
forget that a friend is rather to be possessed in mind, than in body: in which
degree he may also at his pleasure, either visit him, confer with him, help
him, and together enjoy such other pleasures as from friendship may proceed.
For present familiarity may well be said to establishe true friendship, but not
to begin or to creat the same, for that is only to be procured by virtue, as
before we have declared. In proof whereof we may find a number, who though they
have lived a long time together, yet thereby grow not at all into friendship,
because, of the diversity of their manners, and the great variety of their
repugnant natures: other some again, who almost so soon as one beholds the
other become presently friends, because, nothing is more amiable tha^ Virtue,
nor nothing, that sooner provoke a man to benevolence. Therefore then since
of all Societies, there is none so good, nor none so firm, as when good men of
like condition are truly lynked, in honest love and acquaintance together:
From hence I say it proceeds, that a Wiseman whersoeuer he abides, will always
seek to join friendship with such, as are likest to himself, such as with
whom he may as boldly confer as with himself, and such as for like love, mutual
zeal, and unfeigned good will, are but one and the same together with him
self: for so is the precept of Pythagoras, that in friendship there should be
made but one of many. But to proceed, since of common wealths there are two
sorts, whereof the one great, and universally Common, that is to say the
world, the other more peculiar, whereunto by birth we are privately allotted:
this man of whom we talk, shall always thyncke it more commendable to
prefer, the benefit of the greater before the less: for, if so it be
weldone to help one or two, it is reckned much better to help a whole
multitude. But the same this wiseman may not well perform, so long, as he is
conuersaunt abroad in any public assembly, because in such places he can
never be at quiet, but shall still be tormented and beaten with trouble, as a
rock, with the tempestuous waves of the Sea. For when the people shall see
him, to be any thing repugnant unto them in their manners, forthwith they all
conspire against him, and with the sting of their malice never leave to
torment him, until they perceive him, to consent with them in their
wickedness, or to yield unto them in their folly. To the end therefore that
a wiseman may perform, this his chief and principal duty, it is necessary
first that he remove himself, from the daily throng of the people, and that he
withdraw his delight, from the troublesome concourse of the multitude, retiring
himself, into some such private and solitary place, as may be thought aptest
for his own security, and for the furtherance of his knowledge in
philosophy: that there remaynyng among his comfortable books of diverse
sorts, using them as his friendly companions, ready to go out with him when
he pleases, and to return into his closet again when he wills, yea ready
at all times, either to speak, or to be silent, to keep home, or to impart
their secrets abroad in the woddes: he may at his pleasure, either walk and
take the air, or exercise tillage, or use some other honest and commendable
pastime, as to confer, to exhort, to comfort, to warn, to reprove, to
counsel, or to teach the hidden stories of things that are paste: Where also
to be short, he may by his own labor, prescribe unto the world such a
method of life, as may persuade the people, to have death in contempt, to use
moderation in prosperity, stoutnesse in adversity, and to keep a quiet
contentation of mind in all their actions. You see therefore, how I admit into
this solitariness of ours, not only this wiseman alone, but also with him his
like addicted friends, and therwithall besides a general care to benefit the
whole world: For no man doubts, but that those who in their solitariness are
altogether idle, slothful, and full of dumpishnesse, are of all men most
miserable. My meaning therefore is not, that this Solitariness should be without
company, nor that this quietness, should become either sluggish, or
fruitless, but such, as like unto the Solitariness of Scipio Africanus, may
benefit many: in which I would have handled no trifling matters, tending to
unprofitable toys, but causes, of such importance and weight, as may not
yield in the end, either unprofitable labor, dishonest gain, or any foul or
shameful reproach, all which I exclude from this manner of doctrine: but on
the contrary, increase of honesty, reputation of virtue, and reward of
eternal glory. Furthermore, for that as rest unto land, so recreation unto
wit is sometime necessary: I think it not amiss, if for the maintenance of
his health, which nothing as the Physicians allege, does more preserve than
moderate exercise, this wiseman therefore acquainte himself in the trade of
husbandry: for of all things, whereof any gain may be made, there is nothing
better, nothing more profitable, nor any thing more convenient for the
reputation of a man. Which was the cause why the Senators of Rome, did in
old time dwell upon their farms themselves, as witnesses Cicero, who says:
that news was brought to L. Quintus Cincinatus being then at the ploughe, that
he was chosen Dictator of the Empire: and further reports, that both Curious,
and diverse others were called from their Country houses, to the office of
Senators. For husbandry among our Elders was had in such price, that if they
called a man by the name of a good husbandman, they did him (as they thought)
very greatee honor. But see also, how far forth Horace commends this
manner of exercise, saying.

Full happy may that man accounted be*
Whose quiet mind from worldly care is free:
And frames himself, as erst it has bin taught,
To weld the plough, ne owes the vser aught.
What think you now my friend, seeing that Solitariness is thus with such a
number, both of pleasant and honorable cares accompanied, will you therefore
seem to flee and to condemn the same? especially, when also you shall see
that it has always been adorned, with the presence of most notable persons:
of whom, though the number be infinite, yet I hope without tediousness I
may repeat a few. As for example, what say we first of the Philosophers and
Poets? did not they, for the most part shun to dwell in Cities, and wholly
sought, to withdraw them selves unto their Solitarye mansions? If of Plotinus,
a second prince of Philosophers unto Plato, this question were asked, he would
doubtless answer, that this kind of quietness would rather content him, than
the whole world besides. If of Pythagoras the same were demanded, he would not
only commend this trade of life, but would further declare, himself that he
travailed throughout diverse wast and solitary places, and that also he stayed
long time in the wilderness, thereby the rather, to acquaynt himself with
truth: by the example of whom, all his sort of followers named Pythagoria^s,
seeking to avoid the daily storms that happen by company, are said, to have
always dwelt in places Solitary. And that Democritus, no less for his part
performed the like, we also understand. As concerning the which, if of
Parmenides and Atlas we further enquire, we shall likewise find, that the
hills are yet called by their names, upon which they dwelled. Neither if the
truth were known, would Prometheus himself deny, but y^ from hence was
ministered y^ occasion of that mystical tale, that he on mount Caucasus was
stretched abroad to be devoured of a vulture, meaning that there, he employed
himself with such earnest attention, to the serching out of diverse secret
mysteries, that thereby his flesh was greatly abated, which nothing empaireth
so much as study. What may we less conjecture, either of Socrates, Plato, or
Aristotle, but that they all delighted in Solitariness, though happily at some
time, either the care and regard of their scholars, or the necessity of the
common wealth, or else some other like urgent occasion, withstoode their
private desires. Further, what say we of Anaxagoras, who was also of the same
opinion? What of Xenocrates, of all the philosophers the seuerest, and for his
constan^ie and continency, of all other most renoumed? What of Xeno the
father of Stoickes? or of Carneades amongst them the painfullest? or of
Crisippus or Diogenes, whereof the one was offended with the salutation of his
friends, the other, with the very shadow of Alexander the great? Is it not I
pray you to be thought that all these, purposely shunning the society of the
world, picked them out such places as seemed, most convenient and free for
themselves to rest in, that so, they might the rather employ their vnbourthened
minds, to be always conuersaunt in matters of knowledge, which otherwise the
people, with their infinite variety of toys and vanities, would have utterly
oppressed: knowing right well, that their time of abode in the world was but
short, and that death has a thousand passages to enter into us, by the doors
and windows as I may term it of our senses. To proceed, what say we to
Virgill? who fleeing from Rome (a place where greatly he flourished, as well for
his wit, as for the affection borne unto him by the ^mperour then Lord of
the world) meaning thereby to wythdrawe himself unto perpetual
Solitariness, was by untimely death prevented of his purpose, and so
discharged from the burden of all his cares: notwithstanding, thus much by the
same he declared unto others, that Solitariness was the thing he chiefly
desired, to the end thereby to accomplish that rare and excellent work, which
already he had then begone. What of Horace, who writes of himself, that
princely Rome did not so much delight him, as unfrequented Tiber, or peaceable
Tarent, for as it is said: The muses most, the plesantwods embrace,
For towns are foes, unfit for Poets place.


Next, who is able at large to declare, the laudable disposition of Cicero, or
the excellency of his glorious quietness? where invented he his laws? Where
furnished he his Orator? where described he the duties of life? where painted
he out the forms and natures of the Gods? Where refelled he the opinion of
Soothsayers, the root of all error? where set he down the limittes of good
and evil? or where exhorted he men to the study of Philosophy, but in his
Solitary places of rest? Wherein, to the end his time might not vainly be
spente, he applied both his wit and industry (as himself reports) to the
exercise of writing. Farther, mark also what Quintilian reports of
Demosthenes, the greatest Orator among the Grecians: That feruente lover of
Solitariness, used to walk (says he) along the coast of the sea, that so he
might acquainte his ears with the roaring of the water, to the end thereby to
embolden him self, the better to endure the daily noise and murmr of his
auditorie: this also (says he) is that Demosthenes, well known to the world
to have painefully learned, and that in the deserts, that excellent art of
oratorie, which after else where he practiced abroad in diverse notable Cities.
If these may not suffice, what say we then of Seneca? who from a towns man of
Corduba. becoming after a Citizen and famous senator of Rome, with no small
joy of mind, remembers notwithstanding his Solitary living in Corsica, and
prefers the base estimation of that his quiet exile, before this the
courtlike estate of his troublesome glory: for albeit, in another place he
seem to speak against Solitariness, where he says, that evil counsels are
there devised, and so forth as you have before repeated, yet if you mark well
his words, you shall plainly find that he speaks the same of none but of
fools, and of such, as are over much ruled by their own affections: for so,
we are always wont (says he) to direct the fearful and dumpishe person in
his Solitary living, that thereby unadvisedly he hurt not himself: whereby it
appears that he permits not only this life unto others, but farther
persuades his friend Lucilius to esteem of the same, to whom he says: flee
my friend from the multitude, flee from a small number, yea flee from every
one, for I know him not in whose company I would have thee to remain: see
therefore how well I judge of thee, that I dare adventure to commit thee to thy
self, and to the sway of thine own direction. What of Scipio, he that first
by his noble acts and approved valor, deserved the surname of Africanus? was
not he I pray you so great a favorer of this kind of life, that of himself
he was wont to say, that he was never more leysurlesse than when he was full of
leisure, nor never less alone than when he was all alone? for, when thus he
was alone, his virtue did not rest and languish in idleness, but was rather
accompanied with most commendable cares: And those two things, that is to say
Rest and want of Company, which unto others were occasion of slothfulness,
to this man were helps to provoke him unto goodness. What of Scipio his
nephew, called also by the name of Affricanus, was not he likewise so desirous
of rest, that often times with Lelius he would play the husbandman, often times
confer with him abroad, and many times wander himself alone along the sea
coaste of Italy, where to keep him from idleness, he would not stick to
embase that victorious hand of his, which erst overthrew both Carthage and
Numantia, to the gathering up of cockle shells and stones. What of Epaminondas,
with whom the whole glory of the Thebans was borne, and with whom also it
dyed: did not he (who sang very well to his instrument) commend and set
forth his Solitary leisure, with musical harmony? What of Achilles? who
thought the interchaungeable refreshyng of quietness, a thing very necessary
to ease him sometime, from dangerous toil of his laboursome warfare. What of
Hercules, who in the midst of a desert is said to have taken (as it is
reported in Tullie) that wholesome counsel for the direction of his life, when
by fortune being brought unto a place divided into two several ways, the one
of pleasure the other of virtue, at length after much deliberation, despising
that of pleasure, he entered the way that led unto virtue, which brought him
in the end not only to the top of human glory, but also to the number and
fellowship of the Gods. What of Numa Pompilius? who from a stranger being
called (beyond all expectation) to the regiment of the Roman Empire, when he
bent himself to the making of any laws, for the better stay and government of
his people, he would usually then depart from all company, and wythdrawe him
for a time unto a desert wood, that was fifteen miles distant or thereabouts
from the City. What of Augustus Caesar, who always wished to attain unto
this rest? for whatsoever he thought of, or whatsoever he spoke of, it was
always directed to this only end: this was the ease of his present turmoyle,
this was the reward of his labors forepassed, and this only was his comfort
in time for to come. Yea what of Solon himself, who though of his common
wealth, he were the first law maker, governor and director, yet in his latter
age he gave himself (as we read in Plato his dialogue called Timeus) to a
contrary study, and is also, to be reckned among the number of our Solitary
persons. But I make I perceive too much haste, I must therefore turn back
a little, for that I have ouerslipped the Quintians, the Curians, the
Fabricians, and many other besides, that have spente the greatest part of
their lives in the Country. If now to the example of those you will not seem
to give credit, call then to your remembrance our old father Adam, the first
of al mankind, and you shall find, that so long as he lived alone, no
creature was ever more happy, and when he was decompanied, no man was after
more unfortunate and miserable: for alone he stood steadfast, and with company
he fell headlong to destruction. After whom, consider I pray you the general
state, of all the Prophets and Patriarchs, and by them it will appear, that
they neither dwelled in City nor Palace, but shrouded themselves in their
homely cabines, amid the wide and open fields: in which places, they were
thought most worthy to talk with God, and to receive from him those promises,
which since we have seen fulfilled. And forget not withal, how often the
savior of mankind himself, went both to the mountains, and to the Solitary
deserts, yea at the very time of his passion, when he prayed for us so
earnestly to his father: by the manner whereof he left unto us, a perfect rule
and example of life, expressing thereby the way that leads to eternal
bliss. Neither let this be unknown unto you, that his great forerunner
(John) he I mean that with his finger pointed, at the divine person of Christ
our savior, made also his abode in the Wilderness. Last of all, it shall not
be amiss if I put you in mind, how the Solitary wooddes of Aegipt, at the
imitation of Anthonius, Hilarion, and Macarius, were after replenished with the
daily resort of most reverent fathers, such as thought nothing more carefully
to be shunned, than the troublesome recourse of company, to the end, that with
more security they might bestow their time, in the only worship and service of
God: which manner of living, though many men after with great zeal pursued, yet
among the rest, we read the same to have especially bin performed, by that well
disposed father Benedictus, he whom S. Gregory the great so greatly commends,
that from his infa^cy he was a lover of virtue, and an open contemner and enemy
unto vice: whereby, although he had already well entered (as it may be thought) ye
right way to heaven, yet to the end, he might thereto more safely attain, he
has forsook Rome and Nursia, of y^ which, in the one he was brought up, in
the other borne, so y^ by by custom and nature, he had good occasion to love
the^ both, and wholly be took himself to end y^ rest of his life, amid y^ sacred
and Solitary caves: where, how virtuously he lived, I need not I hope at al to
relate, forasmuch as diverse well approved writers, together with general good
report, have sufficiently from time to time declared the same: with the
remembrance of whom, I think best at this time to leave, for that, it would
be too long I see to repeat, the multitude of those that from that time hither
have followed his steps, and have been earnestly persuaded, partly by example,
partly by nature, and partly by divine inspiration, to withdraw themselves
from the daily troubles and vexation of the world. Now therefore, as touching
the farther commendation of Solitariness, which has already been confirmed,
first by arguments and after by examples, I have my friends no more to say,
but only that it seems a very heavenly matter, and therefore, not without
great cause, may it well be named a singular life: the which, that it is in
truth the very sole and only life unto all other lives, the words of Cicero
may very well testifye. This our life (says he) which is called life, is
indeed death, but that other is the only life that is apt for all goodness,
a life that amendeth our manners, subdueth our affections, purges our
offenses, abateth our vices, and increases our Virtues: A life that is the
mother of Philosophy, the helper of Poetry, the reueler of Prophecy, yea the
only mainteiner of all devotion and holiness: And a life to make short, that
of all other lives is most Angelical, and nigh^st resembling to that joyful
and heavenly life, to the which we all desire to attain. But what say you
(...) the last to this matter O Tales, for I well perceive that Lysippus,
notwythstanding all these arguments alleged, is no whit yet removed from his
former opinion.


TALES. Full well in good sooth you have both (my friends) defended your
opinions, and full learnedly and liberally have you disputed of that which was
first proposed, in such sort, as for my own part I know not where any thing
may be added to that which to spoken. Wherein, for that you both disagree in
opinion (according to the manner of all disputers) to the end, we may
therefore finish this doubtful controversy, regard is to be had both of the
time and the nature of each man. For in truth, there are three kinds of
Solitariness. Three kinds of Solitariness.
The first of Time, as the quietness of the night, which nature has equally
allotted all creatures, to the end thereby, to refreshe themselves after their
former labor: the second of Place, and the third of the Mind. To the last
recited, whereof ought all men doubtless to be persuaded, the meaning of
which is no more in effect, but that they dwell with themselves, and converse
but with few, and those also that are good: for nothing more does comfort the
mind, than the faithful familiarity and agreement of good men. The
Solitariness of place, is to be commended only unto those, that have the
knowledge how to use the same: for it is impossible, although we have all one
certain and prescribed end of our lives, yet that all men should therefore
follow, one and the same very trade of living. In the choice whereof, each man
ought first to be well advised, both how nature has framed him, and how
after he has disposed himself: For some there are to whom the Solitary life
is more painful than death, and to whom it will also be occasion of death,
which only happens to those that are unskillful, chiefly, if they want a
companion with whom they may chatte, because, they can neither talk with
themselves, nor confer with their books, but as fruitless blocks, remain
altogyther dumb and unprofitable. Neither is it at all any maruayle, for
Solitariness without learning is a very banishment, or rather a prison: but,
if so thou have learning, then will it seem as pleasant unto thee as thy
native soil, joined with abundaunce of liberty and delight. This is the rest
that by the sentence of Cicero is so plainly verified, where he asks, What is
sweter than learned rest? And to the same end I take it this saying of Seneca
may be also applied: That rest without learning is as ill as death, and the
very sepulture of a live man. This Solitariness of place, is therefore I say
to be preferred unto students, and to such only as are thought to be wise: and
yet no otherwise, but that when need shall require, they may again come
abroad, refusing no peril, either for the safety of their country, or for
the sau^ga^^^ of their friends. For, it were a thing unjust, that any man
should preserve his life, given him first by nature for the only use and behoof
of his country, so long till she enforce him again for to leave it: and
should not as willingly be content to bestow it in the defense of his
country, when by urgent occasion she requires the same, and when with honor
he may gloriously lose it, but shall rather choose to live in shame and
reproach, than to dye with fame and everlasting renown. A wise man therefore
ought chieflye to know, how best to apply both time and place, as well unto
Solitariness as to Society, following therein as nere as he may, the example
of such as in former time, have to his knowledge performed the like.


LYSIPPVS, you have sa^de herein (my friend) both well and truly, for we
seemed I perceive to contend, of the diversity of time and also of place, and
yet we have thereof, made all this while no mention at all: which destinction
well noted, would soon have ended our former controversy.


EVDOXVS. True it is Lysippus, and therefore, let us now make an end, for the
night draws on apace, warning us thereby to leave our boat, and to depart
each one to his lodging till to morrow: at what time, and daily hereafter, so
long as by occasion we shall continue together, we will again begin to deal
in these causes, especially such, as shall be thought to contain any point
of instruction, tending either to the stay of our affections, of our fear or
desire, and whereby also we may gather best fruit, out of the wholesome rules
add prece^tes of Philosophye.


FINIS.

