THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS ESTATE: OR A DISCOVERY OF THE CAUSES, degrees,
signs and differences of the Apostasy both of true Christians and false: IN A
SERMON PREACHED IN LONDON by Master PAVL BAYNE, and afterward sent in writing
by him to his friend W.F.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be
sold at his shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in Popes head Alley.
1618.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, good Wine needs no garland, it will praise it self: so (I
persuade my self) will this ensuing Sermon, which a learned, holy and
faithful servant of God formerly viua voce in public, sounded in the ears
of me and many, and afterward, as a token of his Christian love to me,
bestowed upon me in writing, which being so fruitful and necessary a labor,
in the judgment of the godly and learned that have seen it, and so specially
befitting these lukewarm and backsliding times, I thought I could not,
without prejudice to thee, suffer it to lie by me for my private instruction
and benefit alone, and therefore for thy good, the keeping in precious memory
the Preacher thereof, whom the Lord has gathered into his barn, and for the
glory of God especially, I have consented that it be made more public and
common, by coming under the press. The Lord grant, that it may have that
success in me and thee, which he that gave first life unto it in studying,
and brought it forth by preaching, intended, and I in consenting and causing
to have it printed, desire: so shall the feeble, weak and doubting Christian,
be taken by the hand, stayed and comforted against the fears of total
backsliding, and we all shall be of the number of them which follow faith to
the conservation of our souls: which the Lord for Jesus Christ his sake grant.
Amen.

Thine in his best desires, W. F.

THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS Estate.
HEBR. 10. verse. 39. But we are not they which withdraw our selves into
perdition, but follow faith unto the* conservation of the soul.
THE Apostle having in the verse before, remembered the fearful estate of such
who through unbelief are withdrawn from God, does in this verse prevent a
scruple which might arise in some timorous consciences, doubting whether they
were not in this case next before threatened. He does therefore take such weak
ones by the hand, strengthening them, by bearing them witness of their
condition, manifested by the fruits above mentioned, verse 32.33.34: which
estate is set down here in this verse: First negatiuely, by denial of their
unbelieving revolt. Secondly affirmatively, by auouching their perseverance in
faith. Either of these properties of unbelief and belief, being amplified
from the effects which accompanied them, viz. destruction of the soul (for
that is to be understood from the latter clause) and salvation of the same.

The sum of the words. Fear not though I tell you that backsliders are
vessels of no delight, for your selves with my self, are not such who steal
from our companies, leaving our military profession, which would turn in this
life and the life to come to our further destruction; but we continue in faith,
and put forth our belief more and more, as occasion requires, which brings
us here and everlastingly to see the Lords salvation.

Now for the instructions which both the scope and matter of the verse include
in them. First that Paul does confirm them by bearing them witness of
Obseruat. 1.
their estate. It does teach us, that we must stablish our weak brethren, by
bearing them record of the graces wrought in them; we who have found grace
must confirm others. If any thing more smart be uttered, we must mollify it
with such wise prevention as Physicians, if they foresee ought harmefull to the
body, they correct it with other ingredients, that it may wholesomely be
received. If we saw one ready to trip, we would reach him a hand and sustain
him from falling: much more must we show this love to the soul shaking
through frailty. This wisdom Christ used, he quenched not the smoking
flax: the seasonable Reason 1.
testifying to men their good things causes 2
them to take increase: our honor of them, our duty to the comfort of their
lives and to the truth, does require Use 1.
it. Such therefore are to be taxed who wanting this prudence, handle the word
in dividing it like him in the Emblem, who gave to the Ass a bone, to the
dog straw: such are those Pastors who discourage good devotions, and
encourage men carnally minded, like unto them we read of, Ezechiel, chap.
13.22. Such again are they amongst private Christians, who like Jobs friends
are a breaking to them, whom they should comfort and confirm.

Secondly, we must be provoked by this example to 2
encourage weak ones when they are doubting of their estates: for as a
timorous patient imagining twenty evils, when his Physician assures him that
his case is nothing so, is well satisfied: so here.

Again, in that he says, We are not they that Obseruat. 2.
withdraw. Hence we are given to understand, that some may fall away from the
graces received. In some manner Gods own children and others are reported to
have fallen: David, Saul, Peter, Alexander, etc. But that this may be more
distinctly opened, three things must be considered.

1. First, from what the godly truly sanctified may fall; how far other.

2. Secondly, from whence falls come, and the difference of them.

3. Thyrdly, what are the symptoms or signs of a state declining from God.

To the first, a man not having the true grace of the elect, may fall from all
outward privileges, which he holds as a member of the visible Church.
Secondly, from the effects of his grace in life and conversation. Thirdly, from
the very habitual gifts, which were the fountain whence his fruits flowed.
Thus he may come to be twice dead, and in worse case then ever.

The Lords chosen may fall from their outward prerogatives, and from the
fruits: but that divine nature still abides in them, and it is only with
their graces, as it is with the mind in distempers of melancholy, and
frenzy; with the Sun in eclipses; with the tree when leaves and fruits
fail it; with the natural life when it moves not, ne yet breaths sensible:
which in diseases of the Mother is often discerned. Their faith is a never
failing faith; their life an eternal life; their seed a seed abiding in them.

Causes of defection.
Now for the second, viz. what are the causes of falling away, and that so
diversely; this opened will lend a more thorough light to the former. The causes
which work in withdrawing us are inward or outward. But the variety of these
declinings springs chiefly from the inward.

The cause in the Lords children is, the state of their grace, which is such as
has still relics of sin dwelling with it.

The cause of the others total fall is, an essential defect in their grace,
which reaches not to make a true union betwixt Christ and them, nor yet to
produce true sanctification. In a word, the cause of the ones perseuering, and
the others total deficiencie, is not only to be taken from Gods power and
gracious pleasure, from Christ his intercession, from the stinting of Satan to
the heel of the true Christian seed: but also from the essential
qualification, and disposition of the grace bestowed upon either. But this is a
difficulty further to be cleared; How we may formally distinguish these gifts
which are in the Christian that perseuereth, from those that are in him that
temporiseth. The difference is double:

1. First in the union which is made by them.

2. Secondly, in the different productions which follow upon so different
manners of being united with Christ.

To open the first, is set down this conclusion: The 1
spiritual gift of the temporiser does merely enlighten him to see Christ,
but does not move his will to go unto Christ, as given him of God, that he
might not perish but have eternal life. His application is an ouerweening
hope, taken up by his own presumption; it is not a motion which the spirit does
elicite and draw out, but such as is his enlightening.

In the word of Christ are two things: first the truth of it, a true word:
secondly, the goodness of it, a good word. That this may be apprehended, God
gives his chosen not only an apprehension, in the understanding of the truth,
and goodness of it; but a motion of affiance, which makes the soul go to,
and claspe about Christ whom it beholds. Hence it is that coming and
believing, John 1.12. John 6.35.37. is apprehending, as when a thing is taken
by the handle: and from this property of faith, does come that internal union
twixt the believer and Christ, which makes them dwell mutually one in the
other. Hence it is that the true believer does more affect Christ, prize him,
joy in him, more then the benefits by him.

Now the Papists faith is a mere enlightening, not having any confidence within
the compass of it, (for a man may be sound in their faith, and in damnable
despair at the same instant) and the temporisers faith having no more then an
apprehension in the understanding of the good word of salvation, joined with
presumptuous persuasion and fallible hopes conceived by himself on false
reckonings: these cannot innerly unite him with Christ; but look as a Wenne is
so united in the body by the skin incompassing it, and some kind of
continuation with the other members; but has not sinews, nerves, arteries
shot into it from head and heart, as the other parts: so these by their common
illumination and profession have conjunction with the body, but want the
influence of that more near ligament of that affianced motion of the will,
which only flows from Christ into his proper members. And this is the first
ground of their after failing: for look as standing waters, or never such
torrents which have no head of living springing waters to feed them, cannot in
time but dry up: so these not having Christ, the Wellhead of all grace,
whatsoever is in them, in time fades and vanishes to nothing.

From defect of internal union, which is as it were the fountain, comes a
difference in grace derived. The temporisers, being such as does never truly
humble him, such, as is superficial, insincere: in a word, such as does not
truly sanctify him: by reason of which defect, it is not permanent.

First, not being within the gracious light of this Sun of righteousness, the
depth of his wound is never gaged, and though he know much humiliation, 1
yet he is never truly humbled. First he sees not with humble consciousnes the
sinful deprauation of his nature: his displeasure is more against the fruits,
then roots whence they issued. Paul a Pharisie knew not concupiscence; a
Papist acknowledges not this as sinful after he is once baptized, whereas
this was the highest pitch of Paul's and David's penitential exercise.

Object.
But may not the temporiser know and maintain the truth of this doctrine, yea
propound it fruitfully to others? Answ. Answ.
He may (by faith infused) conceive and assent to it, yea deliver it to others,
but so that the power of it does not reflect on himself, so as to be humbled
in this respect: but as the Moon gives us light which is not rooted in the
body of her, for that continues darksome: so they receive light from Gods
word, and set it forth to others, but have none in themselves. Secondly, not
being within grace, his confession 2
and passion under sin is not free and voluntary, but extorted either from
some evidence of light, or fact euincing him; as Saul to David confessed; or
the rack of Gods terrors enforcing it from him. Whereas the children of God,
who now see that the more their sin is, the more grace superabounded; that
their baseness is his glory whose grace they live under, they frankly, yea
delightfully humble themselves in confessing their vileness. Thirdly, not
being within the 3
grace of Christ with sound affiance, he never grieueth at sin as it is
enmity against his God: for to be contrite in this regard, implies a love to
God, which cannot be in him who has not found God loving him first: he is
vexed at his sins in respect of his miseries he sees imminent, or only as
they are worldward, shameful aberrations from practice of such apparent
virtues, which men may repute glorious, and much affect. In a word, he is
never truly humbled, which his obedience being partial does witness; for he
will take and leave in that which he hears at his own pleasure: yea if
crosses come, he is too proud to humble himself under Gods hand: he is lifted
up above others, whom he out-strippeth in common graces: he is censorious,
without conscience of that natural condition under sin, which is common to
him with others. And from hence it is, that at length his grace falls: for as
a house builded on the sands, without a due groundwork laid; or plants
vnrooted cannot endure: so this frame which wants the foundation and root of
graces, (such as humility is) cannot persist.

2
Secondly, I say from this prime defect of inner union, all the temporisers
graces produced are superficial, slight, full of ouerture: whereas those in
sound believers are solid, substantial, not res intrinsecus defectuosae,
things which though outwardly they have the appearance, yet are inwardly
defective. Hence it is that Paul calls their godliness, a figure of
godliness, 2. Tim. 3.5. their knowledge an external form of knowledge, Romans
2.20. that Christ makes all they have, a semblance, a seeming only, Luke 8.18:
for look as a wild herb, though it have the name and common nature, yet it
differs much from one which grows in gardens, better manured and dressed:
and as a blew, died with blockwood, though it seem brighter a while, yet is
not so substantial as that which is woaded (and therefore we say it is a true
color): so here though the graces of the temporiser have the same name and
common nature, (for they are inferior works of the spirit) yea though they may
exceed in show, yet for the truth and substance, they are nothing to those that
are wrought in honest hearts; and from hence come two things.

1
First, their graces are soon grown up; for a thing superficial is done in
half the time that a substantial thing is in working. They get the start:
and, while many a true heart before them in the Lord is complaining of wants,
and weaknesses, sinful inclinations, usurping in them; they are carried, as it
were, per saltum, to their perfection. But as a true birth, though slowly at
the first, yet still takes increase, whereas a mole grows faster at the
first, but soon cease: and look as in nature, things the soonest ripe, are
the soonest rotten: So it fares with these leap-Christians.

Secondly, I say their graces are insincere, their 2
hearts are never purged from some sin which they love and like to live in,
for sinister ends intertaining the message of Gods mercy, which is not, that
they may reverence him, and serve him all their days without slavish terror:
but they gladly hear it, as hoping that they have a protection by it, though
they hold on in their own courses. For this it is that the elects faith, which
never fails, is called a faith without hypocrisy; that the true believer is
only said to have an honest heart.

As God has made some remedies in nature such as purge universally every
peccant humor, as the Physicians Catholicon, etc. some again that purge cum
delectu, that expel choler, but meddle not with melancholy; phlegm, but
stir not choler: So this medicine of grace, which God infuseth into an honest
heart, it is a Catholic expeller of all known sin, great or little. The
grace of the temporiser purges out the root of no sin; represseth the
moving and paroxismes as it were of some choice sins only, as in Herod. And
hence it is that the grace of the temporiser does not continue: for as corn
growing up with twitch, briars, thorns, is at length smothered; and as
wholesome meat in a stomach full of flying choler is at length ^^^ited: so
reigning sin growing up with these seeming graces, does never cease till they
be brought up and discharged: Luke 8.12.13.14. Thus much to clear that
difference of graces in Gods children and others, which causes that the falls
of the one are not total nor final, which is incident to the condition of the
other.

Now taking it as granted that the Lords children fall, by reason of the
relics of sin dwelling in them, I come to name the external means, which
actually bring forth into Apostasy this inbred defection. These sometime work
it more violently at once, sometime successively, by some heinous wasting sin,
which like a strong poison dispatcheth all quickly. Crosses repeated, and
gradually increased, lures of pleasures and profits, vncomfortablenes, which
accompanies by many means Christian courses, (dead work is quickly given
over) examples of the multitude, a strong backbyas, by which the devil
sometimes draws from persisting in grace, offense at the simplicity, which
to eye of flesh seems to be in Christian courses, at dissension in opinions
amongst men of the same profession, at the sins observed, and falls once known
by such who make profession; the seducing calls of false Teachers, the
glorious shows of holiness, and whatsoever things of this nature, by which
men thorough Satan's working are withdrawn.

Now follows the third thing, the symptoms or signs of a declining soul.
This one thing must be premised, left that weak ones should cast themselves
further down by mistaking the matter. The presence of these evils, and absence
of due dispositions or actions are not evil signs of a dangerously declining
soul, but when they are willingly carried without remorse, renewed desires and
endeavors after the contrary: for as one may be without Gods gracious presence
to his feeling, and yet not a forsaker of God; so one may be without these
things, and not leaving them, but rather left of them, (Gods wisdom for many
ends so dispensing) while by grief, faith and renewed desires, he does follow
after them.

This consideration interlaced for the right understanding of the matter in
hand. Let this be the first 1
sign, viz. a feeble, liuelesse action of grace willingly admitted: v. g. as
when a man can perform any Christian duty without all power spiritual and
good devotion; nevertheless does not challenge himself, as if it were ill with
him in that regard. Laesae actiones laesas arguunt facultates: As when the eye
sees not as it has done, we may presume the instruments or faculties are not
as they have been: So here, when we do not things with the vigor we have
done, it is a sign of infirmity, and a faculty inwardly or outwardly
hindered: but when we can think well enough of this state, it is a sign of
Apostacy and wilful declining; luskish reachings are the fits forerunners
commonly: Gods people declining have fallen first to these formalities, to
performance of duties in perfunctorie fashion, the heart and raines far from
the Lord, in them.

The second sign is a preposterous appetite of unwholesome 2
food liked well enough, no way disturbant to us: when men can be without
preaching, or at least without any that moves their consciences; when they can
extol frothie windy stuff, which fills the^, but never feeds them, so as
their souls are the better for it towar^ God. It is a sign the man is willing
to sleep that draws the curtains about him: It is a presumption, that these
are willing to nappe in their sins, that love not such a light of truth as
should awaken them. Not bearing the wholesome word is the preamble of Apostasy.

3
A third token is indigestion of that we hear, borne contentedly; when the
heat of love does not so digest things, that they might after be distributed
into the veins of every good word and work: because they receive not the
truth in love, etc. 2. These. 2. When meat is taken in, and passes away not
altered by the stomach, it leaves the body in an atrophie, that is, such a
state wherein it is not nourished: So here.

4
The fourth sign is an inordinate appetite after things hurtful and noxious:
as when a man feels no hurt, though he intermeddle immoderatly in the cares
of the world; though he intemperatly quaffe-in these sinful pleasures which
last but a season: when a man loves to follow the good healths, we may boldly
say, he loves to breed ill health. Worldly cares and pleasures are the things
of which the soul is drunken, and surfets; these are the thorns and weeds
with which the seed of graces never thriueth.

5
A fifth sign may be the dis-affecting of our brethren, whom we have
acknowledged as begotten of God. The devil cannot bring a man who has known
any good, to confront and despise him directly: therefore he enters them with
this politic train; he teaching them first to be bold and trample down his
image, and so at length brings them to despise God, 2. Tim. 1.4. Demas (as it
is likely) turning Apostate, forsook the Apostle.

6
The sixth sign is, when there is felt no reluctation in regard of our daily
weaknesses and lesser sins, but they digest with us: if the soul were not
fallen well asleep, it could not concoc so well. When nature (things able to
provoke taken in) makes not resistance, her strength is feeble: So here. But
when a man is grown to this, that he can go on in his impenitencie without
check, it is an evident sign he is down the wind in a wilful declination;
yea that he is far gone in it. Thus you have heard that some fall from their
grace; and for further declaration you have seen cleared, how far all sorts
may fall; whence comes their falls, with the difference of them. Thirdly,
what are the indicants of a soul declining.

The use of all is; First, as to stir us up to take comfort Use 1.
in the true work which God has begun; so to make sure that we have received
such grace as shall not fail: would we not be loath to rear such a frame in a
material building, which should after come down upon our heads? We are
builders, let us make sure to dig so deep, and ground our work so well,
that though it should shake, (as they say, firm houses will) yet it may be
far from fear of ruin. In taking gold we refuse washed and light gold, or
clipped, we weigh them, ring them, etc. In receiving grace be not less
careful that it be right current, not wanting a grain of due weight.

Secondly this, that many fall away, must awaken us Use 2.
to more circumspection; though it light upon some men only, it is every man's
terror. We have great reason, for we live in most perilous times, wherein the
holy Ghost has warned us that the dampe of sin shall make the love of many
wax cold: wherein the contagion of Aposta^^^ is epidemicall; is grown a
popular disease. For now what luke-warmnes? what a vveake pulse beats every
where? men care not to deal with themselves to hold their thoughts to heavenly
things, to awaken their affections, to renew their faith, to blow up devotion;
to live in an holy contention; nay this in our days is counted a superfluous
unnecessary course, forged in the head of some ouer-forward fellows; it is
the indiscreet feruor of green youth, which ages wisdom will take up.
Others more moderatly spoken, think that every thing new is dainties, and that
prime affections cannot be retained: a figleafe, nature, art, grace, go from
less perfect to more perfect. Whether does a child at eight years or
eighteen most love and joy in his inheritance? Do thou not count thy
prentises two last years better then four of his first?

In stead of appetite to the word, now some think the Sabbath may be
tollerably sanctified without any preaching: some count it enough if they be
where preaching is, let it be what it will be; far from such as is able to
work on their souls; as if the orders of the person, not the supernatural
gifts of knowledge and wisdom made the Sermon (but these must not be
severed): some count such plain preaching (as heretofore was effectual in
them) less diligent, and less learned. Thus the devil not able quite to make
them cast off the ordinance, persuades them that change is no robbery; and
that they may sleep the quieter (neglecting such preaching as was powerful in
them) he casts them this pillow, suggesting that they leave not that which was
effectual in them toward God, but that only which was indiligent and
unlearned.

Again, in stead of working the word upon our affections, how many content
themselves to exercise their critickes, this or that was well spoken, etc. and
there is an end? For the world, men have their hands in it elbow deep; yea
many who in their times have made show of a more heavenly mind, some are now
so shie to their brethren, that they will not look at them, not meet on the
same side of the street, not know them. How many, whose hearts would have
smitten them in lesser offenses, can now commit as great, and it never vpbraids
them? nay esteem this tenderness scrupulous simplicity, and melancholic
austeritie. The more vulgar then this disease is, the more cautelous we must be.

Thirdly, we see now that who will keep life and power in his course,
endeavoring a good conscience in all things, they must pass the pikes of evil
tongues which are shaken against them. For now such hear, as if they were
humourists, new-fanglists, Precisians, proud, singular, simple, melancholic
persons, what not? Finally, the devil to make reuolts, now refines his wits,
and turns Angel of light, hanging out our own colors, that he may the
easilier surprise us; and pretending perfections, which we yet want, does
transport many, whom neither crosses nor allurements would prevail against.
So that we had need, if ever, to walk warily, looking to the author and
finisher of our faith: yea thankfully, that so in evil times we are kept
(though vveakly) alive in his sight. Thus much of the second doctrine.

The third follows in these words; to perdition, viz. Obseruat. 3.
of the soul, 2. Pet. 2.20.21. even as he that goes out of the light, must
needs come into darkness: so he that leaves the living God, the fountain
of blessed life, must needs fall into perdition. The relapse into any
sickness is more dangerous, then the first entrance into it: for nature is now
more enfeebled, much spent in her former resistance; again, the disease is
much strengthened as a prevailing conqueror: So in these declinings from the
health some state of grace in some sort attained, sin is stronger (the devil
coming with seven worse spirits), and our capacity of receiving health
lesser; we being twice dead, and for the degree more removed from grace, then
ever before, and this end befalls backsliders most deservedly: for they offer
God the greatest indignity, it being better they had never admitted him, then
having taken him in, to dislodge him causelessly. Again, when such as
forgetting their military Sacrament, steal from their colors, are justly
punished with temporal death; how deservedly are these punished with eternal
perdition, who respect not that warfare to which they have bound themselves by
Sacrament, who flinch away, leaving that displaied ensign of a zealous
profession, under which sometime they have served?

Object.
But how can destruction follow on declining courses, when Gods chosen cannot
perish; and the other sort were never in state of salvation? Answ. This is said
to be the end of it, not absolutely without exception, but respectively, if we
by repentance take not straight steps the sooner, and get our halting healed.

To the first it may be answered, Answ.
that the Apostacy of Gods children in it self tends to destruction; it is
his mercy that preuenteth them in this way, not the fruit of their
backsliding. Secondly, they after a sort destroy themselves, when they bring
their spiritual life into a swoone, and leave not themselves breath or motion
discernable. For the wicked, though they never were thoroughly vindicated or
redeemed from destruction, yet to the judgment of charity they seemed so: now
it is usual to speak of things not according as they are, but as they
appear. Secondly, they though they never had that sound eternal life, yet
they had such a life as is in a wen; and though the roots of their grief were
not brought away, yet the effects were so restrained, and for a time suspended,
that to their seeming they were made well. Thirdly, they are said to fall into
destruction, though they are in it; because they by Apostacy, go to the
height and consummation of it; as we are said by a godly course, to go to life
everlasting, which in some degree we have already. And the truth is, that
falling away does bring the untimely judgments; does procure an effectual
delivering to Satan, who does afterward more fully fill them with his
efficacy: For as God makes the sincerest Saints often of those, who have been
the foulest sinners: so here Satan, when he gets such an one, who has been
in show an Angel of light, he does make of him an incarnate devil. In nature
the sweetest things when they turn, become the sowrest. This so mortal
sickness we must take heed of; and if our love, zeal, tenderness of
conscience be diminished, we must timely seek out for remedy. I know men
think, we are not so far gone; once beloved, always beloved; we have left
nothing but mere curiosity, melancholicke austeritie, men in many
considerations reproueable; such as those, who join not with them, we hope may
be in Gods favor, and go to heaven. But never take such pains to deceive
your selves; these vain words will not still rock the conscience asleep. If
thy spiritual actions be fallen asleep, thy contention against the evil
dwelling in thee ceased, thy appetite after sincere milk and meat abated, thy
tenderness of conscience impaired, and thou can sit under all these things
without repentant sorrow; assure thy self, the end of this (if thou preuentest
it not by repentance) shall be destruction. Luke-warmenes (though men think it
a part of prudence) it is odious with God, and will make us be cast up with
displeasure: true it is that Gods wrath is not presently espied against such,
but that is only because we see not the spiritual judgments, wherewith they
are stricken; and we see in nature the thing is long bred and conceived, before
it is brought forth and manifested.

Secondly, we must be exhorted here to stand constantly in our courses, who do
walk with God in some life and power, though not without great weakness; let us
not give over our labor and holy contention, to which the presence of sin
and defect of righteousness have pricked us: this work of grace goes against
the stream of nature, if we intermit to plye the oar of holy exercise, wind
and tide will carry us back again. Where we cease to improve by good
husbandry the grace received, there it begins to be impaired. True it is,
that the shaking up of our selves, resisting sloth, the restless aspiring
after things which we are still cast from with violence, are in their kinds
laborious: but remember, what men do in their earthly warfare; they (for pay of
two shillings a day) march thorough places often full of difficulty, lie (the
ground being their bed) in the air, no covert over them; in their victuals
they are so sore straightened, often they carry their lives in their hands, and
fight in the Canons mouth: to think upon this once, is enough to make us
ashamed of our softnes and cowardice. But we are of faith, as we say, and men
of courage and wisdom. But alas, first who has these things? secondly, who
does put them forth? thirdly, who is constant in holding them, and making show
of them as occasion is offered?

We may observe this as a fourth instruction, what Obseruat. 4.
is the property of a sound believer or belief, viz. to persevere when they
are tried and opposed: this faith is a precious, sincere, never failing faith;
it grows from one degree to another; the true believer he holds the faith
against hell gates themselves, that is, the powers of hell which oppose him in
it: which that we may more fruitfully understand; we must know that where
sound faith is wrought, there the devil plaieth the assailant, bending al his
force to dis-arme them of this divine shield, by drawing them back again to
unbelief and false confidences which will not help them.

To this purpose he mustereth crosses, vomiteth deluges of false slanders;
stirs up the nearest friends of such as are now come to God by faith, to
persecute them most bitterly: sometime he shows them impossibilities, in
sense of seeing that they desire and believe: sometimes he troubles their
feelings, that so he may shake them in their believing: sometimes he
withdraws their faith by false objects, which he proposes to them; but if
he can not break off their belief, then he lays about to repress the
feruencie and the renewed exercise of their belief, by vnsetling us with some
new devices, when we are more intent; by making our exercise painful, and
uncomfortable, ouercasting the light which was wont to shine to us in the
promises; hindering us from feeling the sweet comfort in them; exciting the
relics of sloth, deadness, inconstancy that are in us: sometime by
causeless fears and sinful shamefastnes he withdraws us from our holy
devout exercise. But this sound faith quenches all these fiery darts which
are thrown against it; and like as a tree which shaken, rooteth more deeply;
or like as a torch which beaten, blazeth more brightly; or like as a star,
which when the air is obscured, shines most clearly: so it is with this
root, torch, this glorious star; these powers of darkness do nothing in
the end, but lend it a more beautiful luster, then it ever put forth while it
was not be rounded with any such enmities.

True it is, that the best faith may hang the wing, being weather-beaten, and
seem to retire under some more vehement delays or tentation: but that which
flies to day, fights again to morrow; and like as it is with those, whose
going back helps them to take their rise and fetch their leap more
commodiously: So here, faith (through him that is the author and finisher of
her) by how much she gave back, by so much in her renewed endeauours she
comes forward more successefully. From this ground many come to be reproved:
Some there are, who will seem to follow sincerity and sanctification, while
making show of these things is gainful; but if crosses come they will lay
down their weapons, and will provide to sleep in whole skins, whatsoever
become of other matters. Some, if they be delaied beyond their own time, cast
up their hopes, and are ready proudly to say, It is in vain to serve God.
Amongst the Lords children, how many are there who follow not faith, growing up
from faith to faith, renewing the exercise of it in fastening on the gracious
promises which are made unto us? Men that will check themselves if they omit
the act of mercy, of testifying truth, of justice where occasion is offered;
blame not themselves for neglecting to renew their faith toward God, when his
promises renewed, or experience of his goodness and truth does call for it
from us.

Some there are, who weakly forespeake things, signifying their unbelief, by
saying, they shall never see this or that evil mending with them; that it is
but a folly to attempt further, seeing we strive against the stream. But this
is not to be carried with full sail of faithful persuasion on him who has
spoken good to us, but thorough attending to that, sense and reason speaks,
to yield to unbelief.

Secondly, we may hence gather the truth of our belief. Has it stood
thorough help of Gods grace in tentation? Christ lets us see that he was
our supporter, it is a true sign of grace never failing: buildings which stand
when winds and storms beat on them, are presumed to be surely grounded,
whereas the paper-walls and painted castles of these who have not unfeigned
grace, cannot endure any sound assault which is made against them.

The last thing to be marked is, what it is that does Obseruat. 5.
bring us to see salvation here and everlastingly, it is our belief, 1. Pet.
1.5. Gods pleasure of working this or that for us, is first made known by his
word revealing it. Secondly, it is delaied for a trial of them to whom it is
given. Thirdly, it is executed. Now the revelation of this future pleasure
only faith apprehends; the delay (wherein many occurrences are incident)
speaking the contrary this faith bears, by cleaving to that word which
formerly it heard from God. When the thing is executed, then faith is changed
with sight; so that it is plain, that faith brings us to see salvation, for
it never gives over till the thing be in present; it does keep us within the
tower of Gods impregnable strength for the present, which is our safety
against all enemies; it does bring us out of all troubles by holding Gods
gracious word; as a man comes from a deep dungeon, by climing a scaling
ladder cast to him, or sitting upon an Eagles wing which would mount up with
him.

In the Chapter following there is a catalogue of glorious believers, the end
of their faith being likewise recorded. Whence we may first see that error of
Papists, who though they ascribe our first forgiveness of our sins to faith;
yet our after-righteousnesse and salvation they refer to good works, penal
satisfactions, application of the Churches treasury, etc. withdrawing
themselves from faith, when now they are brought to be in state of grace; but
faith is never to cease till the thing believed be now in sight, neither will
the same thing be got both by faith and works; for these are such as will not
be compounded, the Apostle being witness.

Again, hence we see how woeful a thing it is to cast away our confidence, we
fling away the plaster that should heal us; for whatsoever evils were upon
us, yet holding our faith on the truth and mercy of God in Christ, they should
vanish away as shewers, which on our garments dry up in time and come to
nothing. Yea their danger is hence discovered, who though they make conscience
of murder, adultery, injustice; yet care not to live in unbelief, which is
of all sins the most dangerous, for the other should not hurt us deadly, were
it not for this; that we will not by faith take that medicine which should
heal us.

Secondly, this must encourage us to persevere in our faith: as Christ looked
to the end of the Cross, so must we look to the end of our faith, that we may
endure all difficulties the better, with which we are incountred. True it is,
that men are often most deceived, where they trust most; but leaning on the
Lord, and waiting on him, thou shall never be deceived, nor miss of his
promised salvation.

But in temporary evils we cannot assure our selves of deliverance. Answ. The
truth is, Object.
Answ.
we see not deliverance, because we exercise not faith in particular promises
so far as we might. Secondly, we must ever be assured of issue, such as is
joined with salvation. Thirdly, though it keep us not out of the fire, yet
faith will keep us from burning, or taking hurt in our most fiery trials;
wherefore let us renew our faith in Gods precious promises, assuring our selves
that the end of it shall be salvation of soul and body in the day of our Lord
Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and Spirit, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

