THE SPIRITVALL ARMOVR.

With which being furnished, a Christian may be able to stand fast in the evil
day, and time of trial; and to quench all the fiery Darts of the wicked.

Written by that godly and learned man, PAVL BAINE; sometime Preacher of Gods
word at S. Andrews in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for R. Milbourn. 1620.

To the godly Reader.
THe Author of this Treatise (Christian Reader) has left this world, and is
gone to the place of the blessed, resting himself in the bosom of blessed
Abraham. He was a godly and faithful man whilst he lived, as his life
showed; so also his labors and works which he has left behind him do
testify. Pity it is his days were no longer, that he might have finished
many things himself which he had begun; some of which are perfected by
others, and some likely never to come forth. Howsoever it fare with other of
his Works, it seems that this was perfected in his lifetime, by his own
hands; which I wish may not only come to the hands of Gods children, but into
their hearts chiefly. And though he have finished his course and is gone the
way of all flesh; yet think that he speaks to thee by this Book, and bids
thee to put on this spiritual Armor, which is indeed the whole Armor of God.
For this Armor being put on will defend thy soul against not some, but all
the fiery darts of the wicked. Happy and thrice happy is that soul that is
thus defended: for it shall go well with it here in this world; but a thousand
times better with it in the world to come. Read it: remember it: practice it:
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things: and bless it unto thee.

THE SPIRITVALL Armor.
EPHESIANS. 6.10. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might.


NOw follows the conclusion of the Epistle: in which are three things; first,
an exhortation, to the 21. verse. Secondly, a narration of dispatching
Tychicus, verse. 21.22. Thirdly, a farewell, verse 23.24.

The sum of the Exhortation is, that we would fortify our selves, to the
end we may go through with these things which oppose us in our Christian
warfare.

Now the manner is two-folde: First, by looking at the strength we have out of
our selves in God, Secondly, by harnessing our selves with a spiritual
strength inherent in us. For these do not one explane the other, because 1.
Pet. 1.5, Gods strength and faith are distinguished, as the matter apprehended,
and the hand apprehending; and it is more suitable to this Allegory: For the
strength of the common soldiers is as much, yea far more in the wisdom and
power of their Leader, then in their own valor and furniture. But one may
say, in the power of his might, and not in the Lord only. Answer: [in the
Lord] in his wisdom, mercy, faithfulness, (for all these do strengthen us).
The other is that immediate thing in which is all our help, as keeping us to
salvation. Now that the Apostle having exhorted to belief, and godly life,
does strike up a Drum, and sound an alarm; it does give us to understand, the
practice of good duties has no small enmity against them. The Devil will soon
(if we set our selves this ways) cry for clubs, and reach us some knocks. We
shall know that these things shall cost us the setting on. Thus in Christ when
he set upon the work of our redemption, Satan did tempt him, as Matthew. 4. and
Romans 7.21. when he would do good, evil would stir in him: and when Paul 1.
These. 2.18. did purpose to come and visit the^ for the strengthening of their
faith, Satan did hinder him: and Mat. 12.46. when Christ was fruitfully
teaching, there we see his acquaintance at the door to speak with him,
calling him from the work in hand, Matthew. 16.22.23. when he told them of his
suffering, Satan by Peter sought to turn him from it (Save thy self). O such is
the force of Satan's opposition, that a man when once he sets him self to
this or that good thing earnestly, he is beaten from it farther then before:
even as the people were who are types to us; when they turned themselves to
forsake Egypt, their servitude was redoubled. Exodus 5. this with patience. As
at other trials so at this we must not wonder. 1. Pet. 4.12. Dearly beloved
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, Why should we think that so
strange which is so frequent, as our meat is not more usual? When we would
buckle to some more spiritual duties, then such an ill disposition comes
upon us: evil is present, the Devil does make us to be annoyed with swarms of
idle thoughts: then what need we use such strictness? be good to your
self, then this friend would speak with us, this business is undone, this
matter lies in despair, thy mother is at the door, then we are moyled and
deeper often in the sin we fled from, then before. While I was musing, the
fire brake forth, then spoke I with my tongue, Psalm. 39.3. We must not think
this strange; but though we be beaten on our knees, yet go still from Egypt
the kingdom of darkness to the glorious inheritance of the Saints in light.

Now particularly in this verse. two things must be opened. 1. That Christians
must have a resolution in their courses. Secondly, who it is or upon what
strength it is we must be courageous. For the first, the Apostle teaches so
much, 1. Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast, quite your selves like men: he
does call upon us to be valorous, like as Ioab exhorted his soldiers fighting
for their country, 2. Sam. 10.12. And of the Christians, it is said, they did
with full purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord: and the self same spiritual
fortitude is necessary in the things we undertake or suffer, if we mean to
go through with them. 1. Chron. 28.10.
Take heed therefore: for the Lord has chosen thee to build the house of his
Sanctuary, be strong therefore and do it. Luk 9.51. It is said of our Savior
Christ when his time was come to suffer, he set him self fully to go to
Jerusalem. Now this spiritual courage does show it self in three things.

expel the fears of cowardice, when we see great enemies against us. Deuteronomy.
20.23. Let not your hearts fear nor be afraid of them: for though a man see a
hideous mass of corruption, yet shall it not affright him. It makes us not to
be dismaide at the difficulties that meet with us: though a man come by
knocks, yet he makes not dainties of them. For Paul though he was driven
upon that he would not, yet he was not dismayed, but gave God thanks that the
best part of him did look another way, and that Christ was his righteousness.
after we are foiled, it makes us renew our battle, and valiantly charge our
enemies with fresh assaults. Iud. 20.22. The men of Israel plucked up their
hearts (there is courage) and renewed the battle; so Paul, though the Devil
did buffet him again and again, yet being courageous, he did renew his
strength against it by often prayer. cast away our weapons; which cowardice
does encourage the adversary, as courage does daunt him. The Devil is like a
serpentine Crocodile: the property of which is, if one follows, it flies
away; if one fly, it pursues him: resist him, he shall fly; be afraid, he will
follow. Men are, as Jeremy complains, courageous to do evil, but they have
no courage to do good. If a Bear or Lion be in the way, they will encounter
the greatest difficulties: if one course prove not, they will turn every
stone; which should make us much more double our courage in that which is good.

2. We see hence, how that Gods almighty strength is it, on which our courage
must be builded. Esaias 30.15 Thus says the Lord God, in quietness and rest
shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength, Phil.
4.14. I can do al things through Christ that strengthens me. 1. Pet. 1.5. We
are kept by the power of God unto salvation: for no strength but his can
prevail against the strong one in the world: he bruseth the Serpents head, he
dissolueth the works of Satan, Genes. 3. Ios. 3.8. The Israelites could not
have come out of Egypt, nor entered the Land of Canaean, if the Lord had not
subdued their enemies, neither might they be confident in sword or bow, but
in the name of the Lord only, in their strong God: much more must our courage
be builded on God, seeing their enemies are flesh, ours are spirits of great
power. Look as it is in soldiers, their chiefest strength lies in their
Captain: so is it true here, that al our strength lies in Christ, the Captain
that leads us to salvation, his power does all our works for us: and that
which is to be in us, does but fit us to stand still and look to this almighty
power of God, which subdueth all things for us. must become a fool; he that will
be strong, must learn to see himself to be weakness it self. We our selves
before our conversion are of no strength. Romans 5.6. After, of no strength: Not
that we are sufficient to think a good thought. 2. Cor. 3.5. None can name the
Lord Jesus, but by the holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 12.3. He is happy that is grown up
to be empty of himself: we are as full of selfe-confidence as of self-loue,
though we cannot discern it. This is the reason we are so often foiled, that
we might see we are of no strength, that all our victories must com from G d.
Iud. 20. The Lord let the Isralites fall in a most just quarrel against their
brethren, that he might strip them of that self confident presumption they had
in themselves. And Paul, so holy an Apostle, was brought to the gates of death
that he might learn this lesson. 2. Cor. 1.9. What makes us after diverse
falls, to be no more afraid of the enemies that buffet us? what makes us that
we can no more feelingly run under the wings of Christ? whence is it that we
have no more poverty of spirit in the evperience of our frailties, but that
secret selfe-confide^ce is mighty in us? Seeing that all our courage must be in
this, that God is with us; let us be nothing in our selves. The blessed souls
can say with Paul, Phil. 3.3. We are those whose hearts being circumcised,
rejoice in the Lord Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Philistims did place all their hopes of the battle in their Goliath: so must
we place all our hope in Christ Jesus: this is our strength, Exodus 14.13.
Stand still, fear not, behold the salvation of the Lord which he will show to
you this day. This is a most blessed estate, to lean on the Lord, and on the
power of his might: many are the benefits of it. It will fear no opposition.
For what cannot Gods almighty power subdue? Psalm. 27.1. Romans 4. Abraham cared
not for the deadness of his body. will so learn to see there is no ability in
him, that he will further lean his faith on the power of God. Psalm. 60.11.
Give us help against trouble, for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 69.29. When I
am poor and in heauiness, thy help O Lord. shall still exalt me. What use the
Psalmist makes of this, that the Israelites had fought vnsuccesfully as left
of God? Lastly, strength being trusted to by faith) the self same strong God
being the author and finisher of our faith. Heb. 13. this puts all out of
doubt. 3. We must glorify the power of God in all things; it is he that
strengthens us. Esaias 25.10. He works all our works for us. Psalm. 108.13.
Through him we shall do valiantly, he is our shield, tower, rock, strength, and
glory.

Now follows the second part of fortifying, concerning the furniture we are
to have; laid down in general to the 14. verse, in particular to the 21.
First, he lays down the duty. Secondly, he does, as a faithful Herald,
again repeat his proclamation, because we cannot hear on this side easily,
but would save our selves peaceably, without looking after warfare. In laying
down the duty, he delivers in the beginning of this verse, the thing to be
done: Put on the whole armor of God. 2. The end, that you may be able to
resist. 3. The reason, which has reference to the duty, and end; in the 12.
verse. Now in the thing to be done, three things are to be marked. 1. That
Christians must have armor that is complete armor, to cover them from top to
toe. 2. That they must not have it lying by them, but must put it on. 3. That
the Christian armor is for matter and making, of God, that is, divine and
spiritual. For the first, there is great reason to prove that a Christian must
have armor. For he has enemies that would wound him deadly otherwise: Exodus:
so soon as he took them out of Egypt, he led them thence armed; because
that Pharaoh he knew would follow them, and puissant Kings encounter them as
they marched to their inheritance. Giants, is truly spoken of us; we are no
sooner born then we have our swords girded to us, our shields on our arms,
etc. Now that we must have complete armor, it is hence manifest: because it
were in vain to have some parts covered, and to lie open to mortal wounds in
other some. The Devil is like those Champions, who if they cannot wound the
head nor the heart, they will prick any part rather then fail. they should
speak truth that that there is any such armor. Like Israel when there was not
a Smith, nor a weapon in it: so is the face of our Israelites, they look not
(though they have bound themselves by the Sacrament to be warriors) after
armor.

Secondly, we must mark that he does not say, we must have armor, or prepare
it, but we must put it on: observe thence, It is not enough to know there is
such armor, but we must have it buckled always upon us, in readiness by us:
we must not do as many, who have wardrobes of apparel, but they wear them
not; as good have none, as use it not. Ans. If we do uncase us of that which
will not let it be drawn upon us: for as he which would put on a new suit,
must first put off his old; so we. Secondly, we must in conscience of our
infirmity pray to God to fit this furniture about us: apparel, they cannot put
it on further then the nurse or mother does make them ready: so it is with us.
Thirdly, more.

they care not for the lighter vvounds; their eyes, tongues, ears are shot
through, as David in Vriahs matter had not his eyes fenced.

the kind of armor [of God] which word notes both the maker and metal of
it; teaching us, that the weapons vvherevvith we resist the devil must be
spiritual. Our weapons (says the Apostle) are not carnal, but spiritual,
2. Cor. 10.5. There is no armor of proof able to resist him, which God
himself does not forge, and is not spiritual: for the strength of brass and
stone is nothing to him; that of the Leviathan may be applied to him, Job. 41.

Secondly, such must the armor be to resist, as the assault is which is made
against a thing: now the devil does not come against us with svvords, but
with spiritual suggestions to withdraw us; laboring to withdraw us from
righteousness and fellowship with God, to unrighteousness and the creature,
leaving the creator. Wherefore we must not fence our selves against the
assaults of Satan by any human means, by any thing which the vvisdome of man
can suggest: but as David, encountering with Goliath, laid aside Readiness weapons
and furniture, and went against him in the Name of the Lord: so we must say,
Not armed with our own wisdom, strength, or helps of the creature, do we
seek to put to flight the power of darkness, but in Gods armor we make
resistance. Secondly, poles, who on Palme-Sunday carry palm-boughs, who put
trust on crosses, crucifixes, holy water, etc: for, not knovving the power of
godliness, they think with fleshly ceremonies to chase away the spiritual
powers of darkness. Again, many troubled with tentations of blasphemy, or
self-murder, they vvil to physic; as if by letting of blood or vomit, they
could purge out the devil: others, when the evil spirit does annoy them,
they make resistance but as Saul, call for music, this or that company, and
employ themselves more busily, that one nail may drive out another; in a
word, so resisting that evil one, troubling themselves, that they make
themselves twofolde more the children of the Devil. 4. There are some who when
they are so troubled, will not stick to go to wisards: when the Devil does
wound them, they will seek to him for a plaster: that cure will be well
done, when the murdering spirit must play the Surgeon. Now follows the end,
that ye may be able to stand. Two things must be unfolded. 1. What this
means (to stand)? Ans. A soldier standing orderly to his fight, does neither
run forth to his peril, nor retire through cowardice; neither is beaten down
through violence. So that standing, is holding their course without hurt
received.

Assaults of the Devil are of two sorts: forcible or politic. Now this Text
speaks of those subtle stratagems, the word signifying one principal kind
(to wit) ambushme^t, that put for the other: the sense then of the words is,
that you may be preserved harmless, notwithstanding the Devil do practice
all his stratagems against you. Thus you see what is the benefit of our
Christian furniture: it does put us out of danger; this is tried proof, we
need not fear any shot if it be well buckled unto us: thus Christ being with
this harnessed, the Devil could not fasten any thing on him: for even some
pieces, are of no less force, much more the whole. 2. Pet. 1. He they joins
faith, virtue, knowledge (which all is but the brestplate of righteousness)
shall not fall: John says, faith (which is but our shield) is our victory. Now
if one piece be of such use, how beneficial is the whole? Again, in the
falls of the Saints it may be seen how they caught their wipes, for lack of
their armor. of God from being wounded in the soul. Which if we were fully
clad with, we might fight at the Cannons mouth secure from danger.

2. We see that the Devil does use policy in assaying us, Thus from the
beginning he showed more of the Serpent then of the Lio^. 2. Cor. 11.3. He did
through deceit beguile Euah. 2. These. 2.8. His working is not in all power
only, but in all deceluablenes of unrighteousness: he is the father of common
Machiauelisme: he knows the Lions skin will not come where the Foxes may
enter; and if he were strength without subtilty, he were the less to be
feared. For what is the Poets Poliphemus when his eyes are vvanting? what is
strength if wisdom and policy be vvanting or absent. But for our further
instruction, we must search out what these subtle strat^gems are, whervvith
he does circumuent us: not that we can find them all out, but that we may
point at the fountains of further meditation.

These may be considered generally, or more particularly. Generally, his policy
in fight is, that he observes all circumstances for his advantage: as person,
place, time; and as he set upon Christ in the Desert when he was now hungry:
the condition of the party, whether in prosperity or in adversity, religious,
or otherw^se: his weapon in choosing and using of which he ha^h great s^ill:
and two things are here remarkable and most eminent. First, that he will then
redouble his forces, when after God is ready to remove him: as men that
besiege a City, if they have intellige^e of any power coming to remove their
siege, they will put forth all their courage: trying if they may make breach or
scale the walls and enter. Revel. 12.12. He can so watch opportunity, that he
can be ready to hurt us with our own weapons. As 2. Cor. 27. he would have
swallowed up the Corinthian in his repentant sorrow.

The more particular conflicts and assaults, some are less seen, some are
more openly hostile. The less manifest assayling of us is, when he
dissembleth his person, or his strength: For Satan often comes in the person
of a friend, sometimes in an Angels of light, sometimes in the persons of
Saints departed; and he is like that policy of the Gibeonites, Ios. 9 9. Like
the King of Israel who fought with Aram in other apparel: 1 King. 22.30.
or like as if a Man of war meeting an enemy should hang out the same colors
with them, and set men speaking the self same language, and of the self same
habit with their enemies, and so should board them and sink them at unawares;
these therefore must a little be opened. First, he comes and closes as a
friend, insinuating, as if he bare us more good will then God. Genes. 3. God
knows if your eyes should be opened, etc. so to Christ, Master spare thy
self: but mark what Christ replyeth, Go behind me Satan. So he comes to
another* What? he has abused thee; do not let him do thee that wrong, others
will be heartened to do thee the like. So when he persuades covetousness, You
must have some thing more then this: You have, and may have a great charge: so
to him that would double his diligence, What need you so disease your self?
God forbid none but such great pains takers should com to heaven. Thus he
would with a friendly parlie, with a Ioabs kiss utterly betray us. Secondly,
he has sometimes taken on him the person of an Angel of light, in words which
he can speak good. Mark 1.24. and 5.7, Thou art the Son of God. The maid
with the spirit of divination says, You are the servants of the most high God:
Acts 16.16.
but he profaneth the words, and uses them unto evil ends, to win himself
credit in his lying, or weaken the truth of them by his confessing: so in
nomine domini begins much wickedness. Secondly, he will set us
unseasonably and busy us about good works, and thus he did Martha, Luke
10.40. making her so busy in the entertainment, that she had no leisure for
the better work, that which Mary chose. This is his wickedness, and he
always does it either to iustle out a better work, or to draw-in with that
good some greater evil. So in the Church, many read often and are thinking of
good things, but the Devil does draw them to this, that they might not attend
the work in hand. Thirdly, he will persuade to evil under the show of good:
thus he will make us under the pretense of discretion and moderation, be like
those who were neither hot nor cold, fit for nothing but to be spued out of
Gods mouth: He will with a show of zeal fetch us off to murder. Luke 9.54.
He did the disciples, and thus he beguileth such who will reform without
authority, and the Brownists who beguiled with a false spirit of zeal, make
separation: so by persuading providence, he does fill the heart with
covetousness: so by persuading perfection, he foileth in will worship: so
these doctrins of Devils forbidding meats, marriage, religiously, are broached
under pretense of chastity, abstinence; invocation of Angels and doubting,
under pretense of humility. Col. 2. and unwritten truths with curious
questions, under pretense of profound learning: such like doctrine. Revel. 2.24
so styled, is called therefore the depth of Satan. 4. By dissuading that which
is truly good, as if it were a vice: thus repenting, and leading new lives,
and taking up the orders of God, this is new-fanglenes, and leuity: thus doing
any duty that is not so generally received, it is dissuaded as singularity and
pride; thus zeal is madness, as in Christ's practice censured. Mar. 3.21. And
Paul was thought to be mad through much learning: thus the lawful remedy is
calumniated as uncleanness; depending on Gods providence is counted tempting
him: as in that example of Ahaz, Esaias 7.12. Particular faith is pride, etc. And
thus he does set fine colors on foul clothes, and like an Angel of light
does beguile us. 3. He takes on him the person of Saints departed: as
apparitions for the confirmation of erroneous doctrines, do fully assure us.

The second less apparent action is, his d^ssembling of his strength; sometime
eleuating, lessening his power: as when our Lord has foiled him in us, he
will make us if he were easily withstood that we might after a sort command
him, that then we might wex secure, and be betrayed, 2. By dissembled flight,
like the stratagem used, Ios. 7. Iud. 20. He will seem as fled, but then he
plays the Parthian, he fights most dangerously: Thus many that have been
prodigal, given to women, are grown better husbands, and become new men; the
Devil seems to be fled: but if they be not new creatures indeed, having
new hearts, hungring after righteousness, and the knowledge of God, in Christ,
the Devil has them far surer then before.

So in Saul, when the evil spirit came upon him; when David played, the Devil
seemed to be gone, but alas nothing less. So some have bin troubled in
conscience, and they have skinned all over in their manner, all is quiet now:
but let them beware, for if they have not met with the right cure, the Devil
by lying still, and dissembling flight, will make them secure to their
destruction.

Now, we cannot find them out better, then by considering of warlike
stratagems, to one whereof the holy Ghost here has reference. Now these are
divided into three bands: for they are either in prying out, or in
concealment, or in matter of attempt. For the first, the devil does pry into
us, and knovveth us but too well, he is named from knowledge, yea he has
his intelligences from every look, gesture, affection, etc; that we may say as
Aram did, We can do nothing in our bedchamber, but he understands it, 2.
Kings 2.11.12.

Secondly, for concealment, he is as subtle to find us out as to hide
himself; and therefore carries his matters so, that the most are murderd by
him before they wist who hurt them; being like the Fox, who enters fetching
leaps into her hole, that one may not be able to trace her to her den she
lies in: which will appear more in his more apparent practices. His more
apparent practices are these; First, his ambushment: and this word does note a
stratagem used by the Israelites against Ai: this is the noted course of the
devil, that he shall bite at the heel, and come upon us behind our back as
it were. Thus sometime he tempts us to gross neglect of our duty or the
contrary, but he comes upon us stealing, with indevotion, or eying man in the
performance of duty, seeking to corrupt the manner or intention: but these
things not taking place, he has lying in ambush, pride and security; with
which, after performing any good duty, we are ready to be overtaken.

A second stratagem, to restrain course of victual from the besieged, or to
take away weapons from the enemy; the one practiced against Samaria, the other
by the Pstilistims against Israel, 1. Sam. 13.19. Now this is the attempt of
Satan against us, to famish us if it were possible: for now at a sermon, the
milk, bread, and meat of our souls, is dealt forth by Gods Steward; but how
many does the devil keep from tasting one mouth full? some vanish in wa^dring
thoughts: some sit like pillars: some if they be held too long, or have it not
trimly dished forth, fall out with their meat, and will none: so many worthy
communicants he makes afraid to touch the sacrament; uncomfortable
performance, indispositions so trouble them. So he does labor nothing more,
then to wring our weapons out of our hands; as prayer, what a deal of
discomfort do we know in it? such svvarms of thoughts impertinent, such
mists, such loss of all comfortable sense? But the devil knovveth, that a
prayer preferred in the obedience of faith, though out of the deeps of death
and spiritual thraldom, is twice acceptable: but his drift is to make us lay
aside prayer. So faith: what is the matter that renewing our faith we have
some trial presently that shakes us more then ever? The matter the devil
aims at is, to make us by such continual foiles, after renewing our faith*
be weary of this, and so cast our shield from us.

A third stratagem in enemies is, to get the contrary forces out of their
hold, or to disorder their march and battle array, Ios. 7. Iud. 20.

Now this is the devils politic practice: for our wall and mount is first our
belief in the word of promise, and threatening of God if we sin; 2. Our
constant course in good exercises. Now the devil vvil dravv us from these, as
those in Mal. 3.14. who were brought to say, It is in vain to serve the Lord:
as Evah, the devil brought her to make a peradventure of death that was so
peremtorily threatened, and then stabbed her deadly. So David was wont to pray
thrice a day, and take times for such devotions: but the devil (as it is
probable in 2. Sam. 11.2.) had caused him to com from his trench, and then did
presently vvound him.

The fourth stratagem is, Spreading of false terrors. Iud. 7. Gedcon with a
frightfull show did so astonish the enemy, that they turned one against the
other: thus the devil does often marshal many causeless terrors, as he makes
others presume when they should tremble. Hence it comes, that he makes
Gods dear christian children be sometime troubled with fear whether they are
in the favor of GOD, whether they ever had true grace whether they have not
sinned against the holy Ghost. So in particular actions if one will make a
conscience of unlawful gain, he will fear them with poverty, They shall not
be able to live: so, if they be liberal, he will cast in this fear, They may
want themselves: so, if they defend an innocent helpless person, he will bid
them look what they do, they may draw an old house on their heads: and he
does fill the eyes of the spirit with such disguised bug-beares.



Now what is the use of all this, we may be k^pt safe.? and suspect the evil
one: this is the Sentinel of the soul, which makes discovery of the
adversary. Be watchful, etc. Credulity is full of peril, but wise suspicion
secureth from danger. Pro. 8.12.) he dwells with prudence, he finds out
counsels, the spirit of vvisdome is in him. If we had to deal with some
crafty B^oaker, we would join the vvisest head we could meet with
against him: but get Christ the wisdom of the father, and no wisdom shall
be able to hurt thee.

David. Achitophels stratagems, in the time of peace, were like the Oracles of
God; but what said David, Lord confound the wisdom of Achitophel. 2.
Forewarned, forearmed.

The reason follows. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, etc.

In which, three things are to be considered. 1. Who are the vvrestlers. 2. The
wrestling it self. 3. The Antagonists that wrestle with us. But the words
are difficult: therefore it may be asked, Ans. from the powers of darkness,
which they make to this end, that they may cast us down from the state of
faith, righteousness, and blessedness; to an unbelieving, unrighteous, and
cursed condition.

Secondly, it may be asked, Ephesus, etc. that is, savage men, of beastly
quality; seeing again that men make us no small exercise? Answ. God says by
Samuel, they have not cast thee off, but me: that is, not thee only or
principally. 1. Samuel, 8.7.

Colos. 1.13. we are said to be delivered from them. John 16.11. The Prince
of this world is said to be cast forth, and judged?

Ans. done: in some measure we have deliverance, but not perfect. We see not
all things subject to Christ. Heb. 2.8. and Romans 16.20. Satan is not, but
shortly shall be trodden down under our feet; This serves in general. But the
last part of the verse is difficult, and therefore requires more particular
examination. For the sum therefore of it, here is a description of the Devil
and his Angels, which are the assaylants of us in the way of salvation. Now
they are described three ways. 1. From the respect of power they have in
regard of this world, and that particularly called principalities, and powers;
generally, called worldly governors; which is expounded by way of correction,
governors of the darkness of this world. 2. They are described from their
nature. 1. Their essence, spirits. 2. Their quality, wicked. 3. From the place
of them, in high places, or heavenly places;

The air called by the name of heaven, as the fowls of the air are called
the fowls of heaven. Now for the meaning, we must open the words. Ans. by us,
though the Lord has revealed it. We say it is taught in the Scriptures, that
if any thing be found out pertinent and sound, it may be known to have been
revealed by God. 2. We say, that these things, though in Scripture not fully
conceived, we may teach modesty, and conscience of our infirmity, when we come
to the Scripture; that so we may seek to have our understanding unlocked. 2.
That we may banish the pride of being wise above that which is written, when we
cannot conceive all things written. 3. That we may teach, that the perspicuous
knowledge of this doctrine of Angels, is kept till we shall be (...) (...). But
yet with reverence so far as the word of God does hold forth light, we may
impart that we conceive.

First, therefore you must know that there are two spiritual kingdoms in the
world. The one of light, God, Christ. The other of Satan, called also the power
of darkness. Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness.
Act. 26. Now as the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, in
righteousness, peace, and joy: So the kingdom of Satan is in power; which
especially stands in four things. In sin, which as a spiritual judgment he
does execute: In the curse. Heb. 2.14 That he might destroy through death, him
that had the power of death: in inflicting evils apparently, evil in body,
soul, goods: and in giving things good in themselves; yet bestowed in Gods
fierce wrath. And thus he bestows through Gods just judgment, the glory and
riches of this world. For when God will let a man thrive in sin, the Devil
will serve him in prosperous success, above that his heart can desire. This
is his proper power in regard of the wicked. Now in respect of the godly, he
has a power to exercise them with sundry tentations.

Secondly, you must set down, that in this kingdom of evil Angels, there
are some in order before others; that is granted of all. More particularly,
there is one universal commander of the rest, and Prince as it were of the
whole world: therefore the Scripture speaks singularly of him, calling him
the Devil, with an eminency above his Angels: Satan, the Prince of this world,
as our Savior does often call him, in John 2. There are Princes, or principal
spirits in Nations and Countries under him. Thus the Scripture teaches, Dan.
10.13. The Prince of Persia, where he speaks of an Angel having power in that
country; having power to work so in the sons of disobedience, that the
matter of the Church was hindered. And these are principally under the Prince
of the whole world.

Thirdly, it may be probably conceived, that in Countries there are of
inferior authority under them, and they are powers. For in earthly kingdoms
(when these two words are joined) the one does signify principal governors,
the other second ones, or subdelegate under them: So that, the first word may
note the Prince of the whole world, and such as are principal over nations
under him. The second, such as are in authority under them, to execute Gods
spiritual judgment of sin and curse, and have power of tempting the Saints.
Now the third word does comprehend both the former, as the general does the
kinds under it: For both the Princes of this world, Princes national, and
powers inferior to them, all are worldly governors.

Now he opens the foundation of this their power; lest they should be
thought governors, such as are the sons of the most high, and have received
magistracy for the good of men; he says, they be rulers in the world, by
reason of the darkness in it: or by the world, I mean the darkness of sin,
all kind of curses, and spiritual temptations. The second thing they are
described from, is their nature. First, they are spiritual: that is,
intelligences that cannot be seen with eye; subtle and powerful. 2. For their
quality, wicked; such as have at least eminently in them al wickedness. The
third thing is the place; the doctrine of which, you may remember in these
three conclusions.

First, they are cast out of heaven; which was their first habitation, Jude 6.
Secondly, the place appointed to them all (and where some are reserved to the
last day) is hell, or the deep. 2. Pet. 2.4. For if God spared not the Angels,
etc. Luke 8.31. And they besought him that he would not command them to go
out into the deep, that is into hell. For these guilty persons are imprisoned
before execution.

Thirdly, that Gods just disposition is such, that for executing his spiritual
judgments and curses on the wicked, and trying with temptations his own
children, some of them are in the earth. Apoca. 12.12. For the Devil is come
down in great rage. Job 1. The Devil compasses the earth. Some are in the
air, as in this place to hinder the saving hearing of Gods word; and in the
story of Job, they stirred up tempests,

Now then the sum of these words, may more largely in this manner be
unfolded. You have good reason to put on the armor of God: for all of us who
have received to believe, and have through faith our hearts purified to
obedience; what is our life, but a continual conflict (wrestle) and who are
those that encounter us? Not flesh and blood, for then we needed not armor of
such high proof, forged by God himself. But those that strive with us, are
such, as if you look at their authority, they have a kingdom amongst men, the
Prince of the whole world; under him national Princes; these have
principalities, and secondarie powers under them. These principalities and
powers, these all of them are great governors in the world, do all of them
resist us, yet I would not have you take them such as have a magistracy over the
outward man, for the good of them, as worldly Princes; who are therefore
called gods. But the regency they have amongst men, is by reason of darkness.
Gods spiritual judgments, curses which God will have executed, and
temptations wherewith God will have his children exercised; governors of the
darkness of this world. Again, for their nature, they are not weak flesh, but
spirit: and therefore subtle, and mighty to spread their wickedness, wherewith
they are replenished.

Finally, they are such to whom (cast out of heaven) though the deep hell
belongs; yet the Lord by his just dispensation (that his judgments may be
executed on the wicked, and his children tried) does let them be in the earth,
and houer over our heads in the air, in great abundance, prying into us, and
so having the vantage of the place against us.

First, then we see here, that no man, whatsoever his worthiness is, or
graces, but is encountered by Satan. Our parents were set-on in state of
innocence: Christ; He desired to winnow the Apostles: for of all other he is
the most opposite to such, as who will still be busiest where he has least
to do. And no marvel: for, the Saints have received Gods presse-mony, and
bound themselves by sacrament to fight against him. hearts which God has
silld with his spiritual treasure; there is booty for his malice to prey upon.

This therefore must be laid down, that All the faithful find spiritual
enmity against them: for though sometime he go away for a season, Luke 4.13;
though there be old men as well as young: yet this hinders not, but that it may
be affirmed of all, that they have their enemies still begirting them, and
assailing them, when they hope for advantage by it. foolish, or humorous,
troubled with they know not what, or think that they are some notorious
sinners, if they be in their minds molested.

Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam, certamina desunt.

Secondly, we must see what is the course of a christian life: it is a
conflicting course, or wrestling continually; power of darkness seeking to
throw him from faith, holiness, blessedness, to sin and a cursed estate: our
life is a warfare. The life of all men generally is full of commotion, Job.
14.1; much more of them, who for opposition in this world, are of all men the
most miserable.

Paul says, his life and course was a warfare; I have fought a good fight,
etc. 2. Tim. 4 7. Jacob, Genesis 32.28, being a pattern of all true-hearted
Israelites, whose lives are a wrestling by tears and prayers, against all
spiritual wickedness. Sometimes it is not manifest to the eye of the world,
that the matter is so with them as it is, they are thought to have fair lives;
but many a man, merry in company, has a shrewe at home: so the Saints, though
they may seem to be pleasant, have that in secret which does fill their
hearts with sighs, and their eyes with tears, something outward, or inward,
or both, wherewith they always wrestle. It must be thus: for the fire of grace
is like the heat of the body in this, if the heat of the stomach had nothing to
wrestle with, it would bring all the body, and so it self, into an utter
consumption: if Gods grace had not something without or within, exercising of
it, with which it might wrestle, it could not, in this estate we are in, be
preserved.



Tim. 2.5. and if any man strive for a mastery, etc: for though this is not the
cause, it is the way to our glory.

(this is a vvrastling and conflicting estate) and it is a sign that the
strong man possesses the house, that all is so quiet.

Video meliora, proboque. Ans. of conscience, and the sensual courses. But by
these three rules we may discern the fight of the spirit and flesh from it:
First, our strife is caused not from enormous swarving, but from the corrupt
quality which infecteth us throughout, our birth, sin, the law of evil which
dwells in the members. Now this is a thing which the light of nature does
not descry.

Paul's fight was, that he could not (...), accomplish the things he would,
in the manner he desired.

Now follovveth the third thing, who it is that does in all things strive
against us? The Devil and his Angels. This the Scripture has of old taught,
God putting enmity between the serpent and the seed of the woman, and therefore
the Devil by eminency is called the Tempter. 1. These. 3.5. And his hatred is so
great, that there is nothing from which he will not take occasion to be dealing
with us. For as God does work the perfecting of his by the buffeting of the
Devil: so Satan does turn the best graces of God to matter of temptation. But
for the clearing of this, we must know that the Devil does sometimes tempt
us immediately: as Ananias, Acts 5.3. Judas, Luke 22.2. Secondly, thus: in
temptation of blasphemy, self murder, in the judgment which he brings,
and in this manner Christ was tempted, in two temptations; and Jobs body and
goods were touched by him.

Now be is plainly wrestling in this kind, but in those things wherein he
is not the next moouer, yet is the first and more remote agent; and therefore
they may be said in some things to wrestle against us: As when the things of
this world arm themselves, or the persons in the world do make us matter;
Satan is a principal worker in them all. The last branch is to be showed in
the next doctrine: the things of the world, as glory, riches, pleasure, must
not be considered as naked things, but as instruments by his use lifted up, the
force they have of bewitching and inueigling our hearts from God. Thus he used
the glory of the world to Christ as a bait to take him with. Thus, 1. Timothy
6.9. riches are his snare; thus the apple delighting the eye and taste, was an
argument he preferred to our first parents: and that life in these things,
which so works on the natural man, comes partly from Satan, which is also
crucified by the same cross of Christ, by which he was subdued. 2. Saint James
Iam 1.14.
says, that our concupiscence withdrawing us, we are tempted of it: but
though it be so fruitful a parent that it can without mid-wifery bring forth
alone: yet we must conceive it so, that for the most part, our lust is moved
and excited by these evil spirits, they blow the coals up, and are the fires
of the sin whereof our concupiscence is the mother: be not angry, give not
place to the Devil, the Devil therefore stirs up anger, Ephe. 4.26.27.
David's heart did swell, but the Devil persuaded and moved it, 1. Chron. 21.1.
The widows following lust, go after the Devil, 1. Tim. 5.15. And as it is
always true that when we do any good thing, we do it from the principles
of grace in us, yet the spirit gives us the will and the deed: so when we
do evil withdrawn by our concupisce^ce, the Devil for the most part does
kindle, and excite the sin which dwells in us, that we may say it is true, The
Devil is, by himself, and by the things of this world, and by concupiscence,
the principal tempter.

that in those things men do or speak offensiuely to us, our principal
enemy is not man. Paul had much opposition by men, yet he says we wrestle
not against men: he saw worse enemies in them then themselves: men did
persecute the Saints, but Revel. 2.10. the holy Ghost says, the Devil does
cast them into prison: the false teachers did seduce the Corinthians, but 2.
Cor. 4.11. the holy Ghost says, Satan did beguile them: the Damsel and men
that chased Peter to the denial of his Master, were not his chief enemies,
but the Devil that desired to winnow him, Luke 22.21. So the Caldeans and
Sabeans, that spoiled Jobs goods, were not the chief against him, but Satan by
them. The Devil does like fowlers who go with their stalking horse twixt them
and the foul, that they may shoot more securely: so he does put men,
sometime our friends, sometime good men, of who^ we are nothing afraid, between
us and him, that he may work his mischief undiscerned. Saul left hunting
David when he heard the Philistims were upon him. let us by the way take good
heed, that he do not circumuent us: the rather, because he will wind in him
self, when we have no ill purpose in it; as Peter praying Christ to spare
himself. The Corinthians being severe to the incestuous person, the Devil
would have used this their course to the ouerwhelming of him with sorrow.

Secondly, the Devil, with his Angels are called powers and principalities.
We see the evil Angels have a great stroke in the frame of this present evil
world, in ordering (or rather disordering) of states and kingdoms: these are
not empty titles,, but given them from a powerful action they have in the
hearts of men, by Gods permission: And the same must be gathered when he is
called the Prince of this world, yea, 2. Cor. 4.4. the god of this world; his
usurpation, and the spirits of evil men yielding him no less. Great is their
power in keeping out good, keeping in evil, procuring judgment: and he does
scour thorough Court and Country, for this purpose. Thus he provoked David by
sin to lay the people naked to Gods judgment, 1. Chro. 21.1. And Satan stood
up against Israel. Thus he labored to cut off the hopes of the Church, by
stirring up evil Princes, to entrap Daniel in the matter of his religion. Dan.
6.5. Thus he stood at the right hand of Iehosuah to resist him. Zach. 3.2.
Prince, Priest, and People, he works in them all to hold up his own
kingdom, and stablisheth all things that serve for it; as on the contrary to
keep out light and truth, and all means which should befriend these. Hence it
was, that the best Kings of Judah never made a thorough reformation: hence,
that in some Countries receiving the Gospel, as in Germany, there have been
such bones of dissension, as subscription to their books of concord, the apple
of discord. For Mat. 13.24.25. the Devil sows tares, when good seed is
sown by the Lord.

Ioh. 7.48. You see your calling, not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called, 1. Cor. 1.26. For then the Devil could not
have so great a sway in the kingdom of this world, if he should not hold
great personages (for the most part) sure to him. as are light of belief in
this point, it proceeds from ignorance: They do not know the power, and
latitude of the Devils kingdom.

The third thing to be marked hence, is, that he says they be governors of
the darkness of this world: that whosoever do live in the state of darkness,
they are under the Devils power. These are joined, the one as the foundation of
the other: and before we have deliverance from the one, we cannot be freed
from the other. Act. 26.18, To open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God, etc. And therefore the Scripture
affirms of one, who hears the word, and comes not to the affectiue
knowledge of it (so to learn Christ, as the truth is in Christ) that he is in
the hands of the God of this world. 2. Cor. 4.4. In whom the God of this world
has blinded their minds, that is, of the Infidels: that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God, should not shine unto
them; for ignorance is the very foundation of the Devils kingdom. Again,
whosoever lives in the darkness of sin, is of the Devil. Ioh. 3.8, He that
commiteth sin is of the Devil: and whosoever is subject to Gods curse (as every
one not truly believing is) is as yet under the power of Satan: for he is
Gods executioner; even as we may say, if a man be led pinioned up the ladder,
and have a handkerchiefe knit before his eyes, that he is in the hands of the
hangman. If one be in the dungeon at the Castle, with boults on him, we may say
he is under the power of the Iayler: so if this veil be knit before the eyes
of the mind and so the face covered: If one do live in unrighteousness and
unholiness, bound with the bands of many trespasses (whose sins you shall
loose) If one lie in the little ease of an evil conscience, whether he be in a
drunken sleep and feel nothing, or if he be waking: such a party is in the
power of Satan; for the Devil is but the Iayler and hangman to the Justice of
God.

our selves, and consider how it is with us: for we would bless our selves,
we would be loath to have one near us, come into such condition for the outward
man, so shameful, so miserable: but let us look our souls be not in worse
hands. It is so with us, that the eye sees not, the heart dreads not, yea we
count our chains and imprisonment the only liberty; and to know nothing, nor
to care for any thing in matters of religion, the pleasant life. Men love
darkness better then light; and because they have ever been in this hell, they
think there is no other heaven: but if you be thus imprisoned in darkness of
understanding, in unrighteousness under Gods displeasure; know this, there will
come a day of execution too soon upon you.

Col. 1.12, break out into thanksgiving. Is it not a merry time when the
gaole-delivery comes, when their fees are paid, when their Irons are took off,
and themselves discharged, that they now may walk at liberty? it is merry with
them, though they hault a little after: so with us, though we limp by reason
of the chains we carried so long, we should tell this treasure often.

As we will have nothing to do with the diu^ll, so must we flee from his
wickedness: if we l^t-in his wickedness, we cannot but give him entertainment:
for, the devil comes unto us in suggestions of unrighteousness; if we
consent to them, we entertain the devil. Ananias and Judas, when they
consented to the wicked motions the devil inspired into them; the devil is
said to fill the heart of the one, and to enter into the other, Luke 22.3. Acts
5.3. and not only of these enormous sinners, but of all that walk in evil:
and for the devil he has a dwelling in them; The strong man armed keeps the
house, Mat. 12. yea, the godly if they listen to wickedness, they give place to
the devil, Ephesians. 4: for look, as when God knocks at our hearts by a holy
motion, if we open in obeying, the Lord does come, and further dwell in us,
Apo. 3.21. So when these wicked spirits do reach out their wickedness unto us,
if we consent to it, they come to possess us after a sort, and have a
dwelling in us. But, you will say then, Ans. consenting to wickedness, we
let-in the devil unto us. Now then take heed: fire; no says he, I will go
to such a one, I will be a spirit of untruth, I will be a spirit of error,
1. Reg. vlt. 22. a spirit of covetousness, of pride, of malice; I will suggest
these things: Consent to these vvickednesses, and you receive the spirit which
prompteth you with them, to your understanding. And the Lord teach us to hate
wickedness, even as the devil that is a spirit of it, full of it, and
laboring to fill us with it.

Lastly, that they are in high places, are above us, Hence learn
circumspection: for, seeing we ly naked to the view of them, we must be
careful, that they spy nothing in us to their advantage: again, what are
they? not only lion-like enemies, but malicious Promoters.

Now if a Promoter, that should bear us no good vvil, should stand over our
heads, would we not be watchful; knovving, that every fault would be
informed against us? so the devil is no other then a malicious accuser of us;
and these spiritual vvickednesses hang hovering over our heads: substance it
is all one with verse 11, yet the considerations in it are diverse: for the
holy Ghost does in repetitions enforce circumstances different; both for our
further delight and instruction, as the same meat makes diverse dishes if
diversely cooked. The words are plain, the parts are the exhortation to our
duty (grounded on the words before) and the ends of our duty: he exhorts to
the one, leading to the other. First, resistance amplified from the
circumstance of time, in the evil day; that is, in the hours of temptation,
of afflictions, of the power of darkness.

Secondly, perseverance, set down by the antecedent, That having finished all
things (that is, having outwrestled all the evils which meet you in these
hard times) you may be able to hold your own; yea to go on more and more
strenghened and fuller of resolution then before. We see then what is the end
of all that is revealed of evil Angels, their subtlety and power; That we
pull up good hearts to resist them. It is not to feed curiosity, but to make us
more vigilant. 1. Pet. 5.8. Be sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil
goes about as a roaring Lio^, etc. Much less is it the purpose of Paul to
disharten us, as those naughty Spies, Nu^. 13. who told of the Giants of
Canaan, so as to quail the courage of the Israelites: but this faithful
servant does so tell them, that he may whet up our spirits to the resistance
of them. 1. Pet. 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith. This then must be our
care, when we know how powerful, subtle adversaries we have, To buckle our
selves to battle, and gird up our loins to martial resistance. Now, that we
may be encouraged to wage this war, who are so weak, First, we must
consider the spirit in us, is stronger then the spirit in the world. 1. John
4.4. The spirit which does bear at one end of the staff in every godly fight,
is stronger then all the Devils in hell. Secondly, all the Devils power is
limited, and that short, that he is not able to wound us mortally. Genesis 3 15.
He shall bruise thy heel: he cannot wound us in the head, or hurt us, as
Christ does him (yea and makes us likewis^) when he does tread him under our
feet. Romans 16 20. The God of peace shall shortly tread down Satan, etc. All
his power is derived and lymited: he can not touch a cattle that belongs to
us, nor a hog, if Christ do not make him his warrant.

This we may see by experience, what is the cause, when we are in the best
liking, the Devil does bring us down and moyle us in sin; and yet, when by
sin we lie under him, he can do nothing till we are risen by daily
repentance: he is at his chains end, and can go no further: if we were in
the mouth of this roaring Lion, he could not couch his fangs without Gods
permission. Qui non potest vincere, nisi volentem, is not much dreadful.
Colos. 2.15. and has spoiled the principalities and powers.

His Panoplia is gone. Now for a man in complete harness to fear a naked
bound Giant, were too much dastardise. Psa. 91.11. For he shall give his Angels
charge over thee, etc. Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits sent
forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation? So that
if our eyes were opened, we might see (as Elisha said) there are more with
us, then against us. If one Iosuah could stand against one and thirty Kings,
of Canaan, what principalities, powers, virtues, shall be able to stand before
our Iehoshuah, the Lord of Hoasts? Wherefore though they be mighty, yet we may
say as he, Number. 14.9. They are as bread for us, and let us take heed how we let
our hearts be daunted, and speak of our sins, and other such infirmities, as
if we never should out-grow them, and wish our selves dead, rather then so
yoaked. For if God would take us at our words, it were enough to keep us out
of that glorious rest of his. Number. 14.28. As I live says the Lord, I will do
unto you even as ye have spoken in mine ears. But we serve a gracious Lord.

We must prepare our selves before the day of temptation comes. Take up, that
when it comes you may resist. It is good for us to be appointed aforehand,
when we know that we shall be set upon with evils. Job. 3.25. He when it was
fair weather looked for a season of temptations. Paul, Acts 20.24. he cared
for nothing but this, that he might finish his course with joy, shoot the
vp-shot well, and in the evil time surrender a comfortable spirit to his
Creator. And this duty is enjoined, when we are bid be sober and watchful.
For first, Mat. 25. who brought not oil, till their Lord was come: they then
came too late, the day after the Fair: so a thousand to one, that who
neglects the present time, and provides not, shall never in the evil day
be able to compass it.

Pro. 6.6.8. she does in summer store up for winter; who may be checked by
their own courses in things earthly. If they have a journey to make of
pleasure, they will be weeks aforehand providing for it: if they fear hard
times, they will lay up something against the dear year. Which wisdom in
earthly things may euince their folly, who will not get a stock of grace, on
which to spend in hard times, when it is no easy gathering. Anno 88. when we
had intelligence of the the ships coming against us, the Drum was stricken up
in our streets, press money walking, mustering every where, all kind of
provision, that we might be able to meet them victoriously: so it becomes,
that having certain intelligence, that these times will come, though it is
uncertain when, we should put our selves always in a readiness.

Thirdly, it is to be marked, That when he bids all the faithful provide
against the evil day, he takes this for granted, tho whosoever are the
Lords, in this course of their lives shall know some hard seasons. He does not
shoot off false fires, making them afraid of moonshine in water, but
forewarneth them of that which should befall them. Neither does he tell them
of evil times, on this particular ground, that persecutions were hard at hand
only, which are not always; but on this ground, that the powers of darkness
do fights against us, which is common to all ages. Wherefore the doctrine is
plain, that the Lords shall know in the course of their lives, some times full
of difficulty. We must not think that honey moons will last all the year. True
it is, there is great diversity: yet this also is true, that in all lives they
have their evil days in them. Some are very dripping ever and anon showrs,
like Jacobs: some fair in the forepart, and ending, but having a sound shower
at noon-time, like Job: some in the ending clowdy and stormy, as John 20.18. It
is said of Peter, that when he was young, he went whither he would, etc. when
these days shall com it is hid. Job 24.1, How should not the times be hidden
from the Almighty, seeing who know him, see not his days. But that such do
abide us is revealed. Every one that will live godly, must suffer persecution.
We must thorogh many afflictions, Acts 14.22. If we have not our chastising
we are bastards, Heb. 12. die on their nests. Job 29.18. Then I said, I shall
die in my nest, I shall multiply my days as the sand; think they shall never
be moved, never see evil, Psalm. 10.6. That their mount shall not be shaken.
They might as well say, the sun shines, they shall never see rain again.

knovving, that if they vvin it not presently, they shall never prevail: so
Satan in death, then or never must he get the day of thee. Think therefore
how furiously he will assault: fear therefore those times; and the rather,
because if you fear, and your hearts melt; God will be merciful. As Josias
when his heart melted at Gods threatenings, God told him, they should not come
to pass in his days. If a rod shaken be enough, a parent will not strike
with it.

Fourthly, that he says, having finished all things, that is, outwrastled all
the evils wherewith in those hard times you shall be exercised; observe hence,
that when times of temptation come, we must look for many things wherein we
are to be tried. Apoc. 9.12. Job when GOD brought the evil days on him, how
many things, one in the neck of another, did exercise him? changes, armies of
sorrow did beset him, Job 10.17. Wherefore broughtest thou me out of the
womb? oh that I had perished, and no eye had seen me. So Christ: the devil
came to him with a threefould temptation, and then gave back but for a season.
The particular evil day is described thus, Ecclesiastes, 12.2. that after
rain comes clouds: that is, it is like this April-weather, as one shower is
unburdened, another is brewed: eue^ as in the evil day, when GOD does muster
his judgments against the wicked, to consume them, God has a pit, snare,
fear; as Esaias 24.17.

Or as Amos 5.19. as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear meet him; or
went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him;
that is, he has one evil in the neck of another to destroy them: so in the
day of temptation he has many exercises, that his children may be thoroughly
tried, as gold in the furnace. Ephraim, Hos. 10.11. we love to thresh, but
endure not the yoke easily. inner man, to all long-sufferance with ioyfulnes.
Thirdly, Job in his day, 13.15. If thou vvilt kill me, yet will I trust in
thee. He that believes, makes not haste.

We must not only have care to outwrastle evils for the present, but to
persevere after; that is, hold our own in grace, yea have grace increased;
showing it self in a holy defiance of all enmity, if the hour of death be at
hand: or in further resolution to encounter new enmities, if life continue. We
faint not, says the Apostle, nay we are more then conquerers, Romans 8.37.
Heereto must be recalled the glorious exulting, Romans 8.38. I am persuaded,
that neither life, nor death, etc. I have fought a fight, what is laid up for
me but a crown of righteousness? And while life continues, we must be
strengthened for further resistance. 1. Pet. 5.10, And the God of all grace,
which has called us to his eternal glory by Jesus Christ, after that ye
have suffered a little, make you perfect, confirm, strengthen, and stablish
you; Where, he makes our confirming and strengthening of us, a fruit
follovving our subduing of temptations: as trees shaken, root more firmly; and
cities besieged, when the enemy prevails not, they grovve ever after more
invincible.

This then must teach us, Again, mark what mind we should have to
persevere, that have suffered; seeing, when we give over to endure, all our
former suffering is in vain. Now if a man had laid much money forth on a
thing, would he lose his former charge for a trifle? no; he would rather
double the cost he had been at: for, we must carry minds rather to double all
our sufferings, then to give over before our end. Again, the more we have gone
through, the more the Lord gives us these minds; the more we should be
fleshed against further assaults. Many fail in this: the standing after many
trials have been well endured, as David fought all the Lords battles, and
passed away his days happily, yet afterward fell most grievously.

Now follow the several pieces of armor, of which in general two things must
be marked; These. 5.8. Paul calls faith a breast plate. Secondly, adversary
power, as well as ward the blows which the devil reaches us. Faith therefore
is called our victory, 1. John 5.4. This is the victory that ouercometh the
world, even our faith. Now then to consider of the several parts as they be in
order, First he says, Stand, being girded about with the girdle of truth. For
the manner of proceeding, before we proceed to the doctrines and word of
exhortation, we will seek out four things: first, what is meant by every one:
secondly, what is the use of it: thirdly, how the devil does labor to disarme
us of it: fourthly, how we may hold our own against him. The girdle of truth
then comes first: Now truth sometime signifies the doctrine of truth, John
17.17. But that it cannot here signify; the sword of the spirit, being thus
to be considered. Truth therefore here, is soundness: which is always
accompanied with constancy, For which cause the Hebrews do in one word
signify both.

For the second, this girdle has three uses. First, it does adorn us: for this
was the use of the Studded belt, which the soldiers did wear, to hide the
gaping joints of their armor, which would have been unseemly: and nothing
does adorn a soul more, then uprightness: as our Savior commending
Nathanael, gave out this speech of him; Behold a true Israelite in whom there
is no guile, John 1.47.

Secondly, a girdle does tie other clothes about us, close to us, which
otherwise the wind would blow about, and would hang but loose upon us: so
this girdle of truth does contain and hold together all other graces,
wherewith the soul is arrayed; and without truth to keep them together, in
time all of them are borne away with winds of temptation. Mat. 13.20.21. That
grace that was not knit together with honesty of heart, came to nothing in the
end: as appears in the Parable.

Thirdly, a girdle trussing up the loins of a man moderately, does strengthen
a man; whence is the exhortation so often used of girding up the loins: so
this grace adds great strength to the inner man, as we may see in Job; who
when God seemed, and men did fight against him, when heaven and earth seemed to
conspire against him, yet this did stick by him, Chap. 27.5, Until I die, I
will never take away mine innocence from my self. Now the works of it are
exercised in our daily course, or in the evil times of greater exercise then
ordinary. Daily it does make us strike at the roots of hypocrisy, we discern
in us, and resist the temptations of the Devil, which tend to make us corrupt
our actions in their end, or manner of pe^formance: but especially it does
strengthen us in the evil time, when the Devil shall be ready to bear us
down, that we have been but hypocrites. Now for the third thing, The Didoth by
four means especially seeks to wipe us of this girdle. He will from the
example of others, Ob.
reason thus: Such, and such as Judas, have had greater things then you, and
gone further then you, yet they were but hypocrites, How can thou tell? is it
otherwise with thee? Many first are last, etc. Answ. We must avoid this
objection, by learning to distinguish true constant grace, from fained and and
temporary: which is fitly done by these two differences. Ephesians. 3.17. It is a
true living faith that makes Christ to dwell in the heart, and this is the
cause why our grace lasts: as we find by daily experience ebbes. And this
water runs exceedng low: yet having the wellhead in us, and renewing our
faith on him the quickening Spirit, rivers do afresh run out of our bellies,
and the current of grace as high as before. The temporiser, though he have a
stream of grace, yet wanting the fou^tain to feed it, it must needs dry away;
as those streams, or ponds which have no spring, nor head of water to
maintain them, cannot continue. Herod, Mat. 8. Now this makes grace it cannot
be held with them. For as a stomach ill affected thorough choler, though never
so wholesome meats be received into it, yet it cannot hold them, but is
provoked to cast: so where there is this obstruction of the soul, the wilful
love of any sinful course, whatsoever grace is received into the heart, it
will not let it rest, but makes the soul cast it up upon all occasions.

Secondly, the Devil will from our unsound performance of duties thus reason
against us: Answ. Now there may be this, not reigning hypocrisy in the hearts
and consciences of Gods people. David, Psalm. 31. when he said, Blessed is he,
in whose spirit there is no guile, did take him self tardy in this evil: and
Bradford, with other of those most holy Martyrs, do much seek pardon of
hypocrisy and carnal gospelling: but no sin that reigns not, must
discourage us. Answ.

Ob.
Thirdly, the Devil will through crosses we bear, and from the preiudicate
opinion of other men bear us down that we are not sound hearted. Answ. Job
is but a canuase about this; where it is determined, that no calamities can
prove a man an hypocrite, nor no opinion of men, though wise and holy: The
self same thing befalls him that swears, and him that fears an oath.
Eccl s. 9 1 2.

La^tly, the Devil will labor to foist in this leaven of hypocrisy in our
daily course, that thus by little and little, he may pick this good se^d of
righteousness out of our hearts. Here our resistance is to hold us to our
own, and pray to God to rebuke him. And this way is made for the fourth
question, How we may keep this truth.

First, by considering the woeful curse that belongs to the contrary: For
God detesteth nothing so, as hypocrisy: and abhors those duties that are
not done to him in soundness. 2. The blessedness of it. Blessed is he whose
heart is upright, Psalm. 119. it is the delight of God; and hither belong all
the uses above named. 3. In our common daily duties to labor this: 1. To
perform them with our heart. 2. As in the sight of God. 3. To his glory, for
this will make the grace of truth to be deeply rooted in us.

Now the^ for the Doctrine, That we must get uprightness of heart for the
strengthening of us. Luke 12.35, Let your loins also be girded about. 1. Pet.
1.13, Gird up the loins of your mind. Now this is the chief girdle that
adorneth us, keeps all our clothes together, strengthens the loins of us:
thus David girded him self, I will walk in the uprightness of my heart, in
the midst of my house. Psalm. 101. 2. King. 20.3. Hezekiah. 2. Cor. 1.12, For
our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God: we have
had our conversation in the world, and most of all to you wards: and it must
not be a natural truth which may cause men to hate halting with their own
knowledge, but has a fruit of the spirit: such as must make us not only look
to the outward duty, but to the inward performance of it; such as must make
us seek to glorify God. a man may be bold to say here, as to children; Not
girt, not blessed: but many that have girdles, yet keep them sluttishly: who
are here likewise to be reproved; and few of us can wash our hands, we being
all hollow pieces, if due examination be taken. Consider but these four
things, and you shall be better able to ferret out the guile of your spirits.
First, how careless we are of the spiritual action, in those things we
perform: as in prayer. To the spiritual doing of this duty, is required,
first, preparation, or keeping the heart fit for it. 2. A devout inward desire,
groaning to God. 3. An awayting, after we have done, to see how God answers
us. But who does not lightly pass over these duties? which is no better then a
vviping the out side of the dish, not looking to that within. Romans 7. in Paul
we see, the law of evil, which did dwell within him, was his principal matter
of conflict. that by us amiss, it is grievous, the shame of it much vpbraids
us: but things that offend God, and which we know he sees amiss in us,
we can let these pass nothing affected; a sign, our love to him is not so
sound; our fear of him, and desire of praise with him, not so unfeigned.

Lastly, of mercy, we speak a great many phrases of course, our conscience
telling us it is otherwise. So is our behavior: we make a semblance of
reverence, but how far it is from the heart, this may testify; that we can
(absent from the parties) use their names proverbially, we shall not have such a
one break into sinister suspicions, as if the fifth and sixth commandments were
blankes with us. So in fruits of love: we can do this party good sometime, but
it is to keep another under, who would else sprout forth so far, that his
shade would dim our lights: as, I will do for such a one, they know good
behauiours, they will do their homage, such a one will thank me for it, I am
sure it will not be given clean away. In leaving sin, many leave it not
because they hate it as sin, but it has often broken out to their reproach;
which is more, confess their own sins, not desiring to give glory to God,
and gain a testimony of a sound heart; but because worldly wisdom does tell
them, It is the best for them to tell their own tale, or it were double folly
to make dainty of that all the world knows. Thus in taking up good duties as
orders in our family, many often look not so much at the conscience of Gods
commandment as at this; The eyes of men are upon us, all the world will cry
shame, if such things be neglected altogether. But you that will keep truth,
take heed of this haulting: for though there may be some relics of
hypocrisy in a good man, yet the nature of haulting is, it will go quite out
of the way if it be not heald. Heb. 12.13, And make straight steps unto your
feet, lest that which is haulting be turned out of the way. And he that
limpeth thus still, may have a lame leg by it to his grave. buy us girdles for
the body; and if costly ones, we keep them carefully, O be wise for your
souls.

Now follovveth the second part of our furniture; Having put on the
breast plate of righteousness. To follovv the self same order: first, Ephesians. 4.24.
John 3.7, He that does righteousness, is righteous. Psalm. 112.3. Riches and
plentiousnes shall be in his house, and his righteousness endures for ever.
Now the second is not so fitly meant here, because the Apostle brings in
the new creature armed: therefore it is s^t to distinguish him from his
armor. Neither is truth properly the new creature, but the quality of him:
neither is faith and love, properly taken in their differences, the new
creature: for they shall cease. Though therefore I will not strive against it,
yet I take the righteousness of the course and conversation, here principally
to be intended. Now into this part of our furniture, three pares are
enfoulded: for this righteousness has these three branches: First, for the time
past, a testimony excusing us, which is the testimony of a good conscience, 2.
Cor. 1.12, For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc.
Paul and Barnabas exhorted the Antiochians with purpose of heart to cleave
unto the Lord. Thirdly, to us as ever. Forgive us (we say) daily our
trespasses: for, our righteousness is rather in purpose then performance, rather
in confession of imperfection, then in any perfection we can attain.
Secondly, for the use of this: it is daily, or more extraordinary: the daily
use is this, that when the devil does tempt us to sin, if the breast be
covered with this purpose not to offend, then his suggestions will fall down
like paper-shot, and shall not pearce us. How can I do this great wickedness,
and so sin against God? The more extraordinary, when men shall load us with
preiudicate opinions, condemning us: this will bear it off; I know nothing by
my self, I care not for man's judgment, 1. Cor. 4.3. As touching me, I pass
very little to be judged by you. When the devil tells us, Thou art not
elected, thou have no faith, thou art not sanctified, all does come before the
tribunal of righteousness; this confirms to us our election. 2. Pet. 1.10,
Wherefore brethren, give rather diligence to make your calling and election
sure. This assures us that we are just, our sins forgiven, and we
sanctified. John 3.7, He that does righteousness, is righteous.

The more beneficial it is, the more studious Satan is to disarme us of it.
First therefore, the Devil will keep us from getting this, in this manner:
Answ. Titus 2.14, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good
works. If we will have some kind of righteousness, he will persuade us to
such a kind of breast plate, as is not of a right metal: Answ. Mat. 5.20.
Though Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a remnant only shall be saved.
Not all that say Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Romans 11.
Mat. 7. Be ye perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect. Mat. 6.2. Desire
and endeavor to follow after it. 3. If we will enter it, he will break us
off by difficulties, discomforts, distractions, and make us yield our weapon,
as weary. But here the power of Christ, the author and finisher of faith,
the beginner and perfecter of his own good work, does carry us on: and the
seed of God is of such force, that it will not let us fall to sinning.
Secondly, the conscience of Gods commandment on one hand, and the comfort of
his acceptance on the other side, do encourage us: so that this assault is
frustrate. 4. He shows himself a Devil indeed; and by aggravating our
imperfections, will offer to wrest from us the testimony of a good conscience,
in this wise. Gods eye is too pure to behold any evil, thou should love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. But thy best deeds have be^n
sprinkled with filthiness, thy own conscience has condemned thee in them;
God is greater then thy conscience. The answer is, by getting a sound knowledge
how far we are to stand upon the righteousness of our courses; of which
mark these things. First, we do not account of it as able to abide the trial
of justice, or to stand for our full righteousness before God. This we
account is dross and dung; these things may dismay a Papist, they cannot
^ismay us. 2. We place the strength of our righteousness in two things. 1.
That it does testify of our true faith: for a work good in a^y measure, does
argue a heart good in some measure; for you cannot have a fig of a thistle:
now a heart in any measure good, does argue a true faith, for that only can
purify the heart. 2. In this that we know they are pleasing unto our God: not
that they can endure the trial of his justice in themselves, but because faith
on Christ does cover their imperfections: and therefore are justly accepted
thorough grace, when the defect is covered; they being not so much ours, as the
work of the spirit ( Colos. 1.11. strengthened with all might through his
power unto all patience, etc.) the wants set aside.

Now we shall strongly hold this part of our armor, if we exercise these
things. 1. Labor to give obedience of faith, in the least things: for there
must be preciseness in keeping Gods commandments, and we must count nothing
little that he commands. Solomon will have us keep his precepts as the sight
of our eye. Pro. 7.2.

And little sins lived in will make way to greater. Men grow from stealing
pinnes, to points, from points to pounds. for any more grievous sweruing, the
best is when it comes home by weeping cross: but how woeful is the state of
the soul, till repentance be given? For as a stomach surcharged, which has
neither vent upward nor downward, so is a soul clogged with guilt, but wanting
repentance. Now then to speak to the doctrine: we that are Christians, must
all labor to strengthen our selves with the testimony of a good conscience,
and a righteous conversation. Thus Hezechiah vvalked, doing that which was
good in the sight of God, neither turning on right hand, nor left, from all
that God had commanded. Thus Zachary and Elizabeth walked, Lu. 1.6. But we
have Paul by precept and practice, teaching the point. Phil. 4.8, Furthermore
brethren, what soever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, etc. think on these things. And we may see, first, how his
conscience did not accuse him for time present. 1. Cor. 4.3, As touching me I
pass little to be judged of you. How he endeavored for the time to come to
keep it so. Acts 24.16, and herein I endeavor always, to have a clear
conscience toward God, and toward man. 3. That he was not without his
exercise of repentance. Oh miserable man that I am, Romans 7. This will keep us
in our daily course, and in the evil hour; whereas if these be not renewed,
we shall come by scare: as Judah going forth without harnessing himself, by
renewing this purpose, we see how soon he was wounded with evil. godliness:
therefore, brown paper shall as well keep out Musket shot, as this will
help them, when the Devil shall let fly his murdring bullets. Many have none
at all, but naked breasts shot through already, their conscience being able to
accuse them, that they have lived in profanenes, contempt of Gods ordinances,
in pride, wrath, covetousness, pleasures: their purposes have been to walk
after their own hearts lusts, doing that which is good in their own eyes. In
steed of sorrow never to be repented of, they can tell you, they were at such
a place, where they were frolic, had entertainment with sports, etc. Poor
thralls of the Devil that have no armor of God upon them. Vrim and Thummin.
Wherefore look that our consciences speak with us, God is greater then they,
renew your purposes every day, strike sure covenants with God: take up the
blessed exercise of broken hearts, bewail your daily wants: for we should
not let a thought which is awry, no not a dream, which sauoureth corruption,
pass without a censure. Job rather sanctified his household on suspicion, and
jealousy, then neglected matters already apparently evil.

Now follows the third, which answers to the greaues, or legge-harnesse,
[and your feet shod] 1. For the meaning: Some do construe the preaching of the
Gospel of peace, the readiness to confession; but this is rather a fruit of
our being shod, then the shooing it self. And this is a more particular thing,
as which agrees with times of persecutions, and persons called to make
confession. But all the parts of this armor agree to all times, and to all
persons. The sense is; being shod with such furniture, as the Gospel of peace
does help us to.

Now the gospel of peace does tell us two things, that make us fully appointed
for all adversities; that God is through Christ a merciful Father: for, all
enmity is killed in his Cross. Secondly, it does assure us, that every thing
that can befall is made for us 1. Cor. 3.22.23, Whether they be things present,
or things to come, all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. Not life
only, but death is ours; that is, is made to serve for our good. So the soul,
knowing these things, is harnessed to go in the ways of tribulation. Secondly
for the use: it serves in undergoing our d^ily afflictions: for, every da^
has his misery. Secondly, in passing these extraordinary evils which shall
betide us: through many afflictions we must look to enter into the kingdom
of God, Acts 14.22: as the use of boots and greaues is against all roughness
of the way, that we may tread on flinty paths, or thorns, and that without
taking hurt. Now the devil will first labor to keep us from seeking after
this peace, by lulling us asleep with a false peace, as this; If God did not
love thee, thou should not thus prosper, thou have no troubles, nothing but
peace shall follow thee. But we must learn to distinguish between a true and
false peace. First, this is grounded on no outward thing, but on forgiveness
of sin. Romans 5.1, Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God
through Jesus Christ: this is brought to us, and applied by the gospel, by
prayer, the gospel of peace, Phil. 4.6, Be nothing careful, but in all things
let your requests be showed to God, in prayer and supplication. Now, the
worldlings peace is so much the greater, the less the gospel is preached to
him: for, this light will not let him sleep; and for wading to it by prayer,
by believing the mercy of God, and promise that all things shall work for hi^
good, he knows not wha^ these things mean. Secondly, the devil will tell us
that have our part in this peace, Esaias 48. vlt. Thou have much wickedness which
God cannot but hate. Ans. Ans. John 16.2. They shall excommunicate you, etc.
this peace stands with all kind of disturbance. As the weather friesing
never so aegrely, a man well booted and appointed in that kind, may ride as
warm as wool: so a man shod with this, may be quiet in the midst of
disquietnes: for, this is his peace; in having our minds prepared with
knowledge of our peace which the gospel reveals: not that he shall not have
evil many ways, but that Gods mercy shall not be taken from him, and that all
of them shall work together to his good. Fourthly, Ans. it follows not, God
is angry, therefore he loves thee not, therefore this or that shall hurt thee.
Now for the fourth thing, How we may preserve our peace. Ans. First, if ever
we knew it, this will help us, to assure us we have it still, To remember the
covenant of peace with us, is an eternal covenant; not for a day, but for
ever. Psalm. 54 10, For, the mountains shall move, etc. but my mercy shall not
depart from thee, neither shall my covenant of peace fall away, says the Lord.
I have compassion on thee; the whole chapter to this purpose: and Christ
says, the world cannot take away this peace from us: if therefore it seem
otherwise, it is but hid in a cloud for a season. Secondly, must, if our souls
be out a little, school them, as David does, Psalm. 42. Why art thou cast
down my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? There is an art of
rocking the soul, and stilling it if out of quiet: the Lord teach it us.

Now for the doctrine: we are to strengthen our selves with learning the
doctrine of our peace through Christ: Paul was thus shod. Romans 8.38.39, I am
persuaded, nothing shall separate me from the love of God. All things, I
know, work together for the good of them that are beloved of God, Romans 8.28.
And this furniture made him go such hard way cheerfully; in which, showrs
of afflictions did fall as thick as hailstones. The Church in the Canticles 7.1.
is commended, that her steps in these shoes are comely. This does make Gods
children, though not in the letter, yet in some sort, tread upon the Adder,
Basilisk, shake off Vipers, and receive no hurt; whereas if the feet be bared
a little with the absence of this (in sense or faith) any thing smarteth sore
on us. Job 13.14, Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth? And 6.3, Therefore
now my words are svvallovved up. Ezechias, seeing God like a Lion, his peace
somevvhat clouded, chattred like a Crane. selves thus fenced against the
craggednes of the way, how are they to be blamed, that never labor to have
part in this peace which the gospel brings? They would be loath not to
provide their bodies against vveather and difficulties of the way they go, but
their souls they care not for. But look, as it is pitiful with one that
goes upon sharp flints, barefoot, etc. or amongst the thorns and bushes, so as
the blood trickleth down at every step: so pitiful shall thy naked soul
be, when adversity shall ^eet thee* if thou be not fenced with this
knowledge of peace, through Jesus Christ.

Oh that we knew these things concerning our peace! What could hurt? If the
sting be pulled forth of an Adder, we may play with it in our bosom: If we
know every thing is for our good, as Job says, we may laugh when destruction
comes. Above all things have a care, that it be a sound peace; for there is in
nature, and bodies, a double sleep; one sick, another sound: now it is seen
in the wakening. For sick sleep makes us when we awake so much the more sick,
the other strengthens us: so peace is the souls sleep. Now if thy peace be
not sound; when God shall waken thy conscience, the more thou have slept, the
more shall thy griefs be increased, nay nothing shall sting thee more then thy
peace; woe to thee that art at peace: but if thou art at quiet, by knowing the
doctrine of peace, by the Gospel, then it shall refresh and strengthen thee.

Now follows the fourth thing, the shield of faith. First, we handle it
generally, in order as before. Secondly, particularly from the circumstances.
First, the manner of exhorting: above all things. Secondly, the commendation of
it; that it can quench all the fiery darts, etc. First, the thing here meant
is, a true lively faith, laying hold on Christ for justification; and in the
rest of Gods word and speci^ll promises, for the pass^^g o^ this present life:
for not only faith on Christ, but on the special promises of God, is
necessary for us: not that these are two several kinds of faith, but one
employed diversely: as the soul in man working in the several faculties of
nature, is not three souls, but one, exercising three diverse functions.
Secondly, for the use of faith, it serves not only to justify us, but to
make us endure in all afflictions, without making haste. The just lives in
time of his afflictions, by faith. He that believes makes not haste. 2. It
does work in us, and guide the course of our obedience. Romans 1 5. To the
obedience of faith, not only in believing the Gospel, but the other word of
command and promise. 3. It does preuail against all enemies. This is the
victory that ouercometh the world, even our faith, 1. John. 5.4. The Use shall
be more particularly branched out hereafter. Thirdly, we must mark how the
Devil does practice against us in this point. 1. He will labor to put upon
us, and serve us with a counterfeit faith. enough; He that believes shall be
saved, Mark 16.16. And all that can be said for the Popish faith may be
brought hither. Ans. Galat. 5.6. It must purge our hearts, Acts 15.9, And he
put no difference between us and them, after that by faith he had purified
their hearts. It must make us to know, Christ has given himself for us.
Galat. 2.20, Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: and in that
I now live, I live by the faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and
given himself for me. And bring Christ into our hearts. Ephesians. 3.17, That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in
love, etc.

Now, to have a faith without good works, a knowledge only of a Savior given
to mankind: this will profit nothing. James 2.14, What avails it my
brethren, though a man say he has faith, when he has no works? He will
labor to wrest our faith from us, more violently or craftily: the first, in
this wise; Simon Magus believed, Acts 8.11. Herod, etc. Faith in temporisers
does not avail them: that faith is no better, for they have done many things,
had joy, kept the Apostles company, and gone as far as thou. Answ. Paul and
Thomas, My Lord, and my God. Who has loved me, and given himself for me.
Secondly, we out-growe these things, in process of time. And therefore it is
to be marked, that all other faiths, the Devil never sifteth them: for either
they are such as will not perfect the parties; as lusts, temptations, etc. or
else such as are his own coin, bearing his inscription: as for example,
carnal presumption. And therefore he lets them pass for current. Herod's did
reach to many things, but not to leave his H^rodias.

Secondly, the Devil will thus shake our faith; True faith is with many
fruits, Iam. 2. Is accompanied with joy. 1. Pet. 1.8, Believing we rejoice,
with joy unspeakable and glorious. Without doubting. Abraham doubted not, Romans
4.20. neither did he doubt of the promise, etc. Now thou have no fruits, thou
art without feeling, comfort, full of doubting. Ans. We must examine, whether
we have any fruits of faith upon us, or none appearing: if we have few
fruits, it argues a weak faith; not that there is no faith, dead trees have
not any fruit at all upon them. If we have none, it must be considered,
whether it was so always with us, or by occasion of some fall; having before
been otherwise. Now, if in the first kind, it is plain, we never had a true
faith; if in the later, it argues faith is in a swoone, or as a tree in the
nipping frost of winter. 2. For sense of joy we must know, that it is a a
fruit may be severed from faith: as in Christ, whose belief was firm, yet
all comfort eclipsed: as in that speech, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? And the rejoicing of faith, is chiefly dispensed in three seasons: Either
in the first breeding of a Christian, that the joints of him may be knit, the
stronger: or after great temptations out-wrestled, that the broken bones may
be comforted: or in times of persecution and martyrdom, that we may be
heartened in it, to constant suffering. Witness our rejoicing in Christ Jesus
daily. Romans 1.17. Grace is like a grain of mustard seed. Now thy faith has no
growth, nay thou art now more doubting then thou have been. Ans. True faith
grows: it is true with these limitations. First, that it is not felt in him
always, in whom it grows. 2. It does not grow in all times, it may decrease
in some degree: the meaning thereof is, that the grace which is in the end,
shall be more then at the beginning, shall have his growth. Now, if the Devil
says to any believer, thy faith never had, nor shall have any growth; The
conscience may easily answer it, Faith has two seasons: One of peace and
building it healthfully, the other of temptations. In the first it grows, and
often is discerned by him, in whom it is. 2. It is in temptations. Now these
are of two sorts. First, such in which faith is exercised, and makes
resistance: as in outward crosses. Secondly, fears, doubting of his pardon,
gripes of conscience. Thirdly, laws of evil, that play the Lord of mis rule
in our members. Now these (faith causing us fly to prayer) seek the word of
promise, renew repentance: these, I say, faith does thrive by: as there are
some growing sicknesses, in which the body shoots out, and when men have
been awhile exercised they perceive it: there are other temptations of
spiritual slumber, whether the heart be half waking, or by some grievous
sin fallen into a dead sleep. In these, faith may be diminished: as the
holy Ghost says of their love, they had lost some degrees. These. 2.13, The
word is effectual in you that believe. Heb. 4.3, The word did not profit where
there is no faith to mingle it with. But thou see not the words power, and
do not profit by it. Ans. The inefficiency of the word is two-folde. Simple,
when it has no saving work: or preparatiue; when it is said to work nothing
as it should, as we desire, as we sometime have felt it.

Now the first stands not with faith, the later does: as for example, put
Aquavitae into a dead man's mouth, and all the restoratiues that may be, they
do nothing with him: but give food, or restoratiues to a man in a dropsy, or
consumption, though he still walk vveakely, and have no appetite before, and
has flashing after, and qualms riding over the stomach, yet he is preserved
by the^: now we say, things do no good, when they do not so healthsomly
nourish, as they use in sound bodies. Now this later is the state of a
Christian soul, not the former: he may answer therefore by denying the
second part of the reason; It is effectual, though it do work nothing with
him, as he has known it. Ans. of the reason is naught, as which runs from
hearing to receiving. The answer is, we must distinguish betwixt hearing, and
signifying, that we are hard-by the effect. The first (in lawful things asked,
in the name of Jesus, 16. Ioh. 23.) is always: the second not-alwaies. For God
when he hears, often makes as if he heard not, nay as if he were contrarily
minded. Lam. 3.44, Thou have covered thy self as with a cloud, that our prayer
should not pass thorough, that is, thou seem so in effect. David. How long
will thou smoke against prayer, etc. open thy ears.

Daniel 10. God made him see, he heard him a good space after: yet he did
hear him from the first request. This then is the state of gods people. But
God when he hears does make as though he did not hear, yea were turned
from them and their prayers in displeasure.

Psalm. 116.10.11, I said in my fear, All men are liers, etc. 1. Sam. 27.1, And
David said in his heart, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, etc. Is it
not better for me that I save my self in the land of the Philistines, etc? And
we by experience find, that often through unbelief and impatiency, we
yield the buckler, and leave awhile clasping that promise which only can
relieve us. But the answer is, by learning what it is to have true faith fail:
there is a double failing; one of the grace, another of the work: now this
later, the work, may cease while faith does not fail: as Luke 22.32, But I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Yet compared with the end,
Peter's confession, which was the work of faith, failed in his mouth, and yet
the grace was safe in his heart: for Christ was heard in that he prayed for.
So that if the reason he thus framed, That faith which fails in the work is
a false faith, this is a false sentence. If he say to me, Thine fails in
the grace, it is falsely spoken to a true believer, to make his grace extinct
when the work fails: for we might as well say a man is dead when he
sleeps. And for his threatening that it shall fail, we must remember, that
hell gates shall not prevail. He has prayed, etc.

Sarah in unbelief. Genesis 18.12, She laughed, because the thing spoken was
against reason. see not, John 20.29. that we walk by faith, not by sight.
Again, Heb. 11.1, Faith is the evidence of things not seen: we must
therefore shake hands with this follovving sense and reason, if we will
make way to belief.

Lastly, the devil will muster many troubles against us, and thus labor to
shake our faith. Luke 22.31, He vvinnovved Peter's faith, by bringing him into
ieopardy of his life. So when many believe, he stirs the tongues of naughty
ones to vvhippe them; if God give leave, he crosses them in their substance,
and otherwise: not that he plaieth so small games as to blot their name, or
cares for their money; but he shoots at this, to unsettle them in the way
of faith, which they have entered. But we must resist thus, by getting
knowledge, that Christ will not let our smoking week be put out; that these
things shall work to our good, Romans 8.28. I but we feel the contrary, they
work so upon us. Ans. He that beats a torch, seems to put out the light
for a season, yet it makes it burn more clearly: the shaking of trees makes
them root deeper. Secondly, by learning the means of holding our faith: which
follovv. These are his more violent practices; wresting of our faith from us:
now his more subtle sleights are, his making us to presume on outward helps,
and withdrawing our hearts by them. Thus, 2. Chron. 16.7. he did preuail
against Asa: for when he sees us hold the rock where we are safe from
him, he will set before us other things, suitable to our corrupt natures;
knovving, that so much as we come to lean on these, so much we come to leave
our GOD. Thus he houldeth out our Lady, Saint Peter, and Paul, in the Romish
Church; and by the creature, vvithdravveth the hearts of the people from their
Creator. In which and other like practices, the devil is like a Fovvler that
has calls so like the natural notes, that birds come unto them: so these
speak our mother tongue, and have a note so liking to the reason and sense of
us, that we cannot hear it, but we are ready to flee unto it. But we must
prevent this mischief by christian caution: the devils exchange will prove
robbery, we shall change a rock for a splitted reed, which will hurt us in the
end. He that leaves his God, forsakes his mercy. Jonah 2.8, They that wait
upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. Again, Ier. 17.5, Cursed is he
that makes flesh his arm, trusting in any outward thing. Secondly, we must
know, that these things cannot do ought for us, further then the Lord of Hosts
shall command them: he uses them at pleasure. The horse and chariot is
prepared, but victory is from the God of battle: many seek the face of the
Judge, but judgment is from the Lord: men rise up early, but GOD builds the
city: we may use meat and medicine, but God is our life, and length of our
days: and it is seen, the swift has not the race, the wise wants bread.

Secondly, the devil will labor to supplant our faith by indirect ways
leading to a release, and seeming to put an end to our evils: for, seeing that
we are weary in enduring, and would fain see rest from troubles, he then will
open postern doors, indirect ways of deliverance; like Fowlers, when all is
hard frost and snow, they show meat, that birds sharply set, may flee on
murder. Thus Sarah, Genesis 16.2, And Sarah said, Behold now the Lord has
restrained me from childe-bearing, I pray thee go-in unto my maid, it may be
that I shall receive a child by her. David, 1. Sam. 27.1, Is it not better for
me that I save my self in the land of the Philistines, etc? Christ, Mat. 4,
Command these stones to be made bread by miracle, now thou art hungry. We
must therefore take heed, that we often think on that in Esaias, He that
believes, makes not haste: and consider again, that the ease of such means,
is like to a draught of drink to a hot ague, it makes the fire burn worse
after: your issue in this kind, is but breaking the iaile which makes us
subject to double punishment.

Now follows the fourth consideration, how we may keep our faith against all
assaults, and increase it. First, by expelling self-confidence, and unbelief:
Secondly, by considerations that lead directly to the strengthening of our
faith: Thirdly, rules of either. First, he that will believe, must deny all
trust in his own wisdom: for, selfe-confidence is a choak-weed of belief.
Pro. 3.5, Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy own
wisdom. We are the circumcision, who have no confidence in the flesh, but
rejoice in Christ Jesus. And as we can grow down, denying our wisdom and
all strength we can make: so shall faith on our great God grow up. 2. We
must strike at unbelief, with the sword of the spirit, taking up our selves for
halting, with such like places as these. Heb. 10, Now the just shall live by
faith: but if any vvithdrawe himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.
As the murmuring and unbelieving Israelites, who would not believe the Lords
oath given them, that he would make them dwell in the temporal Land Canaan,
were accordingly shut out of it: so faithless ones, who believe not Gods
promises, concerning the true Land of Canaan, the heavenly kingdom, shall be
barred from entering that holy place. See Numb. 14.29.30.31.32. Chewing on such
words, will tame the fierceness of unbelief.

Thirdly, we must consider the injurious effects which this sin does to
God, and us. For unbelief gives God the lie. 1. Ioh. 5.10. He that believes
not in God, makes him a liar: then which, what can be more reproachful? and
it does us all the harm: for nothing could hurt us, if this were not. Heb. 4
vlt. They could not enter for unbelief, they were a churlish lewd people,
besides other distempers: but this did them the mischief, for it rejects the
medicines, that would cure us, taken; and pulls off Gods plasters, which
lying on would salve our miseries,: thus purging out this malignant humor, we
shall strengthen faith the more commodiously. First, by looking up to Christ,
when we feel our faith weak, calling him the beginner, the finisher of faith
in us: praying him to increase our faith, and to help our unbelief; thou must
give it, and work it in me, or I cannot have it. A fainting body will taste
something that is cordial, and restoratiue: and a fainting soul must bait it
self, with looking to Jesus, who is our cordial, and restoratiue, and every
thing. Again, we must consider whom we trust, for this will strenghten
belief: it is not with God as with man, who is better known often, then
trusted. The mother of our unbelief is, the ignorance of the affectionate
knowledge of God. Psalm. 9. Those that know thee, will trust in thee: this
confirmed Paul in faith, because he knew him, he trusted to. 2. Tim. 1.12,
For I know who^ I have believed, etc. and I know that he is able to keep
that I have committed unto him, until that day. Now concerning God, two things
must be known. First, his power. Secondly, his truth. Romans 4.21, Being fully
assured, that he which had promised, was able also to do it. Abraham was thus
strengthened. Heb. 11.11. Sarah believed, for he was faithful that had
promised: and for example, I by faith believe my spiritual liberty in Christ,
sanctifification, my life, joy, etc. How should I support my self, when I see
nothing but thraldom, and sin reigning in me, nothing in me but deadness
of heart? Answ. Thus: he that has spoken this to me, Hold me, I will set
thee free, I will circu^cise thy heart, wash it, purge it, heal it of all
rebellions: he that has spoken it, is God Almighty, that gives Being to all
creatures we see, and that invisible world of spirits; that calls the things
that are not, as if they were: that if there were no print of these things in
me, can increase them gloriously: and as he is able, so he is true and
faithful to keep touch, his word being purer then silver seven times refyned.
Thirdly, we must labor to see the preciousnesse of our faith: and this seen,
will make us hold hard, ere we part with it. 2. Pet. 1.3, To you which
have obtained like precious faith with us. A man that has great charge, his
whole state about him, will as soon lose his life as part with his treasure.
Now, in marking what it does, we shall see how precious it is. For what a
grace is that, which when we are buffetted with Satan, does make us to stand?
when our weapons are beaten on our heads, our prayers less comfortable, when
we are laid along, does raise us? when over charged with affliction^, does
still lift our head to Christ our Lord? and makes us say, he is ours, we a^e
his, fire and water must not divorce us. And this for the general handling of
the verse.

Now for the particular. First, from the manner. 1. Above all. 2. The fruit or
use of faith: with which you may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
Devil. First, then we hear, that above all things we must labor after
faith, our care must be chiefly about this. 1. John 3.23, This then is his
commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. This is
Gods commandment wherewith we are charged. For nothing is so glorious to God.
John 3.33, It does give God a testimonial, as it were, of his truth, and
seals that he is true: and for our selves, the holy Ghost makes all our
riches to come in of it. Iam. 2.5, The poor God has chosen to be rich in
faith; not only that faith it self is a precious pearl, but because that by
faith we have all those unsearchable riches of Chr. our Lord: and the manner
of our delivery does show us plainly, what care we must have of it. For if
we bid a servant buy many things, but above all such a thing; he would
gather what he should be most careful in: So here get other things, but
above all, faith. Thus Paul, Gal. 2.20, Thus now I live by the faith, etc. and
Heb. 11, All those Saints pleasing God, had this belief toward him. Now then
to the doing of this, we must labor to ferret out our unbelief. Secondly,
to enkindle and renew our dying faith, and increase it: the first we shall
find these ways. First, mark how we are aff^cted to the word of
threatening; whether it breed in us fear, and careful declining of sin. If
we ye live after the flesh ye shall d^e. If this were beeleeved, we durst as
well take a Bear by the tooth, as give the raines to our corruptions. Who is so
hardy as to thrust his finger into the fire? but we often though we know
nothing, let our selves be carried with lusts through vnbelief^. Secondly,
let us mark how we are aff^cted to the promise. We see, because by a civil
faith we believe man, therefore, if we have a man's word, for this that was
desperate, we are glad, we seek to get security. If we have bonds we box
them up; we know, when they expire, what to challenge by virtue of them. Now
for the promise of God, which secureth us of all good temporal, and eternal,
who enquireth after it, who seeks it in his heart, who rejoices in it, who
says, I look for such a thing, by virtue of such a word, my God has spoken?
which argues we are full of unbelief. Thirdly, our resting in mean^s, and
leaning to them. For, so much as ^he heart does rest o^ the (...) is by sin
withdrawn from the Creator. But how may we find this? By marking how it is
with us three ways. First, if we used means, as not using them, what means
soever we had, our fear and trust to God would be the same as if we vvanted
them: For we would know, that further then God did send forth his word, they
could do nothing. Secondly, if we did our duties, and means were vvanting,
we would be confident; still remembering that of Jonathan, It is all one
with God, to save with many, or with few; with small means, as great. Thirdly,
when we have things we would think little of any means; but ascribe all to
Gods blessing. Now we do the contrary to these: For if we have means, upon
them we are secure; as a man is friended, he hopes to have his cause ended,
though judgment is to come from the Lord: if the Judge him self were made for
us, and if all means be at hand, we can rest; we are so fledge that till
something cross us, the Lord is not cloven to, and sought to by us. Again, if
this or that (requisite in our Judgments) cannot be obtained; though we were
never so diligent, we distrust, and suspect the success, saying, that it
cannot prove well. And again, in the third place, when we have things, our
affections do more lively work on this or that, which fell out (as men
speak) more luckily, then on Gods blessing, which is all in all. Which shows
our secret resting in the creature. Fourthly, our tottering when vv^ are
tried; If we did walk, trusting on God, we should be like mount Sion, four
square; men, howsoever thrown down, standing firmly, vvheras the least thing
does unsettle us. Shall God offer to pass his word, yea give his Indenture to
me, for all good things, shall I not look after it? the points of our hearts
still turned to the power, goodness, faithfulness of our God, which was and
is the matter of our confidence? If weather fail avvhile, men are, as if God
would quite forget them: if doings do decay, such a world for taking they
have not known the like: if crosses overtake us, we are at our wits ends. He
that has crutches, if he learn not on them walking, take away his crutches,
he walks still: but take away a cripples crutches, that goes on them, and
he comes to the ground presently. So if we did not like to cripples lea^e
on these things, we should not be so easily thrown down in their remoueall:
so the impatient breaking off in holding the promise, the double diligence and
excessive care. Mat. 6.3, Shall he not do much more for you, O ye of little
faith? The shifts and sinful courses which men admit to thrive by, all prove,
that there is not right faith in us toward God.

Now the cure of this is, by being displeased with our selves, taking up our
souls in this manner; If the King or a great man should threaten me, would I
not be afraid, and careful to decline their wrath? Shall my God threaten me,
and I be secure and careless? If I have a man's word or bond that is of worth I
write upon the matter, as if I had it: Shall I not joyfully rest in the word,
seal and oath of my God? If a man of worth should be asked a pawn, and not
credited on his word, he would take it in evil part: What a shame is it, that
I will not believe GOD, further then I have his caution? If I would not trust a
man for a few pence, would I trust him for pounds? Cannot I trust God for the
things of this life, and do I say truly, that I trust him for life
everlasting? With such reasoning, a man must make that sin loathsome to his
soul; and then seeing himself a mass of unbelief, must look unto Christ,
and call to him, as the author and finisher of faith, must cry Lord help my
unbelief, must set the promises before him, and chain himself fast to the
meditation of them. Esaias 64 7, sobriety* remembering of our duty, which we are
after to perform. If we go hither or thither, we must do it by faith,
seeing we move in God, and he is the keeper of our outgoings and
incommings. If we sleep, we must not only consider f^mes asce^ding which
cause; but the promise of God that gives sleep to his beloved: yea, we must
apprehend God as our life, and length of our days, not resting in temperan^^s
and co^stitutions

The second thing to be marked, is, the commendations of faith, teaching us,
what fi^rce is in faith to keep us against all assaults of the devil. We are
kept by the power of GOD through faith to salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5. This one is
as all the rest, and therefore is called our victory, which over comes the
world, 1. John 5.4. And it is so mighty, that the powers of hell cannot
prevail against it. Now for the fuller understanding, you must know what is
meant by fiery darts; secondly, how faith does extinguish them. It is a
borrowed speech from poisoned darts, which venime and cause fiery heat in the
person they enter (...) so all those courses whereby Satan sends scorching
heat into the soul, are noted by them: these are either terrors apprehe^ding a
wrath which is a fire that drinks the spirit, as Job speaks. And Paul, 2.
Cor. 7.5, Fightings without, terrors within, we had no rest; or sinful lusts
which he does vvreath against us, which are as fire. James 3, fire of hell.
Job 31, Adultery a fire burning to destruction; or outvvard calamities and
persecutions, which are called heats and fiery trials. Now faith does quench
these after a double manner, sometime not letting them enter, but does latch
them, that they do fall off without pearcing us. This Paul, Romans 7, when the
law came, savv his cursednes. 2. Cor. 7.2. had inward terrors, the devil
likewise did buffet him with sinful suggestions, 2. Cor. 12. He had troubles
as thick as hailstones, following him, yet this prevailed not against him,
because he kept the faith. Peter, Luke 22, had the dart stuck in him awhile:
but faith did renew repentance, and healed him, making the poison of sin a
treacle. Heb. 11.34, By faith the Saints endured all affliction, yea quenched
the fire, yea chose them before release. And we see by experience, that when
the devil does lighten about us with the wild fire of lusts, tempting us to
them, that when we look to Christ, as who has dissolved the power of Satan,
who has crucified the power of them, and said, they shall not reign over us;
this does slake the fire. Again, when fears assault us, coming to peace in
Christ, we are saved: when troubles come, faith makes us live like the bush
in the fire, without burning.

Whrefore this must

were locked up in a tovver invincible? so when death and enmity comes
against us, this faith does lock us in Gods faithfulness, mercy and power,
that nothing can hurt us.



Now follovveth hope: for salvation is here put for hope of it; the thing
hoped for, for the hope it self. For thus it is construed, 1. These. 5.8.
First, therefore it may be asked, What hope this is? Answ. Not only hope of
salvation, which shall be in the last day, but of all te^porall deliverance
from evil. And it may be described, A certain expecting to attain every
thing faith believes, grounded only on Gods grace.

The proper work of hope is, to make us expect: which is to be marked. For,
measuring the word by our common acception, and distinguishing it from the
expectance in heaven; it is one ground (amongst others) of the Papists errors,
whereas expectation in the life to come differs not from hope, in that it is
certain expectation ( Romans 8.15. Phil. 1.20, I certainly look for and hope)
but in this; First, that our expectation here is grounded in faith, that in
sight; this acco^pani'd with grief, that without any difficulty. Secondly, it
is a certain expecting not in it self, but never failing the party which
hops (...). Which must be understood not as if it were certain in his sense,
but in the eue^t: the reason is because hope hangs on faith, which in that it
believes is certain: if the pin be sure, that which hangs on it cannot
fall. Thirdly, the object is not strictly eternal life, but all the good
things temporal and eternal, which faith believes. Lastly, the means on
which hope leans, is here set down, Gods grace. Trust perfectly (the word
is hope) on the grace of God in Christ, 1. Pet. 1.13. Not parting stakes, half
on grace, half on works. Again, hope expects so to obtain as faith
believes; but faith believes through the word of promise, not through
working, Gal. ^.3. A person so soon as he is a true convert, has hope as
well as love, though he has no works as yet: neither can a house be built
and a foundation be laid afterward. Besides, if he should die on his
conversion, and being received though he had done no good works, he should
be saved according to hope. And this error has three things which occasion
it. They conceive that works are partial causes of our salvation, with mercy;
because the Scriptures use such conditional speeches, If you mortfie the
deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, etc. But these conditions are spoken to
parties already now believing, and are conditions that follow, not causes going
before an heir of salvation. If we say to our children, Be good children,
ply your books, you shall be my heir; who would gather, that going to school
is the cause of inheritance. Secondly, they distinguish not betwixt that which
helps hope, and that which erecteth it to hope, from that on which it
depends in hoping: but these are far different. If the stomach be well,
that neither fumes nor distillations trouble, the eye sees clearly: yet the
eye does not depend on the stomach, as the means of seeing: so if the
conscience be not surcharged (fume not up accusations, fears, etc.) the eye of
the soul sees clearly: which we may term hope; Yet it does not depend
on the goodness of the conscience, as the cause why it hops. And hence it is,
that they abuse Scripture, which show the cheery hoping of a good conscience,
as if they proved, that our hope expects as well by works as mercy to
attain that we look for. Thirdly, they consider not, that these are such
Theological virtues, as are appropriated to God, and are no way communicable
with the creature. Why you will say, love is so too, yet we may love the
creature: t^ankfulnesse, yet we may thank the creature. Ans. It may be said we
love not absolutely, but in and for God, and after a sort love God in the
creature, as he loving us (so far as his work) loves himself in us, but
the reason is not alike of these: For, therefore we love the creature, and
give thanks, because there is in them matters of love, and thanksgiving; but
there is no matter to ground hope on, in the creature. Psalm. 108, Give us help
against trouble, for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 127, It is in vain to
rise early, etc. Psalm. 146.3, There is no help in Princes. Why, may one say;
Has not God put virtue in creatures to do thus, and thus; as in a horse to
carry one, in a medicine to heal one? Answ. He has, but yet the exercise of
this power, he keeps in dependence on himself; and cannot be further, then
he pleases to put it forth. For till he who is the Lord of Hoastes becken,
send forth his word, as Psalm. 107, and give them their moving, they can do
nothing. As, I have power to go to such a place: yet God makes me in it to
depend on his pleasure. Iam. 4, I will do this, etc. if God will.

Now the use of this helmet is, first, to strengthen faith; which is the
principal, and first thing in the new creature, as the helmet covers the head
of the body: but faith, you will say, breeds hope; yet hope is such a
daughter, as is a staff to her aged mother. Secondly, it does repel the
battery of our daily distrestes, and impressions of despair. I had fainted,
had I not looked to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. For
hope that God will send strength, and give issue, do so hold up the chinne
that we sink not in deep waters. For the third thing, the Devil does seek
many ways to disfurnish us of this munition. vain grounds: as on this, that
God has blessed us, with outward things; that therefore we are in his favor:
but all our hope must be brought to this touch stone, John 3, He that has
this hope purges himself, even as he is pure. He that has true hope toward
God, will be careful to cleanse out all corruption of flesh and spirit, which
are displeasing to God. If we hope to have any good from man, we will be
careful not to incur his displeasure, do that which he desires. labor
many ways to break it off, by pleading against us our unworthiness. If thy
consciende did not tell thee, thou art thus, then might thou have hope, and
that by cutting the cable which will make us loose our anchor. Answ. There is
double unworthiness; one of an evil conscience that lies in some sin, of
which it will not be reformed: another unworthiness of a good conscience,
which desires and endeavors to be disburthened of sin, but cannot; and
therefore daily renews repentance. Now this unworthiness does not take away
hope: for God does make good his promises, not for our sakes, the house of
Israel, but for his Names sake. Ezekiel. 36.32, Be it known unto you, I do it
not for your sake; the zeal of the Lord of Hosts which he bears us does
it: he leapeth over the mountains of Bether, to come to us; or if he stayed
on our sufficient dispositions, we might all bid our hope farewell. Pro.
13.20, Hope delayed makes a sick soul. God? who will pay use for time he
delayeth. Again, he does not foreslack any fit season, but only waits the
opportunity: and examples of delayed hopes, yet certainly accomplished at
length, may comfort us. Seauenty years, the returning of Gods people from the
Babylonish captivity was reiourned, yet it was fulfilled in the season of it.
Lam. 3.18, And I said, my strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord;
remembering mine affliction, my wormwood, and my gall. Answ. them so much, as
to be dismayed by them. He that will drink a potion, will not roll every drop
about his mouth; and he that will go thorough afflictions, must not demurre
too deeply upon them. Thus Paul looked not at things seen, but unseen. The
end of the cross must be eyed, or the cross will not be endured. Yet we
must not, contrarily, run upon foolish lightness, that will not let the heart
go into any mourning: this is as dangerous a work, as despair it self. 2.
We must remember that hope shows it self, when things are hopeless. Abraham
hoped against hope. Job 13.13, If he kill me, yet will I trust in him.
Thirdly, when things press us most, we are nearest our deliverance: Quum
duplicantur lateres, venit Moses.

Sixthly, hopes have miscarried, Phil. 1.25. And these all through faith obtained
a good report, and received not the promise, Heb. 11. To the first, first we
may thus answer: Nero for a season, wherein he might have been beneficial to
the Philippians.

Secondly, hope is twofould: of things heavenly, or things earthly; now the
later may miss of us, and yet hope remains certain, because hope so looks
for them, as faith lays hold of them: now faith does not apprehend them
absolutely, but so far forth as they shall be good for us. For, that place in
the Hebrews proves, that all things believed and hoped for, are not presently
received upon death. It follows not therefore, that they are frustrate: we
dying shall not presently have the things promised concerning the resurrection
of the body, yet our faith and hope cannot mis-carry in it. Now fourthly the
means, whereby we may strengthen our hope. First, to consider the nature of
it, and the promise annexed to it; It makes not ashamed, it shall be
rejoicing. Pro. 12.18, The hope of the righteous shall be gladness. Esaias 40.
vlt. But they that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall
lift up their wings as the Eagle, they shall run and not be weary, they shall
walk and not faint: if this spirit of hope be in us, we like a blown
bladder sink not in our distresses; if this be down, we hang the wing: and
daily use of it should make us studiously maintain and increase it. Thirdly, to
think how we do in earthly things: we will wait upon things uncertain, dead
men's shoes, attend persons early and late for a good issue in some suit, buy
reuersions, and respect them, though never like to fall in our time. Who is
great like our God? Shall we not attend his leisure? What is precious like
grace? Shall we not vvait on it? Thus James, 5.7, from that the husbandman
does in earthly things, does teach us our duty of patient expecting things
heavenly. Fourthly, it will confirm us to remember experiences forepassed, the
presidents of good hope, how God has made those partakers of their hopes, whom
he seemed to have put out of his sight; David: his people in Babylon, etc. So
to think how sweet they shall be to us when they come. Hope when it comes
is a tree of life, Pro. 13.12.

Christians, by the grace of hope, must strengthen themselves in their
conflicting days. If we want good things spiritual, we must walk by hope;
looking to him, who has said, we shall want nothing that is good. If in
adversity, we must hope to have a good issue out of it, our lives must be
passed in looking for our full deliverance which shall be revealed in the last
time. Thus, Psalm. 123, our eyes are to thee as the eyes of a handmaid to her
mistress, till thou show mercy on us. Luke 2.25. Simeon was a just man,
looking for the consolation of Israel. Thus Paul in his crosses had this hope.
Phil. 3.20, But our conversation is in heaven, whence we look for the
Savior, etc. he conuersed, looking for his everlasting glory. This is our
anchor: without it our lives would be tossed with the billows and surges of
our manifould temptations; especially we must remember to vvaigh this anchor
in a safe road: for the Papists cast it on the sands, even on their own
worthiness, which makes their head piece as strong as a helmet of brown
paper. an answer of his mind which he has often sent to him by prayer? If one
says, I will be with you to help you, or do this or that for you, we
look he should keep touch accordingly: if one send us word he will be
with us, we look and prepare till he comes: but if GOD speak, who does
vvait? though he forewarne us of his coming, who does attend? We would be
loath to tell an untruth, etc. but these great things, of neglecting faith and
hope, we make no conscience of: when Mint and Cummin must be given, the
great things of the law must not be forgotten.

Now follows the svvord of the spirit; so called because it is put in our
hands, and made mighty through the work of this spirit. First, that which is
here understood by the word of God, is, whatsoever out of the written word we
have by reading and hearing, or what God does teach us by experience, agreeable
with that which is in the word written. for the use, it is either defensive,
vvarding the blows which Satan does reach us (as Christ used, Mat 4.) or
offensive, it does strike down the darkness and power of sin us. the devil
does keep men from this sword by excuses, they are not book-learned, have not
leisure as others, to look into such matters, why may not men be saved
without knovving the word? Ans. John 5.39. Again, first seek Gods kingdom,
and the righteousness thereof, etc. Mat. 6. No seed sown, there can be no
harvest; no word, which is the immortal seed, there can be no begetting to
God. If we have the word with us, first he will impugn it by suggestions,
thus; Ob.
How can thou tell this is the word of God: it is not his word. Ans. it.
Object.

Ans. by the word. Again, the Physicians intemperancy will not make the
prescript of diet less regarded. But for our own want of feeling; we must
know when we are so, it is not for any lack in the word, but thorough our own
default: when the tongue is in loss of taste through choler, give it never so
good meat and drinks, all is bitter; yet it is not in the meats, but in the
taste. Answ. should demurre upon some case; though they had twelve diverse
interpretations, it does not take away certainty in the Law. Again, this is a
rotten bleat, not of Christ's sheep, How should we know the meaning of the
Scriptures? Ioh. 10. His sheep hear his voice. God has promised we shall be
all taught of him, Mat. 13.19, Then comes the evil one and catches etc.
There is an example in the Apostles, out of whose hearts he did steal the
word of Christ's resurrection, so plainly foretold them. And we see in
Sermons, some remember not two sentences, at the end of the week, not one:
cares, businesses, pleasures, etc. against which we must be armd, with remembering
of Christ's admonition, Luke 8 18
Take heed how ye hear. It is dangerous meddling with edge-tools: Blessed
are those that hear the word of God and keep it. Heb. 15, To day if ye will
hear his voice, etc. The danger of not keeping the word and bringing forth
fruit, is set forth, by the ground drinking in the showers; and fruitless,
which is near unto cursing. Heb. 6.8. And to this purpose mark the fourth
thing: How we may do that the word may be held of us. We must above all
things keep our hearts: for they are the vessels in which the word must be
stored; if the vessel leak, or be not sweet, the liquor runs out, or
smells of the caske: If the heart be unbelieving, given to lust,
covetousness, voluptuousness, the word will run out, or be smothred, or
perverted. Therefore David prays, Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and
not to covetousness: these two cannot stand together. Secondly, we must
labor to see how precious the word is. Psalm. 119 103.
David found it more sweet the^ the honey comb, more precious then gold or
silver: therefore he held it so constantly. I am like a bottle in the smoke;
yet I forget not thy commandments.

we must cry to God, to give us that faithful remembrancer: the which may
call things we know to our mind, in the time of our need. Ioh. 14.26
It is said when the Apostles received the Spirit, then they remembered etc.
Without the help of Gods spirit we should be like Agar, ready to die for
thirst, though the fountain were by us. we must lay vppe^ the word safe; as
we coffer jewels: to which three things are necessary. First, musing and
considering within our selves of it. Luke 2.19, Mary kept all these sayings,
and pondred them in her heart. of it, Deuter. 6.7, And thou shall rehearse them
continually unto thy children; not that we must talk lightly, with hearts
untuned, but either with hearts prepared, or else with a holy purpose, to
provoke our dull hearts by the words of our mouths: for though words com from
the heart, yet they help the grace in the heart: as apparel is first warmed by
the body, afterward gives and fostereth heat in the body: such holy
communication will make us ready in the knowledge of it. Thirdly, but must
affect it, that we may say so love I thy statutes. 2 Thessalonians. Because they
received not the truth in love, therefore they did not hold to it. Psalm.
119.122, I reioiced at thy testimonies as if I had found great spoils.

all of us must strengthen our selves, by getting the knowledge of Gods word.
The svvord is not more necessary for the soldier, Examples.
then this for us. Thus Christ Christ.
played his prises with it in the temptation, Mat. 4. Job Job.
23.12, Neither have I departed from the commandments of his lips, and I have
esteemed the words of his mouth, more then mine appointed food. Psalm. 119.11,
David.
I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might not offend against thee. Such
as have enemies, do not walk but having their swords girt to them: we cannot
repel wicked suggestions, strike down our own corruptions, without the help
of the svvord, and knowledge of Gods pure word.

above al, heerin they sin, that they let not Christians indifferently have the
word of God in their mother-to^gue; using against Christians the like hostility
that the Philistims used against Israel, they took away the smiths and weapons
of Israel. And mark it: for, this taking the word from Gods people, is an
antichristian practice. If a man should transport our armor, and so
dis-furnish the Realm, it would not serve the subjects in time of need, we
would count him no friend to the State.

convince Christians that are careless of the word of GOD: or if they have the
knowledge of it, they use it as our gentility wear their weapons, to show the
gilded pummels and velvet scabberds, rather then otherwise: so the word which
is a spiritual sword, many do discourse of it for ostentation, rather then to
ward off wick^d suggestions, or hew down their own corruptions with it.

we must be exhorted to get the knowledge of the word, and hold it fast.
Pro. 2.1, My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments
within thee, verse 5, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God. Let the word of God dvvell in you richly in all
vvisdome, teaching and admonishing one another, Col. 3.16. We should ever have
this word in our hearts and mouths: it is no small disadvantage for a man to be
without a vveapon in the midst of his enemies.

what word it is which the spirit of God does accompany, and make mighty in the
conscience: it is the word of God, Esaias 49. vlt. 2. Cor. 3.8, How shall not
the ministration of the spirit be much more glorious? Ier. 23.22. and 29, But
if they had stood in my counsel, and declared my words to my people, then they
should have turned them from their evil way. And in regard that it is thus
accompanied, it is here and in Esaias 48.2. Heb. 4.12, called a two edged svvord,
of so great efficacy, that we may see the Apostles, who being but
fishermen, yet having this word in their mouths, did cast down all the
vvisdome of the world that resisted them. And we see in that Nicene Council,
Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 3.
when all the Doctors could not silence an acute Heretic, a simple man
unlearned in comparison, bringing out the simple testimony of this word, did
subdue him, and convince him, so that he had not ought to answer.

to the pure word, these clear fountains of Israel; not to affect the depths
of humane curiosity: for, the spirit blows not in these voices. Every sound
is not music; nor every such sermon preaching.

Aarons bells, betvveene the silver Trumpet of the Sanctuary, and such tinkling
Cymbals.



Ans. Ans. 2. The word translated, though subject to error, is Gods word, and
begets, and increases faith, not so far forth as man through frailty
erreth; but as he is assisted through speaking and translating, to write the
truth.

The Papists say, there must be infallibility in God revealing, and the Church
propounding, to begette faith: but this is false; for faith comes by the
hearing of the word of God, from the mouth of a particular Minister, who by all
confession is subject to error. Object. But if we err in some things, how can
we believe any thing? they may as well err in all? Ans It cannot be: because
as God does immediately and infallibly assist them, that they cannot err at
all; so we know he is in some measure with them, that they cannot altogether
err. These grounds laid, it is easy to answer. Secondly, If it be objected,
the word you preach and hear, translated and read, is subject to error. Gods
word is not subject to error, ergo, the word ye hear and read is not Gods
word. Answ. The proposition if general, it is false: but it is particular, and
so concludes particularly; else it is false, and the conclusion false, Object.
faith: your word may. Ans. at the weakness of man, but extol the power of
God; which does put forth it self in the midst of humane fraylties.

Now follows the second thing, in which the particular strengthening of our
selves does stand: and that is a matter of fact. The exercise of prayer. The
former things do present before us, men clad in glistering furniture, from top
to toe: And this does show unto us the muster of such glorious spiritual
forces.

In this eighteenth verse, and the two following, are set down three things
concerning prayer. First, the duty it self; Pray always, with all manner of
prayer, etc.

The duty has his amplification from the generality of it [with all prayer]
which is all the kinds of prayer, which are opened, 1. Tim. 2.1, I exhort
therefore, etc. First, deprecatiue, or prayers, that ask remooueall of evils.
2. Petitions, or wishes, of good things. 3. Interc^ssion, for others. 4.
Thanksgiving. Secondly, the duty is set down for circumstance of time
[alwaies] which does not note that we should be daily, or incessantly
occupied in prayer; but that ever and anon, in fit opportunities, we should
betake our selves to prayer. We have elsewhere the same manner of phrase. 1.
These. 5.16, Rejoice always, not that we should be like Democritus always
laughing; but when occasion is offered, show that rejoicing; as otherwhiles,
we must weep with them that weep. The like phrase, 2. Samu^l. 9.7.
Mephibosheth did always eat bread at D^uids table: that is, daily at the
hours of eating, he did remain at the Kings board. Thirdly, in the spirit:
signifying the fountain, whence it must spring; from our spirits, moved by the
spirit of God, which is the inditer of prayer. These are opened, as having in
them some difficulty. Now to return: Prayer is an opening of the heart to God,
in making requests and offering thanks thorough Christ. For the nature of it
is nothing but a motion of the soul in desire and thanksgiving: called the
lifting up of, or the rearing up of the soul.

Beggars pay no debts, but confess insufficiency. Dan. 9.5, It pleads all
guilty, and unworthiness: and how can he demerit with prayer, that cannot
requite ought he has received? We are less then the least of his mercies:
as David, Psalm. 116.12, What shall I give the Lord for all his benefits unto
me? The use of it may be branched out. In regard of God: It does glorify
him, by acknowledging him the father of lights, the fountain of all good we
have and would have. In regard of men, the helping of them thorough love, by
being futers at the throne of grace for them through Christ.

Secondly, in regard of our selves, the use is manifold: but here those uses
of prayer are most pertinent, which do respect the warfare we have in hand.
First, it does make us win the day without striking a stroke: For it keeps
the Devil out, that he cannot have leave to throw a dart against us. Matthew.
26.41, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. Luke 21.36, Pray that you may
escape these things, that shall come to pass, and that you may stand before
the Son of man. it does get us supply of strength, if we come to the
encounter. For, Exodus 17.11. Moses prayer was stronger then Iehosuahs sword.
Pray, and the peace of God shall like a watchtower k^epe your hearts. Look
how Captains fighting abroad for their Country, send their Letters, and so
have men, munition, victuals, money, etc. So prayer is the messenger of a
faithful soul, and fetches every thing from God.

Prayer does strengthen us in faith and hope. For, look as if we commune often,
and familiarly with a man, we have more confidence toward him: so If we by
often prayer, speak with our God, it does imbolden us, and breed more liberty
and confidence toward him, then if we were estranged. Prayer gets all our
other armor fitted about us; we being not able to buckle it on, further the^
our heavenly father does help us on with it.

Now for the third thing, How the Devil does labor to weaken us in the
performance of this duty. Cor. 12.8, For this I besought the Lord thrice; yet
he missed of that he sought: much more, we in temporal things. Ans. That is
not in vain, which does not always get the thing we would have: about which
we must learn three things. Moses, for victory, and had it: Hanna for a
son, and had him. Paul, 2. Cor. 12. My grace is sufficient for thee. Thirdly,
ad voluntatem, yet it always procures issue ad salutem.

from this that prayers are needless. Esaias 65.24, Yea, before they call I
will answer, and vvhilest ^hey speak I will hear. And John 16.24.
Henceforth you shall ask me nothing. Ans. of mercy, or to inform him who is
the searcher of hearts, yet they are necessary as means which God will have
used, that we may receive the things which he of free mercy gives. Genesis 25
21, Isaac knevv he should have seed before, yet he prayed. Elias knevv, and had
told Ahab, God would certainly give rain: yet both prayed, and they are means
to prepare us holily to enjoy the things received. The creature is sanctified
by prayer: for things received by prayer increase our love to God, our
thankefulnes. Psalm. 116, What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his
benefits: makes us ready to part with them for Gods glory.

from our unworthiness. God hears not sinners. John 9.31. And also if I
regard wickedness, the Lord will not hear me. Answ.

God hears not such as doubt of his mercy. Iam. 1.5. Ans. reigning unbelief;
and there is a doubting, and unbelief which is a weakness left in the Saints,
for their exercise. The first is in heathens and unbelievers: the later, which
is a doubting which is in a soul that would be rid of it, and prayer by faith
fights against it, does not hinder us from being heard. Mark 9.22, But if thou
can do any thing help us. Mat. 14.31, Oh thou of little faith, wherefore
did thou doubt?

From our long asking and not receiving. It is in vain for him to pray that
asks and receives not. Ans. James 4.3, Ye ask and have not, because ye
ask amiss. does defer us, to try how we will persevere in prayer; as a
friend when he means to do this or that, does detract it at the first, to
see if the other will importune him. let us be sure of this, that he that
bottleth up our tears, files up our prayers, putting them on record before
him. Mal. 3.16, Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one to his
neighbor, and the Lord harkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. the Devil by tempting us to sin, and distempering of us in the course
of prayer. 1. Pet. 3.7, Likewise, ye husbands dwell with your wives, as men of
knowledge, giving honor unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, even as
they which are heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
interrupted. For, when the conscience is defiled, we are so pricked in the
foot, that we cannot go to God in prayer; and are not able comfortably to
discharge it: we either neglect them, or profane Gods name, in rushing upon
them: we must therefore take heed of sin, as we would with comfort return to
prayers. But here is a question. I have been overtaken with infirmity, the
time of prayer draws on, what shall I do? Answ. Mat. 5.24, Leave there thine
offering before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift. Exodus 33.10, They worshipped every man a
far off, in the door of his tent: but Number. 12.14. There is a worthy example,
If a man's parent should be so offended, as to spet on him; durst he appear
before him for seven days? And shall we be so bold, having offended the
father of spirits, presently to come into his sight? that he has done, the
rather to think what streights he has brought himself unto, either in
neglecting his duty, or profaning the name of his God. If the party be at
hand (as the man and wife) let there be mutual confession; if otherwise, let
there be a purpose of it: and having this purpose, and being in any measure
touched, though nothing so well as we wish, and were meet; we may come to
God, and he will accept us, and heal us. 2. Chron. 33.19, And his prayer, and
how God was entreated of him, etc. Seauenthly, The Devil will labor to
prevent us, and break us off in this duty, by distractions; this thing, and
that, calling us away, by difficulties in the while of prayer: such mists of
darkness, such swarms of wandering idle thoghts, coming before our minds,
that we are much discomforted. Answ. Mat. 6.33. If we promise at this or that
hour, to meet a man when the Clock smites, whosoever we are with, we crave
pardon; we are to go. Make not more bold with God then you would with man.
For the second we must enquire whether letting loose our hearts all day, do
not cause this unfitness at night: and if it be so, we must help the matter
with watchfulness. because of our imperfection in doing it. And to strengthen
us every way, Let us come to the fourth consideration, how to strengthen our
selves, that we may constantly carry forth this duty: Psalm. 65.2, He is a God
that hears prayer: look the whole Psalm. If Princes will not lose any part
of their Royal Title, God will maintain his.

Fourthly, to consider, it is our selves that gain by prayer: and if we lay it
down, we shall have the loss of it. Job 35.7, If thou be righteous, what
give thou unto him, etc? Yea, we must be so far from being offended at Gods
not answering at our want of comfort and liberty, that we must hold even
this, such a prerogative as we are unworthy of. 1. Chron. 22.14, What am I or
my people that we should offer thus? what are we that we should speak to God,
or have access to the highest Majesty?

Cor. 8.12. He spares us as a father does his children, Mal. 3.17. They will
hear with delight the lisping and sta^mering voice of their children: yea,
because the soul is sick, the service is twice welcome. If a sick child
reach us up a thing, we count it more then to send another of laborious
arrands.



Now thus we see in general, that Christians must by this exercise of prayer
strengthen themselves. Psalm. 50.15. And precedents: David, Asa, Iehosaphat,
Hezechiah, when the armies of the Heathen did assail them, by prayer prevailed
against them. This is the refuge of the Saints in all troubles. The Name of the
Lord is a tower of defense, Psalm. 18.10. This is that just man's practice, Psalm.
32. the whole Psalm.

Esaias. 60.7, And there is none that calls upon thy name, neither that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee. And as with the Disciples, John
16.24, Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name. We have all things so cast
upon us, that we use not prayer: but take heed; for the Lord will draw back
his hand, and rather strip you that are his own of all, then leese his honor.
Hos. 5, I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their fault,
and seek me: in their affliction they will seek me diligently. If we will
not seek him, he will make us cry after him: therefore do not (whatsoever
condition you are of) shift it off. Wives think the husband must do it: but
his neglect will not discharge thy duty. Servants think if their masters use
none, they are bound to none. Why should we need motives to this? Spare to
speak^ (we say) and spare to speed. When GOD bids us ask and have, how
unthankful and unworthy vvretches are we, that neglect such kindness, and
will not prove him that is so gracious? to God: for that prayer is to grace,
as povvning is to svveete spices; it makes grace, as faith, reverence, poverty
of spirit, thankfulness, etc. cast a fragrant smell, as which (indeed) is
nothing but the chafing of them.

Secondly, we see, day by day, when it shall be most fitting our condition
and occasion, we must return to this duty, Pray alvvaies. That we are said
to do continually, which we are said to do at fit times daily, as Numb.
28, That was a continual sacrifice which was daily offered, morning and
evening only. And that we are daily to take up this exercise, it appears by
David, Ps. 55. 17, Evening and morning and noone, will I pray and make a
noise, and he shall hear my voice. Dan. 6.10, He kneeled upon his knees three
times a day, and praid and praised his God, as he had done aforetimes.
Secondly, by many reasons, as first our decay of grace when it is not
renewed, or sundry wants and new appearances of evil which daily show
themselves, before not discovered, which must be supplied by prayer; as the
decay daily of bodily strength by sustentation. Secondly,

are to pray, and there discourse that way, would have these things marked;
that we do not deny that the Church has liberty to appoin^ hours, with
caution of edification. foria's, and hours abundantly, above that the Church
of God can attend unto, yea contrary to Gods institution; who has, that we
might keep his worship on the Sabbath, given us six days. which are
performed by the Clergy; whereas the Clergy are not the Church, but the
ministers with the people to whom it is ministered.

day; it is most requisite that we Christians may offer up a continual
spiritual sacrifice to our God, though every one cannot in the like measure
perform these duties: for the circumstances of callings, and conditions of
lives, do make them differ.

that the inward man of our hearts, must chiefly be occupied in prayer. In all
our service, we should say, as To. 1.9. That we serve God in our spirits, but
especially in prayer; it being not the warbling of words, but the yearning,
and panting of the heart after God, and the things of our peace. Such was
Christ's prayer, Heb. 5.7, which in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers,
and strong cries unto him, etc. From his soul they came: for they were offered
up with loud cries, and many tears. And the ardent desire, is the thing which
God hears, though there be no voice annexed; as appears in Moses, Exodus
14:15, Why cryest thou unto me? 2. The prayer outward of the lips, without
the request of the heart, is abominable in his sight. Man. 15.8, Cursed is he
that draws near with his lips, but his heart is far from me. The spirit
is the rise of true prayer: if it proceed not thence, it is an empty ring which
God regards not. And this makes prayer laborious, because the spirit is to
travail in it: and the Saints in this regard, can endure better to hear an
hour, then pray a quarter; whereas the world, they think the out ward
repeating of words with a general intention, to suffice. This Popery is
natural, they cry for praying, rather then preaching. us, that are the Lords.
And let us take heed: for a powerless prayer, if it come not from mere
feebleness, which is accompanied with an abiectnesse of heart, but as it does
the most times from a spirit of sloth joined with presumption; If we from
these grounds shuffle up our prayers without power and life, God will certainly
punish our profaning his name, with letting us fall into some sin, which
shall awaken us with smart enough.

that is the quickening spirit, not being quiet till we get some warmth into
our spirits: and these be the winged prayers, that fly beyond all the
visible heavens; these be the prayers of smoke, in which the Church ascends
to God, out of this world, a barren wilderness.

that as we must pray, so we must use watchfulness for furtherance of
prayer: Not that we should sit up late, as in Nocturnes; or wake before day,
as in morning Mattens: But we must all day long have a wakening soul, that
carries the duty of prayer in remembrance. Watch and pray, Mat. 26.41. Col.
4.2, Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. 1. Pet. 4.7,
The end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watching in
prayer. Where we may see, it is the minds waking, which is principally meant,
though this will keep the body from drowsinesse, in performing the exercise.
The primitive Christians, this is recorded of them; that they did eat their
meat, as remembering they were to call on God, by the night season. More
particularly, there must be watchfulness brfore prayer. 2. In it. 3. After it.
Now our watchfulness before, stands in preventing the impedime^ts, in marking
that in the course of the day, which may fit us for prayer. First, this
watchfulnes will make a man so cast, and make such riddance of business, that
he may not have hindera^ces when he shall go to his duty. God prefixeth a
Meme^to before the Sabbath; teaching that if one do not lift up his mind to
it, and in the six days dispatch his business, he cannot keep it when it
comes: so there is a mindfulnesse to be had of him that will not this way be
encombred with distractions. Secondly, We must watchfully keep our selves
from sin: Let him that calls on the name of Lord, depart from iniquity.
For if we be in the day time indulgent to our lusts, it will be a dampe to our
prayers: and when we yield to sin, it is a token our Watch is down; we
think not of prayer. For if we meant to make suite to a man at night, we
would be watchful in the day, not to lose his favor, by giving him offense,
lest he should refuse us in our request. 2. We must observe our wants in the
day time; as, how prone we are to run into worldly mindedness, in wrath, in
voluptuousnes, in foolish and unfruitful speaking, and therefore, what need
we have to cry, Lord, keep thou the door of our lips. Again, we must labor,
as to have a sense of wants, so to have a feeling of the good things God
gives, of the evils he keeps from us: for without the one we cannot be
poor in spirit, nor beg unfeignedly; without the other we cannot be truly
thankful, and offer up our praise heartily.

Now we must watch in prayer against indeuotion and wanderings, etc. So Esaias
complains 64.7, And there is none that calls on thy Name, neither that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee. After prayer we must mark, how
God has answered us in this or that we have entreated. Psalm. 5.3, Early in
the morning will direct my prayer unto thee, and will wait, stand as in a
watchtower, and see how the Lord will deal with me, and remember me in my
requests. Psalm. 130.5, I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I
have trusted in his word, ver. 6.7.

This doctrine checketh many; such, as when their Watch has been down, rush
upon prayer, even from pots to prayer: when they have supped and given thanks,
though they have let their hearts loose, eat, drunk without fear, sobriety,
profaned their mouths with light unfruitful speech, yet then before parting
of friends, call for a prayer. But though they may after a feast go to prayer,
who eat and drink before the Lord, as Hannah, 1* Sam. 1. after she had
exceeded with a double portion, went and prayed devoutly; yet you that have let
fall your Watch in feasting, you profane Gods Name when you call for a prayer:
and many are so far from remembering themselves all day, that they cannot keep
their eyes open while they are a-praying; they are so affected, as if it would
cast them into an ague to be kept awhile in prayer. This want of watchfulnes
is a common evil, and does us great hurt. This makes us such poor Orators,
that when we come to God, we are barren of praise and request, because we do
not observe in the day matter for this purpose: this, though we know it not,
does make us complain of such mists, rouing thoughts, indisposition, because
we walk all day long forgetful. If one should eat codlings, gooseberries,
pease, would you wonder if at night he were wrung in his belly? would you not
bid him mend his diet if he meant to see it otherwise? so, when we let our
hearts loose all day, feed upon earthly vanity, how should they be
heauenly-minded on a sudden, when bedtime calls on us to prayer?

If one be to make an oration in the schools, he will not venture ex tempore:
how much more should we meditate on the orations we are to make before the
Lord? So if we should devise any thing by way of petition, would we not wait
how it is received? what is said to it? would we give up our petition, and
carelessly depart, never thinking on it? how much more should we wait to see
what will become of our requests to GOD?

With perseverance. we must hold out in our daily course of prayer. What if
God delay, we must not give in, but like Jacob, not let God go till he gives
us the blessing; and like those remembrancers of Sion in Esaias, give him no rest
till he accomplish our desire. This, our Savior by two parables calls us
unto; one, of a friend importuning his friend in the night, Luke 11.5.6.7.8.
another, of a widow dealing with the unrighteous Judge Luke 18.2.3.4.5. This
perseverance is a thing so lovely, that therefore God does delay, to see how we
will be instant, and importunate with him. For he does not seem to reject
prayers that he does not hear, and grant them,: nay, as seed which is the
longest covered rises the first with most increase: so do those prayers which
God seems to bury in forgetfulness a long time, if we persevere, they shall
spring out with the greatest blessing. Esaias 58, We have fasted, and thou
regardest not. Are we better then Paul who prayed thrice, yet was glad to
rest in this, that Gods grace was sufficient? better then those that have
said, How long? Have not we, when God has called and knocked, often
neglected to answer? Let us consider these things: and though God seem to
turn a deaf ear toward us, let us continue our prayers with patience.

Finis.

