A HELP TO TRVE Happiness.

OR A brief and learned EXPOSITION of the maine and fundamental Points of
Christian Religion.

BY Mr. PAVL BAYNE.

1 PET. 2.2. As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the word that ye
may grow thereby. LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin for W. Bladen and are to be
sold at his shop at the sign of the Bible, near the great north door of
Paul's. 1618.

To the Virtuous, and Right Worshipful LADY, the Lady Rebecca Romeny.
THis TREATISE falling into my hands by Gods wise and gracious dispensation,
and providence, and being thought, not only by my self but by diverse others
of riper years and deeper judgment, worthy to be published in print for the
common good of many. I have thought good considering that the long continued
custom of dedicating books to Persons of some eminency in the Church of God,
has gotten the upper hand to dedicate this little Treatise ensuing to your
Ladyships name.

I have observed that among many other reasons moving such learned and godly
Divines as have either wouen some web of their own spinning, or faithfully
traveled in the fruitful labors of other men to Dedicate their writings: one
special reason has been to testify their thankfulness to the parties to
whom they dedicate the same, by publishing their Name both to the present age,
and to posterity for the further encouraging, both of themselves, and others
to proceed in piety and virtue; and especially in patronizing learning and
godliness when they shall see that such a reward remains for them even in
this present world.

But herein I must be very sparing, considering that the neerenesse of blood
betwixt your Ladyship and my self, will hardly suffer me to say the one half
of that which I might truly say, both of your Ladyships virtues in general,
and of your special and manifold favors toward me: for which I will rather
praise GOD, and pray for the continuance and increase thereof in the secret
closet of my heart then make any public proclamation of the same in the ears
of men.

Thus praying your Ladishippe to accept in part of payment, for your many
favors and kindnesses, this small mite, which I bring you in another man's
coin, with my humble and hearty prayers. etc.

Your Ladyships much bounden, and loving Nephew. E. C.

To the Christian Reader, and especially to the religious Householder, whose
desire and care is, to inform himself and his family, in that truth which is
according to godliness.
THe Apostle Paul (a chosen vessel to Christ) carried such an upright mind
and zealous affection to the glory of God, Acts 9.15.
and edifying of the body of Christ, which is the Church, that although he do
earnestly exhort all men to put on the girdle of sincerity (a most fit and
comely ornament for Ministers of the Gospel) yet he professed, Ephesians. 6.14.
that he did rejoice and would rejoice in the sound preaching of Christ
crucified, Phil. 1.18.
though the Preachers thereof were not (all of them) so sincerely affected as
they should have been. Mat. 25.21.
Even so our Paul, the Author of this little Commentary (now entered into his
Masters joy) notwithstanding for his sound knowledge in the mystery of
godliness, he was well able, and for his love to the Church of God, very
ready to have written a more exact Catechism of his own; or might have chosen
some other, already extant in print, better digested then this: yet observing
by the often impressions, and by other experience, the large spread and good
acceptance that these few Questions and Answers found among a number of
Christians, he chose rather to give light, and to put life to these, then in
so great variety of printed Catechismes to forth another of his own framing.

Wherein (Christian Reader) I do observe a gracious providence of God our
heavenly Father, toward such as desire with Cornelius to fear God with all
their Household, and to bring up their young children and servants in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord.

For by this means thou have (to use the phrase of the Apostle) a pattern of
wholesome words, ^ Tim. 1.13.
to direct and help thee to lay open and whet upon thy family, these brief and
fami-points here propounded, which though they be plain in themselves, yet
by reason of the brevity of them, they are made much more lightsome, easy and
useful, by this most plain and pithy Commentary.

Wherefore I would advise and entreat thee (whosoever thou be) that have
already taken a taste of these short Questions and Answers, which have been so
long extant, and so often printed and reprinted, that thou would now use
this help, to take a more full draught of them: and thou shall find (by the
blessing of God) that the profit will exceed the pains.

Only one thing I would aduertize thee of, touching the description and nature
of says, that the first Author of these short Questions and Answers, having
had some further cogitation and conference about it, does think that true
justifying faith (being the primary grace and glory of a Christian) may be
thus described; that it is, A belief of the Gospel, What true faith is.
whereby a man does truly rest and cast himself upon Christ alone, for
remission of sins and eternal salvation, both of soul and body. Which
description, (though there be diverse other, both godly and learned) I take
(under correction) to be most pertinent, and fit for the proouing and examining
of our selves, according to that exhortation of Paul, 2 Cor. 13.5
whether we be in the faith or no (wherein stands the maine comfort or
discomfort of every Christian man or woman in the world) therein notwithstanding
humbly submitting my self and my opinion, to the censure of learned Divines,
and to the judgment of the Church of God; and especially to that part of Gods
Church, which his right hand has planted in this Land.

Thus most humbly and heartily beseeching the Father of lights, Iam. 1.17.
from whom proceeds every good giving and every perfect gift, to give thee a
blessing by the good labors of this blessed man, I commend thee to the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory and praise in the Church for
evermore, Amen. From my house in the Blackfriars, this 22. of May, 1618.

The First Part. Showing how miserable all men are by nature.
1. Q. WHat is the estate of every natural man?

A. Very miserable, and in no wise to be rested in, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. and 4.17.18.
Romans 7.24.

The estate of man is here set forth by a twofold property thereof.

1. That it is miserable.

2. That it is not to be rested in.

Concerning the first: We are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. and
4.17. We are miserable, wretched, poor, blind, and naked, Revel. 3.17. Romans
7.24. But we must not understand this of Nature as it was of Gods making, for
so we were blessed, and made capable of eternal happiness; but of Nature as
now it is marred and defaced through the sin of man. For our Nature may be
considered in a fourefold estate; First, as it was before the Fall, by
Creation: Secondly, as it is since the Fall, by Sin: Thirdly, as it is renewed
by Grace: Fourthly, as it shall be perfected by Glory. The second estate is
here meant. Neither can it be otherwise with us; For look as those that are
highest advanced, when they fall, they become so much the more wretched (as we
see Ester. 7.8.9. and 14.
in Princes Favorites when they come into disgrace): So we in our first Parents
made Ps. 8 47. Heb. 2.7.
far above all visible Creatures, lifted up by the free grace of God to be
Favorites of the most High, when now we fell from this state could not but
become thrice wretched and miserable. The better the thing is the worse it is
when once it is corrupted: The higher any man climeth, the lower he falls.
Now our first Parents becoming miserable, we cannot be in better condition;
the children of Bondslaues can be no better then Slaves, what is in the root
will be in the branches and fruit also.

Object. But why do not men see this their misery?

Answ. 1. Because, as the eye of the body looks to that which is forthright
against it, and does not see inward; which makes us that we see not our own
face, though we behold the faces of others: So the eye of our Understanding,
being cast on things outward, never observes how the matter goes with it
self.

2. Our Consciences are blinded with ignorance within us and darkness without:
Now look as we cannot see the things in a room, if we want eyes, or having
our sight, want a candle, or some other light: So till God give us inward
light, and hold out the candle of his Law unto us we cannot be privy to our
own case in which we stand.

3. Our Judgment is so corrupted, that we take our State to be good, when it
is quite otherwise, Pro. 14.12.
There is a way seems good the issues whereof are death. Look as an eye
bloudshot thinks every thing red without it, when yet it is not so; and look
as Fantasy wanting the guidance of Reason, thinks often that we are Kings
(as in dreams we see) when it is far otherwise; So we, when our Judgments
want the Wisdom from above to guide them, judge our selves in good estate,
when it is far otherwise.

4. The nature of sin is to make us spiritually drunk, so that as men in
drunkenes know not how it is with them, no more do men in their pure natural
state.

5. Because men in their pure natural condition did never know better. Hence
it is that they think themselves in case good enough. Should a Nobleman in
chief favor with the King be banished into some remote place, to live in
rank of poor Cotagers about him, well might he think of his misery, because
he had proved a more excellent estate; but should he get posterity in exile,
they would think their estate as good as their Neighbors, yea rest in it, as
the best that ever they inoyed.

This may convince many and damnation?

Deus non infundit Oleum miserecordia nisi in cor contritum: Bern. Isa. 61.1.4
Mat. 11.28 and 15.24. Act. 2.37.
Christ is not sent but unto those who have sense of sin, neither shall any but
those be refreshed by him: where the heart is not plowed up and broken with
this knowledge the seed of the Gospel shall never be sowed. Yet we must not
think that for degree this knowledge is alike in all, as if none knew grace,
till he had felt hellish anguish; For as we may let forth with the pricking of
a pin the matter of some boiles, or impostumes as well as with deep launcings
and gashings, so God can give a true knowledge and touch of misery, without
making such deep wounds in the Conscience as others feel in their greater
humiliation. The pain that some women feel in their travel is nothing to
that which othersome do endure.

Secondly, We must not abide The Scripture bids us awake and stand up from
the dead Ephesians 5.14. calls on us to return and repent, as on men who are
out of the way, yea out of themselves. There must be in us a fear of standing
in the State we are in, Act. 2.37.
and a care to come forth, a denial of our selves, and a flying by Faith unto
Christ. Nothing will rest in such a state as threatens it destruction, case, we
must not lie still, but seek to rise out of it.

Here are to be rebuked such whose courses are at peace without endeavor this
way, Pro. 1.32.
ease slays the foolish, even as a Sluggard wheeleth in his bed loath to
get up, so do these, not seeing their danger, whose Quorum modo and mod^, non
habent modum.
by and by lasts till the time of grace be quite expired; But let us labor to
come forth, taking the present time, we will meet a sickness betime
laboring to rid our selves of it, Heb. 4.7. (...).
if any thing threaten our name and estate we will endeavor quickly to free
the one and the other, let us be in like manner wise for our souls also.

QVEST. II.
2. Q. WHat makes his estate so badde?

A. Two things: Sin and the Punishment thereof, Esa. 59.2. Romans 6.23. and 3.23.

Of the miserable estate aforesaid there are two Causes, Sin and the
Punishment thereof.

For look as one though he were an Earl, and never so great and happy, if
he be but guilty of treason against the King, is miserable, notwithstanding
all his possessions and greatness; so here had one all the world, if sin lie
at his door and be not pardoned, he is wretched. Again, were one in such a
debt that he is in danger every hour to be taken and haled to prison we
would account him wretched; But sin is a debt ( Forgive us our debts, Math.
6.12.) for which we may be thrown bodies and souls into hell fire, were they
not pardoned. As the cause of sickness may be said to make sick, no less
then the sickness it self, so the cause of miseries may be said to make us
miserable as well as misery it self.

Object. But men feel no such matter in sin. To which I answer. That a
child is not bredde and manifestly brought forth at once, the beginning of
things usually is in one time, the manifestation in another: A man may have the
cause of a sickness twenty years within him, without feeling himself sick,
or knowing one fit of sickness; So sin may be within one as a cause of all
misery, long before he find himself really and sensibly miserable: The reason
whereof is double:

1. It uses to yield for the present a pleasing delight which breeds ensuing
pain in times after following: Thus Good-fellowes, (as we use to call them)
neither feel, nor see any hurt in their intemperate courses, which please
their palate for the present, but breed, though insensibly the painful
diseases in which they end; Luimus senes quae in inventute peccauimus.
Intemperancy in youth ordinarily causing sickness in age. Thus men count it
no hurt to run into books, setting themselves in debt, because it eases
them for the present, though it break their back in the end.

2. Sin is in a heart that loves it, which makes it no whit grievous. Things
in their natural place are not ponderous: A tankard of water is a man's load on
land, but were he in the bottom of the sea, all the water in it would not
press, nor burden him, for the waters there are in their proper place, and so
borne up that they are not weighty: Thus when but the remainders of sin are
in a heart converted to God, they make it cry out, Romans 7.24
O miserable etc. but let never so reigning a sin dwell in a heart
unregenerate it does not seem any whit grievous; such a heart is the natural
and proper seat of sin in which it rests. We see then, that sin is the
principal cause of all misery and so it is indeed; For punishments could not
make a man miserable but for sin: Suppose man had bin made blind, sick,
poor, and mortal, yet if he had no way sinned, these defects should not have
hindered the due perfection belonging to him, neither should he then have been
said to be miserable in them.

The Consideration hereof should stir us up above all things, Acquittance.
Quietus est in his bosom: In this regard Gods children have followed God more
for this, then for deliverance from the evils that have been upon them. Exodus
10.17.
Many will say with Pharaoh, Lord remove this plague, but this is Jnstare
contra symptomata morbo neglecta.
to let the cause of the sickness alone, and to seek only to assuage the
pain of it. Many like as Rogues keep and show their foares, so they glory of
their shame, and will not be healed.

subject to death, then he is miserable, for then is sown the seed of his
future woe. Nevertheless say he go on and be not taken in it, and imprisoned,
men do not account him, nor discern him, as yet to be wretched, but let the
same person once be taken sentenced and executed, and then every body does see
his case to be woeful: for now his misery stands out of the cause and is
actually declared. Thus though while men are conscious of sin only, their
misery is not seen; yet when Gods Justice has inflicted any part of
punishment, then so far forth their misery is openly displaied, and set
forth to the view of all.

Leu. 26.23.24.
that so our sleepie senses may be awaked.

QVEST. III.
3. Q. WHat is Sin?

A. Every breach of Gods law, 1 Ioh. 3.4.

Having laid down summarily the causes of our misery, the particular
explication of them follows, according to the order of nature in which they
were propounded.

In the Answer which contains a brief description of sin, observe

1. That sin is the breach of Gods law only.

2. That every breach of Gods Law is sin. To which may be added, deserving
death, and making the Offender miserable.

the breach of Gods law which may be showed by necessary deduction thus:

Whatsoever is sin to my Conscience, defiles it, and subiecteth it to
punishment: Whatsoever defiles it and subiecteth it to punishment, must be the
breach of some such Law as the Conscience is bound to observe.

The reason is, because the Conscience cannot be punishable, for doing or not
doing that, which it has liberty to do or not to do. That Law which the
Conscience is bound to observe must be the Law of some one which is Superior
to it; Par in parem non habet potestatem.
For equals have no authority over equals, much less Inferiors over
Superiors: We sin not though we stir not at their command who have no
power over us: None is such a Superior, as has power over our Consciences,
but God only. For Superiors having power to command any, they can take
knowledge when they offend, and they can punish those who transgress, with
condign punishment; but none beside God can take knowledge of, Iam. 4.12.
or punish the Conscience. Nothing then can be sin but the breach of Gods law.

Object. But do not the Laws of men in authority bind the Conscience?

Ans. Not by themselves and primarily, but secondarily by participation, with
the Law of God which does immediately and of it self bind the Conscience; As
water does make hot and scald sometimes, not of it self, but as it
participateth in the heat of fire, which immediately from the nature of it
makes hot. If they command any thing repugnant to Gods word we may diosobey
it, and not sin: provided that our denial of obedience come from conscience
of Gods Will, and not from want of due subjection in us.

To return then thither whence we have a little digressed: Sin is the
breach of Gods Law; for look as to miss our rule and measure is to offend and
err in that which by the rule and measure should have been directed; so Gods
Law being the rule by which our Nature and actions should be ordered, we
cannot but err when we leave this; and we cannot sin and offend further then
we transgress it; For nothing can be amiss while it does agree to that
measure by which it is to be measured: And this suffices to show that sin is
the breach of Gods Law.

Wherefore in the first breaks his Law, who only has power to save and
destroy. If we have broke the Kings law where it threatens loss of life, lim,
or liberty, it is fearful; if we have broken something, that great Persons,
such on whom we depend, gave us in charge, how will it disquiet and fear us?
but in every sin we break the Law of the eternal God.

in it; No more can we know our sins as they ought to be known, till some
made wise by the knowledge of the Law, do advertise us of them, or till our
selves get this glass of the Law and look into it. But the most now love not
to have the Law sincerely opened; but resemble those foolish women, who love
not to dress themselves but by false glasses, which make them look quite
otherwise then they are.

Thirdly, seeing sin is to discover the same: So in the night of our
ignorance, we cannot avoid faling into sin, further then this Law as a
candle does give us light. Men will know penal Statutes, and bonds upon
Forfeitures, that they may the better keep themselves from running into them;
let us not think Ignorance will be a Plea sufficient for excuse: If the King
once have proclaimed any thing, and the Subject after sufficient time of
notifying his will be ignorant of it, at his own peril be it.

Further to come to the second point:

Obser. 2. Every breach of Gods Law is sin, yea and such a sin as deserves
death and makes the Offender miserable. The least missing of the rule is an
error as well as the greatest, and both alike for kind, though not for degree;
So the least swaruing from or breach of Gods law, which is our rule, is an
offense of God, and a sin no less for kind, then the greatest, though for
degree some are greater sins then other: yea every breach thereof is sin
deserving death. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10
Cursed is be that continues not in all to do them. For indeed the least
sin is contrary to Charity, as the least drop of water has in it
contrariety to fire; That in the event it does not bring death, it is from
Mercy pardoning, not from the nature of sin, not sufficiently demeriting
eternal damnation.

and does feed our sickness: So we sick of sin love at least some kind of
liberty which may feed our spiritual sickness.

QVEST. IV.
4. Q. HOw many ways is Gods Law broken?

A. By doing things forbidden, leaving things commanded, and failing in the
manner.

First it is to be noted that the Answer is to be understood of all actual
sin: For omission being a privation of action, the sin thereof, must be
reduced to the head of actual sin.

How here are set down three ways of breaking the Law: By committing something
forbidden; By omitting; And by defective performing of something commanded.
The Soul in moving or resting may miss the rule by which it is to be
directed; First by having some object diverse from that which the Law of God
warranteth: Secondly, by carrying it self otherwise then it ought, to that
Object which in Gods Law is commanded.

In sins of Commission the soul erreth in the first kind, for it does move
it self to something which is forbidden unto it therein, and this is the
highest kind of evil; For as in a Wife not to love her Husband is a great
lewdness, but not only to neglect his love, but to turn to the imbracement
of Strangers, is much more heinous: So for the Soul not to cleave to God in
doing righteousness is sinful, but to leave him and turn to love and like
any kind of unrighteousness, this is most sinful.

Now the soul carries it self otherwise then it should to the good
commanded, when either it does suspend, ceasing to move after it, as in sins
of Omission, or when it works for matter that which is required, but in other
manner then God has prescribed; either by not working the thing that we had
in command to do, or by so doing it, that we fail in circumstance. This
last branch is or diverse considerations; for the manner of performance
sometimes is such, as does change the kind, and make that a sin to him who
so does it, which might have been a grateful obedience: Hos. 1.4.
Thus Iehu in killing Ahab and his Posterity propounding private regnancie,
committed the sin of murder, which else had been an act of Obedience and
Justice. Sometimes it is such as does not change the kind of it, turning it to
sin, but hinders the perfection of it, and makes it sinful: thus does
the circumstantiall swaruings whereby our best actions are defiled.

The word in Hebrew which notes (...)
sin, is derived of a word, that signifies the missing of a mark: Now a man
may miss the mark three ways; By shoting over it; By being short of it; By
shoting about it, but wide either on the right hand or on the left: So may we
by as many ways swerue from the Law (which should be as a mark in our eye)
either by going beyond that which is commanded in it, as in sins of
Commission, or by coming short, as in sin of Omission, or by being wide,
when we are about the thing commanded, but so that we are wide in regard of
the circumstance, of that straightness or integrity that should be in our
actions.

to lie and steal, etc. but not to repent, or not to believe, or not to give
all diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, or not to get Knowledge,
they cannot see to be sins, being but the omitting of things commanded. To be
improfitable in doing nothing this way, is not deemed blameworthy. I hope (say
many) I do no hurt; I pray God I never do worse: He were an evil Servant who
taking a stool should sit still and let his work lie undone, though he had no
other fault: So many if they should never go to Church and serve GOD, or say
Prayers, etc. they would think it a sin, but to have their hearts far from
God, to do those things without reverence, they see not this to be sinful:
Nay if the thing they do be lawful, let them use it never so intemperately
they think they sin not, nor should not be rebuked. Let them make a trade
and vocation of Pastime; why they hope God allows recreation. So many, if they
speak this or that which is true, though without wisdom and love, they
think they may do it; Never remembering that good stuff may be marred in the
making: Good things may be so performed, that they shall become Sins and
sinful actions.

QVEST. V.
5. Q. WHat are the punishments of Sin?

A. All miseries of this life, death in the end, hell ever after.

Look as it is with men if they turn themselves from this aspectable light,
they are forthwith environed with darkness; So man turning away by his sin
from God the Father of lights, from whence every good gift comes, he cannot
but be forthwith in outward and inward darkness, in all kind of misery: Three
kinds or degrees are here set down; The 1. in this life: The 2. in death: The
3. after death.

To branch the first would make a Treatise. Our souls are dead in ignorance
and lust, so that they have in them a seed apt to bring forth every sin. Our
bodies have mortality as a worm corrupting them: Our conditions are exposed to
a thousand vanities and wearisome courses, and these are but the beginnings of
evil.

In death, soul and body being divorced, the soul is kept in chains of
darkness, fear, and despair, expecting judgment to come. In the day of
judgment, our bodies reunited with their souls shall jointly be sentenced,
and feel executed upon them the full wrath of God which is a consuming fire,
should we not by sound faith and repentance prevent those eternal woes. Look
as Malefactors, are first followed with Hue and cry, then taken and committed
and kept till the appointed time of Assise, and lastly are sentenced, and
executed; So God first in, and during this life follows and pursues Sinners
with these lighter evils as it were with Hue and Cries ringing in their ears,
at length by death he apprehends them, and keeps them in that dark custody
of damned Spirits (the Devil being as a Iaylor unto God (and in the end when
Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead, he shall then take the
impenitent and cast them soul and body into inquenchable torment.

Object. What are all miseries of this life, punishments of Sin?

Answ. They are, being absolutely considered, no better; but this respect is
changed to those that are in Christ; They are no more punishments of revenging
Justice requiring satisfaction, but chastisements of fatherly justice, which
seeks this way the exaltation of his children. If a Judge whip a Stripling
under the age of thirteen (and save him from the gallows) to satisfy the Law
for his offense past, it is one thing; If a Father whip his son if he take
him pilfering, to keep him from falling into the like, and from coming into
danger of the Law, this is another thing: Two things may be one in nature, and
differ in respects. Two stones may be both alike for the substance of them, yet
the one may have a respect to distinguish one man's land from another (as bound
stones do) which the other has not. Thus sickness, poverty, and disgrace,
common to the wicked and godly, consider them in their being, they are alike,
but the one have a respect, of a just condemnation inflicted by Gods revenging
justice for the satisfying of it, which the others have not; For Christ has
put himself betwixt Gods Justice, and all them that are in him; Romans 8.1. Gal.
3.13.
So that there is no condemnation or curse but he has borne it in their
behalf.

Object.

Answ. state happy that seems happy: To be held in dangerous snares, is no
point of happiness; Psalm. 69.22.
but the Table, and by proportion, the wealth, strength, and honor of the
wicked are snares. Even as poisons, some kill with griping torments, some cast
into a sleep, and make men laugh till they fall down dead: So the curse of
God kills some with dolorous torment going before in this life, some it so
affects that they go in sweet sleeps laughing till they fall into
destruction. Whether is it not more happy to sail with a cross wind which
offers to turn men back, or to have a pleasant gale which does carry them
with full course on sands or rocks which will cause their shipwreck: They are
most miserable who sail to hell with the pleasantest wind; in a word, the
felicity of the wicked being finally impenitent, is like the happiness of
franked ware satted to the shambles; for they thereby are fatted to eternal
slaughter.

This may teach us the true viz. Sin, and how we must remove them; by
getting sin removed. Say to some, Why? how came you thus? What is the cause?
They will answer you, even as it pleased God Sir; by course, It is so with
others as well as with us. Alas, a man will not give another a box on the
ear without some cause; God would not cast on us these miseries, were there
not sin provoking him thereunto; but many feel the fit and pain of sickness,
who know not the cause of it: Now to remove grief many will to Cards, Dice,
Company, and so to remove other evils they will seek this outward thing and
that; never looking out, nor thinking of Sin: But a man might as well look
to remove a sickness caused by some matter impacted within him, by going into
another chamber, putting on a cappe and such external things, which never come
near the cause of his disease. These may like cold Anodynes are such
medicines, as being applied, astonish the disease, and take away the pain
thereof, but remove it not
Anodynes bring us a sleep, and keep us from feeling our misery, but they can
never heal us of them.

This also shows unto

Lastly, we may hence behold of this life make them afraid, but they are worse
afraid then they can be hurt by them. There is a great difference between
two Snakes, if the sting of the one be forth, and the other not; for the
former we may play with it, and have it in our bosom, and there is no danger
in it. Such are the afflictions of Gods children, the sting is forth of them;
Well may they through our weakness, like Bugbares affright us, but surely they
cannot hurt us.

QVEST. VI.
6. Q. IS Sin such a filthy thing?

A. Yea, it is the most filthy, and loathsome thing in the world.

Here is further offered to our consideration, the nature of sin, whose
punishment is mentioned to be so exceeding great. The point is this: That
Sin is the most filthy of all other things: And so indeed it is, and
therefore is called, Filthiness it self, 1 Cor. 7.1. and in sundry other
places. And it cannot be otherwise, since it is nothing else but the corruption
of the Soul, now deuoid of the life of God. The beauty of a humane body is
great, but when the Soul has left it, what is more loathsome then the
corruption of it, when now it is a dead carcass? Thus the beauty of the Spirit
was admirable, while it lived the life of God in Knowledge, righteousness, and
holiness, but when God has forsaken it (who is the Soul of our souls) no
further in lightning or sanctifying it, there enters all kind of sin, as a
spiritual corruption, being in comparison of all other things most detestable:
Corruption optimi est pessima.
The more excellent the thing is, the worse is the corruption thereof. Again,
in matters natural, and moral there is nothing filthy, and loathsome in any
regard, but that the same is in sin by proportion. Nakedness is shameful,
Sin is a spiritual nakedness: Some diseases are filthy, as the Leprosy;
Sin is a spiritual Leprosy. Lamenesse is a deformity, so is crookednes,
Sin is a lamenesse deprauing all spiritual motion; and a spiritual
crookednes. Blacknes is foul and fearful; Sin bears the black Image of
the Devil the Author thereof. We count excrements coming out of the draught
filthy, yet they defile not a man, but Sin that comes out of the Soul does
pollute him. We count dunghills, and smelling puddles filthy, but sin casts
forth so filthy a savor as it were, in the nostrills of God, that he could
not smell a savor of rest till it was removed by that sweet incense of
Christ's death, who to that end offered himself a Sacrifice of sweet smelling
savor unto God. Ephesians. 5.2.
What filthy Creatures have any filthy properties, but they are in sin
proportionably: Hence sinners are compared to dogs, and swine the filthiest
Creatures. What moral vices are most filthy? Drunkenesse and those
filthinesses not to be named; Sin is a spiritual drunkenesse, and a turning
from the chaste love of God to the love of every base thing.

sins but are come to Sodomlike impudency. Some proud Peacocks vaunt in
prancking themselves, some think their fury a thing becoming them well: Some
esteem it as a thing praiseworthy, when they can use their wit and tongue to
derision, and to the circumuenting of others. Some are of that mind, when they
can prodigally fly out, and make light of all others, that then they are jolly
men: Some are as proud of the vanity and curiosity of their mind, as if the
quintessence of wit, consisted therein. The Moors, because blacknes, is
natural to them, count their black hue beautiful: Children are not ashamed,
and Madmen glory of their nakedness: thus it is with Sinners in conceiving of
their spiritual deformity.

Law, and the direction thereof, are far more uncomely then the other: as the
sense does joy to be united to an object pleasing and well proportioned unto
it; so it is auerse and does fly from those that are otherwise. If we go by a
soul stinking place, we stop our noses, and have away; If an ugly shape
present it self we shut our eyes, and endure not the view of it: Thus our
souls should with indignation, turn from all filthy and abominable vices.

QVEST. VII.
7. Q. HOw does this appear?

A. Both by the punishment, and person against whom it is committed.

Here are set down two Considerations, by which, as by a glass we may see
the foulness of sin.

First by the punishment; for proportionable to this in greatness must the
offense be: the reason is, because Justice does rule and measure the
punishment by the offense; if that be little, the punishment that it assigns
is little, if that be great, the punishment is answerable. Now if a thing
measured forth be long and wide, the measure must be understood to be long and
wide also. Hence it is that in humane punishments we see the greatness of the
offense; if one be restrained we gather he has done some fault, if
imprisoned, if hanged in chains, or burned, still as the punishment increases
we conjecture the fault to have been corespondent: How foul then must that
offense have been, which the just and most merciful God has punished with so
many miseries in this life, with death in the end, and after with eternal
destruction.

Again, the foulness of sin is clearly discerned by considering the
person against whom it is committed. For in any good or evil work, the person
that does it, or the circumstance of person about whom it is done does impart
to the work such a respect whereby it deserves accordingly. Let a common man
come to me when I send, and a small thing does recompense his pains, but let a
Doctor of Physic come, and an Angel is his due: the quality of his person
does so dignifie his work, and make it of answerable value. So it increases
the merit and desert of evil. Let one of the people sin, he is guilty, but
l^^ the Priest sin, Leu. 4.3.12 c mpared with Leu 4 27.^.5
his fault i^ greater, and his Sacrifice must be greater. And as the
circumstance of the person doing, increases the desert of good or evil; So
does the circumstance of the person about whom the work is conversant. Let a
Subject do good to any, and it well deserves, but doing some special service
to his Prince he deserves greatly. Let him offend any, he is guilty, but the
higher the person offended is, the more heinous is the sin. If one revile or
slander his equal, it is an offense and may bear an action of the case; but
if a Noble man, it is scandalum magnatum, deserving sharper punishment, and if
the King, it is treason, and worthy of death: Then how foul must that sin be
which is a trespass committed directly against GOD the KING of Kings.

Job, who sometime were rich, when he does by pains, and grief lash a man,
yea grind him to dust, when God takes men away by violent or natural death,
No body rises to consider either of the power of his wrath, or the foulness
of sin, which has been the cause of all this misery. Again, if a child
do ought against his natural Parent, a Servant against his Master, a Subject
against his Prince, we esteem it as a foul matter, but when we lift up the
hand by sinning against God, the filthiness of this is not so apparent.

QVEST. VIII.
8. Q. WHo is that?

A. Almighty God, whose holiness, and justice are infinite.

That we may the better see the foulness of sin, it is first generally to
be considered, viz. That the person against whom we sin is God. Secondly more
especially, That this God is Almighty, and infinite in holiness and justice.

Concerning the first: when David had wronged Bathsheba in her chastity, and
Vriah in his life, yet he confesses that he had sinned against God alone,
Psalm. 51.4.

There may be three things considered in sin: 1. A damage done to our
neighbors: 2. A trespass against the authority of some civil Court of
Justice: 3. A trespass in the Court of Conscience. Now though I iniure my
Neighbor, yet this is not sin as it is an injury to him; but as it is
committed against the Law which does bind my conscience otherwise; So a
trespass against the Laws of some civil Court is not a sin precisely in this
respect, but as in this a higher Law and authority binding the Conscience is
transgressed. Therefore authority may forgive a civil trespass, and the
penalty of it, which the Law determines, without meddling with that sinful
respect which is in the same default against God. For look as a Thief taking
a true man's purse does wrong his Neighbor, but cannot be said to break his
Neighbors Law, but the Kings Law; So in every sin, howsoever we may injury
and trespass against men, yet we cannot be said properly to sin against
them, because no Law binding my Conscience is broken but Gods only, which
respect gives being to sin.

David did. Wounded persons will open their wounds to a Chirurgian who is able
to heal them, so should we.



Object.

Answ. ex Officio, because they bring and apply that word of Gods writ, which
does signify Gods will and pleasure to forgive.

3. Let us remember in every our Neighbor, we seldom think what measure we
offer to God whom we provoke by breaking his Law: The Devil does so keep us
hoodwinckt that we think we love God as well as any, and that we meddle not
with him, but with those that wronged us.

Now more specially observe: 1. That this does further discover the foulness
of sin; that it is against that God who is Almighty: The greater power any
man is of, the more dreadful a thing it is to trespass against him, but sin
does provoke and put God to it as we say, and in committing it, we enter comba^
with him; Now look as t^ see an Infant to war against the Parent, or to see
a pot striving against the Potter, were a detestable sight; So is this much
more, that man should by sin provoke him who has us in his hand, even as man
has a pot, or glass, which, if he do but let it go, is presently broken.

Further, the consideration of the holiness of GOD, may make us the more see
the heinousness and foulness of sin: That which is opposite to him who is
most holy, that is, pure in himself, and the Author of all purity in his
creatures, that cannot but be filthy and impure; look as every thing which
has contrariety with light, must needs be darkness; so what ever is contrary
to him whose eyes are too pure to behold with approbation any sin, Hab. 1.13.
yea, who is purity it self, that must needs be most filthy impurity.

Lastly, the foulness o^ sin may be seen by considering Gods infinite
justice If man do wrong to on^ that handles him unjustly it does somewhat
lessen the fault, but if he deal injuriously with one, who will not offer
him, or any other the least injustice, then every one that has but half a^
eye does descry the foul^ lewdness of the fact: Thus it is, our sin is
against that God whose dealing was most just and equal to us. Again, that
which wrongeth an infinite justice cannot but be most fearful in regard of
the punishment which it incurreth; for infinite in some sort must that
punishment be which does satisfy the wrong done to an infinite Majesty.

This also may be added to set forth the foulness of sin, that it is
committed against that God who is infinite in goodness.

For any Subject to rebel against a Prince, is wretched lewdness, but for one
to rebel against such a Prince who out of his bounty has highly advanced him,
and done him favors from day to day, this is most loathsome disloyalty: Thus
it is with sin which offends a most kind and merciful Lord, who had
freely in creating us, given us such high indowments, and who does daily load
us with blessings.

his Countrymen will never be detected to be so vnbeautifull as he is.

QVEST. IX.
9. Q. WHat must a man do in this estate?

A. Bewail his misery, and hasten to get out of it.

Being in that miserable and accursed estate aforesaid by sin; first, we are
to bewail Our Savior bid the women of Jerusalem, Luke 13.3.
that they should not weep for him, but for themselves in regard of their sins.
In this regard also the Apostle James biddes Rich-men weep and houle, Iam.
5.1. Yea, we must bewail our estate in regard of the remainders of sin which
compass us about; Luke 13.3.
If ye repent not, ye likewise shall perish. Nature is so framed that if she
find her self united to such things as are good and pleasing to her, she
rejoices; So if on the contrary, she do see her self overtaken with, or in
danger of evil, she is disquieted. Thus it is that we cannot truly see our
selves to be in a miserable estate, but we shall grieve and bewail our
condition. When men see themselves in such a case that they are guilty of such
a fault as does touch life, or liberty, then they will bewail themselves, and
wring their hands, accounting themselves unhappy that ever they were borne; but
have they not much more cause to wail, when they shall see themselves by
reason of sin against God, guilty of damnation? There is a natural sorrow,
as a natural fear; when Nature her self makes us grieve through her That
natural l^ue that is in Dammes to their young ones.
[(...)] i. natural affection. And there is a sinful sorrow when men grieve
inordinately upon civil Considerations, as for anger, being crossed, or for
loss often of some small matter. And thirdly, there is a Christian sorrow for
sin, and our misery, to which we are yet in part subject through sin. This
does lie upon us all, which is the exercise of a broken heart, and Sacrifice
which God much respects.

Luke 6.25.
Woe unto them, for they are like to weep and houle when now it is too late.
Some respect all grief as melancholy, and all tears as effeminate, not
becoming a generous mind: This is the height of man's misery, when he does not
pity himself in regard of that which makes him most miserable. We account
the states of men stricken with Phrensies, and Apoplexies very pitiful, for
they feel not how it is with them, not can they pity themselves in these
takings. We condemn them as Monsters of men, who now having their sen^ence,
and being subject every hour to execution, will nevertheless give themselves
to swagger, drink, take Tobacco, etc. but what a Monster art thou, who when
thou hear that thou art a child of Gods wrath, of death, and of eternal
condemnation, wilt yet sleep as securely, and live as carelessly, as if there
were no such matter; the God of this world blinds thy eyes: hence it is that
thou art dreadlesse. That which the eye sees not, the heart dreadeth not.

Let us secondly lament Psa. 51.17.
as spices are then most fragrant when they are powned and bruised; So are our
hearts before God, when by this sorrow they are dissolved: Beside, as the
wicked sow the seed of their sorrow then, when they carnally rejoice; So our
light and comfort is then sowed, when we are exercised in Christian mourning.
Nevertheless, it is not required, that Christians should be of such a fluid
and melting temper that they cannot speak two words this way without sighing,
putting the finger in the eye, and watring their plants. Those who will laugh
at every word, their hearts cannot be coaffected with joy extraordinary in a
sign extraordinary; thus in these cursory tears and sighs, the heart cannot
but want that due grief, which should bear that outward signification.
Again, it does not agree with that rule of Math. 6.17.18.
anointing our selves before men: Not to speak, that whereas tears in time
and place, break the heart of a beholder, these often are no more pitied,
then the sight of a Goose going barefoot, as we speak in the Proverb. Let us
therefore accustom to smite our rockie hearts in our retired devotions, then
our Father who does see it in secret will reward it openly: As wounds by
washing forth the matter are cleansed; so is the heart purged by godly sorrow
which often has tears accompanying of it.

make have to come forth of this estate: We should not give our eyes leave to
slumber, nor let our temples rest, till we found our selves in some measure
delivered: Whilst it is called to day harden not your hearts. Heb. 3.7.8 13.
Psalm. 119.60.
I will not delay to keep thy judgments, says the Prophet. Physicians
observe that in bodily sicknesses delay is most dangerous; but if any where
then here is delay most mortal: When every day our aptness to be restored is
more diminished, our sin by custom more strengthened, Gods favor in some
degree farther removed: If a fire be kindled in the rooft over us, how do we
run and cry to all the Neighborhood for help to get it quenched: And when
the wrath of God has seized on us, in soul, body, condition, his wrath which
is a consuming fire, shall we not without all delay labor to save our selves
from the woeful destruction of it.

Wherefore those are to be leave their pleasures, and profits, and with these
thoughts they delay to come forth, or like Lots wife, look back to Sodom.
Thus ease does slay the wicked ones, who though they sleep secure in sin,
yet their condemnation sleeps not. Before men can fear and fly from any
evil, 1. they must know it: 2. apprehend it as near unto them. If the house
were ready to fall, while we knew nothing but that all were firm, we could not
fear, nor fly away. Again, though we know an evil, if we conceit it a great
way of, we are not affraide of it; as every one does know he shall die, yet
how few fear it, or provide against it, because it is a thing men put far
from them, the oldest may live a year; the weak man thinks a loose estate
may stand long. Thus men, till Gods saving grace begin to work, commonly know
nothing of their spiritual danger; or think as he thought of doomesday, it
is a matter a great way off, and so it is no wonder if so few bestirre them to
come forth of their wretched estate.

But let us, who are the Pro. 6.1.5.
compound with our Creditor before his heavy arrest be served upon us. Should
thou have to deal with many men, thou might have a cold suite; but seek
mercy of God, Ioh. 6.37.
none that comes to him does he cast forth. Oh happy men who are stirred up
to flee the wrath to come.

QVEST. X.
10. Q. CAn a man of himself get forth?

A. No, and beside he has three enemies, the flesh, the Devil, and the
world, who labor to hold him in it.

observed is, That there is no strength in us to help our selves into the
state of salvation. Were we borne blind, deaf, dumb in regard of these
natural senses, there is no power in us, or in all the Creatures to restore
us, although these things exceed not natures compass, in regard of the sense
to be wrought, but only in respect of the manner of working it: Now how much
less have we, or any Creatures strength to restore our selves to the sight
and hearing of the heart, which of themselves are matters altogether
supernatural: We know not, neither 1 Cor. 2 14.
can we know; we obey not, neither Romans 8.7
can we be subject; Romans ^.^
we are of no strength, and look as men naturally dead can do nothing to
help themselves into this present life, though while they are sick only,
some little thing they may do this way; So they who are dead in sins, and
trespasses, and estranged from the life of God Ephesians. 2.1. and 4.18.
, which all are; they can do nothing toward their quickening spiritually. Our
Understanding is dead in ignorance, dead in error, vanity, and folly; our Will
in utter auersenesse, for there is no man but understands more of GOD and his
Will, then he has Will to follow, or affections to like of.

we say because we have no power from which such a supernatural action should
proceed, the most of them say, because we want freedom to exercise that
power of our Will, which is still left in us; Let a man be laden with irons,
why can he not walk? not because he wants a faculty to move himself, from
place to place; but because he is so clogged, that he cannot put into act, that
power, he has. This does obscure Gods Grace, and extol the power of man's
will. If one should say his Physician did help him a little, but deny the
greatness of his Cure, should he not dishonor him? Should the blind whose
eyes Christ opened have said, indeed he did clear our sight, but we had the
power of sight in us before he took us in hand, would not this derogate from
his glory? So to say, indeed he did help us when we were weak, and sick, but
not quicken us as being dead, is it not to obscure the grace of Christ?



The second thing to be That there is in us much resistance to our salvation.
By reason of our natural corruption we not only have nothing which might
further us, but we have in us that sin, and corruption which does fight
against the work of grace, more then water fights with the heat of fire: In
which regard the power restoring us, must be more glorious then that which
first created all things. In particular, our Flesh is our greatest hinderance:
by Flesh is meant corruption of mind, will, and affections, which does show it
self in the outward man whose members are so many instruments, and weapons of
that inward unrighteousness. Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, which cannot subject it self
unto him. We may illustrate these particulars by considering this corruption,
either as it has the respect of a sickness in our Soul, deprauing it in all
the faculties of it; Or as it is a concupiscence, and adulterous love to the
Creature.

Now look as it is with sick men, their sickness desires that which does
feed it, and makes them most auerse from those medicines, diets, and exercises
wherewith they should be cured: So our corruption does incline us to such
courses, making us set against all that which should help us. If you think of
it as of adulterous love, look as nothing does so keep an Adulteress from
returning unto the love of her Husband, as her own false unchaste heart; So
nothing does so much keep us from returning to God as this adulterous
concupiscence of our own hearts.

Oh then let us deny our selves, our own wisdom, will, and affections which
make us (like Madmen) to think all against us that should do us good. For
knowledge, we hope we know enough, there was better living, when there was
less known. For believing, what says the flesh, do thou see any reason for
it? can thou perceive any such thing as they speak? Let them say what they
will, but let them pardon thee for believing before thou do see more: For
more near care of Christian duty. What? shall none go to heaven, but those
who are so forward, there is measure in every thing. In steed of yielding to
Means, as the Word, catechizing, etc. It is strange what the flesh will
object: Men think it is, to make their children soft, and to take away their
spirits to bring them to such kind of instruction; But let us learn to deny
our selves, we are like sick men, between our sickness, that is, the
corruption of our Nature on the one hand, and the voice of our Physician
Christ, giving us counsel in his word on the other, if we will leave the
Physician and hearken to our sickness, then it will grow on us, and we shall
perish: But if we listen not to our disease, yielding to it, but cleave to the
counsel of our Phisician, then shall our sickness be overcome, and we shall
live.

Thirdly, The Devil is also The Strong man will bussle before he will leave
his possession. Even as Pharaoh hindered the going forth of Israel from
bondage, so will this spiritual Pharaoh, our deliverance from under his
spiritual captivity. Look as many hinder the well-doing of sick persons,
who will counsel them, and put upon them things that feed their disease, if
they be for the present a little delightful: So does the Devil who does
nothing else, but animate men, and help them to that which may more and more
increase their corruption, and dissuade them from that which would truly
remedy their evils. Again look as Bawdes, and Pandors, and such like
creatures do much hurt in holding the hearts of unclean women, to their
unclean courses: So the devil who indeed is no other then a Pandor going
between the adulterous Soul on the one side, and the world who is the
Paramour of it on the other, bewitching the heart of the one more and more with
the other.

Let us therefore take heed of him, Mat. 16.22
Oh master be good to thy self. The truth is, when we are hindered from doing
good, the Devil does hinder us; when we are ready to fall from performing any
good motion or purpose, which a better Spirit inspired into us, the Mat. 13.19.
Devil does steal away this seed: When we are stirred up to lust, Math.
13.19.
wrath, etc. the Devil does blow up this fire; Ephesians. 4.26.27.
Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, give not place to the Devil.

Object. We see no such thing.

Answ. We see not how Gods Spirit does work in us every good will, work, and
word, yet we know that his Spirit works in us all that is of this nature.
Phil. 2.13.
The Devil hides himself; Sometimes he comes to us in wicked persons
persuading us: Sometimes (as to our SAVIOVR in Peter, and to Gods Prophet by an
old Prophet) in good persons: Sometimes he does insinuate himself with our
own inclinations, as at this or that time he does see them bent: Sometimes by
outward occasions he does provoke us: Look as Foulers couch under their
stalking-horse, that they may shoot the more securely, and deadly; So does he
keep out of sight, that he may kill unexpected: Wherefore let us not only spit
at his name, but turn away from him in these enterprises, by which he makes
us rest in our natural estates; as good enough, though the issue of them is
death.

Lastly, we are to observe, That the world is no small hinderance, keeping us
back from returning to God, and to the way of pence. By the World we are to
understand worldly minded persons, and things in the world: whether
intellectual, as the wisdom of it. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Not many wise. Or external, as the profits, pleasures, pomp, or ought of
this kind: For though these of themselves be good, yet by accident we are
much hurt by them, as wine though good of it self does much hurt unto persons
intemperate. The World destinguished from the Flesh does seem thus to be
taken. Look as the sick man is much hindered from recovering, by the presence
of things which provoke his appetite; but feed his sickness: So the presence
of those things which so disdiet the Soul, and cherish our lusts, are very
dangerous. And as unclean women are much entangled and hindered from returning
to conjugall love, and duty, by the presence of strange Lovers, and Paramoures:
So are we; for these things are as it were the adulterous friends with which
our soul enters league of unclean amity against God: Hence it is that as
many Women are reclaimed, when they are now translated from such company: So
the souls of many return to God, when now he has stripped them of these
things, though before they would not once seek after him, or cast a look
toward him.

Let us then take heed of the baits of this world; they are a covered hook,
and work murder. How many has the world kept from Christ? Luke. 14.18.19.
We have bought Oxen, and a Farm. How many have they made follow Christ by the
halues, and at length slide back quite from him, like that Demas.

2 Timothy 4.10.
But above all things let us take heed of our own corruption; but for this,
neither the Devil, nor the world could have any power over us; In vain should
one knock at the door where there were none within to look out, and answer:
In vain should the Devil knock by his persuasions at our hearts, did there
not dwell in them these lusts which would look out to him too readily, and
therefore he could do nothing in Christ in whom he could find nothing of
this nature. Again though the Devil be illecebrarum adiutor, Ioh. 14.30.
a Furtherer of all prouocations to lust; and (as unclean persons help
complexion with the painting box) does make them seem to us good in far
greater degree then they are. Yet they would not be able to tempt us
effectually, had we not this lust in us. Look as man while he is now in a hot
fit of his ague, while this heat does possess him, O he thinks drink the
only thing, and counts them happy that may drink enough; but when this
distemper is over, though the pot were by him, cares not to taste it; So these
earthly things, when concupiscence is up, Oh alas (such false glasses these
are) that our judgment, and estimation do think them so good that we may
not forbear them, when the same things at another time (when lust is somewhat
subdued) do little or nothing stir our desires; that he would think his
Fantasy and senses were by some juggling delusion corrupted; So different is
the judgment we have of the same persons and things at one time above another.

The Second Part. Showing what remedy GOD has appointed for our deliverance.
QVEST. I.
1. Q. WHere shall a man find help?

A. Only in Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God.

Having seen our misery, and how it is not in our strength to be delivered, it
remains to unfold the way, by which we are redeemed.

Here then two things are to be observed: 1. Who it is that is our Savior. 2.
That we are saved in him alone.

Touching the first, we have him here described by name, and relation or
nature. His Names are his Christen-name (as we say) JESUS given him at his
circumcision; and his Name of Office CHRIST. JESUS that is a Savior, because
he saves from the blot of sin, the power, usurpation, and spot of it, and
all the evils that entered by it. CHRIST, i. anointed, because he was called
and endowed with all spiritual fulness to be our Priest, Prophet, and King.
Secondly, he is said, the only Son as Ioh. 3.16. the only begotten: God
spared not his own Son: Not a Son by creation, Romans 8.32.
nor by adoption, as we are, but by eternal generation.

Now first this Jesus is said our Savior; Where note how the Scripture does by
name set him out, and describes him unto us: as That Jesus the Christ of God.
Zerubabel, Moses, and Aaron, and all those temporary Saviors were but a type
of this, the sole true Deliverer of all the Israel of God. Look as Kings, and
great men when they style themselves, they first call themselves by their
Christen-names, then by their Names of Office, as JAMES by Gods grace King of
England: So our Savior, which Names are the kingly style which belongs to his
Excellency. Wherefore let us learn to know them what they mean: They are Mel
in ^re, malos in aure, iubulum in cords.
Honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, a Iubile in the heart. They should
be as sweet to us to hear, as a fragrant ointment poured out, is to our
nostrils. What a Servant, or Subject were he that knew not what the first
letter of his Masters, or Sovereigns names meant, such like are too many
Christians, if in this thing they should be examined.

Further, this our Savior is that Son of God. Mat. 16.16
Who am I Peter? That Son of the living God. Great personages upon earth have
their honorable Progenitors sometimes named that thus from their parentage their
renown may be increased; So here is the parentage of our Savior that the
all-sufficiencie of him may thus the better be discerned: but it is to be
marked that he is not said, simply, the Son, but by excellency, the only
Son. For understanding whereof, it is to be marked, that one may be said to
be a son improperly, as we are, and as Adam, and the Angels Job. 1.6.
elsewhere are said to be; And so likewise one may be said to be begotten
improperly, as we are Iam. 1.18. Yea, to be the Image of one as the kings
picture in coin is called his Image; but Christ is said to be the proper
Son, Pro. 8.30. the only begotten, Ioh. 3.16. the substantial Image, Heb.
1.3. For look as it is one thing when men are said to get them children,
because by counsel, and example they draw them to like opinions and qualities
with themselves: Another thing when they are said to get them children, because
by communion of their substance they get other Creatures like in kind, having
the self same nature with themselves: So it is one thing when God, by his word
begets some, for knowledge, holiness, and justice to be like him; another
thing when he does by giving to one his divine nature make him God
consubstantially with himself; and thus he does beget his Christ: Or it is
one thing to take some poor child and bring him up as a Son, adopting him
as an Heir; and another thing to have a son coming out of our own loins: So
it is one thing for God to have us his sons by grace and adoption; another
thing to have Christ his natural Son, who has common with him the self
same Divine nature his Father has. Again, look as the Kings image or picture
in his coin is one thing, the Prince his substantial Image is another: So the
Image of God in us in one thing; but Christ is the substantial Image of his
Father, more lively then any natural Father; for they have not the same
singular body and soul the father has, but the like substantial person for
kind only; but Christ has the same singular divine Nature in him, which is
in the Father. As if we could suppose, Peter and John to have both one
singular soul and body common between both of them.

up a candle to the sun that join other Saviors to this Son of
righteousness.

Secondly, Christ saves us In him alone we have salvation; no other name is
given, Act. 4.12. by himself he has purged us from our sins, Heb. 1.3. for
all that merit and virtue which does begin and perfect our salvation comes
from Christ.

Object. But how can this be, for 1 Timothy 4.16.
Ministers are said to save themselves and others. We are bidden, Act. 1.40.
to save our selves from a froward generation; to 1 Pet. 2.11.
abstain from lusts which fight against us, and to Romans 8.13.
mortify them by the Spirit, that we may live.

Answ. When a man is sick of a deadly sickness, if a Physician prepare him a
medicine of that virtue that it does recover him, though he send it by an
Apothecarie, bid the man take, wish him to keep diet, and to use exercise
after it has restored him; nevertheless, not the Apothecarie, nor the man may
be said to cure the disease, but the Physician only: So it is between Christ
and us, for as much as he has made us a medicine of his own blood, shed in
the sense of Gods wrath, through which comes forgiveness of sin, and that
Spirit which works our full restorement; though he send this by his
Ministers, as Apothecaries, though he bids us believe and take it, though he
bids us refrain lusts, and exercise our selves in every good work, afterward,
least we should suffer a relapse into our old sins, yet he only restores
and saves us. And this holds in this matter the more, because it is his
virtue that must make us to do whatsoever is required from us, both in our
first receiving of grace, and in our proceeding and perseuering therein to the
end.

Wherefore let us cleave only to Christ, Vriah carried, 2 Samuel 11.14.15.
if we should plead their desert in course of Justice. Papists think, that as
he who stands on too firm branches of a tree, stands surer then he that
is but upon one, so he who trusts to Christ and his works too; but there is
great dissimilitude; For who so ioineth works with Christ, Gal. 5.4.
falls from the grace of Christ, and does not continue to stand on him:
Again he that stands with one foot on a firm branch, and with another on a
rotten one, stands not so sure, as if he were wholly on that which is sound
and sufficient for his support: When the Devil had the world thralled unto him
in superstitious errors, then did he cast to their despairing Consciences such
mocke-staies as these to which the Papists lean; such as are men's own
righteousness, merits, satisfactions, the merits, intercession, and power of
Saints, and Angels. He knew that men ready to drown would catch at any thing;
that they would take figge-leaues for couerings, rather then have nothing on
their naked consciences; but alas he that lets go Christ, and looks to
these, is like the dog in the Fable, who having meat in his mouth, snatching
at the shadow thereof in the water, did let fall, and so loose that which he
had. As there is one Son only in the visible world which gives light to all
that see therein: So there is but one Sun of righteousness, which does send
forth beams of righteousness and holiness, to all that believe.

QVEST. II.
2. Q. WHat has be done to deliver man out of misery?

A. He became man, and in our nature answered the Law, and satisfied the
justice of God.

Two things are here to be observed: First, how Christ did qualify himself,
to be our Mediator, by taking our Nature, and so becoming man. Secondly, what
he did in this Nature for our redemption, which is noted in two things: First,
He answered the Law: Secondly, He satisfied Gods justice.

To open the first, the Son that as in the person of a man, there is an
invisible immortal Soul, and a visible mortal body: So in the Person of
Christ, there a^^ two natures all together different: here only is the
di^similitude in this compar^son; Neither nature in us (...) of it self a
perfect person but both concur between them to make a perfect personal being
which neithe^ of them have by it self Now in the person of Christ our nature
is taken into a Person that was perfect before; that look as every Christian
believer, when he is borne of God remains the same entire person which before
he was, receiving nevertheless into him a divine nature, which before he had
not: So Christ when he was borne of the Virgin, continuing the same perfect
person which he had been from eternity, assumeth nevertheless a humane
nature, which before he had not to be borne within his person for ever, and
this was meet that he should indifferently partake with each nature, who was
to go a Mediator betwixt them, for reconciling the one to the other, that the
Mediator betwixt God and man, should be in one person, God and Man.

More particularly he must be God to make his mediatorie works of sufficient
value for our redemption, for hence it is, that his bloodshed was so precious,
that it was Act. 20.20.
the blood of God. The dignity of the person adds worth and value to that he
works: Words with a common man are good cheap, but with a Councellor,
Sergeant or Judge they are of no small price. Even as a finite disobedience
being against a^ infinite Majesty became infinitely evil, and deserved
infinite wrath and punishment: So finite obedience coming from a Person of
infinite Majesty was of infinite force to please God, and procures infinitely
all good things unto us.

Secondly, he must be God that he might be able to bear and overcome, that
which he was to suffer for us. His humane nature would have been prevailed
against by the powers of darkness, overwhelmed with the heavy burden of Gods
wrath, had not the divine nature strengthened it. But look as one man may
bear the assault of a thousand if he be planted in some impregnable hold; So
this humane nature planted within the rock of the divine Person was
strengthened to bear and subdue all things, for hence it was that death and
sin was overcome by him, because he as God was stronger then they. Look as
any thing cast cold into a red-hot Furnace the fire will chase away the cold,
and make it become fiery: So death and sin assaulting that person who was
naturally and essentially life and holiness they could not but be 1 Cor. 15 54.
swallowed up in victory. The stronger will prevail against the weaker.

Man he must be, as fo^^ many other reasons; so the he might have right to
r^deeme us. As in the old T^stament Leu. 25.25.48.49. Ruth. 4.4.
none had right (...) redeeming any that w^^ fallen, but he that was of the
kindred of the deceased; (...) our Redeemer does parta^^ in flesh and blood
with us that he thus becomming^ near kinsman, he mig^^ have right to work
our r^demption; and the qualification of his Person is mad^ the groundwork of
o^^ reconciliation ensuing; Tha^ look as great Kingdom divided, they will let
the son and Heir of the one, marry with the Daughter of the other, and thus
make a happy way for their reconcilement; So the kingdom of heaven, and men
upon earth being disunited, it pleased the Father that his own Son should by
an indissoluble marriage of personal union join himself into our Nature,
that by that means he might make way for the happy reconcilement of us with
himself.

First, hence we may see that part of us, which we have common with the brute
beast, it was a most exceeding grace. Kings in earth may grace some Family and
kindred in their kingdoms greatly, by influence of their favor, by honoring
them (for nobility and honor is but the word of a Prince) by bestowing
revenues and treasure on them, and by calling them to authority. But if a King
should think this too little, he could do no greater thing, then to join
himself i^ marriage with some of that house; For by this means he should
give himself to them all, in that one, whom he had made one with himself:
Thus for the great God our Savior, to show favor in communicating his Graces
with us, is much, but thus to bestow himself upon us, is such grace, as
passes all understanding.

Secondly, we see how we nature now glorious in heaven, I there speak to the
great God, because I know he is there personally united.

Israel and Iosephes brethren went not up to Egypt more willingly, then men
would hearken to such an inuitement. But the Son of God combining himself to
us, does no other thing ^hen inuit us daily to partake in his glory, but we
^^^e a deaf ear to the ^^ace offered.

Observe further, that Gal. ^.4.5.
to which we were subject. For Christ is not only a Mediator, who entreats
for us, but a surety also: as Judah did not only entreat for Benjamin, Genesis
44.32.33.
but did offer himself surety for him; and Paul did not only entreat for
Onesimus, Phile. 18.
but undertook likewise as surety, to answer for him.

Where note against the Papists, that the efficacy of his Mediatorship flows
from his suretishippe he undertakes. Now sureties we know do make
themselves liable to answer the debt of those, for whom they stand bound: So
Christ our surety, did undertake to answer, whatsoever the Law could charge us
with, and to discharge the penalty of it, to the utmost farthing.

borne the curse belonging to them, this would much more refresh us.

Secondly, Let us all re^^t it over to him to answer; for even as women under
couert-baron, have their Husbands, to answer for them, all suites that can be
commenced against them: so have we Christ our Husband, let us then flee to him.

Genesis 8.21.
and was pacified and contented. This does follow on the former; for look as a
Creditor, when he is paid that which is owing to him, he then is at rest, and
has that he would have; so when Christ our Surety, had paid as it were to
Gods Justice, that punishment of the Law, in which we stood indebted, Gods
revenging Justice is at rest, holding it self contented: If you do one wrong,
pay him that which may counteruaile the wrong, and he is satisfied. Thus we
by breaking the Ordinances of Gods justice, did wrong, despising and
dishonoring him, whose appointment we transgressed; but when we present to him,
in our selves, or in our Surety, a condign punishment, undergone in regard of
that transgression, then by due suffering we repay, that honor of his, which
we had violated, by our undutiful transgressing. This was necessary; for
though God loved us, yet would he not let the influence of his grace appear,
in doing us any good, till first justice received contentment: Gods justice had
put in a caution against us: God therefore willing to glorify his grace, yet
not with any disparagement to his justice, does cause his Christ, whom out of
grace he called and enjoined, to perform to him, such an obedience in which
his justice might receive full contentment, that so he might out of grace
bestow on us all good things in Christ, justice no whit gaine-saying: and in
this is the mutual kiss of mercy and of justice.

Ob. But could not God forgive without satisfaction?

Answ. Sin is such a thing as God cannot but disallow, his nature does
determine him to dislike all that as evil, which has not conformity with
himself. 2. I say it does seem, that God is not absolutely bound, to punish
sin with that death his Law threatened: as he was not absolutely bound, to
continue his Creature though doing good, in that life the Law promised, but he
was bound to this, by his voluntary covenant. 3. I say, that since Gods
sanction, Ezekiel. 18.20.
when thou sinnest thou shall die, he cannot forgive without satisfaction to
justice,; 2 Timothy 2.3.
For he cannot deny himself, his will is made known, that his justice
violated, shall be satisfied in condign punishment: wherefore let us take heed
of such Spirits, as make God free to forgive though his justice be not
satisfied: who say no proper price of Redemption was paid for it; but that we
are said to be redeemed, because set free; as the Israelites were said to be
sold, because God yielded them into the hands of their enemies.

Secondly, we see what we must put between Gods revenging justice and our
selves, even Christ satisfying of it. Look as we set a screene twixt the fire
and us, to keep us from the heat of it; so must we by faith set our Savior
Christ twixt the revenging wrath of God which is a consuming fire, and our
souls.

QVEST. III.
3. Q. HOw did he answer the Law?

A. By bearing the punishment which the Law threatened, and fulfilling the
obedience the Law required.

Now is further opened, the particulars of that, which was meant by those words
of the former answer, in that Christ answered the Law. The manner standing
partly in bearing the penalty which it inflicted; partly by performing the
condition of doing all things requisite to the obtaining of life eternal. This
answer does stand in regard of the latter part, upon a judgment of Divines,
who think that the Law, though in innocence it did absolutely tie us only to
obedience, and in case of sinning only to punishment; yet since man's fall into
sin, they think the Law does absolutely knit on us a double bond, 1. to endure
that penalty it inflicteth. 2. That it does tie on us that former bond of
obeying her, that we may live by her. Now the illustration is easy, for this
being granted that Gods justice in his Law, does tie us in this double bond,
both of suffering punishment, and doing to life, all that is commanded in it:
then it is sure that Christ did in both these regards answer for us: Look as a
Surety if he undertake for one who stands bound in twenty several bonds, he
must discharge them all, before the Debtor can be released; So Christ
undertaking for us, if we stand tied in the said double bond, he must answer
both, or our debt must in part be vndischarged. This we know, that he was
made under the Law, Gal. 4.4.
in regard of the curse of it, that he might deliver us from the curse of it.
Again, this we are sure of, that as the Law was a rule of holiness, justice,
sobriety, Christ did perfectly keep it.

Let us know then, Christ has performed it all: so that in him we are
complete, lacking nothing to our full deliverance from all evil, and
consummation of blessedness,

QVEST. IIII.
4. Q. HOw did he answer the punishment of the Law for us.

A. By bearing manifold miseries all his life long, and in the end the wrath of
God, and the cursed death of the Cross.

The sufferings of our Savior are fitly divided into those which befell in the
course of his life, or about the time of his death; for he wanted not from
birth to burial, wherewith to conflict. The first of these two branches
contain those common effects of mortality and misery, such as are incident
to man's nature, as now it is become sinful. For as the Serpent lifted up,
was like to other stinging Serpents, though it had no sting: So our Savior
listed upon his cross, to whom we look by the eye of faith, it was fit he
should be made like, Romans 8.3
to the similitude of sinful flesh, and that therefore he should be
subjected to such infirmities, as follow our sinful nature, but are not
sinful.

Thus he had Heb. 5.7.
natural fear, which was not at the first in created nature, though there
might be a spiritual fear of Gods threatening; yet there was no natural
fear, because there was not any object thereof (any natural evil) as yet
entered, so he had Mar 3 5.
grief, indignation, though these passions in him, were most pure and holy: it
being with Christ, as with a crystal glass full of clear water, which is
still pure howsoever it be shaken; he was in his body subject to weariness,
to hunger, yea, Esa. 53.3.
Esaias says, he was familiarly acquainted with infirmities; in his estate he
became poor, Luke 9.58
The Foxes had holes, but the son of man had not where to put his head; in
his name he was called Math. 10.25.
Beelzebub himself; in a word he did endure such common blames, infirmities,
and miseries, as we do, who are sinful, though he knew no sin; for
personal sicknesses grounded often in the seed, of which we are propagated,
or conceived by intemperancie and other indiscretions, as falling sickness,
stone, gout etc. we must not think our Savior could in his person be subject
to such particular miseries; but as for the common infirmities of our nature
his life was full of them. For look as we train Soldiers by lighter
skirmishes, before we bring them forth to bear the brunt and heat of the
battle: so the Lord trained this great Champion, exercising his strength in
less evils, before he would bring him to the heat and height of all his
warfare. His sufferings about the time of his death, began in his agony, and
lasted to his, resurrection. For though Ioh. 19.30.
from what time he said, it is finished, he had no sense of pain or grife,
yet he was in state of suffering. Now these his greater sufferings may be
reduced to the pains and sorrows of his soul, and the natural death of his
body, which he endured for us.

Though we must not conceive any thing of Christ in suffering, which dissolueth
the personal union of it with God, or the inherent holiness of it; yet without
prejudice of either of these, might he suffer grievous pains in soul. Look
as the body of him did die notwithstanding it remained personally united to God
the Son: so the soul might suffer an impression of his Fathers wrath which
is a kind of death to the soul, notwithstanding the personal coiunction of
it to God himself.

Secondly, the holiness of Christ no whit obscured, he might suffer the full
wrath of God, death; for it does not stand in being (for quality) sinful
properly, or in being deprived of faith and other graces, but in feeing; for
sin, a privation of felicity, or at least a diminution of that blisfull
favor, which is better then life, and in an impression of wrath, which is as
grievous as death it self to the soul: Now this Christ felt, though he wanted
no faith, wherewith to cleave to God; yet he wanted the blessedness which was
to be found in God; yea he felt that wrath against sin, which is a consuming
fire, sin whereof he was guilty in nobis, non in se, in us, not in himself.
Look as the soul may be united with the body (as in sleep (and yet not
work in the body, so God united to Christ in soul, yet did forsake him, and
for a time restrain that influence of favor, in sense whereof consists life
spiritual: but I intend here rather familiar illustration, then profound
speech of doctrine.

His natural death may be considered in his soul, which was severed from his
body, deprived of the faculty sensitive, and operations which it had exercised
in the body, or in his body which was now lying in the sepulcher, in a state
subject to corrupt, though it was preserved Act. 2.31
from knowing actual corruption: and in these was the vpshot of all those
sufferings Christ endured for us. I have nothing to illustrate this, it is a
great mystery beyond all comparison; if any shadow may be used, think what
some persons in their deepest love adventure on, that they may be joined to
some peerless Virgins, they leave their native Countries, commit themselves
to the clemency o^ sea and winds, hazard the^^ lives by many adventures; So
our Savior seeking us worthless creatures, that h^ might make us a praise
(...) himself, does leave heaven, come and walk amongst us, abide many a
little death, and break through death i^ self; how well may he Cant. 5.2.
knock, and say open to me, for my head is full of dew, my locks fall with
the drops of the night.

But against that clause, which says, Christ did not take upon him our
particular and personal evils in suffering for us, may be objected.

bound, but Christ was a surety for us.

Answ. A surety is bound ^o discharge, Adam did by one common s^^ne bring
guilt upon all, not by sinning a particular sin for every man: So Christ by a
common suffering, did satisfy for all, not by suffering diversity according
to the state of every particular person.

Again, it may be asked the stone, dropsy, etc. wh^^ he had no experience o^
these infirmities?

Answ. He could not (...) have compassioned our m^series, had he not tasted
th^^ in the kind, but having ^^sted them in the kind, (...) may know them,
and ha^^ commiseration to them all as any that tastes but (...) spoonful of
salt water, may know what it is, without drawing the whole sea, a^^ pity such
who are force^ to drink it: thus it is (...) these salt waters of our
afflictions.

we count it kindness; ^^t to bear blows, or lie by ^t in our quarrel, this
is love ^^deed in him that thus suf^^eth. But who does lay to ^^^rt these
sufferings, which ^is Savior has suffered in ^i^ behalf; you have some
^^melting, that speak but a lord of some man's death in their hearing, they are
pre^^^tly in tears, who yet ^^ough we should preach till we were hoarse of
Christ's death, will have their eyes dry, not only before us, but never
provoking themselves so much as in secret, once to ^^ue a bleeding heart for it.

This also does show us, hand will cast it self, betwi^ a blow and the head,
thoug^ it should be cut off by the mean: O what vnnatura^ members are they to
Chri^ their head, who will n^ bear one word of disgra^ for him, who endured
suc^ contradiction of sinners (...) their sakes? who will no^ kill one
superfluous lust (...) his sake, who was prodiga^ of his most precious bloo^ in
their behalf?

QVEST. V.
5. Q. HOw did he fulfill the righteousness the Law required?

A. By being subject to ^he will of God, in thought, lord and deed, all his
life ^ng.

Christ did not only suffer that, which was equivalent and correspondent to
all that which each of us in singular should have endured, but did perform
also, as all his life time, perfect obedience; so more principally at his death
in behalf of us all. Now, the Law requires perfect obedience, first in regard
of the thing, which is to be obeyed, viz. that all the will of God be kept,
even all his commandments. Secondly, in regard of the person obeying, that it
be the whole man, outward and inward. Thirdly, in regard of the time, that it
be with perseverance to the end, and therefore the Gal. 3.10.
Law does accurse, such as continue not always, in all things to do^ them,
even with all their might, strength, and understanding, for that is the manner
Deu. 6.5.
, in the Law required. Now our Savior, first h^ did walk in obeying all the
commandments, his love to God the Father, his practice of ordinances of
worship, his praying, and publishing the name of his Father; his setting him at
his right hand and trusting to him, his zeal toward the glory of God, the
zeal of his house etc. his early rising to sanctify the Sabbath in the duties
of it, his subjection to his parents, so far as to work at their trade Mat.
6.3.
, as it is probable, his love to the life of man, even to the neglecting of his
own, his ^uritie, his not seeking earthly things, for he 2 Cor. 8.9.
made himself poor, so far he was from coveting ought which was another,
his Ioh. 18.37.
true testimony before Pontius Pilat; in a word he was so free from
concupiscence, that the Devil himself could Ioh. 14.30
not find ought in him; these the Gospel at large mentions. Christ did not
take what he liked, and leave at his pleasure, but obeyed all the will of God.
For look as it is in the body of man, which is so compact and knit together,
that you cannot wound one part, but the whole man is wounded: so the
righteousness of the Law is so combined, that he who breaks one of them does
violate the whole frame, and becomes guilty of the whole Law, Iam. 2.10
as the Apostle James speaks.

Yea further it is to be marked, that he did not only submit to the moral
duties of Gods law, which in innocence should have bin practiced, but to other
also; yea to ceremonial obseruances, to which man as now sinful (only) was
obliged, even as he suffered the evils which did befall our natures, now being
sinful themselves, being such as had no sin in them; that look what is
recorded of the most generous Captains, viz. That they would work with their
common soldiers, fellow and fellow like, in the homeliest things they set
their hands to, that is apparent in our Chieftaine, who does like to one of us
sinful men, set himself to work, in obeying every thing wherein we were to
obey. As when great Persons will show love, they lay aside state, and forget
circumstances of inequality toward those with who^ they mean to be most
affable and loving.

Secondly, He did obey God with his whole man, with his understanding, will,
affections, as well as his outward man: With what zeal of spirit did he cast
those Merchants out of the Temple? Ioh. 2.17.
For look as a beautiful picture, which has no spirit nor life in it, is but
a shadow without the substance of that it resembles: so a doing the work
commanded in the Law, with the outward man, if the heart and spirit be not
looking to God, intending his honor, reporting their love and duty to him, it
is but an outward form of godliness and justice, wanting the life and inward
power which God requires; he is a Spirit, and his Law is spiritual, given not
as man's to the outward man only, but principally to the soul and conscience.

Thirdly, Christ's obedience was to the end. For he gave up the ghost, in love
to God and man, greater then the justice of the Law could require: it is in
obeying the Law, as in running a race; if one hold not out to the goal, all is
nothing, the price is not received; so should one walk a great while in the
course of obedience, but not persevere unto the end it were in vain, not such
as the perfection of the law required.

Seeing then it is thus, that we may be found clothed with Christ's, that
righteousness which is through faith on him. For it was the will of Christ to
perform, not only a bare satisfaction, but also a most grateful obedience,
that so he might both remove from us, the filthy covering of our sin, and
also cloth us with a rich robe of unspotted righteousness.

put himself in our rooms, and done all that work for us, which we in
person should have wrought, that we might be declared righteous, to the
receiving of eternal life.

QVEST. VI.
6. Q. WHat benefit have we by his death and sufferings?

Answ. Deliverance from sin, and the punishment thereof.

We have deliverance from sin, by all Christ's sufferings after some sort, but
not alike; principally by those before his death, and those in which more
properly his passion consists. Those former sufferings, as they taught Christ
patience, experimentally fitted him, to be a compassionate high Priest, had in
them example for our instruction; so were they accessory and ministering to that
further and more principal satisfactory suffering of his death and passion.
Look as if an Englishman were held prisoner in France, who could not be
released, but on such a ransom tendered, and the good will of the Governors
obtained; say some of his Countrymen would work his enlargement, he does
address himself for France, he lives there submitting himself to the laws
of them, amongst whom for the time he abides, he bears many grieuances in a
country wherein he is not known, he moves with humble petition the
Governors, and offers satisfaction; finally, he does pay that penalty or
price of redemption imposed; in this example, this man may be said to be set
free, by all this suffered for him, but not equally by all, principally by
discharging the ransom imposed; by the other, as by sufferings accessory and
ministering to some other more principal.

Thus Christ, he took our nature, came from heaven, and dwelt amongst us in
that tabernacle of flesh, he yielded himself subject to our fashions and
laws as it were, he did bear indignities and injuries, from the world who
knew him not, he at length tendered, that satisfactory passion to God his Father
for us, and prevailed with his grace, for the bestowing of all good things on
us. The suffering then of death, has an eminency above all other, in the
removing of sin and punishment from us. Look as it was in the shadow; the
faithful of the old Testament, they did as in a Sacrament receive deliverance
from their sin, by the death of their sinne-offering: so is it here with us.
Christ becoming our sacrifice for sins, taking them on him to bear them,
and do them away in our behalf, his offering up comes to quit us from the
guilt of them; No wonder, for if a surety discharge a debt in our behalf, we
stand no longer bound to it; thus our Savior in his death, answering the
utmost farthing, nay performing a suffering of infinite more dignity, then
vindicatiue justice could have required; the grace of God does set us free most
justly; hence Christ is said to have cancelled, Col. 2.14.
whatsoever handwriting was against us, whether that of the Ceremonial law,
as it testified our guilt, or that inward testification of our consciences. For
look as they who have now paid a debt in behalf of any, they call in all
specialties witnessing the debt, which now they have answered, and deface and
cancel them, that naught may ever be claimed by them: thus did our Savior,
so that in his death, we may use that 1 Pet. 3.21.
interrogatory of a good conscience, and say, Romans 8.33, 34.
Who shall lay any thing to our charge, it is Christ that is dead etc.

To consider this more particularly. Christ's death does free us, first from the
guilt of sin. Secondly, from the spot or power of it in us. Thirdly, from all
other punishment.

The guilt of sin is a property in it, binding us to pay condign
punishment, to the justice of God. This punishment therefore borne of Christ,
and presented by him for us, it cannot be but that our bond to bear it, should
be dissolved, or that justice might require again, a thing already discharged.

Secondly, our blot of sin, that life of the old Serpent, that living death of
souls, is removed. For Christ's death must not be considered only as an
exemplarie cause, working mortification of sin, or as a moral cause, by way of
meditation, but as having force obtained by it, and issuing out of it, which
does by little and little abolish sin, even the spirit which does mortify the
deeds of the flesh, both fruits and roots of corruption. Look as Adam dying a
natural death, did kill this natural life in us all, first making it mortal,
so as it necessarily must die, then at length causing death it self: so does
the death of this second Adam work the death of sin, first wounding it in us
with mortality, such as will bring it certainly to death, then utterly
dissoluing it in the end.

Thirdly and lastly, Christ's death does free us, from all other miseries; for
the cause which did breed and continue these taken away, they must needs
likewise be removed. Take away the cause of a sickness, you make the painful
distempers which follow upon it, cease also. Discharge once the debt for him
who lies in the Counter, and all with one work, you free him from prison and
many other greeuances, to which by reason of his debt, he was held subject.

But it may be here objected:

Ans. Rome was not built in one day: Adam, because though we live and see
nothing for a time, but that we are alive and alive like: yet that mortality
is in us, which will like a worm never cease, to fret and corrupt us, till
we come to death it self. If one has so vvounded a man, that he dye within
a year and a day, we say he has slain him, because he has so vvounded
him, that he will certainly dye: thus our sin is taken away in Christ, it
being so vvounded, that in the end, it shall certainly be quite abolished.



of it. We are not delivered from death in the first kind, but in the second.
And thus Christ himself Heb. 5.7.
is said, to have been heard, and delivered from that he feared, not that he
did not taste death, but in that he was not overcome or hurt by it.

Wherefore let us hold to 1 Kin. 1.50. and 2.28.
as malefactors under the Law used to fly to the horns of the Altar, so let
us all fly to this blessed death, Heb. 12.14.
which speaks better things, then the blood of Abel which cried for revenge.

Again, this should encourage us against death, that our Savior has so
endured it, that he has taken the sting out of it, and freed us from the fear
of it: If a sick body should be afraid to drink of any thing, yet if his
Physician should begin, he would not be afraid to drink after him. Christ
has tasted death, and drunk the dregs of it, that nothing might remain for
us, but that which is wholesome.

QVEST. VII.
7. Q. WHat benefit comes by his righteousness and obedience?

A. The favor of GOD and eternal happiness are obtained for us.

A perfect Savior must not only deliver us from evil, but put us into a
secure possession of all good. For blessedness cannot stand in that good,
which being here to day may be lost to morrow. Christ therefore has not only
by his suffering, delivered us from evil, but by that voluntary and most
grateful obedience, which in suffering he showed, he has obtained from the
grace of God, to account us and judge us in him righteous to life eternal. We
must not think Christ's sufferings like the sufferings of the damned ones, to
be merely satisfactorie to justice, and to have no other respect in them; no
it is a most pleasing obedience, which may challenge by covenant, all good for
us: such an obedience in which was showed, the greatest love to God and to man,
that can be comprehended; yea the knowledge of it passes all knowledge. Ephesians.
3.19.


Now that which we get by this obedience, is first Gods grace or favor
forgiving sin, reckoning us righteous to life. Secondly, Actual donation of
life it self. For favor here is not to be conceived of Gods first love, as
if he before ha^ed us, (he was indeed angry with us) but he so loved us, as
that he gave Christ for us; Ioh. 3.16.
It is meant therefore of the manifestation, or influence of his favor, in
conferring ^eally on us, the benefits of justification and life. The sun of
Gods love was eclipsed, till Christ's love toward us (in whom the joyful
Epiphanie of it began) was declared. Though God do justify us out of grace,
yet his sentence is according to truth, and if he pronounce us just to the
receiving of life, we must have some righteousness justifying us. This cannot
be any imperfect righteousness in part sinful; much less can he justify
us having no righteousness, as a foundation to his sentence, therefore it must
be a perfect one, such we have none but Christ's; herein he is an Antitype to
that first Adam, even as Jacob now clothed with his eldest brothers apparel,
did get the blessing: so is it with us having put on Christ and his obedience
(which in effectual calling we do through faith) then the Lord does give us
the blessing. If one do for me any such piece of work, which by agreement
has due to it any wages, or reward upon the work done in my name, I have
title to demand the reward couenanted: thus it is, Christ having done that
righteousness, performed that obedience on which God couenanted to give us
life and all good things, we upon this performed for us, may claim from grace,
which promised it, life everlasting.

Object.

To drive out one wedge with another; Adams sin? Secondly, I say this
righteousness, is not to be accounted as a foreign thing altogether without
us, as the clothes are to the body: but it is the righteousness of the head of
us, with whom we have most near conjunction. May not the whole body be
lightsome, with that light which is in the eye and head only, not in the body?
Christ says it may: Mat. 6.22.
so may we with that righteousness which is in Christ our head.

True they will say, if we were naturally one; As if our spiritual
conjunction were inferior to the other. Again, as we may be made one with
Christ: we may be righteous with his righteousness: the manner of communion
may be extended, as far as the union, but though not naturally, yet in
fictione iuris (as they speak) in account of the Law, we may be one truly
with Christ, as man and wife a^^ one person in law; therefore legally or in
estimation of the law we may be one with Christ, and by consequent in Gods
account, judging in that Court of Chancerie as it were, we may be just with
Christ's justice, which is as much as we urge.

Let us then array our selves, this righteousness will be enough to all the
multitude of us, who shall believe on it.

QVEST. VIII.
8. Q. HOw shall a man find help?

A. Only by a true faith on him.

Two things are here to be marked: 1. That we are saved by faith, which is
described from the property of true faith and person about whom it is
occupied; viZ. Christ on him, but of these hereafter in the next answers.

2. Mark that by faith only we obtain salvation: The Scripture teaches every
where, that through faith on Christ, we get both forgiveness of sin and life
everlasting. Act. 16.30.31.
What shall we do that we may be saved. This answers the question, believe.
The reason is, we cannot have any benefit by Christ till he be united with us:
now he comes to be united with us by belief. To open these two things which
unfold and prove the point of Catechism in ^and; meat, though it have a force
to nourish; Medicine, though it be able to heal; raiment though it can both
adorn and defend the body against the injury of air; wealth, though it can
make rich; yet meat cannot refresh me till I eat it, and after a sort
incorporate it with me; no salve will heal me, till I lay it on my soar; no
apparel will stand me in steed, further then I put it on; no treasure (no
not all the gold in India) can make me rich further then I get my self
possessed of it. Thus it is in Christ the bread of life, the medicine, wedding
garment, the pearl of the Gospel; we cannot have benefit of him further, then
we get to be united with him. Now there are three bonds in the body mystical,
whereof Christ is the head and we members. The first is from Christ to us, that
is the bond of his Spirit. The second runs from us to Christ, and that is
our faith primarily, and consequently our whole heart and other affections. The
third bond runs from each member to other, that is Love.

Object.

Answ. that the King will show him grace, before he can unite himself with
the King by love, as one whom he has found always good and gracious unto him.
Again, if you offer me, and by promise assure me of any kindness, I must
first know what you say to me, and persuade my self you mean as you speak,
before I can love you as my kind friend; thus before we can love God, as
gracious to us, who are by nature children of his wrath, we must by faith
apprehend his love toward us; and before we can love Christ, we must by faith
unite our selves with that grace of his, which he makes known in the word.

Look then as our bodily members by nerves and snewes are knit with the head:
so our faith is that prime and principal ligature, by which we are coupled to
Christ. And therefore it is that first thing, whereby we come to have benefit
by Christ, and fellowshippe in that justification and life which come through
him; wherefore let us labor by faith to get our selves made one with Christ;
If a thing be never so good, what is that to us, till we get some of it we are
not the nearer: so though Christ be of never such value, if we let him hang in
the air, and provide not that he dwell in our hearts, by faith, we shall be no
whit the better for him.

2. Mark in this answer, that it is only Faith whereby we obtain
righteousness unto salvation. For this grace makes only that first
apprehension of CHRIST, through whom apprehended, we are justified and saved.
Though a man has many members in his body, yet he has but one by which he
uses to receive any thing, viz. the hand, and so though our souls have many
graces bestowed on them, yet have they but one hand of Faith, wherewith to
receive Christ, and his benefits unto salvation. But when we say that only
Faith does save us, we mean not that faith, which is alone without all other
graces of love, does save us, but that faith, though it has the company of
other virtues, yet it alone works, in laying hold on Christ, to forgiveness
of sin and life eternal: even as when we say, the eye alone sees, we do
not mean that the eye is alone in the head, without the company of other
senses, but that the eye though joined with hearing, smelling etc. yet it alone
does see, no other sense concurring to help it in that, which is the proper
effect of it self.

If then Faith be so excellent a thing, how fearful is their sin who lie,
not careing to get belief; to lie, theeue, or whore, they see is an enormous
crime, but to live in unbelief, they neither account it uncomely, not
dangerous; to turn ones back disdainfully and carelessly on Gods greatest
love, is of all other the foulest disloyalty: to neglect to take the healing
medicine of Gods own preparing, what is more dangerous, no other sin could
have hurt us, had not this unbelief been adjoined unto them.

QVEST. IX.
9. Q. WHat is Faith?

A. An assurance that by the death of Christ, forgiveness of sins, and by his
righteousness Gods favor and life eternal are obtained for me.

In general (before we enter the particular explication of this answer) you
must know, that a true justifying faith, so far forth as it justifies, is
here described. True faith is commonly called justifying faith, not that this
is the full effect of it, beyond which the efficiencie of it does not extend,
but because this is the principal thing, in which the force of true faith is
occupied, as our souls are called reasonable, not because they have no other
operation, then what is reasonable in simple apprehension or discourse. For our
sensitive and natural actions proceed effectiuely from our souls: but because
this is the most principal work of the soul, therefore it takes true
denomination from it, and is termed reasonable.

Four things are now further to be unfolded, 1. what is meante by assurance.
2. How a true justifying faith may be said an assurance, when true Believers
are many times doubtful. 3. The matter about which justifying faith, and the
assurance of it, are conversant. viz. forgiveness of sin and life, in the
death and obedience of Christ, or about Christ's death and righteousness, as
they are a ground of forgiveness of sin for me, and life everlasting. 4.
The particularitie of it, assurance that my sin is forgiven, and life
obtained for me.

1. For the first, by assurance here is meant an assured or confident
persuasion, which is not only, when the understanding determines that truth is
spoken, but when the will does confidently rest upon that good which is
promised, which as it is in degree greater or lesser, so is doubting more or
less excluded; This is true belief Act. 8.37
of the whole heart. Look as if you promise me any great good matter, say it
be but to lend me an hundredth pounds, when my occasions require it, I have not
only a persuasion in understanding, that the thing you speak to me, you
speak it truly; but because here is in the word, that which is good to me, as
well as that which is true, therefore I have a confidence in my will, which
makes me rest on, and trust to that you have spoken. If the word spoken were
true, but not a word any ways beneficial to me, I might have an assured
persuasion in mind without any affection or moving of will toward it: but when
it is as well good to me as true in it self, it cannot be fully received by a
mental persuasion assenting to the truth of it, without a godly affection
embracing it, as it is a word of good tidings to me who hear it. Thus
Abraham's persuasion Romans 4. Romans 4.17.22. Job. 19.25 27.
and Jobs in the 19. of his book, are to be unfolded.

2. For the second, we must know, that faith is always an assured persuasion,
in regard of the event and thing believed, not in regard of the sense and
feeling of him who believes, whether his heart be steadfast in faith, or
trembling through much unbelief, yet believing (though with much unbelief) he
shall be sure of the thing promised. For it is not the manner of apprehending,
but the thing apprehended, viz. Christ, for which God does pass his promise.
Now look as a trembling palsy hand may take the same thing, which a more
steddie one does, take, though the manner be diverse, the one takes it shaking,
the other without any trembling: so a heart of faith, which yet shakes and
doubts through much unbelief, may take Christ, as well as a heart does which
is more fully persuaded, and therefore shall have the grace promised for his
sake, who is received by faith. God then promising to every true (though weak)
belief; hence it comes that faith is a certain persuasion, in regard of the
thing believed; certainly bringing us to receive the thing promised. For every
house is as sure as the foundation is, every thing hanging on a pin or pegge as
sure as the pegge on which it hangs. A true faith being a trust to Gods
faithful promise, it cannot miscary in the event; for this on which it is
grounded is unchangeable.

Nevertheless, though in the event, it promises a certain persuasion: yet is
it not so always in the sense of the believer. It is one thing to have a thing
surely; another thing to know, I have it s^rely. We have many things, which we
think we have lost: so a Believer, who has a sure belief, yet does not know
that he so believes, nay thinks that he is without faith, when he has it
unfeignedly. This falls out sometimes in the first beginning and conception as
it were of faith, sometimes afterward. Look as childdren live in the womb, and
know not themselves that they do live: so is it with many true believing
souls, who long believe, before they come to see themselves to believe, and be
able by a reflexed operation of mind to say, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know on whom I have believed.

2. Say that now they are come to know, they have faith: and that God is
pleased with them in Christ, yet may this their sense be soon altered, partly
through a childish weakness of judgment, partly through other temptations.
For as children, though they now to their feeling) are well: yet if they come
to see their own blood, or to be left all alone in the dark, begin to
conceive twenty strange matters: so Gods children who now think themselves
well, while they are in the light, and feel his gracious presence, if this be
a little hidden, or if they find not their accustomed life, and cheerfulness
in Gods service, they begin to think all is turned with them, and call all
into question.

Again, look as the wisest man, may come to have the eye of reason so
depraved through distemper of brain, that he shall think his friends seek to
kill him, and are become his foes; yea the eye of his body so depraved by a
stroke, or by ouer-flowing of choler, that he shall think all things before
him red and yellow, though they be nothing so; even so by the violent stroke
of some wasting sin, or the strange work of some more sharp temptations,
(ouerflowing the eye of the soul, as it were with spiritual gall, even the
sense of Gods wrath) the judgment of a faithful man, for the time may be so
depraved, that he shall think God his enemy, and every thing to be otherwise
toward him, then it is.

The third thing to be marked, is that, about which faith is conversant, which
is Christ obeying to death, that he may find righteousness and forgiveness
of sins to life in him. For to believe, that my sin is now forgiven in
Christ, is rather an act of experience in a Believer now justified, then that
belief which is required to justification; to rest on Christ obeying to the
cursed death of the Cross, ^^at I may get pardon and ^^se everlasting from the
^race of God, this is the act ^f true belief, with the ^atter also about
which it is ^^nuersant. Christ is the full ^^d adequate object of be^^efe, as
it does justify, even (...) color is the full object of ^^e power of seeing
that is ^^rs. Faith does not look ^any thing else, as it does ^^ercise that
faculty which works to the justification ^f us, faith does believe
^^reatnings, does sustain us (...) adversities, does (like a Queen) guide all
our acti^^s, does work by love, as (...) instrument conjoined ^^th it; but it
does not iusti^^^ us, but only as it does ^^me it self to apprehend Christ,
as our reasonable souls do see in the eye hear in the ear, digest in the
stomach, but does no^ reason as it does these things, but only as it
conceiueth, and discourses within us. For look as nothing in a poor man, can
mak^ him rich further then it does get riches into his possession: so nothing
in us Sinner^ can make us righteous to life further then it does lay hol^ on
such a righteousness^ which can take away sin and make us righteous to the
receiving of life eternal^ Wherefore though the fai^^ that justifies us, be a
fai^^ working through love; y^ it does not hence follow that it should justify
us, as (...) works by love, no more then this follows, that because the
fire which is hot and gives heat, is also light, therefore it should make
hot so far forth as it is light, not so far forth only as it has heat in
it.

4. For the last, observe: That a true justifying faith does incline a man, to
believe Gods grace, in particular toward him through Christ, even as they that
^ere st^ng with Serpent did come and look to the ^easen Serpent, believing to
find the healing of those deadly stings, that were fastened in them: Thus a
soul ^tung with sin, and fear of death, comes by says to Christ, relying
on him, trusting to find in and through him, cure of those deadly evils,
wherewith it is wounded. If a Physician should call sick persons, saying, do
but come to me, and I will heal you, and we should see many flocking about
him, would we not presently know, that they believed, that he would cure their
diseases; So when Christ says to sinners, believe on me, or come to me (for
Ioh. 6.35
these are all one) and I will help you. What says (think we) have sinners, who
resort to him? is it not a belief that he will according to his word, heal
them, deliver them from sin, and death, and restore them to life eternal? If
there be a particular word, or that which is equivalent, then is there a
particular faith; but there is so. For 1 Ioh. 3.23.
God bids every one believe, and says, that Ioh. 3.16.
whosoever he is that believes, shall not perish but have life, which is as
much as, believe thou Thomas, and thou shall have life.

How can we prove, that John or Thomas are under wrath, and the curse? We
cannot prove it otherwise then thus Gal. 3.10
Cursed is every one, who continues not in ^ll etc. Again the says of true
Believers goes farther, then the faith of Devils can do; but they may
believe that Christ died in general for all sinners that shall believe on him.
Remember that voice of Thomas, Ioh. 20.28.
My Lord, my God, and of Gal. 2.20.
Paul who has loved me, and given himself for me. This pronoune, in
divinity, is most precious. The several applications of these would be too
prolix.

faith is such as may be entire and whole, and yet a man having it, may be in
damnable desperation, as themselves teach, and by reason is evident. For if
faith has not in it any hope or confidence, then is it not opposed to
despair, so as to expel it; for things which will not endure the one the
other, must have contrariety, as fire and water: if the one do not fight and
drive forth the other, then may they dwell together. But true says in Christ,
does breed confidence and boldness, according to that Heb. 10 22.
Let us enter with confidence and boldness through faith on him. True faith
therefore has in it confidence toward the grace of God. For as nothing can
make hot, which has not heat in it self: so nothing could make confident,
which after some manner, had not confidence in it.

QVEST. VI.
10. Q. HOw is FAITH wrought?

A. It is the gift of God, by the work of his Spirit, in the preaching of his
word.

This answer does set down Faith, first from the general nature of it, viz.
That it is a gift of God. Secondly, from the manner of working it, which is set
forth by the paincipall Author, the Spirit, the isntrumental, which is the
word.

For the first observe; Ephesians. 2.8.
that Faith is Gods gift: Iam. 1.17
Every good thing comes from the Father of Lights; but Faith and other graces
are gifts after a special manner; for they come not from a common bounty,
such as God made show of in the creation; but from a special favor, which he
bears his in Christ Jesus. Phil 1.29.
To you it is given (says Christ) not only to believe, etc. The natural head
does not only give sense and motion, to all the members now conjoined, but
does send forth those bonds, whereby they come to be coupled with it: so is
Christ the spring, whence this sinew of Faith does flow and issue unto us. What
is there in a gift, but it does agree to faith? Nothing we say more free then
gift, it must come from the grace of the Donour, and be ours by no former
title: thus faith it is bestowed on us, when we were every way unworthy, and is
a thing quite above the capacity of our nature: so far it is from being due
to us.

2. A gift must be profitable to the receiver, for else it were a giftlesse
gift, to give me that which is not good in it self, or cannot any way be good
to me. But what is so profitable as faith, which obtains through Christ, all
things good for us. Mat. 15.28
Great is thy Faith, be it to thee, as thou will.

Wherefore let us keep

We see, secondly, how we

We see lastly, whither to Heb. 12.2.

The second thing to be observed is, who is the principal worker of Faith,
viz. The Spirit of God. Hence 2 Cor. 4.13.
we are said to receive the Spirit of Faith, that is the holy Ghost, in and
through this gift of faith which he works, and continues in us. Gal. 3.2.
We receive the Spirit of promise through faith. For it is not with the Spirit
and his gifts, as with the body of the sun and his light, the one whereof is
absent from the other, but where ever the gift is, there the Spirit is, as well
to continue it in being, as first to begin it. Ephesians. 1.19 20.
The same power which raised Christ from the dead, is said to raise us up to
believe. If a man should want a bodily eye, or hand from his birth, no less
power could work it, then the almighty power of God. Who then but his Spirit
can give us this hand of faith, which reaches to heaven? this eye does see the
things within the veyle that concern our peace. We must not think that Faith
is such a knowledge, whereof, there are seeds in our nature, out of which by
mere outward teaching, we may be brought to belief; for then should faith be
natural, as all other things are, which our nature can attain to, with
outward helps.

If not the word, but a dead letter without the Spirit, which is preached to
such who remain in unbelief; or more briefly, that word which has not with
it, that power of the Spirit, which almightily works belief, that is a dead
letter, it is not a quickening word: but the word of the Gospel preached, to
such as abide in unbelief, has not with it this power of the Spirit:
therefore it is a dead letter, and therefore it is no quickening Ministry
which is sent to them.

Answ. The first part is false, and so the conclusion inferred, so far as it
concludes the ministry of the Gospel, to be to unbelievers a dead letter. For
it presupposes this error, that a word cannot be spiritual, lively, and of
efficacy, further then it has converting virtue: whereas to convince the
thoughts, and to reprove sin, are effects of the Spirit, and argue a living
piercing word. In regard of the latter thing inferred, that it is not a
quickening converting word, to the impenitent and unbelievers, it is true. For
it is said so from the effect it has in the faithful, toward whom this power
is always put forth: not that all are quickened by it, but because all who are
quickened, come by force of it, to receive this quickening.

Wherefore let us not that such a man, and such a man borne blind, had their
eyes opened, O we think of the wonderful power of God: but when the eyes of
our mind, are opened, we raise not our hearts, to any such observation.

Gad and Nathan, without this we should see no increase.

Lastly, that the word is Gods instrument to beget Faith: The Romans 1.16.
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, the powerful instrument of God;
Romans 10.14.
How can they believe without hearing? the word can do nothing without Gods
Spirit; but his Spirit will not ordinarily do any thing without the word;
neither is it possible to believe without Gods word, it being both the mean
whereby we believe, and the subject matter of our belief. A man may see
without light or color, hear without ear or sound, as possibly as believe
without a word from God. For when faith is a persuasion touching the good will
of God to us in Christ, how can we be persuaded touching his gracious
pleasure, till he declare the same by his word. No man can certainly know,
that another will do this or that for him, till he have his word or promise to
that effect; no more could we ever know, that God would forgive our sins, and
show us mercy, should he not by his word signify the same. Neitheir is it to
be passed over, that he says, The preaching of the word begets faith; For
though a seed has a power to bring forth fruit; yet it does not put forth
this power, till it be sown; and though a net has ability to take fish, yet
it does not this till it be spread and cast forth: so it is in the Gospel,
which is the seed and net of God, whereby he begets and takes souls.

should persuade himself, that such a man would give him twenty pounds a
year, when yet he cannot say, that ever he heard any inckling of such a matter
from his mouth by himself, or by any other from him. But are not these much
worse, who believe strongly, that God will give them the patrimony of his
heavenly Kingdom, though they cannot tell any syllable of his word and
promise, which sounds that way.

Again, we see that those men, who care not for the word, have no faith. True
faith is begotten and continually nourished by the word, cannot be without it,
it is the a^re in which it breaths. What say some; shall none be saved but
these Sermon-men? May we not pray and read at home as good things? who are
worse than these who hear most? They love to hear themselves speak, but
who can see any thing they talk of? These gruntling Swine never had spark
of belief? like as Swine turned up against the light, cry as impatient of it:
so do these beastly men, they cry out to see it, rather then like new
borne-babes, 1 Pet. 2.2.
desire the sincere milk of the Gospel.

The Third Part. Showing how they must live that are delivered.
QVEST. I.
1. Q. SHall all that believe have benefit by Christ?

A. All that truly believe shall, but there is a dead faith which profits
nothing.

Here are two things to be marked. First that a true Faith, makes us
partakers of Christ, and his benefits. Secondly, That no dea^ Faith can profit
us. Look^ as in nature of things, some are counterfeit merely which have an
appearance, bu^ want all inward substance o^ that they make show of; a^ in
false money and jewels i^ is manifest; and look as in plants, some have the
name and common nature, which yet want the singular property that is found in
those that are sown and better manured, as in wild oats and marjoram, twixt
which and tame, there is no small difference, though they bear^ one name: so in
matters spiritual, there are some of them counterfeit and wild as I may say:
some other true, unfeigned, good, peerless, as it is said in the Gospel. Now
look as those ^ngs which are right in ^eir kind, Math. 13.45.46.
they are good to ^ll such purposes, as by na^^re or civil institution agree
(...) them. Current money is ^od to procure, by way of ^^change, any earthly
thing ^^e want: so a true faith is of ^se, to bring us through Christ any
blessing spiritual, (...) corporal which is good for us. T^^ reason is,
because ^me faith does really (as it is ^pposed to imaginarily) that (...)
truly unite us with Christ: (...) that we come to have ^ommunion, in all that
is Christ's, being united with ^n, and by the faith of our ^earts, now betrothed
and ^^rried with him. For even (...) a graft, set into a stock, ^aketh with it
in the sap and life of it: and as a w^man now truly and lawful^ married to a
man, comme^^ to have promotion in him and joint possession of a good things
with him: the we being truly one wi^^ Christ, have all our debts a^swered by
him, have right i^ his righteousness; yea w^ receive that quickening Spirit
issuing into us, from hi^ our head.

1 Timothy 1.5.
called. It is said of the wise M^^chant, he did see^^ Mat. 13.45.
good pearls right in their kind, not glistering glas^ but Diamonds of
luster. L^ the value and profit of fai^^ (being true) persuade the to seek it.
Would tho^ have pardon of sin, would thou see sin subdued in ^^e, would
thou have the ^rit of grace, would thou ^e crosses turned to thy ^^d,
would thou enjoy ^^efits temporal or eter^^l, even as thy self willest?
(...) belief, it will bring (...) all in due time. Why ^e men idolize money
and ^^e after it, but for this, that ^ll fetch any thing they ^^uld have.

Secondly, note that no (...), unsound faith, will (...) us in steed, Iam. 2.14.
What does ^rofit (says the Apostle) ^^gh a man say he have faith (...) have
no works, can faith (...) him? By this demand^, it is most strongly deni^
There are many kinds these dead faiths. Some which are merely counte^feit:
Hamans, Est. 6.6.
What shall be done the man the King will honor he no sooner heard it vv^ in
the heart of the King, (...) honor a man, but vvh^ should the person be besi^
himself: he thought hi^ self the man presently Now these are called faith
because they are inferior ^perations of the Spirit, a^ have an illumination
like faith has, though they ^fer much from that vvhic^ is unfeigned, and
purifie^^ the heart, as wild marjoram ^^th, from that which ^oweth in gardens
well ^immed. Now none of ^^se can profit; though ^^rant money will fetch in ^^y
commodity we lack, (...) that which is counterfeit (...) rejected: so these
faiths (...) like slips, they will not ^^sse in heaven, for the ob^ing of
spiritual blessings ^rough Christ for these do ^ot ^^ely and inwardly v^^ us
with Christ. N^w ^^^te as a griffe tied on out^ardly, with a thread only, ^ill
not grow in a stock, nor that which is united with a ^^ad, as a glass eye, or
as a ^enne only, can ever receive ^e influence of sense and ^otion, as other
members do: so is it with these, whose faith does at most unite them with
Christ, but a^ a wenne is united to the body.



QVEST. II.
2. Q. HOw is a true faith discerned?

A. By the fruits, and namely by repentance.

The distinction, as also ^^e unity of things may be ^^ght, from the causes,
which are one or diverse in ^^ery thing; from the sub^^ct or circumstance of
place wherein they are, and from ^^e properties or adjuncts also. But the
diversity of effects, do distinguish things more apparently, then any ^ther,
by how much effects ^re more obuious and perceiueable then other
considerations; Thus a true faith differs in all the causes, God working this
does i^ out of purpose of bringing one to life and salvation, and does make his
word and revelation, speak more particularly of his grace and favor to the
heart of a true Believer, then to others in whom he has not that purpose, when
he does call them, and therefore does not either fit the seed or put forth his
power so as may be, as ducing to such an end.

2. They differ in matter, for the knowledge of true faith, does more
appropriate things known, and affect the heart in the interest we have in
them, it makes a man know God, as a child knows his father.

3. In the form of affiance, for there is none true in false faith.

4. In the end, which is to bring us righteousness and life, receiving the end
of your faith; to this end God gives it us, but this is not the end of the
other dead faith.

5. For the place, true faith is in the heart, the other in the head.

6. For the adjuncts, true faith is precious, perseuering, ^nfained. But we
cannot difference things more broadly then from the effects, the which place
is here chosen. Now the effect of faith is either interne, such as it has
within it self, or is externe, such as it does work without it self, in the
whole man in whom it is: as fire has an inward effect, which within it self
it exercises, as burning; It has effects externe without it self in other
things, it does harden clay, soften wax, and dry things moist. Thus our faith
it does incite the soul to rest on God, to seek increase of faith, to resist
unbelief, even as it has confidence in it; these essentially flow from it, as
burning is an effect, which proceeds even from the essence of fire, which is
an Element having heat in it: but this effect the Catechism here chooses not,
as being less perspicuous, though all true Believers find it by good
experience.

There are then other more externe effects, which faith does work out of it
self, in all true Believers. First it does work repentance: for the nature of
faith Act. 15.9.
purify the heart; for look as a wild griffe ingraffed in a kindly stock,
comes to have the nature changed, so faith setting us into Christ, though by
nature we are wild Olive branches, yet we by grace of Christ, come to be
altered.

It governs the whole Esa. 28.16.
without making have, as the bodily foot stirs not, but with direction of
the eye: so no grace moves, but this eye of faith has some precedencie, in
guiding of it: indeed as from a root, the body, branches and fruit in the
tree do proceed: so from faith as a root, all the sanctifying graces of the
spirit, and all the fruits of the spirit which grow out of them, do proceed.

Quietus est, from all the sins thereof, and joy likewise 1 Pet. 1.8
unspeakable and glorious; for it does see it self, to find in Christ
infinite treasure. Look then as a good tree, is known if it have on it good
fruit: so is faith if it be accompanied with these fruits, but chiefly if it
have growing out of it, the fruit of repentance.

Thus then we see how we may try and prove our faith.

QVEST. III.
3. Q. HOw does that appear?

A. Because wheresoever Gods Spirit works true faith there he works
repentance also: Luke 19.8.9. Acts 15.9.

These two are coupled together, Mar. 1.15.
Repent and Believe the Gospel; yea the one of them is the cause of the other.
Now where I see the one of things necessarily combined, there I know the other
is also: as in a living body, it has necessarily conjoined with it, a living
soul, where then I see the one, viz. any body alive, there I know is the
other. Smoke can neither be raised, nor continued without some fire, where
then I see smoke, there I know fire is also, though it is not always
conspicuous; thus it is in repentance, which is the smoke of a believing
soul, in which faith is not yet come to blaze forth in Christian rejoicing.

But it is a great question, Act. 5.31.
Christ is the Lord and King to give Repentance and remission of sin to his
Israel. Now what ever is in nature before remission of sin, is before Faith
also; for faith and pardon are so immediately linked together, that what is
before the one, is before the other also.

Adam, by this work of the Law, before he can be by faith set into Christ the
second Adam. This Repentance Austin compared to the needle which made way for
the thread of the Gospel, for the word of Faith to come in after it; this does
plow up the heart, before the seed of faith can be fitly sown in it. If then
we understand Repent and Believe, of this repentance, we yield it precedencie.

There is also a Repentance, which is a grief for sin offending God, rising
from the love of God, and this it is likely to be that Repentance which the
Gospel calls for; but it does set it first, because it is more manifest then
the other, not because it is in nature before the other. There is an order of
generation; there is also an order of manifestation, in which things are made
manifest, Romans 10 9. If one confess with his mouth, and believe with his
heart. Confession last in order of nature, is put before the other for because
we have the Spirit of faith, therefore we speak and confess, as Paul says,
2 Cor. 4.13.

Quest. But why is Repentance required to the forgiunesse of sin?

Answ. It is required not so much to the being of it, as the manifest
declaration of it in my conscience. Things are said to be, when now they are
manifestly declared; thus remission of sin, which is the womb as it were
of faith, is manifestly now brought to light upon repentance, and therefore it
is said repent, and so (even in thy own experience) manifest the remission of
thy sins. The sum is, that faith is alvvay in nature before Repentance,
though we long trauerse the exercise of a broken spirit, before we can feel
our selves persuaded. that our sins are pardoned: that as we see the
lightning first, before we hear the crack, and we see the blossom first,
before we see the bud, though in order of nature, these last are first: so we
see our selves to be in sorrow, before we can feel our selves to have faith,
and to have received forgiveness, though these in nature were before, which may
be thus cleared. None can grieve at sin, as it is offensive to his God, till
he love his God; none can love God till he have apprehended Gods love to him;
no man can apprehend God as reconciled and loving to him, till he has faith;
therefore none can grieve for sin, as it is offensive to God, till he first
has faith.

their first conversion, nor after, have all the same measure of sorrow, though
none escape without knowing this sorrow in some degree.

QVEST. IV.
4 Q. WHat is Repentance?

A. Such a change of the heart, as brings forth a reformed life. Matt. 38.
Romans 12.2. Esaias 1.16.

In this answer two things must be marked. 1 That Repentance evil, is most
displayed, in that which it does work in the heart, the moving, to Matt. 3.8.
both of inward constitution, and outward conversation. Isa. 58.5.
Repentance is not the hanging of the head like a bull-rush, or composing the
outward man, tipping the tongue only, but it is an alteration of the whole
soul and inward man. Joel 2.15.
Rent your hearts (says Joel) Plow up the fallowes of your hearts (says
Jeremy) Look as it is with a traveler, Ier. 4.3.
who has now a long time gone forth of his way, when once he comes to find
it, his judgment does disallow the way he went in, and which sometime he
thought the only true way, his will does turn from it, his affections
likewise are much changed, he greeueth, is full of indignation, to think he
should be so wide, he is angry with those, who did mislead him in it; Thus it
is with us from the time God opens our eyes, to see how we walked astray, in
those ways which we thought good enough, though the issues of them would have
been death. Hence it is, that the Hebrews call Repentance by a word which
signifies Turning. For indeed Repentance is such an act, wherein the soul
does turn about, looking quite another way from that wherein sometime it
walked.

Further it is to be marked, it is not only a change of heart; but such an one
as has going with it, a change in constitution and conversation. For it cannot
be, but when the heart is turned and converted unto God, the whole man will
be converted also, but as the great wheel in a device being turned, the
lesser are together turned with it: so it is here, the heart being that
prim^^^ mobile, that first moouer, according to which, all inferior instruments
are also moved.

To open this further. You must know that Repentance is not any mere external
change. Secondly, that it is not an hypocritall half change of the heart, as
Israel returned to God, but not with her whole heart. Thirdly, that it is not a
change, such as was in Judas, which ended in desparation, but such a change
wherein the soul does so turn from the sin of it, that God seeing sin now
become loathsome to it, does send his spirit into the heart, both to sanctify
it inwardly, and also to lead it into every word and good work, into all
manner of holy conversation. This being the order of these benefits. 1. The
Spirit is sent us from Christ, to work faith in us, by which we rest on him,
and are vni^ed with him. 2. We receive upon this immediately, iusti^^cation
from him. 3. When ^ow Gods love to us (being so wretched in our selves) is
apprehended, we come to feel working in us, this Spirit of repentance. 4. The
Spirit having now brought us to dislike of our sin, turn from it, feel it a
burden, does inwardly sanctify us, killing sin and quickening us with that
life of grace, which inableth the soul to supernatural operation. Fifthly,
Having given us (who are Christ's) these new abilities, it is likewise with us,
to lead us in the exercise of them, Romans 8.14
according to that; S^ many as are lead by the Spirit of God the same are the
sons of God; not reguntur, are governed, but aguntur, are acted and moved;
whence the conversation comes to be altered from that i^ was; So that these
thre^ changes must be distinguished. First, The change of the heart in this
first conversion. Secondly, The change of the heart in sanctification. Thirdly,
The change of the outward conversation. The first being a work of the Spirit,
preparatiue to the other. For look as Physici^ns, before they will give the
medicine, which should bring up tough corrupted humors, restore natural
faculties, and so bring a man to that soundnes of natural actions, which he
formerly enjoyed; before this I say, they will attenuate, cut, and concoct the
matter, making it fit to be educed; even thus our God he does by his Spi^^t
cause Repentance, and the change of it, by which the hold of sin, comme^ to
be so loosened, that t^ soul is ready of it self, (...) labor the expulsion
of (...) before he does send (...) grace of mortification a^ quicknance, and
restore in (...) the integrity of a spirit^^ conversation.

Some desist from some ^nnes, but yet have no ha^ed of them: some by ^elues
have a brunt some^me of sorrow, but it has ^o root in the heart, and
^^nisheth: some like Judas ^aue a strange turn in mind, ^^d yet are not turned
against sin, as sin, is of^^nsiue to God. For as he that fears not to
touch a coal for the fire in it, does ^ot properly fear the coal (for he
will take the coal in his hand) but the fire which burns: so he that is
grieved disallowing a sin, as being notoriously foul, or as it is followed
with vengeance, is not properly grieved at the sin, but at the punishment,
with which it is attended.

Math. 3.8.


QVEST. V.
5. Q. WHENCE comes this ^hange?

A. Chiefly from the sight and feeling of Gods mercy toward us in Christ, Luke
7.47. 1 Ioh. 4.19.

The heart may be pricked with Repentance, by the Law, as I said before; but
this will but make it bleed inward, and rancle more and more; this is a sorrow
to death. The heart never comes kindly to be pricked, so as to break out
into confession, dislike, and true grief for sin (as it is a thing offending
God) till the love of God come in some measure, to be tasted by it. Zach. 12.10.
I will pour out my spirit of grace and deprecation, and they shall mourn,
Mat. 3.7.
repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. We see some sturdy natures which
with severe hard courses are not stirred, come over them with kindness and they
relent: thus it is in the dissoluing of our hearts, they never yield and
relent, till love work on them. Look as it is in the change of the earth, all
the stormy inclemencies of the Winter, though they may cast it into diverse
forms, yet till the sun cause an influence of his sweet heat into the bosom
of it, it is never changed from unfruitful to fruitful, neither is the face
of it till then renewed; So in our souls, though the storms of the Law, may
diversely affect them, yet till the beams of this grace shine into the heart,
they are never truly changed: our hearts could not possibly reflect and
rebound this love to God (for it is love to grieve, that we have offended him)
had not he first caused his love to shine upon us.

As ever then thou would repent, the hammer, and is not hurt, yet a goats
blood will dissolve it, as vinegar does pearl etc. Look to that blood of
Christ our Savior, and he enable us to see it, that so our hard hearts may be
dissolved through the abundance of love manifested in it. What is so hard, but
fire casts and melts it? what fire is so hot, as the love wherewith God
has loved us in Christ?

QVEST. VI.
6. Q. FRom what is the heart changed?

A. From love of the world to the love of God, from carelessness to conscience
and desire to please God, Ioh. 21.15. Tit. 2.12. Phile. v. 11. 1 Ioh. 2.15.

In every moving and alteration there are two points, the one from whence, the
oother to which; as in going any whither, there is one place which I leave, and
another that I go unto; Thus in Repentance, the point from which we turn, is
the love of the world and carelessness: the point to which we are changed and
converted is, the love of God and care to please him.

Observe then first; That by nature all of us live in adulterous love of the
world, the persons, things, fashions in it. Iam. 4.4.
O ye adulterous (says James) Look as women from what time they fall away
from love of their Husbands, grow into league with strangers; so we from what
time, we by sin turn from the immortal God, we turn to the corruptible
creature, loving them not in and for God, loving them not in measure, according
to the goodness that is in them, but inordinately. Some have this adultery in
them more openly; some more covertly. For even as there are some corporally
unclean, not ashamed to walk with their Trulls in the sight of the Sun: so
there are some Esau-like, who will not stick to say, give them the pottage of
pleasure, take who will the birthright: thus in effect do all profane and
civil persons, who care not, and will profess as much for matter of religion;
some have this adulterous love to the world, but think no more of it, then 2
King. 8 12.13.
he of Syria did think, he had in him that cruelty, which he after showed.
For as men may have a disease in body, which they think themselves most free
of: so in soul also, Such are all Christians, who have not received the
sanctifying grace, which makes the heart good and honest.

Turks then for us, for we break our faith, and leave an all-sufficient God,
for transitory trifles and pleasures of sin, which last but for a season.

Observe secondly from hence, That we are turned to the love of God, from the
love of this world, that our growing out of love with the world, is our
returning into love with our Husband, as the amity of the world is enmity
with God: so the enmity with the world, begins amity with God. Look as
unclean women, the more they shake off their Paramours, the more they return
to their conjugall duty: so it is with us; the truth is, we who by sin,
have turned from God, to the inordinate love of these things, can never return
to God till these be left, as he who is come hither from any place, he can
never return to that again, till he has left this, in which he now is. But
how can we leave God, or return to him who is every where? even as two
present together for place, may leave each other, when in heart and affections
they desioyne themselves, though in place they are conjoined: and as a man may
be with light, and yet turn from it, by winking against it, and so going out
of that which shines about him, and return to it by opening his eyes again:
thus we may go from God every where present, while we turn our hearts and
affections from him, and shut the eyes of our minds, from beholding of him;
And we turn to him, when we open the eye of Faith, and unite our selves with
his mercy, and cleave unto him with the love of our souls. This then being our
way of returning to our God, let us labor to root out, this stinking weed of
inordinate love to earthly things, as ever we would assure our selves, we have
love to God. A chaste wife will not content herself in the maine to be loyal,
but she will not give light behavior, lavish favors, unchaste kisses to any
person; And shall not we take up our hearts for halting; for so much
intemperate concupiscence, as still dwells in them, to things earthly, if
thou do but cry out against this, thou shall have an evidence of thy chaste
love to God, Deuteronomy. 22.26.27
as the Virgin that cried out, while villainy was offered her, she was indeed
innocent, for she cried out.

Observe thirdly, That all men before conversion are careless of God. Romans 3.11
None understands, none seeks after him; proportionally as we love any
thing, we mind it, and are careful about it. Now by nature having in us no
true love to God, how can we be careful of him. Look as in the 2. of the
Proverbs Pro. 2.17
, the adulterous woman is said, to forsake the guide of her youth, that is,
her heart did not cleave unto him so, as to be careful of duty toward him. So
all spiritual adulteresses, cast quite away, all rememberance and care of God.
For alas, what would this do, but breed a regret in their consciences, and
make them they could not follow, their disloyal courses so delightfully. Look
at the lives of men, every thing is cared for, but God and heavenly things, are
quite as out of sight, out of mind also. Nay some they even strive, to put
these matters out of thought, it is but a fit of Melancholy, to look this way.
We are like the Deputy Act. 18.14.15.
Gallio, had it been a point of Justice he would have meddled, but for
questions of Gods law he cared not (it is said) for those things. To branch
forth this carelessness, 1. Men before conversion, care not for sin whereby
they offend God; Ier. 8.6.
none says, what have I done? they no more stick upon sin, then an
adulteress on her unclean dalliance.

2. They care not to use any means to be reconciled to God: Nay the further
they can keep them off him, it is better with them: hence it is that they
affect ignorance, and hardness of heart.

3. They are not for any course, which God does use toward them, to reclaim
them, be it by words or blows, it being with them as with Salomons fool,
with Pro 17.10. and 27.22.
whom nothing enters, whether one smite or use indignation, neither piping nor
lamenting will prevail; And as the Drunkard in the Pro. 23.35.
Proverbs, does not heed his knockes, to take admonition by them, no more do
these.

4. What dishonor will be done to God, they are careless of it. We pass not
how they be used whose persons we love not. O this careless estate of God, it
is the height of wickedness, the Lord keep it far from us; but as men asleep
dream of many vain matters, but take no thought of more serious and
substantial businesses; so men asleep in state of sin, their thought and
fancy is running, about vain transitory things, but they take no care of
matters of God which concern their peace.

Lastly mark, a converted man is made careful and conscionable to please God.
2 Cor. 5.9.
Wherefore we dwell at home or go from home, we study to please him: Col.
1.10.
grow up to please GOD in all things; that look as Courtiers they affect to
please their Sovereigns, and will not stir in word or deed, further then
they see will be well taken, they are men that dwell at Placenza (as the
Italian says;) thus Gods children in all they do, labor to be pleasing in
his sight. Care comes from love and fear; Now Gods children converted, have
both the love of God, and the fear of him, so that they cannot be but
careful to please him.

learn to know the length of their Masters feet, let us (I say) learn to
know the will of God, and to perform it acceptably through his Christ, when
GOD has received us of adulteresses, to grace and favor: how should it prick
us forward to care and diligence in duty, while we think how long we walked
undutifully toward him.

QVEST. VII.
7. Q. WHat is this change called?

A. It is called in the Scriptures a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15.

You must observe, he asks here of Repentance, as it is a change accompanied
with sanctification of heart and reformation of life: not as the change of
Repentance is precisely and rigorously distinguished, from sanctification and
reformation; Now Repentance thus taken, is called a new Creature.

For opening whereof, we must not think, that a man is for substance made new,
but only in quality and fashion, as when we turquesse an old garment, making
it up again, we say it is a new garment, that is made up in new fashion,
though it be the old stuff it was: so it is with our making new in Christ.
Look as the air in substance is all one in the night season which it is in
the morning, but in the night it was all darkened and obscure, in the morning
it is all enlightened: so it is with us, the same we are for substance in the
state of sin, and in Christ, but in state of sin we are all darkness of
ignorance and lust, in state of grace we are all light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8.
as Paul speaks: but more fully to understand it, 4. things shall be briefly
opened. 1. How this new Creature is begotten. 2. In what it stands. 3. In
what order it is brought forth. 4. The works whereby it is discerned.

1. In generation of children there are Parents and a seed of each Parent, and
a force making the seed fruitful. This new babe has a father and mother, God
and his Church: a seed whereof it is begotten, a seed inward from God, that
revelation and inspiration, which within the soul he causes; outward from the
mother, that external propounding of the word of God; Finally, here is
likewise that virtue of Gods Spirit, working through this seed, a new Creature
in us. If men by reading precepts of Grammar, and Logic, can beget of
ignorant persons Grammarians, and Logitians, is it any wonder if God, by his
most holy word beget, of us by nature sinful and profane, holy righteous
persons? though we must not thus conceive, as if there were not a higher thing
in Gods begetting, then the other.

2. This new Creature stands in a divine nature, as 2 Pet. 1.4
Peter calls it, which God by his inward work, does create in us, not
drawing that forth, which in virtue of power was before in us, as men of Art
only do, when they make an ignorant Scholar become an Artist with them: but
causing these things to exist, whereof we have not a seed, or spark left in us
by nature, the divine quality changing soul and body, is this new creation in
us, viz. light and wisdom in the mind which does purge it from ignorance,
error, unbelief, vanity, etc. love in the will which does purge it from
rebellion against Gods law, and inclination to evil. The active force of
conscience comes to be rectified, in the direction of it, or that informing
faculty which is in it, in the testification of it, whereby it witnesses to
us, our state and actions.

The affections of the mind are sanctified: the outward man comes likewise
to be renewed, not only because it receives a divine kind of beauty, from
the inward grace of the heart, whose resplendencie may be often obscured, in
the outward; but because the obedientiall faculty, of all the members is so
changed, that now they present themselves Romans 6.13.19.
weapons of righteousness, as before they were instruments at command of sin:
it being with the Spirit and his gifts in filling it, as it was with that
cloud in filling the material Temple which Solomon erected. Frst it filled
the holy of holies, and inmost parts of it, 1 King. 8.10.11.
then issued out into that also, wherein the Priests ministered; Thus in our
Temple, first the soul has the cloud of spiritual graces immediately filling
it, then the body does participate with the same, so far forth as it is
capable.

For the third, even as the natural man is not conceived and borne at once: so
this new Creature, is as it were a great while in the womb, before it comes
out so, as it may be viewed by it self and others. Again, as the natural
birth, is sometime at once conceived, sometime successively by endeauours
repeated; so God conuerteth some at once, some he does work in at sundry
times, in diverse manners, before he work in them saving conversion.

Again, as some come with greater pains into the world, then other: so here
all Christians know not alike dolours in their new birth. Finally conversion is
so wrought, that some discern it, when it first begins, others though they
can observe times of coming more near to God, yet they can say nothing, when
first the work of grace begun in them. Such in whom from tender years have
bin some beginnings this way are builded up insensibly from time to time; they
discern that they are grown up more forward, but they know not how it first
began: it is easy to see the head now gray, but who can tell when the first
hairs changed color; yet in such conuersions as Paul's, or Lydiaes, which
befall persons of ripe judgment, and bring changes very apparent with them,
the very first work may be easily noted.

Lastly, the signs are first, 1 Ioh. 2.13.
the knowledge of the Father. First nature teaches each lamb to know his Ewe;
shall not Gods lambs, even by an instinct, of their heavenly nature which they
have received, know him the Father of them?

2. 1 Ioh. 3.14
Love of the Saints, who are begotten of the same seed with them. Nature
makes persons of a blood love more nearly, then those twixt whom there is no
bond of consanguinitie: so here grace teaches, and inclines chiefly to the
love of those, in whom the Consanguinitie of the same grace, may be discerned.

3. Gal. 5.17
By a fight against the remaining corruption: as natural strength in the
stomach, fights with that which has not agreement with it, laboring to
cast it off, or otherwise to avoid it: so grace strives against sinful
lusts, which fight against the soul.

4. 2 Cor. 5.17.
New men will have new desires, new works, even the works of their heavenly
Father: specially they will have new words. Every Countryman may be known
by his tongue, an English man, a French, etc. So there is a Esa. 19.18.
language of Canaan, which these babes speak, by which they may be
distinguished from others.

Let us then strive to see, Gal. 6.35
Circumcision, uncircumcision, all are nothing, where there is not this new
Creature. Thou who have no knowledge of God, thou who bear an aching tooth at
his children, who have more conscience of their ways, then thy self, thou who
can digest well, all thy daily sins, and never feel thy heart smite
thee, thou whose desires all tend to back and belly, the outward good of thee
and thine, thou who do the works of the Devil, living in strife, envy,
lust, intemperancie, thou whose mouth is full of swearing, lying, beastly
speaking, do thou think ever to see salvation, nay thou must be borne of
God first. For as Parents leave not their inheritances, but unto their own
children begotten of them: so God will not give his heavenly inheritance, but
only to those, who shall be begotten of him, and have his own Image engraven
in them.

QVEST. VIII.
8. Q. HOw does it appear?

A. When in word and deed we endeavor to abstain from all evil, and
exercise our selves in that which is good, Psalm. 34.14 Romans 12.9. Ephesians. 4.25.

The new Creature, we know consists of these two parts. First, the old man,
the corruption of his nature, is mortified. Secondly, he is quickened with a
new life and nature; the Ephesians. 4.18
life of God, and the 2 Pet 1.4
divine nature: Now the framing of him standing in these two, it is no wonder
if we discern him, by desisting from evil and doing good. For if the old man
be mortified in the new Creature, then will such works be refrained, which he
lived in, while he was in this state of corruption: for look as men dead to
this natural life, cease quite from the works of it: so the new man being
dead to sin, lives not in it, when we lived in sin, we were Romans 6.20.22.
free from righteousness, we quite abstained from it: so when we are set free
from sin, and made servants to righteousness, we can no more obey sin, as
if we were the servants of it; hence Christ reasons, Ioh. 8 39.40.
were ye Abraham's children, ye would refrain seeking to kill me. Every thing
that is, has faculty to bring forth that, which does agree to the kind, and
forbeareth that which is otherwise; as a figtree does not bring forth thorns,
nor any other fruit, but figs, such as agree to the nature of it; thus
Creatures in the earth, water, air, they all of them refrain such things as
suite not with their nature, and do that which is kindly for them.

Thus, mere natural and civil men, they abstain from all matter of godliness,
and keep them within compass of that, which is answerable to the being and
faculties which they enjoy: thus a spiritual man, his very nature does make
him auerse from works which have in them contrariancie, to the being and life
of grace he has received, and does incline him to exercise himself, in such
works and words, as are pleasing to that faculty of grace, wherewith he is
endued. For as nature which makes nothing in vain, teaches every Creature to
put forth those powers and faculties, which are in them: so the law of grace
inclines the spiritual man, to exercise this grace, in keeping a clear
conscience in godliness, as Act. 24.16. Heb. 13.18
Paul did. Look as a chaste wife, from the time she is married, desires to
have no fruit, which company with her Husband does not beget: so a new man
from the time he is in Christ, married to him, desires to bring forth no
works, or words, which Christ by his Spirit, does not work and speak in him.

Object. But we sin?

Answ. Romans 7.17.
Not we, but sin in us, we sin not willingly, Should an unclean person
allure the wife that lies in my bosom, and get an adulterous brood, my self
not consenting, should I be guilty or accounted as the Parent of them? Thus
when the Devil inueigleth the concupiscence which is in us, and brings
forth sin, while our will as we are spiritual goes against it, the Lord
will hold us innocent, and account these sins as no fruits begotten by us.

QVEST. IX.
9. Q. IS this perfect?

A. No, we believe not perfectly, and therefore we cannot love perfectly, but
we must strive to perfection, Mar. 9.24. 1 Cor. 13.9. Heb. 6.1.3. 2 Pet. 3.18.

Here are three things to be marked. First he answers the question
negatiuely, by denying of it. Secondly, he gives a reason, from the
imperfection of faith and love. Thirdly, he by prevention (least men should
take occasion of sloth) does in the third place set down our duty, that we
must strive forward. To the first, none can say, Pro. 20.9
my heart is clean. Iam. 3.2.
In many things we sin all: 1 Ioh. 1.8
He that says he has no sin, deceives himself. Though we have such grace
as makes us endeavor to avoid all sin, and do all righteousness, yet is
our grace every way imperfect, for the degree of it: that look as an infant,
though he have every member of a man, yet he has no member which is not
imperfect: so it is with us. And look as the air in the morning, or first
rising of the Sun, though it be every where light, yet it has every where
darkness, and therefore receives till high noone further and further
illumination, as we see in daily experience: so the Sun of righteousness
getting up in our souls, does so dispell the darkness of them, that still
there is much left in them, by his presence to be more and more subdued in us.

could not have done, though they feel much infirmity still clogging of them;
thus should it be with us.

Let us learn secondly, to

Secondly observe, that our faith and love, are both imperfect, and so all our
conversation imperfect; the fruit cannot have that, which the tree has not in
it to give. If our inherent graces which are the tree, be imperfect, the fruit
must needs be so also. 1 Cor. 8.2.
We know nothing as we should, of those things which we know, and many things
we are ignorant in, which we should know. We are like the blind man Mar. 8.24
, whose eyes now opened, began to see men like trees: Look as children know
not at all many things, they come to know afterward, so we; and look as they
do not know fully those things, which they know but superficially: so is it
with us in heavenly matters. Hence our confidence cannot be perfect. Those who
know God best, trust him best, otherwise then it is with men. Psalm. 9.10
Those who know thee, will trust in thee; those who dimly know him, his
goodness and truth, they can but weakly believe on him. Neither does it
hinder this truth, that sometime simple men, who can answer you little of God,
are so strong in faith, that they suffer Martyrdom, when School Doctors turn
tippet; for as these have a more excellent confidence in God, so they have a
more worthy knowledge, then the greatest Doctors, for they do in clear light,
see God to be unto them, a merciful, faithful, and all-sufficient God, in
every season, which the other have not, though in speculatiue knowledge, they
far out-strippe them. Hence likewise, love must needs be imperfect; for the
appetite, as it cannot move to that it knows not at all; so it cannot move
further for degree then it does know the degree of goodness, in the thing it
moves to; Now when we know not how absolute for degree, these good things
are, we cannot love them in perfection.

Again, love follovveth not only the thing known, but the evidence of
knowledge; hence it is that if I know a thing by hearsay, I cannot pity it
so, as if I did see it: so the good of another, does not so affect being
reported, as if our eyes beheld it; for the knowledge of the eye, is more
evident then of the ear.

So because our knowledge, is an ineuident knowledge, by hearsay of belief:
hence it is that we cannot so love God, as if we did see him as he is;
knowledge, confidence, love being imperfect, all our operation is imperfect: if
the member whereby I move be lame, needs must my pace be halting likewise.

Let us then labor to see our wants, in these regards. If our bodily eye did
see but dimmely, we would do twenty things to help it. The longer we follow
God, the better we should know him, the more we have proved him, the better we
should trust him, and love him; thus it is with men, who would think it a
wrong to them, after we have long known them, if our trust and love to them,
should not take increase.

Observe thirdly, That we must all strive to perfection. Math. 5.48. 1 Cor.
13.11.
Be ye perfect. As nature has made most things imperfect, so she has put a
property, by which they enlarge themselves, and grow out to the perfection,
which does agree to their kind; thus plants and living Creatures, we see what
they are in their seed: when they are forth of it, we see what little
beginnings they have, but yet they never cease moving, till they attain their
due perfection; thus God has made all his Babes small and weak in their
beginning, but yet his grace has this property, it will grow Mat. 1^.31.32.
like a mustard seed; this bodily life we have received, we would be loath
but to come in it, to the perfect stature which does belong to us: thus having
received the beginning of a divine nature, we must seek the increase of it in
us. Our life is likened to a race: now a race is but moderate in the beginning,
(for hot at hand does not always speed best:) but the further we go the faster,
the nearer the goal our pace is most fervent: so should all the course of our
life be a progress to perfection. Perfection in regard of sin to be purged
out, in regard of grace to be increased, and strengthened in regard of our
actions and operations. For even the things we do, we must labor to do them
more fully: we see in recovering health, how we are affected. Somewhat better
will not content a man though he can sit up, yet he dare not go forth of his
chamber, when he dares go within the house into other rooms, then oh, if he
could feel his stomach, if he go abroad and feel but faintnes, oh if he
could but walk in his accustomed strength; thus we should be affected, in
receiving spiritual strength from this sickness of sin, till we feel our
selves enlarged to walk constantly and cheerfully before the Lord, we should
never be at rest. But alas, many of us stand dwarfes in religion, we are
affected like as young Scholars are to learning, in seeking grace, we care
not how little we have: but if we will not be dead moles which grow a pace for
a while, and give over quickly, but living birthes in the womb of the Church,
expecting to be brought forth in that kingdom of glory, then let us have
care 2 Pet. 3.18.
to grow in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Such as are no
wiser at fifty, then they are at fifteen, oh how we censure it in them. Let
not the same thing overtake us, in the matters of God; we had the more need to
strive, it is no easy thing to out-wrastle a sickness; beside the nature of
sickness, does make men indisposed to resist it: so do our sins press us
down, that without good resolution, we shall not be able to deal against them.
What might we come to in Christ, if we would strive: but oh, a handful with
ease, better keep where we are with quiet we think, then to make our
condition, by still dealing with our selves, too too restless; but where we
cease to go forward, we begin to go backward.

QVEST. X.
10. Q. HOw must we strive?

A. By a diligent use of the means, which GOD has appointed, for our increase
in Faith and Repentance, 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.20.

We have need to strive, that grace may get up and grow in us. He who will
have a plant thrive in a ground dry, barren and unkindly for it, must strive
much, because his soil will not do further, then it is forced: so he that
will make fire burn, in green moist wood, must follow it with blowing: thus
to get Gods grace thrive in our natures, which are as apt to the weeds of
vice, as auerse from every true virtue, he must strive with them, and offer
violence to them. But because if our striving be not in a right course, it will
not be profitable; therefore we must not only know, that we are to strive,
but the order also, in which we are to strive. Now 3. things are in the
answer. First, By using means. Secondly, using them diligently. Thirdly, the
means are described, which are thus to be used, viz. Such means as God has
appointed to that end. There is no endeavor to attain any end further, then
it causes an use of means conducing thereto: as there is no true desire and
will to be rich, where a man does not use some courses, whereby he may gain
and lay up, and in time grow to a full state; So there is no true willing, or
endeavoring to be rich in faith or grace, further then there is an use of
those means, which both work it and increase it in us. Look as the first
breeding and feeding up this natural man, requires use of means: so it is
with the spiritual man, there must be means used to bring him to being, and
continue him in being.

Wherefore such as care Balaam, but they have no true will of obtaining grace
and salvation. He has no mind to go to a place, who will not rise to stir a
foot thither, when it is free for him if he would.

2. Note that means must not only be used, but diligently. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. Heb. 6.12.
Be not slothful, but strive through faith and patience, to inherit the
promises. He who does row against the stream, must ply his oar, or he will
go down the stream: so it is here, we go against the stream of corrupt
nature, so far as we go in grace. Now this diligent use stands, in using
all the means, private and public. If a Physician bid one take three
several things, he will not think it well to take one: no more when God
prescribes hearing, praying, receiving the Sacrament, is it enough for us, to
think it well, if we do use some one, neglecting others? As nature has made
nothing in vain, nor any thing for all purposes, but one thing to one
principal end: so God has ordained us, none of all the means for our souls
in vain, and he has not made one of them sufficient to all uses, but one to
one purpose, a second to another, the joint number of them sufficient, for our
full and prosperous growth. Wherefore, as we use not only meat, but drink
and exercise, as we have care of our sleeping, waking and passions, that they
may be ordered so, as makes for our health, and thus use the whole multi^ude
of helps, for our bodily health: so must we for our souls also.

2. The second point of diligence is, we must use them with assiduity and
con^^ncie, as occasions are of^^red. For as our body never stands long in a
state, but after one sustenance taken, there is a present decay growing on us
of blood and Spirits, that within few hours, we must use means again: thus
in our Spirits refreshed, there is a decay, not of the substance of grace but
of the feruor, alacrity, strength we feel, which does necessarily call us to
renew use of means.

Again, though the word be immortal seed, and therefore abides, which
corporal food is not: yet in this it is like to corporal food, that look as
bodily food does not put to the body, all that substantial strength and
latitude which belongs to it: so the food of the word does not at one time
augment the soul, with all length and depth of knowledge, faith, love, hope,
justice, temperance, which it is to be brought unto. In which regard, Souls
having grace, have need to go over with the use of means, as well as others,
that the divine nature, may be more and more enlarged, getting up as the light
of the Sun does in the air which it inlightneth.

3. We must be careful to use means, as to take heed diligently of that
which should hinder the fruit of them. Diligence in doing any thing makes us
prevent all incident hindrances to that we would effect: thus we take physic
cum custodia, we will not go into the air, nor do ought, nor use diet, which
should be a let to the working of it. For sedulity or diligence is a daughter
of Prudence, and it is a taskemaster or Surueyor to other virtues in their
works: it does see to this, that every circumstance, be done to the full, as
is fitting for the purpose which we intend: it is never absent from us in doing
any thing, which our judgment duly esteems, and our will is well affected
unto. It is pitiful to see how many use no means: others when we call them
to this diligent strife for progress, why what would we have of them? it is
not our own righteousness or goodness which must save us. So, what still
hearing, praying, streining these strings, there is moderation in every thing:
some are so negligent through their folly, which judges not these things so
necessary, and their want of inclination to them, that to move these unto
them, would make them all a mort as if you did knock them down with a beetle.

Some think means are good indeed, as preaching to people unconverted, but
not so needful for others; we need not hear preaching daily, as feed
dai^ie: for that is a food immortal. But would these now consider, how by our
own nature, the Devil, the World, the work of grace is opposed: They would
see that there were no less need to use diligence and assiduitie for the
soul, in use of means, then for the body it self. Civil things are not
learned, but they must be diligently followed. When should we have a Scholar
if he should go to school one day and play two.

2. It is a good sign of a good Christian, who uses helps with diligence
when he seeks to others to teach and help him. Pro. 10.4.
The diligent hand makes rich: so they are rich in faith and grace, who most
diligently use the means, which help them thereunto.

Lastly observe: They must be means ordained of God to this end; he who
misseth in choice of his means, still fails of his end, to which he would
attain: even as he that misseth the way, leading to a place he would go
unto, does miss of coming to that place he desires.

The means are the way, by which a man does go to, and compass the end which
he propounds. If therefore we should propound to grow in grace, but yet
choose such means, as GOD has not sanctified, we should run on in a wrong
way, never coming to that we intended. As no means natural, can feed our
natural man, but those which the word of God in Creation has blessed to
this end: So no means can sustain, and increase that divine nature, but those
which God, by the word of institution, has blessed to such purpose.

Such then who seek by means superstitious to grow up in grace, by a
picture, a crucifix, stinted orizons, they feed on chalk for cheese, and can
never grow in grace these ways. Some think, why what needs preaching, cannot
they read learned Sermons at home: 2 Kings. 5.12.
though Abana and Pharpar had as good water as Jordan, it would not heal
Naamans leprosy, as the other did: so though in it self a Sermon printed be
as good, yet it has not pleased GOD to appoint by reading printed Sermons so
ordinarily, to work Faith and Conversion, as by the other.

The Fourth Part. Showing what Helps are to be used to that end.
QVEST. I.
1. Q. WHAT are the public means?

A. Hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, and joining in Prayer, Romans
10.13. Luke 22.19. 1 Timothy 2.1.

These are more public means (for the private follow) though indeed these
be the principal. 1 Pet. 2.2.
Desire tenderly the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow by it. The
same things which breed us, feed us also. As in the body, there is no part
made of seed, but whatsoever does nourish it, must first be turned into seed:
so parts made of blood, are nourished and augmented by blood; And look as it
is with the natural babe, the same blood of which in the womb he was framed,
it does strike up into the breasts, and there by a further concoction,
becoming white, it is the nourishment of him: so it is with the spiritual
babe, the same word which did breed him, the same must preserve him, and make
him take increase.

2. The Sacraments are a word of God, dressed in a more sensible manner. That
look as the same bodily food, may be served forth, baked, sod, or roast: even
so the word of God, is not only nakedly set forth to the ear, but visibly
prepared, to the eye also, that so the soul may be more affected, and the
whole man more congruously and fitly fed and sustained by it, who stands of a
bodily, as well as of a spiritual nature. And look as Kings do conueigh to
their Subjects, the gifts of their bounty, not only by word of mouth, and
bare grant, but by passing their seals also: so God does give us his
spiritual gifts, under the broad seal of heaven, that thus we might have
more secure possession of them.

3. Prayer is a most excellent means of obtaining every good thing: it is the
key of heaven. The things we want, are of 2. sorts; such as we may by course
of Justice redeem, and get to our selves, or such which do merely depend, on
the good will of persons, and cannot be gotten, but only by winning their good
will; thus there are two courses of getting things; for we may fetch those
former things, by commutatiue justice, by giving a penny for a penniworth; but
the latter things we cannot procure, but by humble entreaty only. Now all
heavenly blessings, are of this latter sort, such as cannot be gotten, but
only from Gods grace and free favor, and therefore such as we cannot
otherwise get, then by moving him for them with humble ^^pplication. As this
is a part of the Kings preroga^^^e, to have his Subjects pe^^tion to him for
grace, in regard of their temporal exi^encies in which they are: so this is
the Prerogative of that heavenly King, that we should in all things seek to
him. Look as it is in nature, nothing which does grow, but has in it an
appetite and attractiue force, whereby it does draw to it self, such
nourishment as it wants: so no soul ever took increase of grace but there
was in it this appetite of heavenly desire, and attractiue force of Prayer, by
which it does draw from the root, even from God in Christ, every thing
needful for it.



Again, let us frequent the Sacraments, we will attend ^o sealing in less
matters; for ^n earthly things we are not well till the bird be in the ^age,
till all be made sure.

Let us pray to God: up ^oeth Prayer, and down ^omes blessings; the being ^f
every thing, teaches it to ^ray after a sort to the Cretor: the earth weary
with ^rought, will open the ^outh and cry to him; the young Ravens will report
their hunger, and Psalm. 147.9
call to their Creator for sustenance: ^^all not we, if we be his ^hildren,
report all our ^ants to him, and seek all ^ood things from him? sure^y such as
spare to speak, ^re unworthy to speed.

QVEST. II.
2. Q. WHat are the Sacraments?

A. Certain outward signs and seals appointed of God to assure us, that
Christ with all his benefits, are given to us, Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 10.16.

In which answer, 1. mark the common nature of Sacraments. 2. The Author. 3.
The end and use of them. Observe 1. That Sacraments are for their nature signs
and seals. Genesis 17.11.
Circumcision is called a sign of the Covenant. Romans 4.11.
A sign and seal of the righteousness by Faith. There are natural Signs,
as smoke is a sign of fire: there are civil ones, some expressing only, as
Pictures, some signifying the relation of one Person to another, as these
cognizances, do signify such as are Reteinors to those who gave them: some are
signs, by which that is exhibited and wrought which is signified: thus a ring
given in contract of marriage: so the giving a key in token of possession: so
the digging a ^urfe in seazing on land: some signs are sacred, as the
Sacraments, which do not only signify spiritual things, but testify us, to
belong unto God, and also are instruments, exhibiting to us that, which they
represent; that look as a man by his sign (say by delivering a key) does give
the possession of a house to another: so does God by giving these signs, give
to our faith receiving the things signified also: Hence the Scripture speaks
of them as causes. Romans 6.3.
By Baptism we are set into his death; because God does use them, working by
them this effect, though they of themselves work not any thing of the effect.

Object. But why does God use them as instruments, if they have no force of
causing the effect: for men adioyne to themselves, no isntrumental cause, but
it works something of the effect.

Answ. True, for men's active virtue is finite, and cannot reach alone to those
effects, which by instruments are effected. But God, whose infinite virtue does
alone reach, to the working of grace, he may use such instruments, as work to
this or that, but have no virtue of producing it. Yea, men's signs seem no
cause of that, which by signification only they exhibit, as the giving a key,
is not the cause of possession: for possession is no ways in the key, as a
cause, but as a sign only, effectually signifying of it: for the Persons
contracting, and considerations and ends wherewith they contract, are
sufficient of themselves, to cause this effect.

Secondly, that all holy Mat. 21.25.
John's Baptism, was it from heaven or men? it was not from men, but God. None
can make a sign, or pass by seal that which is not in his power to bestow;
Now grace, both of illumination and sanctification, are not in the power of any
Creature, and therefore he cannot institute signs, which shall signify the
conferring of these things, which are above his compass; and as none but Kings
can appoint a seal of estate, which shall sign in the Commonwealth: so none
in the Church, but Christ himself the Lord and King, can appoint a seal,
which shall signify ought in the Church. Beside, to be a Teacher of my
understanding, and an exciter of my devotion, are such effects which require
virtue inherent or assistant, to those things which should be causes of them:
but no Sacramental sign of man's devising (such as in the Church of Rome are
many) has any virtue in it: for then it must come from that word put ^oorth in
the Creation, and so things natural should have a force, communicated to them,
of teaching supernatural, or else by Gods after institution: such we read not
any, but of Baptism, and the Lords supper only; Or by the Churches
impetration. But this cannot be: for Prayer obteineth those effects of things,
to which they serve, by Gods Creation and institution: but not any creating or
new conception of things, to supernatural uses. For then the Church might
ask, that this or that Creature, should be made a Sacrament unto her. But she
should pray without all warrant of Gods will in such a case.

The last Circumstance is the end, which is our further assurance, touching
Christ with his benefits bestowed on us. Where consider first the security
they give us. Secondly, the things they secure to us, Though Gods word be true,
and cannot be made more true in it self: yet it may be made more credible to
me. For there are two things which make a thing spoken, more credible. 1. The
quality of the Person speaking. 2. The manner of speaking or affirming any
thing. God who is truth nakedly speaking any thing, it is presently credible to
my belief: but if God do not simply speak, but solemnly swear: yea not
swear a thing, but set a seal; the same thing, though it cannot be more
true: yet it is become more credible. For look as when a sure man promises us
any thing, we do believe it: yet if he swear it, give us his hand and seal
for it, it does much increase our confidence: so it is here.

2. Now the thing it does secure us, is Christ, his benefits, Ioh 4.10
that gift of God. As within the outward shell of a nutte or such like, which
we see, there is a kernel, which we cannot see; so these signs have under
them, invisible graces. Look as the seals of men are nor set to blankes, but
to testamentary evidences, wherein inheritances, legacies, lands, etc. are
conveyed: so Gods seals are set to his testament, to confirm all that which
Christ the Testator has given unto us; Now himself and his benefits, are that
which he leaves us: seeing then these are pictures and seals, even assuring
Christ himself to us: how should we delight to be in the view of these, and
to attend on the receiving of them.

Loving wives are desirous often, when their Husbands travel to have the
pictures of them. When great Persons do begin to make love to some great
Princess in another land, they send them their picture. Thus Christ our
Husband now absent in heaven, and making love to us in earth, does allow us
these Sacraments, as his pictures, which looking on by the eye of Faith, we
may see him. Again had we but any confirmation of Land, to be passed by seal,
how would we wait on the hour appointed to such business? how much more here,
where Christ and all good things in Christ, are assured to us?

Secondly, let us rest in the use of these seals God has appointed. For all
signs of men's devising, cannot teach or help devotion, but delude, and breed
superstition. Beside, to do any thing which does derogate from the seal of
Kings, and their prerogative therein, we know how dangerous it is, in
Commonwealth: so certainly, to join seals with Gods seals in his Church,
is a point will hardly be answered.

QVEST. III.
3. Q. HOw many Sacraments are there?

A. Two: Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.2.3.4.

The Scripture does know, but 2. Sacraments which are seals of Christ, and his
benefits given to every Believer. 1 Cor. 12.13.
We have all of us been baptized, all been made to drink etc. And the Supper
of the Lord is called Luke 22.20.
the Covenant, as the Antitypes under the Law were but two, Circumcision and
the Passover. There are no visible seals bearing witness on earth, 1 Ioh. 5 6.8.
but water and blood: as some would have the water and blood which issued from
the side of Christ to presignifie; Man in his Creation was holy without sin,
and having a power, to have continued unto life, and a power also to fall away
and become guilty of death. Hence it comes to pass, that being without sin,
and a son of God by Creation, he needed no Baptism as we do, but one
Sacrament to assure him of life, if he obeyed: another to threaten death unto
him if he transgressed. We being now sons of Gods wrath, dead in sin by
nature, we have need of a Sacrament which may seal our Regeneration: and
this being the privilege of one that is borne of Christ, that he cannot sin
to death, we need no Sacrament of Commination, as Adam did; but such a one as
may assure us, of our being fed to life, and preserved through Christ.

five more, but without warrant of Gods word, or reason either. For there is
nothing required, to perfect our being, but it may be found in these two,
nothing for perfecting us in holy use of our Callings, but by these it is
performed; Is meat only to preserve the state of a babe from decaying: does it
not increase him, and bring him to that natural strength, which does belong to
his being? So does the Supper not only keep us, where Baptism leaves, but
bring us on and make us grow to strong men in Christ.

2. If we by sin grow sick, the grace of Baptism seals the Covenant in
which all our sins, as well to come as past, were forgiven us: so that we
need but repentantly, and faithfully to look thereto. 3. If bodily sick to
death, we need no unctions, to make us pass more easily; what will make us
better appointed for death, then our having received him, Ioh. 11.25.
on whom who so believes, shall live though he die. Lastly, these two, as they
give us grace, to perfect us in our Christian being, so also to sanctify us,
in the use of our several states and calling. 4. For the same grace which
makes a man holy does make him use his ministry holily. 5. The same grace
which makes a man godly and temperate, will make him being married use
marriage godlily and temperately. We need no Sacraments of Orders or
Matrimony: but as Salomons idle person, who would not work that he ough, Pro.
6.13
yet would speak with his feet, and abound in that he ought not: so these
Papists, when powerful preaching was laid aside, then they grew to multiply
their Sacraments and Sacramentals; not to name particular ends, in the doctrine
of all these five which are annexed to enlarge, the Episcopal fringe, as
confirmation, to dignifie the Priesthood, as Orders and unction; to uphold
shriuing work, and satisfactions, as Penance; to draw to their Consistories
all causes and Questions matrimonial, as marriage.

QVEST. IV.
4 Q. WHat does baptism assure us of?

A. That we being engraffed into Christ, are washed from our sins by his
blood, and borne anew unto God.

First observe, that Baptism is a sign and seal of our union with Christ:
thence follows our Communion in those effects following. Romans 6.5.
By Baptism we are said to be engraffed into Christ, and Gal. 3.27.
so many as are baptized, are said to put on Christ: not that the first union
is made in Baptism, for it does presuppose a for union by faith, which it does
more manifest and augment. For look as those who by some former absolute
contract, have joined themselves as man and wife, may yet in solemn matrimony,
receive a more manifest and consummate conjunction, then formerly they had: so
we by faith being one with Christ, come by Baptism given and received, to be
more manifestly and fully conjoined with him. Look as the King, when by his
word he grants this or that, he does then first bestow the thing, which yet
by passing his seal, he does more fully and securely give, then before it was:
so it is with God giving by his bare word of promise to the believer, then more
solemnly by his seal, Christ and his benefits. The union of Baptism does ever
presuppose that union which is through faith, whether persons have faith before
baptizing, as Act. 10.2.4 47.
Cornelius, and Romans 4.11.
Abraham the father of the faithful before circumcision, or whether their
faith be to be wrought in them afterward, as it is in most infants.

For as men may by deed and seal, conueigh lands as well to heirs which
shall be borne, as to these which are already brought forth: so may God give
by his Testament and seal, Christ and his benefits, as well to such as already
have faith, as to such as shall come to have faith, and so be begotten in
their season, for Ioh. 1.12 13. 1 Ioh. 5.1.
he that believes is borne of God.

Well then, let us get faith,

2 That our Baptism does assure us, that in Christ the guilt of our sin is
taken away, and the power of it mortified. Though sin be in us, yet the guilt
which is a property binding to punishment may be removed. A Be may remain a
Be, and yet have the sting taken away; yea, the power of sin is so subdued,
that though it may exercise us, it shall not reign over us. Look as through
the first Adams death, this natural life is weakened much, even then when it
seems most lively: so in Christ's death, into which we are implanted through
Baptism, the life of sin receives such a deadly wound, that in virtue it is
more dead then alive, even when it seems most lively, moving to our no small
disturbance. Look as clothes soul and filthy, when they are rinsed and dipped
in water they wax clean and have filth removed: so our souls defiled with
sin, being by Baptism so set into Christ, that his blood is sprinkled on
them; yea, they dipped and bathed in it, and having those pure waters of the
Spirit (which come through the merit of this blood) powered out upon them, they
come to be densed from all defilement.

3 Lastly, that by Baptism we are assured of our regeneration in Christ.
Baptism is called Tit. 3.5.
a lauer of regeneration: things thoroughly washed, they are not only freed
from their spots and stains, but are brought forth white, and new as it were:
thus Baptism washing us, in the true fountain of Israel, the blood of Christ,
it does not only remove our spots, but make us new all over: the blood of
Christ obtaining the Spirit, which works not only mortification, but which
causes also a renouation in us. Beside Baptism Rom 6.4.5
griffeth us as it were into Christ dying and rising; Now a wild sience set
into a natural stock, the stock has not force only to remove the wild
nature, but to give it a new nature fertile of good fruit; so we ingraffed
into Christ, do both loose our sinful nature, and become renewed throughout.

Object. But how does Baptism, or sprinkling of water regenerate?

Answ. God himself,

Let us then labor to which God has by his seal of Baptism, assured us of.
If a man should by his writing and seal warrant to us lands, moneys etc. we
would know these things, and the right and title we had to challenge them from
him: but alas our Baptism i, a dormient, sleeps by us, as if it were such
a matter, we could make no use of. If our Gossips (as we call them) did give
us anything for our children in token of their good wills at the Baptizing of
them, we know it, and can teach our children to know it. But what God our
Father there gave us, none inquireth. Again we see what we must chiefly
look unto, even this which by Baptism is confirmed. Men esteem their Lands
and Moneys, more then their writings: they care not for them further, then they
respect the other: thus we should stand chiefly on making sure, that we have
fellowshippe with Christ, and his benefits: not boast on Baptism, and yet
never heed these things which are all in all. For Gal. 6.15
Circumcision is nothing (so by proportion) Baptism avails not, but a new
Creature.

We see there are many Romans ^.25.
Circumcision becomes uncircumcision, where the Law is not obeyed. So where
there is no labor to die to sin, and live to righteousness: Baptism
becomes no Baptism. Perjured covenant Breakers who thus walk, how will they
answer it to God, when men are ashamed to show their heads to men, if they
keep not touch with them, according to covenant?

QVEST. V.
5. Q. WHat does the Lords Supper assure us of?

A. It does further assure us, that Christ is given to us, to be our spiritual
nourishment, to everlasting life, 1 Cor. 10.16.17. and 11.25.26.

Observe 2 things. First that the bread and wine, are signs and seals,
exhibiting Christ broken with sorrows and shedding his blood for us. Mat.
26.26.
Take eat this is my body; Mat 26.28.
so also of the cup. 1 Cor. 10 16.
Is not the bread we break, the communion of Christ's body? For look as when
we give a sealed evidence, or effectual sign of any thing, we say we give
the things sealed and signified: because we who give these, do with giving
these, immediately give the things signified and sealed by them, as for
example. When going about to give the possession of our house, we give a key
and say, take it, here is possession; or when holding out an evidence sealed,
declaring and confirming our gift of house or land, we say, here take it, here
is my house or land, it is thine; Thus Christ immediately from himself, giving
us his body and blood and the benefits of his Covenant by Signs, says take
these, they are to thee my body and blood, that is, effectual pledges,
together with which I give thee my self, as men with the forenamed signs give
earthly matters. We must not therefore think that when Christ says of the
bread, This is my body, he speaks as we do, when we say of a box
containing in it, an Electuary or Medicine, here is the medicine; or when
holding out a purse, we say, here is the money. For things signed and sealed,
are never thus locally contained in their signs and seals; Neither yet that
Christ is in the bread and wine, as an effect is in the isntrumental cause of
it, as if I reaching out my instrument to one should say, take this, here is my
music; For then should the Sacrament of Christ's death, become an instrumental
cause of Christ's death and Passion, for this is the chief thing signified by
this Sacrament. Besides that, no signs in all the old Testament, were ever
isntrumental causes of that they signified.

Object.

Answ. An absurd inference; our Ministry excels theirs, yet it has no more
virtue in it self, then theirs: for 1 Cor. 3.7.
he that planteth and waters is nothing. Signs instituted in remembrance of
things forepassed, cannot be isntrumental causes of those things signified;
But the Lords Supper was instituted for remembrance of Christ's death, and Gods
Covenant stricken with us in it, which are forepassed; They cannot therefore
properly be causes of these things signified in them. That which is a
Creation, no isntrumental cause can be used in it; But our regeneration and
sanctification, is a Creation; We are created in Christ unto good works;
Every isntrumental cause, does confer some essential force to the effect,
which the principal has not in him, as an instrument musical yields sound,
which is material and essential to harmony, though the Musician cannot by
himself effect it; But there is no essential force to our sanctification,
which is not in God the Sanctifier of us: therefore no creature can be a
proper isntrumental cause. Again man should baptize with the Spirit
immediately, and washing of water should save: Finally, outward things should
be able to make clean, and to defile a man spiritually, which all the
Scripture denies.

Seeing then God does by these Signs and Seals, give us his Son, how great
is his love, Romans 8.32.
will he not with him give us all things also?

work whether a man awake or sleep, if the body be not obstructed; They are a
visible word, Heb. 4.2.
which does nothing further then it is mingled with Faith.

2. Mark, the end of this Sacrament is, that we may be assured of Christ's
dwelling in us, as our nourishment to eternal life. The end of the first, was
to set out Christ, as a Lover of regeneration; the end of all this is to set
him forth, as the perfect refection of us to life everlasting both of soul
and body: hence it is that he, even whole Christ crucified, is first set down
under the shadow of bread, then of wine also, because the intent is to set him
forth, as having the fulness of nourishment, so as in him we are complete.
Adam had his tree of life, we have ours also; Wherefore we must think of
these two Elements, as parts making up one Sacrament, whose nature can be no
more in the one of them, then the nature of man can exist in a soul, if the
body were removed. For look as bread and meats are no perfect nourishment,
because there being a double natural appetite the one of hunger, the other of
thirst, they satisfy the one only, and not the other: so if Christ be set
forth in bread only, the cup removed, he is not by the outward sign set
forth, as one in whom we may be perfectly refreshed.

he is the bread that strengthens our heart, the wine that rejoices them,
hunger and thirst both he satisfies, he is our Mannah, the water issuing from
the rock, to refresh us in the desert: yea to everlasting life will he
nourish soul and body. The Ioh. 6.49 50.
Fathers did eat Mannah and died, but he that eats him spiritually and
sacramentally shall live for ever. For though the body eat not Christ, but
this mouth of Faith in the soul only, yet this eats for soul and body, as
the mouth of the body feeds for all the members of it. If great ones inuit
their inferiors against good times, O how gladly do they resort: but God
inuiteth us to a feast Esa. 25.6.
of fat things, and fined wines, of such food as will quicken us, and expel
death that shall never prevail over us; yet few sharpen their appetites, that
they may come with devotion, to these heavenly dainties.



1 Cor. 11 26.
So often as you eat this bread. So it was in the primitive Church. That
Passover indeed was but once a year administered, because it might not be
offered, but in Jerusalem, where all the Males (in a sort) of the kingdom
could not resort without difficulty.

QVEST. VI.
6. Q. WHo makes the right use of Sacraments?

A. He that is thereby confirmed in faith daily, and in newness of life, Act.
20.11.12. Romans 2.25.

The Sacrament is put sometime, for the whole sacred thing which stands of
the outward sign and invisible grace. So Baptism is put sometime universally,
for the outward washing of water, and inward washing of the Spirit; Thus the
Sacrament here asked of contains both the bread and wine, and Christ
signified by them; Now as there are two things: so they have 2. diverse ends.
The end of the Sacraments, as they are strictly taken for signs, distinguished
from the thing signified, is (as infallible signs) to assure us, that God,
has, does and will work in us, the things signified by them. The end of the
thing signified, is to give nourishment, and to make us take increase in the
divine nature, which is already begun in us; he then must needs use the
Sacrament aright, who attaineth these ends, to which, both it and the thing
signified by it, does serve. For as in every thing else, we have the use of
it, when we attain the end, to which it conduces. We have the use of a
knife, when now we cut with it, as is behoofull: I have the use of a pen now,
when I have written with it; so I have the use of the Sacrament, when now I
have attained, these ends to which the Sacrament is serviceable, by Gods
institution. Now this end is the assuring to my faith, of his giving to me,
and working in me, whatsoever the Sacrament seals: that look as I have the
use of a sealed evidence, when now I am more fully secured, touching all thing
therein couenanted: So I have the use of Gods seal put to his covenant, when I
am assured touching all things therein promised. Now because God does together,
with confirmation of our faith, effect a further exhibition, of the things more
fully believed (for there cannot be a more full apprehending, without some
thing more fully apprehended) hence it follows that he has the right use of
the Sacrament, as it conferreth the thing signified (that is, as by it Christ
the food of our souls is further bestowed) who does grow up in newness of
life by it. For look as he has the right use of bodily meat and drink, who
does out-grow sickness, find himself eased against the diseasments of
wind, phlegm or such like matters, which before meat taken did trouble him,
who does feel his Spirits refreshed, himself more able to go about
business, his strength and stature increased: even so he, who after Christ
received, does feel, as by a medicinable aliment, his infirmities somewhat
weakened, who finds his joy, and comfort, and peace enlarged, his graces
strengthened, the divine nature increased in faith, hope, love, religion,
repentance, justice, temperance, sobriety, has the right use of this
spiritual food. Meats and drinks have an alteratiue property in them; Let us
be cold of complexion, use of hot meats and drinks will by little and little
change our costitution, and make us hot of cold: so on the contrary; thus if we
receive Christ, as a food into our souls, we cannot but become more and more
Christian-like unto him, such a force being in him, that he will assimulate us
to himself.

aquavitae into a dead man's mouth, it will not move him, nay some turn the
grace of Christ, as an occasion of wantonness and further presuming; like as
spiders suck poison from that which the Be turns to honey, and like filthy
vessels, pervert all things within themselves, to their further damnation. We
have too many Christians like the kine in Pharaohs dream: It would be a
grief to us, should we not find, that our bodily sustenance did thrive with
us, but we should feel our selves, as weak and ill-liking after it as before:
but to take this food without fruit, should much more afflict us.

QVEST. VI^
7 Q. WHo obtain this benefit by the Lords Supper?

A. Such as come with knowledge, faith, repentance and love. Acts 8.37. 1 Cor.
11.28.

Earthly food will not nourish and strengthen the body, if the stomach, liver,
etc, be not well affected and prepared for the receiving, altering and
distributing of it: so our souls must come qualified, as here is described,
before they can have benefit by Christ. 1 We must have knowledge, as of our
misery, Christ, says: so of the Sacraments in special. Look as men before
they receive deeds, which others deliver sealed to them, they know what is
contained in them: what it is that the seal is set too: so here our soulr
cannot receive the covenant sealed and delivered to us, till we know what it
is, which God does under seal pass unto us. Beside, as it is a feast, we
love light in our bodily feasting, and to see what it is we feed on: so this
eye of knowledge is necessary, even in spiritual feasting.

2 We must bring forth faith, that is required: faith toward this grace which
the word of God does reach us with the seal; For it is not having faith, but
the new exercise of faith, which makes us worthy Receivers; The Corinthians 1
Cor. 11 32
had faith, 1 Cor. 11 29 30.
yet received not the grace of the Sacrament. Look as a man may have a hand,
yet if when a thing is reached forth to him, he do not put it out, nothing
is received: so we may have this hand of faith, yet if we when God reaches
us the body and blood of his Christ, do not then awaken it, to lay hold on the
grace God offers, we shall go away without receiving it: or look as at a
feast, though we have a mouth, if we will not then open it, and take down the
sustenance before us, we shall return empty: so though we have this mouth of
faith, yet if we do not open it to God now offering to feed us, we shall not
(...) a crumm of that gra^ (...) Sacrament offreth.

^ We must come with Repentance. For as hunger, and sallads of sower tart
herbs, or other sharp things, which give a spurr to the appetite, are good in
these earthly banquets: so is Repentance and the sower meditations of it, the
best sauce, to make this meat relish with us.

4. With love to Christ. Look as earthly meats do no good, when there is not
a natural heat, to work on them: so our heavenly sustenance.

This love is that supernatural heat, which makes us receive him with
profit; What is fitter then love, for those who come to a common love feast;
What more seemly then unity, for such as make protestation, that they are all
one in Christ?



QVEST. VIII.
8 Q. WHAT is Prayer?

A. A craving of those things at Gods hand which we want, and a thanking of him
for those we have, Math. 6.9 and Luke 17.15.16.17.

Prayer is a large word, comprehending all that speech, which the faithful
soul has with God, in way of Petition or thanksgiving; for to these 2.
branches, the Confession of sin, which we make in Prayer may be reduced; the
end whereof is, that sometime by laying open our misery, we may move God to
mercy, that again otherwhile we may by this amplify his kindness to us, so
undeserving in regard of the benefits bestowed on us.

We are to mark in this description 4. things:

1. That it is said to be a craving, this is a fitter word then asking. We
may ask that is due debt to us, but the things we crave, we renounce all
other titles, and fly wholly to his bounty and kindness, at whose hands, we
beg and entreat.

2. Mark, that it is a begging of God.

3. That it is a begging of things behoofull.

4. A craving joined with thanksgiving.

When Superiors will have Inferiors do any thing, they may lay their
command on them, and so bind them to it, by reason of that obedience, which
is owing to them from their Inferiors: but when Inferiors would have this or
that from Superiors, whom they cannot by any means bind to them (for the
Inferior has no authority or power over his Superior) then they fall to
entreaty, not moving them other^^se then from hence, because it is fit their
bounty and rich estate should supply their indigencie, when they are humbly
entreated. Thus Daniel and all holy ones have come to God, Dan. 9.8.9.19.
not for our sakes, to us shame and confusion belongs, but for thy name sake,
thy mercy sake, do thus and ^hus. For indeed in that we beg any thing, we
confess we have no title in justice to it, and that it is most free for him
we entreat, to give it or not to give it, if he please. Wherefore let us come
to God, without conceit of merit, whereby we may in justice claim any thing
from him. For if I think a thing due to me, and my own by right, I cannot
beg it unfeignedly, as I would do a thing which is not mine, further then the
bounty of him I entreat, shall bestow it on me. We must come like the poor
Publican, not like Luke 18.11.14.
the Pharisie in Prayer; and the learned in the popish School do
acknowledge, that it is best in prayer, to lay aside all thought of our own
merit, and only to fly to mercy in Christ.

Secondly, Prayer is a begging of God. Look as nature teaches our children,
to come to their Parents for every thing, not to servants in house with them:
so grace teaches Gods children Romans 8 15. Gal 4 6.
to cry Abba Father, and resort to him in all necessity; All other Persons are
Persons rather praying to God, then Persons to be prayed to, as God. (...).
^.^5.
Call on ^ee in trouble. And look as the calling of creatures to witness any
thing, is not a lawful oath, but only the calling of God, as who is infinite
in knowledge and truth it self, who cannot deceive or be deceived: so asking
creatures to do any thing, is not a religious Prayer; But coming to God
only, as who is the all-sufficient God, Iam. 1.17.
the Father of light, from whom every good gift descends, the Almighty GOD
who can irresistibly effect whatsoever is good for us.

Again, when Prayer does not simply ask things, but ask them as means
making for Gods glory and our salvation, and when no power but God can make
Inferior things conduce to the glory of his name and the increase of grace in
us: hence it is manifest, we cannot ask any thing religiously, but of God
only; Even as a natural man cannot desire any thing according to nature which
does not pertain, to the continuing and well being of nature: so a spiritual
man cannot out of grace desire any thing religiously, which does not someway
profit to the conservation and perfection of that grace which is in him.

Wherefore let us come only to God,

Thirdly, That the things we ask must be behoofull for us: for look as if
we call God to witness any thing not true, we make him a Liar so much as in
us is: so if we ask God to give us any thing not good, we make him an Author
of evil things. True it is as children long sometimes for knives and other
things harmefull, so do we: but this is a sinful weakness, and our
heavenly Father will not hear us in such requests. Christ lays down in that
form of Prayer which we call the Lords Prayer, the things we are to ask,
whether they be good things spiritual or corporal, or deliverance from evils
already upon us, or from such evils into which we may possibly fall, if he
should not preserve us.

more will God? 1 King. 3.10.13.
how did Salomons request please God, and how was it answered?

Lastly observe, that we must as well remember to be thankful for that we
have, as to beg that we have not. We would not that eaten bread should be
forgotten; that men should not keep in mind the good turns we have done
them: it is the end God aims at, Ps 50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise my name. Look as waters come from
the sea, and go into it again: so all good things come from God to us, and
should go back to him, by thanksgiving from us. Look as the seed the earth
has comes from us, and returns to us in the fruit which it brings: so
all Gods blessings are seed sown, in the soil of our hearts, which return
to God again in the fruit of thanksgiving. It is not enough to be thankful,
but we must give thanks; which requires speech to the party himself; yea we
must study how to answer the Lord, Psa. 116.12.
What shall I do for all his benefits to me?

Fourthly and lastly, without Faith God cannot do us good; for look as things
promised by one man to an other, cannot be of force and take effect, till the
person to whom they are promised, come to them, accepting and resting on them:
so Gods promises which he has made of all good things we seek for, they
cannot take effect, till by faith we accept and rest on them. It is against the
nature of things promised, to be put on us further, then we trust to them, and
accept of them.

Let us not then be like Luke 17.17.18.
those Lepers,

QVEST. IX.
9. Q. WHen do men pray aright?

A. When they pray only to GOD in the name of Christ, asking things lawful to
his glory, with Faith, feeling, and love, Psalm. 50.14. Col. 3.17.

The conditions of Prayer, 1. respect the Person to whom, to God. 2. In, and
through whom, in Christ. 3. The things asked. 4. The Psa. 65.2
that all flesh should come to him in their several necessities, abasing
themselves in confessing their indigencie, exalting him, as with whom is
fullness of good things, and uncontrollable power, to effect for us what ever is
good, according to his own pleasure. Now we must come to God only through
Christ. Look as it, as unable to perform that satisfactorie obedience, in
which as a foundation, the impetratiue force of Christ's intercession leans.
For all kind of power, to impetrate all ministerial offices about us, all
power of secondarie executing things for us, all perfection of holiness, these
things are for degree in Saints living, and cannot be foundations which may
bear this Office of Mediation twixt us and God.

Charles, if we had any Request to him, would we wish any other, to mediate
for us? They that leave the grace offered them in Christ and go to other
Saints, Ion. 2.8.
forsake their own mercy.

Observe thirdly, We must seek things lawful to Gods glory. To the first, I
speak something in the last answer. Look as we would not come to any man,
with a request which would tend to his reproach if he should yield it to us:
so we must not come to God with any Requests, the performance whereof may not
be to his glory. Honor with men is the spur of all their actions, a man of
honor will not do that, which shall redound to his discredit, or not be at all
to his credit: much less will God grant us, and effect for us, those things
which are not for his glory.

4. We must come Iam. 1.6.
with Faith, not doubting Heb. 4.16
. Let us enter with confidence, hope well and ever have well. For look as men
count it great treachery, not to be true and do their utmost, for those that
trust to them: so God fails not a believing heart. Beside the suite will be
cold there, where there is no confidence to speed.

5. With feeling. Hungring desire after, yea care and thought, about the thing
we seek: desire of a thing with out word uttered to GOD with mind or voice is
no Prayer: speech to God without inward desire, is but a shadow without
substance. If we find men ask for fashion, not much caring for the thing they
entreat, we answer them accordingly: so does God.

6. Lastly, we must have love to God, reciprocal love in Persons makes suits
successful. Look as men readily yield request to such as they know are their
loving friends: so God if he see we love him, and are friends of his, as he
Esa. 41.8
called Abraham, he will not refuse us in any thing good for us. 2. Again love
to our brethren and fellow servants. If one have suite to some great Person, it
is no small furtherance, to have the love of the people that are about him, of
the servants in family that are respected by him: so it is with us, to be in
loving league with all the Lords servants, is no small advantage to us. 3. In
love of the things we pray for, otherwise if we have no love to them, we
should but use words for form sake, and be indifferent men without all
feeling, and more near touch of the things desired.

Let us then thus come to God through Christ, whose mediation will make our
Prayers as a sweet incense pleasing to God. Let us have care what we ask,
and to stir up our faith in asking, by setting the promises of God, his
Commandments the gracious nature of God, the goodness of the things we seek
before our eyes. For the more we know him, the better we shall trust him. and
the more we trust him, the more he will work for us. Let us feelingly come to
him, setting an edge on our desires, we must consider our wants, the
discomforts attending on them, comforts kept from us, how happy we should be,
were they supplied in the things we want. Thus will our Prayers be like
keene-headed arrows, which will pierce heaven through the feeling feruency
that is in them. Finally, let us get love. With what heart can we come to God,
if we are not in loving league with him and his? Coming thus we shall be
heard directly, or indirectly: as a Physician does not hear his Patient in
that he would, yet hears him in taking occasion to do another thing, more
conducible to his health: so God always hears his, if not just according to
their will, yet as most makes for their salvation.

QVEST. X.
10. Q. WHat be the private means?

A. Reading and Prayer, alone and with others, instructing our families,
thinking upon good matters, admonishing and comforting one another, and
watching over our own ways according to the word, Genesis 24.63. and 18.19. Dan.
92. etc. Luke 21.34. Heb. 10.24. Psalm. 119.9.

Reading is a help to godliness, not simply necessary, but behoofull that we
may increase more easily and fruitfully therein. Ioh 5.39
Search the Scriptures: Deu. 17.18. Ioh. 1.8.
You shall have the books of the Law: Deuteronomy. 6.9.
Thou shall write the Law on the posts of thy doors. These precepts do inioine
it, as a thing which wants not his force for our good. Look as those who can
read their Fathers wills, Evidences, and other writings, have a great advantage
to know them over an other has, who cannot read at all: so it is no small
furtherance, when we can read this Will and Testament, which Christ has left
us. Besides, look as men must get provision of meat and drink, before they
can put it into mouth, chew it and digest it: so the soul must by reading
fetch in as it were, a new provision of heavenly food, before we can have what
to think on, what to chew by meditation, what to direct and excite our care by
in practice and conversation.

Wherefore let us make conscience of this. Look as every man does grow cunning,
in that wherein he uses to read often, if in Cronicles he becomes an Historian,
if in Hearballs he gets the knowledge of Simples: so shall thou with frequent
reading Gods word, increase in the knowledge of his will, and in good
conscience also, if thou do reverently exercise thy self in it. We cannot
read say some: Lament it in your selves, do for your souls as in earthly
things. If there be a clause in thy lease, or in any matter concerning thee,
which thou caust not read, thou will get it copied, forth, and desire others
that can, to read it to thee: so thou should get thee a new Testament, and
entreat others to read before thee, that so thou may supply this defect.

Observe secondly, private Prayer is an exercise, much helping us forward,
whether we do it apart from others, or with others, whether more solemnly
using forms of words before God, or by eiaculation only. Prayer private in any
of these kinds much avails. If one who talks with a good man, is much the
better for it, how much shall the soul be bettered, which does accustom it
self to talk with God from day to day. For when Christ will have us pray
daily for temporal things, how much more is it the will of God, that we
should pray from day to day, and seek his grace in regard of things
spiritual. Look as it is with earthly Subjects, they who see the King and
have liberty of speech with him only, when he does show himself a broad to
his people assembled, they get nothing so much, as those who are daily about
the King, who possess his ear, and are still soliciting their further
aduancements: thus in heavenly matters, he who has private access to God, and
has liberty to solicit him with new Petitions from time to time, such are
most exalted and enriched with spiritual graces.

We must not then think it is enough to pray at Church as if Gods public
service did justle forth his private:

Observe thirdly, that mutual Col. 3.16. Heb. 3.13. and 10.25.
bid often to teach and exhort one another. Look as a little light, when it is
joined to another makes a great light: thus two of mean knowledge meeting
together, and joining light as it were to light, their knowledge comes to be
increased. While we teach any thing we know, we both do good to others, and
imprint the thing we teach more fully in our selves; neither must we think it
enough that Ministers teach: for as the great lights of the Sun and Moon, take
not away the necessity of candle light, no more does the light of teaching
public, make this candle light of our souls, this domestical light of
mutual instruction unneedful.

How lewd are they then who will not be taught any thing, who will tell a man
that shall teach them, he loves to hear himself speak, leave them to
themselves, they know what they have to do, and others who will not teach any
thing? What serves Mr. Parson for, and Mr. Schoolmaster, it is not a thing
belonging to our coat; yea some who will not let fall a word of instruction
themselves, will yet if a Minister teach not, cry out; O he is a dumb fellow,
he teaches not, they see the fault of it here: but why are not thy lips, Pro.
13.14.
a fountain of living waters, Pro. 15.4
a tree of life? why art thou a dumb Christian, when God has commanded thee,
to be an instructor of others?

4. That thinking on good things, much helps us forward; even as looking
breeds loving: so when we by thought of mind, look upon good matters,
sometime there is a love of them bred in us. Psalm. 1.2.
The blessed man's meditation is in the Law of God continually. Meditating on
the law of God, does bring on the doing of it: Mic. 2.1.2.
even as evil thoughts bring on evil actions. For the thought is as the
seed, and conception of al our actions. Now look as after conception, there is
a travel to bring forth, and a birth in due season: so when the soul by
thought has conceived, presently the affections are tickled and excited; for
the affections kindle on a thought, as tinder does, when a spark lights on
it; The affections moved, the will is stirred and inclined; for as a ship is
carried with winds, so is the will with affections, the will bent to a thing,
as the Queen and supreme Gouernesse, commands al inferior powers to
execute what the thought suggested, the affections seconded, and her self at
length accepted.

Wherefore let us draw our thoughts, to those matters; 2 Cor. 3.5.
not think a thought: but let us look to him, who is ready to work it in us.
If we try it, it will seem tedious for our hearts being like children playing
abroad, even as it is a pain to them to be kept in and held hard to any thing:
so it is to our hearts, to be taken up from their rouing, and held to
considerations of heavenly nature; But use will make it easy, and the sweetness
which at length we shall taste in contemplation, will make it delightful: the
rather do it, because though another cannot know thee, yet thou must know thy
self by thy thoughts; as evil thoughts will argue an evil heart: so good
thoughts argue a good one; for these cannot be subject to hypocrisy, as words
and deeds are, which sometime come more from the respect of the Creature, then
of the Creator. Thou must not think of thought, as a matter free to thee.

That admonition is a great help. If a man's will were perfectly good, then
instruction would serve the turn, but his will being dull and backward, he
needs admonition. Heb. 10.24.
Consider one another, to provoke to love. Look as dull Creatures must not only
be showed the way and set into it, but by whips, goades, spurs or such like
instruments driven forward in it: so must the dull hearts of us, by the goades
of well framed admonitions. Beside, admonition is necessary for caution to keep
us back, from running to this or that, which would be perilous: that as wild
Creatures have need of a bridle: so we had need of this bridle of admonition,
for the better holding in of our corrupt natures.

What Christians then are they, every tub stands on it own bottom, they shall
answer for themselves, it may be you will do worse your self: you love to
take on you, and have other men's necks under your girdle; yet should one see
hurt toward their body and state, and not tell them, they would hold him their
enemy for ever: but were thou sound, and not an vlcerous piece of flesh, thou
would let one handle thee by admonition, and not take on so at it, as a thing
intolerable: but as lime will fry when cold water is poured on it: so these
men full of pride and wrath (which is a hellish fire) they are all as hot
coals, let them be never so coldly and gently admonished.

6. Watchfulnes is another Luke 21.34.
Take heed your hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting and cares of this life.
Deuteronomy. 6.11.12.
When you are in houses you builded not, then take heed you forget not the
Lord. Look as it is a great safety to a besieged City, when the watch is well
kept: so is it to us, who have sin, the world, and evil spirits continually
berounding of us; And look as those, who are in a neuter estate for health,
are much helped by watchfulness in diet, and other such regard: so are we,
who are in our souls as neuters, though spiritual, yet in great measure
carnal also.

7. Lastly, mutual comforting Romans 1.11.12.
Paul desired to be with the Romans, to comfort them, and to be comforted of
them. As in civil conversation, we do one give a chearing to another, that
we may the better go through, the variety of businesses and occasions: so we
ought in the spiritual communion also; Even as we cheer one another, by
giving entertainements, such as delight the outward man, and do exhilerate the
heart, in outward manner: so should we seek spiritually, to raise joy one in
another; the outward man battles, when the heart is merry: so when the Spirit
rejoices spiritually the whole man is the better, and comes on the better
for it.

FINIS.

