AN EPITOMIE OF MAN'S MISERY AND DELIVERIE.

IN A SERMON PREACHED ON the third of the Romans, Verse. 23. and 24. by Mr. PAVL
BAYNE.

Hosea 13.9. O Israel, one has destroyed thee; but in me is thine help.

Isaiah 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to
his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Star, under Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in
Pope's Head Alley. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR HENRY BAKER, KNIGHT BARronet, health, honor, and
happiness, from, and in the Lord.
RIght Worshipful, although it be a complaint (perhaps) not causeless, of
too many books penned and printed in these days; yet there is, and ever will
be need of new books, chiefly such as savor of the wholesome doctrine of
Jesus Christ, and set forward that knowledge of the truth which is according
unto godliness. Nay surely, it is no less work of Gods providence, to set
open the fountain of heavenly truth, and to maintain it in a perpetual
current, by the preaching and writing of his faithful servants; then that the
waters of greater rivers, and lesser springs, do run with a continual
stream. For what these are to the earth to water it, that it may be fertile
for men's behoof, and serve their bodily wants; the same are those to Gods
Church to make it fruitful unto the Lord, and relieve the spiritual want of
men's souls. Besides, whereas the muddy and poisonous waters of false and
heretical doctrine, of ungodly and filthy language (like that Revel. 16.3.
noisome bloody sea in which no soul could live and breath the life of God,
does daily bubble, or rather puddle forth with proud and swelling streams,
through the tongues and pens of the devils scribes, or scriblers rather: Is it
not a singular blessing, that the Miraris si no^dum sapientia omne opus suum
impleuit? Nondum tota se nequitia protulit. Senec. not. quaest. lib. 3. c. 32.
fountain of truth does hold its course also, from whence issue the wholesome
waters of life, to correct the poison of the devils puddle, and preserve Gods
people from the deadly contagion of it? Which wholly to damme up, or in part to
restrain, were as great a despite unto Gods people, as was done unto Isaac by
the Philistims, in Genesis 26.15.
stopping up all the wells which Abraham had dug open. What though in new
books we bring to light (specially in points of religion) no new matter? who
(I pray) does cavil at it in living fountains, that they run still the same
waters in color, kind, and taste? we do rather like them so much the better,
counting it a special benefit, that by their perpetual course, as we have
the same waters for kind: so we receive them ever fresh, whereby they are the
more pleasant for taste, and the more wholesome for our use. So it is a
commendation rather than any imperfections in our new writings, that they
propound still the same ancient doctrine touching faith, and good manners, but
happily in some new form and method, whereby they give a fresher and more
pleasant relish to these wholesome waters, and so quicken men's dull and diverse
appetites to the better liking of them, and allure them the more liberally to
drink thereof. I may therefore (I trust, to good purpose) add also this
Sermon of that godly and faithful Preacher Master Paul Bayne, unto some other
books of his, set forth by my self and others, and open (as it were) one
little fountain more, for thirsty souls to draw and drink of. Come to it and
taste who will, I assure him that he shall prove the waters thereof to be
good, sweet, and wholesome. Among water wonders The French Comment on Bartas,
in the third day of his first week, out of Mela.
writers report of two springs, not far distant one from the other in one of
the fortunat Islands; the one whereof does yield deadly waters, and the other
very wholesome: who so drinks of the first, is anon taken and torn with
most painful conuulsions, even unto death; against which, the only sure and
present remedy is to drink of the other fountain there at hand. This
fountain (which here is opened) rises out of Paradise (I mean the
Scriptures) with one head, but in the course thereof it is parted into two
streams. The first giving us the taste of our sinful and damnable state by
nature, is very bitter, and in it self mortal: but the second, refreshing us
with the knowledge of our redemption by Christ, is as the water of life, and
wine of Gods love, most cordial and comfortable. If any desire to be made
whole and sound in soul, he must drink deep of both. The doctrine of our
wretchedness (like unto the Numb. 15.18.
bitter and cursed water in the Law) must search how sound we be within, or
rather make us feel the sick and rotten state of our soul. And then the
doctrine of our salvation by Christ, like the Ioh. 5.4.
waters of Bethesda, must restore us, curing us of our inward rottenness and
outward sores, whereof we are deadly sick. Is cord solus arido Christum
sitit; Sentit miseriam cord qui fracto suam.
We shall never thirst heartily, nor relish fully the sweet waters of life in
Jesus Christ, until we have drunk deep of the salt and bitter waters of our
own misery. Nor will they heal or work upon our souls to health, until
these make our unsound and rotten hearts smart even to death. This fountain (I
grant) is not deep, and like Isa. 8.6.
Shiloah, does run but softly. For it serves rather for Gods Lambs to wade
in, than Elephants to swim in: and it aims more to bring men to a feeling
of their misery in themselves, and true rejoicing in their salvation by Christ,
than to exercise their heads with curious contemplation of schoole-poynts. What
it is (as it is no degenerate offspring of a good man and worthy divine, not
wholly unknown unto you, and sometime entertained by you) I offer it (most
worthy Sir) unto your worships hands. Entertain it (I pray you) according to
your wonted and native courtesy, a virtue (in the eyes of all) eminent in you,
and which (in a special degree) is appropriate unto your self: and derive
some part of that love and kind respect to this orphane Sermon, which sometime
you did show unto the author of it in his life.

For my part, I have sent it abroad with your Worships name wreathed, so to
speak, on the forefront thereof; that wheresoever it does pass, it may
report your singular kindness and good will many ways extended, and yet
continued toward me, and stand up as a witness of my thankful remembrance and
acknowledgement of the same. An office which (I hope) will not be ungrateful
unto you: who although you are far from Themistocles vt Cicero in orat: pro
Archia.
his mind which counted that voice the sweetest music which did most loudly
chaunt his virtues, yet may (without impeachment of your modesty) hear this
imperfect Echo of them, from my ruder tongue, rather stammering thanks from
an honest heart, than glozing with you by a lavish blazing of of your praise.

But not to hold you longer from the Sermon it self, by my courser manner of
discoursing, proceed (Good Sir) to love and countenance learning and virtue;
mor specially, foster piety and religion, hang out from your house (as from an
high watchtower) a banner thereof for example and encouragement to all that
fear God. Esteem virtue the noblest arms of Gentry: as not amiss the
Heathen Iuuenal. Satyr. 8.
Poet, Nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus.
Virtue is only
True Nobility.


And religion the honor and crown of Nobility, as better the Prudent. (...),
in Romano martyr.
Christian Poet, Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros:
Cui quisque seruit, ille vere est nobilis:
Illi rebellis inuenitur degener.
The generous faith of Christ's profession,
Does men ennoble with the best renown:
Who him does serve comes of the noblest blood,
Who him reiects, much baser is than mud.


And in all this take in good part my well meaning heart, who for this, or
whatsoever service I can do, have the full price of my labor to be reputed,

Your Worships most respective in the Lord, I. E.

AN EPITOMIE OF MAN'S MISERY AND DELIVERIE.
Romans 3. verse. 23.24. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God,
and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus.


THere are two things very necessary for every Christian: Two things are
needful to be known.
the one is the knowledge of our selves; the other is the knowledge of the
things that concern our peace. For the first, if we be sinners, that is, such
as feel the burden of sin, Our misery.
and perceive our selves sick thereof: then Christ Jesus is sent to call us,
then he is a physician to us, Mark. 2.17. For the second, Luke 19.42. our
Savior (in most tender compassion) does wish unto Jerusalem but this one
thing, Our delivery.
as that which would make her perfectly h^ppy, namely, that at least she had
known (in that her day) those things which belonged to her peace; intimating
thus much, that herein consists true happiness. Now though nothing is more
needful for us than the knowledge of these things, yet few things are more
neglected. This therefore has given me occasion to speak and discourse of
these words, wherein both these points are sufficiently taught and declared;
that some who have hitherto been strangers in them, may be better acquainted
therewith; others who have set foot in these ways may be helped forward.

But that we may have the more convenient passage to the profitable handling of
these words, it is meet that their coherence be showed, and that what is more
difficult in them be unfolded.

The coherence of the text.
The Apostle in them does make a digression for the preventing of an objection
which some Jew might make against his former conclusion. For the Apostle (in
the verse going before) thus concluding, that all are justified by the
righteousness of faith; some Jew (in regard of the singular preheminences
which they had above other (of which in the ninth of this Epistle we may
read) might stomach the matter, and take it hainously, that they are thrust
into the selfsame order with the uncircumcised Gentiles. Wherefore the Apostle
(to cure all heart-burning in this behalf) does in this verse (by way of
prevention) prove the universality of his conclusion from equal condition of
all, in the contrary thus: All are sinful and condemned, therefore all, both
Jew and Gentile, have need to be justified.

The sense: Gods glory is the image of God.
In the former words there is no obscurity: the latter phrase of being deprived
of Gods glory is somewhat intricate: some taking it to signify the image of
God: but then less should be spoken than was before; yea and that with less
perspicuity; others for glorying or rejoicing before God: but this meaning the
words will not bear, but by violence and constraint. Or rather, the glorius
presence of God.
I rather think the true meaning to be, that all men come short, and are
deprived of the glory of God, that is, the glorious estate wherein the
righteous should have lived for ever, enjoying the presence of God. So Psalm.
73.24. Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.
And the estate which the godly shall enjoy after the labors of this life
outwrastled, is called the state of glory, because the glory of God in the
glorifying of his creature, shall be particularly and especially revealed. So
then the sum of these words is this: All men have sinned, all men by nature
have no part of everlasting life, but are condemned and adjudged to eternal
darkness.

Doct. 1.
The first instruction which we must here take up, is this; that all men by
nature are sinful, All men are by nature sinful.
and stand before the tribunal seat of God guilty sinners. All of us (as the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 53.6.) have turned aside from our childhood like stray
sheep, to those ways which are abomination to God, dangerous, yea deadly to
our selves. To which purpose, Genesis 8.21. the Lord thus speaks, that the
imagination of man's heart is only evil even from his youth up. And David
confesses of himself that he was conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity,
Psalm. 51. Neither can it be otherwise: for all of us came out of Adams
loins, Because they descend from sinful Adam.
and by Adam must needs be begotten in his image, as it is spoken, Genes. 5.3.
that is, not only resembling him in creation, but in corruption. Upon which
ground Job. (chap. 14. verse. 4.) asks who it is that can bring a clean thing
out of filthiness? himself making answer thereunto, that there is none can
do it, it is impossible to be done. I will not labor further to prove this
point: for no man but (generally) does (very contentedly) acknowledge it. I
will only show the same doctrine in the particulars thereof.

We are sinners in three respects.
Every man therefore is a sinner before God in three respects: first, in regard
of sin imputed to him: secondly, in consideration of sin inherent in him:
thirdly, by reason of sin issuing from him.

1. By the sin of Adam imputed to us.
First (I say) all of us are sinners before God, in respect of Adams first
sin, which (after a sort) appertains to us, and is truly ours. All flesh
when Adam sinned, did likewise with him rebelliously transgress. For which
cause the Apostle, Romans 5.12. says, that in him, viz. in Adam we have all
sinned. For Adam being the root of all mankind, we were in him, In whom we
were, and sinned.
and in time, to sprout and shoot out of him: he being our first parent, we
were in his loins, and lineally to descend from him: and so as Leui (in the
seventh to the Hebrews, 9.10.) is said to pay tithe unto Melchisedeck, because
Abraham (from whom Leui did spring in the third generation) yielded that duty:
so all of us being in the loins of Adam (the Lord so decreeing it) whatsoever
he did, that was likewise to be accounted as our deed. Whose sin is
therefore justly charged on us.
Neither is it unjust with God to charge the personal deed of one, on the
heads of us all. For we see in the just proceedings of Princes the same
resembled: who hold guilty, not the traitor only, but the whole blood, race, or
lineage thus tainted, who are therefore justly dis-inherited. And thus much
shall suffice touching the first.

Secondly, 2. By sin inherent in us.
we are all sinners in the eye of God in regard of sin, which (as the Apostle
speaks) dwells in us. And this is nothing else but the lack of
righteousness which originally was in man, and a spiritual leprosy of
iniquity, whereby all his powers inward and outward are infected: but this
point I will explain more manifestly. There was in man not only a natural,
but a spiritual life, which the Apostle calls the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
consisting of a singular knowledge in the mind, Lacking due righteousness.
straightness (as Ecclesiastes speaks, chap. 7.31.) or righteousness in the
will, holiness in the affections. But now man has no light in his mind; as in
the eleventh verse of this Chapter our author cites out of the 14. and 53.
Psalms: In the understanding.
no man understands, that is, no man but by nature he is quite stripped of
all understanding in things spiritual and heavenly: the inward eye lacks
that straightness, which clothing the will (after a sort) should make it to
move after things which are truly good. In the place above named, the Apostle
adds, In the will.
None seeks or enquireth after God, that is, the will has no power whereby
it should move after God, and so by consequent any thing that is truly good.
For as to disallow or approve are functions of the understanding; so to eschew
or prosecute, are faculties appertaining to the will.

So in the third place, In our affections.
all the affections want that holiness that should cause their motions to be
sanctified, and in stead of these excellent graces wherewith we were enriched,
And being corrupt and prone to ill.
corruption and unrighteousness have made seizure of us, and do occupy us
thorowout. In our understanding.
For in our understanding darkness is seated, as the Apostle speaks of the
Ephesians, chap. 5. verse. 8. that before their conversion (whilst yet they
abode in their natural condition) they were darkness it self: having (as it
is chap. 4. verse. 18. their cogitations darkened, so that not the least spark
of spiritual light did shine in them: yea manifold atheistical doubtings and
wauerings, touching God, his truth, justice and goodness are most manifest and
frequent in us, and even possess us: than the which there is not a more
pregnant proof of our gross ignorance in things divine. For how could we
doubt of these things, if with a clear eye of understanding we did see them?
Doubting, howsoever occasionally it be a mother of knowledge, yet in it self
it is the fruit and daughter of ignorance. In our will.
The will is altogether rebellious, as the Apostle further says, All are gone
out of the way. The word, Psalm. 14.3. signifies to give back sturdily, as a
stubburne heifer that refuses to admit the yoke: implying thus much, that the
will of man is become cross and overthwart, neither is, nor can be subject
unto any thing that is good. Take an experiment hereof in our selves. From
this rebellion of the will it comes to pass, that our wicked wills, the
more they are urged with the righteous commandment of God, the more our
vileness and filthiness breaks out and is detected. In our desires and
affections.
So for our lusts and desires, Gal. 5.17. they are against the spirit, that is,
against that law of righteousness which the spirit (as the finger of God) does
write in our hearts. Our joy, our fear, our hope, our love, these are impurely
and vnholily moved in us, being carried after evil and unlawful objects, or
not contained with in due limits for the manner and measure of them. You will
ask how I can tell that man is thus void of all righteousness, and covered with
corruption. Our corruption is discovered. 1. From the Law.
To which I answer, this may be known by the Law. In the 20. verse of this
Chapter it is said, that by the Law does come the knowledge of sin, not only
of that which passes from us in some act, but of that which is still resident
within us. For whatsoever righteousness the Law requires, it does presuppose
in man an excellent conformity, and inward grace suitable and agreeable
thereunto. For the Lord could not in justice have required that of his
creature, which his creature was never enabled to perform.

Now if we lay our selves unto the Law, To which we neither do, nor can
conform.
we shall find that there is nothing in man that does, or can move him to
fulfill the righteousness of it: nay, that that which is in him does draw him
back as which is not, neither indeed can be subject thereunto.

Secondly, 2. By our regeneration.
whosoever are become new men in Christ Jesus may hence perceive it. For this
is a maxim in divinity, that whatsoever is recovered and found of us in
Christ, was first lost in Adam. Wherein what good we receive, was before it
wanting in us.
Find you then, that since you came to dwell by faith in Christ, and he in
you, you have received to know God your heavenly Father? know, that by nature
this knowledge was clean gone. Perceive you, that knowing the Father you come
to this, that you can trust in him for help in trouble, and a supply of all
good both bodily and spiritual? understand then, that by nature there was no
such confidence toward God in you. Come you further upon the knowledge of God
your Father, to love him, his word, and those that are begotten of him? Come
you to delight and rejoice in these? persuade your self that by nature you
were utterly destitute of this spiritual love and joy.

3. By the strife of the flesh and spirit, in which the flesh wholly is
opposite to the spirit.
Thirdly, if thou be a regenerate man, thou may discern it by the strife of
the flesh and spirit in thee. In the which observe if thou can find any good
in thy flesh. Is there any knowledge in it? Nay, do not rather the relics of
the flesh that are in thee, make the word of God (which is in it self most
clear) darksome and obscure? Is there any obedience in it? nothing less. The
law of the members still rebelleth against the law of the mind: so that needs
we must confess with Paul, that in us, that is, in our flesh, in our state of
corruption dwells no good, Romans 7.18. To apply this to our purpose: mark,
what the flesh is, that are we altogether by nature: for we come to be spirit,
not by carnal generation, but by spiritual regeneration. And this leaven of
uncleanness has crept into all the outward members, that the eyes, ears,
lips, tongue, hands, feet, are every where in the Scripture branded for weapons
of unrighteousness. And so let us pass unto the third consideration.

3. By actual transgression.
In the third place, we are sinners in regard of actual transgressions. you
have often heard of sins of omission, and sins of commission. In sins of
omission.
It is worth the marking to see whence these kinds arise: for when we are
altogether deprived of righteousness, it cannot be but that we should omit and
ouerpasse whatsoever is righteous. For where the cause is not, nor ever was,
there the effect must needs be wanting. So on the other side, when the
pollution of sin does wholly occupy the faculties of our mind, soul and
body, whatsoever we think, speak, And of commission.
or do, it cannot but be sinful. For such as the tree is, such must be the
fruit. Neither can figs be gathered on thorns, nor grapes on thistles. Of
which our actual corruption the Scripture every where, and specially very
plainly does accuse man, Psalm. 14.1. They have corrupted their ways, and done
abomination; there is none that does good. What is here meant, but that the
whole way of a natural man, the trade of his life is to work such things as
are abomination, and that whatsoever is truly good, that he altogether
pretermitteth. But this (me thinks) sticks on the stomach, and is not so
easy of digestion as the former. The good which we have by nature
that you can conceive a zeal of some kind of righteousness, that you can
pray, give alms, and do many other good things, and why then should you be
charged with doing no good? Is but appearing.
that all is not gold which glisters: and should not we be as careful, that
in things spiritual we be not deluded with shows in stead of substance? Our
Savior has an heavenly speech concerning these glittering and shining sins
(as one does truly term them) that what is excellent and glorious often with
men, the same is abomination in the sight of God: Luke 16.15. You may think
that you know God, But not spiritual and saving.
but by nature you have not, nor can have any true spiritual knowledge of him.
For as it is 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man is not capable of the things of
God. Only bleare-eyed as we are, and seeing at hand, as Peter speaks, 2.
Pet. 1.9. we can (after a sort) read and conceive what the great books of
heaven and earth teach us concerning him; namely, that there is a divine power,
whose justice, power, and bounty does not obscurely manifest it self in the
administration of the world. And this knowledge stands us in no other stead,
but only to make us inexcusable before God. So we can lend a bodily ear unto
Gods word; but with the ear of the mind we cannot hear: which our Savior
means when he says (to them which heard well enough in respect of the bodily
sense) He that has ears to hear, let him hear, Matthew. 13.9. So we may
receive a kind of zeal after good; but it is like that of the Jews, Romans
10.2. a wrong zeal, in a wrong manner, which leads from Christ, with whom
only is salvation. We can also give alms, and do other good works in our
own conceit, and of other men, but in such a manner as that we cannot stir
an hairs breadth from sin, For want of a clear fountain, viz. a pure heart.
nor get out of the mire wherein we stick. For the Law requires, not only
that the substance of the outward work be conformable thereunto, but that the
fountain whence it springs be pure, Tit. 1.15. And a right end, viz. Gods
glory.
that the end for which it is undertaken (whatsoever it be) be the glory of
God, 1. Cor. 10.31. Now to have a heart purified by faith, is not such a vulgar
thing that all men have it: for all men have not faith, 2. These. 3.2 but these
only to whom it belongs, to whom it is given. Phil. 1.29. To you it is
freely given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also
suffer for his sake. Wherefore when the Scripture does pronounce, that
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 4.24. and that without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. let us not think our penny made worse
silver than it is, when all our works that are done in our natural condition,
are made sins before God, and such as wherewith he is highly displeased, be
they never so goodly and beautiful in the sight of man. The use of this
doctrine shall be jointly handled with the other following: wherefore we will
pass to the second doctrine touching our misery.

And come short] That is, are out of the reach and hope of everlasting life,
and so by consequent are plunged over head and ears into eternal death.

Doct. 2.
From hence then this is our lesson, that by nature we have no part nor portion
in that glorious life, We by nature have no share in life everlasting.
and that everlasting happiness wherewith the presence of Gods glory
replenisheth his for evermore. When Adam had sinned, mark what followed
thereupon, Genes. 3.23.
he was secluded and cast out of the earthly Paradise: in which the estate of
us al is pourtrayed out, and lively represented; namely, that we (being
sinners) are exiled and banished from the Paradise of God, having no interest
in that glorious inheritance. But are under wrath.
Wherefore it is that our Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.3. that we are the children
of wrath, that is, such as to whom appertain those punishments which the Lord
inflicteth in his indignation, and not that life of glory which he gives to
those with whom he is well pleased. Because sinful wretches.
Neither can it possibly be otherwise with us: for the wages of sin is
death, the justice of God so requiring, Romans 6.23. What other pay then can we
challenge or expect, but that of eternal death, who are every way most sinful
wretches, as we have already heard.

Whom heaven cannot admit.
Again, the heavenly Jerusalem is a place so pure, that no unclean thing,
nothing that works any abomination, may have any doings there, Revel. 21.
There is then no place for us therein, who are so besmeared and stained with
sin, that whatsoever we turn our selves unto, is (before the Lord) no
better than abomination. And this in general may suffice touching this
doctrine.

For we are dead. 1. Here spiritually.
But now for as much as we are not (as soon as we come forth of the womb)
cast into hell: know therefore that every one of us are first come short of
this glory in regard of spiritual and heavenly life: of the which there is not
by nature the least spark remaining in us, we being stark dead in our sins:
as (often) the Scripture expressly speaks, Ephesians. 2.1. You were dead in sins
and trespasses. and Mat. 8.22. Let the dead bury their dead. Living men then
who are void of this spiritual life, are no better (in the Lords account) than
dead men, who when they bury others dead as touching this bodily life, it is
as pretty a pageant, as to see one dead corpse carry or accompany another unto
the grave. Yea, let men frolic it, and ruffle in pleasures, and not only live
in their conceits, but live bravely and deliciously; yet even in this condition
they are but dead; and the more thus they live, the further are they plunged
into death, as Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.6. of the widow, Our natural life being
but a shadow of life.
that she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. It is but a
conceit, a name of life, that natural men have: it is but a goodly vizour
drawn over a dead and rotten corpse. Thou have a name that thou live, but
thou art dead, says our Savior to the Angel of Sardi, Revel. 3.1.
Notwithstanding here the Lord does let his Sun to shine, and his rain to
fall on the ungodly, together with his own; and these dead souls enjoy many
documents of Gods favor and bounty; whereby they neither seem, nor indeed
are, so wholly and utterly separate from happiness as they shall be. 2.
Subject to the bodily death
Wherefore there is a second staire, by which all of us (if the Lord succor
not) descend yet further from this blessed life, and this glorious condition,
that is in death, when a dissolution of soul and body comes. Then the body
is committed to the earth, where it feels no good at all, as in life it did,
nor any evil: and the soul is gathered to the spirits of apostate angels, and
reserved to eternal condemnation in chains of darkness, Jude 6. Lastly, 3.
To death eternal.
there is yet one lower descent, in the day of judgment, when as soul and
body at the resurrection (which is both of just and unjust) being reunited,
shall be separated for evermore from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power, 2. These. 1.9. and shall be cast into unquenchable fire,
where the worm of their consciences shall never die, but incessantly vex and
torment them for ever. And so we will in one handle the uses which are to be
made of both these instructions.

Is to furnish us with matter of confession in our prayers.
that they may serve us from week to week, and from day to day, to direct us
in our prayers for the confession of our sins: we have all by rote, and can
utter the words of Saint James, though otherwise than he speaks them: In
many things we sin all, Iam. 3.2. But rare is that man that truly
understands what it is he utters: wherefore let these things be still
present with us, that we may understand fully, and explicate in particular our
corruption and misery, To do it feelingly and particularly.
when we come before the Lord to make our confessions and prayers. For to
confess our selves sinful and miserable, and not know how, and wherein we are
so; surely is nothing else, but with those wicked Jews (whereof the Lord
complains, For slight and general confession is unprofitable.
Isa. 29.) to draw near to him with our lips, while our hearts are far from
him, and to commit that, from which Solomon dehorteth, Eccles. 4.17. viz. To
offer up the sacrifice of fools, babbling with our tongues, what we mind not,
And a mocking of God.
or understand not. Nay, it is a plain mocking of God unto his face, thus
(without knowledge and consciousnesse of our sinfulness in particular, and the
several branches of it) to confess our sins. Who would not take himself
abused by such a debtor? that should confess that he were indebted to him, if
he knew for what, but therein he must pardon him. For he could not call to
mind wherein, nor why, nor how he should owe him any thing. Such a flouting
confession do we make to God of our sins, when in general terms we
acknowledge them, but in the mean while our heart does not smite us for any in
particular, nor can we tell wherein we are so sinful. We must then be well
acquainted with this our miserable condition: the knowledge whereof will help
much to enlarge and excite our hearts to a feeling confession thereof, and a
more earnest craving of Gods mercy for the cure of it. And to drive it home
unto our hearts, To remedy which, we must consider our state in sin.
when we confess that we are thus tainted in soul and body with the leprosy
of sin: let us seriously consider that we are in a most fearful and
lamentable estate. To be fearful and lamentable.
It is a fearful thing to have a noisome disease, a stinking or running sore on
any part of the body: but how much more loathsome and fearful is it to be
covered with boyles and scabs, as was Job, and to have nothing sound in the
whole body: but (as the Prophet speaks) from the sole of the foot, to the
crown of the head, to be laden with wounds, and swellings, and soars full of
corruption. Such a lamentable sight should we see in this ougly leprosy of
sin wherewith we are infected, if we could discern it: whose poison and
contagion goes beyond the most fearful and noisome diseases of the body. And
most contagious.
For be a disease contagious, it is (and not without cause) terrible; yet
cannot it infect where it touches not: but a pestilence, oh how dreadful is
that accounted! what running and flying from it is there? which can only yet
infect the air, and near and neighbor places, to the hazard of such as dwell
at hand, and thereabouts. But this plague of sin has wrought upon the whole
creature, to infect the very heavens, and make all things subject unto vanity,
that as the garment and house which were infected incurably with the leprosy,
the one was to be burned with fire, the other razed down and carried away,
Leuit. 13. and 14. so the whole frame of heaven and earth must burn in the
fire to be purged of it.

It teaches us humility and thankfulness.
and thankful acknowledgement of Gods mercy. If that a man could have seen
the heart of the poor Publican, Luke 18. no doubt one should have seen, that
it was the priuity of these things we have spoken of, viz. that he was so
sinful and corrupt, so wretched and near to damnation, that made him so
abased and abashed in himself, as not to dare so much as to look up to
heaven, made him with such grief and passion to smite his breast, and to sigh
out, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. What was it but the due pondering of
these things, that did carry David to such an admiration of Gods bounty toward
himself and all men, crying out, Psalm. 144.4. Lord what is man that thou
regardest him? or the son of man that thou think on him? and forces the
Prophet to this confession: It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not, From the ignorance of it springs pride and
unthankfulness.
Lam. 3.22. But contrariwise we carry our heads aloft, face the heavens, and
swell with great thoughts of our own vvorth. Again, we are not only
spared from day to day, and saved from wrath, but are fed and filled with
good things from Gods hand, without any due and feeling confession of Gods
patience, bounty, and mercies herein. And whence is it but even hence? that we
have not thoroughly learned, nor taken unto heart these lessons, what we are
naturally before God, viz. abominable, most filthy, and cursed wretches,
children of wrath, and sons of perdition. Find me the man that does know this
in his soul, and is not lowly in his own eyes; does not tremble, and is not
(with an holy shame) confounded in himself when he comes before God, that
does not acknowledge Gods mercy in the least good he enjoys, and wonder at
his bounty, that he does load him (such a caitiffe) with so great benefits.
Grant that poor Mephibosheth had been guilty of treason against King David, as
Ziba did falsely accuse him; and that upon plain conviction of the crime and
sentence of death being given on him, and all things made ready for his
execution, the King had given him his pardon, restored him to his lands, and
(as formerly) admitted him to his own table. Can we think that he would not
have blushed, even as often as he came in the Kings presence? and that he would
not (much more than formerly) have magnified David's princely mercy and clemency
unto him, saying, What is thy servant that thou should look toward, much
more should deal so graciously with such a dead dog as I am? 1. King. 9.8.
If the apprehension of ones outward misery and baseness can so abase our
minds, and endeare the courtesies and favors of other men toward us: how much
rather will it make us truly humble before the Lord, and thankfully to record
his goodness, to understand well how vile and wretched our natural condition
is?

It should stir us up to lay hold of salvation.
When the Jews had heard Peter preaching roundly to them concerning their
wickedness in crucifying the Lord Jesus, and their danger for it; they were
pricked in their hearts, and cried out to the Apostle, Men and brethren, what
shall we do? Act. 2.37. And truly it must needs affright us, and make us to
labor for a better estate, unless we be of that sort of men that have made a
covenant with hell, and are at a league with the grave, Isa. 28.15. to
consider, that we are guilty before the Lord in the loins of Adam: to weigh
that we are throughout stained and spotted with the filthiness of sin: to
think that all we can speak or do, all our thoughts, words and deeds, are so
many inditements against us, and evidences that we are shut out of heaven into
utter darkness. Will any man (unless he be dead drunk) lay himself down
to sleep in the top of the mast, the ship being under sail in the midst of
the sea? Prou. 23.34. And we hold him desperately mad that dare take a nap in
a house on fire over his head. O then let us not, when the wrath of God, which
is a fire burning to the pit of destruction: when (I say) this wrath is seated
in soul and body, let us not presume to snort securely, till we know our
selves pulled out of this fire, and till we perceive that it is fully quenched
and extinguished. And thus much spoken concerning our wretched estate by nature
were enough. But lest those who are delivered from this misery, should think
that this doctrine concerns them not; it shall be needful (in a word) to
adioyne one other instruction.

Mark therefore (beloved) who it is that utters these words, all have
sinned. It is Paul, one who had now labored 20. years in the worthy Ministry
of Apostleship; yet he speaks this, including himself in the same number.
Which teaches us thus much:

Doct. 3.
That after our deliverance we must not shake hands with the doctrine of our
misery, Our misery must not be forgotten, though we be delivered from it.
but still bear it in mind, and often recount it. It is the practice of Saint
Paul almost every where. In the second to the Ephesians, verse. 3. after he had
laid before the eyes of the Ephesians their former estate, he spares not to
rip up his own constitution by nature, thus: Among whom we also have had our
conversation in time past, in the lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of
the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath as well as
others. So again, 1. Tim. 1.15. does he rank himself amongst the chief
sinners: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am the
chief. Lastly, Tit. 3.3. does he make a large acknowledgement of his own, and
others wretched condition, what it was before conversion: We our selves also
were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse
pleasures, living in maliciousness and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. 3. Effects of its remembrance.
And this lesson is the worthier our learning, by how much the use of it is the
greater, for it has three excellent effects.

1. To make us gentle toward others.
First, to remember what we our selves have bin, and are by nature, will make us
meek and gentle toward others, not over rash and rigorous in our censures.
Thus much the Apostle shows plainly unto us in the place aboue-named. For in
the second verse of that chapter, he does bid Titus to dehort men from speaking
evil, and exhort them to softness and meekness. But now, what reason does he
give why such kindness and courtesy should be used toward others? Mark that
in this 3. verse, for we our selves (says he) were in times past disobedient,
unwise, etc. plainly showing, that nothing more engenders mildnes and
gentleness toward others, than to set before us what we our selves have been.

2. To long for our dissolution.
Secondly, in the relics of sin to remember our misery, will make us sigh
and groan for our heavenly tabernacle, and desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. As David being very much a-thirst, did long to drink, and said,
Oh that one would give me of the water of the well of Bethlehem, 2. Sa. 23. So
Saint Paul having well considered of his slavish and irksome case, through sin
(abiding in him, and continually molesting) him does conceive an earnest
desire, and breaks out into most passionate wishes of his full delivery, Romans
7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?

3. To taste our salvation by Christ the more pleasant.
Thirdly, it will make us taste the benefit of Christ more pleasantly. When did
Paul come thankfully (as it were) to take the cup of salvation in Christ Jesus?
even then when he looked unto it through the body of death. And therefore after
his former exclamation, he annexeth this thanksgiving: I thank God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. And certain it is that as the Paschall Lamb did relish
the best, when it was eaten with sour herbs: so by these remembrances (which
humble and break the spirit) our salvation by Christ is made much more
comfortable and sauoury. It reproves those that neglect to call it to mind.
if they do not exercise their thoughts in a frequent meditation of their
natural misery. there are diverse who being advanced from a low estate to
great preferment, forget their base parentage, nor will once look down to the
dunghill from whence they were raised: but what does ensue in such persons,
but strange pride and insolency? out of which they domineere cruelly over
their inferiors; disdain and set themselves against their equalles; and (to
their ruin at length) set at naught him that advanced them, not acknowledging
his former favors, and thinking that they can now sit fast without him. It is
a faireway to spiritual pride.
Gods children are in danger of nothing more than of spiritual pride, with the
which the devil (when all other of his trains fail) hops to blow them up,
by dazzling their eyes with the view of their perfections and present
happiness. And to prepare them thereunto, and make way for this stratagem,
this he does drive at to make them forget what they were of old, and little to
think of their former misery: to which if he can bring them, then (with ease
and readily) will succeed uncharitable censures, and proud disdain of others
inferior to them in grace; contentious emulations toward those that match
them, or go before them; yea a slight esteem of Gods mercy and grace whereby
they were delivered. Great advantage therefore do they give the devil against
them, who love not to keep in mind, and humbly to recount their wretched state
by nature, even when (through Gods mercy) they be freed.

It follows. And are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, whom he has proposed a reconciliation through faith
in his blood.

Even as the way to Sion was by Sinai; so, unless we desire rather to be
carnally secured, than truly comforted, we must pass by the diligent view of
our most woeful plight (wherein by nature we are enwrapped) to the
consideration of the good things which the Lord has prepared for them that
love him. These words then unfolded, will plainly declare what I propounded to
show in the second place, viz. the very thing which belongs to our happiness.
I cannot cast them more conveniently (for our capacities) than into these three
members. The parts.
First, that there is restitution for all sorts of men from this misery, in
these words, All are justified. Secondly, the grounds or causes of this
restitution, and these are two: first, the mercy of God, in these words, freely
by his grace: secondly, the redemption in Christ, whereof he speaks thus,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Thirdly, the instrument whereby
these are applied to us, in verse. 25. through faith in his blood. These three
points we will handle in order.

Doct. 4.
We are restored from this misery.
That there is a reparation of man's lamentable condition, is not necessary to
dispute, since it is a matter nothing controuersall. The Apostle, Gal. 3.22.
evidently says, that all are (by the Scripture) concluded under sin. But
why? that they might lie in this condition? Nothing less: but that the promise
(through the faith of Jesus Christ) should be given to them that believe. And
it were woe with us if this case were any whit doubtful. I will therefore (in
stead of arguing whether there be a restoring yea or nay) set down the order
of our restitution. For though this word Justified, do not signify directly
every parcel of our happy estate, yet it (being opposed to our miserable
estate) does it self signify some part of our deliverance from it, and by
necessary consequence implies all that concurreth thereunto.

First therefore let us know, 1. By justification.
that for man (guilty before the tribunal seat of God, for the sin he
committed as he was in Adams loins, and many adverse sins in his own
person) there is justification, that is, Whereby God acquitteth us from sin.
nothing else (as Paul every where uses it) but an action of God as judge of
all the world, whereby he does acquit his creature of whatsoever crime might be
laid unto his charge, holding him for just and innocent: yea and according to
this justice which he imputes to him, he does most graciously entreat him,
And accepts us to life.
by acception to life everlasting. This is the very import of this word, as is
gathered by these two arguments. First, it is a word judicial, as may be
seen, 2. Sam. 15.4. Oh says Absalom) that they would make me a Judge in the
land, that every one who has any matter or controversy might come to me, and
I would do to him justice, that is, pronounce him quit, cnd clear him, as his
cause requires.

Secondly, the opposition requires the same: for condemnation is set against
it as the contrary, Romans 8.33.34. It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? And this may be considered as the first degree in our reparation, and
is precisely signified by the word it self: which though it be distinguished
from these that follow (otherwise a wholesome form of words and doctrine
cannot be kept) yet it must not be separated.

2 By sanctification.
Secondly, therefore the Lord, whom he thus justifies, he sends into their
hearts the Spirit of his Son, Gal. 4.6. that spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13.
I mean that promised spirit which does regenerate them throughout: so that
though they were by nature darkness, Jn all parts.
yet they now become light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. though they were rebellious
(such as could not be subject) yet now they come to delight (at least in the
inner man of their minds) in the Law of God: though their affections were
profane and unsanctified, yet now they are renewed to that image which is in
holiness; so that their joy is not fixed in outward things, as wisdom,
strength, riches; but in this, that they know the Lord to be their God in
Christ, Ier. 9.23.24. and that their names are written in heaven, Luke 10.20.
their love is settled on God, their hearts speaking with David, Psalm. 73.25.
What have I in heaven but thee? and whom in earth in comparison of thee? So
also their fear and hope is turned from the world, and things temporal, unto
God, and matters everlasting. And though before what ever they did, was sin;
yet now they do those good works which the Lord has prepared for them to
walk in. And thus the life of glory is again restored. For this their
sanctification is the beginning of glory; so that even while they are on earth,
Which is a beging of glory.
they have everlasting life; He that believes has everlasting life, Ioh.
3.36. And Romans 8.23. we are said to have here the first fruits of the spirit.
The first fruits and the whole lump differ not in substance and kind, but in
the measure and circumstance. What were the first fruits of corn, olives, or
any other fruit of the earth offered to the Lord under the Law, but a part, and
a prime part of the whole harvest: and so the sanctifying graces of Gods spirit
which we receive on earth, are parts and beginnings of our glorious life in
heaven, from which they differ not in kind, but in measure and degree. Now when
Gods faithful ones depart, 3. By glorification begun in death.
they go nearer to the fullness of this glory, as whose souls go into
Paradise, as our Savior speaks to the thief, Luke 23.43. and whose spirits
are gathered to the spirits of just and perfect men in the heavenly Jerusalem,
Heb. 12.23. But at the resurrection of the just, Consummate at the resurrection.
then shall this life of glory be consummate, their bodies being made
conformable to the glorious body of Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.21. the Lord being
glorified in his saints, and made marvelous in all them that believe, 2. These.
1.10. Thus far then it goes well, that we who were condemned persons, and
had our faces covered, as being ready to be carried away to execution, should
be justified: that we who were dry wood, fruitful only in the unfruitful
works of darkness, should become green trees planted in the true temple of
the Godhead Christ Jesus, and so be made to bear good fruit abundantly, even
to abound in every good work, that we finally (who were dead) should live.

Now it is some comfort for any man laboring of a desperate disease, to hear
say there is cure for it. But come to one whom some grief incurable (as it is
reputed) does hold, and tell him there is remedy for him; as he will be glad to
hear it, so he will hardly believe it: wherefore he will ask what be the
ingredients or simples of which that medecin should be made, that by this
means (the force of these well considered) he may see if it be likely to do
the deed yea or no. So in maladies spiritual, which no power in heaven or
earth (but that which can subdue all things to it self) can correct. To say
there is a salve for these sores, is somewhat comfortable, but it will not
presently pass for current. You will therefore ask in the first place, how
this should come to pass: for man is full of sin, and the Lords eyes are too
pure to behold nothing but filthiness. When there is nothing then in him which
may move God, unless it be to judgment; how should the Lord come to-restore
him? very well. Look on the next words, We are justified freely by his grace.
Though there be nothing in us, yet the Lord of his free grace does justify us.

Doct. 5.
This then is our lesson; that the grace of God, that is, We are justified
freely by Gods mere grace.
God himself, of himself, in great favor and riches of mercy, bowing down
to succor his miserable creature altogether undeserving: God (I say) thus
merely merciful, does justify us. So the Apostle teaches every where: Tit.
2.11. The grace of God bringing salvation unto all men has appeared. So Ephesians.
2.8.9. We are saved by grace, not of works: where it is to be marked, how the
mere grace of God (not excited by any works, but working of its own accord)
has the whole stroke in our salvation. For works are secluded from working
any whit therein. And although these speeches be plain enough to clear the
point, yet lo how it is affirmed more plainly, 2. Timoth. 1.9. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works but
according to his own purpose and grace, etc. Our salvation is of grace; and
what grace? not such as does follow upon any goodness inherent in us, or works
foreseen which should come from us; but only upon the intent and purpose of
God within himself. This is a truth which was well known in the time of the
old Testament. By mercy and truth (says Solomon, Prou. 16.6.) iniquity shall
be forgiven, and by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil. What mercy
and truth is here meant? what, that of man toward man? no surely. It cannot
be fitly understood, but of Gods mere grace, whereby he promises good things
to men, and his fidelity in performing most constantly what he promises: from
which we obtain this favor, to get our sins covered and pardoned. As the
reverence of Gods Majesty does cause his children to eschew evil; so his mercy
toward them (being in Christ a most merciful Father unto them) does bestow on
them the pardon of their sins. And what else meant the Saints of old, but to
ascribe all to Gods mercy, when they did always make their request to God, and
crave of him to have respect unto them, not for their own sake, but for his
mercies, which last for ever, his kindness and goodness, his names sake, etc.

That God may have the glory of our salvation.
For Gods glory is most dear unto him, neither can he endure therein to have
any partner. Wherefore (in the business of our salvation) he does so work,
that man may have no matter of rejoicing out of God, who does all this work in
himself, and out of man; that who so rejoices, might rejoice only in the
Lord, 1. Cor. 1.31.

It excludes all concurrence of our works.
If our justification then be of grace, there can be no relics of holiness,
nor works of our own that concur thereunto. For besides that, these are
opposed in the places above cited, the Apostle makes this collection very
evidently, Romans 11.6. And if it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else
were grace no more grace. For these two are so opposite, that like fire and
water they expel each the other: and (as says one) Gratia nullo modo est
gratia nisi sit omni modo gratuita: Grace is no way to be counted grace,
unless every way it be most free. For this cause mark how the Apostle
joins freeness or franknesse, with grace. The word which is here used is
(...), and answers to the Hebrew word Chirma. 3. Significations of the
Hebrew Chirma.
It is very emphaticall, and it is especially taken up in these three cases.
First, when a man does a thing without hope of the least profit. Secondly,
when a man does a thing without cause, rashly or lightly; but this sense is
not here pertinent. The third is, when a man does a thing (as we speak)
undeservedly, there being nothing which might move him thereunto, but much
which might persuade with him to the contrary: and this is the sense to be
followed here. For when there was nothing in us which might procure it, nay
much which might ex-asperate the Lord against us (for we were by nature his
enemies) then he saved us freely of his grace.

It does comfort us.
For if our justification did depend on our own worth, endeavor, and
holiness, we could not but despair. Alas what are we (poor crawling worms)
that we should be of any worth in Gods sight, before whom the stars are
unclean? Since though sinful and worthy of nothing.
What is our holiness, but as a filthy and a menstruous clout? and whereunto
can our endeavors reach in any thing to Godward? who can only roll and
wallow up and down in the filth and puddle of our corruption; in the which the
more we stir, the more loathsome stench do we make. But now since it is not
in him that wills, Yet we may boldly accept what God does freely offer.
nor in him that runs, but in God that has mercy, Romans 9.16. we may boldly
accept, and confidently trust in this free grace of God, although we be
unworthy of it. For why should we put away this great grace offered and
revealed to us: why should we not cheerfully embrace it, and rejoice in it,
specially since it has appeared unto all, and God (without respect of persons)
has set it out to be enjoyed of the poor, base, low, and unlearned, as well
as of the rich, high, noble, and learned: and it is not true humility, but a
sottish pride, to put away, and judge our selves unworthy of this salvation,
whereof it has pleased God (in rich mercy) to deem us worthy.

But yet that former point is not clearly on foot. For though this do show
that you may be restored most amply (though you are altogether unworthy) yet
you will be ready to object, that the Lord is just. If he were only
merciful, then you would easily assent hereunto: but he is so merciful, that
he is just also, and has pronounced it an abomination to him, Prou. 17.15. to
justify the wicked, or to condemn the just. What then (will you say) will
become of me being a wicked wretch? and how can the Lord justify me being
such an one: all this is very true. Wherefore let us search a little further.
Freely of grace (says the Apostle) but in the redemption of Christ Jesus.

Doct. 6.
Remember then this by the way, that so the Lord does justify thee of grace,
We are so justified, as that we are made truly righteous in Christ.
that he also makes thee truly just in Christ Jesus. This (in the proof of
this doctrine) will appear more brightly. The point then directly gathered is
this: that we are justified in the redemption of Christ, or in Christ our
redemption. Christ has been at all times revealed to the chosen of God as
their redeemer, in whose blood-shead they should have remission of sins. Who
has always been revealed as our redeemer.
After the fall of our first parents, when they otherwise had fallen into the
gulf of despair, he (our eternal Prophet) gave out the promise of himself,
that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head, Genesis 3.15. that is,
that Christ (in fullness of time borne of a Virgin) should dissolve (as John
speaks, To Adam.
1. Ioh. 3.8.) the works of the devil, do away sin, abolish death; and (as
Paul speaks, Romans 16.20.) tread down Satan under the feet of his elect; and
our first parents had experiment of the truth hereof. For when (by the
threatening) they should have died the death, yet in their sacrifices (which
prefigured this seed, this immaculate Lamb) they perceived the love of God
again recovered. To Abraham, etc.
Abraham had the same promise of a blessed seed (in the which all the nations
of the earth should be blessed) renewed to him, Genes. 18.18. And in all the
Prophets it were easy to show how Christ was present to the eye of the
faithful: as likewise how the nearer this day star was the rising, the more
evidently he was foretold. For God was still reconciling his Israel, viz. (his
elect among the Israelites, and those few that were then scattered among the
Gentiles) unto himself in Christ, even before his coming: but when once he
was exhibited, he reconciled to himself the world, that is, the great number
of his elect, which was dispersed through the world, and did consist of all
sorts, degrees, and nations. All the Fathers had Christ de iure, of right,
though de facto, in deed he were not given in the flesh: And so embraced of
them.
and he was ever present to their faith as their price of redemption, and so
did pass for them in the acceptance of God. There was never any other name
whereby men might be saved, he being (as it is Heb. 13.8.) the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever: what he had been, he was; and what he was, he would be
to eternity.

But wherein does this our righteousness stand? Our righteousness stands in
the redemption which Christ has made for us.
even in our redemption which Christ has wrought for us, as the Apostle says,
that we are justified through the redemption of Christ. For which understand
this, that God the Father has laid all our sins upon Christ, that he was
wounded for our sins, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5.6. He
has taken our iniquities on him, and in his body borne them on his Cross, 1.
Pet. 2.24. Wherefore he which was most just and righteous (offering himself a
sacrifice for our sins, who are unjust, and bearing the punishment which our
sins deserved) has paid our ransom, 1. Tim. 2.6. and redeeming us by this
means, is become that Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world:
and thus he being made unrighteousness for us by these his sufferings: and if
there were any further thing for us to do, doing it also for us. (For he is
the end of the Law, Romans 10.4. and in him we are complete, Colos. 2.10.) we are
made in him the righteousness of God, 2. Cor. 5.21. Christ is therefore (in
Ier. 23.6.) called Jehovah our righteousness. Malachy calls him the Son of
righteousness, chap. 4. verse. 2. because he is first made unto us
righteousness of God, and then does make us righteous unto God. This doctrine
has three uses.

It shows the agreement of Gods justice and mercy in our redemption.
that we are also made just in the redemption of Christ, we may see and
contemplate that admirable mystery, how the Lords justice and his mercy do
kiss each other. There is all justice unto Christ, whose soul felt the anger
of God in that extremity, that his body (affected heerewith) did sweat clotty
blood, who was broken even with hellish torments by the hand of God for our
sins, and was humbled to the death of the Cross. There is all mercy to us:
it is mercy that the satisfaction of Christ should be ours; that all that he
did should be accounted as done by our selves. It is mercy that Christ
(himself the satisfier) should be given us, (...), says Paul, Romans 8.32. He
has gratified us with his Son, he has bestowed him freely on us.

It shows where we may fetch righteousness to justify us.
For often beholding and feeling our filthiness and corruption that is in us,
we are ready to think that we have no justice wherewith to stand and appear
before the Lord. But lo (beloved) here is righteousness enough for thee, and
for me, and for the whole multitude of believers: we are righteous in Christ
our Redeemer. Yea but happily it will stick somewhat with thee how thou should
be righteous with an others righteousness. If a private man indeed should die,
How another righteousness may justify us.
he could but satisfy for his own sin, Gal. 6.5. Every one in this order
bears his own burden. But the case is otherwise with Christ: for he was not
a mere man, but God, in nature, glory and majesty equal with the Father; and
he being not a servant, but the Son by nature, was sent and made subject to
the Law, that he might redeem us which were under the Law, Gal. 4.4.5. And
what Christ did or suffered, he did not as a private person, but as a public,
in the name and behalf of Gods elect; and not of himself, but as appointed
thereunto of God. It was not for himself, but for the faithfulls sake, that
Christ did sanctify himself, Ioh. 17.19. and God it is who does make him
righteousness unto us, 1. Cor. 1.30. It is of force amongst men what one man
does in another name, chiefly where there is a common agreement that it shall
be so. And why may not it be thus in our justification before God: for if the
justice of God prevailed so far, that through the offense of one, many shall
be dead, Romans 5.15. much more shall his mercy cause that grace, and the gift of
grace (that is righteousness which is by one man Jesus Christ) should abound
unto many. For the justice of God serves and ministers to his mercy: as Romans
11.32. God has shut up all under unbelief: but to what intent does Gods
justice this? that so they should remain so? no, but that place might be made
for mercy: as it follows, that he might have mercy on all.

It teaches us to renounce our own righteousness.
let us abandon our own righteousness in this case, counting our best deeds
as menstruous garments, reckoning all as dross and dung to win Christ; that
is, to be found not having our own righteousness, but that which is through
faith. This righteousness is not the righteousness of mere man, but of God:
and to bring ours hereunto, were as foolish as to help the shining of the
sun, with the light of some small spattering candle; or to bring a drop of
muddy water to a clear crystal ocean.

Now there remains one thing further to be handled. For though a remedy
against an infirmity be found out; though every matter be known which
concurreth to the confection: yet unless this be taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, nothing will be effected: so (beloved) unless the grace of God the
redemption of Christ be laid to us after a sort, and received, all is in
vain. Then this is the question (in the third place) how the remedies are to
be used and received? The answer to this question is to be fetched out of the
25. verse, and is contained in these words, by faith in his blood.

Doct. 7.
Which does teach us this doctrine, that we are every one to apprehend the
grace of God in the redemption of Christ to justification, We are tu embrace
Christ's redemption wrought for us by faith.
by hearty and unfeigned faith. Faith has been always requisite as the
instrument to take Christ our righteousness, that so we might (in Gods sight)
be justified. This is taught us every where, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise (by the says of Jesus Christ)
should be given to all. And Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he has
given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should have
everlasting life. Where we see faith to be brought in as the instrument without
the which neither the promise can be appropriated, nor salvation attained. So
Act. 16.30.31. Which is the instrument to receive it.
when the question is made, what shall I do to be saved? it is answered by the
Apostle, believe on the Lord Jesus, thou and thy household, and you shall be
saved. And truly the righteousness of Christ has not been of more ancient
time given to men, than faith has been appointed the receiver hereof.
Wherefore it is called the righteousness of faith, because it is received by
faith, as our righteousness which God imputes to us. If we should search the
register of the Scriptures, a cloud of witnesses would compass us about for
the confirmation of this point. But by the way it seems more necessary to
answer what may be objected. For above we have taught (you will say) that the
grace of God cannot stand with any thing in man: How then (will you ask) can
it stand with faith? How Gods free grace does stand with faith.
It is true that the grace of God does not brook any thing inherent in man,
and of man, and yet notwithstanding may well agree with faith: for faith is not
of man, no not in man by nature. For all men have not faith, 2. These. 3.2. but
it is in man renewed, and as a gift of mere grace: as Phil. 1.29. Unto you it
is given for Christ, that you should believe on him: where faith is challenged
as a largess of the Lords liberality. Secondly, faith does not justify us as
it is an inherent quality in us (for this smells somewhat of the Gnostics)
but as it apprehends Christ Jesus the redeemer, who is made unto us of God
righteousness.

Thus then briefly you see how every one of us must (through faith) take hold
of the grace of God in the redemption of Christ; and that faith is not at all
prejudicial to Gods favor. And now (me thinks) you are willing to know what
it is to believe? What it is to believe.
I will tell you (and that according as the Scripture speaks) without any
laborious distinction. If then (beloved) you first having a sight and sense of
your miserable estate, and beholding Christ crucified before you in this
Gospel; viz. Out of a sense of our misery to go and to rest on Christ for our
salvation.
that is, hearing the word of this free grace of God through the redemption of
Christ, do come and cast your selves on his mercy in Christ the redeemer, and
receive it into your hearts, afterward abhorring your self more and more even
in dust and ashes, loving this God who is so gracious to you, and expressing it
by walking in his commandments; then do you truly believe. For (in the sight
and sense of misery) thus to come to, and rely on Gods mercy, is to believe as
John, chap. 6. verse. 35. He that comes unto me shall not hunger; and he
that believes in me shall not thirst. Mark here, that to believe in Christ,
and to come to him are put for one: when then our will does move toward God,
and make unto his grace in Christ, then we believe.

Again, to receive the grace of God in Christ, And to apply his grace to our
selves in particular.
even every one for himself particularly with an honest heart, in such manner
as to say, It is mine, it belongs unto me: this (by the interpretation of the
Scripture) is to believe, Ioh. 1.12. And he that comes thus to Christ, and
lays hold on him, though it be waueringly, yet he truly believes. Though it
be weakly and not without doubting.
For true faith is not always an undoubted certainty which causes one
gloriously to triumph, let the wind lie in what corner it pleases: but it is
sometimes as smoking flax, and stands rather in groans, sighs and desires,
than confident defiances and challenges, especially under the beginnings of our
conversion, and time oftentation. We speak indeed against the popish
doubtings, wauerings, and uncertainty: first, to show that these, though they
may stand with faith, yet they are no virtues, but fruits of unbelief.
Secondly, because that true faith, which is sometime plunged and perplexed with
much doubting, does often get up, and is carried with a full sail in the
persuasion of Gods mercy: as it is reported of Abraham, Romans 4.20.21. that he
did not doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was fully assured of
the performance thereof: which pitch though we cannot rise and reach unto; yet
if we do from the heart long after Gods grace in Christ, and truly (though in
much weakness) rest on him for pardon of our sins, there is no doubt but we
have that faith unfeigned, which does make us partakers of that redemption which
is in Jesus Christ.

Soli Deo gloria.

