SOLON HIS FOLLY, OR A POLITIQVE DISCOVRSE, TOUCHING THE Reformation of
commonweals conquered, declined or corrupted. BY RICHARD BEACON GENT. STVDENT
OF GRAYES INN, AND SOMEtimes her Majesty's Attorney of the province of
Mounster in Irelande.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. Anno Domini,
1594.

TO HER MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
IF all the acts and monumentes of former ages, most mighty and renowned
Queen, and Empress, which might recommend this action of reformation unto all
posterities, were committed to oblivion, yet the records and monumentes of
your Majesty's most happy government, may sufficiently revive the same: The
act of attainder of Shane Oneile, Ann. 11. Elizab.
where it is said, that your Highness has achieved unto that which is most
rightly termed the greatest magnificence of a Prince, which does not only
consist in high blood, hauty progeny, abundance of private riches and
substance, wherewith your Majesty is every way plentifully adorned, but it
rests chiefly in populous and well governed regions, and in beautiful Cities
and Towns; al which being impaired in your Realm of Ireland, by the iniquity
of former times, now as well the one as the other, by your Majesty's most
godly and careful course of government, are recontinued, amended, and
augmented. What more? Have you not reformed all exactions grievous unto that
people? Have you not reformed that horrible and most detestable custom of
Coiney and Livery, that fretter of the peoples lives and substance, that Nurse
and teate which sometimes gave suck and nutriment unto all disobedience,
rebellions, enormities, vices and iniquities of that Realm, over foul and
filthy here to be expressed? Have you not in place of sorrow, famine,
howling, and cursing, brought joy, iolitie, plenty, and every where blessings
of so gracious a Queen? Have you not reformed that dangerous custom of
Captaineshippe, which by factions did dismember the state of Irelande? Anno.
11. Eliz. cap. 7. fo. 168.
for all which if we should be found unthankful, yet the statutes and
records of that land, would witness the same against us. Great is the honor
which is due unto Robert Fitz Stevens, which first opened the way of Irelande
to the Earl of Stranguile: and great is the honor due unto the Earl, which
opened the same unto Henry the King: and great is the honor which is due unto
the King, which opened the way unto John his Son greatly is he to be
praised, that first so boldly began; and worthy of greater praise is he, that
after the beginning so nobly came to execute the thing so well begun; but most
of all he is to be praised, that shall perfect and finish the same; which
praise by Gods divine providence is light on your Majesty; Anno. 11. Elizab.
for so the subject of Irelande in the act of Attainder of Shane Oneile does
liberally confess: therefore go forward Brutus, for thy glory in reforming,
is far greater then the glory of Romulus in building and instituting of the
city of Rome. All nations with the Romans shall honor your presence, as
another Time-sitheus, for reforming and restraining the Lyparians from their
accustomed robberies and spoils; all nations shall rightly honor you with the
Ladies of Rome, which sometimes offered their jewels to be sold for the
furtherance of public services; for huge be the charges already employed by
your Majesty, for bringing to pass so great things tending to the sound and
universal reformation of this your Realm of Ireland, Act of subsidy Ann. 11.
cap. 1. fol. 148.
as in the act of subsidy more at large may appear. What further honor now
remains due unto your Majesty, for the accomplishing of so great and worthy
actions, if not that which was sometimes given unto Ianus? for that you have
changed the life of man which before your time was rude, cruel, and wild, in
Ireland, and brought it for the most part to be obedient, gentle, and civil,
in such sort as we may truly say with the subject of Irelande, this is the
favor which your Majesty has found in the sight of God to augment,
strengthen, and honor your imperial crown of England, by the thorough
reformation of this your Realm of Ireland. All which considering with my
self, I could not suffer so honorable actions to be buried in oblivion,
without leaving some special remembrance to all posterities, but have made
this plat and counterfeit, the which I here present unto your Majesty's sacred
hands, in baser colors then princes do usually behold, or so weighty
matters may require: but I hope that your Majesty's accustomed clemency will
impute this to Solon his folly and lunacie, which now for his boldness craveth
pardon, rather then commendation.

Your sacred Majesty's most humble and loyal subject RICHARD BEACON.

The Author to the Reader,
GENTLE Reader, with the unskillful archers of our times, I did first aim and
shoot at the public good and profit, according to the trust reposed in me,
and now as one that has lost his arrowe, and missed his mark, I have at al
adventures discharged the second time, to the end that my second labors may
draw home my first losses, if my hand be fortunate to pearce the secret
parts of thy tender and kind affections, and move in thee a friendly
acceptaunce of these my rude labors; if not, look no more for my return to
accompany the pleasant fields, and meddowes, for henceforth I take up my
habitation amidst the rocks and deserts, where my arrows may not pearce, nor
the strength of my bow withstand the bitter winds, and the hard and hoary
frostes, where I shall no more play the fool with Solon in the marketplace,
but the wild man in the deserts. But if thou shall vouchsafe to recall so
unskillful an archer again into the fields, I may perhaps win a bet, that
shall pay for the loss of a rubber. Receive then, Solon his folly, not as a
testimony of his skill, but rather of the goodwil he bears unto thee, and his
country, whereof if thou shall make acceptaunce, the same is thy honor, and
not his: which with thy bounty and goodness, have now overcome as well the
giver, as the gift. But if thou shall censure it by his own proper worth, he
has fore-tolde thee the valewe thereof, and before thy face has now waighed
the same in equal balance, with Solon his folly, but not with his wisdom.

The book unto the Reader.
SINCE Circe at the instance of Ulysses has once again granted unto dumb
creatures liberty of speech, I may not but complain, for that she has brought
us from our former rest and silence, now to speak before that wise Ulysses,
who havinge not tasted of the sweetenes and pleasure of this our solitary life,
since which time Circe first changed us Graecians into the habit of mute and
dumb creatures, may fortune to advance his wisdom, and to hold our former
silence and rest as contemptible. And again of the other side, we being long
deprived of the use and art of subtle speaking, shall much discontent wise
Ulysses, with our homely discourses. But O Circe, has the love of Ulysses, and
the cuntry of Greece, drawn thee unto this indignation against us, as with
Epaminondas, naked and unarmed, I must oppose my self against the scorns and
reproaches of al ages, as against a Grecian army? And with the fond lover in
Petrarke must thou of force make me a sorrowful minister thereof? And with the
silly birds fast tied and bound, must I represent the face of thy loving
thoughts? Then what comfort remains, If I may not say with them, though here
we remain fast tied and bound, subject to all scorns and reproaches, and
bereaved of our former liberty and delights, yet this one Joy rests, that
the Author of these our Calamities, is fallen more deeply then our selves
therein, in such sort as with us he must taste the bitterness of disdain and
contempt, with the which comfort, I here present my self unto your most
friendly view, hoping that this my naked and innocent simplicity shall have
your leave if not your likinge.

In reformatam ornatissimi Beaconi Rempub: seu simulatam Solonis Insaniam,
Carmen.
INsidias fugiens, and laetum caede tyrannum,
Brutus, nobilium gloria prima patrum,
Prudens desipuit; quantum O fuit vtile Brute
Desipere, ingenio qui periturus erat.
Creed mihi gratus furor est, and amabilis error,
Vt teipsum serves negligere ingenium.
Insignem simili fama est vsum art Solonem,
Amissam patriae dum Salamina petit.
Illum quippe furor, praecepsque insania mentis,
Effrenis rabies, and vagus error agunt:
Illi barba impexa, comae sine lege fluentes,
Et loca sola placent, and sine test nemus.
Sic ambo insani sunt, sed cum dispare laud,
Hic furit, vt scipsum servet, and hic patriam.
Robertus Wright Bacc: Theol.

Viro vere politico, civique patriae benevolentissimo, Richardo Beacono Salutem.
QValis in Euboico Salamis fruit Insula ponto,
Qua freta vicinas interlabuntur Athenas:
Talis ad occiduum, pelagi prope marmora, Solemn,
Agnovit (Regina) tuos Hybernia fasces.
Cincta mari Salamis, cincta est Hybernia vtrisque,
Ardua per medios consurgunt maenia fluctus.
Quam been munitum, fati haud ignara futuri
Composuit natura locum, tam docta tueri
Si foret, and dubijs si consulat Anglia rebus;
Non te Hispane ferox, populi praedator Eoi,
Dira per insolitos minitantem praelia motus,
Non lectos iuvenes, non robora gentis Iberae,
Non volucrem in tumido salientem gurgite pinum,
Fluctus cum gemitu, ventosque labor prementem,
Hac primum attonitus spectaverat Anglus in era.
Nunc vbi quisque sibi sapere, and succurrere malit,
Quam patriae, videatque aequis securus ocelli^
Labentem, and valido tibicine sustentandam,
Prona ruit tacito sensim respublica casis.
At tibi pro meritis tantis, pro tam been factis,
Proque hoc in patriam officio, pietate, fideque
Contingat (Beacone) decus post fata perenne.
Johannes Budden Magist. Artium.

A BOOK INTITVLED, SOLON his folly and lunacie, made for the better
reformation of commonweals, conquered, declined or corrupted, by R. B.
EPIMENIDES PHAESTIAN. Well met good Sir Pisistratus, in this holy place of the
temple of Venus, where though the sacrifices be finished, yet notwithstanding
your devotion is highly to be commended.


Pisistratus. You also are happily well saluted right wise and famous
Epimenides, and this devotion which you have friendly now commended, is but a
duty first unto the Gods, and next unto my friends, amongst whom I enumber
you not the least.


Ep: I am the least in power I must confess, that is worthy of Pisistratus,
but not in goodwill: but what matter of importance has caused your arrival
so unexpected upon this coast and haven?


Pisistratus. We lead here a strong army by the commandment of the council
of Athens unto Salamina, for the better repossessing and reforming thereof.


Ep: What? contrary to their former decrees and proclamations, which were so
straight, and that upon pain of death, that no Citizen of Athens should be so
hardy, as once to move the question to the counsel of the City, for the
repossessing and reforming of Salamina?


Pisistratus. Yes verily: for when the Athenians did once behold that their
long and troublesome wars, the which they had now sustained against the
Megarians, for the repossessing and reforming of Salamina did arise unto them,
not from the nature of the people, nor from the difficulty of that action, but
rather that they received all their advertisementes for the advauncement of
those affairs, from such as gave counsel therein, more for their private
profit then for the public good, but chiefly for that sundry governoures
there placed, were found either negligent, or ignorant in the managinge of
public affairs, they willingly revoked their public proclamations, and
made choice of Solon, a most wise and expert governor for leading and
conducting their armies, now here landed for the repossessing and reforming of
Salamina.


Ep: But who persuaded this first unto the Counsel of Athens?


Pisistrat: Solon that faithful counselor of Athens.


Ep: But how durst Solon the wise offend their public laws and
proclamations?


Pisistrat: Solon holding it for an open shame the which would be left unto
all posterities, if the City of Athens should not be able to repossesse and
reform Salamina, now commanding the most parts of Greece, fained himself to
be out of his wits, and caused it to be given out that Solon was become a
fool: and soon after on a day, clothed with the habit, gesture, and
countenance of a fool or man possessed with lunacy, he ran suddenly out of
his house with a garland on his head unto the market place, where the people
straight swarmed like bees about him, and raising himself upon the stone where
all proclamations were made, did so effectually persuade the repossessing of
Salamina unto the people, as what with the weight of his reasons, and the laud
and praise every where spread by his friends of his proceeding therein, their
former proclamations were revoked, and the wars for the repossessing and
reforming of Salamina with greater fury then before were followed, they giving
unto Solon as I said before, the leading of the army, and the whole managing
of that action.


Ep: After this manner did Brutus by a fained frency and lunacie, not only
reform the mighty City of Rome, but wisely acquitted himself thereby, of the
suspicion and jealousy of Tarquine, by the which manner of proceeding, he
delivered as well the City of Rome, as his own person from peril and danger,
so as this common proverb did first arise, Simulare stultitiam nonnunquam
sapientis est. But where remains Solon my dear and familiar friend, that I
may salute him, and give him the best comfort I may, in this worthy action of
reformation?


Pisistrat. He is newly landed with his whole army, and has now for his
better recreation withdrawn himself into a pleasant and solitary garden
near unto the temple of Venus, whereunto if your leisure serve, I will readily
conduct you.


Ep: I readily follow you.


Pisistratus. Sir I go before as the best guide, and not the best man, and
behold Solon in the most solitary place of the garden.


Solon. Thrice welcome my dear and familiar friend Epimenides, behold, this
solitary and pleasant place, as also the times, has even newly conspired
with my thoughts and desires to impose a great and weighty labor upon you.


Ep: No labor may be thought ever so great as shall exceed the greatness
of my goodwill I bear unto Solon. But what may the same be? Tell it unto me.


Solon. As you have of late most friendly lent unto me, your faithful
council, and best advise for the reformation of the City of Athens, greatly
to the advancement of that estate, in like manner now I am earnestly to
entreat your most friendly advise for the better reformation of Salamina.


Ep: This labor and travel* I must confess is due unto Solon, if there
wanted not wisdom, which should give strength for the performaunce thereof:
but I have chosen at this time, for our old familiarity and friendship, to
give you just cause rather to reprehende my skill, then to accuse any part of
that office and duty, which in the highest manner belongs unto Solon; so as
when the fault appears, you shall acknowledge the same to be imposed by
yourselfe, and not received by me without your commandment.


Solon. Then friendly Epimenides, before we enter into this large discourse for
the reformation of Salamina, I will declare unto you a dream, which this last
night amazed my thoughts.


Ep: I pray thee tell it unto me.


Solon. This night I seemed to behold fair Diana with a beautiful Dove
glistering like gold, placed upon her shoulder, slyding and wavering every
where, in such sort, as it seemed to me to be in great ieopardy of falling,
but forthwith moved with compassion I stretched forth my right hand, to
better and reform the place of her standing: wherewith I might behold Diana
with a sharp and sour countenance to threaten the loss of my hand whereat
being amazed, I did awake out of my drousie sleep.


Ep: The people of Salamina, is the threatening Diana, hating all reformation:
the golden Dove, is the pleasant country of Salamina: the wavering of this
Dove from place to place, is the frailty and mutability, whereunto this
country of Salamina has ever been subject: the compassion which you have
taken of this golden Dove, is the love you bear unto Salamina: the moving of
your body and hand, to succor this golden Dove, is the ardent desire now
newly kindled in you for the reformation thereof: the loss of hand threatened
by Diana, is the difficulties and dangers, which shall from time to time,
oppose themselves against you in this action of reformation.


Sol. Describe therefore unto us, first, what you intend by this word
reformation, and then the difficulties and dangers that follow the same, and
lastly the ways and means, whereby we may readily eschew those dangers and
difficulties.


CAP. 1. OF THIS WORD REFORMATION, AND A general description thereof, and how
the same is divided into two several parts and members.
A REFORMATION of a declined commonweal, is nothing else but an happy
restitution unto his first perfection: this word Reformation being thus
described, may in like sort be divided into two parts and members: the one may
be termed an absolute and a thorough reformation of the whole body of the
commonweal, namely of the ancient laws, customs, governementes and manners
of the people: the other may be termed a reformation of particular mischiefs
and inconveniences only, which like unto evil and superfluous humors daily
arise to the annoyance and disturbance of this politic body. For like as in
our natural bodies, says the Physician, so in commonweals there daily
arises that, Quod curatione indiget, and nisi tollatur, inde morbos laethales
parit. This manner of reformation of particular mischiefs and accidents
consists of two parts and members: the one by the profitable laws, which are
framed to meet with such mischiefs and inconveniences, which do or may arise
to the annoyance of the commonweal: such was the law called (...), which
pacified the poorer sort of people called Hectemarij, then in arms against the
rich and better sort of Athens: the other is the true discipline and execution
of laws so made and established. This manner of reformation of particular
mischiefs and inconveniences by good and profitable laws, was mightily
endeavored by your self, when as the Athenians made choice of you as their
general reformer of their laws and commonweal. For you did not change the
whole state thereof, but altered only that which you thought by reason you
might persuade your Citizens unto, or else by force you ought to compel them to
accept; and framed your laws to the subject and matter, and not the matter and
subject unto your laws, as sometimes Lycurgus did in his reformation of
Sparta.


Sol: You have said the truth, for if I should have attempted to turn up
side down the whole government, and to have changed the whole state thereof, I
might afterward never have been able with that small power and forces then
granted unto me, to settle and establish the same again. Again, I did not
think, but that Athens then declined, might well have been restored by this
kind of reformation.


CAP. 2. What commonweal may be restored unto his first perfection by
applying thereunto this manner of reformation.
EPI: No verily: for Quae primis institutis omnino corrupta fuerit, eanunquam
in tales casus incidet, propter quos novis legibus institui queat. For this
cause the first institution of Athens being merely popular, corrupt, and
imperfect, could never after by any laws made for the reformation thereof, be
defended from the tyranny of such as did aspire unto the principality, or
from the ruin first conceived in the corrupt institution thereof. For
notwithstanding they established many laws for the reformation of the
insolency of the noble men, as also to restrain the liberty of the people,
non eam tamen conservare supra centessimum annum potuerunt. But such
common-weals as have their first institution and foundation good* though not
altogether perfect and complete, at any time declining from the first state and
perfection, may by this manner of reformation (made by profitable laws as
occasion shall them require) be not only restored to their first perfection, but
the happy estate thereof may thereby belong continued and augmented: such was
the commonwealth of Rome, whose first institution and foundation was so well
laid by Romulus and Numa, as that after by new laws made for the reformation
thereof, as the necessity of that common weal did require, the same was
rendered long, happy, and prosperous, in so much as it attained at the last an
happy temper and form of government, compounded of three sorts and kinds of
government, namely the Monarchia, Aristocratia, and Democratia: so that we
may conclude, that those commonweals which have their foundation good,
though not perfect and complete, ex ijs quae subinde occurrunt, emendari and
perfici queant ad exemplum Romae: for it is said, non prima illa Romanae reip:
institutio tantum a recta via aberrabat, vt perfici non posset. Lastly such
commonweals which in all the parts thereof are found corrupted and declined
from their first institution, may not by profitable laws made and established
as occasion shall them require, be reformed; whereof sometimes the City of Rome
and now the state of Salamina may be unto us an example: since neither the one
after her final declination, which did chiefly grow by a general corruption
of manners in the people, could be reformed by the laws against Captainship,
against Coyney, and Lyvery, or against the unlawful custom of supporting and
maintaining of rebels or any other new law whatsoever; nor the other by their
laws sumptuarij ambitus, and such like, the reason whereof shall more at large
appear in this discourse following.


Sol: There remains now the discipline of laws as the second part and
member of this particular reformation not as yet consulted of.


CAP. 3. Of a reformation made by the discipline of laws.
Epi: This manner of reformation is nothing else but a fear to offend, bred in
the hearts of the people by the true discipline of laws, after which manner
the City of Rome was sometimes reformed per supplicium de Bruti filijs
sumptum, poenam Decemviris impositam, Spurij Moelij caedes, and similia, post
captam vrbem Manlij Torquatipaena^ de filio sumpta^, eo quod pugnasset cortra
Imperatoris mandatum, Fabii Magistri equitu^ accusationem a Papyrio cursore
institutam, eo quod praeter Dictatoris imperiu^ pugnam commisisset, Scipioni
die^ dicta^, all which being most memorable and fearful examples, did
admonish all others of their duty and obedience unto laws and magistrates.


Sol: Therefore wisely says a learned writer, In conservandis imperiis
regnisque faciendum est, vt antiquae leges and consuetudines in vsum
reducantur, ex earum praescripto vitia puniantur.

After this manner by a severe discipline of laws, did the Lord Gray in times
past, and now Sir R. Bingehame, mightily reform and advance the government of
Salamina, so as we may truly say, by such governors must this nation be
reformed. By this manner of reformation has France in times past, mightily
advanced their government, and especially the City of Paris, which always
has most severely punished offenders.


Sol: But what order of times in this reformation made by profitable laws and
discipline thereof is rightly observed?


Epi: This manner of reformation is made after two sorts: either by laws
limiting the times certain for this reformation; or accidentally thereunto led
and provoked by occasions: for so the City of Rome after the overthrowe given
by the power of the Gauls did reform their commonweal and all discorders
formerly by them committed. The Athenians also after the Megarians had
recovered from them the I Will of Salamina, and the haven of Nicoea, reformed that
commonweal. And not long after the sedition betwixt the people of the
mountains, the valleies, and sea coasts, did occasion a general reformation
to be made of our City and commonweal of Athens. Again, the Romans to
give an end of many contentions raised betwixt the senators and people, sent
Sp: Posth: Albus, A. Manlius, and Sulpitius Gamerinus, as legates unto Athens,
that they might the better be informed of the laws which you Solon had
established for the reformation of Athens, that thereby as by a line, they
might the better reform the City of Rome; and further made choice of their
Decemviri to perfect this their intended reformation by profitable laws.


Sol: Now you have declared to us the reformation which is made accidentally:
there remains now the other reformation, which is made by force of laws and
at times certain, wherein I would willingly understand the reason, that should
limit the times certain of our reformation, and that by laws certain in that
behalf established, fith the accidents, and occurrants in all commonweals,
which do occasion this reformation made by profitable laws, be in themselves
uncertain, and accidental.


Epi: This manner of reformation made of particular accidents at times
certain, and that also by laws and statutes certain, established in that
behalf, is found more profitable then the other which is made accidentally.
For laws are required herein, Ne opus sit per vim peregrinam idem praestare,
and time herein is also to be respected, ne si impunitas longo tempore
co^cedatur, vsque adeo augea^tur vitia, vt sine periculo publico deinde nec
puniri nec extirpari queant; and for these causes especially, the rulers and
governors of Florence were accustomed to say, Singulis quinquennijs
redintegrare formam reip: oportere, otherwise the discipline of law may not be
well preserved. And therefore it is said, that if Room, singulis decennijs,
secundum leges, aliquod magnum exemplum in delinquentes statuissent, nunquam
tanta morum corruptela potuisset civium animos occupare; sed quia tandem rara
esse caepit, aucta est tantopere morum corruptela, vt remedium nullum adhiberi
potuerit. In like manner may we truly say, that so great a corruption could
never have possessed the minds of the people of Salamina, if there the exact
disc^ipline of laws had in good time been applied.


Sol: Now since you have declared at large the order and time, which is rightly
observed in this manner of reformation, proceed unto the dangers and
difficulties, which do usually accompany the same.


CAP. 4. The sundry difficulties and dangers that follow this manner of
reformation.
EPI: The difficulties which herein arise, may lively appear by the question,
which Caesar propounded sometimes unto Pampey, and Crassus, when he was Consul
preferring then unto the Senate, the law for division of lands, called
Agraria; do you Crassus and Pompey, says he, give your consents unto the laws
which I have now propounded? They answered, yea; then he prayed them to stand
by him, against those that threatened him with force of sword to let him. It
may appear also by that action of Pompey, when as he filled the marketplace
with soldiers, and by open force established the laws, which Caesar made in
the behalf of the people. The same also was sometimes lively expressed in the
person of Lycurgus, which for the better establishing of profitable laws,
gaged the loss of his eye; and you Solon the loss of your credit and
reputation with the people of Athens; when as by the law (...), otherwise
called discharge, you incurred the general displeasure and hate, as well of
the poor as of the rich: all which sometimes you lively expressed after this
manner.

Even those which erst did bear me friendly face,
And spoke full fair where ever I them mei:
Began now begin to look full grimme of grace,
And were like foes in force against me set:
As if I had done them some spite, or scorn,
Or open wrong, which were not to be borne.

Sol: You have now revived the memory of my former sorrows, the which I
labor rather to forget. Proceed therefore unto other difficulties, or rather
tell me, why such dangers should arise and follow these actions, which are
found so profitable for the commonweal.


Epi: They arise, partly from the contrariety of humors, and opinions, lodged
in the breasts even of the wisest; partly from the insolency of the multitude.


Sol: It is most true: for Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey, allowed the division of
lands, and established the law Agraria; but Calphurnius, Bibulus, Cato,
Considius, and other Senators rejected the same: the people allowed thereof, but
the nobility condemned it, and the ambition of Caesar. In an other assembly
also of the Senate of Rome, Crassus, Appius, and Nepos, prayed the Senate to
proroge the government of Caesar for five years longger, and to deliver money
unto him out of the common treasure to pay his army, but others impugned the
same; especially Phannins.


Sol: For these causes (be you remembered) I held it a matter very difficult
and dangerous, to deal betwixt the poor and the rich, whereunto I was
required sometimes by the City of Athens, fearing the covetousness of the one,
and the arrogance of the other; the poor desiring, that the land might again
be divided; the rich also of the contrary, that their bargains and covenantes
might a new be confirmed. But what ways and means may be found that may
avoid these difficulties and dangers?


CAP. 5. The ready ways and means to avoid these difficulties and dangers.
EPI: Such Princes and governoures, which will avoid the difficulties and
dangers, which commonly arise in establishing of profitable laws and
ordinances; by reason of diversity of humors, opinions, and factions, they
must of necessity remove for a time, or otherwise employ the leaders and
heads of all such factions, as may give any ways impediment unto their
proceedings; imitating herein Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, who purposely sent
Cato unto Cipres, knowing assuredly, that he would otherwise give impediment
unto their laws and proceedings, especially for the proroging of Caesar his
government, and allowance for his army; or otherwise with Caesar, they shall be
forced to suppress them by authority, and to put Cato to silence by
imprisonment, the which may fortune to displease as well the nobles, as the
people.


Ep: Or otherwise, we are to delude either faction by fair promises and sweet
words, the which subtletie you Solon sometimes used (as Phanias the Lesbian
writes) when as you secretly promised the poor to devide the land again,
and the rich also to confirm their covenantes and bargains; when as you used
these words and sentences, namely that aequality did bre^de no strife; by
which aequivocation of words, you did win as well the poor as the rich,
unto a reformation of disorders; the one supposing, that all things should
be measured according to the quality of the men, and the other took it for
their purpose, that you would measure things by the number, and by the poule
only, whereby you did safely proceed, and mightily further your law called
(...), and did therein overcome all difficulties, by the which, the mighty
sedition, which was then entertained betwixt the poor and the rich, was
appeased.


Sol: You say truly: and for the better iustifiyng of this manner of
proceeding herein, you shall understand, that in a public magistrate, the
same is rightly termed policy, but in private persons, the same is not
unjustly condemned by the name of deceit.


Ep: We have remembered the same, not as condemners, but as approvers of the
fact, and therefore needelesse you have justified your self herein.


Sol: Be it so: proceed then further unto other difficulties and dangers,
which arise herein from the insolency of the multitude, whereof you made
mention in this former treati^e but did not at large discourse thereof.


Ep: Many dangers and difficulties arise from the insolency of the multitude,
as I have said, for that never with one consent of mind, they do admit or
obey any new laws or ordinances, until they plainly understand the same to
be necessary; but the necessity of laws never appears without danger to
the commonweal, which often falls to his last ruin, before the laws can
be perfitly established, which might support the same. The Athenians first
received the evil and mischief, even into the bosom of that commonweal,
before they sought to withstand the same by profitable laws, yea they suffered
the sedition, and vproares, betwixt the issue of Megacles and Cylon, still
fighting and quarrelling, before they could be persuaded to choose you Solon, as
the reformer of there commonweal.


Sol: You may best witness the same, for they suffered the invasion of the
Megarians, they lost the haven of Nysea, and the I Will of Salamina, before they
sent unto you Epimenides into Creta, by whose advise they then reformed there
commonweal, greatly to your laud and praise.


Ep: But more greatly Solon to your commendations, were the mighty factions
long entertained betwixt the people of the mountains, valley, and sea coasts,
quenched and pacified to the great good of Athens.


Sol: they suffered the factions betwixt the poor and the rich, so long to
fester in the bowels of the commonwealth, as the poorer sort did rise in arms
with a purpose to choose unto themselves a captain, and to subvert the whole
state of that commonweal, before they could be persuaded to make a general
reformation of their laws and commonweal: they suffered many vproares and
braules, before they condemned the excommunicantes. The state of Florence also
may with their peril and danger witness the same: which contended not to
suppress the corruptions in the Aretines, before they well near tasted of
their rebellions. In like manner, the Athenians could not be induced, either by
my authority, or else by the vehement persuasions which then I used, to
withstand the tyranny of Pisistratus, before they endured the weight thereof
so heavily, as they could neither cast the same from their shoulders, neither
yet endure the burden thereof.


Ep: This did occasion you sometimes to write and speak after this manner, Each
one of you o men in private acts,
Can play the fox for sly and subtell craft:
But when you come fore in all your factes,
Then are you blind, dull-witted and be daft, etc.


But if we suffer dangers and difficulties in the establishing of good and
profitable laws, how much greater shall these dangers appear unto us, when
we shall use and apply the sharp discipline of laws? the same no doubt is
great, and far exceeds the other; for at such time as Claudius was
accused, and indicted of high treason, by one of the Tribunes of the people, and
by others of the nobility and Senate, the rude multitude and people, did so
boldly and stoutly maintain his unlawful factes, as the Judges for fear
durst not proceed against him, whereby he was discharged of his accusations:
after the like manner did they compass the Senate house, and called for
Caesar, and willed the Senate to let him out at such time, as he was to answer
sundry accusations laid against him. But what ways and means are now left
unto us, whereby we may overcome these difficulties and dangere?


CAP. 6. The several ways and means to overcome all difficulties and
dangers, which arise in this action of reformation, made by profitable laws
and the discipline thereof.
EPI: First we are to remove all occasions, which may move the people or
beholders, to pity or favor offenders. For when Manlius Capitolinus was
sometimes accused as a mover of sedition in Rome, his case was no sooner
pleaded, but the sight of the Capitol troubled his accusers, and the Judges
also; when as pointing with his hand, he showed the place unto the Gods, and
weeping tenderly, laid before them the remembrance of the hazard of his life,
in fighting for the common liberty and safety of Rome, and in defending the
Capitol it self, and repulsing the Gauls; in such sort, as the Judges moved
with pity, knew not what to do, and therefore put over the hearing of his
cause unto another day, because the place of his so notable good service was
ever still before their eyes: wherefore wisely Camillus finding the cause of
delay of Justice, did make the place of Judgment to be removed without the
City into a place called the wood Petelian, from whence they could not see
the Capitol, where his accusers gave apparent evidence against him, and the
Judges considering all his wicked practices, conceived a just cause to punish
him as he had deserved, so as they gave sentence of death against him. Further
no orator, or pleader of causes, is to be suffered to speak in the behalf of
offenders, either to move the Judges to compassion, or to win the offenders
favor in the eye of the beholders. The mischief which arises hereby, did
sometimes appear, when as Caesar was suffered to speak in the behalf of
Lentulus, and Cothegus, companions of Catiline in his conspiracy, by whose
eloquence the offenders had then been delivered, or at the least not committed
to the hands of the officers to be put to death, if the gravitie and authority
of Cato, and vehemence of Catulus, had not dissuaded the contrary. Lastly, the
more often princes shall acquaint their subjects with the discipline of the
law, the more great obedience shall the subjects yield, as well unto laws,
as magistrates, and the less difficulty and danger shall princes find
therein. For the right discipline of laws, does admonish men of their duty,
and does cause them to lead their lives agreeable to law, and from time to
time does suppress the malice of the offenders. For proof whereof, the
Romans so long as they used the just and exact discipline of laws, they
punished the offenders without fear danger, sedition, or mutiny; yea farther,
when as they condemned Camillus unjustly, there was found no friend, no
soldier, the number whereof were many and great, that durst make any
resistance in his behalf: for when as he called unto him his friends and
soldiers, which had served under him in the wars, or that had taken charge
with him, which were many in number, he earnestly besought them, that they
would not suffer him thus vilely to be condemned, through false and unjust
accusations laid against him, and to be so scorned and defamed by his
enemies: his friends having laid their heads together, and consulted
thereupon, made him answer, how that for his judgment they could not remedy
it, but if he were condemned, they would al join together with a very good
will for the payment of his fine. But not long after, Cum toto decennio nullum
Romae statuebatur exemplum paenae delinquentium, then could not the Senate
examine Caesar with their safety, neither yet could the Judges condemn
Claudius without peril.


Sol: Therefore in such commonweals, where the manners of the people are
altogether corrupted, for not applying in good time the discipline of laws, it
behooves the Judges, and such as shall revive the force of ancient laws by
the exact discipline thereof, strongly to be guarded, according to the example
of Cicero being accompanied with a strong guard of Iustie men, when as Consul
he was to convict and execute Lentulus, and Cethegus, for their conspiracies
with Catiline. But Caesar unadvisedly refusing a guard in such cases for the
safety of his person, did eftsoon with the loss of his life approve his
folly: for Brutus, and others, finding him asked in the Senate, without any
strength, or guard did easily execute their malice upon him.


Ep. In like manner, governors in cases of great extremities, for the avoiding
of dangers and difficulties, may proceed against offenders, without observing
the usual ceremonies of law. After this manner did Cicero proceed against
Lentulus, and Cethegus, when as upon proof only, in open Senate, without any
lawful indictment or condemnation, he commanded their delivery into the hands
of the officers to be put to death; for so much may be gathered out of Caesar
his Oration, who at that instant mightily inveyed against that manner of
proceeding, saying, it was not lawful, neither that the custom of Rome did
bear it, to put men of such nobility to death, without lawful indictment or
condemnation, but in cases of extremity. This severe course and manner of
proceeding in cases of extremity, may not be deemed any part of tyranny, if
either we will give credit unto the opinion of Caesar, or unto the fact of
Cicero, and the Senate; or follow the custom of Rome, or deem Cato to be
mild and just, who then being in the Senate, did vehemently persuade the same,
and whose heart was so far from cruelty, as beholding the dead bodies slain
in the camp of his enemies, in the last skirmishe betwixt Pompey and Caesar,
he covered his face and went away weeping.


Sol: I call to remembrance one Sir R. Binghame provincial governor of
Salamina, in my time a most valiant and honorable Knight, and withal a most
wise and grave governor, being given to understand of a general rebellion,
with an intention, not only to overthrowe the state and government, but also
to make deliverance of principal rebels of the sect and nation of the Burkes,
then in prison and safeguard, did forthwith deliver those traitors and rebels to
be put to death, without lawful indictment or condemnation. For seeing
himself fallen into these extremities, that either he must spare the lives of
open and manifest rebels to the damage of the commonweal, or execute them
without lawful indictment and other ceremonies, like a wise governor, two
mischiefs offering themselves at once, made choice of the least, not being as
then to learn that which Caesar sometimes taught Merellus, The times of war
and law are two things: so as in this action and in all other parts of his
government, he has showed himself to be the person, which Archilocus
describes in these his verses He is both Champion stout of Mars his warlike
band,
And of the Muses eke, the arts does understand.



EPI: It seems also convenient for the better avoiding of difficulties and
dangers, that such heads and leaders, as shall be found to give impediment unto
this manner of reformation, be committed to some safe-gard or prison, and there
detained; all which Dionysius advised Dion sometimes by his letters, wishing
him thereby, not to set them at liberty, which hated him and the action which
he had then undertaken of reformation.


Sol: If the Earl of Desmonde late of Salamina, committed to safe-gard and
prison for his sundry rebellions against the City of Athens: had there been
safely detained, the wars of Salamina had neither been chargeable nor
troublesome unto the City of Athens, and if James Fitz Morris in like manner
being in safety and custody of officers to answer all accusations of high
treason, had not been set at large by the Justices for the time being, he had
not then wasted, burned and spoiled a great part of Salamina, neither had he
put the City of Athens to so huge and mighty a charge, nor yet combined with
the enemy to the great danger of that estate. Therefore it is a chief suerty
unto Princes, and great furtherance unto actions of importance, to commit to
safe-gard and prison, such as may give impediment thereunto: for the which
cause king Frederick did no sooner intend the wars against the French, but
he apprehended and put in prison the Prince of Bisigna^ and the County of
Molotte, as friends unto the French. But now since we have spoken at large of
the first part and member of this reformation, let us descend unto the other,
which you have termed a reformation absolute and universal.


THE SECOND BOOK OF Solon his folly.
CAP. 1. A description of a reformation universal, and of the whole state and
body of the commonwealth.
EPI: This reformation universal of the whole state and body of the
commonwealth, is nothing else, but a thorough and absolute mutation and change,
of ancient laws, customs, and manners of the people, and finally of the
commonwealth it self, unto a better form of government.


Sol: It seems then, that this reformation respects three matters
principally: first, the mutation of ancient laws and customs; secondly, the
alteration and change of manners in the people; and finally, a new institution
and a better form of government, then before, prescribed.


CAP. 2. Of the reformation of ancient laws and customs.
EPI: You have well observed my meaning and purpose: and to this effect, a
subtle writer making mention of this reformation general and absolute, says,
that he which shall attempt the same, must alter and change all the ancient
laws and customs, quia ne leges quidem, quae in ipso ortu reipub: a bonis
viris late sancitaeque sunt, sufficientes vtilesque sunt ad eos c^ves
frenandos, qui in eadem repub: a maiorum virtute degenerarunt, and pravi facti
sunt, for, says he, where we find, the times and people thoroughly changed,
embracing now that which is found contrary to their former course and manner of
living, we ought also to change the ancient laws and customs: for,
contraria subiecta non debent eodem modo tractari. The Romans may herein be
unto us a lively example: for after they had subdued Asia, Africa, and in a
manner had reduced under their governemental Greece, they fell eftsoons into a
corruption of manners, contrary to all their former discipline, institution,
and accustomed manner of living: their ancient laws and customs established
for creating of Magistrates, they mightily abused; selling their voices of
election openly in the market place for money: in like manner did they abuse al
other their ancient laws and customs, namely the laws and customs, which
divided the commonweal and power thereof into the hands of the people and
Senators, so as there could not be a reformation of that estate, without a
mutation made of those ancient laws and customs, then grown by the
iniquity of those times out of use.


Sol: But what need we search foreign examples? when Salamina does afforde
sundry proofs thereof, where we may behold many ancient customs and
privileges, granted (no doubt) at the first, for the advancement of public
services, but now turned by a general corruption in the subject, to the ruin
of themselves and the land of Salamina; which must of necessity be altered
and changed, before any thorough reformation may there be established: all
which may appear unto such as shall read the Act of Absentes, which is left
unto us as a register of the fall and declynation of the state of Salamina;
wherein it is manifest, that the Lords of the several counties, of Carthelagh,
and Wexforde, being places privileged, may keep and hold all manner pleas
within the same, by occasion and under pretense and color whereof, the kings
laws, writtes, or other processes, be not obeyed, neither any other law or
justice there used or administered, for the quieting and good ordering of the
subject: so as in defaulte thereof, the kings enemies have them in servage; al
murders, robberies, theftes, treasons, and other offenses, remain unpunished;
the kings wards, reliefes, escheates, and all other his profits and revennewes
are there withdrawn; and the service, strength, and assistaunce of the said
subject, is greatly minished; all which more at large shall appear to such as
shall pervse the said statute: so as we may conclude, that without a mutation,
made of these ancient customs and privileges now grown out of use, and
declyned from their first institution by a general corruption in the subject,
the state of Salamina may never be perfitly and thoroughly reformed. For as the
state of Rome, in manner as before declined, could not by the laws, sumptuarij
ambitus, neither by any other new law be sustained and underpropped, without a
thorough alteration made of all other the ancient laws and customs thereof;
so may we not expect in these days a thorough reformation of Salamina, by the
laws of Captainshippe, the laws against Coiney and Liverie, the laws against
taking of pledges, the laws against wilful murder, or any other new law
whatsoever made for the reformation of Salamina, without a thorough alteration
made of the ancient customs and privileges thereof, all which we there
sometimes employed in that service, were daily taught, rather by experience
then by any learned or deep discourse, that may be made thereof. In like manner
if the custom of Captainshippe, the custom of Coiney and Livery, and the
custom of taking of pledges, the custom of Tanistery, the custom of
protecting and supporting of traitors, had not been abolished by laws, then
all new laws whatsoever would have been found unprofitable for the
reformation of Salamina: for in such cases it is said by learned writers, that
leges novae minus prodesse queant ad tollenda vitia quae regnant. Now since it
is evident, that a thorough reformation may not be made without a mutation of
ancient laws and customs, which are found evil in themselves, or else by
mutation and change of times have now lost their first vigor and force, it
behooves that we do understand, what order and rule herein is to be observed,
for the more ready effecting thereof.


CAP. 3. Of the reformation of ancient laws and customs, and what things
therein chiefly are to be considered.
EPI: In all mutations made of ancient laws and customs, three matters
especially fall into deliberation: first the means; secondly the form and
manner; lastly the subject and matter. The means are in number five: the first
is authority; the goodwill and consents of the people, the second; the third
persuasions; a sufficient power and force, is the fourth; the fifth and the
last is a magistrate, of rare and excellent virtues, which may suppress the
envy and malice of such, as shall oppose themselves against this intended
reformation, made by the mutation of ancient laws and customs.


Sol: But what authority is required for the better effecting of a reformation?
For this as the first matter, you have well observed to be requisite herein.


Epi: All authority herein granted is after two sorts: the one absolute; the
other limited by time, and other circumstances. This authority absolute, was
given sometime into your hands by the Athenians; for after such time as they
had well tasted of the law and ordinance, called (...), they forthwith did
choose you their general reformer of the law, and of the whole state of the
commonweal, without limiting this power then granted unto you, but referred
all matters indifferentlye unto your will, as the offices of state, common
assemblies, voices in election, judgments in justice, and the body of the
Senate. Finally, they gave unto you all power and authority, to cease and tax
any of them, to appoint the number, and what time the cease should continue,
and to keep, confirm, and disanull at your pleasure, any of the ancient
laws and customs, then in being. But this authority absolute, without any
limitation of the power it self, or of the time and continuance thereof, has
sometimes turned to the great prejudice and danger of such as formerly have
granted the same: for the Romans after they had elected their Decemviri, for
the making of a thorough and absolute reformation of the commonweal of Rome,
they forthwith gave into their hands the sole and absolute power of Rome, so
as all other authorities and jurisdictions either of Consul, Senate, or
Tribunes, ceasing, they wholly and only governed Rome, without any provocation
or appeal to be made to any other. Thus when no Magistrate remained, which
might observe the actions of such as were found ambitious, easily did Appius
Claudius, fall into the thoughts of the principality of Rome; he does
strengthen himself with friends, and clye^ts, and daily increases his
wealth, and now of a Citizen is become a fearful enemy to the state of Rome;
in such sort, as they may neither endure his pride and insolency, neither may
they safely suppress the same without their common peril and danger.
Therefore more wisely did the Lacedaemonians give great authority to their
kings; and likewise did the Venetians to their Dukes; but yet with certain
limits and bonds, not lawful for them to exceed; and farther did appoint
certain watchmen, as daily beholders and observers of all their actions and
doings.


Sol: But what limitation of time, in granting this absolute authority, may
breed safety unto him that gives the same? This is the second and last
matter, now remembered by you, and worthy of consultation.


Epi: The provincial government over the Gauls, with an absolute power given
into the hands of Caesar, for the better reformation thereof, was so long
proroged and continued, as at the last with the sword of the Romans, and the
money of the Gauls, he became terrible, as well to the Gauls, as to the
Romans, and returned not a Citizen now of Rome, but as a fearful enemy,
and conqueror, as well of the City, as of all the other territories and
dominions thereof. And was not also the provincial government of Spain
sometimes given into the hands of Pompey with an absolute authority for the
reformation thereof, so long proroged and continued, as with one stamp of his
foot he was able, (as himself reported) to fill the City of Rome with
weapons, and armed men? And did not Appius Claudius by proroging his authority
but for one year, become fearful to the City of Rome? And did not the
Romans by making a Dictator perpetual, loose the liberty of their City?
and does authority thus easily corrupt the manners of good subjects? and is
the age also wherein we live free from such corruption? Nay, more then that, is
there not an enemy on foot, that labors the corruption of the whole? Then
what authority here may be limited so straight, as in this time may not be
thought too large? what time may be so short, which may not be deemed too
long? Therefore let every good and faithful counselor unto the state, with
Cato resist here the proroging of Caesar his government, least too late with
Pompey they acknowledge their error: it shall not suffice here to grant but
one year more unto Appius Claudius; neither is it sufficient that Caesar is
holden in disgrace with the City of Rome; neither may we here safely believe
all which shall say unto Pompey, Caesar is hated of the garrisons, and
soldiers: for when Caesar comes with his fortune, he shall then force, as
well Pompey, as the City of Rome, to acknowledge their former follies and
errors:


Sol. But now unto what person may this authority be safely granted, is a
matter herein, not unworthy of consultation.


Ep: It is safely granted unto a man approved to be good and honest, with this
caution, that he be not of such power and force, as the state may stand in
fear of his greatness. For the best sometimes have fallen by reason of honors
and dignities into a general corruption of manners, and therefore we receive
it as a proverb, honores mutant mores.


Sol. At no time then is it safely committed into the hands of personages of
great might, power, and wealth.


Ep: You have said the truth: for what danger did arise to the state of
Athens, by constituting Garralde Fitz Garralde attained, Liuetenant of
Salamina? who having at once might, power, and sovereign commandment in his
hands, did eftsoons conspire, and combine, sundry treasons, and rebellions.


Sol: The records of Salamina does witness so much as you have said, for there
it is alleged, that he did conspire with the French king and Emperor, for
the invading and possessing of Salamina: he did also in proper person invade
the County of Kylkennie, there burning, destroying, and murdering the kings
subjects: he did invade also with Oneyle, and his forces, O Coner, and other
of the said Earl his friends, alies, and servants, by his commandment the
County of Vriell; wherein he was aided, and assisted by Sir John, brother unto
the said Earl. The like or greater danger did grow unto the state of
Athens, by constituting Thomas Fitz Garralde, son and heir to the said
Earl, Lieutenant of Salamina: who succeeding in the place of his father,
having the like might, power, and forces lent unto him by his friends, alies,
and servantes, and sovereign authority given from the king, did eftsoons
revile that famous City of Athens, and his lawful sovereign, and moved all
rebellions against them; and did therewith also address his letters unto the
Bishop of Rome, and the Emperor, for the invading of Salamina: and farther did
put to death, and cruelly murdered all those which were resident within the
land of Salamina, being borne Citizens of Athens, and amongst others did put
to death that reverende father and faithful counceller John Allin Archbishop
of Deublin, and primate of Salamina. More then this, he constrained with his
power and forces, the subjects of Athens, to give unto him an oath of
obedience, and forthwith besieged the Castle of Deublin, where with his whole
army by the sea coast he encamped, for the better resisting, destroying, and
murdering the army of Athens, Statutes of Ire: 35. H. 8. ca. 3. fol. 11.
as they landed. No less dangers then these formerly rehearsed, appeared at
such times, when as the Duke of York pretending himself Livetenant of the
said land, did with his power, and forces, occupy and possess all the
territories and dominions thereof. Therefore of late days, has the Counsel
of Athens most providently committed this sovereign authority unto such, as may
not be able with forces and power to usurp the same. But if unto this
authority thus given, to effect a reformation, the consentes and good-wils of
the people be found agreeable, no doubt the ^am^ shall mightily further that
action.


CAP. 4. The good will and consent of the people is a ready means to effect a
reformation.
EPI: You have said the truth: for where the good will of the people is first
won and obtained, there the mutation is made, without difficulty and
danger. All which may lively appear in the history of Tarquine, who having
lost as well the good will of the people, as of the Senate, by changing the
ancient laws and customs of the City of Rome, was easily expelled that
kingdom.


Sol: It is true that you have said; for he did draw unto himself all the
authority, as well of the Senate, as also of the liberty of the people, which
sometimes they inioied under their former kings, and for this cause chiefly,
he failed of the good will of the people, in this his mutation and alteration
of things. But Brutus on the contrary, having won the good-wil of the
people, for the effecting of a reformation, and expelling of Tarquine, did
change the state of the commonweal, without any difficulty, danger, or
injury sustained by any other, then the expelling of Tarquine. Likewise, when
the Medicei Vrbe Florentinorum Anno salutis M.CCCC.XL.IIII. pellebantur, the
change was made without danger and difficulty, for as much as the same was
effected by the good will and consentes of the people. Since therefore the
consent of the people, does give so great furtheraunce unto this action of
reformation, it seems a matter very necessary, that every Magistrate
should retain the art, skill, and knowledge, of persuading and inducing the
multitude, as you have in the first chapter of this book well remembered.


CAP. 5. The force of persuasions, and how necessary the same is to effect a
reformation.
EPIMEN: So it is indeed, for the good will and consent of the people, does
promise no small security unto the Magistrate which intends this action of
reformation: and therefore not without cause, Pythagoras was of all sorts of
persons greatly honored, for his singular art and knoweledge in winning the
affections of the multitude, and in persuading, and dissuading the people, all
which Plutarch witnesses after this manner, Pythagoras which loved to dwell,
In highest dignity:
And had a heart to glory bent,
And past in policy:
Much like a man which sought,
By charming to inchaunt:
Did use this art to win men's minds,
Which unto him did haunt.
His grave and pleasant tongue,
In sugared speech did flow,
Whereby he drew most minds of men,
To bent of his own bow.


Though Lycurgus was the eleventh which descended from the right line of
Hercules, though a man of great authority, of great force, of long continuance
a king, yet indevoring a reformation of many disorders, which did chiefly
arise in that estate, by the inequallitie of lands and possessions, therein
(as Plutarch witnesses) he used more persuasions, then force: a good witness
thereof was the loss of his eye. You Solon also altered and reformed that in
the commonwealth of Athens, which you thought by reason you should persuade
your citizens unto, or else by force you ought to compel them to accept.


Epi: The Romans therefore well understanding the force of persuasions, in
all actions of reformation, did institute the holy order of the Faeciales, who
retayning the art of persuading, and dissuading the people, did much further
the commonweal of Rome; for they went many times in person to those that did
the Romans injury, and sought to persuade them with good reason to keep
promise with the Romans, and to offer them no wrong: they did also persuade
the people, to deliver Fabius Ambustus, unto the Gauls, as one that had
violated the laws of arms, and farther proved by many reasons, that a
present reformation made of that disorder and injustice, would deliver Rome
from many calamities, then like to ensue by the power of the Gauls. By this
art and skill of persuading, did Camillus appease the great sedition and
mutinye, raised sometimes by the people of Rome against the Senators, for that
they had not their full mind and liberty, to inhabit the city of Vies. By
this art and skill, you Solon have now of late induced the Athenians to make
wars with the Megarians for the possessing of Salamina, contrary to their
former liking, public laws, and proclamations made in that behalf: and the
like honor did you sometimes win by your oration, made in the defense of the
temple of Apollo, in the city of Delphos, declaring, that it was not meet to
be suffered, that the Cyrrhaeians should at their pleasure abuse the sanctuary
of the oracle; by force of which persuasions, the council of Amphictions was
thoroughly moved, so that they sought a present reformation thereof. By this
your art and skill, you also persuaded those which in Athens they sometimes
called the abiectes and excommunicates, to be judged, whereby you did quench
and appease two mighty factions, the one supported by the issues of the rebels,
that rose with Cylon, and the other by the offspring of Megacles.


Sol: I acknowledge this your friendly report, not as a testimony of any art
or skill, but of the office and duty which I bear unto the city of Athens.
But after this manner sometimes a notable mutinye and sedition raised by the
citizens of Salamina, against the Justices of assizes and iayle deliverie, in
my presence was happily appeased. But now since the necessity of the art and
skill of persuading is sufficiently made known unto us, there remains, that
you describe unto us the art it self, with the parts and members thereof.


CAP. 6. The art and skill of persuading, worthily known and observed of all
public Magistrates.
EPI: The art and skill of persuading, consists in the knowledge of two
matters especially: first we must know how to commend the matter, or person
of such as we intend to persuade; then how to moove, win, and dispose the
affections of the people. For the first, the Poet says truly, that he sings
most sweetly, that sings my praise and commendation.


Sol: This which you have said, did manifestly appear after the battle of
Xerxes fought with the Grecian army, for then all the Grecian Captains being
in the straight of Peloponnesus, did swear upon the altar of their sacrifices,
that they would give their voices after their consciences to those they
thought had best deserved it, where every one gave himself the first place for
worthiness, and the second unto Themistocles. After this manner, did Publicola
win the good will of Appius Claudius, a man of great strength and reputation
among the Sabines, in giving honor unto him, by the way of an embassage,
whereby he gave Claudius to understand, that he knevv him right well to be a
just man, and hated without cause of his citizens; and therefore if he had any
desire to provide for his safety, and to repair to Rome, leaving them which
causeless wished him so much evil, they would publicly and privately receive
him with due honor; by which means, Publicola did not only win Appius
Claudius with those of his faction, which were great and many in number, but
also stayed and turned the wars from the Romans, then intended by the
Latynes and Sabines.


Sol: There remains now, that you disclose unto us the knowledge, how to
win, move, and dispose the affections of the people, as the second part and
member, of the art and skill of persuading.


CAP. 7. The skill and knowledge how to win, moon, and dispose the
affections of the people.
EPI: Herein three matters especially are found worthy of consideration: first
the affections what they be; secondarilie the subject and matter, wherewith
they usually are moved, and carried away, as with the violence of some
tempest; thirdly the ways how to win, moove, and persuade the people,
according to the example of the worthiest and wisest in times past. The
affections which be the first, are in number these; love, hatred, hope, fear,
despair, and such like; the matter and subject which is the second, is
parentage, consanguinity, friends, goods, possessions, lands, the custom and
manner of living, honors, liberty and life; the presence whereof we love and
embrace, and with their absence we are soon carried away unto wrath, hatred,
revenge, hope, fear, and despair: therefore from hence as from a fountain,
have the wise governors in former ages, drawn all the force of persuading; by
the same have they induced the people to embrace matters profitable to the
commonweal, even against their wills. And how mightily these transitory
things have always appeared in the eye of the multitude, it may appear by
the answer given from the Athenians unto Themistocles, whereas he persuaded
the people to leave their city, goods, possessions, and lands, and to get
them to the sea for the better eschewing of the Barbarian forces, which then
were so mighty, as the same might not well be withstoode by the proper forces
of the Athenians: In vain (says the people unto Themistocles) do we then
seek the preservation of our lives, when we shall forsake the graves of our
fathers and auncetours. Such was the love they bare unto those transitory
things: and therefore one amongst the rest, spoke in choler unto Themistocles
after this manner; Themistocles, for a man that has neither city nor house,
it is an evil part to will others that have, to forsake all; but Themistocles
turning to him, replied, we have willingly forsaken houses and walls (says
he) cowardly beast that thou art, because we will not become slaves, for
fear to loose things that have neither soul nor life.


Sol: Now you are to give us to understand, of the sundry ways and means,
how to win, move, and dispose the affections of the people, which is the
third and last matter by you remembered, worthy of every public magistrate,
which shall endeavor the knowledge and art of persuading.


CAP. 8. Persuasions are after two sorts; the wales, and means, how to
persuade, and induce the multitude; the art and skill required in all
persuasions ordinary.
EPI: The ways and means how to win, move, and dispose the affections of
the people, are usually after two sorts: the one ordinary; the other
extraordinary. The ordinary ways and means, are in number three: First you
shall vvisely observe the affections of such persons, as you intend to
persuade; secondarilie, you shall vviselie acquit, and deliver, as well the
matter, as the person of him that persuades, from all suspicion of fraud and
guile; lastly you shall dravv the people unto a particular consideration of the
matter you intend to persuade. We must diligently observe their affections;
for so Phanias Lesbian vvriteth, that the mighty and dangerous faction
sometimes entertained betwixt the rich and the poorer sort of the city of
Athens, was by you Solon easelie pacified, in that you diligently observed the
affections of either, and did secretly promise the poor to devide the lands,
wherewith they remained highly pleased, to the rich you promised the
confirmation of their contracts, which was the matter they chiefly desired.
Also you did not let to feed their humors and affections with the daily
publishing of this sentence, equality does breed no strife; the which did
please as well the rich and wealthy, as the poor and needy sort; for the one
conceived of this word equality, that you would measure all things according
to the quality of the men, and the other took, for their purpose, that you
would measure things by the number, and by the poule only; thus both being
pleased with you, for that you well observed their humors and affections, they
gave into your hands sovereign authority for the ending of all quarrels,
whereby that mighty faction was happily appeased, to the general good of
Athens. You also well observed the affections of the people, when as you
clothed things bitter and unpleasant, with pleasing names; calling taxes,
contributions; garrisons, gardes; prisons, houses; and such like: by the which
policy, you made even things odious, pleasing and acceptable to the people,
and easily thereby persuaded the embracing thereof. In like manner Themistocles
indevouring like a wise general to augment his strengthes by the aid of the
Ionians, in his wars against the Persians, did wisely observe the affections
as well of the Ionians, as of the Persians then his enemies: for passing by
some places, where he knew the enemy must of necessity fall upon that coast
for harborough, he did ingrave certain words spoken unto the Ionians, in
great letters in stone, which he found there by chance, or otherwise brought
thither for that purpose; these were the words, that the Ionians should take
the Graecians part, being their first founders and auncetours, and such as
sought for their liberty; or at the least they should trouble the army of the
Barbarous people, and do them all the mischief they could, when the
Graecians should come to fight with them: by these words thus in graven, and
dispersed in fit places, where the enemy was likely to harborough, he hoped
either to induce the Ionians to take their part, or at the least, that thereby
he should make the Barbarous people, ielous and mistrustfull of them.


CAP. 9. How that the Magistrate which intends to persuade the multitude,
must wisely acquit himself of all suspicion of fraud.
SOL: Now you have sufficiently discoursed of the first means, whereby the
multitude do rest persuaded, the second now remains, namely, the knowledge
how to deliver the matter and person of him that persuades, from all
suspicion of fraud and guile; for then all persuasions move mightily, and make
a deep impression in the hearts of the people, when like unto clear waters,
they descend from the pure fountain of integrity. Therefore when Alcibiades
persuaded the people of Athens to invade and occupy the empire of Sicilia, well
hoping that the people would assign him general of that army, Niceas a man
of rare and excellent virtues, rather regarding the public good then his
private profit, dissuaded the contrary; and to the end the people should be
thoroughly persuaded of his integrity herein, he spoke unto them after this
manner: in times of peace, the City of Athens affords many Citizens, which
shall have place before me, but in times of war, I nothing doubt but to be
the chief and first among them; and therefore be you confident in this, that I
now dissuade the wars, for that it stands more with the public good,
then with my private profitte. In like manner Numa, the better to deliver
himself from the suspicion of fraud, in all matters wherein he labored to
induce and persuade the people, he observed two matters especially: first he
persuaded them, that he did work the reformation of that commonweal by the
means and help of the Gods, in which action no fraud may receive place, for
that they be for the most part, always accompanied with integrity and
sincerity of mind; secondly he persuaded nothing unto the people, but that
which himself performed in person: for Numa judging it no light enterprise
(says Plutarch) to pluck down the hautie stomachs of so fierce and warlike
a people, did pacify their fierce courages to fight, with daily sacrifices,
prayer, and devotion, wherein he ever celebrated himself in person. In like
manner, when you Solon were to publish your law called (...), the better to
persuade the people of your integrity herein, you were the first that followed
your own proclamation, and clearly released your debtors of fifteen talentes
then due unto your self.


Sol: So I did, though it stood with my loss and hinderance. But now there
remains the third and last means, wherewith the multitude is mightily
induced and persuaded, formerly by you remembered, worthy of consultation,
namely, that we draw the people unto a particular consideration of such
matters as we intend to persuade.


CAP. 10. The magistrate which intends to persuade the multitude, must draw
them unto a particular consideration of such matters as he endeavors to
persuade.
EPI: You have remembered that which I could not well forget, the fame being
always found the most assured way to induce the people: for in consulting
and disputing of matters in general, they greatly err, judging all things to
proceed from other causes, then from the true causes thereof. Therefore vvisely
Camillus, when as he indevoured to persuade the people of Rome, from the
inhabiting of the city of Vies, then for the same cause being fallen into a
mutiny, he descended unto particulars with the multitude, and pointed with
his finger unto the graves of their fathers, and auncetours, saying, will you
needs inhabit the city of Vies? And will you forthwith forsake the graves
of your fathers and auncetours? And will you now leave the holy temples
dedicated to the Gods, and sanctified by Numa and Romulus? And will you suffer
the holy fire now newly kindled, now once again to be put out? And finally,
will you leave this your natural city (pointing with his finger unto the
city of Rome) to be inhabited by strangers in time to come, or else to be a
common pasture for vvilde beasts to feed on? By which manner of persuasion he
eftsoons appeased the mutinye, and quenched their ardent desire for the
inhabitinge of Vies. After this manner, did Pacuvius proceed in pacifiyng and
subduing the peoples affections from killing their Senators; which matter by
them was fully determined, until such time, as he conventing the people and
Senators, as for the hearing and determining of some public and weighty
cause, did proceed with them after this manner: now my friends and Citizens
(says he) that which you have even with an ardent desire and affection long
wished, namely the punishment and correction of this detestable and wicked
Senate, the same has fortune now given into your power and hands, freely to
dispose of them at your pleasure, being now altogether naked, and closed in on
every side with walls, where, without tumult of the City, and peril of your
persons, you may freely dispose of them; but least you should prefer the
desire of private revenge, before the common safety of al here gathered
together, it behooveth before you give sentence of these Senators, whom you
do mortallie hate, that you proceed first to the choice of others; for of
force you must either have Senators, which always have been the most wise and
fit counselors of free estates; or otherwise you must of necessity fall into
the hands of a Lord or King, which free estates have ever hated; proceed
therefore to the election of new, and make choice of better men, which may
supply their places: this matter appearing unto the people doubtful, did hold
them long in silence, but at the last one among the rest being nominated,
their clamor and noise far exceeded their former silence, some affirming
they knew him not, some accusing his person, others despising his base art and
science; and much more in the choice of the second, and third, this dissension
was increased, they being more base and obscure, then the first: then
beholdinge the ground, with shame fastnes they confessed their former error,
saying, they did choose rather to tolerate an old evil, then a new, which
might far exceed the old. In like manner the people of Rome, consulting at
large, found that they sustained in all wars the greatest force of the
enemy, they found themselves also to be called to all labors and works,
whereby the commonwealth was to be preserved or augmented, and so forthwith
they judged themselves as worthy of the office and dignity of the Tribuneship,
and Consulship, as any Patrician whatsoever: and therevppon contended, that the
Tribunes should be equally elected, as well of the one as of the other sort;
the which being unto them granted, and descending to make election, could
find none in particular worthy of that honor, or at the least so worthy as
the Patricians and nobles were; then forthwith they did acknowledge their
former error, and made choice of the Patricians only. After this manner, the
people generally consulting of the delays and cunctation, which Fabius used
in repelling the forces of Hannibal, forthwith they condemned him to be a
cowarde and faint hearted; but afterward they waighing that their council by
the several events and overthrowes they received by the rash and overhasty
proceeding of Varro the Consul, and of Marcus Senteinius, with others, they
did soon after adiudge the wisdom of Fabius to be some rare and divine
influence received from the Gods. In like sort the people of Rome, after such
time as Brutus and Cassius had fully executed the conspiracy then intended
against the person of Caesar, generally consulting of that action, remained for
a time, as indifferent beholders thereof, neither accusing, neither yet making
allowance thereof; but no sooner did Caesar his friends show forth his
testament, his several legacies unto the people, his many and cruel wounds,
and those every where freshly bleeding and increasing like a running stream,
the people as possessed with some fury or frencie, every where in the market
place, every where in the corners of the street, in private houses, in the
fields, and in the vvoodes also, cruelly murdered all such, as were partakers
with Brutus in that action. After this manner, the ancient Tirantes of
Athens, contending sometimes to persuade the people to labor, and especially
to til and ploughe the ground, thereby to render them more obedient unto their
government, did give out a certain fable; they tell of the Goddess Pallas,
that she contending with Neptune about the patronage of the country of
Athens, brought forth and showed to the Judges the Olive tree, by means
whereof she obtained the pre-eminence: by which particular demonstration made,
the people were mightily induced to labor and till the land. After this
manner the people of Rome, generally consulting of the division of lands
gained by conquest, did fall into mutinies and seditions against the Senators;
then vvisely the Senators deducted forthwith certain colonies out of the
confines of Italy, whereby eftsoons the multitude were given to
understand, of the particular charge, travel, and other sundry
inconveniences, that did arise by possessing of lands gained by conquest,
wherewith all mutinies were appeased. Thus the magistrate that intends to
persuade the people, must not generally consult of matters, but must descend
unto particulars with them; and therefore that orator shall most readily
persuade, which shall dravv his arguments and the force of his persuasion, ab
effectibus, ab exemplis, or such like: and these be the ordinary persuasions.


Sol: There remains now the other sote, termed by you persuasions
extraordinary,


CAP. 11. Persuasions extraordinary, and when or at what time they be requisite
and necessary.
EPI: Such were they which Themistocles sometimes used, for (says Plutarch)
when all other persuasions failed, and could not work that public good
which he then intended, he did threaten the Athenians with signs from heaven,
and with Oracles, and aunsweres; and when as he could not persuade the
Citizens of Athens, no not for the safegarde of their lives, to depart the
City at the coming of Xerxes, whose forces they were not able to withstand,
he pollitiquely caused a brute to be spread abroad among the people, that the
Goddess Minerva, the protector and defender of the City of Athens, had
forsaken the City, pointing them the way unto the sea; and again, he vvonne
them with a prophecy, which commanded them to save themselves in walls of
wood, saying, that the walls of wood, did signify nothing else but ships;
and for this cause Apollo in his Oracle, called Salamina divine, not miserable
and unfortunate, because it should give the name of a most happy victory,
which the Graecians should get there; by which extraordinary persuasions,
he did induce them at the last to leave the City of Athens, and to betake
themselves to the sea: by occasion whereof, they did not only deliver
themselves from the hands of their enemies, but became at the last
conquerours, and victours over them. In like manner, when all ordinary means
of persuading failed to effect the reformation sometimes intended by Numa, he
made his recourse to these extraordinary helps and means, laying before the
peoples eyes a terror and fear of their Gods, bearing them in hand, that
they had seen strange visions, or that he had heard voices, by which their
Gods did threaten them with some great troubles and plagues: whereby he did
pull down and humble their hearts (as Plutarch witnesses) and made thereby a
thorough change and reformation, as well of the commonweal, as of the manners
of the people. Therefore Plutarch not without judgment affirms, that the
multitude in matters weight, and difficult, rest satisfied and persuaded,
rather by extraordinary, then by ordinary means: all which he does lively
manifest, whereas he induces the multitude exclaiming upon Themistocles, for
not sacrificing the three young prisoners, in so much as Themistocles forced by
their rage and clamor, did sacrifice at the last the three prisoners;
wherewith the people remained fully persuaded, that the victory should be
given unto them over their enemies. Again, sometimes it fares with the
multitude, as with the sick patient, which being overcome with the greatness
of his malady, is thereby become so impatient, as he refuses all wholesome
medicines, which may breed his health and safety; the which malady sometimes
possessed the people of Athens, when as they rejected your counsel for the
vvithstanding of the tyranny of Pisistratus, having then newly with his forces
entered the castle, and forte of Athens, wherewith the people stood so
amazed, as they showed themselves more vvilling to suffer that evil, then able
to prevent the same by your counsel.


Sol: This happens oftentimes, when the people with the suddennes or
waightines of the matter, are found dulled, mazed, and oppressed, and thereby
as with some great malady remain overcome; or otherwise, when they find
themselves formerly deluded, by the like matter, or by the same persons, and
dare not, or will not now give confidence, though for the present he persuades
nothing, but that which is expedient and profitable for the^: the which
matters, the people of Rome objected sometimes against the Senators, when by
the fear of foreign wars, they went about to frustrate the law of
division: and in these cases as Danta reports in his Monarchy, even with
open voice, they embrace their ruin, and abhor their safety and welfare.
But now let us proceed unto the fourth way and means, namely, sufficient
forces which in such cases are to be prepared, whereby the Magistrate with
greater safety and assurance may effect a reformation.


CAP. 12. How strength, power, and forces, are necessary for the better
effecting of a reformation, and how in good time, the same ought to be applied.
EPI: In the reformation of Athens, you Solon found the necessity of forces,
when neither the good-wils and consents of the people, neither the absolute
authority which they gave into your hands, neither yet the art and skill of
persuading which then in the highest manner you retained, was found
sufficient to suppress the ambition of Pisistratus, or to confirm the
reformation which you had newly established, for that you wanted sufficient
power and forces, for the better effecting thereof. Therefore this magistrate
which shall intend this action of reformation, must with Publicola have
sufficient power to execute his virtues and well disposed mind: for by this
means especially did he alter, change, and reform a mighty kingdom, which
had continued a long time, and was thoroughly established.


Sol: For this cause chiefly, I must confess, that I was altogether
vnprovident in taking upon me the function and office of a king, to decide all
controversies and broils, at the instance of my friends and citizens, and yet
refused the kingly name and power, the which then was offered unto me, and
without the which I found by experience, that I could never safely execute
that which seemed to me then profitable for the beter reformation of the
commonweal of Athens.


Epi: So it appeared; for soon after you well understood your former error,
the which you did sometimes liberally confess, saying after this manner, that
with the authority and power then committed into your hands, a man possibly
Could not control the peoples minds,
Nor still their brains that wrought like winds.



Sol: You have said the truth: and for the same cause also at another time, I
could not appease the sedition which did sometimes arise in Athens by reason
of the inequality of lands and possessions after the example of Lycurgus, by
making an equal division thereof, for that I had not then the power, forces,
and authority of Lycurgus. Howbeit I performed that which possibly I might
with the small power and forces then given into my hands by the Citizens of
Athens.


Epi: Surely this occasion of reformation is full of difficulties, as you have
said, and many will still be found, which shall be discontented therewith; the
which has been espied by men of wisdom, and such as have been experienced
in such cases, and sometimes your self not without just cause did acknowledge
in these verses following.

Full hard it is all minds content to have,
And specially in matters hard and grave.
Many and unjust are the accusations and attemptes of the multitude, against
such as have authority and commandment over them; great and many be they in
number, especially in commonweals corrupted in manners, which do labor and
travel so with envy against all excellent men, as that they rather wish their
countries destruction, then by them a prosperous reformation thereof; by the
which occasions, the faith and services of men, are oftentimes sinisterly
interpreted, sometimes by opinion, sometimes by malice, as well to the
overthrowe of great and profitable actions, as also of worthy and faithful
servitors.


Sol: Therefore Moses, before he could establish the laws, which God unto
him had delivered, and commanded, found it necessary, with forces to remove
such, as being pricked forward with envy, did oppose themselves against his
intended reformation, And Hieronymus Savanarole vvanting sufficient forces, was
soon oppressed by the envy of others, and failed of his intended reformation,
as it may appear by his sermons, Contra sapientes huius mundi.


Ep: Neither is it sufficient in these cases to have forces, but as necessary
it is to make use thereof, and in due time to apply the same to the better
furtheraunce of this action of reformation: whereof Lycurgus failing, did
establish his reformation with the loss of his eye, and with no small danger
unto his person, for that he contended rather with persuasions then with
forces, to establish a reformation of ancient laws and customs, and of the
lands and possessions of the Citizens. In like manner Peter Soderin, having
sufficient forces that might well have overcome the envy and malice of such as
were found to oppose themselves against him, did not in time apply the same,
and make use thereof, but rather contended with benefits and with a just and
honest course of life, to overcome the envy and malice of such as vvithstoode
his reformation; whereby in a short time, he did not only perish and undo
himself, but also did overthrowe his country and regiment; forgetting that
which now is every where in experience, that the malice of the envious man,
may neither with offices nor benefits be pleased and reconciled.


Sol: If the necessity of forces be great to effect a reformation, (as it
plainly appears by that which has been said) in such common-weals
especially where the manners of the people are found corrupted, then much
greater is the necessity thereof, when reformation is to be made of a
commonweal, gained by the sword and conquest, as also corrupted in manners;
for that the people having here sustained many injuries by force and violence,
whereunto the conqueror is drawn oftentimes by their disobedience, may not
at any time after with new benefits, offices, and rewards, be reconciled
and pacified: neither shall we find here profitable laws, or any sufficient
means to effect a reformation, without sufficient forces, to repel all
dangers, and difficulties: all which Salamina may well witness unto the world;
for when as the governor there, did contend to suppress by public
proclamation thorough out the whole province of Mounster, that detestable
custom of Coiney and Livery, and other extortions, which had then consumed the
marrowe and fatness of that commonweal of Salamina; then it was found not
sufficient to have the same established by late laws, whereunto the whole
parliament had agreed and consented; neither was it sufficient, that the same
tended to the universal good of the commonweal; but forces herein also were
requisite, to suppress the Butlers, and Garroldines, which then on every side
did arise in the mainteinaunce of that detestable custom of Coiney and Livery:
all which Sir Warram Sentlenger, then provincial governor, can well witness:
by whose care and diligence together with the aid and assistaunce of the
forces and garrisons of Salamina, they were soon suppressed. Forces being thus
necessary for the effecting of a reformation, into whose hands the same is to
be given, is the fifth and last means worthy of consultation.


CAP. 13. How a Magistrate of rare and excellent virtues is required in this
action of reformation.
EPI: This action of reformation with sufficient forces, for the better
effecting thereof, is to be given into the hands of some man of rare and
excellent virtues, by whose constancy and integrity, the envy and malice of the
enemy may be quenched. Therefore the Florentines did not a little err, which in
the times of their difficult wars, held Antonie Iacomine above all others in
great estimation, for that only he had taught the Florentine army, as it were
with his finger, to fight, conquer, and command: yet in milder times, when as
the wars by his industry were grown easy and placable, they little
regarded those his virtues, in such sort, as when three Captains were
propounded to be chosen for the suppressing of the Pisans, he was not accepted
to be one of that number; from the which error this mischief did arise unto
the Florentines, that the Pisans, which by the industry of Antonie might easily
have been reformed, and forced to have obeyed the Florentines, made eftsoons
head against those unskillful Captains so strongly, as the Florentines were
forced dishonourably to purchase their obedience with money. Again Phillip of
Macedonie, after he had beheld the affairs of the Athenians to be given into
the hands of Molosses, Caridemus, and such other unskillful Captains, he
conceived a great hope to overcome them. In like manner, the weakness and
facility of Collatinus the Consul, did much encourage the traitors, in such
sort, as he had never prevailed against the Tarquines, nor reformed the state
of Rome, if the great virtue and severitie of Brutus had not governed at that
time the helm and stern; whereby the courage and boldness of the traitors,
raised by the suffrance and lenity of Collatinus, as a tempest was suddenly
calmed and pacified.


Sol: Therefore provident were the counsel of Athens in committing this actio^
of the reformation of Salamina, sometimes into the hands of the L. Gray,
sometimes into the hands of Sir William Russell as unto another Iacomine, by
whose rare skill and knowledge in military discipline, the Pisans have and
will be forced at the last to obey the Florentines. But let us now proceed
unto the form and manner of altering of ancient laws and customs, as the
second part and member of your general division, worthy of consultation.


CAP. 14. The form and manner of altering the ancient laws and customs of
commonweals.
EPI: The form and manner of altering ancient laws and customs, is usually
after two sorts: either simulac statim; or otherwise, s^^sim panlatimque,
antequam ab omnibus id animadvertatur. After this first manner, you Solon
reformed the city of Athens: for you did not straight pluck up the mischief
by the roots, but by little and little you changed their laws, customs, and
manner of living. After this manner, did Numa alter and change the accustomed
manner of living, and the manners of the citizens of Rome, from a warlike
liberty to a life peaceable and obedient, and that by little and little as (
Plutarch witnesses.) But others led with the opinion and reason of Plato, say,
that to reform a mischief after this manner, is no other but to cut of one of
the Hydraes heads, of the which came afterward seven in the place: and
therefore Agis and Cleomenes took upon them to make a change and innovation
even at once, and as it were with one constant stroke of the hand, to cut of
all the mischiefs of their country, so as we may conclude, that the forms
and manners of reforming of mischiefs in the commonweals, be sundry and
diverse, the which proceed sometimes of the diversity of means and
occasions, which diverslie do offer themselves; as also from the diversity of
the subject and matter, which being diverse in it self, requires a different
form of government.


Sol: You have said the truth; and therefore a wise governor does govern
diverslie according to the means and occasions offered, taking every thing in
his best time wherein he means to deal, the which commendacion was sometime
given not vndeservedly unto Publicola.


Epi: You Solon did sometimes reform the city of Athens, not as you might
have done, neither yet as the necessity of that commonweal required, as well
in respect that the first institution thereof was mere popular, corrupt, and
not durable, as also for that it was declined by many and infinite disorders,
so as it could not for these causes rehearsed have long continuance, without
making a thorough reformation of ancient laws, customs, and government, and
without pulling up the mischiefs even by the roots; the which with that
small power and means then left unto you, you durst not attempt, least by
turning vpside-downe the whole government, you might afterward have never
been able to settle and establish the same again: for these defectes chiefly
in that reformation, it has been observed even of the wisest, that you Solon
have already seen the overthrowe of your commonweal of Athens, and the
tyranny of Pisistratus.


Sol: Yes verily, I did well foresee the same, but yet having neither means
nor power to resist so hard destinies, I was forced to sustain the person,
rather of a sorrowful beholder, then a reformer of so great calamities: but
more happy and fortunate was Lycurgus, Publicola, and Cleomenes, and such
others, though nothing superiors to my self in that care and love which every
citizen bears unto his Country, for that they had sufficient power and
means left unto them (as Plutarch witnesses) to execute their virtuous
desire, whereby they made a thorough change and reformation of their
commonweals, by cutting up all mischiefs by the roots, by reason whereof
the state of their commonweals continued long, happy, and prosperous.


Sol: But what difficulty arises from the diversity of the subject and matter?


CAP. 15. The consideration of the subject and matter of all reformations, and
how the same is diverse in it self, and consequently requires a different
form of government.
EPI: The matter and subject of all reformations is diverse in it self, and
therefore admits the sundry forms of reformation aforesaid: for sometimes
the matter or subject which is to be reformed, is a mischief or evil by long
continuance inveterate, and grown to the height of his strength and
perfection, and there the same shall be more wisely sometimes endured, then
hastily rooted out, to the overthrow of the commonwealth: the which caution if
Tiberius Gracchus had sometimes well observed, the city of Rome had not so
hastily declined, and fallen to her last ruin and destruction.


Sol: But Plutarch led with a contrary opinion, commended the law Agraria, as
the worthiest act that ever Tiberius performed.


Epi: Therein he erred much: for this law was not unworthy only of a wise
citizen in those times, and in that manner as he then preferred the same, but
farther was the overthrow of the commonweal.


Sol: It seems also requisite, that so often as the subject or matter of this
reformation comes in question, that we make a difference in the manner of
reforming of a free and popular estate, from the Monarchy; for in this one, we
shall wisely make a thorough alteration and change, without leaving any
resemblaunce or shadow thereof; but in the other, we are to change the
substance, leaving in the place only a shadow and resemblance of that which
is changed, for the better contentment of the people; for they discern all
things by the outward sense, and not by the sound discourse of reason, judging
things to be such as they seem to be in outward appearance. This order did
the Romans sometimes observe in instituting of there popular government, and
in reforming of ancient laws and customs, after they had expelled their
kings; for they altered the substance, and left in place thereof only a
shadow and resemblaunce of the things altered; for in place of their kings
they produced two Consuls, sed vnum tantum faces habere voluerant, and quidem
totidem numero quot reges vsurpare solerent: and whereas their kings in person
did perform certain public sacrifices, regem sacrificulum creant qui hisce
sacris praeesset, vt nequaquam apud eos regum desiderium esset. Thus by
retayning the shadow only of ancient laws and customs, the people remain
thereby persuaded, that nothing of the substance thereof is taken away or
diminished: in like manner, they carefully observed this rule of policy in
the creation and election of Magistrates and officers, for although they
assigned unto them new offices and functions, yet they did wisely hold the
ancient names, style, and number with their former magistrates, that the
people might deem thereby nothing to be altered and changed.


CAP. 16. Of the right institution and reformation of a monarchy.
BUT otherwise we are to institute and reform a Monarchy, by making there a
thorough alteracion and change of ancient laws, customs, and government,
yea and of the honors, titles, and dignities also, not leaving any shadow or
resemblaunce in place thereof. For after this manner did king David establish
an universal reformation. In like manner Lysander, did pull down the pride of
the city of Athens, and took from them the liberty of a popular government,
whereby in former times it was ruled and governed, and established there
sharp and severe magistrates. But some others carried with a contrary
disposition of mind, have not attempted a thorough and general reformation of
the commonwealth, but reserved only unto themselves a principality and
commandment, the which form of government was observed by Sylla; for when
he had taken the city of Athens, after the citizens had made fierce wars
with him, yet he left it free unto them, enjoying their own laws. The same
counsel did other of the Romans follow, as it appears by the words of
Camillus used unto the Senate after he had conquered the Latins: Dij
immortales ita vos potentes huius concilij fecerunt, vt sit Latium an non sit,
in vestra manu posuerint, si vultis crudelius consulere in deditos victosque;
sed si vultis exemplo matorum augere rem Romanam victos in civitatem
accipiendo, materia crescendi per summam gloriam suppetit. It seems therefore
by the words of Camillus, that the Romans made not at al times a thorough and
universal reformation of commonweals which they gained by conquest, but
embracing rather the counsel of Sylla, reserved only a prncipalitie and
commandment; for by this means, they did easily nourish the ambition which
they had in conquering: for such as have a purpose to perform great acts, and
to win fame and glory, having a mighty power to effect the same, they may
safely follow the steps of Sylla, and other of the Romans, they may say
with Camillus, let us exemplo maiorum augere rem Romanam victos in civitatem
accipiendo, materia crescendi persummam gloriam suppetit: but such as shall
contend to make continuance of their conquest, being not of great forces and
power, should imitate Lysander, and make a thorough and absolute reformation of
the whole commonweal. For Plutarch erred not, when he said that Sylla did
perform the greater acts, but Lysander committed the fewer faults, and did
possess with greater security that which he conquered. Phillip of Macedonie,
followed the steps of Lysander, whereby, possessing at the first but a small
kingdom, he became in a short time a mighty commander of all Greece.


Solo: The Gauls in like manner following the steps of Lysander, did
securely possess for a long time the parts of Italy, called Longobardia:
some others have been found neither to imitate Sylla, nor Lysander, but have
held a mean course betwixt both, in establishing their government. Such were
the Florentines, which in suppressing the rebellion of the Aretines, did remove
some of their principal commanders from their place and offices, others they
bannished, many they condemned, but they did not resume into their hands the
lands, which might have afforded sufficient maintenance unto their citizens,
neither did they destroy the principal city, but preserved the same; whereby
they lost the opportunity of confirming their empire and government, and of
augmenting their commonweal. This mean course has never as yet been found
happy and prosperous: For not thoroughly conquering our enemy, neither by
sword, neither yet by our bounty and liberality, we may not long hold
them, either as subjects or friends. Therefore such as shall contend to be
prosperous, and make continuance of their state, and government, must with the
Romans, so suppress and sharply punish the Latins, as at no time they be
able to rebel, or with bounty and goodness so win the affections of the
privernates, as at no time they should be willing to rebel. The mean course
in times past has been holden for the government of Salamina by a long
space; In which times they were never found happy and prosperous in their
government.


Sol. Now since we have discoursed at large, of the reformation of ancient
laws and customs, and of the helps means and other rules therein to be
observed, as the first and principal matter in all reformations absolute and
universal to be respected, there remains now a reformation of manners in the
people, as a second matter worthily considered.


CAP. 17. Of the reformation of manners, and how that this universal and
absolute reformation may not be effected without the same, and how that the
corruption of manners may be discerned by his fruits and effects.
EPI: The reformation of manners, does mightily advance all commonweals, and
does render them prosperous, and fortunate, of long continuance.


Sol: Therefore not without cause did the Romans, constitute Judges, and
Censors of the manners of the people, which did carefully from time to time,
execute all the laws, De morum censura. Neither was the place of the Censores
holden to be sacred, without due consideration of the commonwealth: Neither
were they without cause above all other officers honored in that
commonwealth, in such sort, as they did depose, and displace, sometimes the
Consuls, sometimes their Dictator, at their pleasure; for no doubt, what by the
refomation made by the industry of their Censors, and by their skill and
knowledge in military discipline, they quietly governed at home, and
fortunately conquered abroad in all parts of the world. Therefore since the
reformation of manners, is a matter of so great importance unto estates and
commonweals, it shall be convenient, that you do describe at large unto us
what you intend thereby.


Epi: We intend nothing else by a corruption of manners, but a departure from
the fear and reverence of God, from the honor and obedience due unto Princes
governors and Magistrates, from the love which we owe unto our Country, and
generally a declining from a just care and regard of public affairs, and all
heroical virtues, unto pleasures, wantonness, vices, and other such private
respects and regardes.


Sol: You have exactly described the same; for as the fatness and goodness of
the earth, is easily discerned by the large profit and benefit it yields to
the laboring hand; and the goodness of the tree by his pleasant fruit; so
the corruption of manners in the people, by his infinite evils, miseries,
common calamities, ruins, and destructiones of states, which every where it
begets and brings forth, as by his several fruits and effects may be
discerned. For it breeds in men a base opinion and estimation of virtues, and
a contempt of magistrates, it offreth in open market the sale of offices, the
voices of election, yea even Justice it self, it enableth Caesar with the
money of the Gauls to purchase not only favor, and offices, but even the
liberty of Rome. From this fountain springs ambition, desire of revenge,
mutinies, sedition, treason, and rebellion, finally it leaves no place, no
not the Senate house of Rome, nor the pulpit for orations, nor the image of
Pompey, no not the open and public market places undefiled and free from
blood, no not the palace of princes, Vte Galbae and Pertinaci accidit, both
which most virtuous kings were killed by their subjects; the which mischief
did arise unto them, chiefly for that the manners of their subjects and
soldiers were corrupted by the malice and evil government of their
predecessors, so as generally it may be reputed the mother, and nourse of al
common calamities.


Epi: That detestable custom, and more detestable confirmation thereof, for
receiving and supporting of traitors, rebels, and evil disposed persons,
coming and arriving into the land, did first occasion so general a
corruption of manners in Salamina, Anno. 10. H. ^.
as more at large the same may appear in the act of repeal thereof made by
king H. the 7.


Sol. Since then this general corruption of manners does draw with it so many
public miseries and calamities, as are before remembered, we can not, except
men be altogether void of humanity and reason, but abhor even the
remembrance of these lamentable times, and be forthwith kindled with a desire
of reformation.


CAP. 18. The several occasions which breed in the hearts of the people or
nation, a general corruption of manners.
EPI: That we may the better effect this reformation of manners, it behooveth
us to understand the several occasions which do nourish the same, and lastly
the sundry ways and means which may be found for the better reformation
thereof.


Sol: First let us understand the occasions as you have said.


Epi: Sometimes we remain corrupted in manners by ease, wealth and security,
with the Romans after their several conquestes of Asia, Africa, and the
greatest parts of Greece, and with the invincible army of Hanniball, by the
pleasures of Capua; sometimes by bitter adversities, with the Athenians we
become haters and despisers of virtue, and we make unto our selves that
hateful law of Ostracismus, whereby we banish and put to death men of rare
and excellent virtues, with the Hectomarij and Hiereling; sometimes we mutine,
and rise in arms against the rich, and other times with the poorer sort of the
oppressed faction of Marius, we compass the Senate house, and demand the
delivery of Caesar; sometimes by the malice and practices of foreign enemies
with the I Will of Euboea and the other parts of Greece, by corruption of
Phillippe of Macedonie we depart from our obedience; sometimes by contempt and
neglect of religion and the professors thereof with Samaria and the city of
Ninivie, we fall into a general corruption of manners, lastly either by our
lightness or incredulity with the Vandales, sometimes in Africa of the Arrian
sects we dismember the body of the Church by sects and factions, so as either
with the Churches of Greece, Rome, and Ravenna, we rise in arms one against
another, or at the least the common people amiddest so great variation of
sects and opinions, finding no an core or place of rest, that may quiet their
troubled souls and consciences, die and live for the most part in great
anxietie and incredulity.


Sol: Now you have at large discussed the occasions which may draw the
people into a general corruption of manners, it shall not be impertinent, to
entreat of the several remedies which may be found to resist so great an
evil, which works the ruin of states and commonweals.


CAP. 19. The ready ways and means to reform and resist a general
corruption of manners.
EPI: The chief and principal remedies are found to be in number three:
namely a secret prudence and wisdom; secondarily good laws well executed;
thirdly a succession of severe Magistrates: for no doubt like as the wild
olive and fig tree, by the continual addressing of a skillful husbandman, is
made at the last kindly, profitable, and fruitful, and not inferior to the
natural branches; so a commonwealth overgrowne with a general corruption of
manners, and thereby become savage, barbarous, and barren, like unto the vvilde
olive and fig tree may by the continual pruning and addressing of a skillful
magistrate, be made obedient, civil, and profitable unto that prince, whom God
has constituted to be the labourer in that vineyarde; the which is to be
effected by the three ways and means before remembered: the first whereof is a
secret prudence and understanding, wherein two matters principally are found
worthy of consideration: first the subject and matter; secondarily the time;
for as the infirmities in our natural bodies, growing upon contrary causes,
receive not their cure by one self same council, and medicine, for the which
cause we endeavor, to cure the frenzy by rest, and by motion the lethargy; so
it fares with the infirmities of a pollitike body; for where the corruption of
manners in the multitude grows by wealth, rest, and security, there it
receives his present cure with the lethargy by motion, dispersing the
humors, and finally by sharp correction and discipline: but otherwise it is
where the same proceeds from extreme adversity for there it receveth a
happy cure, with the frenzy by ease, patience, and sufferance, for Contraria
subiecta non debent eodem modo tractari: Wherein Charles the fifth has left
unto us an example, when as he stood before Meats in Loranie with his army,
which was then so distressed by extreme sickness and famine, as they openly
railed on him, especially his Spanish would call him the son of a mad woman
with all the vile words they could devise, yet he would not hear them, but
threw crowns amongst them, saying to his nobility, harken these knaves, yet
if I call the worst by his name, he will not refuse to do any thing for me
though it cost him his life. The like wisdom was showed in the like matter by
Caro, and other Senators of Rome, at such time as when the poor and needy
persons which at that time had reposed all their hope and confidence in Caesar,
had compassed the Senate house and called aloude for Caesar then accused before
the Senators, bidding them to let him out, Cato then to acquit the
commonweal of the insurrection of the poor and needy persons, did not
severely correct them, but contrariwise persuaded the Senate to make a francke
distribution of corn amongst them for one month the which amounted to one
hundredth and fifty Myriades made at the common charge of the citizens, by the
which council he quenched not only a present great fear, but did in happy
time scatter and disperse abroad the best part of Caesar's force and power, at
such time as he was made Praetor, and that for respect of his office he was
most to be feared. The same council did Pericles sometimes embrace, when as
the people of Athens did mutine against him, for that he would not suffer them
to hazard the battle with the Lacedaemonian army, then burning and spoiling
in all the parts of their country; for he did not then with bitter speeches
and sharp punishments pacify that mutiny, but contrariewise with a large
distribution which he caused to be made amongst them out of the common
treasure, and division of lands that were gotten by conquest, he did quench
that sedition. And it is said, that when Luctatius, one of the greatest
authority at that time in Rome, did inveigh against Caesar, in that he had
seditiously set up the honors and victories of Marius contrary to their
public laws and decrees, and urged then a condign punishment aunswerable to
so great an offense, he spoke nothing for the punishment of the people which
then gathered themselves together for the aid of Caesar, and the rather for
that they being of the faction of Marius, had been long oppressed and trodden
under foot by the authority of Sylla. In like manner, when we shall behold
men of rare virtues and great deserts toward the commonweal, in times of
peace and liberty contemned and despised, with Narcetus that rare and
excellent captain, least thereby they fall with him into a general corruption
of manners, and combine with the king of Lombardy, for the invading of Italy,
we shall wisely with the Venetians in such cases, always better the fortune
of those which have faithfully served, and never remove them from their former
dignity, without giving to them places of higher and greater commandment, and
with Themistocles not only speedily revoke the banishment of Aristides, and
such others of his quality, but also to advaunce them to greater honor then
before, fearing least otherwise he take part with the Barbarian nation to the
ruin of the state of Greece. But herein one caution is wisely observed, that
in such cases contending to remove a corruption of manners, which may otherwise
possess the minds of rare and excellent personages, by a contempt and
disdain which follows them, chiefly in times of happiness, wealth, and
security, we do not endaunger thereby the whole state of the commonwealth,
the which we shall then easily prevent, if we shall not employ them in the
greatest places of commandment, least contending to acquit themselves with
Claudius Nero, of all disgraces and injuries wrought by the deceit of
Hasdruball, they desperately hazard, and put in adventure the whole state
thereby. Neither are we in such cases with the Romans, to give unto Camillus
discontented with his banishment the supreme commandment of the City and
army; for after slaughter made of all other their captains by the power of the
Gawles, they were led thereunto rather by necessity, then by wisdom;
neither do all men banished and disgraced, carry with them that honorable
mind of Camillus, and that ripeness of judgment, to prefer the honor and
public good of the common-vveale before his private reputation and vvelfare:
But on the contrary, if we shall labor to cure the corruption of manners that
grows by peace, wealth, and security, we are in such cases, with
Luctatius to remove the same by sharp discipline, whose council if the
Senators had then followed, many miseries and public calamities, which the
ambition of Caesar soon after wrought against the city of Rome, had been
vvisely foreseen and prevented: or otherwise in such cases, if we shall like
unto the wise physician disperse abroad those pestilent humors according unto
the example of Camillus, and with him imploye the citizens of Rome, now puffed
up with the pride and insolency of their new obtained victory and conquest of
Vies, and with the rich spoils thereof, now in mutiny against the Senators
and nobles, now resorting with great tumult about the pulpit for orations,
for establishing of laws tending rather to the destruction then to the division
of Rome, as in the wars against the Phalerians, and there besiege the chief
city, not so much with a purpose to win the same, but rather with him to
keep our country men busied, least by repayring to Rome, they should take
occasion to mutine; whereby with the wise physician we shall disperse abroad
those humors, which may trouble the quiet state at home. Lastly if we shall
wisely take hold of time, whilst she is running her swiftest course with her
force and violence, perhaps we may be carried more then with an ordinary
expedition unto the height of our thoughts and desires; for the times which
shall represent unto us the show and face of public calamities, as famine,
plague, pestilence, poverty, and wars shall mightily advaunce this action of
reformation: for so the Senators of Rome by an appearaunce of foreign wars
did often pacify the mutinies and seditions of the citizens of Rome, raised
for the law of division of lands gained by conquest: and the Romans after the
battle of Cannes gave due obedience unto Magistrates, and did severely
prosecute their laws against the Vestall Nuns, and finally whatsoever the
Magistrates did command, the people would most readily obey. The like
obedience was sometimes found unto laws and Magistrates, after the people of
Rome had received their overthrow by the power of the Gawles, in such sort, as
the corruption of manners that then reigned in them was soon quenched and
reformed. The times also which did produce sundry public calamities in Vlster
parcel of the dominions of Salamina, did work there the like effects, as it
appears in the statute of Attainder of Shane Oneile; where it is said after
many public calamities sustained by the wars, they cried first for mercy,
and then for Justice, in such sort, as the reformation of that country did
offer it self easy unto the hands of the Magistrates that would lay hold
thereof, as by express words of that statute more at large may appear.
Wisely therefore Plutarch in comparing the acts of Fabius with Pericles,
says, that Pericles governed the Athenians in their chiefest prosperity and
wealth, whereby they were corrupted in manners, and rendered insolent, and
mutenous, and not easily governed; but Fabius then governed Rome, when as it
was humbled by many adversities, esteeming it a matter of no great difficulty,
to rule a city all ready brought low by adversity, and which compelled by
necessity is contented to be governed by a wise man.


Sol: But since this matter is at large discoursed, let us proceed unto the
other means which are left unto us for the better resisting of a general
corruption of manners, and what force, good and profitable laws may have
therein.


CAP. 20. The necessity of good and profitable laws for the better effecting
of a reformation of manners.
EPI: The Egyptians by a long space prevented this general corruption of
manners, which either peace, wealth, security, or otherwise the fertility of
place might breed in the hearts of the subjects. The like laws did Romulus,
Numa, and other governoures which succeeded them, carefully from time to time
establish, as neither their long peace and rest which they enjoyed in the
government of Numa, neither yet the fruitfulness of the soil of that empire,
nor the commodities of the sea, neither their daily victories, could by the
space of a long time and many ages, corrupt the manners of the people. In like
manner the Germans above all others have best continued the integrity of
manners in the subject, chiefly for that they have not only been most
studious of profitable laws, but also most faithful observers thereof, the
which thing above all others has preserved their people and country, as well
from this corruption of manners, as also from the servitude and oppression of
others. And where it is said, that Spain has not fallen so deeply as Italy,
and France, into a general corruption of manners, this proceeds not from
the goodness of their nature, but from the strict observation of the ancient
laws and customs of that kingdom.


Sol: I have viewed the laws of Salamina, and I find them no less profitable
then the laws either of the Egyptians, Romans, Germans, or others
whatsoever, for the reformation of manners; so as there remains nothing, but
that with the Germans we be faithful observers of our laws* for so it may
appear by express words contained in the statute made against marying and
fostering, Act. 28. H. ^. c. 13. fo. 1.
where it is related after this manner: Notwithstanding diverse good statutes
and acts of parliament made for the reformation of that country, wherein is
contained, that every of the kings subjects offending the same, should be a
traitor attainted, yet by the default and negligence of the heads and rulers of
that land under the kings highness, the said statutes were not duly put in
execution, so as no reformation has followed the same. In like manner,
disorders were sometimes committed in the countries of Flamminia and Emillia,
by the negligence of Magistrates in not executing the laws, before Pope
Alexander the fixed had wisely displaced and removed the negligent governoures
thereof; before which time, these regions were full of theft, robberies, and
rebellions, the which offenses did not arise from the nature of the place or
people, as some did then suppose, but rather from the malice and negligence of
their governoures; for they being poor, would notwithstanding live richly,
and sumptuously; they made laws, and were the first that offended against the
same, and by their example invited others thereunto; neither did they punish
any that offended the laws, until they increased to great strengthes and
numbers, ac tunc demum (says the author of this history) non Iusticiae
conservandae causae, sed praedae dulcedine permoti, paenas ab omnibus simul
gravissimas exigebant; ex quare hoc sequebatur absurdum, vt expilati assiduis
illis mulctis homines ad paupertatem redigerentur, atque hinc impellerentur ad
vexandos alios, quibus existimabant se viribus esse superiores, quo quidem modo
vitia non emendabantur, sed ad ea homines instituebantur, dependebant que haec
omnia ex prava eorum regulorum natura. Lastly, the many and sundry privileges
are found to give impediment unto the execution of profitable laws, and to
nourish a corruption of manners in the subject, as more at large it does
appear in the act of Absentes, which is left unto us as a register of the
fall and declination of the state of Salamina, wherein it is manifest that the
Lords of the several countries of Catherlagh and Wexfords being places
privileged, may keep and hold al manner pleas within the same, under color
whereof the kings laws, writtes, or other process be not obayed, neither any
other Justice there administered, for the quieting and good order of the
subject, so as in the default thereof, the kings enemies have them in servage,
all murders, robberies, theftes, treasons, and other offenses remaining there
unpunished.


Sol: But what Magistrate may be found sufficient to establish a reformation of
manners?


Epi: A severe Magistrate is herein required: for that a commonweal mightily
corrupted in manners, is squared and reformed only by the rule and line of
Justice which we call distributive, the which for the inequality thereof, may
not without great motions and sharp remedies reform the enormities and
mischiefs of the commonweal. Lastly where the manners of the people remain
corrupted, there the laws, De morum censura, and all other laws are found
unprofitable, unless by a severe and stout Magistrate they be supported and
maintained. For if Brutus had not severely proceeded, as well against his own
sons, as against all other traitors, he could not have reformed the
corruptions of Tarquine, and of other his confederates.


Sol. He that shall in these weighty actions of reformation proceed as you have
said with lenity and softness, shall never with Collatinus be able to
suppress a corruption of manners in the subject, but he shall by that course
rather imbolden and comfort traitors in their intended purposes; therefore
herein the wisdom of Valerius was highly commended, who though by nature
courteous, and gentle, and thereof surnamed Publicola, yet by wisdom now
became so severe and sharp for the reformation and good of his country, as he
most sharply and bitterly prosecuted the treasons of Tarquine.


Epi: They which shall live and govern Sparta, where the people are in manners
corrupted, must with Cleomenes sharply prosecute and punish offenders; but
where the manners of the people be not corrupted, there a mild course of
government does work his office, and carries with it allowance and
commendations. For this cause it is said, that the patience of Peter Soder^n
was profitable as well to the commonweal as to himself, so long as the age
and time continued mild and gentle, but after the times were changed into an
iron age, the same then required a greater severitie then could be found in
Peter Soderin, which by no means nor occasions, nor by the change of times,
could be led from his accustomed patience, by the which he did not only
overthrow himself, but did also perish his whole country. Therefore very well
says a learned author, for the better reformation of manners corrupted in the
people, and for the better reviving of the force of ancient laws, a severe
Magistrate is requisite.


Sol; But great is the hatred which in such cases follows the person of a
severe Magistrate, and it draws with it sometimes peril and danger unto
Princes.


Epi: This question admits one other distinction: for an absolute Prince is
to imitate the humanity of Cyrus described by Xenophon, but such as shall
govern by way of deputation, are rather to follow the severitie of Manlius
Torquatus, least otherwise with Peter Lawredane, we do not only make the
Venetians ielous, but also disable our selves by our lenity and softnes, to
perform this difficult action of reformation, wherein severitie is required.
To conclude, it must be that grave and severe Tymasicheus, that shall reform
the licentious city of Lyparensis, and draw them from spoiling, praying, and
rebelling. Lastly, we must make a continual succession of severe Magistrates,
as before I have remembered. For Epaminondas with a just severitie may reform a
corruption of manners in the Thebanes, but if he once fortune to dye, the
Thebanes shall eftsoons return to their former corruptions.


Sol: Now fith you have at large discussed of the two parts and members of
this universal and absolute reformation, namely the reformation of ancient
laws, customs, and lastly the corruption of manners in the people, there
remains now a new and better institution then before prescribed, as the
third and last member of your general division.


Epi: I will proceed then unto the institution it self, wherein form matters
are found worthy of consideration: first, the soveraintie and commandment;
secondly, the form of government; thirdly, the form and manner of the
institution it self: lastly, the several ends and scopes of this
institution? For the first, which is the soverainty and commandment, the same
is given sometimes into the hands of one, sometimes in the hands of few, and
sometimes into the hands of all in general. This one is termed a Democratia,
or a popular estate; the other an Aristocratia; the last a Monarchy, Thus be
commonweals properly distinguished by the soveraintie and commandment, and
not by the diversity which sometimes appears in the form and government
thereof: for all institutions are made after the one of these kinds, and all
other are but corruptions of these estates, and no proper or distinct
commonweals.


Sol: But which institution is to be preferred above others?


Epi: The institution no doubt of the Monarchy, is the most firm and durable,
and freest from al dissension, mutinies, and sedition. And the wise men of Rome
were not deceived, when beholding the market place filled with bows, slings,
and swords, and the pulpit for orations sprinkled with blood, they said,
there remains now no other way to give help and remedy to these troubles
of our commonweal, but the authority of one man only, that may command us
all. And as this estate is freest from trouble, as you have said, so is it of
all others most honorable and glorious, and even the very lively image of God
and nature, as Artibanus did sometimes faithfully deliver unto Themistocles.
The next manner of institution in account, seems to be the Aristocratia, for
that it acquiteth it self best of al other common-weals, from corruption and
errors in their censures and judgments: for as the large and running waters,
are not so easily corrupted, as the standing poole; so many wits, and minds,
are not so easily deluded and corrupted, as one. But worst of all others does
this commonweal acquit it self of envy, dissension, and emulation amongst
themselves, which like unto a mothe or worm, gnaweth a sunder the heart and
intralles of that commonweal, and at the last confounds and destroieth the
same. But yet the popular estate is of all others least permanent, especially
where the commonweal is mere popular, as well in regard of the soveraintie and
commandment, as of the form and manner of government; whereof the
commonweal of Athens may be unto us an example, which was instituted by you
Solon, and after in the same age confounded by Pisistratus:


Solo: So it was: for wanting sufficient power and forces, I was forced to make
such laws for the instituting of that commonweal, as they were willing to
receive, and not such as I was willing to give: for I must confess, that
popular institution, which is equally tempered, and compounded of the three
sorts and forms of government, after the manner and institution of Rome, to
be more firm and durable; and this form of government also does give a
perfection and continuance to all other estates before remembered. Therefore
Romulus after the death of Remus, and Tatius Sabinus, did aim at that form of
government in the institution of the commonweal of Rome; for he reserved unto
himself the sole and kingly auctority over the army only, and to convent the
Senators for the affairs public, the which form of government, in his
person was kinglike, and after the form of a Monarchy; but in the person of
the Senators, who had authority to consulte, and publicly to persuade and
dissuade the attempts for wars, and to discuss all other civil causes, as the
state of that commonweal required, the form of an Aristocratia, was rightly
by him observed; and in the other parts of his government, as in framing of
his laws and such like, he rather affected a popular liberty, then a
Monarchy.


Epi: After this manner the king of France has reserved unto himself a kingly
name, style, honors authority, and commandment over the Senate, and to
assemble them for the affairs public, and a sole absolute and royal
authority over the army for making or finishing the wars, lastly an
authority for the levieng and receiving of the revenews belonging to the
crown, but the execution of laws he leaves to the Senate, and Judges, who
govern by such laws as respect a popular liberty and free estate, in the
making of which laws, the people have also their voices, like as in popular
estates, where the people hold the soverainty and commandment; so as by this
form of government as well to the king, and the nobles, as also to the
people, such power is granted, with so just and equal proportion, as either
the dignity of the one, or the liberty of the other may justly require; in the
well tempering whereof, all the skill, art, and policy of government is
wholly contained, and he that shall hold the best and most just temperature
herein, comes nearest to the perfection of nature; who by how much more
equally she does temper the four humors and elements in our natural bodies,
by so much we receive a more perfect strength, and a longer being and
continuance.


Sol: This is the best form of instituting of commonweals, the which you
have now described; but in this institution some are found to aim at peace,
some at honor, as the butte and scope of all their actions; so as their end
and scope being diverse, it seems they may not embrace one form of
institution.


Epi: You say well: for they which shall aim at a commonweal peaceable and
permanent, it behooves them to seclude strangers, not to train their people
and subjects in military discipline, according to the example of the
Lacedaemonians, and to possess a place or fort, as well by nature and the
situation thereof, as by art rendered invincible, according to the example of
the Venetians. But such as shall aim at honor and glory, as the butte and
scope of their institution, must entertain strangers, they must endeavor to
render the commonwealth populous, they must daily train and exercise the
people in military discipline, and they shall wisely deliver the feeble, and
weak, from the hands of the oppressor, they must entertain many associates
and friends, by the which policies they shall render themselves every where
invincible according to the example of the Romans.


Sol: But what manner of institution is most permanent and to be preferred?


Epi: Neither the one nor the other may be found so happy and permanent, but
at the last, with the apple in his fulripenes, they fall with their own weight
and poyse to the ground; the one by discord and mutinies of the soldiers, for
that their citizens are rendered bold by the continual use and trayning in
military discipline; the other by effeminacie, ease, rest, and security,
hasteneth in like manner unto mutinies and discords, as to his last ruin; so as
either by a fatal destiny (as it were) imbraceth there own confusion: but
not after one manner; for the one like unto a flower, or the pride of youth, in
the height of his glory, vanishes, away, and leaves the image of true glory,
as a lively picture, to invest a perpetual memory of a worthy and excellent
Institution. But the commonweal which in his first Institution aymeth only at
peace and permanency, with effaeminacy, discord, and mutinies, bredde by long
ease, rest, and security, embraces with the other his final and last
destruction, but leaves not the like memory of his Institution.


Sol: It seems the^ by that which you have said, that the institution of that
co^mon-weale, which aymeth at virtue, honor, and glory, is to be preferred
before the other, and of princes much more to be desired. But may not one
selfsame commonweal, aim at the one and the other?


Ep: No verily: for as the tree which has but a slender root, may not long
support weighty and mighty branches, against the fury and violence of the
wind and tempest; so commonweals which aim at peace, having but a slender
root, and foundation, laid for the supporting thereof, as before I have
remembered, may not be long victorious, and hold themselves upright in actions
of great importance: and if they fortune to be so with the Venetians, which
have much regarded this manner of institution, they shall no sooner win, but
eftsoons for want of proper forces to defend, they shall loose the same
again: so as for free estates and commonweals, this manner of institution
seems not to be the best, but for servile commonweals, and such as have
lived always subject to others, as Pisa sometimes to the Florentines, Cremona
to the Venetians, and Salamina to Athens, it may be holden for the safest: for
by this manner of Institution, they shall more easily retain the subjects in
their obedience and subjection.


THE THIRD BOOK OF Solon his folly.
CAP. 1. A description of this word Declination, with the several signs and
tokens thereof, whereof some are termed ordinary, others extraordinary.
SOL: You have made a perfect anatomye of this word Reformation, and not only
with the cunning Painter you have described the outward shows and lineaments,
but with the wise Physician you have well known, and laid open the inward
parts thereof: but now disclose unto us, the secrets which lie hidden under the
words subsequent, and contained in the first and general description, namely
of a declined commonweal.


Ep: These words offer sundry matters worthy of consideration.


Sol: What be they?


Epi: First, the description of this word Declination; secondly, the signs and
tokens; thirdly, the times; fourthly the parts and members; fifthly, the causes
and occasions; and lastly, the means to resist the same.


Sol: Make the first step unto the description thereof, which is the first
matter herein to be considered.


Epi: A Declination of a body polliticke, is nothing else but a fall and
departure from his first institution, and perfection, so as we may rightly
term it the subject and matter of this our reformation.


Sol: You have aptly described the same: therefore make your progression unto
the second matter, and declare unto us the signs and tokens, which with Jonas
as forerunners and messengers, gives the City of Ninivie to understand of
their declination, and destruction.


Epi: The death of noble and worthy personages, does threaten a declination of
the welfare and happiness of estates, and commonweals. For the first token
(says Plutarke,) that threatened some great mischief to the commonwealth of
Rome, was the death of Julius one of the Censores: for the Romans, says he,
do greatly reverence the office of a Censor, and esteem it as a sacred place.


Sol. And has not the city of Rome, of late years been deprived of grave
and worthy Censores, by untimely death, not inferior to Julius?


Epi: Yes verily: and for this cause we are greatly to fear that changing our
ancient Consuls for new Decemviri with the city of Rome, we perish and fall
in actions of great importance and difficulty: and therefore with that
faithful and worthy citizen Camillus, I pray daily upon my knees, that this
bitter calamity unto us now threatened, if the same may not be turned from us,
do light upon my self, and such other private citizens of Rome, that have
deserved the same, so as the city with her noble army and forces may be
preserved.


Sol: Pass this over with this comfort, that the new Decemviri retain in them
the great virtue and worthiness even of the ancient Consuls; and proceed unto
signs of declination.


Epi: There may not be greater signs found of common calamities ensuing, then
an universal security, which sometimes possesses the minds and hearts of
the subjects. The which was found in the Romans, at such time as they
sustained the great overthrow by the power of the Gawles; for then all sorts
of persons in the city were found to be possessed with a general security,
in so much that they neglected all religion, they contemned the holy order of
the Faecials, and made no account of their propounded religion, and lastly they
were found so secure, as they neglected all their former discipline of wars,
yea they iested and made themselves merry with Marcus Cedicius, which gave them
warning thereof. In like manner a general security did possess the
Philistians, when as Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armoure,
come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised, for it is
not hard for the Lord to save with many or with few, so as they both showed
themselves to the Philistians; but they as men secure, scorned Jonathan, and
said, see the Hebrews come out of the holes wherein they have hid themselves
for a long time, but Jonathan eftsoons put them to the sword. But for that
the histories and reports of ages past, do afforde infinite proofs and
examples hereof, let us proceed readily unto other signs and tokens of
declinations.


Sol: Before a general declination, the people are found possessed with a
general fear; for before the overthrow given by Samuel unto the Philistians,
the people were holden with a mighty fear of their future fortunes, and of the
event of those wars, insomuch as it is said, there was a fear in the host,
and in the field, and among all the people, the garrison also and they that
went out to spoil were afraid themselves, and the earth trembled, for it
was stricken with fear by the Lord. And after this manner Christ prophecieyng
of the destruction of Jerusalem, unto such as asked what signs shall there be
when these things shall come to pass, he said, there shall be trouble upon
earth, and among nations perplexity, and men's hearts shall fail them for
fear, and for looking after those things which shall come on the world.


Epi: After such time as Camillus was unjustly condemned and banished, there
was not a Roman of any understanding, but believed certainly, that some
great punishment would follow them incontinently, and that the wrong and
injury which they had done him, would be quickly requited with some sharp
and terrible revenge, not only unpleasant to think upon, but farther most
notable to be spoken of thorough the world: then fell out so suddenly upon the
same, such mischiefs toward the city of Rome, as it was doubted to be the
handy work of some God, that would not suffer virtue to be vnrecompensed
with ingratitude.


Sol: There remains yet a greater sign of declination.


Epi: What may the same be?


Sol: When the commonwealths shall generally depart from all the parts and
right rules of government, the same is a manifest sign of declination. For
before the overthrow of Rome by the power of the Gawles, there was found all
disorder and confusion, they were not governed by one selfsame commander, as
in former times, but their governoures being many, contrary to the discipline
of wars, bredde naught else but confusion. The like disorder did they admit
in all the other parts of their government, as in the history thereof more
at large appears, the which did breed the ruin and destruction of that
city. These be the ordinary signs of declination.


Sol: You seem hereby to give us to understand of signs extraordinary.


Epi: Yea verily.


Sol: What be they?


Epi: Great earthquakes shall be in diverse places, hunger, pestilence, and
fearful things, and great signs shall there be in heaven, there shall be
signs in the sun, and the moon, and in the stars, the sea and waters shall
roar; this is the time wherein Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled; these be the times
wherein they shall fall on the edge of the swoorde, and shall be led captive to
all nations; these be the signs whereby as by the budding of the fig tree,
we know summer to be near at hand, so by these we may discern common
calamities a far of, as also when they approach near unto us.


Sol: Before Caesar was murdered in the Senate house, there appeared many
terrible signs in the heavens, in the air, and upon the earth, which did
threaten his overthrowe and destruction, and many common calamities unto that
city: in like manner before the sacking, burning, and destroying of Rome by
the Gauls, one Marcus Cedicius a man of fair condition, honest, and of good
conscience, told unto the Tribunes a thing that was well to be considered of:
for he said that the night before as he was going on his way, in the new
street, he hard one call him alowde, and returning back to see what it was,
he saw no living creature, but only heard a voice bigger then a man's, which
said unto him, Marcus Cedicius, go thy way to morrow morning to the Tribunes
of the soldiers, and bid them look quickly for the Gauls.


Epi: Surely God governs the world, and the creatures upon earth,
mercifully and lovingly, in sending sometimes Marcus Cedicius unto the city
of Rome, yea sometimes Jonas unto the city of Ninivie, nay that which is more,
in making the dumb creatures, as well in heaven as in earth, to speak unto
us, and foretell us of our destruction.


Sol: To the good they be tokens of his mercy and favor, and to the wicked
they threaten his Justice and judgment, so as what the highest has determined
in his secret foreknowledge, the same shall stand and may not pass. For in
vain shall Caelphurnia cry out in the night, Caesar is slain, for he shall
not give credit unto dreams; in vain shall she persuade him in the day to
keep his house, and not to go abroad, for he shall be deluded with the hopes and
flatteries of Brutus; in vain shall the southsaier forewarne him of his
destruction, for he shall not regard prophecies; in vain do his friends and
vvelwillers set down in writing the days, times, and means of his
destruction, and deliver the same into his hands, for he shall not once read
or regard it; so the highest has determined and the same shall stand and may
not pass: Brutus shall flatter, wound, and kill him, and he shall fall with
the stroke thereof; in vain shall Marcus Cedicius forewarne the Tribunes of
the people, that the Gauls with their army are marching toward Rome, for
they shall laugh and make themselves merry thereat, and not foresee how they
may resist them; they shall be as men amazed and bewitched, and forget even
their ordinary discipline, and fall into all disorder of government, their
City shall be wasted and destroyed; for so the highest has determined, and
the same shall stand and may not pass.


Epi: To this purpose Plutarch writing of the death of Caesar, says, that the
declinations and destinies are more easily foreseen then avoided.


CAP. 2. The times wherein commonweals do usually fall and decline.
SOL: But what may be the times ordained by a secret foreknowledge in the breast
of the highest, of the declination of commonweals?


Epi: The same only is known to the highest, and to us left uncertain.


Sol: But what does he not manifest every where by his ordinary power and
government of this inferior world, of that whereof we may in no sort be
ignorant?


Epi: By his ordinary government you mean naught else but his power, whereby he
gives to all things their first being, progression, continuance, perfection,
and declination.


Sol: Thus you make the perfection of all things, to be the end of his
continuance, and the beginning of his declination, and to be the last show of
his being, and the first of his declining.


Epi: I will show you the truth, even from the mouth of that Prophet Daniell,
a mighty king shall stand up, says he, that shall rule with great dominion
and do according to his pleasure, and when he shall stand up, his kingdom
shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of the heavens,
and not to his posterity nor according to his dominion, which he ruled, for his
kingdom shall be plucked up by the roots, and the same given unto others.


Sol: By this example, you seem to infer, that kingdoms and principalities,
being at the highest, do then decline and fall: for so did this mighty king
Alexander (whom the Prophet Daniell now intends) sometimes rule great
dominions, but even then says the Prophet did he perish, even when he
commanded at his pleasure, and lastly, even when this king (says the Prophet)
did stand up, and was at the highest, even then did he fall with a disease
which followed his drunkenness and superfluity, or otherwise by the poison
which was given by Cassander, even then was his kingdom broken, says the
Prophet, and plucked up by the roots, even then was the time wherein it was
divided amongst strangers, namely his twelve chief princes, and not given
unto his posterity, then it was wherein his posterity did murder and destroy
one the other, even these were the times, wherein his kingdom soon after was
divided toward the four winds of the heavens: for Seleucus had Siria,
Antigonus Asia Minor, Cassander the kingdom of Macedonia, and Ptolomaeus
Egypt.


Ep: You well understand as well the matter, as my meaning, and to the same
purpose, says the Prophet Daniell, there shall arise a king so mighty, that
he shall do what him list, he shall exalte and magnify himself, against all
that is God, but when his glory shall be every where increased, then the
king of the South shall pushe at him, and the king of the North shall come
against him, and like a whirlewinde, with chariots, and horsemen, and with
many ships, shall enter his pleasant country, and have power over all the
treasures of gold and silver, and over all the princes things of Egypt, and
none shall be found that may withstand him, he shall plant the tabernacles
of his palace, between the seas and the glorious and holy mountain, but even
then is the time, says the Prophet, that he shall come to his end, and none
shall help him.


Sol: These were the Romans, which sometimes reigned upon earth like Gods:
but even then eftsoons they perished as men. For when Augustus had overcome
the Parthians, and recovered that which Antonius lost, when they were found to
reign quietly from sea to sea, and in Iudaea, then came they to their end,
and none was found that could help them.


Epi: The same Prophet says, the king of the South shall be angry with the
king of the North, and shall set forth a great multitude, and fight with the
king of the North, and the multitude shall be given into his hands, then the
multitude shall be proud, and their hearts shall be lifted up, for he shall cast
down thousands, but he shall not still prevail, for the king of the North
shall come and cast up a mount and take the strong City, and the arms of
the South shall not resist, neither shall there be any strength to withstand,
but he shall come and do with him what he list, and none shall stand against
him.


Sol: The Prophet intends Philopater which sometimes governed great
dominions, yet could he not withstand the power of Antiochus, and Phillip king
of Macedonie, which the^ came against him, neither shall the Egyptians be able
to resist Stopus Antiochus captain, for this is the the time wherein none
shall be found that may withstand them.


Epi: And in the same place it is said, that when the king of the North shall
take the strong city, yea even when the arms of the king of the South shall
not resist him, yea then when there may not be found any strength to
withstand him, even then when he has planted himself in the pleasant land,
even then, says the Prophet, shall a Prince be found, which shall cause his
shame to light upon him, beside that he shall cause his own shame to turn
upon himself by retiring toward the fortes of his own land, but he shall
be overthrown and fall, and be no more found.


Sol: Thus did Antiochus sometime fall, whom the Prophet here intends, when
as Attilius and Lucius Scipio, did put him to flight, so as for fear of the
Romans, he was forced to fly to his holds and fortes, and after robbing the
temple of Jupiter Dodonaeus, was slain by the people of the country: so as we
may infer by these examples nothing else, but that commonweals do
participate with the quality and nature of all other creatures, in that first
they have their being, their progression, their continuance, their perfection,
and lastly their declination; so as from their being they receive progression,
from progression they receive continuance, from contitinuance a perfection,
from their perfection a declination: for his perfection is naught else, but his
ripeness which is gathered by continuance, by whose poyse and weight,
eftsoons it falls to the ground and declineth.


Epi: You well understand the matter.


Sol: Then let us make our progression unto the parts and members of every
declination.


CAP. 3. All declinations are in number two, the one ad sanitatem, the other ad
interitum.
EPI: All declinations are after two sorts: the one, ad sanitatem; the other,
ad interitum; both which declinations did sometimes appear in the
commonwealth of Rome: the one, when as the Senate and people by co^tending for
honors, gave occasions of most happy laws, and more happy restitution of the
declined state of that polliticke body. But after declining by peace, rest, and
security, unto a corruption of manners, they never could give an end unto
their contentions then raised for profitte and gain, so as the same may be
said to be a final declination, not ad sanitatem, but ad interitum.


CAP. 4. The several occasions and causes of all declinations, and first of
occasions maliciously suggested.
SOL: There remains now that we do proceed unto the occasions and causes
of all declinations, which is the fifte matter remembered by you worthy of
consideration.


Epi: You have well put me in remembrance thereof. For as the declination of
our natural bodies arises chiefly either from occasions, as rest, labor,
heat, cold, hunger, thirst, superfluity, abundance, or from the malice or
distemperature of the disease or sickness it self: so the declination of this
polliticke body grows partly by occasions, and partly from the malice and
corruption of the subject, as from the unnatural distemperature of that body.


Sol: The truth of your opinion neither wants proof nor example: for in the
declination of the commonweal of Rome, in the times and regiment of Tarquine,
we may behold first a general distemperature bred in the body of that
co^mon-weale by his misgovernment, so as the people and Senators did expect
nothing more then a fit occasion to execute the same. And if the deflowring
of Lucretia had not happened, yet noe doubt this distemperature and malice of
the subject would have attended other occasions, as they should conveniently
have offered themselves. But if this malice and distemperature had not
proceeded with the occasion, or if the occasion had not accompanied this
distemperature, no doubt Brutus and Collatinus would have desired the just
punishment of this offense, rather at the hands of Tarquine, then by the aid
and help of the people.


Ep: Therefore wisely says one, sine occasion frustra virtus, sine virtute
frustra occasio sese obtulit. For in vain shall occasions profer themselves,
where they find not the malice of the subject ready to rescue and assist them.
And in vain likewise shall the malice of the subject swel and overflow his
bounds, when all occasions shall be removed, which are in place of the feet
and legs that support this distemperature.


So: To disclose therefore the chief and principal occasions, which may
further and nourish any way the distemperature of this polliticke body, seems
a matter not unworthy of deliberation.


Epi: Nay it is a matter rather which should possess the highest thoughts of
the mind and understanding of Princes and Emperors.


Sol: Let us proceed to enumber them if we may, and set them down under the
account of matters necessary for the better sustaining and upholding of this
polliticke body.


Ep: Occasions are usually after two sorts: either given; or maliciously
sought and suggested.


Sol: You have said the truth: for when Darius preferred Daniell above all the
other rulers and governors, because the spirit in him was excellent, they
sought an occasion against Daniell, concerning the kingdom, but they could
find no fault, and therefore it is said, we may find no occasion against
Daniell, except we find it against him concerning the law of God: whereupon
the rulers craftily conspired to go unto the king, and after this manner to
advance their malice they spoke unto him, king Darius live for ever: all the
rulers of thy kingdom, the officers and governors, the counselors and dukes
have consulted together to make a decree for the king, and to establish a
statute, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty
days save of thee O king, he shall be cast into the den of Lions. Now O
king confirm the decree, and seal the writing that it be not changed
according to the law of the Medes and Persians which alters not. This
request feeding the ambition of king Darius, was eftsoons sealed by him, and
he made a law and decree. Then these men assembled and found Daniell praying
and making supplication unto his God. The which eftsoons they embraced as a
fit occasion lent for the destroying of Daniell, and repayring to the king,
said unto him after this manner, have thou not sealed the decree that every
man that shall make request to any God or man within thirty days save to thee
O king shall be cast into the den of Lions? the king answered and said, the
thing is true according to the law of the Medes, and Persians, which alters
not. Then answered they and said unto the king; this Daniell which is of the
children of the captivity of Judah, regards not thee O king, nor the decree
that thou have sealed, but makes his petition three times a day. But
understand O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, that no decree
or statute which the king confirms, may be altered or broken. Then forthwith
by the kings commandment, Daniell was cast into the Lions den. This one
example may suffice for occasions maliciously suggested.


CAP. 5. Of occasions given by misgovernement, and such other means.
SOL: Let us now proceed to enumber the occasions given.


Ep: Occasion of declining is then given, when the nobility is not respected:
for Caesar by holding a light estimation of the Senanators and nobles, at such
time as they repaired to give unto him honors, and by depriving and abusing
the Tribunes Marullus and Flavius, did give the first occasion, says Plutarch,
of his fall and declining: and Romulus entreating the Senators and nobles of
Rome, more severely and rigorosly then in former times they were accustomed,
was for this cause by treason murdered.


Sol: And no less occasion is then given of falling and declining, when either
by the iniquity of times, or the proper industry of princes, the nobility is
in so great measure advanced, as they become thereby dangerous and fearful
unto the state: by the one occasion Salamina has often and sundry times
declined.


Epi: What by the iniquity of times?


Sol: Yea verily: for upon the division of the house of Lankaster and York,
justice there declining, the nobility held as it were a sovereign
commandment over the co^monalty, they call their lands by the name of their
cuntries, their tenants by the name of their followers and men, they give laws,
and prescribe unto the people their manner of living, they oppress where they
dislike, they reward whom they favor, they perish whom they hate, and finally
they make themselves judges and arbitrators of the goods, lands, life, liberty,
and of all the fortunes of the subject. Anno (...) decimo E^ cap. 7. fol. 168.
The which over great power and commandment does lively appear in the act
made for the taking away of the great authority of Captainship with all
exactions: wherein it is declared, that the Lords of Salamina in the time of
justice declination, under the pretense of defending the people of Salamina,
and their own possessions, arrogated unto themselves absolute and regale
authority within large circuits; by the distributio^ whereof each man had as
much right as force would give him leave, by means whereof they grew unto
such greatness as they acknowledged no superior, no obedience unto the
counsels of Athens; they hold for laws there own wills and desires, by
their proper authority they gather and assemble the people of the said
pretenced countries, rules, and Captaineships, to treat, conclude, and agree
for making of war, or peace, roades, injuries, granting of ceases, been
volences, finding of men of war, as horsemen, footmen, galloglasse, kearne,
hasbutteres, horses, horseboyes, huntes, studkeepers, officers, and adherentes:
and more then this, these Nobles and Lords did lead as Captains, the people
thus assembled unto the accomplishing of act and acts offensive, and invasive
without special authority.


Epi: By these statutes and records thus by you remembered, it seems that all
the wars of Salamina did proceed from the greatness of the Nobles and
Lords.


Sol: So much the record it self does report, Anno 11. Eliz. cap. 7. fol.
168. Vid Attay. of the earl of Kildare. acts 28. H. 8. cap. 1.
where as it it is said, that their greatness was such, as they did
acknowledge no superior, nor any obedience unto Athens. It is said also that
the might and greatness of James sometimes Earl of Desmonde; Garralde Fitz
Garralde, Earl of Kildare, and Thomas Fitz Garralde his son, was the occasion
of many rebellions, as by the records of Salamina more at large it may
appear.


Epi: It seems also by the records of Salamina, by you now remembered, that
the Nobles and Lords by their greatness did mightily oppress the co^monalty,
enforcing the^ to grant ceases, benevole^ces, finding of men at arms, as
horsemen, footmen, galloglasse, kearne, hasbutters, horses, horseboyes,
huntes, studkeepers, officers, and adherents.


Sol: Yes verily: for by way of protection and defense the nobility did levy
exactions intolerable, so as they were forced to establish a law, that no man
within the land of Salamina shall have any tribute, or exaction, or any other
unlawful imposition of or upon any subject within the same land.


Epi: Herein they were provident of the preservance and continuance of the
estate of Salamina; for nothing gives greater occasion of declining then the
oppression of the co^monalty. For the Israelites being mightily oppressed by
the Egyptians, were thereby enforced to follow Moses, by whom they were
restored unto their liberty. The Persians, Medoru^ imperio infensi, were
thereby induced to follow Cyrus. And the natural citizens of Rome, being not
defended from the oppression and fury of Hanniball, took occasion of
revolting and rebelling. How displeasing oppressions be every where unto the
multitude, the same the people of Salamina have livelie witnessed, when as
they termed sometimes the exactions of Coiney and Liverie, imposed by the
nobility and Lords of that land, by the name of grievous exactions: nay with
great Emphasies they term it the frette of our times, and substance: nay yet
with greater indignation carried against this manner of oppression, they term
it by the name of that horrible and most detestable custom of Coiney and
Liverie, yea they term it to be the very nurse, and teate, that gave suck and
nutriment to all disobedience, rebellions, enormities, vices, and iniquities of
that realm over foul and filthy, here to be expressed, and such as did
justly provoke the wrath and vengeance of the almighty God upon the people of
that land. The like oppression of the nobility over the meaner people, was
sometimes the author of many seditions in Rome, and provoked the people to
demand Tribunes, which as arbitrators of the insolency of the nobility,
might give them just defense from their oppression. And this stirs the
people sometimes the better, to make their deliveraunce from the oppression of
the mighty, with the consent of the foreign enemy, even to the invading and
destroying of the people and country.


CAP. 6. The means to withstand all occasions of declining, growing unto the
com:+mon-wealth by the greatness of the nobility.
SOL: Since this seems to be a matter of so great importance, to defend the
multitude from the oppression of the mighty, it shall be convenient that we now
proceed unto the means whereby we may in such cases, as well abate the
greatness of the Lords and Nobles, as also deliver the multitude from their
oppressions and wrongs.


Epi: The means are sundry.


Sol: What be they?


Epi: First we are to establish laws, whereby as well the dignity of the
Nobles, as the liberty of the people, may be preserved and defended, according
to the example of all commonweals well governed.


Sol: Herein Salamina is found inferior to noe nation, especially for laws,
which respect the liberty and welfare of the people, the which is the matter
now in deliberation.


Epi: What be they?


Sol: The laws against Coiney and Livery, the laws against Captainship, the
laws against taking of pledges contrary to the common law, with many other
laws prohibiting unlawful customs and exactions; so as it seems that good
laws are not sufficient to render a commonweal, happy and prosperous.


Epi: Noe surely, no more then a medicine well prepared may cure the diseases
of the body, if the same be not rightly applied: it rests therefore, that
governoures provincial, do diligently intend the observation of these laws,
in such sort, as they be inviolable, whereby in a short time they shall
confirm the minds of the multitude, and render them secure, quiet, and
contented.


Sol: This which you have said, by sundry acts and records, now extant for
Salamina, may appear: for there it is said, that the people were not only
drawn from rebellions and unlawful attempts, by the extirpation of this
exaction of Coiney and Livery, but they were sometimes by the due exaction of
that law, strongly endued to affect and embrace justice and peace, so as al
commandments by way of justice are there obeyed. Naie that which is more,
in place of cursing and rebellions, there is found joy, iolitie, and blessing
of that goddess Minerva, the protector and defendour of Athens, by whose
providence so great an evil was remooved. So as we may conclude, that nothing
does so much induce a nation or people, be they natural subjects or gained by
conquest, to embrace that government which is prescribed unto them by those
which have rule, power, and authority over them, there is nothing (I say) so
availeable to render the^ loyal subjects, and willing embracers of
government, as a just defense given by due execution of profitable laws from
all oppressions and wrongs.


Epi: You have said the truth: for a nation conquered desire their former
liberty; for no other cause so greatly, as thereby to possess that which is
their own freely and securely; so as enjoying the same, they have attained
the end of their desires, and rest for the most part contented with the
government. But on the contrary, with the oppression of the mighty, the
thoughts and desires of their former liberty are daily kindled, in such
sort, as they stick not to practice with foreign enemies the restitution
thereof. It is necessary therefore in such countries, that the laws for the
defense of the multitude against oppressions be holden inviolable, in such
sort as every one may* confidentlie say with the governoures of Darius, it
is the law of the Medes and Persians which may not be broken.


Sol: But some provincial governoures of Salamina, have been found more
studious with Savanorola in making of profitable laws, then faithful
observers thereof, whereby the whole country of Salamina has well near
perished: but I could vvish, that with Savanorola at the least they might loose
their honor and estimation amongst the Florentines: for much evil arises
unto Salamina, not only from the malice of the people, but by the negligence
of Magistrates, in that they hold not their laws inviolable; for the which
causes they may never confirm the minds of the multitude unto the state, nor
render them quiet, and contented. But what other means is now left unto us to
deliver the multitude from oppression?


Epi: Commissioners in every of the several Provinces are to be constituted,
which as judges shall restrain and suppress the ambition of the nobles, and
shall carefully defend the people from oppressors. Therefore wisely the king
of France has constituted a judge or arbitrator, which as a third person sine
regis invidia proceres caederet, and tenuiores tueretur. Nihil melius, nihil
sapientius hoc decreto esse potuit: nec regni aut ipsius regis potior
securitatis causa.


Sol: But what number of judges may suffice herein?


Epi: You say well: for if one judge be ordained, the mighty and great
personages shall more easily corrupt him, then many. Therefore the Florentines
having entertained but one judge for the suppressing of the ambition of the
nobility, whom they called Capitaneu^, seeing him seduced by the nobility, in
his place constituted eight judges or Commissioners.


Sol: But in this second institution, they found less security then in the
first: for where a few are placed for the rule and government, there they be
found commonly ministers and pleasers of the nobility, and contemners of the
people; the which the Venetians wisely foreseeing, have not only ordained
their Decemviri, but also other magistrates, quos Quarantos vocant, and further
for the same only they have constituted Concilium Praegium qui summus est
magistratus, to this end, that neither judges nor accusers should be wanting
for the suppressing of the ambition of the nobility.


Epi: As you have said, this must needs be the best form of government that
may possibly be ordained in such cases; for many judges are not so easily
corrupted as one: again many are found to be of greater strength and
integrity to resist the displeasure of the nobility then few; and like as
many eyes discern more perfectly then one, and that which escapes or
deceives one eye, may be perceived and that without error by many; so many
wits judge more soundly and sincerely then one. Lastly, we all obey more
willingly the censures of many, then the judgments of a few, or one person
whatsoever.


Sol: But vvhither are we in such cases more to endeavor the favor of the
nobility or the multitude?


Epi: It is said that a Monarchy governed popularlie is then secure and void
of peril: for in the multitude or people consists the strength and force of
every kingdom; the which Nabid king of the Lacedaemonians well understanding,
endeavored wholly the love and favor of the people, so as with his proper
forces he was able to vvithstande and resist his enemies, without the aid of
foreign princes. And Appius Claudius on the contrary, neglecting the favor
of the people, did wholy cleave to the nobility, and lost thereby the
principality and commandment which then he had obtained.


Solo: It must be confessed that in commonweals gained by conquest, you shall
advance your government more assuredly by the favor of the people, then by
the might of the nobility; for nature it self by an enforcing necessity has
taught the weaker part to adheare unto that which is the strongest; and for
this cause the people diverse ways oppressed by the ambition of the mighty,
are forced thereby to hasten and run unto their conqueror, as unto a large
palm tree, to be defended from the storms and violence of the mighty, so as
delivering them from oppressions, they willingly yield their obedience; but
of the contrary the nobility are not so readily won nor so easily kept.
Therefore the Romans in all countries by them conquered, did labor nothing
more then to humble and deiect the mighty, and to protect and defend the
feeble and weak, and deliver the people from oppressions. The like order of
government did the Graecians observe, especially in provinces by them
conquered, which differed in language and manner of living: for there the
people, if they be not carefully defended from the oppressions of the mighty,
by these outward differences as signs and badges of their former liberty, do
hasten for the restitution thereof unto all rebellions, and do provoke some
foreign enemy to invade. Farther in commonweals where generally the manners
of the people are found corrupted, there dangerous it is to advance the Lords
and chieftaines, Anno: 11. Eliz. cap. 7. fol. 168.
as it may appear by the statuts and records of Salamina: for there it is
declared that the L: and chieftaines of that land, in the times of justice
declinatio^, by pretext of defending the people and their own possessions,
arrogated unto themselves absolute and royal authority within large circuites,
by means whereof they grew unto such greatness, as they acknowledged no
superior, nor obedience unto Athens, they held for laws their own wills and
desires, and finally they assembled and led the people unto the accomplishing
of all acts offensive and invasive, without special authority, as before we
have at large discoursed. Therefore in Salamina, and in other commonweals
gained by conquest, where the manners of the people remain corrupted, we are
to give impediment (says a learned author) unto all the means whereby the
nobles may raise themselves unto such greatness, as thereby they may become
fearful unto the commonweal, and providently shall we favor and deliver
the people in such estates from oppression.


Ep: For this cause wisely have the council of Salamina suppressed and cut of
al exactions and tributes, by a firm and stable law before remembered, as the
means, whereby the nobles and cheifetaines did raise themselves unto such
greatness, as they became dangerous unto the commonweal. And to the same
purpose have they made another statute, whereby it is ordained and enacted, that
no Lord nor gentleman of the said land, retain by liverie, wages, or promise,
sign or token, Act Anno. H. 7. ^0. cap. 6.
by indenture or otherwise, any person or persons, but only such, as be or
shall be his officers, as baylifes, stewardes, learned counsels, receivers, and
meniall servantes, daily in householde, at the said Lords proper costs and
charges entertained. Thus if wisely we give impediment unto the means which
raise the chiefetaines and nobles of Salamina unto this greatness; if with
Pompey we shall impeach the forces of Caesar by calling away two legions or
regimentes; if with Pompey we shall withdraw from Caesar, Labienus, and other
his friends and commanders; if we shall cut off all exactions, and tributes,
which Caesar leavieth upon the people; if we shall cut off all that infinite
number of retainers, followers, and men which follow Caesar more then his
menial household according to the statute of retainers; if we shall suppress
all unlawful authorities of Captainship and such like, which Caesar chalengeth
over the meaner people; if the great and large countries which Caesar
possesses, we shall part and dismember by drawing in the custom of
Gavelkinde, by the whch policy, Wales was sometimes reformed, and brought in
subjection; then Caesar shall be no more able to rebel, and we shall rightly
manage the state of Salamina,


Sol: Do you think, that the statute against Coiney and Livery, is a
sufficient bar against the Lords and cheiftaines that they raise not
themselves unto their former greatness?


Epi: No verily: for now they challenge those exactions as lawful services and
reservations by the way of tenier heretofore reserved by their au^cestors, and
predecessors, and by these means hold the subject in servage, or otherwise
they drive them to particular shifts, which are tedious, infinite, and
troublesome to the state, and the utter undoing of the subject; all which may
well be appeased by way of composition betwixt the Lords and tenantes: and the
better to enable us to make an equal composition herein, we are to understand
that these demaundes are of three sorts, and kinds: The one received his
beginning by unlawful means, namely by force and by violence, these are
commonly called by the names of black rentes; such were the exactions which
the Obrians sometimes levied upon the inhabitaunce of the country of
Limbricke. Other demaundes there be, which did grow by way of giving
protection and defense, from such as found themselves oppressed with the power
and might of others; such exactions sometimes have been yielded by the
inhabitants of the small country of Limbricke, unto the ancestors of the now
Earl of Kildare, and such did Mac Morris sometimes yield unto the late Earl
of Desmond attainted. Lastly, other demaundes there be which did grow by the
way of tenier; these may easily be discerned from the others, in that they be
due unto the Lord only, from the hands of his proper tenantes or
freehoulders, and the same commonly shall appear to be so by vvriting or
indenture.


Sol: You have well disclosed the means whereby the greatness of the
nobility and chiefetaines may be abated, and the people defended from the
oppression of the mighty, in times peaceable, wherein law and justice does
prevail. It seems also that it is a matter of like necessity that the good
subject be defended from the oppression of the enemy or rebel: for the
natural subjects of Rome, revolted unto Hanniball, when as they found them
selves not defended from his oppression.


Epi: We must with Fabius providently from time to time send aid sufficient
to such as are our subjects and friends, whereby we shall still hold and
keep them in obedience and subjection.


Sol: If this course had generally been holden by some governors of Salamina,
the rebellions had neither been great, neither yet of long continuance;
therefore wisely it is said, Qui non defendit nec obsistit si potest iniuriae,
tam est in vitio, quam si parents aut patriam aut socios deserat: and after
this manner speaks a christian Doctor, saying, Fortitudo quae per bella
tuetur a Barbaris patriam, vel defendit infirmos, vel a latronibus socios,
plena iusticia est. By which course of government, the Romans almost
conquered the whole world, as Cicero witnesses saying, Noster populus,
socijs defen^endis terrarum iam omnium potitus est.


Epi: It seems also to be a matter of like necessity, that the governors of
Salamina do with all care and endeavor confirm the minds of the subjects
by having a due regard of their merits and services toward the state, least
otherwise when no estimation is had of their merits and public services,
they take occasion thereby of coffeehouse. For the slender care and
estimation the French sometimes held of the public merits of such as had
well deserved, gave the first occasion of their expelling out of Italy; for so
much do their Cronicles and histories witness, where it is said, that the
nobility were not embraced with that humanity they looked for, and much less
had recompenses equal to their merits, yea they found many difficulties to
enter into the chambers and audience of the king. There was no distinction of
persons, the merits and services of men were not considered, but at
adventure, the minds of such as were naturally estraunged from the house of
Arragon, were not confirmed, many delays and difficulties were suborned
touching the restitution of the lands and goods of those that were of the
faction of Aniow, and of the other Barrons that had been banished by the old
Ferdinando. And lastly favoures and graces were imparted to such as procured
them by corruption and means extraordinary, and not to such as had deserved
the same. Wisely therefore shall the governoures of Salamina confirm the
minds of such as are estranged from the house of Arragon, and countenance
such as were banished by Ferdinando, and lastly if they shall imparte favoures
and graces to such as have deserved the same, according to the advice of
Pliny, which says, Tu largiere bellorum socijs, periculorum consortibus.


CAP. 7. The occasions of declining, which usually arise unto the state by the
disorders and oppression of the soldier.
EPI: Noe less occasion is offered of declining, when by the oppression of the
soldier, the people remain discontented.


Sol: You say truly: for the disorder and violence of the soldiers draws
with it a suspicion of perpetual servitude, which caused the Italians to
abandon the power of the French, for that they committed many disorders, and
offered violence unto the people; so as that love, that desire, that affection,
wherewith they honored them before, had now taken contrary quality, and not
only turned into hatred, conspiracy, and accursings against them, but also in
the place of the malice they bare to the Arragons, there was new insinuation of
compassion to Ferdinando, in such sort, as all the kingdom with no less
desire expected an opportunity, to repeal the Arragons, then a fevve months
before they had desired their destruction.


Sol: The same history does witness the like in sundry other places, saying,
that garrisons governed with a desire to spoil, and pray, be the authoures of
great coffeehouse: yet some there be carried with a contrary opinion, which
give liberty unto the soldiers to oppress and spoil the people, following
the counsel of Severus Imperator, which sometimes he gave unto his children,
saying, Inter vos consentite, milites vitate, reliquos omnes spernite.


Epi: This counsel of Severus Imperator, no Prince may safely put in
practice, but such as have a collected power and force into the strength of one
entire army, which shall far exceed the force and strength of the people:
as the Sulthan, the Turk, and such like kingdoms, which has of footmen,
twelve thousand in number, and sixteen of horsemen, for the guard of his
person. These kingdoms and such like, shall more wisely favor and enrich,
rather the soldier, then the people. But such Princes which have not a
collected power, and force, and such as does far exceed the strength and
power of the people, are no farther to satisfy the soldier then justice, his
deserts, and the laws of the land shall require. Therefore Carolus passing
many countries, where the forces of his soldiers were inferior to the
people, did straightly command, that they should abstain from committing of
vvronges and injuries.


Sol: This which you have said agrees with reason, but sometimes not with
the necessity of times, which was never yet subject to humane discretion.


Epi: It must be confessed, that the times of wars, and peace are not all
one, but yet as well in the times of vvarres, as also in times peaceable, we
ought to show our selves studious in delivering the people from oppression: For
what hope may we have of those cities, vbi milites in cives gravius quam in
hosts grassantur.


CAP. 8. The ready ways and means to resist all occasions of declining,
which may arise by the oppression of the Soldiers.
SOL: Then we shall readily perform the same, if we shall remove the occasions
which are in number two: namely the want of pay; and want of other discipline;
for if the soldier were well paid, and offending by martial discipline well
punished, all disorders by these means would be easily reformed.


Epi: You say well: payment ought first to be made, and then discipline
exercised, for disciplinam, inquit Cassiodorus, servare non potest icinnu^
exercitus, dum quod deest semper praesumat armatus.


Sol: But ought this payment to be made at the charge of the Prince, or of the
subjects.


Epi: At the common charge of the subjects? because it is a common safeguard
(...) benefit which equally redoundeth to all.


Sol: You say well: for garrisons are placed for naught else, but to guard the
good subject from the sudden invasion or oppression of the enemy or rebel, and
if they ought to defray the charge, that reap the benefit, then every subject
should make equal contribution herein.


Epi: We do agree herein, that payment ought to be made at the common charge
of the subject, but convenient it were that this charge were drawn to a
contribution certain; for where the contributions are altogether uncertain by
the way of cease, or otherwise, there the people are usually oppressed, and
the Prince vvearied with complaints, or the same rejecting, the people, take
occasion thereby to mutiny and rebel. Therefore wisely Henricus secundus rex
Francorum nostra aetate tributum imperarat, Anno. 1549. Quod vulgus talionum
appellavit, testatus seid militum stipendio daturum, ne cum caeteris
vectigalibus conturbaretur, vt plebs abiniurijs ac direptionibus militum tuta
esset. At an other time, payment was made by certain cities for the
maintenance of ten legions, vt ab incensionibus ac direptionibus militum
tutae essent. In like manner the counsel of Athens by receiving a composition
certain from the hands of the subject, in liew of cease and duties
uncertain, have thereby mightily quieted and pacified the subject, augmented
the public treasury, and advaunced and reformed that government.


Epi: Show us I pray you the order and manner of the compositition.


Sol: The first composition taken for the west parts, was framed after this
manner, as it may appear by this president which I do here deliver unto you:

By the Lord President and Counsel of Mounster.
Whereas John Mac Conoghor of Corbally, in the County of Waterforde gentleman,
complained unto us, that he holding and occupying two plough lands in Corbally
aforesaid, the same being charged with cease, and other impositions
uncertain, he desired to yield a yearly rent out of the same to her Majesty,
in respect of the said cease and other (...) charges, to the maintenance of
the household of the Presidencie, or otherwise that by occasion may be imposed
upon the said County; and therefore has granted and compounded for him and
his heirs, to pay to her Majesty's use, yearly out of the said two plough
lands, the sum of forty shillings sterling; which being by us on her
Majesty's part and behalf accepted, We will and require you, and every of you,
from hence forth in no wise to charge and impose or suffer to be charged, or
imposed, the said lands, or any part thereof, with any her Majesty's cease of
horsemen, horse boys, kearne, galloglasse, biefe, mutton, porke, corn,
subsidy, or any other charge or provision whatsoever, tending or belonging to
her Majesty's service by way of cease to be demanded or challenged: In
witness whereof, I the said John have to this part of the Indenture remaining
with the said Lord President set to my hand and seal, the xxvi of October,
1577.


Epi: I find sundry matters observed in the making of this composition worthy
to be commended. First for that the same was effected with the consentes of the
subjects, and not forced and commanded, as sometimes the Israelites were by
Samuel, which in his oration unto the people, said, Regem habituri estis, qui
decimas fructuum vobis imperaturus est: neither here are they pressed by the
authority of any duke of Albane, to render the tenth part of all things
vendable, Vnde porro Belgarum ab Hispanis rebellantium orta seditio.


Sol: I hold reasonable tributes to be a matter of so great importance and
necessity, as Princes may lawfully command and exact the same at the hands of
the subject, and therefore says one, Quid enim restaret, quo princeps imperium
tueri possit, sublatis portorijs ac tributis? And therefore when Nero offered
to acquit and deliver the subject of all tributes and impositions, wisely the
Senate after thanks rendered unto Nero, dissuaded the fact, Ne Respub: aere
diruta, momento collaberetur; saying, though many seditious persons desirous of
innovatio^ have promised the people immunitie of all tributes and impositions,
yet to grant the same it were altogether unlawful; and if it were lawful,
yet ought you not to do the same for the safety of the commonweal, Cum eo
veluti firmamento Resp: nitatur.


Epi: Be it so, that they may command a matter so necessary for the
sustaining and upholding of the commonweal; yet for the avoiding of sedition,
and the coffeehouse of the people, their consentes are required, the time
also is to be regarded, the nature of the commonweal is to be respected, and
lastly the employment of those tributes ought to be unto public uses. For
Princes in the beginning of their government are not to impose tributes,
fearing least the ten tribes for this cause shall rebel, and that a new king
be chosen in the place of Roboham. But at such times they shall more wisely with
the French King being newly possessed of the Duchey of Milbaine, acquit and
discharge the people of al tributes, which did mightily as then advance his
conquest. Again, the nature and condition of the commonwealth is a matter no
less worthy of consideration, then the time: for if the commonweal has
been from time to time a free estate and not subject to others, as sometimes
the Romans were, to such estates all manner of tributes are grievous, and
therefore not to be exacted, but upon urgent causes, the which ceasing, the
people ought to be delivered from tributes. But the people of Florence on the
contrary, having always lived in servitude, and as tributaries to others,
admit vvillinglye all sorts of impositions and tributes from time to time
imposed upon them by their duke: and for this cause Salamina long ere this
might have been made profitable unto Athens, for that they have always lived
in servitude, and subject to all impositions and tributes, and many exactions
have been reared there by force and violence, to the maintenance of idle and
evil disposed persons, the which being converted to private uses and not to
public services, have little profited the City of Athens; all which the
records and statutes of Salamina, do many ways witness, and especially the
statutes against Coiney and Liverie: and therefore the last matter which is the
employment of tributes to public uses, is not the least; wherein we are to
have diverse regardes: first, care is to be had of the Prince and his family;
secondarilie of the stipendarily soldiers, the which two matters are chiefly
respected and regarded in the composition before remembered; thirdly of
magistrates, which for want of their pay and stipend, do more egerly sometimes
then the soldiers rob and devour the people; fourthlie of such as have well
deserved of the commonweal. Finally care is to be had of the poorer
subjects, least by want, and extreme poverty, they become movers of sedition.


Epi: The charge being thus defrayed, to the end exact payment may be made, it
were convenient that the soldiers were paid by the poule; for if payment be
made as now unto the Captains, the soldier receiving not the same in due
time, dares not complain against him, but is driven to seek his maintenance
by oppressing of the people. Thus oftentimes the soldier is found to hate his
captain which fails to make payment, and the captain disliketh the
soldier, because he fails in order and government, so as by this private
malice, impediment is given oftentimes unto public services. The which
mischief has reigned long in Salamina.


Sol: Doctor Sutliefe that learned and skillful writer has discoursed hereof
at large in his military works, and therefore we will proceed unto the
other occasion of all the disorders in the men of garrison, which is the want
of military discipline; for having neither a judge nor court martial orderly
kept for the due trial and punishment of offenders, the soldier for the most
part receives no punishment for his offense, or being punished in courts
civil, they may well complain of their manner of trial by the native borne
people of the country.


Epi: It is prohibited in all countries well governed to the men of garrison,
to hold any affinity, consanguinitie, contract, or bargains, with the native
borne people of the country, fearing least by this intercourse of
friendship, the garrisons may be at the last corrupted: but greater occasion
of corruption is there given in Salamina, where not only these disorders are
admitted by the negligence of Magistrates there placed, but that which is
more, the native borne people are made tryers of the life and fortunes of the
men in garrison: and may they boldly prosecute in times of wars such as be
enemies to the state, whom in times of peace they may justly fear as
malicious cryers of their goods, life, and fortunes whatsoever. Therefore most
necessary it is, that a court martial be established and orderly kept, as you
have said, thoroughout the whole province of Salamina, for the reforming of
disorders and mischiefs before recited.


CAP. 9. Occasions of declining are then given, when Magistrates placed for
reformation of any Country or province, are not supported and countenaunced
during the time of their government.
SOL: There remain yet other occasions of the declining of commonweals,
worthy of remembrance.


Epi: What may the same be?


Sol: If Princes, Kings, and States, shall not publicly grace, countenance,
and support all governoures and Magistrates by them placed for reformation of
any province or nation during the time of their government, the subjects shall
take thereby occasion of rebelling. For the Gauls understanding that Rome did
conspire to disgrace Caesar, raised themselves forthwith in arms under the
leading of Ambiorix, and Vercingentorix, in such sort, as if they had not to
hastily proceeded therein, they had put all Italy in as great fear and
danger, as it was sometimes when the Cimbri came to invade their city.


Epi: We need not search foreign examples herein: for Salamina by this
error committed was for many years vexed with the rebellions of the Burkes
and the Orurkes, until that famous knight Sir B. Bingham by his singular art
and skill in military discipline, as an other Caesar, suppressed at the last
Vercingentorix, and the rebelling Gauls.


Sol: What governoures were there, that were found so unskillful in their
charge?


Epi: A late deputy of Salamina, whose name here I pass over with silence,
for that I may not say, honoris causa nomino. But O you governoures, Princes,
Kings, and Emperors, whatsoever, countenance all inferior governoures and
magistrates placed for the reformation of any nation or province: countenance
Pericles, which beholds always the Amazon holding his dart with a hand
stretched forth even in his face, with whom as with a deadly enemy he must
always be fighting: countenance Camillus, which now is placed to reform and
suppress the mutinous citizens, wherein if he fortune to be inferior for want
of your countenance and assistaunce, he shall be suppressed, condemned; and
banished, or at the least he must of force surrender his office of Dictator.
Countenance Pericles, for otherwise he shall be as one that has committed
incest, he shall be a coward, the author of wars, yea of the plague, and of
whatsoever else, which may draw with it the hatred of all the citizens of
Athens. Countenance Camillus, for there shall be a Lucius Apulius, which
maliciously shall accuse him for stealing part of the spoil of the Tuscans:
Lastly countenance this Magistrate placed for reformation; for with David, he
is placed to fight with a bear after a lion, with a Giant after a bear, with
a King after a Giant, and with the Philistians after a King. They must fight
with infamy after envye, with accusations after infamy, with condemnation
after accusations, with judgment after condemnation, with imprisonment after
judgment, with banishment after imprisonment, for Simul ista mundi conditor
posuit Deus, odium atque regnum. But if you shall not countenance them, the
Gauls shall rebel against Caesar, the citizens shall mutiny, but Camillus
shall not be of force to suppress them; yea this action of reformation shall
fall to the ground, and the commonweal it self may not long continue.


CAP. 10. Occasions of declining, which arise unto the commonweal sometimes,
by secluding a nation conquered, from bearing of offices, and dignities.
SOL: Let us proceed unto other occasions of declining of estates and
commonweals, which arise oftentimes by secluding a nation or people conquered
from bearing of offices or dignity in the commonweal: for they remain
possessed with a desire to be restored unto their former liberty, for this
cause especially, Vt ipsis dominari, and publicis muneribus praefici liceat.


Ep: And one the other side, no less occasion is given of declining, if you
shall advaunce them unto the offices, and dignities of the commonweal. For
did not Salamina decline sometimes by constituting Garralde Fitz Garralde
attainted, Lieutenant of Salamina? did they not at other times decline by
constituting Thomas Fitz Garralde sometimes Lievetenaunt of the several
provinces thereof? and at other times, by giving authority into the hands of
James of Desmonde? all which, to them which shall view the several records
of their attainder, more at large may appear. For the like causes, Nec
Achaeorummerita in Romanos, vel Aetolorum vnquam effecerunt, vt aliqua sibi
imperij fieret accessio; nec Antiochi potentia fuerunt inducti, vt suo ipsorum
consensu aliquam in ea provincia potestatem haberet. If the Lacedaemonians in
their petition exhibited to the counsel of Amphictyons, held it convenient and
necessary, that the towns and Cities of Greece, which were not of the league
with the Graecians, against the barbarous people, should be removed from the
place of a counselor; then much more, those which are not only, not parties
with the Graecians, but of league with the barbarous people, yea their feeed
and sworn servantes, are to be dismissed by the counsel of Amphictyons; for
to such we shall more safely give offices of profit, then of commandment,
whereby the multitude shall rest pleased, and the state acquitted of peril and
danger: and if we shall give any higher places to any then those of profit
and gain, let us then carefully with Antipater make choice of such Athenians,
as shall not be studious of any innovation.


CAP. 11. Occasions of declination, which arise sometimes by the difference of
laws, religion, habit, and language.
SOL: You have well discussed this matter: therefore let us proceed unto other
occasions, amongst which I may find none that does more contain, and hold
the subject of Salamina, in their disobedience and savage life, then the
difference of laws, religion, habit, and language, which by the eye deceives
the multitude, and persuadeth them that they be of sundry sorts, nations, and
countries, when they be wholly together but one body, as the same more at large
appears by the statutes and records of Salamina, Act. 28. H. 8. cap. 16.
in the which a manifest proof is alleged of that which I have said; for
there it is affirmed, that those parts of Salamina, which embrace an
vinformity of laws, religion, habit, and language, with the City of
Athens, are found by daily experience, much more loyal, civil, and obedient,
then all the other parts of Salamina, which are not as yet reduced unto so
good an uniformity: for the which causes as well the counsel of Athens, Act:
28. H. 8. cap. 16.
as of Salamina, have established certain laws for the uniformity of
religion, laws, habit, and language, and thereby have charged the subjects and
governors of Salamina upon their duties of allegeaunce, to hold throughout
all the parts thereof, one uniformity.


Epi: The Cities and towns which the Romans did not destroy, were permitted
as free subjects to live, and to enjoy their own laws: and it is said, that
the king of France being taught by experience, that it was the most ready way
to win the affections of the people, to permit them as free subjects to live,
and enjoy their own laws, did revoke and call home his deputy from the
government of the City of Genuenses, and permitted them to make choice of
their own governor.


Sol: These objections which you have made, do receive several aunsweres: and
as for the Romans, they held that course and order of government by you
remembered, until their power did extend beyond the confines of Italy, but
then they gave Praetors, and provincial governors unto their Cities. Again,
their lenity by you remembered, did as much advance their ambitious thoughts in
conquering, as sometimes their knowledge in military discipline, so as it may
be commended for a ready way to conquer, but not* as a safe way to hold and
keep. And as for the French, we may not safely follow their steps as guides
herein, for that they are deemed of all nations valiant conquerours, but not
provident defenders and keepers thereof, so as unto them we may rightly say,
Vincere scis Hannibal, sed vti victoria nescis.


CAP. 12. The ready ways and means to remoove aloccasions of declining.
BUT now let us close up this long discourse with one policy used by the
Romans, which being rightly applied may remoove all occasions of declining:
for after they had subjected Macedony unto their rule and government, for the
better preventing of all occasions of rebelling, they divided the kingdom into
four provinces, with a capital punnishment to be imposed upon such, as
should wander and travel from province to province, or should change their
habitation, or contract affinities, or use merchandise with those of other
provinces, by which course of government, they did eftsoons remove all
occasions of declining and rebelling: for traitors and rebels having once
incurred the penalty of laws, may find no safety but in wandering from
province to province; their broken and decayed forces may not be repaired, but
by contracting of affinities with such of other provinces, which they find to
be of strength and force; and sometimes under the color of merchandise, they
transporte letters, importing and nourishing thereby a general combination; by
which means Shane Oneile attainted, sometimes labored the corruption of all
the West parts of Salamina, as in the statutes of his attainder it does lively
appear: and by the like practices before remembered, did the late Burkes and
Orurkes of Conought nourishe for a long time all their wicked rebellions. And
therefore Mummius Consul Achaeis victis, quo minus rebellarent, caetibus ac
societatibus interdixit, Corinthum quae duo maria brevi terrarum intervallo
iungebat, disturbavit.


CAP. 13. The subject and matter, as also the form, from whence every
distemperature of this pollitike body has his being and subsisting.
SOL: But since we have discussed at large of the principal occasions of
declining of estates and commonweals, and of the ways and means to
suppress the same, it remains that we entreat at large of the distemperature
of this polliticke body: for it behooveth princes not only to foresee and
prevent occasions of their declining, but also to know the nature of this
distemperature, and how it has his subsisting and being, and by what means
the same may be suppressed; for in vain shall occasions offer themselves,
where this distemperature is not kindled, or being kindled where it is
suppressed.


Epi: You have moved a matter of good importance, whereof the first is a
distemperature of this polliticke body, the which is nothing else but a
declininge from a just proportion either in obeyinge or governing the subject.
This distemperature with all other things has his beeinge and subsistinge
from his proper matter and form: the matter also has his being, either from
a general corruption of manners in the people, as in the times wherein Galba,
and Pertinax lived and reigned, who though most just and upright kings, were
notwithstanding slain by their subjects; or else it proceeds from a
corruption in the head only, the which sometimes reigned in Tarquine; for if
the people had then been corrupted in manners, they could not have been found
so constant defendors of their liberties, and so desirous of reformation. The
form as in all other things, so unto this distemperature as unto his proper
matter it gives his subsisting and being, the which form if we shall describe,
it may be resembled to a fair cloak give^ to cover foul practices, shaped
out by a cunning workman, whereby the people oftentimes remain deluded, and
the commonweal subverted; for so ambitious persons desirous of innovation,
have always proceeded under an honest cloak and show, to distemper and
disquiet the common peace of the weal public, and therefore it is truly
said, Ambitio tam per virtutes quam per vitia nos oppugnat.


Epi: But here we are to observe this caution, that if this form has not his
proper matter which is the corruption of manners in the people, wherein it
may make a deep impression, the distemperature that grows thereby, shall
easily be recovered: and for this cause the form which Tarquine gave to his
ambition, was easily defaced by Brutus, and Valerius, for that the manners of
the people were not then corrupted. In like manner Marcus Manlius, and Spurius
Cassius, had set down unto themselves a form of disturbing the peace of the
commonweal, and for the advauncing of their own ambition, but finding the
manners of the people then uncorrupted, the matter wanting into which, the
form which they before had framed, might be received, they both failed of
their purpose. But otherwise it fares with the commonwealth, when this
form has found his proper matter and embraces the same, namely the
corruption of manners in the people; for in such a case there is kindled
foorthvvith so mighty a distemperature, as without great resistaunce it may
not be quenched: and for this cause the form of ambition which sometimes
Sylla, Marius, and Caesar, had framed unto themselves, meeting and concurring
at once with the corruption of manners in the people as his proper matter, did
assuredly advaunce their ambition, to the overthrow of that estate. Therefore
most false is that position, which affirms, that the people corrupted in
manners, are more easily held in subjection, then a nation uncorrupted. The
second caution to be observed, is the consideration of the sundry forms of
disturbing commonweals, which usually does advaunce her ambition not after
one selfsame manner, but sometimes with a show of profit, sometimes with
the show of magnanimity, and at other times she promises an alteration and
change of things to the contentment of al. After this last manner she
presented her self sometimes unto the Athenians, and therefore it is said,
that notwithstanding the citizens of Athens observed and obeyed the laws,
which you Solon made for their reformation, yet they were found so corrupted in
manners, partly by reason of their several factions, and partly by idleness,
wherewith the city of Athens was well near destroyed, as they desired
nothing so much as a change and alteration of things, every man hoping thereby
to be better then his adversaries. Secondarily by a show of magnanimity, the
people of Rome were sometimes induced so far to embrace the counsel of Varro
for the resisting of Hannibal, as thereby they near perished themselves and
the common-vveale. Finally, many are no less bewitched with a glistering show
of profit and gain, the which Pericles well understanding, did forthwith
devide the enemies lands gained by conquest, among the people, and did
appointe them rewards for all things, and did make large distributions among
them, whereby at the last he did withdravv their obedience from the counsel
Areopagite, unto his sole rule and government: in like manner Phillip of
Macedonie corrupted certain tirauntes of the I Will of Euboea, who with money in
like sort corrupted the people, whereby they became rebels and traitoures to
their country; after the same manner he corrupted and subdued the most parts
of Greece, but shall not now the infinite calamities and miseries of the other
parts of Greece: admonish us not to be deceived with this form of ambition
which Phillip of Macedonie has now framed to our utter destruction? O you
Graecians, let him not say as heretofore, with my treasure I have corrupted and
subdued the most parts of Greece, and have found there no fort so strong, but
that with an Ass laden with gold, I might enter the same, fearing in the end
he make us his Asses and Mules, to carry his silver and gold and not to use
the same, or rather slaves to be committed to perpetual bondage: but let us
with the noble Romans, refuse the money of Spurius Cassius, Ne libertatem
vendere eo pretio videamur; let us not give credit to his flattering orators
the Jesuits, which bribed by Polycarphon labor the destruction of Athens; let
us not be infamous with the Neapolitanes for inconstancy; let us not be led
this day to affect the French, and to morrow with a new insinuation of
Ferdinando; for so it will be, when the yoke of the French shall once seem
heavy and intolerable unto our shoulders. In vain then with the labourer of
Phrygia, shall we dig the earth, and searching say, we seek for Antigonus;
for such as govern, do rule as tyrauntes and oppressors over us: in vain
with the worthy woman of Megara, shall we take up the bones of Phocion in the
night, and give unto them the honorable ceremonies of burial, for the affairs
of the Athenians may not prosper, because Phocion is dead; in vain shall we
then cry and say, O dear hearth and toombe, we pray thee faithfully to keep
the bones of this honorable personage, until such time as the Athenians shall
repent them of the many injuries and wrongs done unto him, for Phocion is now
dead, and the affairs of the Athenians may not prosper: in vain shall we make
unto our selves a costly stand or image in remembrance of so worthy a
personage, for the affairs of the Athenians shall not prosper, in that Phocion
is dead. Let us therefore in time with the wise governor suspect the
flattering of this our enemy, as the calmenes of the sea, which is naught else
but a manifest token of a present and imminent tempest; and with Cicero and
Cato, withstand in time the flattery and ambition of Caesar, least with the
Romans to late we repent the same: let us not as men overcome with the
greatness of the tempest, desperately seek our safety in the midst of the
rocks and sands, but rather let us fighting for our Prince and country, say,
we will overcome, or die.


CAP. 14. The sundry ways and means left unto us for the suppressing of
every distemperature reigning in this polliticke body.
SOL: But what means are left unto us to suppress this distemperature?


Epi: First we are to give impediment unto the form and manner, and with
Valerius deny the embassadoures of Tarquine to speak unto the people, least by
flattery they be deluded: with Brutus we are to condemn and execute even our
own sons, corrupted by Tarquine: and with Valerius we ought to deny the
deliverie of Vendicius unto the traitoures: thus we must give impediment unto
the form, wherein this caution is to be observed, that the same be done in the
beginning. For the Romans having sometimes laid a form of their ambition for
the disturbing and conquering of others, the same was at the first little
regarded, until they had advaunced their ambition so highly, as to late their
associates and neighbors did acknowledge their error, and when they much
desired, they found themselves much unable to suppress the same.


Sol: What other means remain to suppress this distemperature?


Epi: First we are to proceed by good and profitable laws to the suppressing
thereof: for the Romans being given to understand, that forty several nations
had combined for their ruin and destruction, they did forthwith create a
Dictator to manage the affairs of their wars, unto whom they gave an
absolute power; all which, as well the manner of the creation, as his authority
and continuance was established by laws, fearing least when this
distemperature should be once thoroughly kindled in the bowels of the
commonweal, they might want either time to effect the same, or that this
innovation might then give occasion of mutiny. Secondly, we are to make
preparation for the wars, and with Themistocles daily to arm and exercise the
Athenians, to build and vittaile our galleys, for the battle of Marathon
(says he) will not give an end unto these wars, but rather it does foretell
us of greater troubles. Thirdly, we are to resist this distemperature by the
force and strength of our alies, confederates, and associates: and herein above
all others, we are highly to esteem and regard the confederation of free
Cities and estates; for they do not easily, or for light causes depart the
same, in regard they proceed iudicially by voices, as well to establish, as
to dissolve the same; the which caution Tusci olim observabant, and therefore
it is said, Multum negotij fuit populo Romano cum Tuscis hoc modo inter se
confederatis: by which observation they became as well by sea as by land,
mighty commanders; so as it is said, Quod ante tempora Romanorum Tusci
potentissimi fuerint terra marique. After this manner do the Helvetians at
this day proceed in their wars: and in times past, Achaei atque Aetoli. In
like manner the Romans the better to overcome all difficulties in their
wars, did make an association with other free Cities and states, by the which
manner of proceeding, they did every where conquer and command. But the
Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, not making any confederation, or
association with other free Cities, did not long continue their greatness.
Fourthly, we must be able at all times to produce a collected power and
strength of our proper subjects, well trained and exercised in military
discipline, for the suppressing of this distemperature; for otherwise the
Thebanes and the rest of the Cities of Greece, shall decline and revolte from
the Lacedaemonians; and Italy shall revolte from the Venetians, Quoniam resp:
Spartanorum and Venetorum populum habuit imbellem; therefore says one, In
promptu habeas exercitum egregium ad exemplum Romanorum, quo motos liceat
componere fluctus. Fifthly, necessary it is, that we do possess all the
strong fortes and holds, the which although they shall little avail us against
any general or strong assault made against them, by such as command the
field, for that either with the forte or rock of Arazze, they shall give
place unto the fury of the artillery, or with the town and forte of Avon for
want of succors, or with the town Valencey by the treason of Donate
Raffaguin; yet they being placed upon the confines of the country, may
withstand all sudden attemptes, and give succor unto the wounded and
diseased. Sixthly, for the better suppressing of these distemperatures, we are
to take hostages and pledges with king Porsenna, from such persons as are
likely to depart from their obedience, to the disturbance of the common peace,
and tranquillity of the subjects, by the which way he suppressed the malice
of the Romans; then shall we safely with him dissolve our army, and
vvithdrawe our strength. The people of Salamina has in all ages been found
so factious and rebellious, even in the times before Athens made their conquest
over them, as the whole kingdom being then divided into four several parts
and provinces, which they termed kingdoms, yet all being commanded by the
king of Vlster, they did from time to time yield many of their best and chief
personages, for pledges and hostages of their obedience unto the king of
Vlster: if then their native borne kings alied, fostered, married, and
continued even one in the others bosom, did yield pledges for their
obedience, how may we in this troubled age safely dismiss pledges, and set
them at liberty? may we expect greater fidelity, then they bare sometimes to
their native kings? or do these times offer more security? or does this
nation use more fidelity? who so looks into the histories and records of
their new and late wars, shall find in them their old disposition to
rebel; and that this universal obedience which now they yield, is nothing
but a sudden heat or calm, which is the true messenger of a tempestuous
weather. The seventh caution observed for the suppressing of this
distemperature, is speedily to disarme the people, and not suffer them at all
to be trained or exercised in military discipline, especially where the people
be not free, but obedient and tributaries unto us: for the use, knowledge, and
exercise of military discipline, does render them bold, turbulent,
disobedient, and rebellious against us: for what boldness and disobedience
reigns in the people of Salamina, by trayning and exercising them in the
feats of wars, Anno. 10. H. 7. cap. 13
the same may lively appear in their records and statutes, where it is said,
that diverse persons have assembled with banners displaied against the
lievtenaunt and deputy of the said land, whereby many times the deputy has
been put to reproach, and the commonweal set in adventure: for this cause it
is said, that Veneti and Spartani opera plebis in bellis non vterentur; and
more wisely the Lacedaemonians holding Thebes under their subjection and
obedience, would not permit that any Citizen of Thebes should be trained
in the wars, but rather labored to render them peaceable, and by ease and
rest, soft and effeminate; and there was no smith to be found through all the
land of Israel, during such time as the Philistians held them in subjection,
least the Hebrews make them swords and spades, say the Philistians. Let us
then draw the people of Salamina from the exercise of the wars; let us with
Numa cool and pacify the hoate courage of the Romans to fight, by the daily
use and exercise of religion, prayer, and devotion; and let us with the
ancient kings of Athens, draw them unto planting, sowing, and ploughing the
land; and let us there advance and show forth the olive tree unto the judges;
let us there from henceforth honor the Godesse Pallas, and not Mars or Neptune,
as heretofore; for she of right ought there to prevail, and have pre-eminence;
for she it is that shall cause the people to embrace with all humility and
obedience the government of kings. Put that great number of Heilotes to
labor, and plough the ground, and let no man be trained but the free
Citizen, says Lycurgus, let them yield unto us magna vectigalia, and let us
give unto them magnum and egregium exercitum, if need shall require. Lastly,
let us advance all occupations and sciences with the counsel Areopagite, that
thereby they may be drawn from the study and thoughts of innovation and
change, for difficilis res est, says a learned writer, innumerabilem
multitudinem a principe vel a paucis coerceri, nisi plebs operibus intenta
quaestum faciat. Therefore wisely did sometimes Pericles, Vespasianus,
Augustus, and now the Venetians, hold the minds and thoughts of their
Citizens always occupied and employed in labors, occupations, and sciences.


Sol: There are which finding this polliticke body distempered, have divided
the same into parts and factions, whereby as a smoke parted into many rivals
it loses his principal force: for with the aid and assistance of the weaker
part, they have suppressed the stronger, and then easily commanded the
weaker; and for this cause it is said, that the kings of Egypt have
heretofore divided their regions and kingdoms by factions, Ne vnquam
conspirare inter se Aegyptij omnes possent.


Epi: This course of government is never to be embraced, but upon a great
extremity, when as neither there remains counsel, nor forces, which
otherwise may suppress this distemperature: for thereby four mischiefs shall
arise unto the state; first the rentes, revenewes, customs, compositions,
tributes, escheates, and other profits annexed unto their crown, shall
thereby cease; for it is said, the Florentines by their civil factions, that
first received their beginning of the disorders which were in the government
popular, were rendered as well unable to pay the French king the residue of the
money which had been lent them by the Duke of Millaine, as also to defray the
ordinary charges of the wars with Pisa. The like mischief did arise unto
the several towns of Bomagua, from their several factions and disorders; but
why do we seek foreign examples? did not all compositions, customs, rentes,
revenewes, tributes, and other escheates, and profits, for a long time cease by
the extreme poverty of the subjects of Salamina, which did first arise unto
that country by reason of their several factions? as it may appear by the
statute of Captaineship, where it is declared, that in the time of justice
declination, the Lords and chiefetaines fell into much strife for greatness of
rule and government, by reason whereof they drew unto them other inferior
states to be of their several factions, whereby the country was drawn into
that poverty, as for a long time, all rentes, revenewes, and other profits
there ceased, and more then that, a new charge and trouble did grow unto
Athens for the appeasing of those disorders. Again, the honor of well
governing and commanding is hereby lost, which is a second mischief that
arises unto us herein; for ob discordias civium aceidit, vt vnius imperio non
pareant, sed in diversas parts divisaregio nullis principibus parere cogatur.
All which did sometimes lively appear in Salamina, when as the Lords and
chiefetaines of that land, by drawing all other inferior states unto their
several factions, did thereby withdraw the fear, obedience, Act. of
captainship. 11. Eliza. cap. 7. folio. 168.
and attendance of the subject of Salamina, due unto the state of Athens, and
wholly converted the same unto themselves, as in the statute of Captainship more
at large may appear. Thirdly by factions and discordes there grows a neglect
of al public affairs; for it is truly said, that in the civil discords of
the Florentines, no man having a sound care of the affairs public, and many
of the principal citizens being suspected, either to fre^d the Medices, or me^
that desired an other form of government, things were overruled more with
confusion then with counsel. Lastly, greater mischief then any before
remembered, arises by factions and discordes; for in such cases a third person
shall easily atchieve unto the principallity, and suppress either faction at
his pleasure; for so Clearchus by the assistance of the faction of the
nobility, was enabled to hold the place and kingdom, as well against the people
as nobles, which were then the two factions that reigned and disturbed the
politic body: and it is also said, the particular factions of the citizens of
Millaine drawing to private counsels, did immediately conspire and take arms
against Lodowicke Sforce, in such sort, as he was forced thereby to make his
present departure with his wife and children, at which instant the citizens of
Millain with francke and ready goodwil received the enemy: and have not several
factions of Salamina, offered themselves with fra^cke and ready goodwill to
receive the enemy? has not James sometimes Earl of Desmond sent unto the
french king, and by all means excited and provoked him to send an army for the
invading of Salamina, the which conspiracy did not then take his desired
effect, by reason of a peace the^ immediately concluded betwixt King H. the 8.
and the french King? again being frustate of that hope, has he not many ways
provoked the emperor, to send an army for the invading and possessing of
Salamina? in like manner has not Thomas Fitz Garrald addressed his letters unto
the Bishop of Rome, as also unto the Emperor, by one Gale in Granyll, otherwise
called Charles Raynold Archdeacon of Kelles, for the invading of Salamina? Act.
28. H. 8. cap. 1.
all which in the act of the attainder more at large may appear. And has not
Oneile, who by sufferaunce and tollerance, long supported his faction against
the state, sometimes addressed his letters unto several foreign Princes, for
the drawing in of strangers to invade and possess Salamina, the which were
publicly intercepted by the Lord Deputy? etc. All which may evidently
appear in the statutes of his attainder. Again did not the faction of the
ancient Britains lay open a gap unto Caesar his invasion, and did he not by
the aid of one faction of the Gauls subdue the rest, and them also in the
end? Was not the Duke sometimes of Valentinois, emboldened to invade the
dominion of the Florentines, with a weak and slender army, by the fear,
suspicion, and great disagreement, that then possessed them, for that he had in
his army Vitellozze, and the Vrsins, and for that also Peter de Medicis was
abiding at Loiana in the country of Bollognia at his direction? for it is
said that he did entertain Peter de Medicis, Vitellie, and the Vrsins, not
with a mind or desire to advaunce them, for nothing more then that could be
farther from his thoughts, but to augment the mutinies and disagreementes of
the Florentines, by the which he hoped to urge them either to better
conditions, or be able to occupy some place of importance in their
jurisdiction. And did not the Megarians during the vproares raised by the
several factions then maintained by the issue of Cylon, and the offspring of
Megacles, take from us the haven of Nysea, and the i will of Salamina? then we
may rightly conclude, that so long as we have an enemy, which raises
himself against us, so long we ought for the safety of the whole, strongly to
suppress all factions whatsoever: for factions breed an unsettled mind in
the people, and does nourish this desire of change and alteration; the which
did livelie appear in the people of Athens, during the continuance of the
several factions, then entertained betwixt the people of the valley, sea-cost,
and mountain; for not withstanding they al kept and observed the laws made by
you Solon, for their reformation, yet there was none found but gaped for a
change, and desired to see things in another state, either parties hoping
their condition and state of life would amend by change, and that every of
them should be better then their adversaries. There remains now that we
deduct colonies, which is the last, but not the least means to suppress this
distemperature, which of all others is the most beneficial for the co^taining
of a nation conquered in their duty and obedience; wherein four matters are
worthily considered: first the necessity of deducting colonies; secondarily
the benefit that redoundeth thereby unto commonweals; thirdly what order and
manner in deducting colonies is to be used and observed; lastly, the
impedimentes which are usually given unto the deducting of colonies.


Sol: Show us the necessity of collonies.


Epi: A nation conquered may not be contained in their obedience without the
strength of colonies or garrisons: for may we be induced to believe, that that
people or nation, who daily bewaileth and accuses his present state and
condition, may persist therein longer then they be pressed there unto by
necessity? and more then this in the act of Absentes, the mere native borne
people of Salamina, 28. H. 8. cap. 3.
are termed to be mortal and natural enemies unto their conqueror and all
his dominions. After this sort did the citizens of Cremona affect the
Venetians; and the Pisans, the Florentines: but now to suppress this
distemperature, if we should give unto them garrisones, and Praesidia
perpetua, nihil isto intollerabilius est, says a learned writer, quia tantum
abest vt victi vincentium imperijs assuescere condiscant, vt non prius a
novandis rebus conquiescant, quam aut praesidia interemerint, aut arces
ceperint, aut finitimos principes ac populos ad bellum accerserint; whereof we
need not search foreign examples, when the daily calamities of Salamina do
witness the same, which happened since the times, wherein we gave unto them
praesidia perpetua: for how many ways did this people incite the French King,
how often have they provoked the Pope to invade this land of Salamina? Again
the Emperor and all other Princes and Potentates, what fortes and holds have
they not taken, and how many of our garrisons have they most cruelly slain and
murdered, the same, in the several acts of Attainder of Shane Oneile, Garralde
Fitz Garralde, 28. H. 8. cap. 1.
James of Desmond, and by several other records, may appear at large.
Neither does this form of government draw with it a perpetual
coffeehouse only, but also an infinite and continual charge in
maintaining these several garrisons, as well to the Prince, as to the subject;
for so in the act of subsidy and other records it may appear. Neither be
these all the discommodities that perpetual garrisons draw with them, for
these notwithstanding, 28. H. 8. cap. 11.
we have been forced to send at sundry times armies royal to suppress
disorders and rebellions, as the same more at large may appear in the act of
restraining of tributes; so as we may conclude, that where colonies are not
strongly and faithfully deducted, there the end of the first wars, is but a
beginning of the second more dangerous then the first; the which may appear
by the records of Salamina: for no sooner were the people or sects, called
Omores, Odempseis, Oconores, and others, expelled by great forces and
strengthes, to our great charges, out of the several countries of Liece,
Sl^wmarge, Irry, Glimnaliry, and Offaile, but eftsoon for that we deducted not
colonies, they traiterouslie entered the said countries by force, Act. An. 3.4.
Phil. and Mariae c. 2. folio. 145.
and long detained the same, until they were with greater forces expelled, all
which more at large may appear in the act made for the deviding of countries,
into shiere grounds, so as we may conclude, that it is not for wise Princes to
persevere in that course of government, which does nourish as it were a
perpetual interest in troubles, charges, and expenses: for the which causes
chiefly did the Venetians willingly abandon the government of Bybienna and
Pisa, and we of Athens, Salamina, the which did chiefly arise unto us, for
that in steed of planting of colonies, we placed garrisons. Now then if we be
willing to cast of our former and manifold troubles, if we be desirous to
dismiss our selves of these infinite and perpetual charges, and lastly if we
endeavor to be strong against the invaders, and such as shall contend to
occupy Salamina by force, let us loose no opportunity of deducting of
colonies, for they be deducted and maintained with small or no charges, and
with no great offense, but only to such whose lands and houses they possess,
the which remain for the most part pacified, in that they enjoy their life
which stood in the hands of the Prince, as well as their lands to dispose,
for their offenses: and if they should remain discontented, for that having
respect to the whole kingdom they be but a handful, and also dispersed and
poor, they may never be able to hurt or disturb the state, and all others
which find themselves free from their losses, shall rest pacified, partly
fearing, least they commit any thing rashly or foolishly, and partly doubting,
least the like befalls them as to those which remain spoiled for their
offenses. Again, being thus deducted with small or no coffeehouse, and
maintained with far less charge, they be found also more faithful and
stout defendours of the confines of the country then garrisons, and therefore
it is said by a man of great understanding, Si reges nostri capto Ludovico 12.
rege Insubriae, Colonias eo misissent, vt quondam Celtarum reges fecisse
dicuntur, Insubria a Francorum ditione ac potestate non tam facile defecisset:
nec vero Hispani praesidijs militaribus nulla Colonia deducta perpetuum eius
regionis imperium tuebuntur, sed ab imperio subditi arrepta occasion
desciscant oportet; non aliter quam Belgae, quos iam pridem colonijs Hispanorum
ad imperium retinendum coniungi necesse fuisset, quoniam nec vlla vis diuturna
esse potest, and pessimus diuturnitatis custos est metus: in like manner
Salamina notvvithstanding the strength of garrisons, does daily take all
occasions of declining, but in former times, after colonies were deducted, then
Salamina continued for many ages in their obedience, in such sort, as none
durst bear up head, but lived as vassals and obedient people, until partly
by the iniquity of the times, partly by our domestical factions, and lastly by
a negligence and security then found in these colonies, they were overthrown
and expelled by the native borne people of that land, all which in the act of
attainder of Shane Oneile more at large may appear, as also in the statutes of
Absentes.


Sol: Now since the necessity of colonies does manifestly appear by
infallible proofs and examples, let us proceed unto the profit and benefit
that grows thereby.


Epi: The benefits that hereby arise to the commonweal, are sundry and
diverse: first the people poor and seditions which were a burden to the
commonweal, are drawn forth, whereby the matter of sedition is remooved out
of the City; and for this cause it is said, that Pericles sent into the
country of Cherronesus, a thousand free men of his City there to dwell, and
to devide the lands amongst them; five hundredth also into the I Will of Naxus,
into the I Will of Andros others, some he sent to inhabit Thracia, and others to
dwell with the Bisaltes; as well thereby to rid the City of a number of
idle persons, who thorough idleness began to be curious and to desire change of
things, as also to provide for the necessity of the poor townsmen that had
nothing, which being natural Citizens of Athens served as garrisons, to keep
under those which had a desire to rebel, or to attempt any alterateration or
change: secondly by translating of colonies, the people conquered are drawn
and intised by little and little, to embrace the manners, laws, and
government of the conqueror: lastly the colonies being placed and dispersed
abroad amongst the people, like Beacons do foretell and disclose all
conspiracies, and as a garrison also are wont to suppress the mutinies of such
as are desirous of alteration and change; and to this effect it is said, in
the statute of Absen^es, that the colonies, which were sometimes deducted for
the defending of the confines of Salamina, then and many ages after abiding in
the said land, did nobly and valiantly defend the same against all enemies
whatsoever, as also kept the same in such tranquillity and good orders, as the
kings had due subjection of the inhabitance, the laws were well obeyed, and of
all the revenewes and regalties they were duly answered as in any place
whatsoever: lastly, they yield a yearly rent, profit, or service unto the
crown for ever; for these causes above rehearsed it is said, Romani victis
hostibus Colonias deducebant: and the French conquering Lombardy, did chase out
the ancient inhabitants, and in their dwelling placed colonies: in like manner
the Emperor of the Turks from time to time, of Christians whom then he
reduced in servitude, deduceth colonies, so as it is said, that Carolus 5.
imperator debellatis Pernanae regionis gentibus, eadem quam Turcarum rex, in
coloniarum translatione, ratione vsus est.


Sol: Now since as well the necessity as the profit of deducing colonies does
sufficiently appear unto us, let us proceed unto the manner and order of
translating of colonies, as the third matter worthy of consultation.


Epi: In the order and manner of deducting collonies, certain rules are to be
observed: first that the lands be so divided, as strengths by great numbers may
be deducted, and therefore Duo cuique iugera tributa sunt; but not long after,
Prolatis finibus, lege Licinia septem iugera cuique civi assignata legimus, the
which order was observed by the Romans. But otherwise the Emperor of the
Turks, iugera quindecim cuique attribuit. The Romans labored to deduct
colonies by great numbers, especially out of the confines of Italy, to the end
that by the proper strength and forces of colonies, they might easily defend
the confines of their dominions, and suppress al such as were found desirous
of innovation. Secondly we are to plant and place our colonies in the most rich
and fruitful lands, Vt in eo civibus numero auctis alimenta suppetant,
potentiaque auctae huiusmodi novae vrbes, omnem internam vim propulsare atque
etiam opprimere queant. Thirdly, such as are to be deducted in the number of
colonies, we shall wisely make them but proprietaries of the lands, during
life only, Vt fructuarij occasu fructus in aerarium cogerentur, quoad
principis beneficio alius succederet, quemadmodum Amurates cum Timariolis egit:
by which constitution three matters beneficial to the weal public shall
arise; first opportunity shall be lent from time to time, to recompense
servitours by these casual profits that shall arise, without imposing any
new charge upon the commonweal; secondly by the death of this tenant for
life, the profits thereof grow unto the prince until the lands be newly
disposed by him; thirdly, the prince or state being to dispose these lands at
his or their pleasure, shall with this reward bind the proprietarie of the
land during life, in all services to be loyal and faithful; lastly, by
holding this course, sundry inconveniences shall be eschewed which usually
follow such as grant these lands in perpetuity; for in such cases they have
been found in Salamina, especially after two or three descentes, to
inter-marry and foster with the mere native people, and by that occasion
decline sometimes from their obedience; at other times they are found to make
leases of their lands, or to make a grant over of their estates unto such as
are not well affected unto the government, to the overthrowe of themselves and
commonweal, as it may appear in the statute of Absentes, where it is said,
that the colonies being possessed of their lands, did make leases of diverse
of their holds and manners unto the late Earl of Kildar attainted, by
occasion whereof the same came to the possession of Thomas Fitz Garralde, his
son and heir, who intending a dangerous rebellion, was aided, assisted, and
maintained against the state, by the inhabitants, and occupiers of the said
land, so as the state was compelled of force to send thither an army royal
for the better suppressing of those disorders and rebellions; lastly, these
colonies must unite and gather themselves together into places of strength,
walled or entrenched for their better defense against sudden incursions, and
never be destitute of provision sufficient for their defense: for such of our
ancient colonies in Salamina, which in times peaceable suffered their towns,
holds, and castles to decay, and neglected the mainteining of such garrisons,
as of right appertained unto them to maintain, were in difficult times exiled,
bannished, or put to the sword, only such remained and prevailed, which with a
collected power and strength, did inhabit places walled or entrenched, and
were not found destitute of sufficient provision for the wars, as it may more
at large appear in the act of Absentes. Therefore of late days two worthy
Knights, Sir Henry Walloppe Treasurer, and Sir Nicholas Bagnole Knight
Marshall, being the principal personages of the late deducted colonies, for
the better strengthening of the confines of Salamina, have not dispersed their
forces but wisely collected them into one place of strength, whereby they have
repelled from time to time, all internal forces or sudden incursions.


Sol: You have at large described unto us the necessity, the profit, and the
order and manner of deducting of colonies, you shall orderly proceed, if you
now entreat of the impedimentes which usually are given unto such actions.


Epi: The impediments are sundry and diverse: the first is given by such as
usually oppose themselves against all new orders, for that they reap a
benefit by the old disorders. The second is equal with the first, and
proceeds from a general incredulity ingrafted in all sorts of persons,
which never yet have given affiance or confidence unto new attemptes, be they
never so profitable. The third impediment arises greater then the rest, when
the authors of these new orders, shall become faint defendors thereof, and
shall give leave and way to others, which give impediment thereunto. The last
impediment is the great trouble and charge, which follows such as shall
inhabit lands far removed; with the consideration whereof, the Roman
Citizens were sometimes withdrawn, and discouraged from the inhabiting of the
lands removed out of the confines of Italy, and the same also does not a
little withdraw the new colonies from inhabiting Salamina: But Muhamedes the
Emperor sometimes of the Turks, conte^ding to remove this impediment, Cuique
coloniae duos bubulos ac sementem dedit.


So: Now you have at large discoursed of a reformation of declined
commonweals, declare unto us what you intend by the subsequent words which
follow in your general and first description, where you term it an happy
restitution unto his first perfection.


Epi: I have termed it an happy restitution, when the same is effected without
bloodshed and spot of tyranny, or cruelty; but yet it must be confessed that
where sanandi medicina may not prevail, there execandi, is rightly used;
neither is nature said to hate those members and parts, which she cutteth of
for the preservation and safety of the whole body: and by this word perfection,
I intend nothing but that good, which even from the first institution we did
aim and shoot at, Nam omne principium bonum aliquod spectabat, and this is
the end and scope of al reformations: as for example, when Athens had first
conquered Salamina, they labored nothing more, then to contain the subject in
his obedience unto the City of Athens under good and profitable laws, and
that the people might more assuredly be drawn thereunto without any great
grievance or offense, they strongly deducted colonies into all parts of
Salamina, and established there many and profitable laws, the which were truly
and justly observed by many ages, and so continued their obedience from time to
time, until these colonies were by the iniquity of times exiled. Let then our
second reformation be like unto the first, for Omne principium bonu^ aliquod
spectabat: so as I may end like as I began this discourse, saying, that a
reformation of a declined commonweal is an happy restitution unto his
perfection.


Sol: You have wisely discoursed of all the parts of this general description,
and happily have made an end thereof, for behold my messenger hasteneth unto
me more then with an ordinary expedition.


Nuncius. My Lord and general Solon, the Megarian army approaches near at
hand; for now standing upon the pinnacles of the temple of Venus, we did
plainly discover their ships. Solon then turning himself unto Epimenides
said, I go armed against the Megarians with the wisdom of Epimenides; in
such sort, as with Numa I may safely sacrifice when as they remain in arms,
in requital of which good counsel from henceforth I shall confess to hold
my life from Epimenides.


Epi: These mean lights which I have given for the reformation of Salamina,
with the wisdom of Solon as with the beams of a bright sun, remain
extinguished, so as there rests nothing but our former goodwill which may tie
you to make acceptance thereof


Sol: And the same may never die but with Solon; farevvell then Epimenides.


Epi: And you Solon in like manner a due.


Then with the great noise and clattering of the weapons, and armor of the
soldiers, I suddenly awaked, and remained for a small time amazed with the
event of so weighty and great matters, but at the last my drousie sense being
newly refreshed, I might behold, all was suddenly vanished and nothing left in
place but a vision or dream, the which according to my small skill, and
understanding, I have here expressed in pelting prose and not in heroical
verse; wherewith Solon as then it seemed to me, did much commend and grace the
matter, which then he uttered unto Epimenides.

FINIS.

