The order of the Communion.

The proclamation.
EDward by the grace of God King of England, France and Irelande, defendor of
the faith, and of the church of England and Ireland in earth ye supreme head:
To al and singulier our loving subiectis, Gretyng*
for so much as in our high Court of Parliament, lately holden at
Westmynster, it was by us with the consent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Commons there assembled most godly and agreably to Christ's
holy institution enacted, that the most blissed Sacrament of ye body and
bludde of our savior Christ should from thensfurthe be commonly delivered and
ministered unto all persons within out Realm of England and Ireland, and
other our dominions under both kinds, yt is to say, of bread and wine,
(except necessity other ways require) least every man phantasiyng and
deuisyng a sundry way by himself, in the use of this most blissed Sacrament of
unity, there might thereby arise any unseemly and ungodly diversity: Our
pleasure is by thaduise of our most dear uncle the Duke of Somersett,
governor of our parson, and Protector of al our Realms, dominions and
subjects, and other of our preuye Counsel, that the said blessed Sacrament
be ministered unto our people only after such form and manner as hereafter, by
our authority, with thaduise before mentioned is set furthe and declared:
Willing every man with due reverence and christian behaueour, to come to this
holy Sacrament and most blessed Communion, lest that by the unworthy
receiving of so high mysteries, they become guilty of the body and bludde of
the Lord, and so eat and drink their own damnation: but rather diligently
triyng themselfes, that they may so come to this holy table of Christ, and so
be partakers of this holy Communion, that they may dwell in Christ, and have
Christ dwelling in them: And also with such obedience and conformity to
receive this our ordinance, and most godly direction, that we may be
encouraged from time to time, further to travel for the reformation, and
setting furthe of such godly ordres, as may be most to gods glory, the
edifiyng of our subjects, and for thaduauncement, of true religion. Which
thing, we (by the help of God) most ernestly entende to bring to effect:
Willing all our loving subjects in the mean time, to stay and quiet
themselfes, with this our direction, as men content to follow authority
(according to the bounde^ duty of subjects,) and not enterprisyng to run
before, and so by their rashenes, be come the greatest hynderers of such
things, as they more arroga^tly then godly, would seem (by their own private
authority) most hotly to set forward. We would not have our subjects so
much to myslike our Judgment, so much to mistruste our zeal, as though we
either could not discern what were to be done, or would not do all things
in due time: God be praised, we know both what by his wourde is mete to be
redressed, and have an ernest mind, by the advice of our most dear uncle, and
other of our priuey Counsel, with all diligence and convenient speed so to
set furthe the same, as it may most stand with gods glory, and edifying
and quyetnes of our people: Which we doubt not, but all our obedient and
loving subjects, will quyetly and reverently tarry for.

God save the King.
The order of the Communion.
First the person, Vicar or curat, the next Sunday or holy day, or at the
least one day before he shall minister the Communion, shall give warnyng to his
parysshioners, or those which be present that they prepare them selfs thereto,
saying to them ope^lte and plainlte as herafter follows, or such like.

Dear friends, and you especially, upon whose souls I have cure and charge,
upon (...) day next I do ente^de by Gods grace to offer to all such as
shall be thereto godly dysposed, ye most comfortable Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, to be taken of them in the remembrance of his most
fruictfull and glorious passion: By the which passion, we have obteuied
remission of our sins, and be made partakers of the kingdom of heaven, whereof,
we be assured and asserteyned if we come to the said Sacrament, with hartye
repentance for our offenses, steadfast faith in Gods mercy, and earnest mind
to obey gods will, and to offend no more: wherefore our duty is, to come to
these holy mysteries with most hearty thanks to be given to almightye God, for
his infinite mercy and benefits, given and bestowed upon us, his unworthy
servants, for whom he has not only given his body to death and shed his
bludde, but also does vouchesaufe in a Sacrament, and mysterye, to give us his
said body and blood spiritually, to feed and drink upon. The which Sacrament,
being so divine and holy a thing, and so comfortable to them which receive it
worthelye, and so dangerous to them that will presume to take the same
unworthily: my duty is to exhort you, in the mean season, to consider the
greatness of the thing, and to search and examyne your own consciences, and
that not lightly, nor after the manner of dyssimulers with god: But as they
which should come to a most godly and heaue^lie banquet: not to come, but in the
marriage garment, required of God in scripture, that you may so much as lies
in you, be found worthy to come to such a table: The ways and means thereto
is.

First, that you be truly repentau^te of your former evil life, and that you
confess with an unfeigned heart to almyghtie god your sins and unkindness
toward his Majesty committed either by will, word or deed, infirmity or
ignorance, and that with inward sorrow and tears, you bewail your offenses,
and requier of almightye god, mercy, and pardon, promising to him, from the
botome of your hearts, thamendment of your former life. And emonges all others,
Iam commanded of God, especially to move and exhort you, to reconcile your
selfs to your neighbors, whom you have offended, or who has offended you,
puttyng out of your hearts, alhatered and malice against them, and to be in
love and charity with all the world and to forgive other, as you would that
God should forgive you. And if there be any of you, whose conscience is
troubled and grieved in any thing, lacking comfort or counsel, let him come
to me, or to some other dyscrete and learned priest taught in the law of God,
and confess and open his sin and grief secretly, that he may receive such
ghostly counsel, advise, and comfort, that his conscience may be releued,
and that of us as a minister of God and of the church, he may receive comfort
and absolution to the satisfaction of his mind and avoiding of al scruple and
doubtfulnes: requyring such as shall be satisfied with a general confession,
not to be offended with them that does use, to their further satisfiyng,
thauriculer and secret confession to ye priest, nor those also, which think
nedeful or convenient for the quyetnes of their own consciences, particulerly
to the Lord. Let your mind be without desire to sin: Repent you truly for
your sins past, have an earnest and lively faith in Christ, our savior, be
in perfect charytie with all men, so shall ye be mete partakers of these holy
mysteries: But above all things you must give most humble and hartye thanks
to God the father, the son, and the holy ghost, for the redemption of the
world, by the death and passion of our savior Christ both God and man who did
humble him self even to the death upon the cross for us miserable sinners,
liyng in darkness and the shadow of death, that he might make us the children
of God, and exalte us to everlasting life. And to the end that we should
always remember the excedyng love of our Master and only savior Jesus Christ
thus doi^g for us, and the innumerable benefits which by his precious blood
shedyng, he has obtained to us, he has left i^ these holy mysteries as a
pledge of his love, and a contynuall remembrance of the same, his own blessed
body and precious blood, for us spiritually to feed upon, to our endless
comfort and consolation. To him therefore with the father and the holy ghost,
let us give, as we are most bounden, contynual thanks, submittyng our selfs
wholly to his holy will and pleasure, and studiyng to serve him in true holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life. Amen.

Then the priest shall say to them which be ready to take the Sacrament.

If any man here be an open blasphemer, aduouterer, i^ malice, or envy, or any
other notable crime, and be not truly sorry therefore, and earnestlye minded to
leave the same vices, or that does not trust himself to be reco^cyled to
almightye God, and in charity with all the world, let him yet a while bewail
his sins and not come to this holy table, least after the taki^g of this
most blessed bread, the deuell enter into him, as he did into Judas, to
fulfill in him all iniquite, and to bring him to destruction, both of body and
soul.

Hear the priest shall pawse a while, to see if any man will wythdrawe him
self: and if he perceive any so to do, then let him common with him pryuely at
conuement leisure, and see whether he can with good exhortacion, bring him to
grace: and after a little pause, the priest shall say.

You that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and offenses,
committed to almyghtie God, and be in love and charytie with your neighbors,
and entende to lead a new life and hartelye to follow the commandments of
God, and to walk from hensforthe in his holy ways, draw nere, and take this
holy Sacrament to your comfort, make your humble confession to almightye God,
and to his holy church, here gathered to gether, in his name, mekely kneling
upon your knees.

Then shall a general confession be made in the name of al those that are
minded to receive ye holy Communion, either by one of them, or else by one of
the ministers, or by the priest himself, all kneelyng humbly upon their knees.

Almyghtie God, father of our lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, judge
of all men, we knowledge and bewail our manyfolde sins and wyckednes, which
we from time to time, most greuouslie have committed by thought, word, and
deed, against thy divine majesty, provoking most iustlye, thy wrath and
indignacion against us: we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry, for
these our mysdoinges: The remembrance of them is greuouse unto us, the burden
of them is intolerable, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most
merciful father, for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake: Forgive us all that is past, and grant that we may ever hereafter, serve and please the, in
newnes of life to the honor and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Then shall the priest, stand up, and turnyng him to the people, say thus.

Our blessed Lord, who has left power to his church, to absolve penitent
sinners, from their sins, and to restore to the grace of ye heaue^lye father
such as truly believe in Christ, have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you,
from al sins, confyrme and strength you in all goodness, and bring you to
everlasting life.

Then shall the priest stand up, and turnynge him toward the people, say thus:

Here what comfortable words our savior Christ says to all that truly
turn to him.

Come unto me all that trauail and be heavy laden, and I shall refreshe you. So
God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, to the^d that all
that believe in him, should not peryshe, but have life everlasting.

Here also what S. Paul says.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be embraced and received, that
Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners.

Hear also what S. John says.

If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, he it is that obtained grace for our sins.

Then shall the priest kneel down and say in the name of all them that shall
receive ye Communion, this prayer followyng.

WE do not presume to come to this thy table (O mercyful Lord) trusting in our
own ryghteousnes, but in thy manifold and great mercyes: we be not worthy so
much as to gather up the cro^mes under thy table: But thou art the same Lord,
whose propertye is always, to have mercy: Grant us therefore gracious Lord
so to eat the flesh, of thy dear son Jesus Christ, and to drynk his blood
in these holy mysteries, that we may continually dwell in him, and he in us,
that our sinful bodies, may be made clean by his body, and our souls
washed through his most precious blood. Amen.

Then shall the priest rise, the people still reverently knelyng, and the
priest shall deliver the Communion, first to the ministers, if any be there
present, that they may be ready to help the priest, and after to the other.
And when he does deliver the Sacrament, of the body of Christ, he shall say
to every one, these words followyng.

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for the, preserve thy
body unto everlasting life.

And the priest delyuering the Sacrament, of the blood, and geuyng every one to
drink once and no more, shall say.

The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for the, preserve thy
soul unto everlasting life.

If there be a deacon or other priest, then shall he follow with the Chalyce,
and as the priest ministers the bread, so shall he for more expedicion
minister the wine, in form before written.

Then shall the priest, turnyng him to ye people, let the people dep^rt with
this blessing.

The peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his son Jesus Christ, our Lord.

To the which the people shall answer.

Amen.

Note, that the bread that shall be consecrated shall be such as heretofore has
been accustomed. And every of the said consecrated breades, shall be broken in
two pieces, at the least, or more, by the discretion of the ministre, and so
distributed. And men must not think, less to be received in part, then in the
whole, but in each of them the whole body of our savior Jesus Christ.

Note, that if it does so chance, that the wine hallowed and consecrate does
not suffice or be enough for them that do take the Communion, the priest
after the first Cup or Chalice be emptied, may go again to the altar, and
reverently, and devoutly, prepare, and consecrate an other, and so the
third, or more likewise, beginning at these words, Simili modo, postquam
cenatum est, and endyng at these words, qui pro nobis and pro multis
effundetur in remissionem peccatorum, and without any leuacion or lyftyng up.

Imprinted at London, the eight day of March, in the second year of the
reign of our sovereign lord king Edward the. VI: By Rychard Grafton printer
to his most royal Majesty.

In the year of our Lord.

M. D. XLVIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


