A COVNTERBANE against EARTHLY CAREFVLNES.

In a Sermon preached at Cranebrooke in Kent. 1617.

By Mr. Paul Baine sometimes Preacher of Gods Word at Saint Andrews in
Cambridge.

1. Pet. 5.7. Cast all your care on him for he cares for you.

LONDON

Printed by H. L. for Nathanaell Newbery, and are to be sold at his Shop under
St. Peter's church in Cornehill and in Pope's Head Alley. 1618.

To the Right worshipful Sr William Crauon, Knight, and one of the Aldermen of
the Honorable City of London, Eternal Happiness.
RIght worshipful and worthy Sir, having received an assured testimony of your
favor and love, and not being able to render, nor your Worsh. ad-mitting the
most usual gratifications; I am enforced, because I would avoid Ingratitude (a
vice most odious unto God and man) to manifest unto you my thankful mind in
this manner, altogether out of my element; but that it has pleased God to
dispose of it so fitly, that in the very Interim of your favor this Sermon was
brought unto my hands, without a Patron, to be published in the world. And
seeing I conceived it not convenient so to send it forth incident to so much
enmity in regard of its opposition to the worlds affections, I presumed to make
bold with your worship, who had bin my patron to entreat your favor also
toward this orphane, that under your protection it may pass more safely and
freely into the hands and hearts of worldly men. And indeed it will be very
necessary for them to carry this Antidote always about them near their hearts:
for so shall they escape that death which by earthly carefulnes is ready to
seize upon them. For the more the world is drowned in worldly lusts and cares,
(as hardly was it ever so deeply as now) the more requisite is it that there
should be all means used to pull men up out of this whirle-pit wherein they
are diuing unto their everlasting perdition: now what means can be more
effectual heereunto, than the explication and fit application of that which
our blessed Savior himself has prescribed to this purpose? even to turn our
minds from seeking earthly things which perish with the using (and for the
getting and using whereof God will require a strait account at our hands) unto
those things which are spiritual and will endure with us to our comfort for
ever. And herein did the reverend and learned author of this Sermon express
himself to be a wise steward, viz. by giving a fit portion to worldly men in
fit season. For if it could once be fixed in men's minds to love Gods kingdom
and his righteousness, so as to seek it first of all, and to believe that all
necessary earthly things should be added unto them; then the deadly cares of
the world would vanish away and trouble them no more, at least nothing so
dangerously. But this is rather to be wished than hoped for, in regard the
world has so deceived men, that now nothing on earth is esteemed good but that
which is gaineful: nay goodness it self finds little regard but for the
gaining of earthly com-modity; so that most men set themselves to catch at the
shadow of good, in the mean time losing the substance of it. Yet this essaie
to recover men into their right minds again, and to reduce them into the true
way of happiness as it was most commendable in the holy preacher hereof: So I
hope the publishing of it shall not be unacceptable unto any. Howsoever, I
humbly desire your worships favorable aspect unto it: and if it shall please
you (when you are free from greater affairs) to cast an eye upon it, I doubt
not but you shall find something worthy your view and consideration. But my
slender commendations will but dim the splendor of this burning light: and
therefore firmly hoping and humbly desiring your worships pardon for my
overmuch presumption, I com-mend you to the almighty pro^ection of God the wise
governor of every thing in heaven and earth; who makes all things
worke-together for the best unto those that love him.

Your Worships most humbly at command, N.N.

A COVNTERBANE against EARTHLY CAREFVLNES.
Mat. 6.33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and
all these things shall be added unto you.


WE will premise a few things concerning the scope, coherence, parts and
explication of this text, that we may come to the instructions which offer
themselves to be deduced from it. Our Saviors scope is, The scope of this
scripture.

Contraria contrarijs optime curantur.

The care of heavenly things a remedy against earthly carefulnes


by a revulsion to heal an inordinatenesse which was in his disciples, in
caring and seeking after the things of the world. Now this he does by
prescribing a contrary practice, and making them a promise upon the use of it:
and therefore, whereas they were set upon earthly things, he commends to them
the care of heavenly; whereas their hearts were full of distrust,
earthly-mindednes, and vnweanednesse from the things of this life, he wishes
them to endeavor after true righteousness, which entering would free them more
and more from these defects.

The coherence.
Touching the dependence of this use on the former, it may be conceived as a
further reason, and so a new stroke driving the same nail, dissuading their
preposterous seeking earthly things, It is a new ^eason.
which was the point the former reasons did enforce: And then the argument
concludes thus: These things, which while you bend your selves after heavenly
matters, will flow in upon you of their own accord, those you need not seek
so eagerly; but if you seek Gods kingdom, these things shall be cast you in
over and above. Or rather a new precept.
Ergo etc. Nevertheless, because of this particle (but) which makes
opposition, I do not take it to be a farther reason, but a new precept
prescribing a contrary exercise, by which the disease now sufficiently
discovered might be healed in them.

The parts.
The parts are two: 1. The duty required; 2. the reason. In the duty there
are three things. First, The act to be done, Seek: 2. The manner, Seek
first. 3. the matter or object, Seek first Gods kingdom and his righteousness.
In the reason which is ab vtili, 3 things likewise are obserueable: 1. the
things should be given the^, and these things, viz. aboue-named, 2. the
quantity of them, and all these things, 3. the manner of bestowing them, in
that last word, shall be added unto you. Now for the more full explication of
this Scripture, The explication. What seeking is.
we must know, that seeking is an action of diligence and care, endeavoring
to find some good, which, after possession once had, is lost of us, or to
obtain some good thing which we yet never enjoyed. See how Mary and Joseph sought
Jesus when they missed him in their return from Jerusalem, Behold, (says his
mother to him) thy father and I have sought thee with heavy hearts, Luke 2.48.
Seek first, that is, in time, before other things, and with your principal
strength and care. Gods kingdom is put so^time for that state of grace through
which God rules in the hearts of his people, as, Romans 14.17. Gods kingdom is of
grace,
The kingdom of God is in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
or
But from this standing in righteousness, peace, etc. it is here distinguished,
and seems therefore to be taken for that heavenly kingdom of glory; of glory.
in which we must consider first, the place and glorious mansions, in which as
everlasting tabernacles we look to dwell hereafter. For heaven is a place, yea,
a bodily place, whose place is bodily.
which shall properly receive and measure our bodies glorified. If it be called
a sp^rituall place, it is to be understood respectively, as the body is called
spiritual, so far forth as spiritual is opposed to natural, not to corporal
and substantial. This heaven is not like these natural and aspectable
heavens, which we now see, yet is a space proportioned to such bodies as are to
be received and contained in it. Secondly, Glory is 1. in the endowment of
soul and body.
we are to consider the glorious estate which shall there be revealed, which
stands 1. in the glorious endowments of soul and body. For the glorious
light of the soul shall make the body lightsom and glorious, as the candle does
the lantern in which it is carried. 2. 2. in our communion with God.
In our communion which we shall have with our God himself, whom we shall see
as he is, though we cannot thoroughly comprehend the infiniteness of him. which
is the chief.
And this is the height of our happiness. For look as a bride is nothing so
happy in her bridal apparel and ornaments, as in her husband to whom she is
hand-fast: so shall it be with us, our glory shall be nothing to us in
comparison of our God.

Gods righteousness is that in Christ by faith apprehended.
Seek his righteousness: Gods righteousness is sometime put for that righteousness
that is in Christ our great God and Savior, and is by faith laid hold of by
us. Thus it is usually taken, Romans 1.17. For therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith. And Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God: Sometime for that righteousness
which God commands in his law being spiritual, Or that wrought in us by the
spirit.
and which God works in us by his spirit, when now through faith we have
union and communion with Christ. Now the law of opposition does lead us to
understand the righteousness which is wrought in us. For as those heavenly
things next before unfolded are most directly opposed to earthly: so to their
distrust in Gods promises, vnweanednes, earthly mindednes, the contrary graces
inhaering in us stand in most direct opposition against them. Now the things
which l^^e are universally promised, are those things which (...) naturally
seek, Earthly co^forts promised.
or all those things which God kno^ (...) we need, whether absolutely, or in
respect of dece^^ and conueniency, all things needful to our being or (...)
being. Shall be added unto you: that is, shall be given you as a vantage, as a
vantage.
over and above those heavenly things after which you endeavored. For the word
is taken from those additaments which by surplusage are cast in to some full
number. The sum is, as if he had said, The sum
I have dissuaded you from inordinate pursuing these outward things; now I
prescribe you a contrary practice: Seek before all things, and with your
principal strength, those things above kept in the heavens for you; endeavor
your selves to get you hearts stablished with true righteousness, such as God
commands in his spiritual law, and works by his spirit: do thus and you
shall be no loosers; For all things which are needful for your being and well
being shall as a vantage be cast on you through the faithfulness of your heavenly
father who cares for you.

Now we come to the instructions. Instructions
First, we will consider of the duty required, Seek Gods kingdom, seek his
righteousness: Secondly, the manner of perfourming, Seek first: From the first
observe here, 1. doctrine. Christians ought to seek heaven.
that true Christians must here on earth set themselves to seek heaven and
heavenly glory: Seek Gods kingdom. So Col. 3.1. If ye be risen with Christ,
seek the things that are above; and again, Philip. 3.20. Our conversation is
in heaven, from whence we look also for the Savior, the Lord Jesus, who
shall change our vile body, etc. Abraham, Heb. 11.9.10 is set before us as an
example of this thing, who did count even the land of promise a strange
country, looking for and seeking after a city which has a foundation, It is
their place and country.
whose builder and maker is God. For that kingdom above is their proper place
and native country, 2. Cor. 5.2. and they are but strangers on earth, Psalm.
119.19. They have ^n inclination toward it i^ born a^ew
An inclination and affection therefore toward heaven is given to every
Christian, when now he is once begotten and borne anew to God: Like as when any
heavenly body is engendered here below out of the proper place of it it has
begotten with it an inclination to rise up to that place to which it belongs:
as the fire, A^ fire to it is spi^^^e.
which here we kindle, and is engendered below here on earth, it being no
earthly but a heavenly body, has from the first being an aptnes and
inclination carrying it toward the sphere of fire which is the proper place of
it: so from what time we by Gods calling are begotten heavenly creatures here
on eatth, we have produced in us an inclination which does make us move toward
heaven and heavenly glory, the proper place and condition which belongs to us.
Would not an English man, Or an exile to his country.
(by any case exiled) much long to smell the smoke of his native country? Thus,
if we be heavenly creatures, we cannot but in desire aspire thither while we
are here on earth as exiles and pilgrims from our heavenly father.

But before we come to the use of this point, we will more at large branch
forth this duty of seeking Gods kingdom, Gods kingdom is sought.
by poynting forth the means and respects in regard whereof we may perform
this duty of seeking, here enjoined.

1. by seeking divine knowledge of it* chiefly from the ministry of the word.
The first respect is, when we seek to get our selves informed in those
things which it becomes us to know and to do about this kingdom. Now we
do this, when we come forth to be instructed by the word of God which is the
word of the kingdom. Look as a man seeks earthly things, when he goes out
to the Crier to learn of them: and, look as clients seek their earthly
inheritances, when they go forth to advise with their learned counsel; thus,
when we go with diligence to the ministers, proc^nes.
who are (...) or (...), To. 10.14 that is, Criers by office, who proclaim the
bringing to light of this kingdom by Christ: and when we wait at the posts
of Wisdom her gate, Pro. 8.33. like as clients do, attending on Gods
ministers, who are to know the laws of this kingdom, that men may seek them
from their lips.

2. 2. By getting evidence to show for it, which are the promises thereof
believed on
We may seek this inheritance of Gods kingdom in getting something which we
may show for our right and title to it: Now, this we do by exercising our faith
in some promises, by which God does freely pass it unto us: as Fear not
little flock it is your fathers will to give you a kingdom, Luke 12.32. If we
be sons we are also heirs; even heirs of God, and ioynt-heires with
Christ, Romans 8.17. God gave his son, that whosoever believes in him, should
have everlasting life; John 3.16. We are begotten by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ unto a lively hope, even unto an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and
which fades not away, reserved in the heavens for us, which are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation that is ready to be revealed in the
last time, 1. Peter 1, 3, 4, 5. Thus men seek their earthly matters whilst
they get good copies for that they hold. Now, the promises of GOD laid hold
on are the only deed and instrument which can be showed for title unto
eternal life.

3. 3. By entering possession of it in a sanctified life.
We may seek this kingdom in regard of getting our selves possessed of it:
which we do by this means, while we labor by a sanctified course to draw
nearer it and enter it here on earth. Men will not only get right unto the
things they seek, but they will endeavor to be possessed, to dig their turfe
in that land they purchase. The more the Israelits did subdue the Canaanites,
the more they were possessed of Canaan. Sanctification is an entrance into
glory.
Thus the more we overcome our sins, grow in graces, the more we grow
seized of our heavenly Canaan. Join (says Peter 2. ep. 1. cap. 5.6.7.) virtue
with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and
with temperance patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness
brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness love: For as it after
follows, ver. 10.11. If these things be among you, ye shall never fall; For
by these means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The further that one
did go up into the porch of the temple, the nearer he did come unto the holy
of holies; the further one goes up in the suburbs of a city, the nearer he
approaches the city it self: Thus it is herein the visible church, our state
in sanctification has it self to glory in the same proportion that our being
in a porch, or body of a church, to our being in the quire; or our being in
the suburbs to our entering the city it self.

4. By procuring it assured to us.
4. We may seek it in regard of getting our title and possession made sure to
our consciences. Thus we seek earthly inheritances, not only to be seized of
them, but by strengthening our selves in them. Hence it is, that we will sue
out fines and writs, which may in a manner after a certain time put an end to
all claims which may be made by any, some few persons on just ground excepted.
So we must give all diligence to get these things ascertained unto us; From the
promise of Gods protection.
which we do chiefly, while we faithfully lay hold on Gods promises, which
promise our protection: as, that he is our God, who will keep us from every
evil work to his heavenly kingdom; 2. Tim. 4.18 The witness of the spirit
while we get the Spirit to witness to our spirits this gift of perseverance
which is bestowed on us; while we learn to dye by faith; Christ, Faith in
Christ pre^^ruing and ^ais^ng us, and God keeping to by his power.
as the author and finisher of our faith, and raiser of us up at the last day:
and the Father, who is stronger than all, keeping us in his hand even by his
almighty power, as in a strong tower unto salvation. We can never be sure
enough of earthly things; we desire to see the bird in the cage, and have all
things so settled as there may be no question. How much rather should we not
content our selves with uncertain hopes of our heavenly inheritance, but
travail to have it settled on us and thoroughly assured to our souls.

Finally, 5. By prayer for all help^ unto it.
we seek the kingdom of God in all these respects jointly by making petition
to him. Even as subjects by making requests get many things from their
Sovereigns: so do we, who have no way of getting any good thing, but by flying
unto his grace in Christ. Thus Christ taught us to seek. Lord let thy kingdom
come. Mat. 6.10. Thus, The Spirit helps the faithful with fighes and groans
that cannot be uttered. Romans 8.26.

The use of this is to rebuke most Christians, Use. The reproof of the worldly
minded who dot^ on earth.
who indeed live as Heathens. For, what do they seek after, but such things as
Turks and Pagans seek after? Many say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6.
Many there are, says Paul, Phil. 3.18.19. of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you weeping, who do mind earthly things: but the matter of Gods
kingdom lies by a^ a refuse thing quite forgotten. It is the wise merchant
only, Neglect ^ods kingdom. For want of true wisdom
who seeks precious pearls, Mat. 13.45. Worldly men wanting that wisdom
from above are no more affected toward this heavenly inheritance, than those
who are born destitute of civil wisdom are toward earthly. These we see, not
having civil understanding whereby to discern the worth of their hopes, they
never set their minds upon the fair possessions they might have, but vanish
away in trifles correspondent to their weakness: so do al natural men, who
understand not the things of God; they are careless of this kingdom of God,
and glorious inheritance, being wholly taken up with a common wealth fitting
their kind, the halfe-penny transitory things of this present life. And as the
poor Israelites were scattered over all the land of Egypt to gather stubble and
pick strawes, Exodus 5.12. so do these range all the country, and are
dispersed all abroad to pick and gather up worldly things no more in
comparison than stubble and strawes. Wherefore let us not be in the number of
these fools, worse than any who are usually begged; let us set our hearts on
this heavenly inheritance; We are to se^ke out ^e^u^nly inheri^^nce. By ^ll
good cou^s^s.
let us seek to be informed about these things; let us get sure conueiances;
let us by the conquest of all spiritual enemies enter this heavenly Canaan; let
us labor to get our consciences ascertained, that we shall be kept safe in this
grace in which we stand in the hope of glory. If we have right unto and hope
of earthly matters, V^l^sse we will be more earn^st for earthly things th^n it.
we will not fail to seek after them; yea, (though we be poor, and they that
detain them mighty,) we will sue in forma pauper is, but we will recover
them; nay, if we have lost but trifles, if any silly beast be straied from us,
we will ask and enquire after them: And is there any thing more worth thy care
and pains in looking after, tha^ gods kingdom and thy eternal salvation? can a
man be persuaded that he has great and goodly possessions befallen him though
in remote parts, S^^w ^ur v^b^^^^^ conce^^^^g ^t.
but his mind will run much on the matter? his desire will be to hear and
speak of it, to make a journey to see it: Can we then be truly persuaded,
that an heavenly kingdom is given us, but our thoughts will be upon it? and we
shall desire in Gods good time to see it. Where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also, Mat. 6.21. Women have in their wombes not only living
births, but sometime also dead: An^ ^^^ifes^e^ ^e^^es to be ^^^d Ch^is^^^^s.
now the former cannot live always pent in the womb, but it will strive for
greater freedom; whereas the other have no motion in them to come forth: thus
it is with the church. She does bear in her womb and travail of some living
some dead births: the living, they will in their time strive to come forth,
crying: Oh, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Romans 7.24. And, I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil 1.23. whereas dead
Christians they could be content to live here always, and sing their Requiem
here on earth: if they may still sit in the warm sun, and have
wherewithal, they can easily forbear all further happiness.

Now, the second matter we are to seek after, 2. Doctrine. Gods kingdom cannot
be sought ^i^^o^^ Gods righteousness.
is Gods righteousness: Seek his righteousness. Where observe, That all true
Christians, yea, all who truly seek the kingdom of GOD in the world to come,
must seek sound righteousness in this present world. These two God has
joined, and they may not be severed. For sound righteousness is though not the
cause of reigning, It (...) the (...) to the k^^gd^^
yet the way to the kingdom. Neither can any be said truly to seek that he
may come hither or thither, when they do not set a foot in the way which
leads to the place they would come to. He that has this hope, says S. John
1. Ioh. 3.3. in him, purges himself even as God is pure. And so holy David,
Psa. 17.15. As for me I will behold thy face in righteousness. He knew no
other way to come to the view of Gods blessed face, but by righteousness.

Now, fully to open this, two things are to be considered: 1. what this
righteousness is, or what it stands in: 2. the quality of it. This
righteousness is simply inherent righteousness, and stands partly in putting
off the corruption of nature; partly in getting the grace of Gods Spirit
strengthened and increased; It stands 1. in putting
and last of all in the integrity and perfection of spiritual actions. These
three duties are required of the godly: 1. In putting off all sin.
1. The first we are exhorted unto, 2. Cor. 7.1. Having therefore such
promises, beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, growing up unto holiness in the fear of God. For like as light
cannot enter further than darkness is chased, nor health return in further
degree than sickness is removed; so we cannot for measure further grow in
grace, Without which is no place for grace. Chi^fly natures corruption. And our
actual reigning sins. 2. In grace strengthened and increased.
than we find corruption decreasing in us. And here we must labor chiefly
against that sin that dwells in us, as the root and fountain of all
sins, to which by custom, complexion, company, age or any other way we feel
our selves most inclined.

The second thing we are exhorted unto, 2. Pet. cap. 3. verse 18. Grovve in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: we must
never stint our selves to a measure of grace, but be ever coming on and
growing forward.

The last thing David sought, 3. In the soundnes of our action^
whilst he prayed God to enlarge his heart, that he might run the way of his
commandments, Psalm. 119.32. And this flows from the former. For, look as in
the eye the more every hurtful humor is removed, and the more the visiue
power is restored, the more perfitly and easily it sees: so it is here: the
more sin is purged out, and grace increased, with the more facility and
perfection we are occupied in every good and spiritual word and work.

The quality is to be gatherd from that which here is added; his righteousness:
that is, Gods, It is supernatural and spiritual.
such as God supernaturally works in us, such as Gods spiritual law
enioyneth; not such as nature produces, standing in equity and other moral
parts, Not moral
nor yet such as has a tincture of religion, Not formal. Which is but
counterfeit.
I mean a profession of an outward form of godliness void of power: for
this is but a Pharisaicall righteousness, which shall not inherit the kingdom
of God, Mat. 5.20. and is but like a beautiful picture, which has nothing in
it but an external appearance. This thus opened lends light to conceive the
reason of this truth propounded. Every thing that receives being, nature does
give it such an instinct, that it seeks to preserve and bring on to
perfection that being it has received. It is the being and life of a Christian
True Christians having in their regeneration received a supernatural being,
even the divine nature or image which stands as in knowledge and holiness,
so in the righteousness here expressed, Which he cannot but seek.
they cannot but endeavor both to continue and take increase in this
righteousness begun in them. I say more, a Christian cannot but seek this
righteousness more than heaven it self. Y^^ m^^^ (...).
For every thing does more seek that which sustaineth the being of it, and
more declineth that which threatens destruction to it, than it seeks any
thing which only conduces to the more happy estate of it. Man more seeks
necessary sustenance for his life, more labors to expel some deadly
disease, than in following wealth, honor and the rest, which respect only the
well-being of it: thus here it is; this righteousness is as it were the very
being of a Christian, heavenly glory is but his blissful being, whence it is,
that he does more seek to get himself healed of sin, the souls deadly
sickness; more seek to have grace sustained and increased; more seek to have
integrity and soundness in those actions in which he is exercised, than he
seeks heaven it self and that heavenly glory which is reserved for him. It
is the speech of Anselme well agreeing to this purpose. If I had sin set on
this side of me, and on that side hell, so that necessarily I must be plunged
into one of them, I would rather cast my self into hell than commit any sin:
And if I had on one hand righteousness offered unto me, and on the other
Heaven, to take one without the other: I would much sooner make choice of
righteousness than heaven.

The vs^s (...). to show their vanity who (...) this (...).

N^, ^ho^^ ^^^ers o^ ^t.


The use of of this is three-folde: First, it lets us see the vanity of such
who think that they may seek heaven well enough though they be careless of
holiness, and never sought to God to heal their evil hearts, judging
themselves and humbling themselves under his hand; though they never knocked
and cried for the increase of faith, knowledge and repentance; nay, though they
mock at those who follow righteousness, as men ouer-precise, holy, mad,
forward, (...) by Satan.
fondlings that know not what they would have. The Devil in outward things
makes men idolatrously lean to means; in spiritual things makes them presume
all without means: Si^^^ (...) w^^hout h^ (...). Es^^. 5.^.
But without holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12.14. And, the pure in heart
only shall behold him, Mat. 5.8. Look as those that were to stand before the
Persian Monarchs in Court, were to be clothed in royal apparel; and
especially those virgins which were to be brought as spouses to them, they were
first purified, perfumed, E^^. 2.12.1^
trained up and prepared in sundry kinds: so, all that shall be married to
God in Christ, or, that shall stand in the presence of his glory, must by this
course be made fit for such a purpose.

This also comfort those that seek righteousness. 2. To comfort the seekers
of it, who are true disciples.
For it is an evidence, that they are the true disciples of Christ, the best
Christians; that feeling their want and weakness of grace, the presence and
strength of sin in them, their bondage and lamenesse in spiritual actions,
do seek for grace for the crucifying of sin, and for their spiritual
liberty. And blessed
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, Mat. 5.6.
Nevertheless, as it is commendable not to remember any thing past, so, S^ they
grow on And take notice of Gods grace toward the^ for thank^ulnes ^^d comf^rt.
as to grow secure and idle, not striving to any further perfection: so it is
behoofefull to think how far God has brought us, so as to confirm our faith,
and provoke ourselves to thanksgiving. There is a double hunger in nature: the
one healthful; the other no better than a very sickness: for there is a
disease called the hungry evil: when though a man be full, yet having no
sense of his repletion, the stomach does as painefully and rauenously hunger,
Which good souls omit to their discomfort.
as if the man were affamished. Thus it comes to pass in Gods children; who,
not considering nor getting sense of that God has done for them, are often as
painefully hungry, as if they yet had received nothing at all which might stay
their stomach. It is great pity that Gods children do no more consider this:
It is surely a fault in them very prejudicial unto their comfort, which they
might reap by observing Gods work in themselves, and grace toward them.

3. To exhort, to increase in it begun in us. That we may differ from
hypocrites. Who wish for heaven, but neglect righteousness.
Lastly, let us here be exhorted, that if ever we did partake in the divine
nature, we do show it by striving to grow in this righteousness which is begun
in us but imperfectly. This will argue us to be true disciples. Suchlike
things as any seeks, such is the man. Balaam may say, Oh, that my soul might
die the death of the righteous, Numbers 23.10. But what does the heart of a
Dauid-like Christian say? Oh, that my ways were so directed that I might keep
thy statutes, Psalm. 119.5. For so David being ravished with a view of the
good man's blessedness, does presently conceive not this desire, Oh, that I had
this happiness; but rather this, Oh, that I could use the means to bring me
to it; Oh, that my ways were so directed, etc. All after a sort wish and seek
heaven, but seek not righteousness: But thou can not seek the one without
seeking the other; and finding this righteousness thou shall also find heaven,
though thou do not expressly think upon it. Which will bring us to heaven
even at unawares. If we renew i^.
Let a man go in this or that path, though he think not whither he goes, yet
he shall find himself brought to that place to which the way leads. We must
renew this spiritual being, as we do our natural: Even as in nature there
is still coming upon us a sense of weakness, Wh^^^ ^o the sense of inf^ ^it^^^
do^^ t^ (...)
and feeling of burdensome superfluities, that we might be stirred still to
repair and increase natural strength, and expel that, which retained would
prove harmefull: so in the soul we have weakness ever and anon returning, that
we might never want a spur to incite us to seek still a fresh after the
continuing and augmenting of righteousness in us. Again, if we have some great
bargains we love to finger some great earnest: Now, thus it is, And our better
^ssur^nce draw us.
that the very earnest of heaven and heavenly glory promised, is this
spiritual righteousness wrought in us. Thus much for the dewty, now for the
manner.

Seek first. Observe here, 3. Doctrine, Spir^^uall things ^re chiefly to be
sought. John 6. Luke 13.24
that spiritual things must be sought with our principal endeauours, we must
neither foreslowe them, nor be negligent in following the^. The Scripture
biddes us labor for the food that perishes not: And, Strive (as for maistery)
to enter; for many shall seek to enter in, and not be able. It forbideth
sloth; Be not slothful but through faith and patience seek to be partakers
of the promises, Heb. ^.12. It commands us all diligence: 2. Pet. 1.5, 10.
Give all diligence. According a^ in price they pa^^a^.
We seek things according to our estimate of them. And indeed every thing is to
be sought more or less, as it is good more or less; hence it is that things of
no worth we seek not at al, we let them lie untaken up: things of small worth
we se^k remissely; silver and gold, most carefully. Now, what is more precious
than grace, or mo^e excellent than heavenly glory? If therefore we count them
before all things, let us show it by seeking them answereably. And we mean to
sp^^^ Mat. 11.1^^
Fervent seekers shall find. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and
the violent do take it. And slou^h in Gods works is accursed. Ier. 48.10.
Mat. 25 26
Cursed is he that does the work of God negligently; The slothful and evil
servant enters not into his Masters joy.

Uses. 1. To blame such a^ put off this care to the last.
Many may be hence rebuked, who begin at the wrong end, seeking the world
for the present, and reserving some purposes about these things in times to
come.

Again, such who though they do not excuse, and put off the matter for the
present, 2. Such as post over religious duties slightly.
yet they post over most slightly all such duties, as concern their souls
health, thinking it enough if the work be done, though with never such
ouerture. These commonly are wise in their own eyes, Pro. 26.16.
(like Salomons Sluggard, who thinks himself wiser than seven who return
an answer,) much condemning the forwardnes of others: Condemning others
forwardnes.
What needs all this ado think they? God forbid no more should be saved but
those few who are of this humor; There is a measure in every thing; It is not
our striving, but the good mercy of God that must save us. Thus, men are witty
to plead for sin, even for that formal sloth that will slay them
eternally. But let us remember this, Double diligence is to be used in heavenly
things.
Seek first, and awaken our selves, doubling our diligence this way. Nothing is
more absurd than to bring beetle and wedges to cleave strawes, doing trifles
with superfluous labor, and to be careless in matters of greatest moment.
Again, we see no earthly things of worth will be achieved without labor; they
must be wooed, before they be wedded; and shall we think without seeking to
atteine those things which are the very vpshot and harvest of all our hopes?
Think with thy self how men turn every stone, and how many irons they will
have in the fire at once, that they may gather earthly treasure. They will have
something going in trade or stock on their grounds, Which we may (...) of good
(...) for the world.
something by them for purchase, something out at use, something for bargain
and adventure. If we be thus industrious in gathering treasure upon earth,
which rust does canker and the thief rob, how much more diligence should we
use in getting heavenly treasure, enduring substance? such as grace, which
shall never perish, which shall not be left as earthly things are, but shall
follow us and dwell with us for ever. Now follows the reason.

All things should be given them. 4. Doctrine The best way to thrive in the
world is 1. to be rich in God. Who does promise the godly 1. protection from
hurt in his service.
Where observe that the next way for a man to thrive in his outward state, is
first to grow rich in his spiritual. Oh, that there were in you such hearts to
keep my co^mandeme^ts always that it might be well with you and yours after
you for ever (says the Lord) Deuteronomy. 5.29. For, first God does undertake to
keep damage from his, while they are occupied in his service. Look Exodus
34.24. When all the males should be gone to Jerusalem, and none but weak women
and children left at home, yet God does undertake that no enemy should have the
heart to break in on the. 2. 2. All good
God promises to bestow on us every thing that is good: Ps. 84.11. No good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. 3. 3. A comfortable use
of his blessings Isa. 1.17.19.
God promises to his a cheerful use of all the good benefits vouchsafed them.
Cease to do evil, learn to do w^ll, etc: If ye consent and obey, ye shall
eat the good things of the land. Did not Josiah eat and drink and prosper
while while he executed judgment and justice, Ier. 22.15. Godliness has not
only the promises of this life, but of the life to come, 2. Tim. 4.8. He that
gives the head, Will not stand for small matters with them to whom he has
given heaven. 1. Kin. 3.10 etc. 10 13.
gives hair also: God gives us his kingdom and righteousness, which are
principal, (which he ever does when we seek them diligently,) how should he
not add these inferior things also which are but accessory to the other? If
he did so like and recompense Salomons seeking of politic wisdom, which
might serve him to go in and out before his people, that he gave him it, and
also peace and wealth which he had not sought; how much more shall he do this
here promised to such as seek his kingdom and righteousness? We see earthly
men, that if they have a servant, who is very diligent and faithful in their
business, Nor neglect a faithful servant.
though he has not the skill to lick his fingers, and be for himself as
many would; in such a case will not a wise and equal Master the more bestirre
him to reward his service, by how much he discerns him the less to seek
himself? how much more then shall GOD do for his servants, whom he does see to
be wholly bent to his business? When the people followed Christ into the
desert, Mat. 14.19. and^. and 15.32. etc.
God did rather by miracle feed them, than they should want while they sought
his kingdom.

Ob, concerning the good man's crosse^ and the wickeds prosperity. Ans. The
crosses of the godly are either chastiments of their ^^^lings: Or t^ia^^ ^^the^
^^^^ng to doub^^ pro^, O^ (...) w^^^ ^od and ^^w^^^ (...) 2 C^^. ^. Cor. 2.9.
Phil. 4.1^.
But it may be here objected, that the godliest have the most crosses and
smallest measure of these earthly things; whereas the wicked are free from the
cross, and swim with wealth.

To the fi st I answer, that the godly man is often followed with crosses,
because he has not followed righteousness, and lived godlily according as
God requires in his covenant. If he have done this here enjoined and yet have
crosses, they are either such as end afterward in a doubled prosperity like
Jobs, and then this here promised is still true or they are such as dwell with
him. In which case God does recompense the want of outward things with himself
and contentation of mind. Thus Paul was in poverty, in ieopardy, in hunger and
thirst, in cold and nakedness etc; but he rejoiced in these infirmities, and
was enabled to do every thing through Christ strengthening him. Now, this
change is no robbery. And whereas it is said that they have not the greatest
measure of earthly things, it is commonly true: but their little is better than
the abundance of the wicked.

For first, The subst^nce of the godly ^s 1. a token of Gods ^a^e, and from his
own hand. Genesis 3^.5.1^ 2 An earnest of their heau^^^y inheritance.
it is given them from Gods hand as a token of his favor. God (says Iaakob to
Esau) of his grace has given these children to thy servant, and God has had
mercy on me, and therefore have I all these things: Now an angel from the
kings own hand is more esteemed than much more other money which has no such
respect.

2. It is an earnest of Gods eternal favor in bestowing on them the heavenly
inheritance. Now, a little money that binds some great bargain is better
than much more that has no such relation.

3. It is freely bestowed; 3. I^ f^e^^^ giu^^.
they shall have no reckoning to come in for it.

Now, The pros ^rity of ^he wicked is but seeming b^ing indeed a curse. As that
which is ^. mix^d of^ with much disco^ce^^.
the prosperity of the wicked is but in appearance prosperity, being a pleasant
poison which kills by casting into a sweet sleep; or by moving the person to
laugh till he fall down dead by force of it. Even as poison kills some with
intolerable gripings, others with very great delight: so does Gods curse
sinners.

For the things they possess, sometime God does mix them with such
discontentmens that they are all as nothing; as is seen in Haman whom God did
make the stiff knee of Mordecai so to vex and gall, that all he had did him
no good Est. 5. And Ahab though a king, yet when he had the vineyard denied him
grew so sick of the sullens, that he could not so much as taste ought of his
kingly provision, 3. King. ^1.4.

2. A sn^re to them.
2. If they have the iocant use of things, yet it is nothing while God gives
them these things as snares to them, like as Saul gave Michol to David to be a
snare unto him, 1. Sam. 17. Though it be not warrantable for a man in his
policy demoliri honoribus, to overthrow men by aduancements, yet God (sin so
requiring it) may do it most justly.

3. Not of Gods love, but patience.
Again, they have these things but as traitors their allowance more or less,
from the clemency and patience of the prince, rather than his favor to them.
Now, it is better with a poor subject that works for 12. pence a day with the
kings love and protection, than with these have they never so much.

4 Must be reckoned for
4. For these things are not given them freely, as by a father to his children,
but rather given in as by an host to his guests, for whom he keeps a
reckoning. The last dish will mar their feast.

The uses, 1. to encou^^ge us unto godliness.
The use is 1. to encourage us in this work in making conscience of it, knowing
that it is not in vain; but has the promise even of this present life. Have
thou labored to overcome sin, to grow in grace, to serve thy God more
fruitfully and chearefully, and art thou nevertheless for the present in
poverty? Be not dismayed, God owes thee a good turn; he will recompense his
tarriance, with use abundant. The sun ere while is long in getting forth,
when yet the day proves most fair and pleasant.

2. We see the woeful state of many, 2. To convince their error who think^
it the way to beggary.
who think this precise care of religion to be the high way to the hospital.
If one strain courtesy at one oath, if one will not borrow with the Sabbath
for furthering his own business, if one will not keep lewd servants when they
are othwise gainefull, r, if one will not double with his tongue, use his wit
to circumvent, if one will not humor those from whom he may reap profit, if
one will not dance to what the time pipeth, if one will not take any way to the
wood, and lay about with six fingers counting al gain that may be gotten;
Christians now-adaies think such a man may set down his rest for rising. Who
are worse than Sadduces.
O most unchristian Christians! worse than the Sadduces; for that they did
believe God so to prosper outwardly the keepers of his law, that having no
belief of another life, (for they did think souls as bodies were mortal) yet
they walked keeping the letter of the law most strictly as their name does
intimate.

3. 3. To show the cause why even sundry good husbands thrive not, That is
t^eir neglect of religion. In the godly some s^^^ n^^ ^^p^med of. Some
infi^mi^y ^^^^cei^^^.
Let us hence take notice what does keep down many in these earthly things,
and clean ruinate others: What but lack of seeking heavenly things? There are
some men of no lewd qualities, frugall enough, men able to make their market,
yet nothing will go forward with them. And this is the just judgment of God,
because they never have set their hearts to matter of religion. Again, many of
Gods children go backward in these things, because they lie durtily without
repentance of some sins which God would have them judge in themselves; or else
they discern not their infirmities, by reason whereof wealth would be hurtful
to them, and labor not to get them mortified. For God holds down many, Which
w^^ ^^^^e (...) pr^^pe^^^y.
because he does see that if they ride on the fore horse, and were aloft this
way, it were for none to com near them: Such is their pride that they would
not know any; others to be to contentiously given, that none should live
quietly by them, but would be ever pushing and goring their brethren as bulls
do the weaker ^artell with their horns; others so voluptuous, that if they had
wherewithal, they would run riot into all intemperancy. Now a father will
lay a knife out of the way from a child who is like to hurt himself with it.

Hence is also the ruin^ of many men's estates and how.
Farther, for the want of this God does ruinate the estates of many by not
keeping them from such courses of trusting, where what they trust shall come
home with loss; into courses of suretiships, into suits of law and building,
into dealing in things wherein they have no judgment, into the hands of
untrusty servants (who are a backe-doore which will pull down the greatest
houses) that he may punish their not serving him fruitfully in the things they
enjoyed.

4. To sh^^ th^^we^lth with^^t go^linesse is no bl^ssing.
Lastly, if thou have not been a seeker of righteousness and GODS kingdom,
do not think the things thou have to be additaments bestowed in Gods favor,
nor yet possessions making thee happy. They are but like that Manna which
gathered besides the Lords commandment did putrefie and come to nothing. So
shall all these things, But a curse to greater ^^dgement.
they shall increase thy condemnation and make thee one day have the heavier
reckoning, if thou go on in impenitency. Wherefore let me counsel thee what
to do in this case. Did thou hold land on such terms as would not maintain
thy title, but rather expose thee to danger of accou^ting for all the time that
thou had held them? The only way to secure thy self is to turn Tenant to
God.
Suppose thou might strengthen thy self in these by turning Tenant to the
true Lord; would not thou readily put it in execution? Thus it is here: All
thou enioyest with carelessness of Gods service and seeking his righteousness,
thou art subject to be brought to a heavy reckoning for it, and to have it
taken from thee in Gods just judgment. Tenant.
Turn therefore to him who is the supreme Lord, pay this rent which here he
requires, seek his kingdom and his righteousness, then thou shall be happy in all thou possessest. To God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost,
be ascribed (as it is due) all glory, honor, blessedness, might, majesty and
dominion, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
To the worlds white Sons.
O Witless mortals! you all heedlesse catch
Appearing Shadows; let the Substance go;
At bables, bubbles, butterflies do snatch,
But the true treasure to seek out forslowe;
Carke for your Carcass, it to clothe and feed,
Your Soul leave naked, and let pine for need.
The nimble Fire still upward does aspire
To its own sphere: and his dear native Home
The wandering Exile ever does desire.
The living Birth pent in its mothers Womb
Does restless struggle for more liberty:
But void of Motion the dead Mole dothly.
Were you from God with life divine inspired,
Earth were too narrow to confine your Hearts:
Or were your Souls with love spiritual fired,
They would not dote on mere terrestrial parts,
But God would love, and to enjoy that Love,
Would upward rise and aim at things above.
Felt you your wants; most earnest would your care
Be for your Soul, your Body setting light.
Knew you the world; its garish Shows and rare
You would despise, which but delude the sight.
Saw you Heavens bliss, base would the world appear,
But Heaven to win, no pains, no cost too dear.
Which breathed in our foggie air whilcome,
But weary of those stinkes it did discern,
To Heavens pure air and clearest light is gone;
Learn whither your chief labors to direct:
Learn what success you may thereon expect.
Seek Gods blessed Kingdom, Seek his Righteousness:
All worldly comforts shall then follow you.
Heavens shadovv is this earthly happiness:
Who holds the body has the shadovv too.
On thy Gods service do thou only think,
And he will provide thee raiment, meat and drink.
FINIS.

