THE VVOVNDS of Civil War.

Lively set forth in the true Tragedies of Marius and Scilla.

As it has been publicly plaide in London, by the Right Honorable the Lord
high Admiral his Servants.

Written by Thomas Lodge Gent.

O Uita! miserolonga, foelicibreuis,



LONDON, Printed by John Danter, and are to be sold at the sign of the Sun
in Paul's Church-yarde. 1594.

The most Lamentable and true Tragedies of Marius and Scilla,
Enter on the Capitol Sulpitius Tribune: Caius Marius: Q. Pompey Consul:
Iunius Brutus: Lucretius: Caius Granius: Lictorius: Lucius Merula Jupiters
Priest: and Cyn^a: whom placed, and their Lictors before them with their Rods
and Axes, Sulpitius begins. SVLPITIVS TRIBVNE. Grave Senators and Fathers of
this State,
Our strange protractions and unkind delays
where weighty wars does call us out to fight
Our factious wits to please aspiring Lords,
You see has added power unto our foes,
And hazarded rich Phrigia and Bithinia,
With all our Asian Holds and Cities too:
Thus Scilla seeking to be General,
(Who is invested in our Consuls Pall)
Has forced murders in a quiet State:
The cause whereof even Pompey may complain,
Who seeking to advance a climing friend,
Has lost by death a sweet and courteous son.
Who now in Asia but Mithridates,
Laughs at these fond discentions I complain?
While we in wrangling for a General,
Forsake our friends, forestall our forward war,
And leave our Legions full of dalliance,
VVaighting our idle wills at Capua.
Fie Romans, shall the glories of your names,
The wondrous beauty of this Capitol,
Perish through Scillas insolence and pride,
As if that Rome were robbed of true renown,
And destitute of warlike Champions now?
Lo here the man, the rumor of whose fame,
Has made Hiberia tremble and submit;
See Marius that in managing estate,
Through many cares and troubles he has past,
And spent his youth, upon whose reverend head
The milke-white pledge of wisdom sweetly spreds:
He six times Consul, fit for peace or war,
Sits drooping here content to brook disgrace,
Who glad to fight through follies of his foes
Sighs for your shame whilst you abide secure;
And I that see and should recure these wrongs,
Through Pompeys late vacation and delay,
Have left to publish him for General,
That merits better titles far than these:
But (Nobles) now the final day is come,
When I your Tribune studying for renown,
Pronounce and publish Marius General,
To lead our Legions against Mithridates,
And crave (grave Fathers) signs of your content,

Q. Pomp: Believe me Noble Romans, and grave Senators,
This strange election, and this new made Law,
Will witness our unstable government,
And dispossess Rome of her Emperie;
For although Marius be renownd in Arms,
Famous for prowess, and grave in warlike drifts,
Yet may the sunshine of his former deeds
Nothing eclipse our Scillas dignity:
By lot and by election he was made,
Chief General against Mithridates,
And shall we then abridge him of that Rule;
T were injury to Scilla and to Rome:
Nor would the height of his all daring mind,
Brook to the death so vile and foul disgrace.

Iu, Brutus: Why Pompey, as if the Senate had not power
To appoint, dispose, and change their Generals:
Rome shall belike be bound to Scillas Rule,
Whose haughty pride and swelling thoughts puffed up,
Foreshowes the reaching to proud Tarquins state:
Is not his lingering to our Roman loss
At Capua where he braues it out with feasts,
Made known think you unto the Senate here?
Yes Pompey, yes: and hereof are we sure
If Romans State on Scillas pride should lie,
Romes Conquests would to Pontus Regions fly:
Therefore grave and renowned Senators,
(Pillars that bear and hold our Rule aloft,
You stately, true, and rich Piramides)
Descend into the depth of your estates,
Then shall you find that Scilla is more fit,
To Rule in Rome domestical affairs,
Then have the Conquest of Bithinia,
Which if once got, heel but by death forgo,
Therefore I say Marius our General.

Lucretius: Lo thus we strive abroad to win renown,
And naught regard at home our waning states;
Brutus I say the many brave exploits,
The warlike Acts that Scilla has atchieude,
Shows him a soldier and a Roman too,
Whose care is more for Country than himself:
Scilla nill brook that in so many wars,
So hard adventures and so strange extremes,
Has borne the palm and prize of victory,
Thus with dishonor to give up his charge:
Scilla has friends and soldiers at command,
That first will make the towers of Rome to shake,
And force the stately Capitol to dance,
Yer any rob him of his ^ust renown:
Then we that through the Caspian shores have run,
And spread with ships the Oriental Sea,
At home shall make a murder of our friends,
And massaker our dearest Countrymen.

Licto: The power of Scilla naught will veil against Rome,
And let me die Lucretius ere I see,
Our Senate dread for any private man,
Therefore Renownd Sulpitius send for Scilla back,
Let Marius lead our men in Asia.

L. Merula: The Law, the Senate wholly does affirm,
Let Marius lead our men in Asia.

Cynna: Cynna affirms the Senates Censure just,
And says let Marius lead the Legions forth.

C. Granius: Honor and victory follow Marius steps,
For him does Granius wish to fight for Rome.

Sulpitius: why then you sage and ancient Syres of Rome,
Sulpitius here again does publish forth,
That Marius by the Senate here is made,
Chief General to lead the Legions out,
Against Mithridates and his Competitors,
Now victory for honor of Rome follow Marius.

Here let Marius rowse him self. Marius: Sage and imperial Senators of Rome,
Not without good aduisement have you seen,
Old Marius silent during your discourse:
Yet not for that he feared to plead his cause,
Or raise his honor trodden down by age,
But that his words should not allure his friends,
To stand on stricter terms for his behoof:
Six times the Senate by election has,
Made Marius Consul over warlike Rome,
And in that space nor Rome nor all the world,
Could ever say that Marius was untrue,
^hese silver hairs that hang upon my face,
Are witnesses of my unfeigned zeal,
The Cymbrians that yer-while invaded France,
And held the Roman Empire in disdain,
Lay all confounded under Marius sword,
Fierce Scipio the myrrour once of Rome,
whose loss as yet my inward soul bewailes,
Being asked who should succeed and bear his Rule,
Even this (quod he) shall Scipios armor bear,
And therewithal clapped me upon the back:
If then grave Lords, my former passed youth,
was spent in bringing Honors into Rome,
Let then my age and latter date of years,
Be sealed up for honor unto Rome.

Here enter Scilla with Captains and Soldiers. Sul: Scilla, what means these
Arms and warlike troops
These glorious Ensigns and these fierce Allarms,
It Is prowdly done to brave the Capitol.

Scilla: These Arms Sulpitius are not borne for hate,
But maintenance of my confirmed state:
I come to Rome with no seditious thoughts,
Except I find too froward injuries.

Sul: But wisdom would you did forbear,
To yield these flight suspicions of contempt,
where as this Senate studieth high affairs.

Scil: what serious matters have these Lords in hand?


Sul: The Senators with full decree appoint,
Old Marius for their Captain General,
To lead thy Legions into Asia,
And fight against the fierce Mithridates.

Scilla: To Marius? Jolly stuff: why then I see,
Your Lordships mean to make a babe of me.

Iu. Brutus: It Is true Scilla the Senate has agreed,
That Marius shall those bands and Legions bear,
which you now hold against Mithridates.

Scil: Marius shall lead them then, if Scilla said not no,
And I shall bea Consuls shadow then,
Trustles Senators and ungrateful Romans,
For all the Honors I have done to Rome,
For all the spoils I brought within her walls,
Thereby for to enrich and raise her pride,
Repay you me with this ingratitude:
You know unkind, that Scillas wounded Helm,
Was nere hung up or once distaind with rust:
The Marcians that before me fell amain,
And like to winter hail on every side,
Unto the City Nuba I pursude,
And for your sakes were thirty thousand slain:
The Hippinians and the samnits scilla brought,
As Tributaries unto famous Rome:
I, where did scilla ever draw his sword,
Or lift his warlike hand above his head
For Romans cause but he was Conqueror:
And now (unthankful) seek you to disgrade,
And tear the plumes that scillas sword has won.
Marius I tell thee scilla is the man,
Disdaines to stoop or veil his pride to thee;
Marius I say thou may nor shall not have,
The charge that unto scilla does belong,
Unless thy sword could tear it from my heart,
Which in a thousand folds impalls the same.

Marius: And scilla hereof be thou full assurde,
The honor whereto mine undaunted mind,
And this grave senate has enhaunsed me,
Thou nor thy followers shall derogate,
The spence of years that Marius has ore-past,
Inforraine broils and civil mutenies,
Has taught him this, that one unbridled foe,
My former fortunes never shall oregoe.

scilla: Marius, I smile at these thy foolish words,
And credit me should laugh outright I fear,
If that I knew not how thy froward age,
Does make thy sense as feeble as thy joints.

Marius: Scilla, Scilla, Marius years has taught
Him how to pluck so proud a yonkers plumes,
And know these hairs that dangle down my face,
In brightness like the silver Rodope:
Shall add so haughty courage to my mind,
And rest such percing objects against thine eyes,
That maskt in folly, age shall force thee stoop.

Scil: And by my hand I swear ere thou shall mase me so,
My soul shall perish but I Will have thy bearde,
Say grave Senators shall Scilla be your General.

Sulpitius: No the Senate, I and Rome her self agrees*
There Is none but Marius shall be General.
Therefore Scilla these daring tea^mes unfit,
Beseem not thee before the Capitol.

Scilla: Beseem not me? Senators advise you,
Scilla has vowed whose vows the heavens record,
Whose oaths has pierst and searched the deepest vast,
I and whose protestations reign on earth:
This Capitol wherein your glories shine,
Was nere so pressed and throng de with scarlet gowns,
As Rome shall be with heaps of slaughtred souls
Before that Scilla yield his titles up,
I Will mate her streets that peer into the clouds,
Burnisht with gold and Iuorie pillors fair,
Shining with Jasper, Iet, and Ebonie,
All like the palace of the morning sun,
To swim within a sea of purple blood
Before I loose the name of General.

Mar: These threats against thy country and these Lords.
Scilla proceeds from forth a Traitorshart,
Whose head I trust to see advanced up
On highest top of all this Capitol:
As erst was many of thy progeny,
Before thou vaunt thy victories in Rome.

Scilla: Graybeard, if so thy heart and tongue agree,
Draw forth thy Legions and thy men at arms,
Rear up thy standerd and thy steeled Crest,
And meet with Scilla in the fields of Mars,
And try whose fortune makes him General.

Marius: I take thy word: Marius will meet thee there,
And prove thee Scilla a Traitor unto Rome,
And all that march under thy traitorous wings,
Therefore they that love the Senate and Marius
Now follow him.

Scilla: And all that love Scilla come down to him,
For the rest let them follow Marius
And the Devil himself be their Captain.

Here let the Senate rise and cast away their Gowns, having their swords by
their sides: Exit Marius and with him Sulpitius: Iu: Brutus: Lectorius. Q.
Pompey: Scilla, I come to thee,

Lucretius: Scilla, Lucretius will die with thee,

Scilla: Thanks my Noble Lords of Rome.


Here let them go down and Scilla offers to go forth and Anthony calls him
back, Anthony: Stay Scilla, hear Anthony breath forth,
The pleading plaints of sad declining Rome.

Scilla: Anthony, thou know thy honey words do pierce,
And move the mind of Scilla to remorse:
Yet neither words nor pleadings now must serve,
When as mine honor calls me forth to fight,
Therefore sweet Anthony be short for Scillas have.

Anthony: For Scillas have, O whither will thou fly?
Tell me my Scilla what do thou take in hand?
What wars are these thou stirrest up in Rome?
What fire is this is kindled by thy wrath!
A fire that must be quenched by Romans blood,
A war that will confound our Emperie,
And last an Act of foul impiety.
Brute beasts nill break the mutual law of love,
And birds affection will not violate,
The senceles trees have concord among themselves,
And stones agree in linkes of amity,
If they my Scilla brook not to have jar,
What then are men that against themselves do warre^
Thoult say my Scilla honor stures thee up:
Is It honor to infringe the laws of Rome?
Thoult say perhaps the titles thou have won,
It were dishonor for thee to forgo:
O, is there any height above the high,
Or any better than the best of all?
Art thou not Consul? Art thou not Lord of Rome?
What greater Tytles should our Scilla have?
But thou will hence, thou will fight with Marius
The man, the Senate, I and Rome has chose.
Think this before, thou never liftst aloft,
And let fall thy warlike hand adowne,
But thou do raze and wound thy City Rome:
And look how many slaughtred souls he slain,
Under thy Ensigns, and thy conquering Lance,
so many murders make thou of thy self.

Scilla: Enough my Anthony, for thy honied tongue
VVasht in a sirrop of sweet Conseruatiues,
Drives confused thoughts through scillas mind,
Therefore suffize thee, I may nor will not hear,
so farewell Anthony, honor calls me hence,
scilla will fight for glory and for Rome.

Exit Scilla and his followers. Merula: See Noble Anthony the trustles state of
rule,
The stayles hold of matchles soueraignetie,
Now fortune bears Rome into the Clouds,
To throw her down into the lowest hells,
For they that spread her glory through the world,
Are they that tea^e her proud triumphant plumes:
The hart-burning pride of proud Tarquinius,
Rooted from Rome the sway of kingly ma^e,
And now this discord newly set abroach,
Shall ease our Consuls and our Senates down.

Anthony: Unhappy Rome and Romans thrice accursed,
That often with triumphs sild your City walls,
With kings and conquering Rulers of the world,
Now to eclipse in top of all thy pride,
Through civil discords and domesticke broiles:
O Romans weep the tears of sad lament,
And rent your sacred Robes at this exchange,
For Fortune makes our Rome a banding ball,
Tossed from her hand to take the greater fall.

Gra: O whence proceeds these foul ambitious thoughts,
That fires men's hearts and makes them thirst for Rule:
Has sovereignty so much be witcht the minds
Of Romans: that their former busied cares
Which erst did tire in seeking Cities good,
Must now be changd to ruin of her walls?
Must they that ^eard her stately Temples up,
Deface the sacred places of their Gods?
Then may we wail and wring our wretched hands,
Since both our Gods, our temples and our walls,
Ambition makes fell fortunes spightfull t^nalls. Ex: all.

A great Alarm: le^ young Marius chase Pompey over the stage, and old Marius
chase Lucretius: Then let enter three or four soldiers and his Ancient with
his colors, and Scilla after them with his hat in his hand, they offer to fly
away,. Scilla: Why whither fly you Romans,
What mischief makes this flight?
Stay good my friends, stay dearest Countrymen.

1. soldier: Stay let us hear what our Lord Scilla says.

Scilla: What will you leave your chieftains Romans the^^
And loose your Honors in the gates of Rome?
What shall our Country see, and Scilla rue,
These Coward thoughts so fixed and firmd in you?
What are you come from Capua to proclaim,
Your harties treasons in this happy town?
What will you stand and gaze with shameless looks,
Whilst Marius butchering knife assailes our thro^^s?
Are you the men, the hopes, the stairs of state?
Are you the soldiers pressed for Asia?
Are you the wondered Legions of the world,
And will you fly these shadows of resist?
Well Romans I will perish through your pride,
That thought by you to have returned in pomp.
And at the least your General shall prove,
Even in his death your treasons and his love.
Lo this the wreath that shall my body bind,
Whilst Scilla sleeps with honor in the field:
And I alone within these colors shut,
Will blush your dastard follies in my death,
So farewell hartles soldiers and untrue,
That leave your Scilla who has loved you. Exit.

1. soldier: Why fellow soldiers shall we fly the field,
And carelessly forsake our General?
What shall our vows conclude with no avail?
First die sweet friends, and shed your purple blood,
Before you lose the man that wills you good.
Then to it brave Italians out of hand:
Scilla we come with fierce and de^dly blows,
To venge thy wrongs and vanquish all thy toes.
Exeunt to the Alarm.
Actus secundus. Scena prima
Appian solus. Enter Scilla triumphant, Lucretius, Pompey, with souldierr.
SCilla: You Roman soldiers, fellow mates in Arms,
The blind fold Mistress of incertaine chance,
Has turned these traitorous c^^mers from the top,
And seated Scilla in the chiefest place.
The place beseeming Scilla and his mind,
For were the throne where matchles glory sits,
Empald with furies threatening blood and death,
Begirt with famine and those fatal fears
That dwell below amidst the dreadful vast:
Tut Scillaes sparkling eyes should dim with clear
The burning brands of their consuming light,
And master fancy with a forward mind,
And mask repining fear with awful power.
For men of baser metal and conceit
Cannot conceive the beauty of my thought.
I crowned with a wreath of warlike state,
Imagine thoughts more greater than a crown,
And yet befitting well a Roman mind.
Then gentle ministers of all my hopes,
That with your swords made way unto my wish,
Hearken the fruits of your courageous fight,
In spite of all these Roman Basi^sks,
That seek to quell us with their currish looks,
We will to Pontus we will have gold my hearts,
Those oriental pearls shall deck our brows:
And you my gentle ^rends, you Roman peers,
Kind Pompey worthy of a Consulls name.
You shall abide the father of the state,
Whilst these brave lads Lucretius and I,
In spite of all these brauling Senators,
Will, shall, and dare attempt on Asia,
And drive Mithridates from out his doors.

Pomp. I Scilla, these are words of mickle worth,
Fit for the master of so great a mind:
Now Rome must stoop, for Marius and his friends
Have left their arms, and trust unto their heels.

Scilla. But Pompey, if our Spanish Iennets feet
Have learnt to poast it of their mother wind,
I hope to nip upon the gray beards heels,
Till I have cropped his shoulders from his head.
As for his son, the proud aspiring boy,
His beardlesse face and wanton smiling brows,
Shall (if I catch him) deck yond Capitol:
The father, son, the friends, and soldiers all,
That ^awne on Marius, shall with fury fall.

Luer: And what event shall all these troubles bring?


Scilla. This: Scilla in fortune will exceed a king.
But friends and soldiers, with dispersed bands
Go seek out Marius fond confederates:
some poast along those unfrequented paths,
That trackt by nookes unto the neighbring sea:
Murder me Marius, and maintain my life.
And that his favorites in Rome may learn
The difference betwixt my fawn and frown,
Go cut them short, and shed their hateful blood, Ex. Soul.
To quench these furies of my froward mood.

Lucr. Lo scilla where our senators approach,
Perhaps to gratulate thy good success.

Enter Anthony, Granius, Lepidus. Scilla I that perhaps was fitly placed there:
But my Lucretius, these are cunning Lords,
Whose tongues are tipped with honnie to deceive:
As for their hearts, if outward eyes may see them,
The devil scarce with mischief might agree them.

Lep. Good fortune to our Consul, worthy scilla.


Scilla And why not General against the king of Pontus?

Gran: And general against the king of Pontus.

Scilla. sirrah, your words are good, your thoughts are ill,
Each milk white hair amidst this mincing beard,
Compard with milions of thy treacherous thoughts,
Would change their hiew through vigor of thy hate.
But did not pity make my fury thrall,
This sword should finish hate, thy life and all.
I pre thee Granius, how does Marius?

Gran: As he that bydes a thrall to thee and fate,
Living in hope as I and others do,
To catch good fortune, and to cross thee too.

Scilla: Both blunt and bold but too much Mother wit;
To play with fire where ^urie streams about,
Curtall your tale fond man cut of the rest:
But here I will dissemble for the best.

Granius: Scilla my years has taught me to discern,
Betwixt ambitious pride and Princely zeal,
And from thy youth these Pee^es of Rome have marked,
A rash revenging hammer in thy brain,
Thy tongue adornde with flowing eloquence,
And yet I see imprinted in thy brows,
A fortunate but froward governance.
And though thy rival Marius mated late,
By backward working of his wretched fate
Is fallen, yet Scilla mark what I have seen
Even here in Rome the Fencer Spectacus,
Has bin as fortunate as thou thy self:
But when that Crassus sword assayed his crest,
The fear of death did make him droope for woe.

Scilla: You saw in Rome this brawling ^encer die,
When Spectacus by Crassus was subdewd:
Why so, but sir I hope you will apply,
And say like Spectacus that I shall die?
Thus peevish eld discoursing by a fire,
Amidst their cups will prate how men aspire:
Is this the greeting Romans that you give,
Unto the Patron of your Monarchy?
Lucretius shall I play a pretty jest.

Lucre: What Scilla will, what Roman dare withstand*

Scilla: A brief and pleasing answer by my head,
Why tell me Granius do thou talk in sport?

Granius: No Scilla my discourse is resolute,
Not coynd to please thy fond and cursed thoughts:
For were my tongue betraide with pleasing words,
To feed the humors of thy haughty mind:
I rather wish the rot should root it out.

Scilla: The brauest brawler that I ever heard,
But soldiers since I see he is oppressed
With crooked choler, and our Artists teach,
That fretting blood will press through opened veins,
Let him that has the keenest sword arrest,
The gray-beard and cut off his head in jest.
Soldiers lay hands on Granius.

Granius: Is this the guerdon then of good advise?

Scilla: No but the means to make fond men more wise,
Tut I have wit, and carry warlike tools,
To charm the scolding prate of wanton ^ooles,
Tell me of Fencers and a tale of Fate?
No, scilla thinks of nothing but a state.

Granius: Why scilla I am armd the worst to try.

Scilla: I pray thee then Lucretius let him die.
Exeunt with Granius. Beshrow me Lords but in this jolly vame,
Twere pity but the prating fool were slain:
I fear me Pluto will be wroth with me,
For to detain so grave a man as he.

Anthony: But seek not scilla in this quiet state,
To work revenge upon an aged man,
A senator, a sovereign of this town.

scilla: The more the Cedar climes the sooner down^
And did I think the prowdest man in Rome,
Would winch at that which I have wrought or done,
I would and can controwle his insolence.
Why senators, is this the true reward,
Wherewith you answer Princes for their pain,
As when this sword has made our City free,
A brauing mate should thus distemper me?
But Lepidus and fellow senators,
I am resolude and will not brook your taunts,
Who wrongeth scilla, let him look for stripes.

Mark Anthony: I but the milder passions show the (...)
For as the leaf does beautify the tree,
The pleasant flowers bedecke the painted spring,
Even so in men of greatest reach and power,
A mild and piteous thought augments renown*
Old Anthony did never see my Lord,
A swelling shower that did continue long,
A climing tower that did not taste the wind,
A wrathful man not wasted with repent,
I speak of love my Scilla, and of joy
To see how fortune lends a pleasant gale,
Unto the spreading sails of thy desires:
And loving thee must counsel thee withal,
For as by cutting fruitful vines increase,
So faithful counsels works a Princes peace.

Scilla: Thou honey talking father speak thy mind.

Anthony: My Scilla scarce those tears are dried up,
That Roman Matrons wept to see this war:
Along the holy streets the hideous groans,
Of murdered men infect the weeping air:
Thy foes are ^led not overtaken yet,
And doubtful is the hazard of this war:
Yea doubtful is the hazard of this war,
For now our Legions draw their wastfull swords,
To murder whom? Even Roman Citizens.
To conquer whom? Even Roman Citizens.
Then if that Scilla love these Citizens,
If care of Rome, if threat of foreign foes,
If fruitful counsels of thy forward friends
May take effect, go fortunate and drive,
The king of Pontus out of Asia,
Least while we dream on civil mutenies,
Our wary foes assail our City walls.

Pompey: My long concealed thoughts Mark Anthony,
Must seek discovery through thy pliant words:
Believe me Scilla civil mutenies,
Must not obscure thy glories and our names:
Then since that factious Marius is suppressed,
Go spread thy colors midst the Asian fields,
Mean while my self will watch this Cities weal.

Scilla: Pompey I know thy love, I mark thy words,
And Anthony thou have a pleasing vain,
But senators I hammer in my head,
With every thought of honor some revenge:
Enter Lucretius with the head. Speak what shall Scilla be your General?

Lepidus: We do decree that Scilla shall be General:

Scilla: And wish you Scillas weal and honor too*

Anthony: We wish both Scillas weal and honor too

Scilla: Then take away the scandal of this state,
Banish the name of Tribune out of town,
Proclaim false Marius and his other friends.
Foe men and traitors to the state of Rome,
And I will wend and work so much by force,
As I will master false Mithridates,

Lepidus: The name of Tribune has continued long.

Scilla: So shall not Lepidus if he withstand me.
Sir you see the head of Granius,
VVatch you his hap unless you change your words,
Pompey now please me Pompey grant my suit.

Pompey: Lictors proclaim this our undaunted doom,
we will that Marius and his wretched sons,
His friends Sulpitius, Claudius and the rest
Beheld for traitors, and acquit the men
That shall endanger there unlucky lines,
And henceforth Tribunes name and state shall cease,
Grave Senators how like you this decree?

Lepidus: Even as our Consulls wish, so let it be*

Scilla: Then Lepidus all friends in faith for me,
So leave I Rome to Pompey and my friends,
Resolud to manage those our Asian wars,
Frolike brave Soldiers we must ^oote it now,
Lucretius you shall bide the b^unt (...) me,
Pompey farewell, and farewell Lepidu^.
Mark Anthony I leave thee to thy books,
study for Rome and scillas Royalty.
But by my sword I wrong this graybeards head,
Go sir place it on the Capitol:
Aiust promotion fit for scillaes foe.
Lordings farewell, come soldiers let us go. Exit.

Pompey: scilla farewell and happy be thy chance,
Whose war both Rome and Romans must a duaunce.

Exeunt senators. Enter the Magistrates of Minturnum with Marius very
melancholy, Lucius Fauorinus, Pausanius with some attendants. Pausanius: My
Lord the course of your unstaid fate,
Made weak through that your late unhappy fight,
VVithdrawes our wills that f^ine would work your weal:
For long experience and the change of times,
The innocent suppressions of the just
In leaning to forsaken men's relief,
Does make us fear lest our unhappy town,
should perish through the angry Romans sword.

Marius: Lords of Minturnum when I shapd my course,
To fly the danger of pursuing death,
I left my friends, and all alone attaind
(In hope of succors) to this little town,
Relying on your courtesies and truth.
What foolish fear does then amaze you thus?

Fauorinus: O Marius, thou thy self, thy son, thy friends,
Are banished and exiles out of Rome,
Proclaimd for traitors, rest of your estates,
Adiudgde to death with certain warrantize.
should then so small a town my Lord as this,
Hazard their fortunes to supply your wants?

Marius: Why Citizens, and what is Marius?
I tell you not so base as to despair,
Yea able to withstand ingratitudes.
Tell me of foolish laws decreede at Rome,
To please the angry humors of my foe:
Believe me Lords I know and am assurde,
That magnanimity can never fear,
And fortitude so conquer silly fate,
As scilla when he hopes to have my head,
May hap ere long on sudden lose his own.

Pausanius: A hope beseeming Marius, but I fear,
Too strange to have a short and good event.

Marius: Why sir Pausanius have not you beheld,
Campania plains fulfild with greater foes,
Than is that wanton milke-sop natures scorn.
Base minded men to live in perfect hope,
Whose thoughts are shut within your cottage eues,
Refuse not Marius that must favor you:
For these are parts of unadvised men,
With present fear to lose a perfect friend,
That can, will, may controwle, command, subdue,
That brauing boy that thus bewitcheth you.

Fauorinu^: How gladly would we succor you my Lord,
But that we fear.

Marius: What? the Moone-shine in the water.
Thou wretched stepdame of my fickle state,
Are these the guerdons of the greatest minds,
To make them hope and yet betray their hap,
To make them clime to overthrow them straight?
Accursed thy wreake, thy wrath, thy bale, thy wheel,
That makst me sigh the sorrows that I feel.
Untrodden paths my feet shall rather trace,
Than wrest my succors from inconstant hands.
Rebounding Rocks shall rather ring my ruth,
Than these Campanian piles where terrors bide.
And nature that has lift my throne so hie,
Shall witness Marius triumphs if he die.
But s^ee that gave the Lictors rod and axe,
To wait my six times Consulship in Rome,
will not pursue where erst she flattered so,
Minturnum then farewell for I must go,
But think for to repent you of your no.

Pausa: Nay stay my Lord and daine in private here,
To weight a message of more better worth,
Your age and travels must have some relief,
And be not wroth, for greater men than we
Have feared Rome and Roman tirranie.

Marius: You talk it now like men confirmde in faith,
well let me try the fruits of your discourse,
For care my mind and pain my body wrongs.

Pausanius: Then Fauorinus shut his Lordship up,
within some secret chamber in the state,
Mean while we will consult to keep him safe,
And work some secret means for his supply.

Marius: Be trusty Lords, if not I can but die. Exit Ma.

Pausanius: Poor haples Roman, little ^ottest thou,
The weary end of thine oppressed life.

Lucius: Why my Pausanius, what imports these words?

Pausanius: Oh Lucius age has printed in my thoughts,
A memory of many troubles past,
The greatest towns and Lords of Asia,
Have stood on tickle terms through simple truth,
The Rhodian records weil can witness this.
Then to prevent our means of overthrow,
Find out some stranger that may suddenly,
Enter the chamber where as Marius lies,
And cut him short, the present of whose head
Shall make the Romans praise us for our truth,
And Scilla pressed to grant us privilege.

Lucius: A barbarous act to wrong the men that trust,

Pausanius: In Countries cause in justice proves just.
Come Lucius let not silly thought of right,
Subject our City to the Romans might:
For why you know in Marius only end,
Rome will reward and scilla will be (...),

Lucius: Yet all successions will us disco^mend. Exeunt.

Enter Marius the younger: Cethegus: Lectorius with other Roman Lords and
soldiers. Young Marius: The way ward Lady of this wicked world.
That leads in luckles triumph wretched men,
My Roman friends has forced our desires,
And framde our minds to brook too base relief,
What land or Libian desert is unsought,
To find my father Marius and your friend:
Yea they whom true relent could never touch,
These fierce Numidians hearing our mishaps,
Weep floods of moan to wail our wretched fates.
Thus we that erst with terrors did attaint,
The Bactrian bounds and in our Roman wars,
Enforst the barbarous borderers of the Alps,
To tremble with the terrors of our looks.
Now fly poor men affrighted with our harms,
Seeking amidst the desert rocks and dens,
For him that whilom in our Capitol,
Even with a beck commanded Asia.
Thou woeful son of such a famous man,
Vnsheath thy sword, conduct these warlike men
To Rome, unhappy Mistress of our harms:
And there since tyrants power has thee oppressed,
And robbed thee of thy father, friends and all,
So die undaunted, killing of thy foes,
That were the offspring of these wretched woes.

Lectorius: Why how now Marius, will you mate us thus;
That with content adventure for your love?
Why Noble youth resolve your self on this,
That son and father both have friends in Rome^
That seek old Marius rest and your relief.

Marius: Lectorius, friends are geason now adays,
And grow to fume before they taste the fire:
Adversities bereauing man's a^ailes,
They fly like feathers dallying in the wind,
They rise like bubbles in a stormy rain,
Swelling in words and flying faith and deeds.

Cethegus: How fortunate art thou my lovely Lord,
That in thy youth may reap the fruits of age,
And having lost occasions hold-fast now,
May learn hereafter how to entertain her well:
But sudden hopes do swarm about my heart,
Be merry Romans see where from the Coast,
A weary messenger does poast him fast.
Enter Cinnas slave with a letter enclosed posting in have.
Lectorius: It should be Cinnas slave or else I err,
For in his forhead I behold the scar,
Wherewith he marketh still his barbarous swains.

Marius: Oh stay him good Lectorius for me seem,
His great post have some pleasure should present.

Lectorius: Sir art thou of Rome?

Slave: Perhaps Sir no?

Lectorius: Without perhaps say Sir is it so?

Slave: This is Lectorius Marius friend I trow,
Yet were I best to learn the certainetie,
Lest some dissembling foes should me disery.

Marius: Sir leave off this foolish dalliance,
Lest with my sword I wake you from your trance.

slave: Oh happy man, Oh labors well atchieude,
How has this chance my weary lims reuiude:
Oh Noble Marius, Oh Princely Marius.

Marius: what means this Pesant by his great rejoice.

slave: Oh worthy Roman, many months have past,
Since Cinna now the Consul and my Lord,
Has sent me forth to seek thy friends and thee:
All Libia with our Roman Presidents,
Numidia full of unfrequented ways,
These weary limbs have troad to seek you out,
And now occasion pitying of my pains,
I late arriude upon this wished shore,
Found out a Sailer borne in Capua,
That told me how your Lordship past this way,

Marius: A happy labor worthy some reward,
How fares thy master? what is the news at Rome?

Slave. Pull out the pike from off this iauelin to^^
And there are tidings for these Lords and thee,

Marius: A policy beseeming Cynna well:

Lectorius read, and break these letters up. Letters.
To his honorable friend Marius the younger greeting.
BEing Consul (for the welfare both of father and (...), wish other thy
accomplices) I have under an honest policy (...) my instalment in the
Consulship, caused all Scillas friends that were indifferent with the other
neighbring Cities to revolt: Octauius my fellow Consul with the rest of the
Senate mistrusting me, and hearing how I sought to unite the old Citizens with
the new, has wrought much trouble, but to no effect. I hope the soldiers of
Capua shall follow our faction, for Scilla hearing of these hurly-burlies is
^oa^ting homeward very fortunate in his wars against Mithridates. And it is
to be feared, that some of his friends here have certified him of my
proceedings, and purpose to restore you. Cethegus and Lectorius I hear say are
with you. Censorinus and Albinou^nus will shortly visit you. Therefore have and
seek out your father, who is now as I hear about Minturnum. Levy what power
you can with all expeditio^, and stay not.

Rome the^ Kalends of December.
Your unfeigned friend, Cinna Consul.


Marius: Yea Fortune, shall young Marius clime aloft,
Then woe to my repining foes in Rome,
And if I live (sweet Queen of change) thy shrines,
Shall shine with beauty midst the Capitol,
Lectorius, tell me what were best be done.

Lector: To sea my Lord, seek your warlike Sire,
Send back this pesant with your full pretense,
And think already that our pains have end,
Since Cynna with his followers is your friend.

Marius: Yea Romans we will furrow through the foam
Of swelling floods, and to the sacred Twins
Make sacrifice to shield our ships from storms.
Follow me Lords, come gentle messenger,
Thou shall have gold and glory for thy pains. Exeunt.

Finis secundi Acti.
Actus tertius.
Scena prima.
Enter Cynna, Octauius, Anthonius, Lictors, Citizens. Cyn: VPbraiding Senators
bewitched with wit,
That term true justice innovation:
You ministers of Scillas mad conceits,
Will Consulls think you stoop to your controules?
These younger Citizens, my fellow Lords,
Bound to maintain both Marius and his son.
Crave but their due, and will be held as good
For privilege, as those of elder age:
For they are men conformd to feats of arms,
That have both wit and courage to command.
These favorites of Octauius, what with age
And palsies shake their iauelins in their hands,
Like hartlesse men attainted all with fea^e:
And should they then ouer-top the youth.
No, nor this Consul, nor Mark An^honie,
Shall make my followers faint, or loose their right,
But I will have them equal with the best.

M. An: Why then the Senates name (whose reverence
Has blazd our virtues midst the Western I Will)
Must be obseurde by Cynnas forced power.
O Citizens, are laws of Country left?
Is justice banished from this Capitol?
Must we poor fathers see your trooping bands
Enter the sacred Synod of this state.
Oh brutish fond presumptions of this age,
Rome would the mischiefs might obscure my life,
So I might counsel Consulls to be wise.
Why Countri-men wherein consists this strife?
Forsooth the younger Citizens will rule,
The old men's heads are dull and addle now:
And in elections youth will bear the sway?
O Cynna, see I not the woeful fruits
Of these ambitious stratagems begun,
Each flattring tongue that dallieth pretty words,
Shall change our fortunes and our states at once.
Had I ten thousand tongues to talk the care,
So many eyes to weep their woeful miss,
So many pens to write these many wrongs:
My tongue your thoughts, my eyes your tears should move,
My pen your pains by reasons should approve.

Cynna: Why Anthony, seal up those sugared lips,
For I will bring my purpose to effect.

A^th: Does Cynna like to interrupt me then?

Cynna: I Cynna sir, will interrupt you now,
I tell thee Mark, old Marius is at hand,
The very patron of this happy law,
Who will revenge thy cunning eloquence.

Ma. An: I talk not I to please or him or thee,
But what I speak, I think and practice too:
Twere better Scilla learnt to mend in Rome,
Than Marius come to tyrannize in Rome.

Octa: Nay Marius shall not tyrannize in Rome,
Old Citizens, as Scilla late ordaind,
King Tullius laws shall take their full effect,
The best and aged men shall in their choice,
Both bear the day and firm election.

Cynna: Oh brave Octauius you will beard me then,
The elder Consul and old Marius friend,
And these Italian freemen must be wronged.
First shall the fruit of all thine honors fail,
And this my poniard shall dispatch thy life.

Lepid. Such insolence was never seen in Rome:
Naught wants here but name to make a King.

Octa: Strike villain if thou list, for I am pressed,
To make as deep a surrow in thy breast.

Young Cit: The young men's voices shall prevail my lords.

Old Cit: And we will firm our honors by our bloods.

Thunder. Anth: O false ambitious pride in young and old:
Hark how the heavens our follies has contrould.

Old Cit: What shall we yield for this religious fear?

Anth: If not religious fear, what may repress
These wicked passions, wretched Citizens.
O Rome, poor Rome, unmeet for these misdeedes,
I see contempt of heavens will breed a cross:
Sweet Cynna govern rage with reverence.
Thunder. O fellow Citizens, be more aduisde.

Lepid. We charge you Consulls now diss^lu^ the Court
The Gods contemn this brawle and ciui^l i^rres.

Oct: We will submit our honors to their wills:
You ancient Citizens come follow me.

Exit Octauius, with him Anthony and Lepidus. Cynna: High Jove himself has
done too much for thee,
Else should this blade abate thy royalty.
Well young Italian Citizens take heart,
He is at hand that will maintain your right:
That entering in these fatal gates of Rome,
Shall make them tremble that disturb you now.
You of Preneste and of Formiae,
With other neighbring Cities in Campania,
Prepare to entertain and succor Marius.

Citizen: For him we live, for him we mean to die.
Exe.
Enter old Marius with his keeper, and two soldiers. Marius: Have these
Minturnians then so cruelly,
Presumd so great injustice against their friends?

Iailer: I Marius, all our Nobles have decreed
To send thy head a present unto Rome.

Marius: A Tantals present it will prove my friend,
Which with a little smarting stresse will end
Old Marius life, when Rome it self at last,
Shall rue my loss, and then revenge my death.
But tell me Iailer, could thou be content,
In being Marius for to brook this wrong.

Iailer: The high estate your Lordship once did wield,
The many friends that fawnd when fortune smild,
Your great promotions, and your mighty wealth:
These (were I Marius) would amate me so,
As loss of them would vex me more than death.

Marius: Is Lordship then so great a bliss my friend?

Iailer: No title may compare with princely rule.

Marius: Are friends so faithful pledges of delight?

Iailer: What better comforts than are faithful friends?

Marius: Is wealth a mean to lengthen lives content?

Iai: Where great possessions bide, what care can tutch?

Marius: These stales of fortune are the common plagues*
That still mislead the thoughts of simple men.
The shepherd swain that midst his country cote,
Deludes his broken slumbers by his toil,
Thinks Lordship sweet, where care with lordship dwelt
The trustfull man that builds on trothles vows,
Whose simple thoughts are crossed with scornful nayes,
Together weeps the loss of wealth and friend:
So Lordship, friends, wealth, spring and perish fast,
Where death alone yields happy life at last.
O gentle governor of my contents,
Thou sacred chieftaine of our Capitol,
Who in thy crystal orbs with glorious gleame^,
Lendst looks of pity mixed with majesty,
See woeful Marius careful for his son,
Careless of lordship, wealth or worldly means,
Content to live, yet living still to die:
Whose nerves and veins, whose sinews by the sword
Must loose their workings through distempering stroke:
But yet whose mind in spite of fate and all,
Shall live by fame although the body fall.

Iail: Why mourns Marius this recurelesse chance?

Mar: I pre thee Iailer would thou gladly die?

Iail: If needs, I would.

Mar: Yet were you loath to try.

Iail: Why noble Lord, when goods, friends, fortune fail
What more than death might woeful man avail?

Mar: Who calls for death (my friend) for all his scorns,
With Aesops slave will leave his bush of thorns.
But since these traitrous Lords will have my head,
Their Lordships here upon this homely bed,
Shall find me sleeping, breathing forth my breath;
Till they their shame, and I my fame attain by death.
Live gentle Marius to revenge my wrong,
And sirrah see they stay not ouer-long.
For he that erst has conquered kingdoms many,
Disdaines in death to be subdude by any.

He lies down. Enter Lucius Fauorinus, Pausanius, with Ped^, a Frenchman.
Iail: The most undaunted words that ever were.
The mighty thoughts of his imperious mind,
Do wound my heart with terror and remorse.

Paus: It Is desperate, not perfect noblenes,
For to a man that is preparde to die,
The heart should rent, the sleep should leave the eye:
But say Pedro, will you do the deed?

Pedr: Mon monsieurs perla sang dieu, me will make a trou so large in ce
belly, dat he sal cry hough come vne porceau. Featre delay, il a true me fad^e,
he kill my modre. Faith a my trote mon espee: ^erale fay dun sol dat, Sau,
sau, Ieieuera, come il founta pary, me will make a spitch-cock^ of his persona.


Favor: If he have slain thy father and thy friends,
The greater honor shall betide the deed:
For to revenge on righteous estimate,
Beseemes the honor of a French man's name.

Pedro: Mes messiers, de fault auoir argent, me no point de argent, no point
kill Marius.


Paus: Thou shall have forty crowns, will that content thee?


Pedro: Quarante escus, per le pied de Madam, me give more dan four to se
pretty damosele, dat have le dulces tettinos, leleures cymbrines. Oh they be
fines.


Fauorinus: Great is the hire and little is the pain,
Make therefore quick dispatch, and look for gain.
See where he lies in drawing on his death,
Whose ^ies by gentle slumber sealed up,
Present no dreadful visions to his heart.

Pedro: Bien monsieur, le demourera content. Mary's tu es mort. Speak die
preres in die sleep, for me sall cut off your head from your espaules before
you wake. Qui es stia, what kind a man be dis.


Favor: Why what delays are these, why gaze ye thus?


Pedr: Nostre dame, Jesus estiene, oh my siniors der be a great diable in ce
eyes, qui dart de flame, and with de voice d'un bear, cries out, Villain dare
you kill Marius. Ie tremble: aida me siniors, autrement I shall be murdered.


Paus. What sudden madness daunts this stranger thus?


Pedro: Oh me no can kill Marius, me no dare kill Marius: adieu messiers, me be
dead si ie touch Marius, Marius est vne diable. Jesus Maria saua moy. Exit
fugiens.


Paus. What fury haunts this wretch on sudden thus?


Favor: Ah my Pausanius I have often heard,
That yonder Marius in his infancy
Was borne to greater fortunes than we deem:
For being scarce from out his cradle crept,
And sporting pretely with his compeeres,
On sudden seven young Eagles soard amain,
And kindly pearcht upon his tender lap.
His parents wondering at this strange event,
Took counsel of the Southsaiers in this,
Who told them that these seuen-fold Eagles flight,
Fore figured his seven times Consulship:
And we our selves (except bewitched with pride)
Have seen him six times in the Capitol
Accompanyd with rods and axes too.
And some divine instinct so presses me,
That sore I tremble till I set him free.

Paus: The like assaults attaint my wandering mind.
Seeing our bootlesse war with matchless fate,
Let us entreat him to forsake our town,
So shall we gain a friend of Rome and him:
Marius awaketh. But mark how happily he does awake.

Mar: What, breath I yet poor man, with mounting sight
Choking the rivers of my restless eyes?
Or is their rage restraind with matchless ruth?
See how amazd these angry Lords behold
The poor confused looks of wretched Marius.
Minturnians why delays your headsman thus
To finish up this ruthful tragedy?

Fauorinus: Far be it Marius from our thoughts or hands
To wrong the man protected by the Gods:
Live happy (Marius) so thou leave our town.

Marius: And must I wrestle once again with fate?
Or will these Princes dally with mine age?

Pausan: No matchles Roman, thine approved mind
That erst has altered our ambitious wrong
Must flourish still, and we thy servants live
To see thy glories like the swelling tides
Exceed the bounds of Fate and Roman rule.
Yet leave us Lord, and seek some safer shed,
Where more secure thou may prevent mishaps:
For great pursuits and troubles thee awaite.

Marius: Ye piteous powers that with succesfull hopes,
And gentle counsels thwart my deep dispaires:
Old Marius to your mercies recommends
His hap, his life, his hazard and his son.
Minturnians, I will hence, and you shall fly
Occasions of those troubles you expect.
Dream not on dangers that have faud my life:
Lordings adieu, from walls to woods I wend,
To hills, dales, rocks, my wrong for to commend. Exit.

Favor: Fortune vouchsafe thy many cares to end. Exe.

Actus tertius.
Enter Scilla in triumph in his chare triumphant of gold, drawn by four
Moors, before the chariot: his colors, his crest, his captains, his
prisoners: Arcathius Mithridates son, Aristion, Archelaus, bearing crowns of
gold, and manacled. After the chariot, his soldiers bands, Basillus,
Lucretius, Lucullus: besides prisoners of diverse Nations, and sundry disguises.
SCilla: You men of Rome, my fellow mates in Arms,
Whose three years prowess, policy, and war,
One hundredth three score thousand men at Arms
Has overthrown and murdered in the field:
Whose valors to the Empire has restorde,
All Grecia, Asia, and Ionia.
With Macedonia subject to our foe:
You see the froward customs of our state,
Who measuring not our many toiles abroad,
Sit in their Cells imagining our harms,
Replenishing our Roman friends with fear.
Yea, Scilla worthy friends, whose fortunes, toiles,
And stratagems these strangers may report,
Is by false Cynna and his factious friends.
Reuilde, condemnde, and crossed without a cause.
Ye^ (Romans) Marius must return to Rome,
Of purpose to vpbraid your General.
But this vnd^unted mind that never droopt:
This forward body formd to suffer toil,
Shall have to Rome where every foe shall rue,
The rash disgrace both of my self and you:

Lucretius: And may it be that those seditious brains,
Imagine these presumptuous purposes?

Scilla: And may it be? why man and will thou doubt,
Where Scilla daines these dangers to auer^e?
Sirrah except not so, misdoubt not so,
See here Ancharius letters read the lines,
And say Lucretius that I favor thee,
That dare but suspect thy General,

Read the letters and deliver them. Lu^r: The case conceald has moved the more
misdoub^,
Yet pardon my presumptions worthy Scilla,
That to my grief have read these hideous harms,

Scilla: Tut my Lucretius, fortunes ball is tossed,
To form the story of my fatal power:
Rome shall repent, babe, mother, shall repent,
Air weeping clowdie sorrows shall repent,
vvind breathing many sighings shall repent
To see those storms concealed in my breast,
Reflect the hideous flames of their unrest:
But words are vain, and cannot quell our wrongs,
Brief periods serve for them that needs must postit.
Lucullus since occasion calls me hence,
And all our Roman senate think it meet,
That thou pursue the wars I have begun,
As by their letters I am certified,
I leave thee Fimbrias Legions to conduct,
with this prouiso, that in ruling still,
You think on Scilla and his courtesies.

Lucullus: The weighty charge of this continued war,
Though strange it seem, and over great to wield,
I will accept it so the Army please.

Soldiers: Happy and fortunate be Lucullus our General.

Scilla: If he be Scillas friend, else not at all:
For otherwise the man were ill bested,
That gaining glories straight should lose his head.
But soldiers since I needly must to Rome,
Basillus virtues shall have recompense.
Lo here the wreath Valerius for thy pains,
Who first did enter Archilous trench:
This pledge of virtue sirrah shall approve,
Thy virtues, and confirm me in thy love.

Basillus: Happy be Scilla, if no foe to Rome.

Scilla: I like no iffs from such a simple groom,
I will be happy in despite of state,
And why? because I never feared fate.
But come Arcathius for your fathers sake,
Enjoin your fellow Princes to their taskes,
And help to succor these my weary bones.
Tut blush not man, a greater state than thou,
Shall pleasure Scilla in more baser sort.
Aristion is a jolly timberd man,
Fit to conduct the chariot of a King.
Why be not squeamish, for it shall go hard,
But I will give you all a great reward.

Arcath: Humbled by fate like wretched men we yield

Scilla: Arcathius these are fortunes of the field.
Believe me these brave Captyues draw by art,
And I will think upon their good desert.
But stay you strangers, and respect my words,
Fond hartles men, what folly have I seen:
For fear of death can Princes entertain
Such bastard thoughts, that now from glorious arms
Vouchsafe to draw like oxen in a plough.
Arcathius I am sure Mithridates
Will hardly brook the scandal of his name:
Twere better in Picaeo to have died
Aristion, than amidst our legions thus to draw.

Aristion: I tell thee Scilla, captives have no choice,
And death is dreadful to a caytiue man.

Scilla: In such imperfect metals as is yours.
But Romans that are still allurde by fame,
Choose rather death than blemish of their name,
But I have ha^t, and therefore will reward you.
Go soldiers, with as quick dispatch as may be,
Hasten their death, and bring them to their end,
And say in this that Scilla is your friend.

Arcathius: Oh ransom thou our lives sweet conquero^*

Scilla: Fie foolish men, why fly you happiness,
Desire you still to lead a servile life.
Dare you not buy delights with little pains.
Well, for thy fathers sake Arcathius,
I will prefer thy triumphs with the rest.
Go take them hence, and when we meet in hell,
Then tell me Princes if I did not well.
Exeunt milites. Lucullus, thus these mighty foes are down,
Now strive thou for the king of Pontus crown.
I will to Rome, go thou, and with thy train,
Pursue Mithridates till he be slain.

Lucul: With fortunes help, go calm thy countries woes
Whilst I with these seek out our mighty foes.
Enter Marius solus from the Numidian mountains, feeding on roots.
Mar: pat: Thou that have walked with troops of flocking friends,
Now wandrest midst the laborynth of woes,
Thy best repast with many sighing ends,
And none but fortune all these mischiefs knows.
Like to these stretching mountains clad with snow,
No sunshine of content my thoughts approaches:
High spyre their tops, my hopes no height do know,
But mount so high as time their tract reprocheth:
They find their spring, where winter wrongs my mind:
They weep their brooks, I wast my cheeks with tears.
Oh foolish fate, too froward and unkind,
Mountains have peace, where mournful be my years:
Yet high as they my thoughts some hopes would borrow,
But when I count the evening end with sorrow.
Death in Minturnum threatened Marius head,
Hunger in these Numidian mountains dwells:
Thus with prevention having mischief fled,
Old Marius finds a world of many hells.
Such as poor simple wits have often repinde,
But I will quell by virtues of the mind.
Long years misspent in many luckles chances,
Thoughts full of wroth, yet little worth succeeding,
These are the means for those whom fate aduances:
But I, whose wounds are fresh, my heart still bleeding,
Lives to entreat this blessed boon from fate,
That I might die with grief to live in state.
Six hundredth sons with solitary walks,
I still have sought for to delude my pain,
And friendly Echo answering to my talks,
Rebounds the accent of my ruth again:
She (courteous Nymph) the woeful Roman pleases,
Else no consorts but beasts my pains appeaseth.
Each day she answers, in yond neighbring mountain,
I do expect reporting of my sorrow,
Whilst lifting up her locks from out the fountain,
She answers to my questions even and morrow:
Whose sweet rebounds my sorrows to remove,
To please my thoughts I mean for to approve.
Sweet Nymph draw nere thou kind and gentle Echo. Echo.
What help to ease my weary pains have I? I.
What comfort in distres to calm my griefs? griefs.
Sweet Nymph these griefs are grown before I thought so? I thought so.
Thus Marius lives disdaind of all the Gods. Oads.
With deep despair late overtaken wholly. Oly.
And will the heavens be never well appeased? appeased.
What mean have they left me to cure my smart? art.
Naught better fits old Marius mind then war, then war.
Then full of hope say Echo, shall I go? go.
Is any better fortune then at hand, at hand.
Then farewell Echo, gentle Nymph farewell. farewell.
Oh pleasing folly to a pensive man.
Well I will rest fast by this shadie tree.
Waiting the end that f^te allotteth me. sit down.
Enter Marius the son, Albinouanus, Cethegus, Lectorius, with soldiers.
Marius: My countrymen and favorites of Rome,
This melancholy desert where we meet,
Resembles well young Marius restles thoughts.
Here dreadful silence, solitary caves,
No chirping birds with solace singing sweetly,
Are harbored for delight: but from the oak
Leaueles and saples through decaying age,
The sc^tch-owle chants her fatal boding lays.
Within my breast, care, danger, sorrow dwells,
Hope and revenge sit hammering in my heart,
The balefull babes of angry Nemesis
Dispearse their furious fires upon my soul.

Lector: Fie Marius, are you discontented still,
When as occasion favors your desire?
Are not these noble Romans come from Rome?
Has not the state recald your father home?

Marius: And what of this, what profit may I reap,
That want my father to conduct us home.

Lector: My Lord, take heart, no doubt this stormy slawe
That Neptune sent to cast us on this shore.
Shall end these discontentments at the last.

Mar: pat: Whom see mine eyes, what is not yon my son?

Mar: iu: what solitary father walks there?

Mar: pa: It is my son, these are my friends I see:
what have forepining cares, so changed me?
Or are my looks; distempred through the pains
And agonies that issue from my heart?
Fie Marius, frolic man, thou must to Rome,
There to revenge thy wrongs and weight thy tomb.

Marius iu: Now fortune frown, and palter if thou please,
Romans behold my father and your friend.
Oh father.

Marius pa: Marius thou art fitly met:
Albinouanus and my other friends,
What news at Rome? what fortune brought you hither?

Albino: My Lord, the Consul Cynna has restord
The doubtful course of your betrayed state,
And waits you prresent swift approach to Rome,
Your foe man Scilla poasteth very fast,
With good success from Pontus to prevent
Your speedy entrance into Italy.
The neighbring Cities are your very friends,
Naught rests my Lord, but you depart from hence.

Mar: iu: How many desert ways has Marius sought,
How many Cities have I visited,
To find my father, and relieve his wants?

Marius pat: My son, I quite thy trauells with my love,
And Lords and Citizens we will to Rome,
And join with Cynna have your shipping here?
What are these soldiers bent to die with me?

Soul: Content to pledge our lives for Marius.

Lect: My Lord, here in the next adjoining port,
Our ships are rigd and ready for to sail.

Marius pa: Then let us sail unto Hetruria,
And cause our friends the Germans to revolt,
And get some Tuscans to increase our power.
Deserts farewell come Romans let us go,
A scourge for Rome that has deprest us so, Exeunt.

Actus quartus. Scena prima.
Enter Mark Anthony, Lepidus, Octauius, Flaccus, Senators. Octa. WHat helps
my Lords to ouerhale these care^?
What means or motions may these mischief end?
You see how Cynna that should succor Rome,
Has levied arms to bring a traitor in.
O worthless traitor, woe to thine and thee,
That thus disquieteth both Rome and us.

Anth: Octauius these are scourges for our sins,
These are but ministers to heap our plagues:
These mutinies are gentle means and ways,
Whereby the heavens our heavy errors charms,
Then with content and humbled eyes, behold
The crystal shining globe of glorious Jove:
And since we perish through our own misdeedes,
Go let us flourish in our fruitful prayers.

Lepid: Midst these confusions mighty men of Rome,
Why wast we out these troubles all in words,
Weep not your harms, but wend we straight so arms,
Lo Dis^ia spoyld, see Marius at our gate*
And shall we die like milksops dreaming thus?

Octa: A bootles war to see our ^o ^ntrey spoild.

Lep: Fruteles is dalliance whereas dangers be.

Anth: My Lord, may courage wait on conquered men?

Lep: I even in death most courage does appear.

Octa: Then wanting death I mean to seat me here,
Hoping that Consulls name and fear of laws,
Shall justify my conscience and my cause,
Enter ^ messenger* Now sirrah, what confused looks are these,
What tidings bring thou of dreriment?

Messen: My Lords, the Consul Cynna with his fre^^^
Have let in Marius by Via Appia,
Whose soldiers wast and murder all they meet,
Who with the Consul and his other friends
With expedition hastes to this place.

Anth: Then to the downfall of my happiness,
Then to the ruin of this City Rome.
But if mine inward ruth were laid in sight,
My streams of tears should drown my foes despite.

Octa: Courage Lord Anthony, if Fortune please,
She will and can these troubles soon appease.
But if her backward frowns approach us nie,
Resolve with us with honor for to die.

Lep: No storm of fate shall bring my sorrows down,
But if that Fortune list, why let her frown.

Anth: Where state's oppressed by cruel tyrants be,
Old Anthony, there is no place for thee.
Drum strike within: Hark, by this thundering noise of threatening drums,
Marius with all his faction hither comes.

Enter Marius, his Son, Cynna, Cethegus, Lectorius with soldiers: upon sight
of whom Mark Anthony presently flies. Octa: Then like a traitor he shall know
ere long,
In leuying arms he does his country wrong.

Marius pa: And have we got the goal of honor now,
And in despite of Consulls entered Rome?
Then rouse thee Marius, leave thy ruthful thoughts:
And for thy many toiles and cares sustaind,
Afflict thy foes with twice as many pains.
Go soldiers seek out Bebius and his friends,
Attilius, Munitorius with the rest,
Cut off their heads, for they did cross me once:
And if your care can compass my decree,
Remember that same fugitive Mark Anthony,
Whose fatal end shall be my fruitful peace.
I tell thee Cynna, nature armeth beasts
With just revenge, and lends in their kinds
Sufficient warlike weapons of defense:
If then by nature beasts revenge their wrong,
Both heavens and nature grant me vengeance now,
Yet whilst I live and suck this subtle air
That lends breathing coolenes to my lights,
The register of all thy righteous acts,
Thy pains, thy toiles, thy trauells for my sake,
Shall dwell by kind impressions in my heart,
And I with linkes of true unfeigned lone
Will lock these Roman favorites in my breast,
And live to hazard life for their relief.

Cyn: My Lord, your safe and swift return to Rome,
Makes Cynna fortunate and well appaid,
Who through the false suggestions of my foes,
Was made a coffer of a Consul here:
Lo where he sits commanding in his throue,
That wronged Marius, me, and all these Lords.

Mar: iu: To quite his love, Cynna let me alone,
How fare these Lords that lumping pouting proud
Imagine how to quell me with their looks.
No welcome sirs, is Marius thought so base?
Why stand you looking babies in my face?
Who welcomes me, him Marius makes his friend:
Who lowres on me, him Marius means to end.

Flaccus: Happy and fortunate thy return to Rome.

Lepidus: And long Marius live with fame in Rome.

Marius: I thank you courteous Lords that are so kind.

Mar: iu: But why endures your Grace that brauing mate
To sit and face us in his roabes of state.

Mar: pa: My son he is a Consul at the least,
And gravity becomes Octauius best.
But Cynna would in yonder empty seat,
You would for Marius freedom once entreat.

Cynna presses up, and Octauius staieth him. Octa: Auant thou traitor, proud
and insolent,
How dare thou press ne^e civil government.

Mar: Why Master Consul, are you grown so hot?
He have a present cooling card for you.
Be therefore well aduisde, and move me not:
For though by you I was exilde from Rome,
And in the desert from a Princes seat
Left to bewail ingratitudes of Rome.
Though I have known your thirshe throats have longd
To baine their selves in my distilling blood.
Yet Marius Si^s, has pity joined with power:
Lo here the Imperial Ensign which I wield,
That waueth mercy to my wishers well:
And more see here the dangerous trote of war,
That at the point is steeld with ghastly death.

Octa: Thou exile, threatnest thou a Consul then?
Lictors, go draw him hence: such brauing mates,
Are not to boast their arms in quiet states.

Marius: Go draw me hence. What no relent Octauius*

Mar: iu: My Lord what heart in durate with revenge,
Could leave this lossell, threatening murder thus?
Vouchsafe me leave to taint that traitors seat
With flowing streams of his contagious blood.

Octa: The fathers son, I know him by his talk,
That scolds in words when fingers cannot walk.
But Jove I hope will one day send to Rome
The blessed Patron of this Monarchy,
Who will revenge injustice by his sword*

Cynna: Such brauing hopes, such cursed arguments,
So strict command, such arrogant controwles.
Suffer me Marius, that am Consul now,
To do thee justice, and confound the wretch*

Mar: pat: Cynna, you know I am a private man,
That still submit my censures to your will.

Cynna: Then soldiers draw this traitor from the throne,
And let him die, for Cynna wills it so.

Mar: iu: I now my Cynna, noble Consul speaks,
Octauius, your checkes shall cost you dear.

Octa: And let me die for Cynna wills it so?
Is then the reverence of this robe contemnnd?
Are these associates of so small regard?
Why then Octauius willingly consents,
To entertain the sentence of his death.
But let the proudest traitor work his will,
I fear no strokes, but here will sit me still.
Since justice sleeps, since tyrants reign in Rome,
Octauius longs for death to die for Rome.

Cyn: Then strike him where he sits, then hale him hence.

A soldier stabs him, he is carried away. Octa: Heavens punish Cynnas pride and
thy offense.

Cynna: Now is he fallen that threatened Marius,
Now will I sit and plead for Marius.

Mar: pat: Thou do me justice Cynna, for you see
These peers of Rome have late exiled me.

Lepid: Your Lordship does injustice to accuse
Those who in your behalf did not offend.

Flacc. We grieve to see the aged Marius
Stand like a private man in view of Rome.

Cyn: Then bid him sit, and lo an empty place,
Revoke his exile, firm his government,
And so prevent your farther detriment,

Lepid: We will account both Marius and his friends,
His son and all his followers free in Rome:
And since we see the dangerous times at hand,
And here of Scillas confidence and have,
And know his hate and ranco^ to these Lords,
And him create for Consul to prevent
The policies of Scilla and his friends.

Cyn: Then both confirmd by state and full consent,
(...) The rods and axe to Marius I present,
And here inuest thee with the Consulls pall.

Flaccus: Long, fortunate and happy life betide
Old Marius in his seuenfold Consulship.

Mar: iu: And so let Marius live and govern Rome,
As cursed Scilla never look on Rome.

Marius pat: Then pla^de in Consuls throne, you Roman states
He takes his seat. Recald from banishment by your decrees,
Enstald in this imperial seat to rule,
Old Marius thanks his friends and favorites:
From whom this final favor he requires,
That seeing Scilla by his murthrous blade
Brought fierce seditions first to head in Rome,
And forced laws to banish innocents:
I crave by course of reason and desert,
That he may be proclaimd as erst was I,
A traitor and an enemy of Rome:
Let all his friends be banished out of town:
Then cutting off the branch where troubles spring,
Rome shall have peace and plenty in her walls.

Cynn: In equity it needs must be my friends,
That one be guilty of our common harms:
And since that Marius is accounted free,
Scilla with all his friends must traitors be.

Mar: iu: My fathers reasons Romans are of force:
For if you see and live not too secure,
You know that in so great a state as this,
Two mighty foes can never well agree.

Lepid: Then let us seek to please our Consul first,
And then prepare to keep the exile out.
Cynna, as Marius and these Lords agree,
Firm this Edict, and let it pass for me.

Cynnn: Then Romans, in the name of all this state,
I here proclaim and publish this decree:
That Scilla with his friends, allies and all*
Are banished exiles, traitors unto Rome.
And to extinguish both his name and state,
We will his house be raced to the ground,
His goods confiscate: this our censures is.
Lictors proclaim this in the market place,
And see it executed out of hand. Exit Lictor.

Mar: pat: Now see I Senators, the thought, the care,
The virtuous zeal that leads your toward minds,
To love your friends and watch your common good:
And now established Consul in this place,
Old Marius will foresee aduenient harms:
Scilla the scourge of Asia as we hear
Is pressed to enter Italy with sword,
He comes in pomp to triumph here in Rome,
But Senators you know the wavering wills,
Of foolish men I mean the common sort,
Who through report of innouatio^s,
Or flattering humors of well tempred tongues,
Will change and draw a second mischief on:
I like your care, and will my self apply
To aim and level at my countries weal.
To intercept these errors by advice,
My son young Marius, Cethegus and my friends,
Shall to Preneste to prevent and stop
The speedy purpose of our forward foe.
Mean while ourselves will fortify this town,
This beauty of the world, this maiden town,
Where streaming Tybris with a pleasant tide,
Leads out the stately buildings of the world.
Marius my hope, my son, you know your charge,
Take those Iberian legions in your train,
And we will spare some Cymbrians to your use,
Remember thou art Marius son, and dream
On naught but honor and a happy death.

Mar: iu: I go my Lord in hope to make the world
Report my service, and my duty too,
And that proud challenger of Asia,
Shall find that Marius son has force and wit.

Exit cum Cethego. Marius pat: Go thou as fortunate as Greeks to Troy
As glorious as Alcides in thy toiles,
As happy as Sertorius in thy fight,
As valiant as A chilles in thy might.
Go glorious, valiant, happy, fortunate,
As all those Greeks and him of Roman state.

Enter led in with soldiers Cornelia and Fului^. Corn: Traitors why drag you
thus a Princes wife,
As if that beauty were a thrall to fate.
Are Romans grown more barbarous than Greeks,
That hale more greater than Cassandra now?
The Macedonian Monarch was more kind,
That honored and relieud in warlike camp
Darius mother, daughters and his wife,
But you unkind to Roma^e Ladies now,
Perhaps as constant as the Asian Queens,
For they subdude had friendship in disgrace,
Where we unconquered live in woeful case.

Mar: What plaintiff pleas presents that Lady there^
Why soldiers, make you prisners here in Rome?

Soul: Dread Consulls, we have found Cornelia here,
And Scillas daughter posting out of town.

Marius: Ladies of worth, both beautiful and wise,
But ^ere allied unto my greatest foe:
Yet Marius mind that never meant disgrace,
More likes their courage than their c^mely face.
Are you Cornelia Madame, Scillas wife?

Corn: I am Cornelia Scillas wife: what there?

Marius: And is this Fuluia Scillas daughter too*

Fuluia: And this is Fuluia Scillas daughter too.

Mar: pat: Two welcome guests in whom the majesty
of my conceit and courage must consist:
What think you Senators and countrymen?
See here are two the fairest stars of Rome,
The dearest dainties of my warlike foe,
Whose lives upon your censures d^o consist.

Lepid: Dread Consul the continuance of their lives,
Shall egg on Scilla to a greater have.
And in bereauing of their vital breath,
Your grace shall force more fury from your foe:
Of these extremes we leave the choice to you.

Mar: Then think that some strange fortune shall ensue,

Full: Poor Fuluia, now thy happy days are done,
In steed of marriage pomp, the fatal lights
Of funerals must mask about thy bed.
Nor shall thy fathers arms with kind embrace
Hem in thy shoulders trembling now for fear.
I see in Marius looks such tragedies,
As fear my heart, and fountains fills mine eyes.

Corn: Fie Fuluia, shall thy fathers daughter faint
Before the threats of dangers shall approach?
Dry up those tears, and like a Roman maid,
Be bold and silent till our foe have said.

Marius: Cornelia wise unto my traitor foe?
What gadding mood has forced thy speedy slight,
To leave thy country, and forsake thy friends?

Corn: Accursed Marius, offspring of my pains,
Whose furious wrath has wrought thy countries woe*
What may remain for me or mine in Rome,
That see the tokens of thy tyrannies?
Vile monster, robbed of virtue, what revenge
Is this, to wreake thine anger on the walls?
To race our house, to banish all our friends,
To kill the rest, and captive us at last?
Think thou by barbarcos deeds to boast thy state,
Or spoiling Scilla to depresse his hate?
No Marius, but for every drop of blood
And inch of wrong he shall return thee two.

Flaccus: Madame, in danger wise dome does advise,
In humble terms to reconcile our foes.

Marius: She is a woman Flaccus, let her talk,
That breath forth bitter words in steed of blows,

Corn: And in regard of that unmodest man,
Thou should desist from outrage and revenge.

Lect: What, can your Grace indu^e these cursed scoffs!

Mar: Why my Lectorius, I have ever learnt,
That Ladies cannot wrong me with vpbraids.
Then let her talk, and my concealed hate,
Shall heap reuengement upon Scillas pate.

Fulu: Let feauers first afflict thy feeble age,
Let palsies make thy stubborn fingers faint,
Let humors streaming from thy moystned brains
With clouds of dymnes choke thy fretfull eyes,
Before these monstrous harms assail my sire,

Mar: Byr Lady Fuluia, you are gaily red,
Your mother well may boast you for her own,
For both of you have words and scoffs at will:
And since I like the compass of your wit,
My self will stand, and Ladies you shall sit:
And if you please to wade in farther words,
Lets see what brawles your memories affords.

Corn: Your Lordships passing mannerly iniest,
But that you may perceive we smell your drift,
We both will sit and countenance your shift.

Mar: Where constancy and beauty do consort,
There Ladies threatenings turned to merry sport.
How fare these beautiful, what well at ease?

Full: As ready as at first for to displease.
For full confirmd that we shall surely die,
We wait our ends with Roman constancy.

Mar: why think you Marius has confirmd your death!

Full: What other fruit may spring from tyrants hands!

Mar: In faith then Ladies, thus the matter stands,
Since you mistake my love and courtesy,
Prepare your selves, for you shall surely die.

Cornel: I Marius, now I know thou do not he*
And that thou may unto thy lasting blame,
Extinguish in our deaths thy wished fame.
Grant us this boon that making choice of death,
We may be freed from fury of thine ire,

Marius: An easy boon, Ladies I condescend,

Corn: Then suffer us in private chamber close
To meditate a day or two alone:
And tyrant if thou find us living then,
Commit us straight unto thy slaughtring men.

Marius: Ladies I grant, for Marius nill deny,
A suit so easy, and of such import:
For pity were that Dames of constancy,
Should not be agents of their misery.
Here he whispers Lectorius. Lectorius, hark, dispatch. Exit. Lector.

Corn: Lo Fuluia, now the latest doom is fixed,
And naught remains but constant Roman hearts,
To bear the brunt of yrksome furies spite,
Rouse thee my dear, and daunt those faint conceits,
That trembling stand aghast at bitter death:
Bethink thee now that Scilla was thy sire,
Whose courage heaven nor fortune could abate.
Then like the offspring of fierce Scillas house,
Pass with the thrice renowned Phrigian Dame,
As to thy marriage, so unto thy death:
For naught to wretches is more sweet than death.

Full: Madam confirmd as well to die as live,
Fuluia awaiteth nothing but her death.
Yet had my father known the course of change,
Or seen our loss by luckie augurie,
This tyrant nor his followers had lived,
To joy the ruin of fierce Scillas house.

Mar: But Lady, they that dwell on fortunes call,
No sooner rise, but subject are to fall.

Full: Marius I doubt not but our constant ends,
Shall make thee wail thy tyrants government.

Marius: When tyrants rule does breed my care and woe
Then will I say two Ladies told me so.
But here comes Lectorius,
Now my Lord, have you brought those things.

Lector: I have noble Consul.

Mar: Now Ladies, you are resolute to die.

Corn: I Marius, for terror cannot daunt us:
Tortors were framde to dread the baser eye,
And not t'appall a princely majesty.

Marius: And Marius lives to triumph ore his foes,
That train where warlike troops amidst the plains,
And are inclosde and hemd with shining arms,
Not to appa^ such princely Majesty.
Virtue sweet Ladies is of more regard
In Marius mind where honor is inthronde,
Than Rome or rule of Roman Emperie.
Here he puts chains about their necks: The bands that should combine your
snow white wrests,
Are these which shall adorn your milk white necks:
The private cel^s where you shall end your lives,
Is Italy, is Europe, nay the world:
Th'Lux^nian sea, and fierce Sicilian Gulf,
The river Ganges and Hydaspis stream,
Sha'l level lie, and smoothe as crystal ice:
Whilst Fuluia and Cornelia pass thereon:
The soldiers that should guard you to your deaths,
Shall be five thousand gallant youths of Rome,
In purple roabes cross bard with pales of gold,
Mounted on warlike coursers for the field,
Fet from the mountain tops of Cortia,
Or bred in hills of bright Sardinia,
Who shall conduct and bring you to your Lord,
I unto Scilla L^dies shall you go,
And tell him Marius ho^ds within his hands,
Ho^^r for Ladies, for Ladies rich reward,
But as for Silla and for his compeeres
Who dare against Marius vaunt their gold^n c^ests,
Tell him for them old Marius holds revenge,
And in his hands both triumphs life and death.

Corn: Does Marius use with glorious words to jest,
And mock his captives with these glosing terms?

Mar: No Ladies, Marius has sought for honor with his sword,
And holds disdain to triumph in your falls.
Live Cornelia, live fair and fairest Fuluia:
If you have done or wrought me injury,
Scilla shall pay it through his misery.

Fuluia: So gracious (famous Consul) are thy words,
That Rome and we shall celebrate thy worth,
And Scilla shall confess himself overcome.

Corn: If Ladies prayers or tears may move the heavens,
Scilla shall vow himself old Marius friend.

Mar: Ladies for that I naught at all regard,
Scilla's my foe, I Will triumph over him,
For other conquest glory does not win.
Therefore come on, that I may send you unto Scilla, Exeunt

Enter a clown drunk with a pint of wine in his hand, and two or three
soldiers. 1 soul: Sirrah, dally not with us, you know where he is.


Clown: O sir, a quart is a quart in any man's purse, and drink is drink, and
can my master live without his drink I pray you?


2 soul: You have a master then sirrah?


Clown: Have I master thou scondrell? I have an Orator to my master, a wise
man to my master. But fellows, I must make a parenthesis of this pint pot, for
words make men dry: now by my troth I drink to Lord Anthony.


3 soul: Fellow soldiers, the weakness of his brain has made his tongue walk
largely, we shall have some novelties by and by.


Clown: Oh most surpassing wine, thou marow of the vine,
More welcome unto me, than whips to scholars be,
Thou art and ever was a means to mend an ass,
Thou make some to sleep, and many mo to weep,
And some be glad and merry, with heigh down derry, derry.
Thou make some to stumble, and many mo to fumble:
And me have pinkie nine, more brave and jolly wine:
What need I praise thee mo, for thou art good with heigh ho

3 soul: If wine then be so good, I pree thee for thy part,
Tell us where Lord Anthony is, and thou shall have a quart.

Clow. First shall the snow be black, and pepper lose his smack
And stripes forsake my back, first merry drunk with sack,
I will go boast and tracke, and all your costards crack,
Before I do the knacke shall make me sing alack:
Alack the old man is weary, for wine has made him merry: with a heigh ho.

1 soul: I pre thee leave these rymes, and tell us where thy master is.


Clown: Faith where you shall not be unless ye go with me. But shall I tell
them so? O no sir, no, no, no, the man has many a foe, as far as I do
know: you do not flour me I trow. See how this licor fumes, and how my force
presumes. You would know where Lord Anthony is? I perceive you. Shall I say he
is in yond farm house? I deceive you. Shall I tell you this wine is for him?
the gods forfend, and so I end. Go fellow fighters there is a bob for ye.


2 soul: My masters, let us follow this clown, for questionles this grave
orator is in yonder farm house. But who comes yonder?


Enter old Anthony. Anth: I wonder why my peasant stays so long,
And with my wonder hastes on my woe,
And with my woe I am assaild with fear,
And by my fear await with faintful breath
The final period of my pains by death.

1 soul: Yonds the man we seek for (soldiers) vnsheath your swords, and make
a riddance of Marius ancient enemy.


Clown: Master fly, fly, or else you shall die: a plague on this wine has
made me so fine, and will you not be gone, then I Will leave you alone, and sleep
upon your woe, with a lamentable heigh ho. Exit.


Anth: Betrayed at last by witles oversight,
Now Anthony, prepare thy self to die:
Lo where the monstrous ministers of wrath
Menace thy murder with their naked swords.

2 soul: Anthony well met, the Consul Marius with other confederate Senators,
have adjudged thee death, therefore prepare thy self, and think we favor thee
in this little protraction.


Anth: Immortal powers that know the painful cares,
That weight upon my poor distressed heart,
O bend your brows and leuill all your looks
Of dreadful awe upon these daring men.
And thou sweet niece of Atlas on whose lips
And tender tongue, the pliant Muses sit,
Let gentle course of sweet aspiring speech,
Let honnie flowing terms of weary woe,
Let fruitful figures and delightful lines
Enforce a spring of pity from their eyes,
Amase the murthrous passions of their minds,
That they may favor woeful Anthony.
Oh countrymen what shall become of Rome,
When reverend duty droopeth through disgrace?
Oh Countrymen, what shall become of Rome,
When woeful nature widow of her joys,
VVeepes on our walls to see her laws deprest?
Oh Romans has not Anthonies discourse,
Sealed up the Mouths of false seditious men,
Assoild the doubts and queint controlls of power;
Releeud the mournful matrone with his pleas?
And will you seek to murder Anthony?
The Lions brook with kindness their relief,
The sheep reward the shepherd with their fleece:
Yet Romans seek to murder Anthony.

1 soul: Why what enchanting terms of art are these?
That force my heart to pity his distress.

2 soul: His action, speech, his favor, and his grace,
My rancor rage and rigor does deface.

3 soul: So sweet his words that now of late me seems
His art does draw my soul from out my lips.

Anth: What envious eyes reflecting naught but rage,
What barbarous heart refresht with naught but blood,
That rents not to behold the sensles trees
In doaly season drooping without leaves?
The shepherd sighs upon the barrain hills
To see his bleating lambs with faintfull looks.
Behold the valleys robbed of springing flowers,
That whilom wont to yield them yearly food.
Even meanest things exchangd from former state,
The virtuous mind with some remorse does mate.
Can then your eyes with thundering threats of rage,
Cast furious gleames of anger upon age?
Can then your hearts with furies mount so hie,
As they should harm the Roman Anthony?
I far more kind than sensles tree have le^t
A kindly ^ap to our declining (...),
And like a careful shepherd have foreseen
The heavy dangers of this City Rome,
And made the citizens the happy flock
Whom I have fed with counsels and advice,
But now those locks that for their reverend white,
Surpass the down on Aesculapius chin:
But now that tongue whose terms and fluent style
For number past the hoasts of heavenly fires:
But now that head within whose (...) brains
The Queen of flowring eloquence did ^w^h:
Enter a Captain. These locks, this tongue, this head, the life and all,
To please a tyrant traitrously must fall.

Capt: Why how now soldiers is he living yet?
And will you be bewitched with his words?
Then take this fee false Orator from me, stab him.
Elysium best beseemes thy faintfull lims.

Anth: Oh blisfull pain, now Anthony must die,
Which serud and loud Rome and her Emperie. moritur

Capt: Go curtall off that neck with present stroke,
And straight present it unto Marius.

1 soul: Even in this head did all the Muses dwell:
The bees that sat upon the Grecians lips,
Distild their honnie on his tempred tongue.

2 soul: The crystal dew of fair Castalian springs,
With gentle floatings trickled on his brains:
The Graces kissed his kind and courteous brows,
Apollo gave the beauties of his harp,
Enter Lectorius pensive. And melodies unto his pliant speech.

Cap: Leave these presumptuous praises, countrymen,
And see Lectorius pensive where he comes,
Lo here my Lord the head of Anthony,
See here the guerdon fit for Marius foe,
Whom dread Apollo prosper in his rule.

Lector: Oh Romans, Marius sleeps among the dead,
And Rome laments the loss of such a friend.

Cap: A sudden and a woeful chance my Lord,
Which we intentive feign would understand.

Le: Though swollen with sighs my heart for sorrow burst,
And tongue with tears and plaints be choked up,
Yet will I furrow forth with forced breath
A speedy passage to my pensive speech.
Our Consul Marius, worthy soldiers,
Of late within a pleasant plot of ground,
Sat down for pleasure ^ere a crystal spring,
Accompanied with many Lords of Rome:
Bright was the day, and on the spredding trees
The frolic citizens of forest lung
Their lays and merry notes on pearching boughs:
When suddenly appeared in the East,
Seven mighty Eagles with their tallents fierce,
Who wauing often about our Consulls head,
At last with hideous cry did s^are away.
When suddenly old Marius all aghast,
With reverent smile determinde with a sigh
The doubtful silence of the standers by.
Romans (said he) old Marius now must die.
These seven fair Eagles, birds of mighty Jove,
That at my birth day on my cradle sat,
Now at my last day arm me to my death:
And lo I feel the deadly pangs approach.
What should I more? in brief, with many prayers
For Rome, his son, his goods and lands disposd,
Our worthy Consul to our wonder did.
The City is amazde, for Scilla hasts
To enter Rome with fury, sword, and fire.
Go, place that head upon the Capitol,
And to your wards, for dangers are at hand. Exit.

Capt: Had we foreseen this luckles chance before,
Old Anthony had liude and breathed yet. Exeunt.

Actus quartus.
A great skirmish in Rome and long, some slain. At last enter Scilla
triumphant with Pompey, Metellus, Citizens, soldiers. Scilla: Now Romans
after all these mutinies,
Seditions, murders, and conspiracies,
Imagine with impartial hearts at last
What fruits proceed from these contentious brawles*
Your streets, where erst the fathers of your state
In robes of purple walked up and down,
Are strewed with mangled members, streaming blood.
And why? the reasons of this ruthful wrack,
Are your seditious innouations,
Your fickle minds inclinde to foolish change.
Ungrateful men, whilst I with tedious pain
In Asia sealed my duty with my blood,
Making the fierce Dardanians faint for fear,
Spredding my cullers in Galatia,
Dipping my sword in the Enetans blood,
And foraging the fields of Phocida.
You called my foe from exile with his friends,
You did proclaim me traitor here in Rome,
You racde my house, you did deface my friends,
But brauling wolves, you cannot byte the moon,
For Scilla lives so forward to revenge,
As woe to those that sought to do me wrong.
I now am entered Rome in spite of force,
And will so hamper all my cursed foes,
As be he Tribune, Consul, Lord or Knight
That hates Scilla, let him look to die.
And first to make an entrance to mine ire,
Bring me that traitor Carbo out of hand.
Bring in Carbo bound.
Pomp. Oh Scilla, in revenging injuries,
Inflict the pain where first offense did spring,
And for my sake establish peace in Rome,
And pardon these repentant Citizens.

Scilla: Pompey, I love thee Pompey, and consent
To thy request, but Romans have regard,
Least ouer-reaching in offense again,
I load your shoulders with a double pain.
Exeunt Citizens. But Pompey see where jolly Carbo comes
^ooting it featly, like a mighty man,
What no (...) sirrah to your Lord?
My Lord? No Scilla, he that thrice has borne
The ^ame of Consul scorns to stoop to him,
Whose heart does hammer naught but mutinies.

Pomp: And does your Lordship then disdain to stoop

Carbo: I to mine equal Pompey as thou art.

Scilla: Thine equal villain, no he is my friend,
Thou but a poor anatomy of bones,
Casde in a knauish tawny withred skin:
VVilt thou not stoop? art thou so stately then?

Carbo: Scilla, I honor gods, not foolish men.

Sci: Then bend that wythered bough that will not break
And soldiers cast him down before my feet: They throw him down.
Now prating sir, my foot upon thy neck,
He be so bold to give your Lordship check.
Believe me soldiers, but I ouer-reach,
Old Carbos neck at first was made to stretch.

Carbo: Though body bend, thou tyrant most unkind,
Yet never shall thou humble Carbos mind.

Scilla: oh sir, I know for all your warlike pith,
A man may ma^^e your worship with a with.
You sirrah levied arms to do me wrong:
You brought your legions to the gates of Rome:
You fought it out in hope that I would faint.
But sirrah now betake you to your books,
Entreat the God to save your sinful soul.
For why this carcass must in my behalf
Go feast the ravens that serve our augures turn.
Me thinks I see already how they wish,
To bait their beakes in such a jolly dish.

Carbo: Scilla thy threats and scoffs amate me not:
I pre thee let thy murthrers have me hence,
For Carbo rather likes to die by sword,
Than live to be a mocking stock to thee.

Scilla: The man has have good soldiers take him hence,
It would be good to alter his pretense.
But be aduisde, that when the fool is slain,
You part the head and body both in twain.
I know that Carbo longs to know the cause,
And shall: thy body for the ravens, thy head for daw^.

Carbo: O matchles ruler of our Capitol,
Behold poor Rome with grave and piteous eye,
Ful-fild with wrong and wretched tyranny.

Exit Carbo cum militibus. Enter Scipio and Norbanus, Publius Lentulus. Seill:
Tut the proud man's prayer will never pierce the sky.
But whether press these mincing Senators?

Norbanus: We press with prayers, we come with mour^ full teacer*
Entreating Scilla by those holy bands
That linkes fair Juno with her thundering Jove,
Even by the bounds of hospitality,
To pity Rome afflicted through thy wrath.
Thy soldiers (Scilla) murder innocents.
O whither will thy lawles surie stretch,
If little ruth ensue thy countries harms.

Scilla: Gay words Narbonus, full of eloquence,
Accompanied with action and conceit.
But I must teach thee judgment therewithal.
Dare thou approach my presence that have borne
Thine arms inspight of Scilla and his friends?
I tell thee foolish man thy judgment wanted
In this presumptuous purpose that is past:
And loytering scholar, since you fail in art,
I Will learn you judgment shortly to your smart*.
Dispatch him soldiers, I must see him die.
And you Carinna, Carbos ancient friend,
Shall follow straight your heedles General.
And Scipio were it not I loud thee well.
Thou should accompany these slaves to hell:
But get you gone, and if you love your self, Exit Scipio,

Carinna: Pardon me Scilla, pardon gentle Scilla.

Scilla: Sirrah, this gentle name was coynd too late,
And shadowed in the shrowds of biting hate.
Dispatch: why so, good fortune to my friends,
As for my foes, even such shall be their ends.
Conueigh them hence Metellus, gentle Metellus,
Fetch me Sertorius from Iberia,
In doing so, thou stand me in stead,
For sore I long to see the traitors head.

Metell: I go confirmd to conquer him by sword,
or in the exployt to hazard life and all.

Scilla: Now Pompey let me see, those Senators
Are dangerous stops of our pretended state,
And must be curtald least they grow too proud,
I do proscribe just forty Senators,
Which shall be leaders in my tragedy.
And for our Gentlemen are over proud,
Of them a thousand and six hundredth die,
A goodly army meet to conquer hell.
Soldiers perform the course of my decree,
Their friends my foes, their foes shall be my friends,
Go sell their goods by trumpet at your wills,
Mean while Pompey shall see and Rome shall rue,
The miseries that shortly shall ensue.

Exit. Alarm skirmish a retreat, enter young Marius upon the walls of
Preneste with some soldiers all in black and wonderful mellancoly. Marius:
Oh endless course of needy man's avail,
What silly thoughts, what simple policies
makes man presume upon this traitorous life?
Have I not seen the depth of sorrow once,
And then again have kissed the Queen of chance,
Oh Marius thou Tilli^ius and thy friends,
Have seen thy foe discomfetted in fight.
But now the stars have formde my fin^ll harms,
My father Marius lately dead in Rome,
My foe with honor does triumph in Rome,
My friends are dead and banished from Rome,
I Marius father friends more blessed then thee:
They dead, I live, I thralled they are free,
Here in Preneste am I cooped up,
Amongst a troop of hunger sta^ued men.
Set to prevent false Scillaes fierce approach.
But now exempted both of life and all.
Well Fortune since thy fleeting change, has cast
Pore Marius from his hopes and true desiers,
My resolution shall exceed thy power,
Thy colored wings steeped in purple blood,
Thy blinding wreath distainde in purple blood,
Thy royal Robes washed in my purple blood
Shall witness to the world thy thirst of blood,
And when the tyrant Scilla shall expect
To see the son of Marius stoop for fear,
Then then, Oh then my mind shall well appear,
That scorn my life and hold mine honor dear.
Alarm aretreat. Hark how these murtherous Roman viperlike,
Seek to betray their fellow Citizens,
Oh wretched world from whence with speedy slight,
True love, true zeal, true honor late is fled.

Sold: What makes my Lord so careless and secure,
To leave the breach and here lament alone?

Mar: Not fear my friend for I could never fly,
But studdy how with honor for to die,
I pray thee call the cheifest Citizens.
I must advise them in a weighty cause,
Here shall they meet me and until they come,
I will go view the danger of the breach.

Exit Marius and the soldiers. Enter with drum and soldiers Lucretius with
other Romans as Tuditanus etc. Lucretius: Say Tuditanus, did thou ever see
So desperate defense as this has been:

Tudit: As in Numidia Tigers wanting food,
Or as in Libia Lions full of ire,
So fa^e these Romans on Preneste walls.

Lucret: Their valor Tuditanus and resist,
The man like fight of younger Marius,
Makes me amazd to see their miseries,
And pity them although they be my foes*
What said I foes? O Rome with ruth I see
Thy state consumde through folly and dissension.
Well sound a p^rle, I will see if words
Can make them yield, which will not fly for strokes?

Sound a parle, Marius upon the walls with the Citizens. Marius: What seeks this
Roman warrior at our hands?

Lucr: That seeks he Marius, that he wishes thee:
An humble heart, and then a happy peace.
Thou see thy fortunes are deprest and down,
Thy vittels spent, thy soldiers weak with want,
The breach laid open ready to assault,
Now since thy means and maintenance are done,
Yield Marius, yield, Prenestians be aduisde,
Lucretius is aduisde to favor you.
I pre thee Marius mark my last advice.
Relent in time, let Scilla be thy friend:
So thou in Rome may lead a happy life,
And those with thee shall pray for Marius still.

Mar: Lucretius, I consider on thy words,
Stay there a while thou shall have answer straight.

Lucretius: Apollo grant that my persuasions may,
Preserve these Roman soldiers from the sword.

Marius: My friends and citizens of Preneste town,
You see the wayward working of our stars,
Our hearts confirmd to fight, our victuals spent.
If we submit, its Scilla must remit,
A tyrant, traitor, enemy to Rome,
Whose heart is guarded still with bloody thoughts.
These flattring vows Lucretius here auowes,
Are pleasing words to color poisoned thoughts*
What will you live with shame, or die with fame?

1 Cit: A famous death, my Lord delights us most.

2 Cit: We of thy faction (Marius) are resolud
To follow thee in life and death together.

Marius: Words full of worth, beseeming noble minds
The very Balsamum to mend my woes.
Oh countrymen, you see Campania spoild,
A tyrant threatening mutinies in Rome,
A world dispoyld of virtue, faith and trust.
If then no peace, no liberty, no faith,
Conclude with me, and let it be no life.
Live not to see your tender infants slain,
These stately towers made level with the land,
This body mangled by our enemies sword:
But full resolud to do as Marius does,
Vnsheath your ponyards, and let every friend,
Bethink him of a souldierlike farewell.
Sirrah, display my standerd on the walls,
And I will answer yond Lucretius,
Who loves Marius, now must die with Marius*

Luer: What answer will your Lordship then return v^*

Marius: Lucretius, we that know what Scilla is,
How dissolute, how trothles and corrupt:
In brief conclude to die before we yield:
But so to die (Lucretius mark me well)
As loath to see the fury of our swords
Should murder friends and Roman citizens.
Pie countrymen, what fury does infect
Your warlike bosoms, that were wont to fight
With foreign foes, not with Campanian friends?
Now unadvised youth must counsel eld:
For governance is banished out of Rome.
Woe to that bough from whence these bloomes are sprung,
VVoe to that Aetna, vomiting this fire:
VVoe to that brand, consuming Countries weal:
Woe to that Scilla, careless and secure,
That gapes with murder for a Monarchy.
Go second Brutus with a Roman mind,
And kill that tyrant: and for Marius sake
Pity the guiltles wives of these your friends,
Preserve their weeping infants from the sword,
Whose fathers seal their honors with their bloods.
Farewell Lucretius, first I press in place stab.
To let thee see a constant Roman die,
Prenestians, lo a wound, a fatal wound,
The pain but small, the glory passing great. again.
Prenestians see a second stroke: why so.
I feel the dreeping dimnes of the night,
Closing the couerts of my careful eyes.
Follow me friends: for Marius now must die
With fame, in spite of Scillas tyranny. moritur.

1 Cit: We follow thee our chiefetaine even in death,
Our town is thine Lucretius: but we pray
For mercy for our children and our wives. moritur.

2 Cit: O save my form Lucretius, let him live, moritur.

Lucretius: A wondrous and bewitched constancy,
Beseeming Marius pride and haughty mind,
Come let us charge the breach, the town is ours
Both male and female put them to the sword:
So please you Scilla, and fulfill his word. Exeunt

A little skirmish, a retreat: enter in royalty Lucretius. Lucret: Now Romans
we have brought Preneste low,
And Marius sleeps amidst the dead at last.
So then to Rome my countrymen with joy,
Where Scilla waights the tidings of our fight,
Those prisners that are taken, see forth with
With warlike iauelins you put them to death.
Come let us march, see Rome in sight my hearts,
Where Scilla waights the tidings of our war.

Enter Scilla, Valerius Flaccus: Lepidus, Pompey, Citizens Guard: Scilla seated
in his roabes of state is saluted by the Citizens, etc. Flascus: Romans you
know, and to your greefes have seen
A world of troubles hatched here at home,
Which through prevention being welnigh crossed
By worthy Scilla and his warlike band:
I Consul with these fathers think it meet
To fortify our peace and Cities weal,
To name some man of worth that may supply
Dictators power and place, whose majesty
Shall cross the courage of rebellious minds,
What think you Romans, will you condescend?

Scilla: Nay Flaccus, for their profits they must yield,
For men of mean condition and conceit
Must humble their opinions to their lords,
And if my friends and Citizens consent
Since I am borne to manage mighty things,
I will (though loath) both rule and govern them.
I speak not this as though I wish to reign,
But for to know my friends: and yet again
I merit Romans ^arre more grace than this.

Flaccus: I countrymen, if Scillas power and mind^
If Scillas virtue courage and device,
If Scillas friends and fortunes merit fame,
(...) should (...) Dictators name.

Pompey: What think you Citizens, why stand ye mute^punc;
Shall Scilla be Dictator here in Rome?

Citizens: By full consent Scilla shall be Dictator.

Flaccus: Then in the name of Rome I here present
The rods and axes into Scillas hand,
And fortunate prove Scilla our Dictator.

Trumpets sound: cry within Scilla Dictator. Scilla: My fortunes Flaccus
cannot be impeacht,
For at my birth the plannets passing kind
Could entertain no retrograde aspects.
And that I may with kindness quite their love,
My countrymen I will prevent the cause,
Against all the false encounters of mishap.
You name me your Dictator, but prefixe
No time, no course, but give me leave to rule,
And yet exempt me not from your revenge:
Thus by your plesures being (...) aloft,
Straight by your furies I should quickly fall.
No Citizens, who reads Scillas mind,
Must form my titles in another kind.
Either let Scilla be Dictator ever,
Or flatter Scilla with these titles never.

Citizens: Perpetual be thy glory and renown,
Perpetual Lord Dictator shall thou be.

Pompey: Hereto the Senate frankly does agree.

Scilla: Then so shall scilla reign you Senators,
Then so shall Scilla rule you Citizens:
As Senators and Citizens that please me
Shall be my friends, the rest cannot disease me*
Enter Lucretius with soldiers. But see whereas Lucretius is returnde.
Welcome brave Roman where is Marius?
Are these Prenestians put unto the sword.

Lucre: The City noble Scilla raced is,
And Marius dead not by our swords my Lord,
But with more constancy than Cato died,

Scilla: What constancy and but a very boy,
Why then I see he was his fathers son,
But let us have this constancy describde.

Lucr: After our fearce assaults, and their resist,
Our seige, their salying out to stop our trench:
Labor and hunger rayning in the town,
The younger Marius on the Cities wall,
Vouchsafte an interparle at the last:
Wherein with constancy and courrage too,
He boldly armed his friends him self to death:
And spreading of his colors on the wall,
For answer said he could not brook to yield,
Or trust a tyrant such as Scilla was.

Scilla: What did the bransicke boy vpbraid me so?
But let us hear the rest Lucretius.

Lucre: And after great perswsasions to his friends
And worthy resolution of them all:
He first did sheath his poniard in his breast,
And so in order dyed all the rest.

Scilla: Now by my sword this was a worthy jest,
Yet silly boy I needs must pity thee,
Whose noble mind could never mated be,
Believe me countrymen a sudden thought,
A sudden change in Scilla now has wrought.
Old Marius and his son were men of name,
Nor Fortunes laughes, nor lowers their minds could tame,
And when I count their fortunes that are past,
I see that death confirmde their fames at last.
Then he that strives to manage mighty things,
Amidst his triumphs gains a troubled mind.
The greatest hope the greater harm it bringes:
And pore men in content their glory find.
If then content be such a pleasant thing,
Why leave I country life to live a king?
Yet Kings are Gods and make the proudest stoop,
Ye but themselves are still pursude with ha^^
And men were made to mount and then to droope,
Such chances wait upon incertaine fate,
That where she kisseth once she quelleth twice,
Then who so lives content is happy wise.
What motion moves this Philosophy?
Oh Scilla see the Ocean ebbs and floats.
The springtime wanes when winter draws nie.
I, these are true and most assured notes.
Inconstant chance such tickle turns has le^t.
As who so fears no fall, must seek content.

Flaceus: Whilst grauer thoughts of honor should allure thee
What makes scilla muse and mutter thus?

scilla: I that have past amidst the mighty troops
Of armed legions through a world of war,
Do now bethink me Flaccus on my chance,
How I alone where many men were slain,
In spite of Fate am come to Rome again,
And ^o I wield the reuer end styles of state,
Yea, Scilla with a beck could break thy neck,
What Lo^^ of Rome has d^r^e as much as I?
Yet Flaccus kn^wst thou not that I must die?
The laboring sisters on the weary Loombs,
Have drawn my webb of life at length, I know:
And men of wit must think upon their tombs.
For beasts wit careless steps to (...):
Where men whose thoughts and honors, clime on hie,
Living with fame, must learn, with fame to die.

Pomp: What le^s my Lord in governing this state,
To live in rest, and die with honor too?

ssilla: What lets me Pompey? why my courteous friend,
Can he remain secure that weilds a charge?
Or think of wit when ^lattrers do commend?
Or be aduisde that careless runs at large?
^o Pompey, honnie words makes foolish minds,
And po^re the greatest wit with error blindes.
(...) I murdered Ant^o^^e thy friend,
Romans: some here have lost at my command
Their Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, and Allies,
And think you Scilla thinking these misdeeds,
Be thinks not on your grudges and mislike?
Yes Countrymen I bear them still in mind.
Then Pompey were I not a silly man,
To leave my Rule and trust these Romans than?

Pompey: Your Grace has small occasions of (...),
Nor seek these Citizens for your disclaim.

scilla: But Pompey now these reaching plumes of pride,
That mounted up my fortunes to the Clouds,
By grave conceits shall straight be laid aside,
And scilla thinks of far more simple shrowds.
For having tried occasion in the throne,
I Will see if she dare frown when state is gone.
Lo senators, the man that sat aloft,
Now deignes to give inferiors highest place.
Lo here the man whom Rome repined often,
A private man, content to brook disgrace,
Romans, lo here the axes, rods and all,
I Will master fortune, least she make me thrall.
Now who so list accuse me, tell my wrongs,
Vpbraid me in the presence of this state.
Is none these ^olly Citizens among,
That will accuse or say I am ingrate.
Then will I say and boldly boast my chances,
That naught may force the man whom Fate aduances.

Flaccus: what means scilla in this sullen mood,
To leave his titles on the sudden thus?

scilla: Consul I mean with calm and quiet mind,
To pass my days while happy death I find.

Pomp: What greater wrong, than leave thy country so?

scilla: Both it and life must scilla leave in time.

Cit: Yet during life have care of Rome and us.

scilla: O wanton world that flatterst in thy prime,
And breathest balm and poison mixed in one.
See ^ow these wavering Romans wished my reign,
That why lom sought and sought to have me slain,
My Countrymen this City wants no store
Of Fathers warriors to supply my room,
So grant me peace and I will die for Rome.

Enter two Burgers to them Poppey and Curtall. Curtall: These are very
indiscreet counsels neighbor Poppey, and I will follow your misaduisement.


Poppey: I tell you goodman Curtall the wenche has wrong, oh vain world, oh
foolish men, could a man in nature cast a wench down, and disdain in nature
to lift her up again? could he take away ^ir dishonestie without bouncing up
the banes of matrimony? oh learned Poet well did thou write ^ustian verse.

These maids are dawes that go to the laws and a babe in the belly.


Cur: Tut man it is the way the world must follow, for maids must be kind, good
husbands to find.


Poppey: But mark the fierce if they swell before, it will grieve them sore.
but see yondes Master scilla, faith a pretty fellow is a.


Scilla: what seeks my countrymen? what would my friends?


Curt: Nay sir your kind words shall not serve the turn, why think you to
thrust your soldiers into our kindred with your courtesies sir.


Poppey: I tell you Master scilla my neighbor will have the Law, he had the
right he will have the wrong for therein dwells the Law.


Consul: what desires these men of Rome?


Cur: Neighbor sharpen the edge tole of your wits upon the whetstone of
indiscretion that your words may shave like the rasers of Palermo, you have
learning with ignorance therefore speak my tale.


Popp: Then worshipful Master Scilla, be it known unto you, that my neighbors
daughter Doritie was a maid of restoritie, fair fresh and fine as a merry cup
of wine. Her eyes like two potcht eggs, great and goodly her legs, but mark
my doleful dittie, alas for woe and pity: a soldier of yours upon a bed of
flowers, gave her such a fall, as she lost maidenhead and all. And thus in
very good time I end my rudefull time.


Scilla: And what of this my friend, why seek you me,
Who have resignd my titles and my state
To live a private life as you do now?
Go move the Consul Flaccus in this cause,
Who now has power to execute the laws.

Curtall: And are you no more Master dix cator, nor G^neralitie of the
soldiers?


Scilla: My powers do cease, my titles are resignd,


Curtall: Have you signd your titles? O base mind, that being in the powles
steeple of honor, have cast thy self into the sink of simplicity. Fie beast,
were I a king, I would day by day suck up white bread and milk, and go a
ietting in a ^acket of si^ke, my meat should be the curds, my drink should be
the whey, and I would have a mincing less to love me every day.


Poppey: Nay goodman Curtall, your discretions are very simple, let me cramp
him with a reason. Sirrah, whether is better good ale or small beer? Alas see
his implicitie that cannot answer me: why I say ale.


Curtall: And so say I neighbor.


Poppey: Thou have reason, ergo say I it is better be a King than a clown. Faith
master Scilla, I hope a man may now call ye knave by authority.


Scilla: With what impatience h^are I these vpbraides
That whilome plagude the least offense with death.
Oh Scilla these are stales of desteny,
By some vpbraids to try thy constancy.
My friends these scorns of yours perhaps will move,
The next Dictator shun to yield his state,
For fear he find as much as Scilla does.
But Flaccus, to prevent their further wrong,
Vouchsafe some Lictor may attach the man,
And do them right that thus complain abuse.

Flaccus: Sirrah, go you and bring the soldier
That has so loosly leant to lawles lust,
We will have means sufficient be assurd
To cool his heat, and make the wanton chaste.

Curtall: We thank your mastership: come neighbor, let us iog, faith this
news will set my daughter Dorothie a gog. Exeunt cum Lictore.


Scilla: Grave Senators and Romans, now you see
The humble bent of Scillas changed mind.
Now will I leave you Lords, from courtly train
To dwell content amidst my country cave,
Where no ambitious humors shall approach*
The quiet silence of my happy sleep.
Where no delicious Iouisance or toys,
Shall tickle with delight my tempered ears,
But wearying out the lingering day with toil,
Tyring my veins and furrowing of my soul.
The silent night with slumber stealing on
Shall lock these careful closets of mine eyes.
Oh had I known the height of happiness,
Or bent mine eyes upon my mother earth:
Long since O Rome had Scilla with rejoice
Forsaken arms to lead a private life.

Flaccus: But in this humblenes of mind my Lord,
Whereas experience prooude and Art do meet.
How happy were these fair Italian fields,
If they were graced with so sweet a sun:
Then I for Rome and Rome with me requires,
That Scilla will abide and govern Rome.

Scilla: O Flaccus, if The Arabian Phoenix strive
By natures warning to renew her kind,
When soaring nie the glorious eye of heaven,
She from her cinders does revive her sex.
Why should not Scilla learn by her to die?
That carst have been the Phoenix of this land.
And drawing near the sunshine of content,
Perish obscure to make your glories grow.
For as the higher trees do shield the shrubs,
From posting Phlegons warmth and breathing fire,
So mighty men obscure each others fame,
And make the best deseruers fortunes game.
Enter Genius. But ah what sudden fu^es do affright?
What apparitious fantasies are these?
Oh let me rest sweet Lords, for why me thinks,
Some fatal spells are sounded in mine ears.

Genius: Subsequitur tua ^ors: priuari lumine Scillam,
Numina Parcarum ^am fera precipiunt.
Precipiunt fera iam Parcarum numina, Scillam,
Lumine priuari, mors tua subsequitur,
Elysium petis, o foelix! and fatidici astri:
Praescius Heroas, o petis innumeros!
Innumeros petis o Heroas! praescius astri
Fatidici: and foelix, o petis Elisium!

Euanescit subito. Scilla: Ergone post dulces annos properantia fata?
Ergone iam tenebrae pramia lucis erunt?
Attamen, vt vitae fortunam gloria mortis
Vincat, in extremo funere cantet olor.

Pom: How fares my Lord? what dreadful thoughts are these
What doubtful answers on a sudden thus?

Scilla: Pompey the man that made the world to stoop,
And ^ettered fortune in the chains of power,
Must droope and draw the Chariot of Fate
Along the darksome banks of Acheron.
The heavens have warnd me of my present fall.
Oh call Cornelia forth, let Scilla see
His daughter Fuluia ere his eyes be shut.

Exit one for Cornelia. Flaccus: Why Scilla, where is now thy wonted hope
In greatest hazard of unstaid chance?
What shall a little biting blast of pain
Blemish the blossoms of thy wonted pride?

Scilla: My Flaccus, worldly joys and pleasures fade,
In constant time like to the fleeting tide
With endless course man's hopes does ouer-beare?
Naught now remains that Scilla feign would have,
But lasting fame when body lies in grave.

Enter Cornelia, Fuluia. Cornelia: How fares my Lord? how does my gentle Scilla?

Scilla: Ah my Cornelia passing happy now.
Free from the world, allied unto the heavens,
Not curious of incertaine chances now.

Cornelia: Words full of woe still adding to my grief,
A curelesse cross of many hundredth harms.
Oh let not Rome and poor Cornelia loose,
The one her friend, the other her delight.

scilla: Cornelia, man has power by some instinct
And gracious revolution of the stars,
To conquer kingdoms not to master fate:
For when the course of mortal life is run,
Then Clotho ends the web her sister spun.
Pompey, Lord Flaccus, fellow senators,
In that I feel the faintfull deawes of death
steeping mine eyes within their chilly wet,
The care I have of wife and daughter both,
Must on your wisdoms happily ^elie,
With equal distribution see you part,
My lands and goods betwixt these lovely twain,
Only bestow a hundred thousand Sestercies,
Upon my friends and fellow soldiers.
Thus having made my final testament,
Come Fuluia let thy father lay his hand,
Upon thy lovely bosom and entreat
A virtuous boon and favor at thy hands.
Fair Roman maid, see that thou wed thy faires,
To modest virtuous and delightful thoughts:
Let Rome in viewing thee behold thy sire,
Honor Cornelia from whose fruitful woombe,
Thy plenteous beauties sweetly did appear,
And with this Lesson lovely maid farewell.

Fuluia: oh tedious and unhappy chance for me.

scilla: Content thee Fuluia, for it needs must be.
Cornelia I must leave thee to the world,
And by those loves that I have lent thee o^^,
In mutual wedlock rytes and happy war.
Remember Scilla in my Fuluia still:
Consul farewell, my Pompey I must hence,
And farewell Rome, and Fortune now I bless thee,
That both in life and death would not oppress me, dies.

Cornelia: oh hideous storms of never danted fate,
Now are those eyes whose sweet reflections coold
The smothered rancors of rebellious thoughts
Clad with the sable mantles of the nig^t.
And like the tree that robbed of sun and showers
Mournes desolate withouten leaf or sap:
so poor Cornelia late bereft of love,
Sits sighing, haples, ioyles and forlorn.

Fuluia: Gone is the flower that did adorn our fields,
Fled are those sweet reflections of delight,
Dead is my Father, Fuluia dead is he
In whom thy life, for whom thy death must be.

Flaccus: Ladies, to tire the time in restles moan
Were tedious unto friends and nature too,
Suffices you that Scilla so is dead,
As fame shall sing his power though life be fled.

Pompey: Then to conclude his happiness my Lords,
Determine where shall be his Funeral.

Lepidus: Even there where other Nobles are interd.

Pompey: Why Lepidus what Roman ever was,
That merited so high a name as he?
Then why with simple pomp and funeral
Would you intombe so rare a paragon?

Corn: An vrne of gold shall hem his ashes in,
The Vestall virgins with their holy notes
Shall sing his famous (though too fatal) death,
I and my Fuluia with dispersed hair
Will weight upon this noble Romans hearse.

Fuluia: And Fuluia clad in black and mournful pale
Will weight upon her fathers funeral.

Pomp: Come bear we hence this trophee of renown,
Whose life, whose death was far from fortunes frown,

Exeunt omnes. The Funerals of Scilla in great pomp. Deo iuuante, nil nocet
liuor malus:
Et non iuuante nil iuuat labor grauis.
FINIS.

